THE MARROW OF CHRISTIANITY: OR, A spiritual Discovery of some Principles of
Truth, meet to be known of all the Saints; represented in ten Sections.

By T. Collier, Minister of the Gospel.

Whereunto is added an Epistle, Written by M. SALTMARSH.

Isaiah 32 20. Blessed are ye that sow besides all waters, etc.

Isay 33.16. He shall dwell on high, his place of defense, shall be the munitions
of Rocks, bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure, verse. 17. and thine
eyes shall see the King in his beauty, etc.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black spread Eagle, near the West end
of Paul's, 1647.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader;
FOr to thee alone, do I commend this small Treatise, who alone, art able to
judge of spiritual things; for, the spiritual man judges all things. I have
here in this Treatise, presented unto public view, some principles of Truth.
Although I suppose that some particulars herein, may seem somewhat strange at
the first sight; yet I question not, but the same Spirit of Truth, which is
given forth from the Father, through the Son, to the Saints, will by degrees so
gather Us up into the mystery of Truth, that we shall all speak the same
thing, from our walking in the same light, and acting in the same power. I have
in this place only three words to mind thee of, as a preparative to what thou
shall read in this ensuing Treatise.

First, that the discovery of the first man, Adam, to be but a humane man: a
man, endued, with humane perfections; is not a strange, but a glorious truth,
and meet to be known: for, the knowledge of this one particular, leads us to
the knowledge of the Creatures nothingnesse; the wisdom, power,
righteousness, etc. of the Creature, it is all but of the Earth, and that it
is the proper work of Christ, the second man, to ruin and destroy in thee,
all, that is of the first Adam, even those relics that remain; that wisdom
is turned into folly, that strength, into weakness; that righteousness and
holiness; into mere filthiness and pollution: so that Christ does not where
he comes in mercy, restore man to his first condition, as it was in Adam; but
destroys those principles, as we are Christians, and so creates a new man in
us, which, after God, is created in righteousness, and true holiness, Ephesians.
4.24. and he that is in Christ, is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. All old things
are done away, behold all things are become new; and as is the earthly, such
are they who are earthly; as is the heavenly (that is, Christ) such are they
who are heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.48.

Secondly, that the glory of a Christians life is in the knowledge of Christ,
living in him: so the Apostle, Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ;
Nevertheless, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and Christ in you:
the hope of glory, is the great mystery of the Gospel for the Saints to know,
Col. 1.27. that is, not to live wholly on the eying of what Christ has d^ne,
without us, for us; but likewise to be able to experience the life of that
Christ in us, being made partaker of the same spirit, of the same Annointings,
etc.

Thirdly, that the knowledge of Antichrist, is the knowledge of a mystery, I
mean, a mystery of Iniqui^^, which none can know, but those enlightened from
^bove: that, as the mystery of the Gospel is bid; so likewise is the mystery
of Iniquity hid from them that perish.

Lastly, and in a word; My desire is, that, what truth thou find here
written, thy spirit may be made one, in, and with the same truth; that so,
both thou and I, may have communion and fellowship with the Spirit in the same
truth; and what information or consolation thy spirit finds from what is
truth, (letting any Creature-weaknesse, thou find, pass) let God have the
glory, and so, thy poor friend in the unity of truth, and fellowship of the
Gospel, has his utmost end.

THO: COLLIER.

A Table of the principal things contained in this Treatise.
SECTION 1.
OF Adams condition before his fall. page 1. Adams in a condition of humane
perfection. page 1. 2. The Image of God, what in Adam. page 2. 3 5. Man's best
wisdom, but the remainder of the first Adam; in it; many too much glory. page
3. 4. What the Image of Adam is not. page 8.
SECTION 2.
The cause or ground of man's fall. page 8. First the mutability of his
condition. page 8. God not the cause of sin. page 10. The second cause of man's
fall. page 11. Satan's Temptation. page 12. Why Satan called a Serpent. page 12.
The cause of man's fall, disobedience. page 13. The Tree of Knowledge of good
and evil; why so called. page 13.
SECTION 3.
Man's misery by reason of his fall. page 14. 15. Man's misery considered under
3. heads. page 16.
SECTION 4.
What is the means God has appointed for the recovery of man out of this
condition, that is, jesus Christ. page 27. The sin and fault is laid upon
Christ. page 17. 18. Christ bare the sins of all: all are saved, and how not
saved, and the reason why. page 19. 20. 21. Christ not the efficient cause of
love, but rather an effect of love. page 22. 23. 25. How Christ delivers from
wrath. page 23. 24.
SECTION 5.
How persons come to have benefit by this means that God has appointed, as
the way of life; which is by Faith. page 26. What Faith is. page 26. 27. How
faith is obtained. page 28. Faith, not a condition of the Covenant. page 29.
Faith a branch of the Covenant. page 30. Faith an evidence of the Covenant.
page 30. The means by which Faith is wrought. page 31. The properties and
effects of Faith. page 32. How faith justifies. page 32. 33. Faith produces
peace with God. page 33. Faith puts the soul into the possession, of love, it
fills the soul with joy. page 34.
SECTION 6.
Wherein the condition of persons restored by Christ, and their union with God,
is discovered: which is, first; a freedom from sin. page 35. Second, in being
one with, and in Christ. page 36. Christ and the Christians relations, one:
first, Christ a Son; so the Saints. page 36. Secondly, relation of spiritual
union. page 37. In the Spirit, power, wisdom, righteousness, love, and glory.
page 38. to the 49. Saints Communion with the Father, Son, and each other. page
50. 51. 52.
SECTION 7.
Wherein is declared what the Law is, and what the Gospel; with the difference
between them, both in the Letter, and in the Spirit. page 55. First, what the
Law is, in the Letter. page 55. 56. 57. Secondly, what the Law is, in the
Spirit. page 56. What the Gospel, in the Letter, is. page 61 62. What the
Gospel, in the Spirit, is. page 64. The Mystery of the Gospel, what. page 65.
The life of Faith in the most spiritual page 67. 68. The difference between
the Law and the Gospel. page 70. 71. The glorious effects of the knowledge of
God in the Spirits. page 63.
SECTION 8.
The Matter of the Church, what. page 75.
SECTION 9.
The spiritual Kingdom of Christ in his Church in the latter days of the
Gospel, discovered. page 80. Who are the subjects of Christ's Kingdom. page 81.
The external glory of the Church of Christ in the latter days. page 82. 83.
The spiritual glory of the Church. page 85. The Kingdom of Christ wholly
spiritual. page 90. Objections answered, concerning the personal reign of
Christ. page 93.
SECTION 10.
Of death, resurrection, and Judgment. page 108. 2 Part.
A brief discovery of Antichrist or the man of sin, both in the History and
in the Mystery. page 113.

To the Reader.
PErusing this Treatise, I could not but take notice of some precious truths
in it, and commend them abroad. Romans 14.17. Ephesians. 4.3. 1 Cor.
The spiritual design of this Author I find to be this; to set up the
Kingdom of God in spirit, and to draw believers by that more into spirit; and
that no difference of outward administrations, or Ordinances should divide
Christians that are baptized into one spirit; which Truth I did much rejoice to
see from his penn and practice, and should rejoice to see the like from all the
rest. We know, he is not a Jew, who is one outward, Romans 2.
neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the flesh, we are the
circumcision says the Apostle, Phil. 3.
who rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

There are some excellent Truths hinted in this book which I intend to speak
on, (as, of the two Adams, the spiritual Church, the spiritual Liberty, the
spiritual, not personal reign of Christ) in a little Treatise of my own.
Ephesians. 1.17. 1 Cor. 2.
The Lord fill us with the Spirit of wisdom and Revelation: The spiritual man
judges all things.

John Saltmarsh.

THE Marrow of Christianity.
SECTION 1. Of Adams Condition before his fall.
THe condition of Adam in his innocercy before his fall, war, 1. A condition of
humane perfection, an upright and perfect man, this is the conclusion of
wisdom, Eccles. 7.29. Lo, this only have I found that God has made man
upright, but they have sought out many inventions.

Obj. But it is said, Genesis 1.27. that God created man in his own Image, in the
Image of God created he him therefore it seems that Adam had more in him then
perfect humani^y, that he was partaker of the divine nature.

Answ. For the clearing of his Scripture, two things are to be considered. 1.
what is meant by the Image of God? 2. 2. what is not mean, by it? 1. what we
are to understand by the Image of God in which Adam was crea^ed: 1. reason,
wisdom and understanding, Adam was made a reasonable wise and understanding
man: in this particular he was in the Image of God: A wise God; there is no
searching of his understanding. Esa. 46.28. Adam had the Image of Gods wisdom,
not the wisdom of God, not the thing it self, it dwelled in God fully, it was
essential in him, but imparted to Adam, it was, and is in God essentially, he
is wisdom it self, Adam was but the Image, God himself the substance. That
this Image was in man at first, appears first from Scripture, Genesis 2.19.20.
the Lord brought all the creation, to wit, sensitive Creatures before Adam,
that he might give names unto them, or to see what he would call them: God
would now put him to the employing of that reason and understanding he had
given unto him, a perfection of reason above all other Creatures. 2. It
appears from natural experience, hence it is, that there is so much enquiring
after a perfection of humane reason, so much studying of Arts, as Philosophy,
Logic, Rhetoric, etc. but from these corrupted relics, or principles of
reason yet remaining in feign man, striving after, and hardly being satisfied,
without the perfection of reason, able to give a reason of all things, and this
your heathen Philosophers have gone far in, and this is that may be attained in
an high measure, and yet be but a reasonable moral man, nay, were it possible
to attain that perfection that was in Adam, yet it would be no more then a
moral and humane perfection, and this is that which many who bear the name of
Christians too much press after and glory in, as if without this wisdom there
could be no knowledge of the mind of Christ, thus did the Greeks seek after
wisdom. 1 Cor. 1.22. the Greeks being the deepest in the knowledge of humane
Arts, and of the nature and cause of things, therefore they would judge of the
Gospel according to reason, they seek after natural wisdom: but says the
Apostle, we preach Christ to the Greeks, foolishness; so indeed is the Gospel
in the ministry of it mere folly to the highest natural understanding in the
world, nay it is that which the wisdom of the Gospel destroys, where it comes
in power, he destroys, the wisdom of the wise, and brings to naught the
understanding of the prudent, 1 Cor. 1.19. and here lies the great mystery of
mistake, I had almost said, of Iniquity, we seek after the knowledge of God in
the wisdom of the first Adam, how many are there that would confine the
knowledge of God unto this wisdom who are not ashamed to say that Philosophy
is the mother of Theology, and without this natural wisdom men must come
short in the knowledge of God? when the truth is, the first Adam was of the
earth, earthly, the second is the Lord from heaven, and they who have but the
first Adams wisdom are still of the earth, earthly, the wisdom of the first
Adam comes infinitely short of bringing us to the knowledge of God in the
spirit, but it is by the wisdom of the second Adam, who is the Lord from
heaven, and the wisdom of the father, we attain the knowledge of God in the
spirit; which wisdom destroys, and brings to naught the wisdom of the first
Adam, 1 Cor. 1.19. Chap. 2.6.7.8. and 3 Chap. 18.19.20.

Note that all unbe^ievers and car^all professors are in the wisdom of the
first Ad^m, all believers spiritually made alive by Jesus, being delivered from
themselves, are in the wisdom of the second Ad^m, the Lord Jesus who is the
wisd^me of the Father, 1 Cor. 1.24.

2. Adam was in the Image of God, that was in a perfect moral pure and
sinlesse condi^ion, he was made upright, innocent without sin, but he sought
out many inventions.

Qu. How may a moral purity and righteousness be said to be the Image of God?

Answ. 1. God was, and is perfectly, essentially, and spiritually pure, Adam
was but the Image or Character of this purity, as it is possible to draw a
complete Image or Caracter of a living man in piece of stone or timber, and we
say and speak truly, that it is the Image or likeness of a living man, yet it
is not a living man, nor has it any part of man's nature in him: even so was
Adam in the Image of God, there was not only the wisdom of God in creating of
him, but the properties of God in some measure imparted to him, yet not
partaker of the divine nature, righteousness, and freedom from sin was
morally in him, yet not partaker of that spiritual holiness that is in God.

But secondly and more principally in the first Adam who was earthly, was the
Image of the second who was the Lord from heaven, so that all the
righteousness, holiness, wisdom, etc. of the first Adam, was but an Image of
the second Adam, and that moral and humane perfection in the first, and those
remaining principles that yet remained in his nature was at the highest and yet
is but an Image, as a drawn Character in a piece of timber or stones: of the
second; the spiri^uall and divine nature which dwelt in Christ bodily, and is
communicated spiritually unto all the spiritual posterity of the Lord Jesus,
who in himself and in his saints is the substance of that Image which was in
the first Adam.

3. Adam was in the Image of God in respect of a power: he had power given him
to stand or fall, and in this power he stood till the temptation came: the
first temptation he fell, and this power was but an Image of the power of God
in which the second A^^m came, and of which all the Saints are made partakers,
they enjoy the sub^tance of Adams Image.

4. Adam was in the Image of God in respect of eternity, he had given him an
everlasting being in that moral upright estate, had he not degenerated from it
as appears Genesis 2.17. In dying thou shall dye, hence a negative must be
necessarily included, in obeying thou shall live, but this life in Adam was but
a Character or Image of that spiritual and eternal life, souls are made
par^akers of in the second Adam, John 4.14. thus it appears that Adam was a
man in whom all humane perfections, wisdom, righteousness, and purity dwelt,
yet secondly, he was in a mutable and changable condition, and so quickly fell
from his station, and perfection in which he was created, he sought out many
inventions.

A second thing considerable, is; what this Image is not?

1. It is not that wisdom and understanding which the second Adam was endued
with, and all believers are made partakers of in the days of the Gospel, Esa.
11.1.2. 1 John 2.27.

2. It is not that purity and righteousness which dwelt in the Lord Jesus the
second Adam, and so spiritually in all the saints, 2 Cor. 5.21.

3. Neither was it that power put in the second Adam, who is one in God, and
stands while God stands, for he is the Lord from heaven: neither that power
saints are made partakers of, who are one with God in Christ, and kept by the
same power unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. preserved in Christ, Jude 1.

4. Neither was his eternity such an eternity in which the saints are invested,
a spiritual eternity, an eternity in God the Father and in the Son, a
glorious, unconceivable eternity, Col. 3.4. Psalm. 16.11.

2. As it was a condition of humane profection, not of spiritual perfection,
so it was a condition free from pain and sorrow, for he was free from sin, and
so, from sorrow; his sin brought in sweat and sorrow.

SECTION 2. The cause or ground of man's falling.
THE cause or ground of man's falling from his first estate, may be considered
under three particulars. 1. The mutability of his condition. 2. The temptation
of Satan. 3. His disobedient acting, contrary to the revealed mind of God.

First, the mutability of his condition, he was created of God, though upright
and perfect, yet subject to a change: the power being put in his own hand; the
first opportunity presented him, he falls, and (indeed) it could not be
otherwise, he could not stand of himself unless he had bin God.

Obj. If the mutability of Adams condition was the first cause of his fall;
then it seems that God himself was the first cause of sin, if God made man at
first in that condition that he might fall, nay, that he could not but fall,
then God himself seems to be the first cause both of sin and misery.

Answ. It is true, that the first cause of all things is in God, he was before
all things, he created all things, and all things live and move in him, and by
him, and he works all things after the council of his own will, yet 2.
although he be the first cause of all created things, yet not of any evil that
through degeneration, and Satan's temptation, flows from those beings: man in
his first creation was good, but through his degenerating from it, he became
evil; so that the evil was not in God, but in man.

3. God having made man in such a condition, man of himself freely,
voluntarily, and rebelliously falling, God brings about his everlasting
purpose in raising up some in the second Adam, to a spiritual and everlasting
union with himself, where they shall be for ever preserved, and be kept by the
power of God from falling: and others; (to wit) all unbelievers left in the
nature of the first Adam: and there he manifests. 2. the cause of man's
falling, his justice, the temptation of Satan, or the Serpent, so he is called
Genesis 3.1. note first what Satan is that tempts and overcomes man, 1. he is a
spiritual enemy to mankind, as appears not only by his deluding of our
first parents, but the whole Scripture discovers as much, he goes about like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour, no sooner was man created of God,
but he seeks presently to devour him, God having given forth Christ as a
remedy, he presently sets upon him likewise, to devour him, if he could, and
so in him all mankind for ever* Mat. 4. Thus you see Satan is an adversary to
mankind, 2. Satan or the devils, or the fallen Angels, the Angels that fell
seem to be many, Jude 6. the Angels that kept not their first estate are
reserved in everlasting Chains under darkness, unto the Judgment of the great
day, so there are many devils or evil spirits, as appears by the man
possessed by the Devil, when Christ asked his name, he answers my name is
Legion, for we are many, 3. He is a lying and deluding Spirit, that often times
transformes himself into an Angel of light: hence it comes to pass, that he
so deludes all the Sons and Daughters of disobedience that they look upon all
his works of darkness with delight and pleasure: and often times it comes to
pass, that he so far transformes himself into a son of light, that he
delivers souls under the name of Christ, and when nothing less then the name
of a Christian will serve, he will be the Christ, or rather the Antichrist to
deceive souls, hence it comes to pass, when downright papacy will not serve,
he will turn himself into a prelaticall shape, rather then loose his Rule and
credit amongst the sons of men: if once prelacy grow out of date, he can change
himself into other shapes; if ten horns be too heavy to be borne, he will be
content to wear but two like a Lamb, rather then none at all.

Qu. Why is Satan called a Serpent?

Answ. Because in his first prevailing with the woman he did either make use of
the Serpent, Genesis 3.1. who was a subtle creature, and so comes in the Serpent
unto the woman, or else secondly transforms himself in the shape and form of
the Serpent, and so represents himself unto the woman, and so from hence
received the denomination of a Serpent, Rev. 12.9. If the first, then learn,
that Satan usually makes use of the wisest and subtilest creatures to bring to
pass his will in or by them: If the second, learn that Satan can transform
himself into any shape or form to delude and deceive souls.

A third cause of Man's fall, was, disobedient acting, contrary to the mind of
God, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye, says the Lord, Adam
eats thereof, and dies: disobedience was the cause of man's fall, Romans 5.18,
19.

Quest. What was Adams disobedience?

Ans. Eating the forbidden fruit, Genesis 2.15.

Qu. What was this fruit?

Ans. The fruit of a Tree in the Garden or Paradise of God, Genesis 2.9.16. called
the Tree of knowledge of good and evil: good, if a man did not eat of it;
evil, if he did eat of it, A Tree, whosoever eats the fruit thereof, shall know
the difference between good and evil; so he indeed knew good by the want of
it, and evil by the sense and enjoyment of it.

What mystery might be represented by this pleasant fruit, I shall not at
present dispute, because it is something dark unto me; whether sin, which
seems very pleasant unto a carnal eye; or the world, which much prevails
upon a carnal mind; or honor, or both: All these temptations Satan made use of
unto Christ himself, and represented them to his eye, as a deceiveable fruit,
if possible he might deceive him: And the Tree of Life representing Christ,
that whosoever eats and drinks of him, might live for ever, Jo. 4.14. Rev.
22.2.

SECT. III. Man's Misery by reason of his Fall.
Man's misery by the sin of Adam, was death, In dying thou shall dye; or thou
shall dye the death, Genesis 2.17. Now under the name of Death, the Scriptures
comprehend diverse things: A spiritual death in sin; so are all Natural men
dead in trespasses and sins, subject to external miseries, and deadly plagues,
Exodus 10.17. External afflictions upon the body, so Paul, 2 Cor. 1.23. the
dissolution of man's external and natural life, Genesis 35.18. Psalm. 146.4. The
perdition of body and soul for ever: All which miseries come in by the sin of
Adam. As the second Adam was the way letting in all good to mankind; so was the
first Adam the way or flood-gate letting in all miseries upon soul and body.

Object. Some will object and say, But how could Adam lose a spiritual life,
and so come under a spiritual death? seeing he never had a spiritual life in
God; how could he lose that which he never had?

Answ. Although Adam had never a spiritual life in God, yet he had a
spiritual subsisting given him of God, free from sin; and so, capable of
defilement: For the truth is, it is the internal part of man that sins, the
form or body of man is acted by the guiding of the internal part; so that
Adam now dies in his spirit, he has neither power, wisdom, nor will to do
that which is well-pleasing to the Lord; he has not only lost that wisdom,
will, and power of acting in the first Adam; but likewise of believing, and so
of applying that salvation tendered in the second Adam, until he spiritually
and powerfully draw up the soul unto himself, John 6.44. and so makes him not
only partaker of all that complete righteousness wrought for him; but
likewise fulfils all righteousness in him, Romans 8.4. Or else man's misery may
be considered under these three heads: 1. A condition of death, as you have
heard, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death; that is death
internal, and death external, and death eternal; without a means, or a
remedy preventing it. 2. A condition of enmity, I will put enmity between thee
and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; and all unbeleevers, which so
live and remain, are in a state of enmity, God has not declared himself any
other unto them; and their nature is still at enmi^y with God. 3. A condition
of insufficiency to help themselves: Adam was notable to help himself, all that
he could do, was to hide himself, he could not deliver himself out of this
condition: neither are all the sons and daughters of Adam able to help one
soul out of this condition, if God help not. Therefore this should teach
souls made alive by Christ, to admire mercy, and to cry Grace, Grace, unto the
whole work of God, both in them, and for them.

SECT. IV. What is the means God has apppointed for the recovery of man out
of this condition?
THe means God has appointed to deliver Man out of this condition, is Jesus
Christ; and therefore promises Christ immediately upon the Fall, Genesis 3.15.
Herein is Gods love manifested, that he leaves not man in his lost estate; but
gives forth his son out of his bosom, that he might seek and save that which
was lost, and so deliver us from wrath to com, Romans 5.9. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. He is
Jesus the Savior, and the alone Savior of his people from their sins, Mat
1.21. Acts 4.12. that is, he is the alone way, through which the Father brings
down salvation to sinners, and through which he draws up souls to himself;
there is no other way, of God, down to the soul, nor of the soul, up to God,
but through Jesus, Joh. 14.6.

Quest. What must Christ Jesus undertake and perform; before the breach is made
up, and fallen man recovered?

Answ. 1. He must take the sin and fault upon himself, Isai 53.6. 1 Pet.
2.24. He that knew no sin, was made sin, for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Admirable mercy, that when man had
sinned, and lost himself; Jesus Christ, who never knew sin, either in act or
thought, must now take upon him the sinners sin, and so be made as it were, a
lump of sin! and this he did willingly of himself, he bare our sins on his own
body on the Cross; Christ took the whole sin of Adam, and the whole world upon
himself, when Adam had sinned, and all mankind him, Adam and all must have
died, Christ takes the sin upon himself; and so taking the sin upon himself,
he withal takes the curse, and so undergoes the sentence of death The curse
was, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye the death. Christ he dies
the death, that so he might free man from death; and so Christ in bearing the
sin and the condemnation, recovers man out of this lost and undone condition.
Two objectictions here need to be cleared.

Object. 1. Whether Christ Jesus the second Adam bare the sins, and so, the
condemnation of all men?

Ans. First, it is without question, that he took the sin and fault of the
first Adam upon him, and so, the sin of the world of man, whose nature was in
him, and so taking the sin, so the condemnation of the whole upon him; else
he could not have effected that work for which he came.

Object. If Christ bear the sin and condemnation of all, why then are not all
saved?

Answ. 1. All are, in one sense, saved, that is, with an external salvation
from the present curse and death pronounced, and so the whole world have a
being by Christ, and a redemption, a salvation, a peace, which it enjoyes by
him; a mercy that they are not sensible of, Col. 1.20. Having made peace by the
blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself, whether things
in heaven, or things on earth, etc. Note, all things are reconciled. What
things? The same that were made by him, verse 16. All things partake of this
reconciliation and peace.

Secondly, all are not saved with an eternal salvation, because all do not
believe. It is true, that there was a salvation purchased from the external
part of the present curse for that present sin; yet Adams posterity acting
other sins, draw on other external judgments; but there was likewise, by the
taking away of the present judgment, or death threatened, a prevention of the
present execution of that eternal death, included; and so a spiritual and an
eternal life by Christ obtained; yet so, as that none partake of it but
believers: so that, although there be a salvation purchased by Christ, and
tendered unto all, yet none are made partakers of this salvation, but
believers; and none can believe savingly, but those who are drawn up to the
Father, through the Son by a power above themselves, who were known and
beloved of God from everlasting, the Father giving forth his Sonn^ as a public
person, making sa^is^action to the Law of Transgression, rhat all mankind might
be brought under the tender of the Gospel; that so, upon believing, they might
be delivered from both the first covenant, and transgression, no man being
(indeed) delivered from either, but by believing; all men remaining in the
first Adam, and so under the Law of transgression in the Spirit, unless
beleev^rs; Christ having purchased an eternal salvation; but keeps it in his
own hand and dispenses it in the Spirit, to those to whom God gives hearts to
receive both him and it: so now, nothing hinders the salvation of any man, with
relation to Christ, a Savior or Deliverer, from the transgression and sin of
the first Adam: (on Gods part) externally all partake of it; internally, only
believers: He is the Savior of all, but especially of them that believe. And
nothing (on Gods part) hinders the eternal salvation of all, with relation to
the purchase, or price paid, but only on Gods part, his eternal purpose to
draw up some into union with himself, in ^is Son; and leaving others to
believe, if they wou^d, or could. And from hence, on the crea ures part, being
thus left, only a Christ tendered, able to save them, if they believe, they
being left of God, having neither, will, skill, nor power to bele^ve; perish
everlastingly, under the rejecting of the Gospel.

Object. It seems to be injustice in God to condemn the sin of all upon
Christ, and yet to condemn it upon the sinner too.

Answ. 1. It was as easy for Christ, being thereunto appointed of the Father,
to make satisfaction to the Law of Transgression for the sins of all; as one.
Such was his excellent worth.

Secondly, the spiritua^l and eternal part of it remains still with God in
Christ, and is handed forth to none but believers; and so it remains that
there is no injustice in God to put such a worth in the sufferings of his Son,
that it is able to satisfy the law of transgression for all, and able to save
all that come to God by him; and yet to condemn sin, even the sin of the
first, as iwell as the rejecting of the second Adam, n all those that refuse
him, seeing his eternal purpose in all, was, the setting forth of his Son as a
peacemaker, that so there might be a visible ground upon which the beloved of
God might accept of peace, and so come to enjoy that invisible union with the
Father in the Spirit, which he from eternity intended: and likewise, that there
might be a visible rule of rejecting all who wilfully con^emne their own peace,
and so judge themselves unworthy of eternal life.

Quest. Did Christ purchase life and love from the hand of the Father?

Ans. Nay, he did not purchase life and love from the hand of the Father, but
was a gift flowing forth from the Fathers love: The death of Christ was not the
cause efficient either of life or love: but love in God was the efficient cause
of the coming forth, and suffering of Christ, John 3.16. God so loved the
world, that he gave his Son.

Qu. In what sense then may Christ be said, to deliver from wra^h, 1 Thessalonians.
1.10. And, to purchase his Church with his blood? Acts 20.28.

Answ. 1. He delivers from wrath in a twofold consideration: First, from that
wrath and justice of God, gone forth in a righteous law; it being broken, wrath
is gone forth upon all, because God is Truth, and so in the letter, wrath is
gone forth upon all through Adams trnasgression, and so all unbelievers in that
sense, are under wrath, and there remain eternally, if not delivered, John 3.
last. 2. They are delivered from wrath with relation to their apprehension:
Never any soul comes savingly to Christ, but he first makes him sensible of an
estate of wrath, and so every believer may truly say, They were once children
of wrath, that is, in an estate of wrath, under the Law of Transgression, and
so are delivered from wrath to come; because if God had not from everlasting
received them into the number of those written in heaven, they must likewise
have endured wrath to come.

Secondly, He purchased his Church with his blood, and so salvation for them,
under two considerations: 1. He purchased his Church from the Law of
Transgression, God having said, In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall
dye. Man eats, and so should have died eternally, had not God provided such a
remedy; therefore he gives his Son to purchase Man from that condition. 2. He
purchases His with his blood, from wrath and condemnation in their own
apprehensions; Man being sensible of his lost condition, must have something to
satisfy his conscience, therefore likewise the Father gives Christ, and in
both these, not as the first and moving cause of any thing in God; but God out
of his love gives forth his Son to effect that work. As if a man indebted for
more than he is ever able to pay, the Creditor having vowed satisfaction, the
debtor is cast down and troubled exceedingly: the creditor to satisfy both his
own word, and the mind of the debtor: sends forth his Son, and fully inables
him to pay the debt; he brings along the debtor with him, pays the debt,
cancells the bands and sets him free, and thus it was with the Father, man had
sinned, God had said, in the day thou sinnest thou shall dye, this debt of
death must be discharged: the Father, that he might be just, and yet a
justifier, and that the conscience of fallen man whom he loved might be
satisfied, he gives or sends forth his Son, he pays the debt, and so
satisfies the word of the Father, and the conscience of the sinner, and so
(indeed) is not essentially the procuring cause of love, but rather an effect
of love to satisfy both the word of the Father, and the conscience of the
sinner, and this was Gods way from eternity, through which he intended to
manifest himself to his people.

SECTION 5. How persons come to have benefit by this means that God has
appointed as the way of life?
SInners come to have benefit by Jesus Christ, by believing, John 3.16.36. he
that believes on the Son, has life, and he that believes not on the Son,
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides in him: Faith as an instrument
is the means appointed of God, by which, sinners receive, and own Jesus
Christ, and life by him. For clearing this truth, three things will be
necessary to be considered.

First, what faith is?

Secondly, how it comes?

Thirdly, the properties and effects of it.

1. What it is; faith is the apprehending and applying Christ, and so the
father, and his everlasting grace in him. 1. It is the apprehending of Christ
that is the observing and beholding of him, as he is in himself, the seeing of
him in his beauty, and excellency, Esa. 33.17. thine eyes shall see the King in
his beauty, it is to see all that worth to be in him that the soul needs, and
then 2. to apply him according to the souls present occasion, a dying Christ,
to a dead soul, and this Christ commends unto us to be the faith by which
souls come to enjoy salvation, John 6.40. this is the will of him that sent
me, that he that sees the Son and believes on him, may have everlasting life,
(note) he that sees the Son, that is apprehends that wor^h and excellency,
that ability the Father has put in him to save sinners, able to save all those
to the utmost that come unto God by him, and believes on him, that is applies
him, receives him as its alone Savior, and justifier, to them he gives power
to become the Sons of God, ^ohn 1.12. even to as many as believe on his name.
2. this faith does not only apply Christ, as given forth of the Father singly,
and a part from the Father, but it applies, that is, ownes the Father in the
Son, and that everlasting love of the Father to the Soul, brought down
through the Son; for the Son is but the Fathers way down to sinners, John 24.6.
John 12.44. He that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent
me that is, be loves not alone in Christ, but believes and injoyes that
everlasting good will and love of the Father, to the Soul, and so sees the
Father in Christ, commending love, and so giveing forth himself to the Soul,
and so is able to see and say tha it is indeed God that justifies, and that God
was in Christ, (as the way) reconciling sinn^rs to himself, not imputing their
sins; and now the sinner sees that Christ never acted any thing, or brings down
any thing to the Soul, bu^ what was and is the good will and pleasure of the
Father, and so faith ownes, not only Christ, but the Father giving forth the
Son as the price of their redemption, Ephesians. 1.7. Gal. 3.13. and way of their
adoption, Gal. 4, 5.

2. How is this faith obtained?

Answ. It is the free gift of God, as Christ who is its objects and all other
good things, or every good and perfect gift comes down from the Father, God,
in Christ, is the Prince and Author of our faith, Heb. 12.2. Looking to Jesus
the Author and finisher of our faith, Ephesians. 2.8. ye are faved freely by grace,
through faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God; faith is the
proper and peculiar gift of God, no man comes unto me, except the Father
which has sent me, ^raw him, it is the Father that works all, the Father
first loves, and then gives his Son, and then draws Souls up unto himself in
the So^, ^lse they never come: No man comes t^^ne, unless the Father draw him,
John 6. hence it is that the experienced soul desires to be drawn, C^n^. 1.2.
Phil. 1.29. for unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to
believe, but to suffer, that is, you who have received this gift of faith,
must expect to suffer likewise.

Obj. But is not faith held forth in the Gospel, as the co^di^ion of the
Covenant of grace, he that believes shall be saved? A. 1. Although it seems in
the letter of the Gospel, to be held forth as a condi^ion of the Covenant, he
tha believes, shall be saved, yet it is in the spirit or mystery of the
Gospel, of condition on Gods part, it is true, none can be said, and say truly
himself, that he is in the C^venant of grace, before faith; yet this faith is
the gift of God, as you have heard, and if any condition it is on Gods part in
the mystery, and it is his promise, Heb. 8.10. this is the Covenant I will make
with them, I will write my Laws in their hearts says the Lord, that is, I
will take them off themse ves, and make them partakers of my spirit, which
shall cause them to own love in God, and o live out of themselves, in God, and
shall cause them to act spiritually, even as Jesus Christ himself acted, and
so faith may be said (indeed) to be rather a b^anch, or part of the Covenant of
grace, than the condition, for God in the Covenant promises to write his Law,
and to give faith and all good unto the soul, he gives Christ a Covenant, and
with him he gives all, having given us his Son, how shall he not with him,
give us all things?

2. Faith is (indeed) an evidence to the Soul, that it is in the Covenant of
grace and made one with God, hence it is called Heb. 11.1. The evidence of
things not seen, that is, not seen with a carnal eye, the spirit evidenceth
it, and faith receives that evidence, and to the soul is satisfied through
faiths believing of the word and spirit of God.

Obj. What is the means by which God works faith?

Answ. The means by which God works faith is his word and spirit, by the
preaching of the Gospel, as the isntrumental means of his spirit working as
the principal means, Romans 10.14. John 6.63. now it is true God is not limited
in his way of working, (that is) he has not confined himself to a verbal
preaching, although it is true likewise, that he ordinarily and usually,
works faith by by such means: but a Gospel preaching as of necessity in the
working of faith: that is a spiritual Gospel desiring of the love of God in
Christ, and such a preaching may be by the spirit of Christ in reading some
word: or any other way he pleases to work, and it may truly be called a
Gospel-preaching: any spiritual Gospel discovery to a soul, through which it
is brought up into Gospel-injoyments, may truly be called a spiritual
unfolding or preaching of the Gospel. Hence it is, that the preaching of the
letter, or a verbal preaching, is no where called a powerful and prevailing
preaching, unls the spirit preach: it is the spirit that must convince the
world of sin, John 16. and our Gospel came not only in word, but in power and
in the holy spirit, 1 These. 1.5. It is true, God usually works by means, but
it is as true that he can as well work spiritually without means, if he
please, and this he has done much of late, I do not question but many who are
spiritually enlightened, and live in the spiritual enjoyments of God, have had
experience of it.

Qu. 3. What are the properties and effects of faith?

Answ. The properties and effects of Faith are many: It justifies the soul
from sin, Act. 13.39. by him all that believe are justified from all things,
from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses.

Qu. How may faith be said to justify?

Answ. 1. Not as the efficient cause of our Justification, that is, God only
in Christ, it is God that justifies who shall condemn?

But 2. Faith justifies, as it receives Christ and applies him as its
justification: so that it is said to justify, because it satisfies and quiets
the soul in Christ who is its justification, Romans 4.5. he that works not,
but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness. Note two words: 1. He that believes on him that justifies,
that is, Christ; all that believe, are justified, by him, Acts 13.39. So it is
Christ that justifies; faith only ownes that justification held forth in
Christ. 2. word, His faith is counted for righteousness; that is, either
first, God never declares a man righteous and just, until he give him faith to
enjoy his righteousness in Christ: or else secondly, his faith is counted or
called his righteousness, because he never till then enjoyed his
righteousness. And so that when I say, or the Scripture says, that Faith
justifies: that is, faith receives and ownes the justification of God in
Christ declared, and so the soul by it lives in the enjoyment of justification
and freedom from sin.

The 2d property or effect of faith, is, union and peace with God, Romans 51.
Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, chap. 15.13. Now the God of
hope fill you with joy and peace through believing. This is one glorious
effect, that those who once were a-farre off, should now be made nigh by the
blood of Christ, and be brought into the enjoyment of it by believing.

The third effect is, it puts the soul into the possession of the love of God,
1 John 4.16. We have known and believed the love that God has to us: and God
is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him: It acts
the soul above it self, and causes it to dwell in God, and so to dwell in
his love, and this is an exceeding glorious effect, and that which, in the
fourth place, fills the soul with joy, 1 Pet. 1.8. Joy unspeakable, and full
of glory. What can a soul desire more, than to dwell continually in the love
of God; When the soul is satisfied from its union with God, and its dwelling
in God, that all the administrations and makings forth of God, is love unto it!
And thus it dwells in love, and from hence is filled with joy, it causes the
soul always to dwell at the right hand of God, where is joy and pleasure for
evermore.

Fifthly, in a word to conclude, the effect of faith is such, as that God by it
works up the soul to an internal and external conformity to Christ in some
measure, with a spiritual and eternal conformity in perfection in another
world, 1 John 3. 1, 2.3. Phil. 3.19. where faith shall cease, and love and
unity be made perfect, 1 Cor. 13.13.

SECT. VI. Wherein is the condition of persons restored by Christ, and their
union with God, discovered?
THe Restoration of persons by Christ may be considered, 1. either external
and general: or else 2. more special and spiritual.

First, externally and generally, and that has a relation to a^l, it is as ye
have heard formerly, 1. A condition of being in the world: 2. A condition of
possibility of a spiritual and eternal well-being in God, if God in his S^nne
draw up the soul to himself, John 6.44.

But secondly, and that I principally intend, is the more special and
spiritual condition of souls thus drawn up to God in Christ; it is not only a
restoration to the condition of the first Adam, with relation to a freedom
from sin. This every believer enjoyes by Christ a freedom, a justification
from sin: But secondly, every soul drawn up out of it self to God, is brought
into the condition of the second Adam; which is a condition as far above the
first, as the heaven is above the earth: For, the first man is of the earth,
earthy; the second Man is the Lord from Heaven: And as all men have born the
Image of the earthy, so those who believe, bear the Image of the heavenly; and
as is the heavenly, such are all they that are heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49.
And wherein Christ exceedes the first Adam, therein believers exceed; for they
are as he is, even in this world. 1 John 4.17.

Now the condition of Christ, and so the Saints, exceeds the condition of the
first Adam, not only in their being upheld by God; but principall^ in these
four particulars:

1. In their spiritual relations unto God: Christ, and so all believers are
related to the Father as Sons, and that not only by creation, as the first
Adam, or natural generation: but first Christ a Son by a spiritual proceeding
and coming forth from the Father, who was eternally one in the Father, and so
in him all believers are made by the same Spirit, the adopted Sons of God,
being made partakers of the same divine Nature. Adams Sonship was in the flesh
by creation, or in the Spirit by regeneration, and the Spirit of adoption;
which is indeed a mystery to all natural men, and worthy to be looked into and
known of all the sons and daughters of Syon, 1 John 3.1, 2, 3. Behold what
manner of love is this, that we sh uld be called the sons of God.

2. Relation of Christ, and so of the Saints as of sons, so of a spiritual
union with God, not only a union by way of peace, but a union of Spirit: thus
was the Father and the Son, one, John 14.10, 11, John 10.30. I and the Father
are one. And thus are all the Saints one in the Father and the Son, and in and
with each other in the Spirit, John 17.21. It was a part of the prayer of
Christ, who was heard in all things he asked, That they also may be one in us.
Now the union of the Father, Son and Saints, may be considered, either as
first a union of spirits; The Lord powered down of his Spirit abundantly upon
the Lord Jesus, according to that glorious prophecy, Esaias 11.2 And the Spirit
of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of Wisdom and understanding, the
spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and the fear of the
Lord. And this was fulfilled when Christ was baptized, Matthew. 3.16 John 1.22,
23. Of this spirit are the Saints made partakers, John 14.16, 17. I, says
Christ, will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, and he
shall abide with you for ever, even the spirit of truth, whom the world cannot
receive. This Spirit of Christ, or this spiritual anointing, is that which
every son and daughter of God are made partakers of, Romans 8.9. Now if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Christ dwells spiritually in
all the Saints, Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates. Therefore it
concerns all who profess themselves to be Christians, to examine themselves:
It is much to be feared that there are exceeding many carnal Christians, I
mean, that bear the name of Christians, and that in a more than a common and
ordinary way. And if Christ be in you, Romans 8.10. the body is dead because of
sin, that is, the body is a dead and sinful body, and cannot act toward God;
and if Christ be in you, you shall be sensible of it. Never a soul wherein
Christ's dwells, but is sensible of its own deadness, through the dwelling of
Christ there, Col. 3.8. ye are dead (says the Apostle) and your life is hid
with God in Christ: but the spirit is life because of righteousness, that
spirit of Jesus, that adopteth sons to the Father in him, and has discovered
and made the soul partaker of the righteousness of God in him: lives and acts
continually in the spiritual Christian. Hence it is, the Apostle could say by
experience, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: Thus are the
Saints made partakers of the same spirit of life that was in Christ Jesus, 1
Cor. 6.17. he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit, of the same
annoyntings, and the annoyntings that ye have received shall teach you all
things, 1 John 2.27.

2. They that are joined to the Lord, are made partakers of the same power:
there is a union with the Father in his power, the spirit of Might was powered
upon Jesus Christ, and he stood in the power of the Father: as he came forth in
the wisdom of the Father, so he acted by the power of the Father, and this
power the first Adam never had, and as Christ the head was upheld in the
Fathers power, he was anointed with the holy spirit and with power, Act.
10.38. All power in heaven and earth was given to him, so that he stood in the
power and strength of the Almighty (and this did not the first Adam, if he had,
then he had not fallen) he is called, Esa. 9. the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace, so that he stands while God stands: So likewise
this is the condition of all the Sain^s, spiritually made one with God in him,
the same power upholds them that upheld Christ, they are kept by the power of
God unto Salvation, Gods power is become the Saints power: A glorious word of
comfort for the Sons and Daughters of Syon, with relation to aff^ictions,
either external or internal, they stand not in their own strength, they are
not founded upon their own bottom, they are out of themselves, the power of
God is theirs, and they may conclude with comfort, that while God stands, they
shall stand, he has promised to be with his in aff^iction, to uphold them, to
comfort them, to carry them through in his bosom: If the Saints were but
sensible of this truth, that the power of God is for them; it is that would
exceedingly help them against the fear of fa^ling. 2. Consider this might be
a warning to the Saints, to take heed of acting in their own power, but in all
undertakings, to see themselves acted by a power above themselves.

3. As there is a union of spirits, a union of power; so there is a union in
wisdom, the wisdom of God is become the Saints wisdom, and that not as in the
first Adam; he was made partaker of wisdom, God imparted wisdom unto him, so
as to make him a reasonable man humane wi do^e according to his humane nature;
so that here dwelt in him, as you have h^a^d formerly, a humane perfection in
this par icular: but the second Adam, Christ, was not only made partaker of
the gifts of wisdom; but he was the very wisdom of the Father, he was both
the power and the wisdom of God, he had the spirit of wisdom powered down upon
him, he dwelt in the Fathers bosom, and lived in the knowledge of the whole
Council of God, and from hence he never did his own will, but the will of the
Father, and as Christ, so all the Saints are made one in this wisdom Christ
who is the wisdom of God is made unto us, wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30. not only by
way of imputation, but by the operation of the same spirit, who dwells as truly
in every believer as in Christ, and as the wisdom of the spirit increases, so
the wisdom of the flesh decreaseth: that wisdom in the first Adam was a
humane wisdom, this a spiritual and heavenly wisdom, this wisdom destroys
that wisdom: that is, in the things of God, he destroys the wisdom of the
wise, and brings to naught the understanding of the prudent: that wisdom sets
the creature a-working; this, sets the creature a believing: that wisdom
carried on the creature in its own power; this spiritual wisdom sets the
creature out of himself in the power of God: that wisdom carried on the
creature to the answering of God in the letter; (and yet in all comes short)
this wisdom carries on the soul, where it dwells, not after the oldnesse of
the letter, but after the newness of the spirit: In a word, that wisdom could
not help to the knowledge of God in the spirit; this does, 1 Cor. 1. after
that in the wisdom of God, the world ( viz. in the wisdom of the first Adam)
by wisdom knew not God, but the wisdom of Christ teaches the spiritual
knowledge of God, 1 Cor. 2.12.14, 15, 16. Hence it is, that those who are
taught of God, despise the worlds wisdom, and are content to be fools to the
world, and in the worlds eyes, that they may be wise in God. Hence it is
likewise, that so many Ignorants, in the wise and learned men's account, are
made partakers of the knowledge of God in the mystery; which (indeed) according
to the Word of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.27. Confounds the wise and learned, and
mighty things of the world: this being a truth; that Saints are made one in the
wisdom of the Father: How should this, in the first place, encourage them to
look up to the Lord, for the more full enjoyment of this spiritual wisdom;
that as they are made one in the wisdom of God, so they might live in the same
wisdom; and from a deep sense of their own folly, to look unto the Lord for
continual teachings, and leadings forth in the Spirit, expecting that promise
to be fulfilled, thou shall hear a voice behind thee, saying; This is the way,
walk in ^t, when thou turnest to the right hand or to the left. 2 This might
be a ground of comfort to the Saints, in all their walkings with God; the
wisdom of God is theirs, that GOD, with, and in, whom they are made one, is
their wisdom; and in the conclusion, they shall be swallowed up in the
perfection of it, as Christ himself, 1 John 3.2. 3 This might answer that
foolish opinion of the world, who look upon the most Spiritual Saints, as the
worst Fools in the world: It is true, the wisdom of God is folly with men;
but if they could look with a spiritual eye, they should see, that those
people, are the only wise people, wise in God; and those who live below upon
Creatures, and things that will not, nor cannot satisfy, are (indeed) in Gods
account, the only fools, and they themselves shall be driven to confess it
one day. 4 Christ and the Saints are made one with God in righteousness; Gods
righteousness was Christ's righteousness: for the fullness of the Godhead
dwelt in him bodily; He was filled with the spiritual indwellings of God, who
continually acted him according to the divine pleasure; and as the second man
was made one in the righteousness of the Father; so are all the Saints made
one in the same righteousness: he was made si^ne for us, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.

Quest. How may the Sa^nts be said to be the righteousness f God, in Christ?

Answ. Either, First in the Letter; or secondly, in the Spirit. First, in the
Letter, there is a righteousness presented, which is the first thing sinners
are made partakers of; that is, the righteousness of a Christ, dying upon the
Cross, making satisfaction to the letter of the law, and to the Conscience
troubled, by reason of that letter, which is (indeed) the cause of sin; for
where no law is, there is no transgression: Now, Christ dying upon the Cross,
satisfies the Law; and likewise upon the sight and application of him, sati
fies the troubled Conscience. This is the first righteousness God discovers to
the souls of sinners, and by Faith makes them partakers of it, and this is
called the righteousness of God, because God gave forth his son, enabled him
to go through, and by his suffering, to obtain such a righteousness for his
people, that might both satisfy the law transgressed, and the Conscience of
man transgressing.

Secondly, in the Spirit, the Saints are made the righteousness of God; that
is, God, now as in Christ, dwells and acts in his Saints by his Spirit, writes
his law in their hearts, makes them partakers of his own nature, and so goes on
in fulfilling his own righteousness in them: For, the righteousness of the
law in the Spirit is fulfilled in us, as well as the law in the letter for us
who walk not after the flesh; that is, after the law in the letter, but after
the Spirit of Christ who dwells in us, and acts according to its own pleasure,
and so by degrees draws up the spirits of his people to himself, until at
last, they are swallowed up in the fullness of the righteousness of God in the
Spirit, and be made wholly and for ever one in the Father with Christ, 1 John
1.2. A glorious mysterious truth, meet to be known of all spiritual Ones; this
is the top of the Saints glory, and their height of spiritual perfection, the
knowledge and enjoyment of this spiritual Oneness in the Father, and in the
son, 1 John 2.24

5 There is an Oneness in love and delight between the Father, Son, and
Saints: the Fathers love and delight is in his Son, and Saints, Matthew. 3.17.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; well pleased with his Son,
and with his Saints in his Son. Hence the Lord speaking after the manner of
men, is said to delight and sing, and rejoice over his people, even as the
Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, Esa 62.5. Zeph. 3.17. to rejoice even
with joy and singing: So likewise it is the delight and joy of the Saints to
live in the Fathers love, the very thoughts of it is precious, and the
enjoyment of it, exceeding glorious: though the soul seems to come short of
the perfection of that enjoyment in this world; yet what it sees and enjoyes,
with the expectation of perfection in another world, fills the soul with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory; and now as the soul dwells in the Fathers love,
delight, and joy; so likewise, it dwells in the Fathers will, and it delights
in, and is well pleased with, the will of the Father, it can say with Christ,
what ever temptation presents it self; yet not my will, but thy will be done,
such is the Oneness between the Father, Son, and Saints, they delight and
take pleasure in each other.

6. There is a union in g^ory like wise; the Fathers glory is the Sons glory,
and the Sons glory is the Saints glory, what this glory shall be is
unconceivable and unexpressable: to go about to express it either with tongue
or pen, would rather darken it than illustrate it: yet, a word by the way; The
perfection of the Saints glory shall be the enjoyment of all things in God, who
is, and shall be, their everlasting fullness in the spirit. Those who dream of
a Kingdom after the flesh, or of any external pleasures in the highest
measure, discover themselves, to have exceeding carnal thoughts of the Saints
glory: It is true, they shall have a Kingdom, but a spiritual one, so called,
because enjoying all spiritual satisfactions in the Fountain, when the body
and all the whole internal and external part of man shall be turned into
spirit, 1 Cor. 15.44. And our vild body shall be changed and made like his
glorious body. In a word; Such is the Saints glory, and shall be in the
perfection of it, through their union with God in Christ; that we must
conclude with 1 John 3.2. We are already the sons of God; but it does not yet
appear what we shall be. But this we know, when Christ shall appear, we shall
be made like unto him; and this is enough for us to know: And as there is an
Oneness between Father, Son, and Saints; so likewise there is a spiritual
union between the Saints: This was Christ's prayer, who was heard in all things
he prayed for; that the Saints might be one, as he himself was one, in, and
with the Father: the union of the Saints, is not a carnal union, but a
spiritual: they who are joined to the Lord, are one spirit.

Use 1. To encourage all the Saints to press forward in the power of the Lord,
after a farther knowledge, and enjoyment of this spiritual union with the
Lord, and with the Saints: Truly friends, as this was not only the resolution
of the Apostle himself, Phil. 3. but his prayer for the Ephesians, 1.16, 17.
That the God of our Lord Jesus, the Father of glory, might give unto them the
spirit of wisdom, in the Revelation of him, that their eyes being enlightened,
they might know what was the hope of their calling, and the riches of his
glorious inheritance in the Saints: so is it my desire, not only to press
forward in the power of God, after the knowledge of this mystery; but that all
the Saints might live in the knowledge of it, that their hearts might be
comforted together, being knit together in the spirit of unity and love. The
effects of the knowledge of this blessed union will prove exceeding glorious.

1 It is that will produce a glorious spiritual communion, and fellowship with
the Father, Son, and Saints; union always being that which produces
communion, even a civil union after the flesh; when once the Lord says,
concerning man and woman, they are no more twain, but one flesh, that
produces fellowship and communion after the flesh: so likewise, and much more
does a spiritual union produce a spiritual communion and fellowship; a
fellowship and communion with the Father and the Son, in all his
administrations, in all the ways and acts of his providence, civil or
spiritual: the spiritual Christian enjoyes God in all, 1 John 1.3. Our
fellowship is with the Father and his son Jesus Christ (Christ and the Saints
from their union with each other.)

1 They dwell together in the spirit, they are his house, and he dwells in them;
the Temples of the holy spirit, and they dwell in him: they who dwell in God,
dwell in love.

2 They enter together in the spirit, eat, O friends; drink, yea, drink
abundantly; the Lord takes as it were spiritual satisfaction in his Saints,
and they take spiritual satisfaction in the Lord; it is their life to live in
the enjoyment of him.

3 They walk together in the spirit, they have their garden and galleries, and
pleasant delights.

4 They talk together, and commune with each other in the spirit, the Lord he
makes forth himself in the spiritual discoveries of his love to his Saints, and
the^ they are carried forth to tell him of it, to admire him in it, and to
praise him for it: and thus there is many a sweet conference, and
heart-discovery between the Lord, and a spiritual Christian, which makes the
soul to revive within it self.

5 Christ and the Saints lie down together in the spirit, and take their fill
of love each with other, they sleep, as it were, in the bosom of each other,
and so they rest themselves in love. And this likewise produces fellowship
amongst Saints, a fellowship in spirituals, a fellowship in temporals, and they
continued in the Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship, in breaking bread and
prayer, and breaking bread from house to house, being filled with gladness and
singleness of heart, Act. 2. and they who believed had all things commune, a
community as well as a unity; that is, so far forth, as need is, and calls for
it; so in gifts; so in all things. 1 Cor. 3.22. All is yours, Paul, Apollo,
and Cephas, And secondly, the knowledge of this spiritual glorious oneness
which the Father, produces an exceeding earnest desire in the soul enjoying
of it; to live more and more in that glory. What is the reason Professors
content themselves to be so low, so carnal in their minds; but because they
were never acquainted with, nor enjoyed higher things? but the Apostle who had
seen and tasted of that glory, forgets all behind, and presses forward; if so
be, that he might obtain the resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3. and apprehend
that for which he was apprehended, that love, that grace, that God who had
apprehended him. Certainly, that soul who has once tasted how good, how
gracious the Lord is, in the spirit, can never be satisfied with the knowledge
of him, in the Letter. 3 The knowledge of this spiritual union with God
produces an acting more in and after the spirit of God: How does the creature
set it self a-work, and acts it self even in the Letter of the Gospel, as well as
formerly in the Letter of the Law, for want of knowledge of the union in the
spiritual power of the Lord! although without Christ, that is not being acted
by Christ; we can do nothing; the Creature being unacquainted with that
spiritual mystical union with God, acts himself in the things of God. 4 The
knowledge of this spiritual union with God, produces the killing and
crucifying of that earthly part: nothing kills and destroys the flesh, but the
growing up in the spirit. Oh! how would the soul many times be content to
undergo any thing, so it might be rid of pride and self, and those fleshly
corruptions; and why? it is the growing up in the spirit, that destroys the
flesh: the more you live in and after the spirit, the less, after the flesh. 5
It is that will help us to know Christ and the Saints, more in and after the
spirit, and less after the flesh, and so will produce a more spiritual
communion amongst all the spiritual Saints of Jesus. 6 And lastly, it is that
will make the thoughts of a change exceeding sweet, because the soul lives in
expectation of a glorious freedom from sin and sorrow, and a full perfection
of spiritual and eternal glory, therefore it can be contented to be dissolved,
and to be with Christ, which is best of all, where it shall for ever live in the
continual admiration of, and glorying in the spiritual enjoyment of God, whose
work shall be everlastingly and fully to enjoy, and freely to sing praises unto
the Lord.

SECTION. VII. Wherein is declared what the Law is, and what the Gospel is;
with the difference betwee^ them both in the Letter, and in the Spirit.
THE Law in the Letter is a rule of life answerable to those moral principles
of nature left in man since his fall; the substance of which Law was written in
the heart of the first Adam, and was contained in that Verbal word; In the day
thou eatest, thou shall dye the death: Man having yet the principles of that
Law remaining in him. God having by the promised Messiah given a farther being
to Mankind in the world; he gives forth the righteous Law more at large in the
Letter, that so his Creatures might have a rule in the letter to walk by, and
likewise might be the more sensible of the loss of both; that principle and
power they had once in Adam, given unto them; and likewise with it, gives,
though not the same power, yet the same promise of external life in the Land,
God gives them. 2 The Law was that by which sin came: that is, by which sin
became sinful: For it is true, had not God given a Law; yet' man would have
been acting contrary to the pure mind of God: therefore he gives a Law, that
sin might become out or measure sinful, and it was added, because or
transgression; for where no law is, there is no transgression: For, by the Law,
was the knowledge of sin, and so it was an Administration of death, both in
the hands of Adam, as well as Moses, 1 Cor. 3 6, 7.

3 The Law in the Letter was an Image or Character of that spiritual
righteousness, God intended to bring in by Jesus Christ: Aas Adam was an Image
of that spiritual perfection God intended to make his partakers of in the
spirit by Christ; So this Law in the Letter was a rule answerable to that moral
principle of righteousness in Adam, and a Character likewise of that spiritual
righteousness that every believer attaines in Christ: the righteousness of
the Law in the Letter, was not that believers enjoy in Christ; but that
righteousness Adam enjoyed in his state of innocence. It was not the
righteousness of God; but a Character of that righteousness, holiness, and
purity, that all believers are made partakers of in the spirit: It was not that
righteousness, by which God intended to give life and glory eternally; but
such a righteousness which had external promises annexed unto it: For, if
there had been a Law given, that could have given life; then righteousness had
been by the Law. Wherefore, I conclude, that the Law in the Letter was but a
character of the spiritual righteousness of God, which is the life of the
Saints, and that by which God never intended to justify any to Eternity: For,
the Law in the Letter kills, not justifies; but the spiit gives life, 2
Cor. 3.6. The Law was given to Adam in th Letter, and Moses was he Minister of
the Law in the Letter, but, Christ is the Minister of the Law in the spirit:
Therefore Moses says himself, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up,
unto you, like unto me, him shall you hear in all things, Acts 3.22, 23. Deuteronomy.
18.15.

Object. It is said, Romans 15.8. that Jesus Christ was the Minister of
Circumoision.

Answ. True, he was the Minister of it for the truth of God, to confirm the
promises made unto Abraham, he was a Minister of it, so as to fulfill the truth
held forth in it: So the word Minister (Diaconos) signifies, God having
promised Christ to come of the seed of Abraham, he gives forth circumcision,
and diverse other ordinances, as Types representing him, and he is the Minister
of all, to act and fulfill all, and to be the substance of all those types for
the truth of God: Else God had not been true in his promises, neither had
salvation been obtained either by the Fathers, to whom the promises were made,
or the Gentiles who were a-farre off, and likewise included in the promises:
Therefore he was the Minister of circumcision for the truth of God, to
confirm the promises unto the Fathers, and likewise that the Gentiles might
glorify God for his mercy: Not so much a Minister in the giving forth of it;
but in the fulfilling of it, which gives occasion to the Gentiles to rejoice
and praise the Lord.

Object. Paul applies the words of Moses in the Law, Deuteronomy. 30.12, 13, 14. Romans
10.6, 7, 8. to be the righteousness of faith, The righteousness of faith
speaks on this wise.

Answ. It is true, that Christ and the righteousness of the Gospel, was
included in the Law. There was a literal or external righteousness expressed
in the letter, to which were external promises annexed: but there was a
spiritual and internal righteousness included, which, only believers were
made partakers of, which was a righteousness brought in by Christ, and
obtained by faith, which is the law in the Spirit, or that spiritual
righteousness of God, that believers are made partakers of, which is the
second thing propounded, what the Law in the spirit, is.

Secondly, the Law in the spirit, or the spiritual righteousness contained in
the Law, as you have already heard, is the righteousness of God, which every
believer is made partaker of. Note these two words for the more full clearing
of it.

First, that there was a spiritual righteousness included mystically in the
letter of the Law, which none ever saw into; but those spiritually enlightened.
Paul had experience of it, Romans 7.14. For we know that the Law is spiritual,
but I am carnal. The Law in the Letter was not spiritual: For the same
Apostle could say, that he walked concerning the righteousness of the Law in
the letter, blameless, Phil. 3. yet he call^ it, a fleshly walking: If any man
had cause of glorying in the flesh, I much more. And he says, he was alive
once without the Law; but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed,
Romans 7.9. alive, without the Law, in the spirit; for, he was not without the
Law, in the letter: by that it was he judged himself to be alive; he walked
concerning that, blameless; but when the commandment came, that is, when the
spiritual righteousness of the law was unfolded, which was no less than the
righteousness of God; then he saw how short he came of that righteousness:
he was yet but in the letter, in the flesh, and not in the spirit; Then sin
revived, I died

Secondly, that this Law in the spirit, is that spiritual righteousness of
God, that believers are made partakers of, 1 Cor. 3.6. The letter kills, but
the spirit gives life. The letter kills, the letter requires an exact and
perfect obedience, which none was able to perform; and so, the very letter of
the Law did kill. So at first it killed Adam and all his posterity; and so it
killed the Jews, being given forth in a more large way; for it was the
administration of death: but the Spirit gives life, viz. the Lord Jesus, the
spirit and substance of the Law, both moral and ceremonial; for the first man
was made a living soul, to answer a moral righteousness; the second was made
a quickening spirit, to give life to those, dead in the first Adam: And as the
Father has life in himself; so has he given to the Son to have life in
himself, and he quickneth whom he will, John 5. The Law, in the letter
kills; the law, in the spirit, quickneth: Therefore Christ says, I came not
to destroy, but to save, John 12.47.

Secondly, what the Gospel is, There is likewise the Gospel in the Letter, and
the Gospel in the Spirit: The Gospel in the letter; which properly does
signify glad tidings: and this Gospel is to go forth amongst all; but none
are made partakers of it in the spirit, but believers: All are made partakers
of it in the letter, it is glad tidings to all; and that in a double sense: 1.
It is glad tidings to all; for, all have a Being by it: it is that which has
made peace for all; an external peace, in taking away that present curse.

Secondly, it is that wherein internal and external peace is held forth and
propounded to all, which is glad tidings; none are exempted in the letter, til
they exempt themselves through unbelief, and so judge themselves unworthy of
eternal life.

Secondly, there is the Gospel in the letter likewise, as it is a Gospel of
spiritual peace and reconciliation: And thus every believer receives it, first
in the letter, through the power of the spirit, and this is Christ in the
flesh, dying upon the cross, taking away the condemnation of the Law in the
letter. And this is that answers the guilt of sin in the natural conscience; a
visible satisfaction for a literal transgression: This was Gods way to take
away sin, and this is the first discovery God makes of himself to a sinner,
because he is pleased to conform himself to that way that might best suit with
our understanding, and so by degrees to draw us up more in the spirit unto
himself, and this is the Gospel in the letter, answering the Law in the
letter, and the conscience troubled through the sense of sin, which is the
first knowledge of Christ; and is (indeed) but a knowledge after the flesh, and
so is in the esteem of the Apostle, but a carnal knowledge (that is) being
compared to the spiritual knowledge: therefore the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3. I
cannot write unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto
Babes in Christ. Note, I do not speak thus of the knowledge of Christ upon the
Cross, and the application of it, taking away the guilt of sin, as a low and
slight thing in it self: For first, it is Gods way to satisfy sinning souls,
and so none ever partake of mercy, but by this way. Secondly, it is that, being
wrought by the spirit of Christ, brings souls under the denomination of
children, 1 John 2.12. Thirdly, it is that by which the soul enjoyes much joy
and peace; who so has obtained it from the Lord, has obtained a good degree,
and much boldness in the spirit. Yet fourthly, God usually by this way, brings
souls up into a spiritual union with himself, and in comparison of the souls
enjoying of God in Christ, the Scripture calls it a carnal or fleshly
knowledge: and doubtless many may attain the knowledge of the Gospel in the
letter, and may own a dying Christ upon the Cross, and yet be but a humane
faith, a literal Gospel, and never truly known in the Spirit. But those who are
brought to the knowledge of and believing in, Christ dying upon the Cross, by
the saving work of the spirit, shall grow up in the more spiritual knowledge
of him.

Secondly, the Gospel in the spirit is the righteousness of God imparted in
the spirit to the believer: it is the making of the believer partaker of the
same nature, of the same spirit that was in Christ Jesus. The Gospel in the
spirit is the same as the Law in the spirit, and represents the spiritual
righteousness of God, with which he intends to cloth his people, and it is
called, The righteousness of God in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. As there was a literal
transgression of the Law; so there is a Gospel in the letter, to answer it; and
a Christ dying upon the cross. As there was a spiritual righteousness
included in the Law; so likewise is there a spiritual righteousness in the
Gospel, that is, in Christ, they are both in Christ: the former righteousness is
the knowledge of Christ, without, as dying, and satisfying: the second, is the
knowledge of Christ spiritually formed in us, which is here done in part, and
we shall in the conclusion be wholly changed, and swallowed up in that
spiritual righteousness. And indeed here lies the great mystery of the Gospel
in these three particulars.

1 God in Christ, 1 Timothy 3.16. 2 Christ spiritually in the Saints, Christ in
you the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. 3 That full spiritual change into the spirit
at the last day, 1 Cor. 15.15. So that this is the glad tidings of the Gospel
in the spirit, not only that we are made one with God, but likewise that we
are made one in God; he dwells in us, and we dwell in him, and we now serve
no longer in the oldnesse of the letter; that is, with our old nature, in the
old letter given forth to Adam, and by Moses to the old end, the obtaining of
righteousness, but in the newness of the Spirit; that is, the renewed mind by
the spirit, to a new letter written in the heart, to a new end, to glorify the
name of our Lord Jesus, and to declare our co^formity to him in the spirit.
That this is in the Gospel, in the spirit, which the Lord Jesus brings up his
unto by degrees; the Scriptures in the spiritual understanding will declare,
not only for confirmation, 2 Cor. 5.16. with Heb. 10.19, 20. In the first, the
Apostle says: Henceforth we know no man after the flesh; yea, though we have
known Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth we know him no more after the
flesh. Note first there is a knowledge of Christ after the flesh, even of the
Saints; Although we have known Christ after the flesh, yet know we him no more.
Why? verse. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, Christ is formed
in him after the spirit, and he comes now to know a spiritual Christ within
him, as well as a fleshly Christ without him. The second Scripture says, We
have boldness to enter into the holiest, by the blood of Christ, by a new and
a living way, that he has consecrated for us through the veil; that is to say,
his flesh: where likewise note, that the blood of Christ is but the way into
the holiest, and the flesh of Christ is the veil, through which we enter into
the holiest; that is, into the spiritual and heavenly enjoyment of God. We come
first to the flesh, and secondly to the spirit, the flesh being the way to the
spiritual enjoyment of him, where Christ is entered already in the perfection,
and will in conclusion draw all his spiritual Ones after him unto the same
perfection, into the same glory.

Object. If this be the Gospel in the Spirit, to know Christ no more after the
flesh, and to live in the spirit, to look upon Christ as the way, in the flesh,
into the spirit, or holiest where he is; then what need of faith so much spoken
of in the Scripture, the just shall live by faith, and We are justifi^d by
faith? etc.

Answ. 1. Faith may be acted not only on Christ dying upon the Cross, but in
Christ living in the soul: that is, my believing that Christ is spiritually
formed in me; as well as that he has dyed for me, that I am justified in the
spirit, as well as in the flesh; faith has the same object in the spirit, as in
the flesh, to believe that Christ lives spiritually in the soul, and that it
shall be swallowed up in the conclusion wholly in the spirit.

2 There may be often occasions to make use of faith likewise, while we are in
this body of flesh: although the soul obtaines a good degree of the enjoyment
of the spirit, from, and in God; yet there will be through the presence of
corruption some stir and trouble: and this God in his wisdom permits for
ends best known to himself. The Apostle Paul, who lived exceeding highly in
the spirit, sometimes in the third heaven, that is, in the highest discovery of
God; yet he meets with a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet
him, that was, some strong lust in the flesh, that might cause him to look down
again: And the reason he renders, Lest he should be exalted above measure, 2
Cor. 12. For, the truth is; if God should cause any one to live always in
heaven, that is, above all lusts and corruptions, in the highest discovery and
enjoyment of God; he would be ready to be lifted up above measure. Experience
teaches us as much, ready to look upon all knowledge and enjoyment, believe it
to be nothing but carnal; therefore he brings down Paul, that he might exercise
faith, and live upon grace, as well as others, My grace is sufficient for thee,
My strength shall be perfected in thy weakness. So that notwithstanding this
life of a Christian in the spirit; yet there will be the use of faith always
either in the Spirit, or in the Letter: sometimes God brings a soul to live
upon grace, as it was revealed by Christ in the flesh, and brought home and
enjoyed by the spirit: when we are at home in the body, we are absent from the
Lord in the spiirit; but when we are absent from the body, we are at home in
the Lord in the spirit.

3. There is a continual use of Faith, and that of the most spiritual
Christian, with relation to the perfection of our eternal enjoyments: for, the
Saints do not only enjoy a oneness with God here, and from hence much
spiritual and internal glory; but by faith, believes, and hope, expects that
perfection of glory hereafter, wherein it shall be perfectly made like unto
Christ, when this vile body shall be changed, and made like unto his glorious
body, which at present so acts it self even in the Saints, which prevents them
even of that perfection of glory, which they by faith expect when the change
comes: when Corruption, shall put one Incorruption, and Mortal, shall put on
Immortality: When this natural body shall become spiritual; then shall be
fully enjoyed what has been by faith believed, and by hope expected; and of
this has the spiritual Christian a taste, in the spiritual enjoyment of God
here, although not as then so fully swallowed up in that glory.

Obj. But it seems that Christ in the flesh is the way to Justification and
glory, the way into the holiest, which is heaven it self, where none shall
enter till they are changed, but Christ who is entered already, Heb. 9.24.

Answ. True, Christ is entered into heaven it self only in perfection, but
believers they enter likewise in part, viz. when they are got within the veil,
that is to say, the flesh; then they see into the spiritual mystery and
mansions of glory unconceivable, and indeed un-utterable, as the Apostle says;
and desire to live continually within the veil, if it might be, while they are
here, yet they are raised up more and more, in the spirit: and in the
conclusion, shall be for ever with Christ within all veiles, which was best of
all; as the Law in the Letter was a veil to the Gospel, both in Letter and
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.14. So is the Gospel in the flesh a veil to the Gospel in the
Spirit, a veil through which, and within which all the Saints by degrees shall
fully enter.

Qu. What is the difference between the Law and the Gospel?

Answ. The difference is both in the Letter, and in the Spirit, the Gospel in
the Spirit is the substance of that righteousness, spiritually included in the
Law, as the Type, Image, or Character of that spiritual substance the Saints
are partakers of. Hence, it is often called the Law in the Spirit, the Letter
kills, the Spirit gives life, and I through the Law am dead to the Law, that
I might live unto God, Gal. 2.19. that is, I through the Law of the Spirit,
that is, the righteousness of God in Christ, am dead to the Law in the Letter,
that I might live unto God in the Spirit, and not to the Law and self in the
Letter.

2. Difference is in the Letter of the Law, and so of the Gospel, and this is
glorious, for the letter of the law required a righteousness that was broken,
death ceiseth on all by that means, the Gospel in the Letter holds forth a
righteousness in Christ, fulfilling the Letter of the Law so that what
righteousness is in the Law required, is obtained by Christ, and every
believer is made partaker of it, and so the difference is, 1. The Law
prescribes a Rule, the Gospel fulfills the Rule, Mat. 5.28. The Law requires a
righteousness, The Gospel fulfills that righteousness. Romans 10.3. The Law was
the administration of death; the Gospel, the administration of life.

Qu. Is not the Law in the Letter, a Rule to believers?

Answ. 1. Not as it was handed forth by Moses, from Mount Sinai: so it was a
killing Letter; but 2. as it was taken into the hand of Christ, and so
satisfied and handed forth by Christ being turned into Gospel-Rules; it
remains a Rule, so far as we are in the flesh, I mean, in the knowledge of
Christ after the flesh* but as God writes his Laws in the he^ris of his
people, and takes them up in the spirit; so shall they live above the Law in
the Letter, even of the Gospel; yet not without: for they have it within them:
it is in their hearts; and so they are a Law unto themselves: Then the Rule in
the Letter is as a stay in the hand, or as a guide in the way, helping the
soul up to the Spirit, and then he walks not after the flesh, but after the
spirit, having the Law of the spirit of life within himself, guiding him in
the way of holiness, and so that Scripture is made good, 1 John 3. The
annoyntings which you have received shall teach you all things, and ye need not
that any man teach you: and The spiritual man judges all things, yet he
himself is judged of no man, 1 Cor. 2.14.

Application: To encourage the Saints in the power and spirit of Jesus to
press forward after this knowledge, and enjoyment of God in the Spirit: this
was Paul's resolution, who had tasted of the spiritual discoveries of God (as
deeply as any) to press forward after perfection, Phil. 3. Forgetting things
that are behind, not always living below. The effects of it will prove very
glorious. 1. It is that by which you shall be able, with the more evidence of
light and truth, to judge of things that differ, the spiritual man judges all
things. 2. It is that will make the life of a Christian exceeding glorious,
carrying him through all difficulties with much spiritual joy. 3. It is that
will put a period to all differences and divisions amongst the Saints.
Divisions flow from our ignorance, and dwelling so much in the Leter, 1 Cor.
3.3. whereas there are among you divisions and strife; are ye not carnal, and
walk as men? Those divisions, and that strife amongst the Saints about things
in the Le^ter, argue that they are exceeding carnal, but this knowledge of God
in the Spirit, will as a mighty Gu^^e swallow up all those litterall
differences, and put an end to all strife, both among particular Saints, and in
the Nations. Esa. 2.2.3.4. When once the Mountain of the Lords House (which is
his Saints) comes to be established on the topp of all Mountains and Hills,
that is; in the spiritual enjoyment of God, above all carnal and fl^shly
things; then shall all wars and divisions have an end, and not till then.

4. It is that will cause many a glorious Star to fall from heaven: many who
have acted much after the Letter, will upon the discoveries of the glory of God
in the Spirit; fall from that light they seemed to have.

SECTION VIII. The matter of the Church, what?
THE Church of Christ may be considered either as more general or more
particular. 1. More general, and then it includes the whole body of the Saints
in the spirit, this of some is called the invisible Church, but to speak in
the Scripture Language, it may be rather called the general or universal
Church, the whole body of Saints in the Spirit, called the mystical body of
Christ, because of their spiritual union with and in Christ their head: This
Church or assembly (for so the Greek Ecclesia properly signifies) we shall
read of Heb. 12.22.23. ye are com^ to Mount Sion, and unto the City of the
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels,
and to the general assembly or Church of the first borne, and written in
heaven, and to the spirits of just men made p^rfect; this is the Church that
shall be made one in glory; he general assembly of Saints, the spiits of just
men, and it is that might be desired at present, that Saints Communion might
flow more from their union in the spirit, and not altogether from the union in
the letter: this is the glorious Church of Christ; and the knowledge of it in
the spirit, will cause Saints to own each other more in the spirit. 2. The
Church of Christ may be considered more particular, or a particular body, or
company of Saints in the visible profession of the Gospel, walking in the
enjoyment of Ordinances; taking particular care of each other, and building up
each other in the faith: and of this Church we shall read, frequent in the new
Testament; and this Church is likewise called the body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.27.
and it is not to be questioned, but that this practice is very commendable
amongst Saints: and the knowledge of God in the Spirit, and of Saints in the
Spirit, will not break or lessen the fellowship of particular Churches; but
increase it, and make it to be more spiritual: for, questionles that which
tends to the breach of communion and fellowships amongst Saints, is not of God,
for God is love, and they who dwell in God, dwell in love: it is that will
increase love, and this is the more excellent way, and that which in conclusion
will swallow up all differences: yet one thing is much to be desired, that is,
that there might be a general union amongst the Saints; that those who are
spiritual might not be divided in spiritual Communion, because of some
litterall differences about the use of ordinances and the like. Oh that the
Lord would help us to bear with each other in such things! why cannot Saints
in matters of difference bear with each other according to the Apostles rule?
seeing he that observes a day, observes it to the Lord; and he that observes
not a day, observes it not to the Lord, and both give God thanks.

Obj. But our difference is in matters of Ordinances for the most part which
God commands, and has given them to us as privileges;

Answ. True, yet they are such commands and privileges as God has given to
his Servants to lead them up to himself in the Spirit: and what if some enjoy
God gloriously in the Spirit without these, and we find them spiritual, and
walking answerable to the spirit of Christ: why should my conscience judge
another man's Liberty? and why should not we hold Communion with such in the
Spirit, and in the letter too, in those things wherein there is a union? but
the truth is there is too-too much erring at present upon both hands; the one
judging it too carnal for any Saints to walk in the use of ordinances, which
is not a truth at present; the other judging it inconsistent with the Gospel,
and the state of a Christian to live without the practice and use of
Ordinances; a third sort there are that would submit to Ordinances, but want
Administrators, and this is more carnal than either of the former, because they
expect that to be in a creature which is only in God; but here should be a
learning and forbearing, where the spirit of Christ is.

A fourth sort there are who put Ordinances upon those not capable of them
without any word at all in the letters and this is the most carnal work of all,
and savours much of the earth, and of an old Testament-spirit, from whence
usually, the ground is brought, and it were much to be desired that the Lord
would be pleased to enlighten their eyes, that they might have more spiritual
apprehension of the Gospel, and the end of Gospel Ordinances: yet it should be
the wisdom of those taught from above, to own any thing of God wherever they
find it: and although, it is true, there cannot be a Communion with and in
things never of God prescribed; yet the spirit of lov^ should so temper ^u^
spirits, as that we should not bite and devour each other; but, let as many as
are spiritual, though differing in some circumstantial things in the letter,
yet own each other in ^he spirit, impu^ing those differences to the flesh: and
this union in the spirit, the knowledge of it, will in conclusion bring all the
Saints into one spiritual way, Esa. 35.9. And so they shall worship God in the
Spirit with one heart, Z^ph. 3. and so pu an end to divisions, and dividing
principles which flow merely from the flesh.

SECTION IX. The spiritual Kingdom of Christ in his Church in the latter
days of the Gospel, discovered.
THE Kingdom of Christ has always been, and still is, spiritual, but in the
latter days of the Gospel, it shall be much more spiritual and glorious than
formerly with relation to the subjects of it. For the clearing of this truth in
hand, note these 4. particulars.

1. That Christ is a King.

2. Who are the subjects of his Kingdom.

3. That his Kingdom shall increase in glory and spirituallnesse in the latter
days.

4. That his Kingdom is spiritual, and not of this world.

First, that Christ is King; I suppose it is unquestionable: all who own the
Gospel but in the letter, confess as much in word; see a Scripture or two to
confirm it, Psalm. 2.6. The Lord speaking of Christ, says, Yet have I set my
King upon the holy hill of Sion, notwithstanding the rage of men, yet Christ is
King, and will reign so likewise, Psalm 45. with Heb. 1.8. but unto the Son he
says, thy Throne, O God, is for ever, and ever; a Scepter of righteousness is
the Scepter of thy Kingdom: he has a Kingdom and a Scepter by which he
rules; he is the Prince of the Kings of the earth, a King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords.

2. Who are the subjects of his Kingdom; it is true, he is King over all, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, he will rule over his enemies with his Iron rod,
and dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel; but he is in a more special
manner King over the Saints, and in them he lives; and so rules: in them as well
as over them: he is not only King of nations, but king of Saints, Rev. 15.3. It
is part of the Saints song of joy, Just and true are thy ways O thou King of
Saints: and in the Saints he reigns spiritually and powerfully; for in the day
of his power he makes them a willing people: the subjects of Christ's Kingdom
are a free people: the manner how Christ reigns in and over his people, and
what are his Laws, I pass it in this place, and referr you to the Kingly
Office of Christ in my book entitled, the exaltation of Christ in his
Offices: and, and so come to the 3. thing propounded; That is, that the
Kingdom of Christ shall increase in glory and spiritualnesse in the latter
days: the glory of the Church in the latter days shall increase, and the
manifestation of Christ's Kingly power shall increase, Esa. 9. of the increase
of his Government and Peace; there shall be no end. The Churches glory shall
consist of 2. particulars, that is external and internal.

1. External, the Church shall enjoy much external glory, liberty, and peace,
even in the world in the latter days.

Qu. Wherein shall the external glory of the Church consist?

Answ. 1. In the abundance of peace and quiet, even from the men of the world,
Esa. 66.12. I will extend peace to her, like a River, and the glory of the
Gentiles like a flowing stream: peace shall be extended not only in the
Spirit, but in the letter likewise; for the ground of this peace is rendered in,
verses 15.16. for behold the Lord will come with fire, etc. Esa. 65.25. the
Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, etc. they shall not hurt nor destroy in
all my holy Mountain, says the Lord: God will take away the Wolvish
disposition of men, that they shall live peaceably amongst the Saints, they
shall not hurt nor destroy, etc.

2. God will take off the spirits of evil men, he will make them stoop and fall
before the Saints, Mich. 7.16.17. The Nations shall see and be confounded at
all their might, they shall lay their hand upon their mouth, their ears shall
be deaf, they shall lick the dust like a Serpent, they shall move out of their
holes like worms of the earth, they shall be afraid of the Lord our God, and
shall fear because of thee. Thus will the Lord deal with his enemies in the
latter days, he will take away their Chariot-wheels, and cause them to drive
heavily.

3. God will give the Saints a good name, even amongst their enemies: they shall
be high even in the thoughts of bad men, Isa. 65.15. And ye (to wit the Lords
enemies) shall leave your name for a curse to my chosen: for the Lord will slay
thee, and call his servants by another name. Formerly, the Saints had a name of
reproach amongst the wicked: if a man departed from iniquity, he made himself
a prey; but the Lord will give his servants another name, even amongst their
enemies, that men shall not bless themselves in their evil ways; but whosoever
blesses himself in the earth, shall bless himself in the God of truth.

4. God will make his enemies in stead of persecuting, to serve the Saints,
Isai. 60.12. For the Nation and kingdom that will not serve thee, shall
perish; yea, those Nations shall be utterly wasted. Verse. 14. The sons of
them that afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee; and all they that
despised th^e, shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet, and shall
call thee the City of the Lord. Thus you see the Churches enemies shall not
only acknowledge the Saints, and confess them to be the Lords City; but bow
down unto them, and do them service.

5. The Saints shall be exceeding many, and that will add to their external
glory: Times have been, that to be a Christian indeed, would have been a
wonder, and he that departed from iniquity, made himself a prey, and so were
counted the offscouring of all things; but now a little-one shall become a
thousand, and a small one a strong Nation, yea, the Lord will hasten it in his
time* Isa. 60.22. and verse. 5. Then shall thou see and flow together, and thy
heart shall fear and be enlarged; because the abundance of the Sea shall be
converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee. This,
with much more, shall be the eternal glory of the Church.

Secondly, the Church shall enjoy abundance of internal glory in the latter
days: both is coming on apace.

Quest. Wherein shall the Churches internal glory consist?

Answ. 1. In the abundance of spiritual light and knowledge: Much ignorance
has possessed the souls, even of Saints, a long time; a veil has been spread
over all Nations, both Gentile as well as Jew; but the veil shall be taken
away, Isai. 25. And I will, says the Lord, destroy or swallow up in ^his
mountain, (that is, in the Church) the face of the covering cast over all
people, and the veil spread over all Nations. Such has been the ignorance
that has overspread all People, and Nations, through the spiritual operation
of the man of sin; that, the mystery of the Gospel has been hid, as it
were, from us, and sealed up even with seven seals, a perfection of darkness,
that none was found worthy to open it: Humane Arts, and Creature-wisdome being
set a-work, did but so much the more darken it, and cast a veil upon it, till
at last the Lord Jesus begins to open it himself, and will unseale it by
degrees, and cause the veil to vanish away, to the great glory of his
spiritual Ones; but to the great terror of all humanists, who were left
without this spiritual knowledge of Christ. See the further confirmation of
this truth, Isa. 11.9. The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as
the waters cover the sea. As ignorance has, as a veil, been spread over all
Nations: so shall the knowledge of the Lord go forth abundantly throughout all
Nations, Isa. 60.17, 19, 20. Rev. 21.22, 23.

Secondly, that which shall make for the Churches spiritual glory, shall be
the enjoyment of a full freedom from the guilt of sin; that which much
troubles many a precious soul: and it was that the Apostle Paul was freed
from, Romans 8. We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again; but
the spirit of adoption whereby we cry, Abba, Father. And this is that the Lord
has promised to his people in the latter day, Isa. 33.24. And the inhabitant
shall not say, I am sick, the people that dwell therein, shall be forgiven
their iniquity. Sin is the cause of spiritual sickness: This cause shall be
taken away; for, they shall be forgiven their iniquity; i. e. they shall live
in the knowledge and enjoyment of it. And from henceforth they shall not say, I
am sick, and the voice of crying and weeping shall be no more heard in her,
for, the former things are passed away: there shall be no more sin nor sorrow,
but everlasting joy shall be upon her head and sorrow and sighing shall pass
away, Isai. 35.10.

A third thing that shall make for the Saints spiritual glory, is the knowledge
of, and enjoyment of, a spiritual Oneness with God in Christ, and each with
other: although this be a glorious spiritual truth: yet it is that the Saints
have lived exceeding short in the knowledge of it; the knowledge and enjoyment
of it will be exceeding glorious to the spiritual Christian. What this union
is, and wherein it consists, I refer it to what has been said formerly in
the glorious condition of persons in the second Adam, above the first.

A fourth thing that will make for the Saints spiritual glory, is, a living
above creatures and things, in the spiritual enjoyment of God, whom to enjoy
is life; when all things below, shall be nothing; when the soul shall be
content to suffer the loss of all things, that Christ may be all, and in all;
the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad rivers and streams, wherein
shall go no Gally with Oars, nor shall gallant Ships pass thereby, Isai.
33.24. no need of rowing in creatures or things, no need of gallant ships, of
any thing to carry the soul up unto God, or to bring God in Christ down to the
soul; but the glorious Lord will be all, and in all, and the spiritual
Christian shall live in the enjoyment of him. verse 23. Then shall the tacklings
be forsaken, or loosed, they could not strengthen their Mast, they shall not be
able, who desire it, to sail any further or longer in ordinances, duties,
creatures; but the great spoil shall be divided, and the lame take the spoil,
the lame contemptible ones, they are the people that are like to enjoy this
spiritual glory.

A fifth thing that will make for the Saints spiritual glory, is a spiritual and
internal conformity unto God: they shall live up in the spirit, and walk after
the spirit, Christ will manifest himself spiritually in them: the light of the
Moon shall be as the light of the Sun; and the light of the Sun shall be
seuen-fold as the light of seven days; the light of the Moon, that is, of the
Church, shall be as the light of the sun, that is, Christ the son of
Righteousness, who is both a Sun and a shield; and the light of the sun
shall be sevenfold, that is, Christ shall appear in the spirit to his,
conforming them to himself in the spirit, which will appear seven times more
glorious, than formerly when we knew him after the flesh. Zach. 12.8. He that
is weak and feeble amongst them, shall be as David; that is, Christ; David shall
be as God, even as the Angels of God before him: This is the glorious
conformity that all the Saints shall have unto Jesus Christ in the spirit, and
this glorious unity and conformity unto the Law of Righteousness is that will
appear at the first sight of it very terrible and dreadful to the sons of men.
Cant. 6.10. Who is She that looks forth as the morning, fair at the Moon,
clear as the Sun, terrible as an Army with Banners: such will be the
strangeness of this glorious truth, that it will not only appear terrible and
dreadful to the men of this world, but even Christ sets it forth himself with a
note of admiration, not as if it were strange to him, but rather to discover
her excellent glory; and (indeed) the Church will be worth a looking on, and
her glory a seeking-after, of all spiritual ones.

4 Particular propounded for the clearing of the truth in hand, is; that the
kingdom of Christ is wholly spiritual, and not of this world, that as
formerly, so in the latter days, the glory of his Kingdom shall be in the
spirit, and not in the flesh; it will be spiritual, and not personal: for
clearing of it, I shall first prove it from testimony of Scripture. 2ly. By
spiritual Arguments grounded upon Scripture. 3ly Answer such Questions and
Scripture-grounds, which seem to hold it forth.

1 By testimony from Scripture, it is the word of Christ himself. My Kingdom is
not of this world; that is, not a fleshly, and external Kingdom over the
bodies of men; but a spiritual and internal one; the kingdom of heaven is
within you: So likewise, 1 Cor. 5.16. There is no more knowledge of Christ
after the flesh, they are too fleshly thoughts for a spiritual Christian.
Secondly, it will appear by spiritual Arguments likewise.

1 Argument. The spiritual presence of Christ with his Saints, is the most
glorious presence. Christ will be most gloriously present with his people in the
latter days, ergo, his presence, and so his Kingdom, will be a spiritual
presence, and not a personal, The major Proposition is evident from Scripture,
that the spiritual presence of Christ, is the most glorious presence: This
Christ tells his Disciples when he was personally with them, John 16.7.
Nevertheless it is expedient that I go away, for if I go not away, the
Comforter will not come unto you: And therefore, Christ tells his Disciples, Ioh.
14.26. That if they loved him, they would not reason, because he said, he would
go away; because his spiritual presence was the most glorious presence: and we
see it by experience, that the Disciples of Christ were most spiritual, and had
most spiritual enjoyment of God, when Christ was gone from them in person, and
they enjoyed him in the spirit. That the presence of Christ in the latter days
will be most glorious; appears by all that have been formerly spoken, and I
think none of light, deny it: then the conclusion holds true, that the presence
of Christ with his people in the latter days, wherein they shall enjoy most
light and glory; will be a spiritual presence.

2 Argument. If Jesus Christ be known of the Saints no more after the flesh,
but after the spirit; then his reign in the latter days of the Gospel will not
be personal, but spiritual: but, he is no more to be known of the Saints
after the flesh, as you have formerly heard, 1 Cor. 5.16. Therefore his
presence, and so his Kingdom will not be a fleshly or personal presence and
kingdom; but a spiritual.

3 Arg. Spiritual glory, and spiritual enjoyment, is that which most of all
suites with the majesty and glory of God. Ioh. 4.22, 23, 24. Col. 3.1. 1 Cor.
2.9, 10, 14 The glory of the Saints shall be spiritual, and their enjoyment
spiritual in the latter days; spiritual knowledge, Esa 11. and spiritual
conformity unto Christ, Zach. 12.8. and spiritual joy and rejoicing, Isa 35,
10. Ergo, the presence and Kingdom of Christ, in, and with his Saints, will be
a spiritual Kingdom, and not a personal.

4 Arg. Christ's Kingdom and presence shall be with all his people, filling them
with spiritual glory, Isa 25.7. He will take away the veil spread over all
Nations, and v. 9. And they stall say, Lo, this is the Lord, we have waited
for him. Christ's personal presence cannot be with all his at once: therefore
his presence and kingdom will be spiritual, and not personal.

Objections answered concerning the personal reign of Christ.
Obj. 1. That Christ was promised to the Jews to come as a King, and they to
this day expect him to come a King, to deliver them from their captivity;

Ans. 1. It is true, he was promised to come as a King, Isa 9.7. and so he
came a King, although not in outward appearance, Matthew. 2.2. Where is he that
is born King of the Jews? we have seen his Star in the East, and are come to
worship him. He was the King of the Jews, when He was born, he was a Child,
and yet a King. 2 He is King of all spiritual Jews, for he is not a Jew, that
is one outwardly, but he is a Jew, that is one inwardly: and Christ reigns
spiritually in all his people, the Kingdom of Heaven is within you. 3 Christ
will appear a spiritual glorious King to the Jews, the natural seed of
Abraham, in the latter days, gathering them from among the Heathen to himself
in the spirit, and so will reign in and over them in the spirit gloriously,
Ezekiel. 37. throughout. See verse. 24, 25. That they shall be gathered in with all
the beloved of God, by the spiritual working of Christ, and not by his personal
appearing; is clear from this ground: They shall be gathered unto Christ, from
the beholding of Christ crucified, and not from the beholding of his glorious
personal appearing: Therefore, Christ shall come a King, in the spirit, to his
people, and not in the flesh: see Zach. 12.10: They shall look upon him whom
they have pierced, and mourn over him, etc. The eying of a pierced Christ, shall
be the way of bringing in Jew, as well as Gentile.

Obj. 2. Christ suffered reproach and shame in the flesh from his enemies:
therefore, it is likely he shall be glorified in the flesh before his
adversaries.

Answ. Christ shall without question be glorified in the presence of his
adversaries, and all Nations shall be gathered together before him, when he shall
appear from heaven in flaming fire, to render vengeance to them that know not
God, and obey not his Gospel; but, whether Christ shall appear personally, or
in any personal form, will be a great question: but with much spiritual power
manifesting himself to the salvation of his people, and to the confusion of al
his, and his Churches enemies, Matthew. 5.25.

Obj. 3. It is said Rev. 20.4. That those that had been beheaded for the
testimony of Jesus, and for the Word of God, that had not worshipped the Beast,
nor his Image, nor received his mark in their foreheads, and they lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand years, and the rest of the dead lived not again.

Answ. For clearing the mystery of this Scripture, it will be requisite, first
to set down the things asserted from hence. 2ly To unfold the mystery intended,
which will answer the things asserted: the things asserted hence are these: 1
That Christ shall reign a thousand years personally. 2 That all the Saints
departed from the beginning of the world, shall be raised, and come and reign
with him. 3 That the wicked shall not be raised till after the thousand years
be finished,

For answer unto, and clearing of the truth.

1 I conceive it to be a glorious truth, that Christ shall come and reign a
thousand years, along time, spiritually in his people; but not personally
amongst his people: that Christ shall reign thus gloriously, see not only this
Scripture, but Rev. 11.15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great
voices in Heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms
of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever. Thus, you see,
Christ shall have a Kingdom, and for the time of it, it is said Revel. 20. to be
1000. years, and in Isa 60, to be many Generations, I will make thee an
eternal excellency, a joy of many Generations.

Obj. But its said, Rev. 11.15. That the Nations and Kingdoms of the world,
are become the Nations of Christ, and he shall reign for ever: therefore, it
seems that his kingdom shall be personal.

Answ. The Nations and Kingdoms of the world may be said to be the Nations and
Kingdoms of Christ, in a twofold respect, and yet Christ not reign personally;
and this the Scripture clearly holds forth.

1 In respect of the abundance shall be converted unto Christ in all nations,
that in comparison of what has been formerly: the Nations and Kingdoms shall
become the Kingdoms of Christ, Esa. 66.19.20.60. Chap. from 5. to 12. verse. 2.
Christ may be said to be the King of Nations, in respect of the ruling of his
Saints over their enemies; for in this Kingdom of Christ shall the enemies of
Christ be subjected and shall serve the Saints, the Nations that will not serve
thee shall perish, and Christ reigning in his Saints over them, may be said
truly to reign over them, Psalm. 149.7.8.9. Rev. 2.26.27. Rev. 5.10. Thus the
first assertion in part is truth, Christ shall reign 1000. years, that is many
Generations; but it will be spiritual, and not personal.

2. Assertion from thence is, that all the Saints from the beginning of the
world shall be raised and come, and reign with Christ.

Answ. For the clearing of the truth in this Scripture, which will answer this
assertion, consider, 1. what is meant by the beheading for the witness of
Jesus, 2. What is meant by not receiving the mark of the beast. 3. What is
meant by being raised, living and reigning with Christ. 4. What is meant by the
not living of the rest of the dead until the 1000. years were finished. 1.
What is meant by being beheaded for the witness of Jesus: It is a spiritual
beheading; such a beheading are all the Saints who shake off Antichrists badge
and yoke like to meet withal. Christ is said to be the head of the Church,
and the head of every man, that is, of every Saint, is Christ now, when the
Lord discovers the evil of Antichristian ways to his people, and they forsake
it, they durst not receive either the Image, name, or mark of the beast, they
shall presently be beheaded by the beast, that is, they will condemn them as
those that forsake Christ, and cry out on them, that they are revolted, that
they are Sectaries, Hypocrites, Heretics, etc.

And thus they behead the Saints spiritually, and that for the testimony of
Jesus, because they cannot but declare the things that they have seen, and
heard from him, which will overthrow and ruin all things contrary to himself
in the end. 2. What is meant by a receiving of the Image or mark of the beast?

Answ. By the Image of the beast is meant that likeness that it has unto the
first beast, who seems to receive a deadly wound being compared with Chap.
13.11. to 16. that is, this beast seems to make a change, he speaks great
words, his look is more stout than his fellows; he thinks to change times and
Laws, yet when all is done, it is but the Image of the first beast, the
exercise of the same power, the same wisdom in the things of God, the same
worship for substance, it is all the same in substance, and it is but the
number of a man all of the flesh, it is from below, yet such must the worth and
the excellency of it be for a time that whosoever will not receive the Image of
the first beast, and account it something too, is likewise to be beheaded, and
not to be suffered either to buy or sell amongst them, and many a Saint is like
to be given into his hand, and he shall prevail over them, but it shall be but
for a time, times, and the dividing of a time, and then the Kingdom shall
become the Saints. Dan. 7. 2ly. The Image is that internal spiritual principle
from which the beast acts, for none can truly follow the beast, but those who
have received this Image, that is who act from the same principle, those are
acted, who act for and from the man of sin, and it is called an Image, because
it resembles Christ both in the internal as well as the ex^ernal part; yet acts
from his own wisdom by its own power, according to its own mind, to its own
end, and this in all resembles Christ.

Now these who refuse this Image in the spirit, and cannot be contented with a
wisdom like Christ, a self acting in the room of Christ, a rule short of
Christ; an end besides Christ: from hence casting off this Image, is carried on
in another track then before: they come to be beheaded for Christ, because they
cannot receive the Image, who is the Antichrist in the Spirit and not Christ,
so that here is not only the Image of the first beast, with relation to pattern
and power, but likewise in relation to holiness, the first will be for Christ,
and so the second, yet are both but Antichrist, 2. What is meant by the mark
of the beast in the forehead, and in the right hand; by the mark in the
forehead, is meant the visible profession of Antichrist in the external part
those that would not visibly profess the ways of Antichrist: or in the right
hand; that is, to act for him, these were denied to buy or sell, Chap. 13.17. to
sell, that is to preach the Gospel; for Antichrist under the notion of preaching
the Gospel, sels his wares, but a time is coming that none will buy their wares
anymore, so they deny any who own not the Image name, or mark, to sell; hence
they may examine those who preach upon such and such intergatories, and if it
appear that they deny the Image, name, or mark; they may not sell, that is,
give forth freely what God communicates unto them, when others sell or buy,
that is, partake of any spiritual good amongst them if they could prevent it,
and those were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, but they were at last
raised, and lived with Christ 1000. years, that is raised up from their low
condition, taken up into heaven in the sight of their adversaries, and lived
with Christ in the Spirit, reigning triumphantly over all spiritual enemies,
self, satan, world, and those Merchants that sell all (yea the souls of men
too) shall be weeping, and crying alas, alas, Rev. 18. when the Lord shall make
good that word of truth, Es^. 66.5. hear the word of the Lord ye that tremble
at his word, your brethren that hated you, that beheaded you, that cast you out
for my name sake, said, let the Lord be glorified, that is, (it tends to the
Honor of God to behead and to cast out these men) but he shall appear to your
joy, you shall be raised up with Christ, and I will give you a new name, but they
shall be ashamed.

Obj. John says, the Saints that had not worshipped the Beast (he speaks in
the Preterpluperfectence therefore it seems not to be the Saints raised who at
present were beheaded in the mystical sense, but the Saints that had been
beheaded in the litteral sense.)

Answ. First it is the use of the Spirit, or the spirits Language, to deliver
it self in dark and mystical terms, so the Apostle says in another case, 1
These. 4.5. that we which are alive and remain til the coming of the Lord, etc.
the Apostle speaks of, we, as if he had intended the Thessalonians and
himself, which was least intended; but the Saints, who being all one in the
spirit, and but one mystical body in Christ, while there are any Saints in the
world, the Apostle makes it to be all one, as if He and the Thessalonians
were them, and so delivers it in the present tense; when he might have said
rather, to speak after the manner of men, then they which shall be alive at his
coming, etc. as in Revel. the word might have run thus; and so questionless,
it is to be understood: then they that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus,
were raised or lived, and reigned with Christ, as the sense of the former; then
they that shall be alive at the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them
which are asleep: so that the spirit of God, might as well deliver a truth,
which is in the Present tense, in the Preterpluperfect tense; as, a truth in
the Present tense, which was in the Future; and yet is, all to exercise the
mind of him that reads, and to let us know, there is mystery in the Gospel.

Secondly, very few Saints have been beheaded in the litteral sense: those that
have dyed for Christ, have dyed other deaths, and not beheaded; therefore, we
cannot understand it in the letter, but in the spirit.

The fourth particular propounded, was, what was meant, in that the rest of the
dead were not raised, until the 1000. years were finished; that is, none that
had been bodily dead, Saints, or wicked, good or bad, were raised, till after
the 1000, years were finished, and then you shall see the resurrection of all,
which is called the second resurrection: The first, is called a resurrection,
and the first resurrection; because it shall be a resurrection from shame and
disgrace in the world. And secondly, it shall be a glorious resurrection in the
spirit: this first, all the Saints have in some measure been partakers of it.
Thus it appears, that Christ shall have a Kingdom, a glorious, a spiritual
One.

Quest. But when shall this Kingdom be?

Answ. 1. It is already begun in the spirits of Saints; the Kingdom of Heaven
is within you. 2 I believe that the time of the 1000 years, which is a more
glorious estate in the spirit is not yet begun: but the beginning of that time
shall be when the 7 seals are fully opened, and the 7 trumpets fully founded,
and the 7 vials powered forth, they being but effects of each other; the opening
of the seals, occasions the sound of the trumpets; the sound of the trumpets
occasion the vials, the opening of the seals, the unfolding of the mysteries
of the Gospel, (which have been hid, Rev. 5.1, 2.) As light breaks forth, the
trumpets sound, the servants of Jesus preach forth the mystery of the Gospel:
the preaching of the mysteries of the Gospel, in the power and purity of it,
occasions the vials of wrath to fall upon the Antichristian estate, both in the
spirit, and in the letter; which work is now a doing. (Wait the Lords time, and
it will come on apace.) But first, we are yet like to be given into the hands of
the little horn, who changes times and laws; the two witnesses are yet like to
be slain, and to sydead 3 days and a half; and the woman clothed with the
Sun, to be driven into the wilderness for a little space, a time, times, and
half a time; the Beast with two horns like a Lamb, has yet a little time to
make use of his power; persuading them that dwell in the Earth, to make an Image
to the first Beast; and that none but those who own it, shall buy or sell with
them: the Saints beheaded under the Altar to wait a little time, before they be
raised up to live with Christ 1000. years: but it is not long, the vision is
for an appointed time: in the end, it will speak, and not ly; it will come, and
not tarry: The first 1000. is almost past the second and third, are coming on
apace; and all the Nations and Kingdoms in the world will come apace to be the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever; their
lives shall be prolonged for a season, and a time; and other Scriptures are
alleged for the personal reign of Christ; as the stone cut out of the
Mountain, without hands, Dan. 2. that is, the glorious power of Christ, by weak
means, subduing all Antichristian enemies, without his Saints, and all
Antichristian things, by his spirit, within them: So that in Dan. 7.10. the
glorious company of Saints attending on Christ in the spirit, which shall be
fulfilled at the raising of the two witnesses up into heaven, in the sight of
their enemies, Rev. 5.10, 11. This is the first glorious work of the Lord
Jesus, in, and amongst the Saints: the Lord reigns, let the Saints rejoice:
the Lord reigns, let the world tremble. See Zach. 14.5. The Lord our God will
come, and all the Saints with him; that is, Christ will come in the spirit, and
all the Saints shall appear gloriously in him.

A word of Application: First, if this be truth, that the Kingdom of Christ
is a spiritual kingdom, and not of this world; this may inform us how far,
besides the Gospel in the spirit and truth of it; those men are, who make the
Kingdom of Christ to be merely political and a state Kingdom, who turn the
world by a humane power into the Church and Kingdom of Christ (as they say)
and Christ must have a worldly carnal Kingdom, no better than the Kings of the
earth enjoy; or else he shall have none at all: it savors exceedingly of the
earth, and ere long, thither it must return.

Secondly, this should encourage the Saints to press forward after the
knowledge of God in the spirit; that as the kingdom of Christ is spiritual,
and not of this world; so may the Saints Kingdom likewise be in the spirit, and
so all their enjoyments may be spiritual enjoyments: this is that will make the
soul fat, and wel-liking in the Lord, fill the soul with joy and peace, which
the world is not acquainted with; their eyes never saw it, nor their hearts
conceived it; neither are they like to see it, unless the Lord make them
spiritual.

SECT. X. Of Death, Resurrection, Judgment, and the state of the Saints, after
judgment, eternally with God.
FIrst, of death: It is appointed for all men once to dye; Dust we are, and to
dust we must return; and therefore, it behooves us to expect it: All the days
of mine appointed time, will I wait, till my change come: Death is certain,
although the time be uncertain: it is, that none are in a common and ordinary
way exempted from, unless those Saints who are alive at the last coming of
Christ; they shall be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, 1 Cor.
15.51, 52. and so shall be caught up in the spirit, to meet the Lord in the
Air, 1 These. 4.17. Secondly, of the resurrection.

That there shall be a resurrection of the body at the last day, is evident,
John 5, 28, 29. John 11.24. with 1 Cor. 15. throughout, Rev. 20.12, 13.
although this truth is by some, denied, and by others, too carnally looked
upon; some thinking, that our bodies of flesh shall be raised in the same
form, in which it dyed; others, that it shall be spiritual, yet question,
whether it shall he of the same substance: therefore, it will be necessary, to
consider two particulars, for the clearing of it. First, by what power we shall
be raised. Secondly, with what bodies.

1. By what power.
Answ. 1. By the same power, by which Jesus Christ was raised; which was by the
power and spirit of God: he was declared to be the son of God with power by
his resurrection from the dead, Romans 1, 4. Secondly, by the same power and
spirit the Saints are enlightened, and raised from the spiritual death of sin,
and self, which is the same power, by which the body of Christ was raised: so
that when we say, we are raised by the resurrection of Christ in the spirit;
that is, by the same power, by which Christ was raised: therefore, the Apostle
desires to know the power of the death, and resurrection of Christ, Phil.
3.10. by the same power and Spirit shall our bodies be raised at the last day,
Romans 8.11. 1 Cor. 15 13, 14, 15, 16. this being a truth that they shall be
raised by the same power: it may somewhat direct us to the form in which they
shall be raised, which is the second particular, that is in a spiritual form,
not in a fleshly, for as the spirit of Christ raises us up in the spirit while
we are here, so shall it raise up our bodies in the spirit at the last day, it
is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body, our vile bodies shall be
changed and made like his glorious body, he took upon him our form that so we
might be brought into his form, for when he shall appear we shall be made like
unto him, the substance of our natural body raised in spirit.

Of Judgment, It is appointed to all men once to die, but after this the
Judgment; when all men shall be called to an account before him (to wit the Lord
Jesus) there to give an account for all things done in their bodies, whether
good or bad, Mat. 25. and so God in this way will acquit his Saints and clear
them before the world, although this is not their life; neither that in which
they appear, Mat. 25.36. to 40

Fourthly, of the estate of the Saints after Judgment, it is first ever to be
with the Lord, beholding his glory, 1 These. 4.17. John 17.24. and in his
presence will be fullness of joy, and 2. at his right hand everlastingly to be
completed in the same glory, Col. 3.3. when Christ who is our life shall
appear, we shall appear with him in glory, all flesh shall be swallowed up in
Spirit, and our bodies shall be changed and made like his glorious body, all
things that offend shall be done away, and we shall be made eternally one in the
Father and in the Son, and in the spirit one in eternity, one in enjoyment,
and one in glory, this for the Saints is enough to know, besides, what shall be,
we do not know, it is an height, and depth, a length and breadth unsearchable.
Oh the unsearchable riches of Christ! what the Saints do enjoy, what they shall
enjoy, swallows up the spiritual Christian in the beholding of it* hence let
us continue searching after an higher measure of the height, depth, breadth, and
length of his love, which passes knowledge: and there shall we be able to see
and say that his wisdom is unsearchable, and his ways past finding out.

FINIS.
A brief Discovery of Antichrist, both in the Mystery, and in the History.
By THOMAS COLLIER. 1647.
For my more clear proceeding in the discovery or the Man of Sin, five
things are considerable.

1 What Antichrist, or the Man of Sin is. 2 What his Reign. 3 What shall be
his discovery. 4 What his ruin. 5 When his ruin shall be.
SECTION I. What Antichrist, or the Man of Sin is.
ANtichrist or the Man of Sin, is to be considered, either in the Spirit, or in
the Letter. 1 In the Spirit, Antichrist signifies one seemingly for Christ, yet
in deed is against ^^m, and so is but a Man of sin, a son of perdition, and
this he will appear to be, both in the Mystery, and in the History.

1 In the mystery, or spirit, and in this he has taken hold of every man,
especially in these latter days; yet it is true, much time has been spent by
many, to find out this Man of sin, who he is, and for the most part ascribe
it to some particular man never looking at the mystery, or root of iniquity,
which is not in the first place, a man, but a wicked thing in man; and this,
for want of a spirit of discerning, we have not seen Antichrist in our selves,
but have cast him upon others, and so miss of the thing, or at least, most
strike at the top-boughes, and are ignorant of the root: Now Antichrist in the
mystery, or spiritual and internal part; It is a confederacy between Satan,
and the deceitful heart of man, transforming himself into an Angel of light;
nay into the Son of light: and while nothing less than Christ, and Christian
will satisfy; he will be the Christ, or at least the Antichrist, instead of
Christ to deceive souls. For this was and is the last, the greatest and most
deceiving stratagem that ever Satan made use of to rui^e s^u^^s; that, where
he cannot content souls but they must be Christians, he can be content with
that, so he may be the Christ: hence he is called the man of sin, the Son of
perdition, that wicked deceiver, 2 These. 2. It is not Satan acting in a carnal
and fifthly form of the flesh, but in the most refined part of the first Adam,
so he keep the creature in the first Adam still, he cares not.

1. There must be a reformation that it shall enjoy, provided it be legally in
the Letter, it must believe or else it cannot be satisfied, and b^lieve it
does; but the ground must be built upon that first reformation, qualification,
etc, wisdom is required to walk in Gods ways, and to the knowledge of the
mi^de of God: wisdom must and may be obtained; provided it be humane, the
wisdom of the first Adam, that is en^ugh: power of acting must likewise of
necessity be obtained: a power shall be obtained, but it must be a
creature-power, and a creature-acting under the name and no^ion of the power of
God; that is indeed and intruth condemned though in none owned there must now
sometimes be a spiritual mind, and that it injoyes likewise in its own
apprehension, although hardly obtained, and indeed the highest pitch of
spiritualnesse is but carnal to the spiritual man's enjoyment: this is a high
pitch of spiritual mindedness where Satan dwells; to have self thoughts of
Reformation, thoughts to pray more, to walk more exactly, and to please God
better; never, thoughts of living out of its self more, and of living in the
enjoyment of God in the Spirit more; and spiritual joy it must have s^mtimes
too: why? that it shall have likewise, but it must arise from enlargement in
duties, humiliations, selfe-actings, reformation, and all from self, and thus
Satan and the deceitful heart joins together, to the delusion of many a
soul, and this is Antichrist in the Mystery; the man of sin spoken of in
Scripture, that comes with all deceivablenesse of unrighteousness: and well may
he be called a man of sin an Antic^rist, a mystery of iniquity; for in this
shape he deceives souls, and they are never sencible of it, drawn in and never
know it, until everlastingly undone, and he has his diversities of forms in
this kind.

1. If the name of Christian will serve, and yet live loose and profane; that
they shall have, and there he will hold them. If there must be a conformity to
Christ, and a more zealous and conscionable walking; to quiet the Conscience,
it shall have it: he will go as near unto Christ with the soul as may be,
provided it rest it self below: and thus, Christ says, many shall come under
this delusion, expecting life from duty, and it will appear to be but works of
iniquity of sin, (why) because acted by the man of sin, acted not from a right
principle, nor by a right power, neither to a right end; acting there must be,
but not Christ-acting. Hence it is, that though he will be a Christian, and so
talks much of Christ, yet; he denies Christ to be come in the flesh, that is
in the flesh of his Saints, the spirit of Christ acting and working all things
in the Saints (and they are sensible of it) and thus this deceivable man of sin
carries on hoodwinkt to perdition many and many a soul, And now it is more
wicked and deceivable, than when in its proper place, acting after the lusts of
the flesh, Gal. 5.19.20.21. then every one almost is sencible of it. Hence it
is, that Christ says, Mat. 12.45. The unclean spirit being cast out, that is
out in its unclean form; it can no longer be owned: he is now content to come
in, when it is swept and garnished, profaneness and filthynesse is gone, and
now he comes in a more refined form, perhaps legal reformation, as the
present Pharisees to whom Christ spoke, or else the name of Christian, or the
knowledge of Christ, after the flesh; but Christ says, the latter end of the
man thus deceived is seven times worse than the beginning: he comes in this
refined form with seven worse spirits than himself, and so makes him seven
times more, the Child of perdition than before. Oh then, how does it concern
every one bearing the name of Christian to look about themselves, if they are
not deceived and deluded, with this Antichrist under the name of Christ! seeing
it is the highway of souls ruin, now in the days of the Gospel; for herein
does Satan declare himself to be the Master of Arts in transforming himself
into the son of light, and under the name of Christ, and Christian, to ruin
souls.

2. There is Antichrist in the History or in the Letter, and this flows from
Antichrist in the Spirit: now the soul being possessed with Antichrist, he
grows up into some form, and now not only in the spirit invisibly, but in
the letter: more visible he appears sitting in the seat of God, and he may be
descryed principally under these 3 heads, as sitting in the seat of Christ,
and acting those things which properly belong to Christ.

1. In making Christians by a humane power, it being the proper work of God in
Christ to make Christians, John 6.37.44. but now here is an Antichrist will
undertake the business, and so turns the world into Christians or rather
Antichristians, and pretend that they do the work of Christ too: when, if he
did the work of Christ, he would rather keep off all carnal ignorant ones, and
accept of none, until made willing and spiritual by Jesus Christ; for Christ
does not only own souls, when they come; but first gives them a will to
come, and that by a spiritual, and not a humane power. Hence it comes to pass,
that there are so many carnal profane ones under the name of Christian, because
made Christian not by Jesus Christ but by men.

Oh that the Lord would be please to inlighten the understandings of these men
betymes, that they might not walk in a way so directly opposite to the Gospel,
and destructive to their own and millions of souls.

2. In prescribing rules of worship which is proper only to Jesus Christ to
prescribe rules, and to carry through the soul in acting according to these
rules.

1. To prescribe rules; this belongs unto Christ, and who ever undertakes it,
puts themselves in the room of Christ, and is the Antichrist: this is to
exercise creature-wisdome in the things of Jesus Christ, and (indeed) to sit in
the seat of God. It is the work of Christ in the Spirit to help; in prayer
or any duty; we know not what we pray for as we ought, but the spirit helps
our infirmities, Romans 8. It is Christ that helps both to see our wants, and
forms by his spirit, words within accordingly. Therefore those who prescribe
forms and rules of worship, put themselves in the room of Christ.

2. It belongs to Christ to give in power to act according to those rules, but
Antichrist gives the command, and so carries on an external acting, not
according to Christ; but his own mind.

3. Antichrist may be discovered as sitting in the seat of God not only 1. In
making Christians. 2. In prescribing rules, but 3. In compelling all unto those
rules whatever Christ says, that matters not; he himself will be the Christ,
and must be obeyed, let Christ say what he will, and all that question his
power must be the Antichrist, for he exalts himself above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped; so that he, as God, sits in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God, and in all these particulars there is a
mystery lies, a myste^y of iniquity, that is iniquity hid under the name and
notion of Christ; therefore, so much the more to be dreaded. To be a Christian,
is accounted a gallant thing: and therefore, not only himself; but others
likewise look upon it to be a matter of much piety, to make men Christians, and
cause them to own Christ.

Oh! but here lies a mystery of iniquity, many souls made Christians by a
humane power, are but Antichristians, and so under the name of Christian, are
likely to be undone for ever, if the Lord prevent it not: An excellent thing
accounted in the world to make creatures Christians, as soon as they are born,
by sprinkling a little water upon them, and so in bearing them in hand, that
they are so ever after: but here lies a mystery of iniquity, and one of the
soul ruiningst mysteries of iniquity as ever came from Hell: Speak England,
speak all Nations called Christian; whether (almost all people of all sorts,
devoutly slain in the spirit under this mystery of iniquity) to have forms of
worships prescribed, that all Priests and People may walk in one form and way
of worship, and all compelled unto it, is accounted an excellent part of
Christianity? but here lies a mystery of iniqui^y under it. First, it brings
all sorts of people to be acting in something, though worse than nothing, and
so de ude themselves in all their actings; it causes them to look to men, and
not to Christ Secondly, it causes them to bless themselves in their unity, in
forms and worships, never questioning their Oneness with Christ in the
Spirit, they are as strangers unto it. Hence it is, that uniformity in the
Letter, is so much called for amongst all sorts of people, being wholly
ignorant of unity in spirit.

I could instance in diverse other particulars as Ministry, Gifts, Church,
Ordinances all have something like Christ in them; but it is al but the number
of a man, merely humane, carnal Ministry, humane gifts, and annointings in
stead of the spirit, carnal Church, invented Ordinances: but I pass it at
present.

SECT. II. What is his Reign.
ANtichrists reign is likewise in the spirit, and in the letter; Antichrist or
the Man of sin, is as high in his reign, as confident of his good estate.

First, his reign in the spirit in the mystery, he shows himself, that he is
God; he persuades souls, that he is the Christ, his wisdom and his
righteousness, his rules and his Ordinances, they are of God; and they must
stand, although it has neither Scripture nor reason, I mean in the spirit for
it: and thus this mystery of iniquity has reigned a long time; it began to
work in the Apostles days.

Secondly, the reign of Antichrist in the Letter: he also visibly shows
himself, that he is God, and must be submitted unto, under penalties, fines,
and imprisonments, better speaking against the Ordinances of Christ, than his
Ordinances. And thus he reigns with power, and likewise with much confidence;
for, She sits as QVEENE, and says, she shall see no sorrow; but her
sorrows will come in one day, etc.

SECT. III. The discovery of Antichrist.
THE Revelation of Antichrist may be considered, either first, as he openly
and publicly reveals himself to be the Antichrist by his confidence, and
powerful acting, as the Christ, or above Christ: of this, the Apostle speaks,
2 These. 2.3.

2 It may be considered, as a mystery of iniquity, and so revealed by the
spirit of Christ unto his servants; and so the revelation or discovery of
Antichrist unto the Saints, shall be by the spirit of Christ in the preaching of
the Gospel: as it is a mystery of iniquity in it self; so it must be that
hidden wisdom in a mystery, 1 Cor. 2. that must discover it. Now where the
Lord works for his discovery, he first discovers him to be the Antichrist;
he helps the soul to find him out: And then secondly, he discovers the
evil, the iniquity of him he lets the soul see; that it is, the greatest, and
the subtlest adversary that ever it had to deal withal; the most dangerous,
because clothed under so fair and Christlike a Garb, and the hardest to be
discovered; such an Adversary, as bears souls in hand, that they are going to
heaven, when they are in the broad and rode-way to ruin, like a cunning
Hocas-Pocas, that jugleth away a man's estate, before he is aware of it, and all
the while pretends friendship: and thus it is the spirit o God in the Gospel,
that must discover and reveal Antichrist in the mystery; that same spirit who
revealed it to the Apostle Paul, and the same who revealed both his rising and
falling, to John in the Revelations; those who think to attain the discovery
of him by humane industry, historical readings, etc. are exceeding low in
their apprehensions, and come short of the discovery of him: he may be
strongly working in a man, while he is discovering of him.

SECT. IV. What shall be the ruin of Antichrist?
THe consummation of Antichrist shall be by the same means that discovers him,
the bright goings forth of Jesus Christ in the Gospel: for, as the kingdom of
Jesus Christ goes up in the spirit; (for the kingdom of heaven is within you
etc.) so the kingdom of Antichrist must go down: this is the means foretold
and prescribed by the Apostle, who foresaw him in his rising, 2 These. 2.8. The
Lord will consume him with the breath of his mouth, and destroy him with the
brightness of his coming, the preaching of the Gospel, and the bright comings
forth of Jesus Christ in the spirits of his people shall both consume and
destroy him: As it is not a humane wisdom that shall discover him, so neither is
it a humane power that must destroy him: for all humanity in the things of God,
whether wisdom or power, it is Antichristian: Therefore, not that which shall
destroy Antichrist; but that which will uphold him until he be destroyed: the
ruin of Antichrist is farther held forth, Rev. 14.6. The Angel flies through
the midst of heaven, preaching the everlasting Gospel; and verse. 8. Another
Angel follows, saying, That Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great City,
etc. The preaching of the Gospel, is the means, you see, of Antichrists ruin;
and the Sermon is, Fear God, and give glory to him. This Sermon, is that will
ruin Antichrist, both in the letter, and in the spirit; give glory to God,
that is, let God be all, and in all: let God be your enjoyment in the spirit;
see you live upon nothing below him; give not glory to creatures, duties,
actings, any thing either of the first Adam, or Antichrist: give glory to God
in the letter, give not glory to Man, set not up Man in the room of God; do
not cry the voice of Man, and not of God, in any of the things of God; and this
is the Sermon that shall ruin Antichrist.

See likewise, Rev. 12.9. The Devil and Satan, the mystical Antichrist, was
cast forth of heaven, to the Earth; that is, he shall not be suffered any more
to delude souls, in a heavenly shape: the Devil is now turned Christian, and
he makes war with the Saints, under the name of Christ, both in the Spirit,
as well as in the Letter: And hence the great war is between Christ and
Satan in Heaven; that is, between the Heaven of Christ, and the Heaven of
Satan, under the name of Christ. But now John says, he saw Satan cast out of
Heaven; that is, he shall deceive souls no more, in a Heavenly form; neither
persecute the Saints any more under the name of Christ: (A glorious word, and
it is coming on apace) for, the most part of souls in that part of the world,
called Christians, are ruined in the Devils Heaven; and believe it, this is the
great work Christ has to do, in these latter days, the consummation of
Antichrist; that is, First of all, Antichrists spiritual delusions, by which he
has deceived souls. 2 And all Antichrists deluding forms and ordinances, by
which the common sort of people are generally deluded: the work of Christ is
to power down Vials of wrath upon the head of the Man of sin, both in the
spirit, and in the letter: Look about you therefore, all you, whose spiritual
life consists in nothing, but spiritual and Antichristian delusions, with
invented and Antichristian forms and ordinances. A Vial of Wrath is coming on
you, which will shatter to pieces al your confidence: and then, if mercy prevent
not, you may stand looking on, and crying; alas, alas, in one hour is so great
riches come to naught? and then, when this is fulfilled, there shall be no more
war in Heaven, or spiritual delusion under the name of Christ.

A glorious word for those that dwell in Heaven, and that which will cause joy to
the Saints.

For, first they shall be without, and above, all danger of delusions, in the
spirit, or in the letter,

And secondly, they shall from the same ground, be for ever freed from
fellowship with Hypocrites, and literal Christians; for their communion shall
be more, in the spirit, and less, in the letter: and there shall in no wise
enter into it, any thing that defiles; neither whatsoever works
abomination; that is, lives earthly, carnal, and profane, or makes a lie;
that is, Hypocritical, that seems to be what he is not; But they which are
written in the Lambs book of life: and there shall be no more a Cananite in the
house of the Lord for ever. This is the great work Christ has to do in these
latter days; the consummation of the Kingdom of Antichrist, who has a long
time sat in his seat, with the exaltation of his own Kingdom in the spirit.

SECT. V. Quest. When he shall be ruined.
Answ. FIrst, in the mystery and spirits of the Saints, as Jesus Christ comes
in, and shiues gloriously in the spirit; so shall Antichrist be discovered, and
destroyed: and so he has received a great blow already in this Nation,
through the shinings in of Jesus Christ in the spirit amongst many of his
Saints: so that this is the time of Antichrists ruin: when Jesus Christ comes
in, and takes place in the spirit of his people; as the Kingdom of Christ
increases, so the Kingdom of Antichrist decays and consumes.

Secondly, Antichrist shall be destroyed when the everlasting Gospel shall be
preached; that is, when the Angel flies through the midst of Heaven,
preaching the everlasting Gospel; that is, when the Ministers of the Gospel
shall come forth with their full, and heavenly discoveries of God in the spirit,
being permitted to preach the Gospel, by the Earthly power in all places with
liberty: For, much has been done already by the witnesses professing in
sackcloth: that is, almost always in danger of a civil persecution; and much
ignorance of the mystery of the Gospel, which has caused them to prophecy in
sackcloth; yet they have had power, to cause fire to come from Heaven, as often
as they please, burning up all Antichristian forms, and invented delusions:
And then, what will be done, think you, when the Ministers of the Gospel shall
come forth in the full and bright discoveries of the Gospel, with liberties
here below for the publishing of it?

Thirdly, Antichrist shall be destroyed, when the witnesses have been slain,
and lain dead three days; (that is a short space) then a tenth part of the
City shall fall, and the rest shall have their time prolonged; but, for a time and
a season. The first woe is almost past; behold, a second, and third woe comes
quickly: wait, and it will come apace.

Thus have I from the Light of Truth, with as much brevity as may be, in some
measure, hinted at this Man of sin, this Mystery of Iniquity, with his
reign, ruin, with the means and time.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 4. line 5. for ministry, read mystery, p. 5. l. 29. for in piece, r. in a
piece, p. 11. l. 1. for manifests. 2. The cause of man's falling, his Justice,
etc. r. manifests his Justice, the second cause of man's falling, is the
temptation of Satan, p. 12. l. 7. for he delivers, r. h. deludes, p. 18 l. 13.
for all mankind him, r. in him, p. 22. l. 3. for and eternal, r. and internal,
p. 28. l. 2. for John 24. r. John 14.6. p. 28. l. 25. f. or, r. for, p. 29. l.
24. f. of, r. a, p 30. l. 10. for blanch, r. branch, p. 31. l. 12. for as, r.
is, p. 30. l. 13. for desiring, r. discovering, p. 37. l. 4. f. or, r ours, p.
51. l. 9. for enter, r. eat, p. 66. l. 11. f. believe, r. below it, p. 66. l.
11. f. ever of, r. the present enjoyment of, p. 78. l. 20. f. learning, r.
bearing, p. 85. l. 8. for eternal r. external, p. 93. l. 7. f. stall, r. shall.


