A Collection of RECORDS OF The great Misfortunes that has happened unto Kings
that have joined themselves in a near alliance with foreign Princes, with the
happy success of those that have only held correspondency at home.

Wherein is contained these particulars, viz.

That Hen. of Navar marrying with Mary of France, was unfortunate and fatal to
the Protestant Religion.

That the K. of Navar turning from a Protestant to a Persecutor of them, lost
his Crown, and dyed a violent death.

The last Lord Henry's of France murdered, because he but favored Protestants.

That Hen. 4. was a victorious Prince, while he was at defiance with the Pope,
but afterward was stabbed by a Jesuit.

How the black Prince lost France, and was poisoned.

The danger for Princes to marry with one of a contrary Religion.

Of Prince Arthurs marrying with Spain, and the success.

That Queen Elizabeth being a loan woman, and having few friends, refusing to
marry with Spain, and ronouncing the Pope, Reigned victoriously, and so did
King James.

That the best Support for the Crown of England, is the two Houses of
Parliament.

London. Printed for Henry Iackeson, 1642.

C R


A COLLECXON OF RECORDS: Of the great Misfortunes that has happened unto Kings,
that have joined themselves in a near alliance with foreign PRINCES.
I May seem presumptuous what is well intended, I am more the confident will
not be either offensive to any, or prejudicial to me.

I shall therefore in the first place give some instances, wherein it does
appear what inveterate malice, and deadly hatred the Papists beat toward the
Protestants; for if they murdered the last L. Henry's of France, because they
but suspected them to favor the Protestants, how will they turn their malice
against the Protestants themselves, which profess to be so, And it is as
unsafe for men, as displeasing to God, to rely upon them.

Hen. of Barbon, K. of Nava^, Father of H^n. 4 drawn by an im^ginary Crown of
Sardinia, and the Provinces of the Spaniard, left the Protestants both in
profession and person, and became a persecutour of those whose Protector he
was, but whilst he cast his hopes upon Spain, he was deprived of his own
Crown, and was shot with a bullet in his own trenches, besieging the poor
Protestants in Rome.

Hen. 4. his Son, what battles did he fight, what dangers did he escape, even
to admiration, when he was at defyance with the Pope and Spanyard. But when in
a politic and worldly respect, he tasted the same sower grape, which set his
Fathers teeth on edge. First a young Jesuit struck him on the mouth, and then
a Popish Rabseka stabbed him to the heart. Whereas Q. Elizabeth, notwithstanding
the few friends she had abroad, and division at home when she came to the Crown
being a loan woman, yet she refused the K. of Spain, and notwithstanding the
thundering of the Popes Bulls, etc. they were never able to cut so much as the
lap of her Coat, or to diminish one hair, much less the Crown of her head.
And his late Maj. King James of famous memory, continuing constant in the same
Religion, that she professed, and though there were but one Protestant Prince
in Christendom then besides himself, chose rather to match with her then with
all the wealth of Spain, or any other Popish Prince and none can be too
circumspect in this particular, especially since not a Somerset, or a Suffolk,
or a Secretary only: but the first, the strongest, and the wisest man that ever
was, though they were all good men, and Types of Christ, yet they were here by
tempted and seduced. And although it is more dangerous for Kings to marry with
one of a contrary Religion then for any other, yet are they most subject
hereunto, because few men dare be so bold, either to counsel or advise a King
in this business, and though they command Nations, as they are Kings, yet are
they subject to passion as they are men. Abraham's Injunction is a good
direction, not to take her amongst the Cananites, Princes in respect of their
happiness, and other men's miseries, seem placed in an Earthly Paradise,
having power to taste of every Tree in the Garden, where having many Royal
Branches, if they shall only meddle with the forbidden fruit, how dangerous
and woeful is their condition; for the Serpent will not only beguile the
woman, but the Philistines will inteate Dalilah, and she will bettay Sampso, So
while they plow with our Heifer, they will unfold our Riddle and undo our State.

And whereas Christ's Church is like his coat, closely woven, and at peace within
it self, though some ignorant Separatists seek to make a hole in our coat and
Church, and the Papists labor to make the rent worse, and the desperate
Jesuit will if he can make it past mending, for wheresoever they come, they
turn Christ's into Dejaniraes garment, which as it set Hercules on fire, so it
set others in combustion; the reason is, their first Founder was a soldier,
and ever since the way of Peace, they have not known, at least not loved.

To instance in a particular, not unfit for the present purpose, we have not
heard of any Protestant King that ever married with a contrary Religion, since
the last Henry of Navar with the best Marie of France, which marriage was so
unfortunate to the Parties, having never Issue, and being afterward, div^^c't,
was also fatal to our Religion, so that there was more blood spilt in those
Nuptials then wine spent; for whilst the Protestants dreamed of the glory and
security they should have by the Match, they were most miserably massacred: And
who doubts but what the French Papists committed in their own Country, they
would be glad to see done in this Kingdom, for without b^each of charity, we
may doubt of their sincere meaning, though there be a Treaty of Peace, for in
88. when there was a Treaty with Spain, their Armado came upon us.

If therefore we ever live, or are led by example, or precept, we shall find
it was forbidden the best People of the world to marry with a different
Religion.

The Injunction, the Reason, and the effect are laid down in Deutronomie to the
Jews, that they should not take any daughters of the neighboring Nations
(though greater and mightier then themselves) to be wives for their Sons, to
turn from God and serve other Gods, then will the Lord wax hot against them,
and destroy them suddenly.

All which are verified in Solomon, the wisest King that ever was, who married
one of the greatest Kings daughters that then was, yet we see the weakest Sex
withdrew the wisest man. So Sollomon became an Idolator, his Son a fool, his
Subjects rebelled, and the best part of his Kingdom rent from his Posterity.
And now we have seen the danger and unlawfulness of matching with strangers,
so if we descend to our Books of Chronicles, we shall find that God has crossed
if not cursed our Alliance and Association with foreign Nations. The Prince of
the greatest performance that this Kingdom or Christendom ever had, was the
black Prince, yet our Chronicles Record, that going into Spain to settle Don
Pedro in that Kingdom, besides the monstrous ingratitude and perfidiousnesse of
the Spanyard, who failed in the performance of those Conditions he had
promised, which caused the miserable Revolt in France to the loss of our
Inheritance, the Prince was poisoned in that Country, that he never had his
health af^erwards.

But to come nearer to our own times, all the marriages for the last 130. years
(except the several second Marriages of Hen. 8. and our Gracions King that now
is) have bin with Spain, and with how little good the Success shows, Prince
Arthur married with the Spanish Kings Daughter, and God took him away suddenly
without Issue.

King Hewrie afterward married with the same Daughter, and God took away all
the Male Children of this Match, and left only a Daughter, in whose short Reign
was shed more blood for the true Religion then for the false ever since.

Then Queen Marie married with Spain, which was so discontenting to the People,
that it caused Wyats Rebellion, and so discomfortable to the Queen that it
broke her heart, so dishonorable to the Kingdom, that merely for that cause we
lost Callis in few days, which had bin above twenty years in our possession, so
that we may see that whatsoever the occasions or necessites of the Crown be,
it will find more support by casting it self into the Arms of the Subjects,
which are the two Houses of Parliament, then by seeking to any foreign Foe, or
Envious Enemy, whereunto whenever we leave and trust, we shall find the
Egyptian Reeds, and their Intentions, rather to supplant then to support us.

EINIS.

