A true ALARM In weakness, unto Babel, from God, by his spi-right mind in the
soul which lives in God.
Thus says the Lord, Thou art well come Pen to Paper; the effects ouf this
Truth shall make them tremble that now do vaper, in religions, riches, and gay
clothing. Which vaper is the smoke ouf the bottomless pit, nothing but lies do
ascend out ouf it, which have no bottom in Truth, or in themselves.
REader, at the end ouf my Paper called, A Voice from heaven, I do speak ouf
the spi-right knowing what the 24 letters do afford, either in the single
letter, or in the compacted word. It is true; for the spi-right has discovered
in me, that there be many words that are not ouf truth spelling, or ouf truth
compacting, as they are compacted. The word is spi-right, and not spirit;
spi-right to-all, and not spiritual; and ouf, and not of.

The Lord the Confounder comes swiftly to confound all men's talk, because when
they talk they do not understand name or nature which ouf they talk. The
spi-right ouf truth is the confounder. Whosoever has the spi-right mind, that
shall not be confounded. There is a great deal ouf talk ouf taking God his Name
in vain: all do take his Name in vain, but the spi-right mind in men, which
sees all vanity in them.

The unfallen Angels, that never did deceive, nor ever was deceived, will have
the government ouf the veiled soul from the deceit which they are veiled with,
by subjecting ouf the deceiver, to do according as the truth does rule them,
which is never to have any free will to deceive or destroy, but to become the
true power his footstool. Then God is all in all, and the Wicked one has the
fall.

God does not speak to the self-minde ouf man, or in it, but does cleanse it
away; then he speaks into his own mind in man, and his own mind receives
him. God will have all cleansed before him, as he is clean. The body ouf man is
a Figure; the soul in it is a subject or essence, carrying or bearing the body
about. This subject is to be no subject to that that gives it any self carnal
mind, or subject to any other affliction; it is to be a sun to life, and not
subject to death. When the unfallen power has raised it by his spi-right mind
up into himself, then man is not himself, he is in the eternal nature it self.
There is the unfallen undeceiver, and the fallen deceiver, and the fallen
deceived; these are distinct beings one from another. The undeceiver is a
Minister ouf his spi-right to the soul that lies under the altar or carnal
mind; which spi-right in it being set up, does see or spy all that is
perishing, and that which is everlasting. I the Lord will have nothing to
worship me, but my spi-right in the soul, which does worship me discerning what
it does. The man Christ so called received the spi-right without measure into
his soul, which did spi-right-to-all truth and lies; therefore it was said, The
Godhead in him dwelt bodily. There is but one minister ouf the spi-right into
men, which does by its ministry discover all Babel in them to its self, within
its self in them.

Men have a great many words falsely compacted, or spelt, or understood, which
they call Gospel. The vain mind never shall know any other Gospel but his own
Babel-Gospel, which he has stolen from other men's experiences to his own
advantage, to deceive, so far as he has his own inclination in them to be
deceived. Nothing in man can receive the spi right, but the soul, it being
cleansed ouf all that is contrary to it, it receives faith in God, or spi
right of God, which is the single eye, everlasting truth. The power or father
ouf the spiright and soul will purge out the carnal mind out ouf the soul, and
let nothing inhabit in his kingdom but spi-right.

Thus says the spi-right that does spy all truth and all lies in men, or in
that power that is in combination to deceive his own whole creation, that
lives within his own inclination; he cannot deceive the spy, for in it there
must live no ly, or inclination to ly, for it does a ly defy, saying, Depart
from me, I know you to do wickedly; thou shall be reprobated for ever, never to
live in union with God the true spi-right-to-all false no spi-right or seer ouf
truth: this is the son ouf perdition, that would be prying into all that the
spi-right says, that he may be the nearest likeness as he can be to truth,
calling himself spi-right, when that he does abominate the true spi-right that
does behold him in all his actions, feeing them: he is in rage and madness, he
would not lose his cloak. The spi right mind says, All in the soul but me is
a reprobate: I do see with my single eye into thee, whosoever thou be; this is
no mystery to the true spy; but it is unto the ly, that does wonder and perish
eternally. All that ever did wonder, was and is the reprobate at his self, and
at the everlasting truth. The spi-right sees all things, and there is no new
thing to it, that is in God. sun, moon, and stars. Here is a great deceit in
the interpretation ouf this saying, No new thing under the sun.

Some say, All things ever were as they are, and that is the fool that does
expect any change in the world; one generation goes, and another comes, and
so it will be forever, as it is now with men, living now as they do, in all
manner ouf wickedness. There is a truth in that saying, but for this
interpretation, it is not ouf the spi-right ouf truth; for the spi-right says,
that as darkness does abound in men, so the light is not to be seen in them, or
is in them. Thus says the spi-right, Light shall so abound in men, that
darkness shall not be seen in them, or be in them. The spi-right is true, all
men are liars.

There are two sowers, two seeds, one ground. The true sower is the sower ouf
the spi-right mind into the soul, which soul is the ground in the body ouf
flesh. The false sower is the cumberer ouf the soul or ground with a false
conception ouf a carnal mind, having in it the false sowers inclination to all
manner ouf his evils. The word Woman is taken for the carnal mind, it is the
bondwoman that must be cast out from oppressing ouf the soul; which soul is to
be the freewoman, when she has received the spi-right, without any darkness
in her. Then the soul does not groan in the strange wilderness ouf sin, but is
set free into Eternity, where nothing but spi-right shall inhabit: there she is
caught up into the heaven ouf heavens out ouf sin his sight, which once with
her did fight; there is God spi-right.

And after the soul has received the spi-right mind into it, and the carnal
mind done away, then there is soul spi-right that sees God, it being the life
ouf faith that it lives, which is one with God in all things, seeing him face
to face, without any shame or disgrace; all deceivers and their deceit must not
look him in the face, but with shame blush with disgrace. There is a savor ouf
death unto death, which must now be ashamed ouf his savoring or relishing ouf
death, because the Lord will reign over them, and will discover all that has
been hid, on the house top, to all that is of the self-same wicked nature, as
well as unto the righteous nature. The wicked nature never did savor truth,
nor never shall; the righteous nature never did savor the wicked nature, nor
never will: it is a clean soul that God does savor with his true mind, which
is spi-right, or discern right, or see right with the single eye which has in
it all light: it is God the Father ouf life and light, which does spi-right ouf
all things, for there is nothing out ouf his sight.

By John Cole-venman, a Messenger ouf the God ouf Truth.

Reader, if thou be willing, stick this Paper on the wall or post, where it may
be read, in the house, or anywhere else.


