Collections of LETTERS from several parts, CONCERNING The Affairs of the
ARMIES IN ENGLAND AND IRELAND

Licensed by the Secretary of the Army.

Printed at London for Robert lbbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane,
1649.

Collections of LETTERS from several parts, Concerning the Affairs of the
Armies in England and Ireland.
A Letter from Milford Haven.
SIR,
WE have taken a Flemish Vessel, called the Swallow of Bristol, about 300 Tun
burden, which was forced into this Harbor by contrary winds, she came from
Waterford, having on board her 70 Tun of Kilpe, 13 Packs of skins. 8 barrels of
Tallow, containing 2022 pound weight, 6 Packs of Wool, containing twenty stone
in each pack. 5 sacks of Linen Yarn, containing 600 pound weight, and 9
Hogsheads of Honey, she was seized upon by Col Blake, and since ordered by him
to go for Dublin, with a Troop of Horse, and from thence to return to
Bristoll, where he is to deliver both ship and goods unto the Collectors there.
I have taken 2000 l. security of the Merchant to the use of the Commonwealth
for the performance of it.

Your Servant, Hen: White.
From before Milford Haven 28 October 1649.

SIR,
THE Lord Lieutenant has taken Wexford, but I presume, you will receive notice
thereof before this comes to your hands therefore I omit that.

Owen Roe is upon his march from the North, and it is given out, and
intelligence from several parts informs me, that it is in order to a
conjunction with Ormond, and that he is hired with a great sum of money, and
to Command in chief their Forces: I cannot relate this but as common reports,
and intelligence.

And it is further reported, that he intends to burn all our quarters unto
Dublin.

I regard not these threats, nor fear him not, our strong God is always the
same, in whose strength I shall not fear to go out against him, or any that
shall come to annoy these Quarters, and not doubt but to give good Account
thereof, and if their Conjunction prove well, it will be but in order to their
Destruction, is the confidence of,

Your Friend and Servant. John Hewson.
Dublin 20 Octo. 1649,

Mr. Peter's Letter from Ireland.
SIR,
Briefly, the 11 of September we took in Tredagh as I writ, the 11 of October
we took in Wexford, where the hand of God wonderfully appeared, we were forced
to storm Wexford, where the enemy was strong every way, our men (after battery
of the Castle, and yielded by Captain Stafford the Governor,) entered upon
their flight over the water, and two thousand were killed and drowned, Col:
Lehunt entered with his Lifeguard, and was wounded with a Pike, Col: Roe's jaw
broken with a Bullet, who is since dead, we lost but five men every way, we
have near 80 ships, and 100 Boats to fish in, of which here is a fine Trade.

God has spoiled the spoyler, abundance of plunder and rich; It is a fine spot
for some godly Congregation, where house and land wait for Inhabitants, and
occupiers, I wish they would come.

On Friday last we took Rosse by condition upon the battery, where our horse
could hardly have entered. The English stayed with us, about 3 or 400. the
Irish went over the water.

Waterford will not take in Ormonds Soldiers, who would have had 2000 gone in,
but they refused, because they said he had no Army to relieve them. We are
marched to Doncannon, Col: Tuttle, and Col. Collams Regiments of Foot, and my
Lords of Horse, are gone thither: We hear Owen Roe Oneale is upon his march
this way. I never saw such discoveries of Gods presence in the world, only we
had sickly companies, even to thousands.

Send us clothes of all kinds, I pray, but be sure to help us by what interest
you have in heaven. From the North to Rosse we have all clear. I wonder
thousands do not come out of England to see this work, which I hope is the
fulfilling of Prophesies: However I bless the Lord for what I see. God is with
our General certainly, however he deal with him. I say pray for us, and him
who is

Yours, H. Peter's.
Wexford 22 October. 1649.

Another Letter.
SIR,
SIR Charles Coot with a party about three thousand has taken Colraine and put
most to the sword, among which a brother of George Monroe is killed, another
brother of his leaping over the walls to escape was drowned, the Governor also
Colonel Guordon cannot be found, but its thought he is killed.

Sir Charles understanding notice was gone to Monroe before Belfast, of his
being about Colraine, he forthwith marched out of the Town, leaving in it a
Garrison, and met George Monroe about half way to Carickefergus, fought, and
totally routed him, and killed many of them, and he and Col. Hambleton are fled
to Charlemount. This is strange news and much affect us here.

Sir Charles presently marched to Carickefergus, and the 23 instant laid fiedge
to it, we hear also that a strong party from Dublin are come into the North.
Also a ship of the Parliament of England coming into the North and finding a
small Frigot riding near Carickefergus, which he was informed had transported
Sir James Mungomery out of Ireland into Scotland, he surprised her, the Frigot
was one of six Guns, and twenty Oaers employed by the State of Scotland, in the
Irish Seas, to observe all passages there, and the Captain sent to Captain
Clarke Commander of the English, acquainting him therewith, Clarke replied he
was confident he was a Knave, and that none belonging to the States of Scotland
certainly would transport such a Traitor as Sir James Mungomery, therefore he
would keep her, This is all at present from him that is,

Sir yours to serve you,


The copy of a Letter from Col. Hewson in Ireland.
SIR.
ITs certain Owen Roe is joined with Ormond, but as certain, but in order to
both their Ruins, Though hand join in hand they shall not go unpunished.
After the Lieut. Generals Regiment of Horse came from Venables, he was much
distressed by George Monroe in conjunction with Phillim Oneal, but Sir Theoph.
Jones came seasonably to his relief, with a thousand Horse and Foot; so that
the Enemy who had fired Lisnegarvin and Antrim (though our men kept the Castles
in both) fled into their Garrisons, and now Venables is in the Field, and I
hope joined with my Lord President, who together will be at least 3000. Horse
and Foot; and I hope in short time, to give a good account of the North parts
of this Nation; Rosse was taken last week, and our Army is now at Doncannon.

Sir, I am in haste, but this relation is a brief account of our affairs, as
they came to the knowledge of

Your loving Friend, J. Hewson.
Dublin 29. October. 1649.

Another Letter from Ireland.
SIR,
SInce my last, Cork and Younghall assuredly are ours, they have their
Commissioners with my Lord, for Indemnity etc.

Bandon also and Kingsale are coming in, Inchequins Trumpeter came newly to my
Lord, who would gladly do himself some good, his Lady is turned out of Cork*
Oneale is joined to them, and we have faced them, but they do not like us.

I pray let all men know, that if any Foot will come to Mr. Peter's at Milford,
he is ready to carry them for Cork, or Wexford, and provide comfortably for
them. Indeed I saw at Wexford the Hogs eat their Stayne, and drink their blood,
and am persuaded God will follow his vengeance home.

Dublin 5 November. 1649.

Imprimatur

Jo: Rushworth.
13 November. 1649.
FINIS.

