Collections of Notes Taken it the KINGS Trial, at Westminster Hall, On
Saturday last, Janua. 27. 1648. With the sentence Denounced against the KING,
who is condemned to be Beheaded.
PRoclamation was made, the Court set and called, 70 Commissioners then
present: The Hall door was commanded to be setopen, And the Sergeant at Arms
was sent to appoint them to bring away the King to the Bar.

At the kings coming to the Bar, the Soldiers and also the people many of
them cried out, Execution, execution, execution.

Proclamation made and silence commanded.

The Lord President began to make a speech, But the king offered to interrupt
him, by pressing that he might be heard first.

The Lord President told him that he might be heard in his time. The king
asked whither he should be heard before Judgment was denounced, the Lord
President told him, that he should have liberty to speak before the sentence
was pronounced. And thereupon the king did forbear.

The Lord President proceeded to his Speech by which he declared before the
Court, That they knew that the prisoner had been often at the Bar, before the
Court, And a charge brought in against him, but that he had still been so far
from putting in his Answer, that he disputed their authority, and demurred to
the jurisdiction of the Court, authorized by the highest Court in the kingdom,
that the Court overruled the demurrer.

That yet (notwithstanding) he continued wilful, and in contumacy against the
power of the Court, the highest Court of justice.

That the Charge against him, and his contumacy to the Court was considered
upon, and the power of the Law against such offenses as are charged against him.

But yet if he have somewhat to say, the Court will hear him, if he desire it:
But if it be to dispute the power of the Court, that was not to be suffered;
for therein he struck at the root of all power, the power, where it lies
originally, the power of the supreme Court, the Commons of England in
Parliament assembled, which the Court can by no means permit.

Yet that if he would speak any thing to the matter contained in the Charge, he
should be heard concerning what he had to say, as to that.

Then the King spoke, pressing to be heard in some things that he had to offer,
which he said was most material to the peace of the kingdom, and good of his
people, pressing also his own honor and conscience.

And that though in those respects he might have delayed to have had sentence
passed upon him, yet he desired that they would hear his motives. And said
that an hasty sentence passed, may sooner be repealed then recalled. And that
which the King now moved for, was; that before sentence was denounced, he might
be heard in the Painted Chamber, before the Lords and Commons, pressing hard
that this might be granted, saying, that it might be that they had not thought
of such a thing before. And he used diverse arguments to persuade them to
consider of this his motion.

The Lord President told the King, that this was still a further declining of
the Authority of this Court.

The King answered the Lord President, That it was no declining of the Court:
only that he had something to offer the Lords and Commons for the peace of the
Kingdom.

The Lord President asked the King, if he did not decline the Court.

The King said, not in that which he had said, And pressed that the Court would
hear their King, what he had to say.

The Lord President told the King, that the Court has waited 3 Courts before
this, to hear him, with great patience, and that he might in Answer to his
Charge have said what he had pleased* But that he disputed the power of the
Court, and disowned them; Though he was acquainted that it was founded upon the
authority of the Commons of England in Parliament assembled, The supreme power
of the Kingdom, and that now again he appealed to another Jurisdiction; And
that these things still savor of delays.

But that yet this Court would withdraw, before the pronouncing of sentence, to
consider of what had passed.

The King asked whether he should withdraw.

The Lord President answered, that he should know the pleasure of the Court
presently.

Then Proclamation was made to declar^ that the Court did adjourn itself, for
half an hour, into the Court of Wards.

But before they withdrew, command was given to the Sergeant at Arms, that the
prisoner withdraw, And so the King withdrew, and as he was going down, the
Soldiers and the People cried, Execution, execution.

The Court then withdrew into the Court of Wards for half an hour, and then
returned, Proclamation was made, And the King* again sent for, and brought to
the Bar. The people cried out again Execution, Execution. The Lord President
then spak declaring that upon the Kings desire they had adjourned to consider
of what he had then said to the Court. That it has been declared by what
authority they have power, that they have it by an Act of the Commons of
England in Parliament Assembled, from them they have their Commission. That the
Court has considered what he had moved, and find nothing but further delays.

And that they had considered of his defaults, and were unanimously resolved,
that sentence and judgment should be pronounced*

The King still pressed as he had done before, and that it was out of his good
Intentions which he owes to his people* and urged much to be heard by the Lords
and Commons in the painted Chamber, concerning what he had to propound
concerning the Kingdom.

The Lord President declared that the Court had considered fully of what he had
said in that, but that added nothing at all relating to the charge, to which he
was to answer; and then the Lord President told the King, that the Court did
desire to know of him whether he had any thing more to say for himself, why
sentence should not be denounced against him.

The King still pressed to his former desires.

The Lord President told him, that it was in vain to reinforce these things
again, for the Court had considered fully thereof, and declared their
Resolutions, and it was required whether he had any thing else to say.

Then the Lord President made a most excellent Speech, in which he gave very
great satisfaction (as to the whole business) to all that heard him.

That the Court had something further to say to him.

That he a few days since spoke well of deferring the Peace of the Kingdom,
but that his actions have been quite contrary; that he has gone upon very
erroneous principles with his party, and that they had let fall such language
as this; That for whatsoever he had done he was to give account to none but
God, and that he was superior to the Law, and whereas he should have labored
to protect the Laws of the land, that the King would probably answer, that so
he had done, but who shall judge that, That he and his party, such and such
persons that had gone away from the Courts of Law and from the Parliament, they
were not fit to be Judges of the Parliament, the highest Court of the Kingdom,
The Commons of England in Parliament assembled.

And that as the Law is above the King, so there is something above the Law,
the people of England, all Laws are for their peace and safety.

That they gave Laws to their Governors.

That it is true, as the King is King he is above one private Subject, and has
no Peer, but before a Court of Justice, there he is in comparison with the
Court the lesser: That if the King be without a bridle, they are to bridle Him.

The Lord President instanced the Barons VVarres, that then they would not
suffer Kings to be Tirants. And that if they now will neglect what the Barons
of old did so carefully look to, that they will not be negligent of their duty.

The Electors of a King is to have justice executed; he is but an Officer
entrusted by the people: And if he go away from that, they may call him to
account for it.

Parliaments were to adjudge concerning wrongs done by the King, Queen, and
their children, when they could not have relief elsewhere, the case of the
people of England now have been the same; and where should the Kingdom be
relieved better then by the Parliament, and what wrong he had done to the
people, sad experience witnessed,

That he said a few days since he knew the Laws as well as most Gentlemen,
That he that knew his Masters will and did it not* deserved the more stripes.
And some examples given King Edw. 3. and others he declared also concerning the
Kings actions to force Parliaments, and of Parliaments, and what means he has
used to crush this Parliament, the great bulwark of the peoples safety to
tear it up, that so the Subjects liberties might be destroyed.

Then the Lord President gave presidents of diverse Tyrants that have suffered
for their Tyranny (though one wished that the people of Rome had but one nee^
that he might cut them all off at once.

France, Spain, Aragon, Rome, the Ephory of Lacidemonia, Scotland, nay the
Kings Grandmother, and so in England many presidents, both in the limes of the
Saxons, and since the conquest, many examples have been quoted.

That though Kings have title by inheritance, yet they are conformed by the
people, and by the Kings Tyranny they are loosed.

Then the Lord President declared wherein the King had been a Tyrant, Traitor,
and murderer, and what God has commanded to be written concerning a murderer,
Genesis 9. and Numb. 35. and pressed the king in a sweet manner to repent of his
sins.

And he also declared the resolution of the Court, to go on in the work of the
Lord, against all opposition though they should perish in it. And the Sentence
was denounced against the king.

The Sentence denounced against the King was, That the said Charles Stuart King
of England shall be put to death by having hi^ head cut off from his Body.

FINIS.
Jannu. 27. 1648.
Imprimatur

Theodore Jermings.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Ibbitson. 1649.


