Responsoria Bipartita, SIVE Vindiciae suspensionis Ecclesiasticae ut et
Presbyterii EVANGELICI.

A double Reply, containing a Vindication of the ancient practice of the Church
(according to the rule of the word) suspending the ignorant and scandalous from
the Lords Supper. As also of Ecclesiastical Presbyteries as the subject of
Church Government.

The first in answer to one M. Boatmans challenge of all the Ministers on earth
to make suspension of any but Turks, Jews, Pagans and excommunicate persons
from the Lords Supper, appear from Scripture. In answer to whom the said
censure is justified by several arguments from Scripture, and the universal
practice of the Church, the Magisterial vanity also of his Sermon, December. 13.
and March 28. in Peter's Church in Norwich is discovered, by animadversions on
each. In which answer also some objections of Erastus, Mr. Prin, and Mr.
Humfry, are collaterally considered, and answered.

The second part in answer to Theophilus Brabourn, who has talked something in
a little pamphlet against the Lord Jesus Christ as Lord of his Church, and Lord
of the Sabbath, against whom it is proved, he has said nothing to any purpose
but to discover his own weakness.

To which is prefixed an Epistle giving account of the whole, and fully
answering whatsoever, Mr. Thomas Morshall, in his three Sermons lately printed
upon Mat. 22 8. Mr. Barksdale in a letter of his dated May 26. 1652. and
printed with a disputation at Winchcomb Nov. 9. 1653. and Mr. Timson in his
late book in answer to Dr. Drake have said in these for promiscuous communion.

By JOHN COLLINGS, B.D. and Pastor of the Church of Christ in Stephens Parish
in Norwich.

In ipsa Catholica Ecclesia magnopere curardum est, ut id teneamus, quod
ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est; hoc est enim vere proprieque
Catholicum. Vincent. Lirinensis. con. haer. cap. 3. London, Printed by H. Hills
for Richard Tomlins, and are to be sold at his house at the sign of the Sun and
Bible near Py-Corner.

To all those who love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, especially such of them
whose lot is cast in the City of NORWICH.
Beloved Friends and Brethren,
IT is not for my own sake, nor for the sake of those who are my Brethren in
the work of reformation here or elsewhere, that I am come out into these lists;
both my self (and I suppose all of them) could either have been content to have
come up to Mr. Boatmans principles, and practice, and so endeared our selves to
all our people, or at least have born with patience the names of Pharisees,
Dremers, such as do things wiser ages never thought of, Recusants, Presbyterian
Reformadoes, Calvin's fellows, (which are the Rhetorical terms that M. John
Boatman, and M. Thomas Marshall, have bestowed upon us) securing our selves in
the assurance of our innocence, and pitying their ignorance, who if they had
been better acquainted with the Scriptures, and the practice of the Church
would have spoke more modestly. Nor is it for their sakes, because I think they
have said any thing worth the answering. We know it is an easy thing, for one to
stand in a pulpit, and cry out against the way of God, as a Pharisaical way, a
Pharisaical invention, a dream, an impleding Scripture, and to set upon the
Title page of a book, The Kings censure of Recusdants; he that has but got a
mastery over his conscience, and a bold face, may do such things cheap enough.
In the mean time we know: the Gentlemen will eat their words, when they are
challenged for them. It is for your sakes (dearly beloved Brethren) and for our
Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for his Churches sake, that we cannot be silent;
for the Lords sake whose sacred Ordinance we cannot with patience see
prostituted, and his blood counted as an unholy thing: For his Churches sake,
that what she has believed and practiced in all times and ages, might neither
be judged heresy or novelty: for your sakes that you may not be seduced by the
great adversary of reformation, or any that drive on his designs (though
possibly not wittingly) into an alienation of heart from, and an enmity to the
great work of the Lord in cleansing the Sanctuary, and refining of Zion, which
we have hoped the Lord is about in England, and has been for some years; yea
and for their souls sake who are angry with us, that we will not let them eat
and drink judgment to themselves, toward the good of whose souls our bowels
yern, and we are loath that by our means they should increase their guilt, and
more and more harden themselves to eternal ruin: was it not (my beloved
Brethren) the burden that lay upon the souls of the old Non-Conformists, that
there was no bar to keep any from the Lords Table (but one which superstition
made?) was it our just grief then that we had no bar, and is it our work now to
remove the bars, yea the Lords and the Churches ancient land marks, shall not
the Popish faction rise up in judgment against us at the last day and say,
Aquinas Vasquez. Bonaventura.
Lord we disputed whither a secret sinner might be received to the Sacrament,
and these reformers plead for open sinners receiving; yea and the Prelatical
party which we condemned shall say, Lord we gave the Minister authority to keep
any from the Sacrament for any notorious sins, yea for speaking against the
prayer book, or the Kings authority in things Ecclesiastical: These pretend to
reform us, and cried out against us; yet do not only admit but plead for the
admission of such as speak against Jesus Christ the great King of Zion. Thus we
have justified our Elder Sister Sodom, and our younger Samaria, yea neither of
them would plead for the wickedness which we do. This has brought me into the
lists; now I am there, I shall desire but fair play If our adversaries can
prove, all primitive Churches and modern Churches in an error, and themselves
only in the right (though we must needs be concluded to err with good company)
yet I hope I shall not stop my ears against due conviction. But we must crave
leave to try them with the two weapons of Scriptural Reason and Antiquity, to
prove that we are not cowards in this Cause of God.

Since my book was sent to the Press, three others have came to my hands, all
pleading for promiscuous communions; I crave your patience for a backblow for
them; much of them I have answered before hand. I shall subjoin a few
animadversions more upon what they have in them. An answer to Mr. Thomas
Marshall.


The first contains two or thee Sermons preached by one Mr. T. Marshall on
Matthew 22.8. As I discern in him a spirit which from any Sober man deserves
rather flight than answer from those ill favored passages, p. 21. where he
charge us with sequestring, first, the bodily bread from the Pastors and then
the bread of Christ from the peoples souls. And page 25. where he has this
passage, Mr. Calvin and his fellows whom the Presbyterian Reformadoes follow,
perceiving what a jewel of auricular confession they have lost, etc.
Christians! this same despised Mr. Calvin, was one whose name will live and
smell sweet when Mr. Thomas Marshalls will rot (it is a name too well known in
the Church of Christ for Mr. Marshall to Eclipse) but I say as these and many
other ridiculous passages, shows me at first view what the author was, and
how unworthy of an answer; So some others, (which I stumbled upon at first)
assured me I should find nothing in him worth the answering? witness his
division of those words, The wedding is ready, into the wedding and the
Propensity of it.

But to pass by that, and much other pitiful stuff (set out a little (like an
old rusty suit) with an end or two of gold and silver lace taken our of the
Fathers, Page 14.
and much of that spoiled too either in the taking of, or setting on.)

In his 14. page he would make us believe, That the Feast meant chiefly Matt.
22. is The Lords Supper; and to prove this, he cites Origin in the Margent, who
by his own confession, only says it may be stretched to that (and all that
know any thing of Origin, know he had a trick of stretching Metaphors too far.)
But does Origin say, the Lords Supper, is chiefly meant? No surely he had more
judgment by far. But I wonder who authorized Mr. Marshall to say this was the
feast made for all Nations, Isaiah 25 9. surely then the Apostles were ill
Stewards of the Lords house that did not first invite all the Heathens to this
Supper. Page 15.
But it is like those good men were old Presbyterian Reformadoes (inconsiderable)
Calvin's fellows too.

It was an hundred to one, that in the 15. page Mr. Marshall had not brought in
Christmas Feasts into this Text, which would have been a New Argument for
Christmas day, and worthy of such a Doctor, and then he might have proved from
Scripture, that it is his and our duty to invite men to a Christmas Py. But he
remembers something, (that he has lost his New years gifts I suppose) and must
sigh and lament he says with Jeremy, That men do not keep Christmas day (for
that he makes the English of not coming to the Solemn Feasts.)

I am come to his second Sermon.

He has done with the wedding (he says) (he has made the Feast a very short
one) now have at the Propensity to it (an hard word; he has therefore here
Englished it by preparation) though I think he is unhappy in this expression
too, it being prepared, Page 21.
not preparing; and preparation argues no more previous acts sure. The feast he
will have to be the Lords Supper, in spite of our teeth, but surely that was
not ready when Christ spoke this.

He falls heavily upon us, p. 21. for not having the Feast ready; Page 22.
but he is mistaken, we have the Supper ready; and the question betwixt us is
only whether all Mr. Marshalls guests be ready; Mr. Marshall thinks our master
keeps an open house for all comers; we think he keeps an orderly house, and
every servant must have his portion in their season.

He says, We pretend peoples unworthiness; This he tells us will not excuse
us: true if he can prove we are bound to give it to all; but if we be only
bound to give it to the visibly worthy, I hope it will. He says true, (but
nothing to the purpose) that some ignorance and sin repented of, will not make
a man unworthy. The question is, whether a gross ignorance of the mysteries of
religion and sin not repented of, will not? what he says there of Judas his
sin, and the disciples ignorance, is nothing to his purpose, till he proves we
refuse some less ignorant then the Apostles; and that Judas was, 1. a
communicant, 2. openly scandalous before that time. Page 23.


I wonder he will take notice of Ambrose his excluding the Emperor Theodosius,
considering Theodosius was not excommunicated, and yet kept back by Ambrose;
and that not, as he would insinuate, by Rhetoric and swasion, but
authoritatively, and something severely, Ambrose telling him, he would not
administer till he was gone. For what he says of the Church of Corinth, Page
26.
I have answered it in the following sheets.

He is very angry with them who come in to sequestered livings; they are the
Feast, Mat. 22. too it seems, for he applys Quomodo huc intrasti? to them who
dare come in to them without the wedding garment of the scandalous Ministers
leave: In the same place, afraid I suppose of the stool of Repentance in
Scotland, he falls heavily upon Presbyterian discipline. Alas good man! more
has been said for that discipline long ago than he is able to answer. Page 27.


He says the Sacrament was administered by Christ, and Acts 2. without Elders;
but he sees not how lamely the ergo must hop after these premises, considring
the order of the church was not then established. Page 28.


O but the Apostle says nothing of Elders 1 Cor. 11. no more does Moses Genesis
1.1. but what then? the Apostle is treating of the Sacrament, and yet says
nothing of them, but he spoke of them 1 Cor. 12. as Governments; and chap. 5.
he had spoke of not eating with, and purging out scandalous sinners, which
surely are acts of Government; and if there be Governments in the Church
distinct from Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, as is plain 1 Cor. 12.28. if Mr.
Marshall awakes his reason, Page 29, 30.
it will see Elders concerned in this act of Government. He is mistaken in
telling us Paul excommunicated the incestuous person, for he only gave order to
the Governors of the Church to do it, 1 Cor. 5.4.

He pretends to answer our arguments; he says we say, The Sacrament will then
be profaned if all be admitted. He grants this himself as to personal
profanation, and we plead for it further as to a defilement of the communion;
but he says we cannot help it. If he means it of men of his persuasion, I know
not what to say: they indeed resolving to admit all, cannot help it. Page 31.
But we think we can, and therefore suspend the scandalous and ignorant; for
what he says expounding Matthew. 7.6. of Reproof, he agrees with Mr. Boatman; I
have sufficiently in the following sheets showed the vanity of that restrict
interpretation.

In his 31. page he pretends to answer a second Argument of ours drawn from the
Ministers danger participating with the sins of others. As to what he says
upon this point, passing by his gird about the Covenant, he tells us the
damnation mentioned 1 Cor. 11.29. Is not to the giver, but to the Receiver.

But what is this to the purpose, if in giving we do partake of the sins of
others, there is a damnation also will attend our giving it, and surely there
is a guilt may be contracted by a participation of the sins of others,
otherwise the Apostle forgot himself in warning us we should take heed of it,
and the Schoolmen have spent their time ill to tell us how many ways it may be
incurred. The question is, whether the Minister giving the Sacrament to the
unworthy, incurs this guilt; Page 31.
if Mr. M. thinks he does not, let him speak out and we will join issue with
him upon that. He says we are commanded to give it, but he has not proved it
by Luke 22.19.

He thinks he has nicked it by a distinction of cooperations; he says the
Minister does only cooperate to the sinners sin in receiving in actu primo,
not in acti secundo.

1. If this distinction will serve the turn, it will excuse giving it to Turks.

2. But we must tell him that the actus primus is sin; It is sin for an
ignorant scandalous person to receive.

3. I do not well understand what Mr. Marshall means by the actus secundus; if
he says his receiving sinfully is actus secundus, I cannot understand how his
sinfulness can make a distinct act: if he means receiving damnation, this
indeed may more properly be so called, but then he that by giving to him
contributes to the cause, does doubtless contribute to the effect; for surely
if he be causa causae he must be also causa causati.

He thinks our third Argument from the scandal of godly Communicants is invalid.

1. Because he conceives we are commanded to give it to all.

2. Because he conceives it is not scandalum datum (a scandal given) but only
taken; but we deny both these we find no such command.

3. It is a scandal given, for we are commanded not to keep the Feast, not to
eat with such, not to give holy things to dogs etc. of which see more in the
following sheets.

He says the Minister must exclude none of himself. Page 33.
I have examined that chap. 11. he says it belongs to a Court of Judicature. I
wonder what Court he means, for Elderships he has declared against them. The
Common prayer Book gave this power to a single member, so do the Canons 1603.

In the latter end of the second Sermon he lets fly against Presbytery. But
what has the man to say against it? Page 33, 34.
why it has been thrice endeavored to be established to no purpose. He
forgets that it is the only Government now established in England by the Form
of Church Government, passed sine die, by both Houses of Parliament, 1648. And
I believe it may stand long enough if it stands but till M. Marshall be able to
dispute it down.

I find no more In him to this purpose; Page 46.
only one passage in his third Sermon stumbles me where he tells us, that
communicants may be worthy dignitate Congruentiae, or ex merito congrui. What
others may, I cannot tell. I do not understand that Divinity; if he means
honestly, he is at best unhappy in his expressions.

Since I had read over this Pamphlet, An answer to M. Barksdales letter printed
with the disputation at Winchcomb
there came to my hands a Book, entitled a disputation at Winchcomb, in which
I find a letter, dated May 26. 1652. from one Mr. Barksdale to one Mr. Helm,
wherein he propounds 14. Arguments for promiscuous communion. I will shortly
turn them into form and show you where they halt.

If we must fulfill Christ's precept do this in Remembrance of me, (...).
then we must administer the Sacrament to all.

But we must fulfill Christ's precept.

Ergo.

The Consequence is false; Christ only spoke to his disciples to do it in
communion of his disciples; no other were there; he that administers it in a
scandalous communion, does not do that in remembrance of Christ.

If Christ washed Judas his feet, and admitted him to the Sacrament, then we
ought to admit all.

But Christ washed Judas his feet, and admitted him to the Sacrament.

Ergo.

1. The consequence is false, for Judas was no scandalous Sinner.

2. The Minor cannot be proved, Judas indeed sat down with the twelve, but
went out immediately upon the Sop, Joh. 13. which was before the paschal Lamb
was eaten; long before the Supper was administered, as I prove in the following
sheets.

If the Lords death must be showed to the ear in hearing, then also to the eye
in the Sacrament to all men.

But it must be showed to all to the ear in hearing. Ergo.

The consequence is false, and 1. will conclude for receiving heathens to the
Sacrament.

2. Nothing must be done in Gods worship, but what he has appointed; he has
appointed the word to be preached to all; but he has not appointed the
Sacraments for all.

Besides the word is by Gods appointment a converting ordinance, so is not the
Sacrament:

4. The Sacrament is not an Ordinance for mere presenting Christ's death, but
for sealing our interest in it.

If there be the same danger upon hearing unworthily, as receiving the
Sacrament unworthily, then those who are admitted to hear may be admitted to
receive.

But there is the same danger upon unworthy hearing, the word being to some the
savor of death.

Ergo.

1. The consequence is feeble; for admit there were the same danger upon the
one or the other, yet the praerequisite duties are not the same, through an
inability to perform which, those who are sounable are to be excluded.

2. I doubt whether either the sin of unworthy hearing, or the danger be so
great as the sin, and danger of unworthy receiving. There are degrees of sin; I
know not how we should better judge the greatness of sin than by Scripture
expressions: The Scripture says, He who eats and drinks unworthily, eats
and drinks damnation to himself, and is guilty of the body and blood of
Christ; it is made equal to the sin of Judas, which surely was greater than
the sin of Peter in denying his Master. For the danger, it is true in exitu, the
danger of both is the same; but it seems God is quicker in judgment with such
as by unworthy receiving the Sacrament trample under foot the blood of Christ;
for this cause (says the Apostle) some of you are sick and weak, and some are
fallen asleep. The Scripture says, Blood-thirsty and deceitful men shall not
live out half their days. This concludes Bloodthirstiness of more dangerous
consequence than other sins.

If the Apostles baptized whole multitudes upon profession of faith, and
afterward admitted them all to the Sacrament, though many of them afterward
appeared not right, then we may administer the Sacrament to all.

But the Apostle baptized whole multitudes upon profession of faith, and
afterward admitted them to the Sacrament, though many were not right.

Ergo,

Here is fallacia (...). Profession of Faith is an ambiguous term, it
signifies either a mere verbal profession or such a prosession as is real, or
at least not visibly contradicted.

The Apostles baptized and admitted to the Sacrament such as made a profession
of the faith, not contradicting it by a lewd life; it does not therefore
follow, that we must admit to the Sacrament such as make indeed a verbal
profession, but at the same time in works deny him to whom in words they
profess; we deny the Sacrament to none who make as much profession of their
faith as those did whom the Apostles Acts 2. admitted to the Sacrament.

The Sacrament ought to be administered to all Saints.

But all Christians are Saints. Saint Paul calls the Corinthians so.

Ergo.

1 Here is the same fallacy again. The sacrament is to be administered to all
Saints, That is, to all who visibly appear sanctified through the Spirit of
grace; but all Christians are not Saints in that sense. So the minor is false.

1. In some sense all baptized persons are Saints, as they are separated from
Heathens and by their baptism dedicated to God; if Saints be taken in this
sense, the Major is false. Children of believing parents are called holy 1 Cor
7. that is Saints federally; but yet I hope Mr. Barksdale will concur with the
reformed Churches in acknowledging the admission of children the error of some
primitive Churches.

3. St. Paul calls all the Members of the visible Church Saints, but it will
lie upon Mr. Barksdale to prove that he means it of them all viritim; I believe
it a term applied to them conjunctim, and the Denomination taken a part
meliori.

Those who were admitted in the Church of Corinth, may be admitted in our
Churches.

But disorderly persons were admitted in the Church of Corinth.

Ergo.

The Major presumes the Church of Corinth perfect, and that they did nothing
amiss, the contrary to which is plain from 1 Cor. 5. else the Major is false;
for wherein the Church of Corinth was sinfully remiss, they ought not to be our
pattern.

But Mr. Barksdale tells us, They were not blamed for their coming together,
but for their coming together for the worse. Be it so, and that which caused
this was the scandalous persons amongst them with whom they ought not to have
eaten, as he told them in the fifth chapter. But the Apostle does not check the
Minister and forbid him to offer the Sacrament, but only bids them examine
themselves. True, he says no more, 1 Cor. 11. But it was because he had said
enough before 1 Cor. 5.8, 10, 11, 12.

Those who may be admitted to join with us in prayers and singing Psalms may
also be admitted to the Sacrament.

1. Either this Proposition is false, or let me assume.

1. But Turks and Indians may be admitted to pray and sing with us. Yet I hope
Mr. Barksdale will not admit them to his Sacrament.

2. Prayer and praise are pieces of Natural worship, homages due from God as
their Creator. O come let us worship, and bow down and kneel before the Lord
our Maker; receiving the Sacrament is a piece of instituted worship for those
who have interest in Christ as a Redeemer.

But Mr. Barksdale tells us we sing the hundred Psalm with them, We are his
flock.

Sol. So we read in their ears, 1 Cor. 6.11. yet it will not follow all of them
are washed, and justified and sanctified, etc. Yet they are his flock; in the
sense of that Psalm he has made them, and he feeds them, they are the sheep of
his Pasture, so he does the Young Ravens, Matthew. 6. yet it will not follow they
must have the Sacrament.

They are of the great flock, But Christ has a little flock, to whom he will
give the Kingdom; to these the Sacrament belongs only, not are we to give it to
any but such as are visibly of this flock.

A converting, quickening Ordinance belongs to all.

But the Sacrament is a converting Ordinance.

Ergo.

The Major is granted; He proves the Minor, because the word is joined with it;
and if the word alone be, much more when conjoined with the other.

At once to show the Vanity of this opinion (which so prevails in the world)
that the Sacrament is a converting Ordinance.

1. If it be so, then it is proper and consonant to Scripture to go amongst
heathens, and as soon as we come, call them to a Sacrament in order to their
conversion, as to preach the Gospel to them.

But surely none ever thought so, nor was it ever practiced in the world yet;
what it may be if these principles be well practiced, I cannot tell.

2. Again, if it be a converting Ordinance, there can be no personal
unworthiness sufficient to debar any from it; then come Turks, Indians,
Papists, Incestuous persons, excommunicate persons, etc.

3. If it be a converting Ordinance, I see no reason why the Communicant should
be bound to examine himself, and so eat, or whether he has skill to discern
the Lords body. But to answer distinctly.

1. When we speak of converting Ordinances, we mean Appointments of Jesus
Christ for the conversion of souls to himself, distinguishing betwixt those
things which may be useful ex accidente to convince and convert, and what ex
instituto is designed to that end. Hearing of the word is such, Faith comes by
hearing, Romans 10. Hear and your souls shall live, Isaiah 55. Let any one show
us any Scripture speaking to this purpose concerning the Lords Supper.

2. Besides the preaching of the word is one thing, but the readin^ the word of
Institution at a Sacrament is another thing; let Mr. Barksdale prove the latter
appointed by Christ for conversion.

3. Either the word alone (read at the administration) is a converting
Ordinance, or the Word and Elements making up the Sacrament. If it be only the
word, wicked men (for ought I know) may stay and hear that; if he says more,
he must prove it.

But to his tenth Argument.

Those whose children may be admitted to Baptism, themselves may be admitted to
the Lords Supper.

But the children of the ignorant and scandalous may be admitted to Baptism.

Ergo.

Though some will deny the Minor, yet it shall satisfy me to put Mr. Barksdale
to prove the Major.

1. Children are baptized in their parents right. I see no reason why it should
necessarily be the immediate parent.

2. Besides there is no self-examination pre-required to baptism.

3. The children of the legally unclean were not forbidden circumcision.

1. But the parent must have a personal right to the Lords Supper.

2. He must examine himself, and so eat.

3. Of old if he were legally unclean he must not eat the Passover.

What we cannot help, we must do.

But we cannot help promiscuous admintstrations.

The Major is questionless true, ultra posse non datur esse.

But the Minor is false. Cannot must be expounded Physically or Morally: if he
means of the first, we can help it; Ambrose would not administer till
Theodosius was content to withdraw. If he means it in a moral sense upon the
account of that confessed maxim, Id tantum possumus quod jure possumus, It is
clearly petere (...), a begging of the question, which is whither Gods word
has not given us power? To suspend the ignorant and scandalous.
and I wonder Episcopal men should so far forget the Rubric and Canons as to
deny it. For our parts, besides the authority of Gods word, discharging our
consciences, we think the Form of Government established 1648. by Parliament
discharges our practice.

He goes on.

A separation in the Church is unlawful.

But this practice of suspension makes a separation in the Church.

Ergo.

If the Major be true, the legally unclean could not lawfully be kept from the
Passover, yet God threatens the Priests for not doing it. Besides,
Excommunication is a separation in the Church; for the excommunicate person is
not out of all relation to the Church, but to be admonished as a brother; yet
we are to separate from him (as a diseased member) both in respect of
Sacramental communion, and intimacy of civil communion.

The unworthiness of some must not debar others of their right.

But (admitting suspension) this is done.

Ergo.

1. As to the Major if he means by debarring others of their right, devesting
them of their right, it is true. 2. if he means hindering them for a time from
enjoying their right, It is a question whither such a case may not be, suppose
the peace of the Church must be broken, or suppose there be one or two have a
right who cannot make a communion.

But to the Minor.

2. I see not how the admission of suspension enforces the debarring of any
their right. Let the worthy be received, and the unworthy suspended. The good
mother will feed her children, but if the dogs be so many that she cannot at
present, she will watch her time till they be shut out of doors.

To whom the tender of the Covenant belongs, to those all the seals of it
belong.

But to the ignorant and scandalous the tender of the Covenant belong.

Ergo.

The Major is false; though the tender of the Covenant belongs to all, yet the
seal belongs to none but those who have evidenced their acceptance of the
covenant; God has commanded the offer of the Covenant to all, but not the
setting of the Seal.

I find no more in that book looking thwart upon me; for I durst not defend Mr.
Helms his Arguments. If Mr. Barksdales friends have truly represented the
dispute. I could either have wished Mr. B. stronger Opponents that day, or at
least his Opponents stronger Arguments.

But I must not let pass a passage or two I find there in a letter from Mr.
Barksdale to Colonel A. dated June 1653.

1. He tells the Colonel, and now the world that Judas was an hypocrite
disclosed, when Christ admitted him; whether Christ admitted him or no, I have
showed we have just reason to doubt, if not to conclude the contrary. But
suppose he did, how it appears he was an hypocrite disclosed, I cannot tell;
that Christ (who as God knew hearts) knew his heart is plain indeed, but is an
hypocrite known only to an all seeing God disclosed think we?

2. He tells the Collonell, Christ did not eat the Lamb. This is indeed
Grotius his notion; to which more afterward. But neither Grotius, nor Mr.
Barksdale sure shall ever make sober Christians believe that Christ supped that
night with a humane invention instead of a divine institution; the eating of
that (...), was no fulfilling the Law, which we think Christ did in that last
act.

In the same letter he tells us, That the sop Christ gave to Judas was the
Sacramental bread; upon this very ground was founded the mistake of diverse of
the Ancients, from whence they concluded Judas was at the institution, and a
communicant there, because they conceived this (...) was the sacramental bit.
To this opinion, Cyrill, Euthymus, and (as I remember) Austin (somewhere) does
incline; I confess it startled me at first, because he hints me that (...) does
signify a bit of bread; and so does Dr. D. Hammonds Annotations on John 13.
Hammond in his late Annotations on the Gospel, who also puts in Hesychius for
a witness should say (I know not where) that (...) signifies (...); From whence
he confidently concludes (as well he might) that Judas was at the Sacrament.

I must confess at first blush I had almost began to quit our notion of the sop
being the bitter herbs dipped in the Charosheth, allowing the Dr. and other
learned Expositors (in the same mistake) a great deal more Critical learning
then I dare pretend to. But post (...), (which they say are best) remembering
that they did not use to dip bread in the Char^sheth; and that if this were the
Sacramental bread, it would enjoin us all to dip it before we give it (for I
cannot allow the Doctors notion of (...), though I have not time now to enter
my exceptions, I resolved to look a little before I subscribed. And first I
find,

Hesychius says no such thing; he says indeed (...) so signifies, but says
nothing of (...), and it is a pittyful shift that the Doctor has, faying (...)
is a false print; for which

1. Suid. in verbo (...). Scapulain Lex. Budeus in Lex.
You have only the Doctors word.

2. Suidas then is false printed too; for he says the same (...).

3. If there had been no such word as (...), the Doctor might have been
believed; but there is such a word in the Greek tongue which so signifies.
Scapula expounds it Frustulum; Budeus, inferior pars pains, mica aut crustulum
panis nimium assati.

4. If indeed (in Hesychius) (...) had stood in the place of (...), we might
have been so charitable as to have believed the Doctor, but Hesychius has not
(...) at all, but only its Primitive (...), and there are nine or ten words
which in their Alphabetical order intervene (I may mistake the number, but I
believe not much if at all) now considering this, why we should believe the
Printer rather than the Doctor mistaken, I cannot tell; especially considering
what others no less Critics in the Greek tongue say.

5. Steph. Thesauru. Gr. Lin. Bnd. Comment. Gr. Lin. Bud. Lex. Gr. Suidasin
verbo (...). Phav. in Lex^ Diog. Laertius in v. Diog. Eustathius in ^om Od. l.
2.
Stephen says it signifies a crust of bread put into a man's mouth, a mouthful
of bread, or any other edible thing. Budeus in his Commentataries tells us it
signifies any mouthful, in his Lexicon he translates it by Buccella a mouthfull.

Suidas says it signifies Bread, and not only so, but Reiesculente frustulum,
quantum os capere potest, quod ideo Buccea vocatur sive Buccella, a morsel or
mouthfull of any edible thing.

Phavorinus expounds (...) by (...), says he, (...), (parts, little bits of
things, thence it is joined with (...) (which it needed not if it signified as
much alone) and indeed for this there is a place plain enough in Diogenes
Laertius in the life of Diogenes where we find (...), for which (says Stephen)
debuit dicere (...); what Phavorinus says of (...) he has borrowed verbatim
from Eustathius, who says the same thing in his comment on the ninth book of
the Odysses; where we find Homers authority sufficient to spoil the Doctors and
Mr. Barksdales notion, where it is said of the Cyclops being asleep, -- (...)
(...). -- Homer. Odyss. l. 9.



From whence it is plain that (...) does only signify a mouthful, a bit, and
does not designare materiam; and conformably to this Hesychius expounds it only
by (...), (now surely (...) is but a pig of his own Sow) and being a diminutive
derived from it, Hesyc. in Lex.
does not add to the signification (...). can be no more than a little (...),
being daughter to it; conformably to this is (...), another sprig from the same
root, used Romans 12.20. If thine enemy hunger, Romans 12.20.
(...), which surely need not be construed Give him a bit of bread to eat, and
1 Cor. 13.3. 1 Cor. 13.3.
(...) where it cannot be construed of bits of Bread, except we will say Paul's
estate was made up of nothing but loaves of bread. By all this the vanity of
the Doctors and and Mr. Barksdales Criticism appears; as also how dangerous a
thing it is to build divinity conclusions upon vain criticisms. (...) signifies
only a little mouthful; be it of what it will; for that must be understood by
what is joined with it. Christ took (...) a little mouthfull and gave it to
Judas; but it still remains to prove that this was bread; we say it was the
herbs, which he dipped in the Charcsheth and gave it to Judas.

And so much may serve for Mr. Barksdale.

There is yet a third book come out since I sent my sheets to the Press, wrote
by one Mr. Timson, An Answer to Mr. Timson.
a private Christian of Great Bowden in Liecestershire. It is properly directed
as an answer to Dr. Drake. I shall not take that learned man's work out of his
hand, knowing how able he is to do it himself; yet (craving first pardon of the
Doctor) now my hand is in, I shall subjoin an animadversion or two; especially
upon such passages in his book as contain the principles on which his whole
discourse is built, and where he speaks in thesi to the business.

The Authors study seems to be to beget in his Reader an opinion of his
moderation, upon which he is something froward with the Doctor for some harsh
expressions (as he calls them p. 1.) words that might have been spared (he
says) p. 2. he calls it unbrotherly and uncharitable dealing; Qui alterum
incusat probri, ipsum se intueri oportet. This had been capable of a very good
interpretation, if Mr. Timson, had taken as much notice of his friend Mr.
Humfreys (I had almost said) brutish reflections upon the Doctor, and abusing
of Scripture to do it (witness the two last pages of his Rejoinder; and that
vein of Security which runs through the whole book (to pass by his false and
imperfect proposals of the Doctors answer, that he might have advantage to
scoff him; and all this is prefaced in with such humble professions of
self-denial and piety, as are more then ordinary) I say if Mr. Timson had
equally taken notice of this too, he might have been judged more unbiassed then
we can now conceive him; especially considering his own reflections upon the
poor Presbyterians p. 8, 9. whom he charge with setting up Officers in the
Church whom Christ never empowered with the keys, etc. and such a way as no
word does warrant; and causing a careless forbearance of the Sacrament, and
suspending persons upon accounts for which there is not the least warrant either
of Rule or President, and making excommunication both less, and more than it
is, and doing many things. All which are beside the rule, p. 10. It Is well he
mends it with I think; for we hope we are able to make learned men think
otherwise, or else deny both Scripture and Reason too.

These are heavy charges and argue as unbrotherly and uncharitable dealings,
with some hundreds of men in England, as learned and judicious as Mr. Timson
complains of in the Doctor, especially considering there is (besides many
other) a book written in Mr. Timsons mother tongue too, called Jus divinum
Regiminis Ecclesiastici with a Vindication of it, published by some learned
Brethren of the Province of London, proving (past Mr. Timsons answering) those
same offensive officers and that same unwarrantable way, and suspension. But
thus much only to let the Reader know that as Mr. Timson is much Mr. Humfries
friend, so he has imitated him a little too far in quarrelling with his
brother for what himself intended to be ten times more guilty of.

In his fourth page he puts the Question, Whether all Church Members not
rightly excommunicated may come to the Lords Supper; he is for the Affirmative;
something larger he is in his principles then Mr. Humfry (his friend) who
excepts those who are excommunicate de jure.

Mr. Humfry and Mr. Timson too except Infants, persons distracted, and drunken
persons. The Doctor says right, that by the same reason the Ignorant and
scandalous are to be excepted: I know Mr. Humfry is angry at this and does not
love to hear of it often (whence it is that in his Rejoinder he so ridiculously
disturbs his Reader with dallyings) but to speak to the business, I demand of
Mr. Humfry, and his friend Mr. Timson, what it is which gives one right to the
Sacrament. I know they will say Church Membership. I proceed; Either this
alone, or this and something else. If they say this alone, it must necessarily
follow that according to their principles then all those who are Church Members
have a right to it; for Quod convenit alicui qua tali must needs convenire omni
tali, and then Infants, and mad men, and d^unkards must come, let them say what
they can.

If they say that Church Membership alone does not give them a plenary right.
Timsons Bar removed, p. 5, 6, 7, 8.


1. Many of their arguments will fail, as I shall observe anon. 2. Some may be
suspended. 3. I must enquire what it is then which joined with
Church Membership does entitle them. I cannot find Mr. Humfrey nor Mr. Timson
speaking plainly to this; the latter spends time to prove the ignorant and
scandalous are more capable then Infants and mad men; but he is not clear in
telling us wherein their capacity lies: whether in this that they have more
years, which fails in mad men, or in this that they have more wit; if I
understand them them think they are in a more capacity to exercise their
reason: Well then; is this the thing that conjoined with Church Membership,
gives all a right to the Sacrament? then it follows

That all Church Members, who are able to exercise their reason, ought to be
admitted to the Table of the Lord.

Why are Drunkards then excepted by M. Timson p. 4. (excep he means only during
the time of their drunkenness) But if Mr. Timpson remembers, p. 5. he tells us,
the Church is to enquire what is agreeable to the will of God revealed. So then
it being granted both by Mr. Humfry and Mr. Timson; that mere Church Membership
does not give a plenary right to the Sacrament; for then infants and distracted
persons and drunkards must not be excepted; we in enquiring what else must be
conjoined with it, must have an eye to the will of God revealed.

And let Mr. Timson show us the least shadow of Scripture to prove that a
capacity of exercising their reason is that other thing, which superadded to
Church Membership, gives a plenary right, and we will be his bondmen.

In the mean time thus far it is agreed betwixt us, that mere Church Membership
does not give one a right. Then Mr. Timson has granted his question against
himself; for some Church Members not rightly excommunicated may not come to the
Lords Table.

But this then is the question between us, what it is which superadded to
Church Membership, which gives only jus ad rem, haereditarium, et remotum, must
give a man jus in re, aptitudinarium, and proximum, a plenary full right to the
Sacrament.

Mr. Humfry and Mr. Timson, if I understand them, say as I said before, a
capacity to exercise their reason; we say

Knowledge and Faith which works by holiness.

Here is the question: by whom shall we be tried? By God and the Country, says
the Malefactor; by God and the Church say we. By God speaking to us in his
word, and inabling us by virtue of that candle set up in us to fetch true
conclusions from sacred principles, comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

1. First I plead against their opinion thus;

If a mere capacity to exercise reason entituleth a Churchmember to the
Sacrament, than every Church member in such a capacity has an undoubted right.

This consequcence stands upon such foundation of reason, that he who does not
want the capacity mentioned in it must confess it.

I assume then;

But every Churchmember that has a capacity to exercise reason, has not an
undoubted right to the Lords Supper.

Ergo.

What Mr. Timson thinks I cannot tell; but I am sure Mr. Humfry is almost angry
with the D^ctor, that he should understand him of such as of right ought to be
excommunicated.

Now surely it is possible that one may be in a capacity to exercise reason,
and yet so notoriously scandalous, that of right he ought to be excommunicated.
Suppose one had committed incest or adultery, and that immediately before a
Sacrament; such a wretch may be in a capacity to exercise reason, yet surely
Mr. Timson has large principles if he thinks such wretches have a plenary
right to the Ordinance.

Let Mr. Humfry and Mr. Timson say what they can. Something besides
Church Membership must be added to give one a plenary right to the Sacrament;
or else Infants and distracted persons must have a plenary right. And something
besides an ability to exercise reason; or else an incestuous person immediately
after his vileness has as full a right as any; and the like might be said for
a Drunkard, a Murderer, any profane person, openly defending his profaness,
for one who does not know whether Christ were a man or a woman, etc.

2. Secondly I urge further according to Mr. Timsons principles,

He must be able to discern the Lords body from common Bread.

But many men may be Church Members and rational, and yet not able to do this.

Ergo something else must be superadded.

3. A child of five or six years old is able to exercise reason and is a
Churchmember if baptized; if these two things give a plenary right, such
children ought undoubtedly to be admitted.

This is sufficient to show the vanity of this Conceit, That mere
Church Membership, with a capacity to exercise Reason, gives one a plenary
right to the Lords Supper.

And if mere Church Membership does not do it, no nor that with this second
thing added:

I Query what it is does it. Surely it must be something above these: we say a
Knowledge of the things of God conjoined with faith in Christ, such a faith as
is evidenced by holiness.

It will stand Mr. Humfrey and Mr. Timson in hand either to speak clearly to
this, and tell us what gives a plenary right, or to acknowledge with us that
these things (superadded to Church Membership) do: which if they grant us, Let
them say what they will. Dr. Drake says true, that by the same reason that Mr.
Humfry and Mr. Timson except infants and persons distracted, ignorant and
scandalous persons are to be excepted; and Mr. Humfrys excepting out of his
opinion infants and persons distracted, is but a crafty trick to prevent those
arguments which he foresaw he could not answer, like some late Arminians, who
tell us, Christ died to purchase a possibility of salvation for all but such as
shall die impeninent.

And the Reader may easily perceive the sores of M. Humfrys book, by his
kickings in his Rejoinder, where the Doctor touched him. I say Mr. Humfry and
Mr. Timson must hold that a mere natural capacity to exercise reason in one who
is a Churchmember, gives him a full right to the Sacrament, or else there is a
par ratio for keeping away the ignorant and scandalous as for infants and
persons distracted. And if they hold so I have showed them what follows upon
it. When Mr. Timson speaks clearly to this point, we will more strictly examine
his judgment.

He spends his 8, 9, 10. pages in entering his exceptions against the
Presbyterian Discipline where he charge the friends of it sufficiently, and
d^als as unbrotherly with some hundreds of Learned and Reverend men, as he
charge Dr. Drake to have done with Mr. Humphry, and something more.

Considering that the Reverend Doctor if he be a little smart with his
adversary, yet withal he answers his adversary Et miscuit utile amaro.

But Mr. Timson has answered nothing said in the defense of those practices
which he so deeply censureth. All that I shall say is, we hope, Long aliter in
Coelo quam Boudenae de Presbyterio conclusum est.

Jesus Christ and Mr. Timson are not both of a mind. But in the mean time,

Q^is tuler^ Gracchos de seditione querentes? why does Mr. ^imson inveigh
against unbrotherly, uncharitable, weak dealing, before he has apologized for
his own dealing in that manner with so many men and Churches too? I think the
impartial Reader of his book may see enough of it in his book.

Thus we see not only what he observes, That good men are apt to reprove
others in things controverted, but also for things they will do themselves.

In his 12. and 13. pages he puts some Quaeries upon the 1 Cor. 11. an
ingenuous answer to which he thinks would moderate our rigor as he calls it;
and therefore he has favored us with his opinion as to them, p. 14, 15, 16,
17. etc.

Because indeed all his superstructure stands upon the foundation he here lays,

I shall crave leave to examine a little what he says here.

1. I observe that in propounding them he forgot the rule of Frusta fi^ per
plura quod fieri possit per pauciora.

For his four first quaeries are reducible to this one.

1. Q Whether the unworthy Receiving mentioned 1 Cor. 11.29. (for which the
Corinthians were chastned v. 30.) was personal or habitual; or merely actual
miscarriages in reference to the order, in which they ought to have received?

His fifth, sixth and seventh are reducible to this second.

2. Q. Whether the duty of self-examination prescribed by the Apostle as a
Remedy to prevent future Judgments, were not such as the unregenerate and most
ignorant person might use? etc.

3. Q. His eighth, Whether an incapacity to perform this duty, or neglect of it
did give a writ of ease from the precept of public duty and service, Do this
in Remembrance of me?

4. Q. His last quaery is, Whether there be any thing in the institution,
nature, language and actions of the Sacrament in the Context, or elsewhere
incongruous to the unregenate man's receiving?

As to the first of these Queries. Mr. Timson thinks p. 14. That they are not
blamed for their personal unworthiness; for chap. 1. ver. 1, 2. they were all
sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints; I see no great harm is like to
come of it, if we should grant that the Apostle there does not primarily speak
of habitual personal unworthiness, but actual. But Mr. Timson in his answer to
the second and third Query, thinks the unworthy eating signifies only their
disorderly eating, and for this only p. 14. he thinks they were punished, v.
30. this is the Sum of what he says, p. 14, 15. 16, 17, 18.

To which I answer.

1. It Is not much material to dispute whether the Apostle there speaks of
habitual unworthiness or only actual; That there is a personal unworthyness
himself must grant, or else Turks and Excommunicated persons cannot be excluded.

2. Whether every unregenerate man (as unregenerate) be personally unworthy,
Mr. Timson seems to doubt, we believe, but there is no need to dispute it here.
For

3. We grant that every Church member is by us to be looked upon as habitually
worthy, unless by some actual miscarriage he declares himself actually
unworthy, which we believe may be done as well by his ignorance, discovering
his actual misimproving of the means of grace, as by his scandalous life and
conversation. Yet we believe their Church Membership is not that which makes
them habitually worthy but their interest in Christ, which charity obliges us
to believe they have till by some fruits they discover to us the contrary.

4. We dare not deny but the disorderly eating in the Church of Corinth, was an
unworthy eating, and might be a cause of their punishment ver. 30. we know God
is very tender of his own order. God has made a breach upon us (says David in
Vzzah's case) because we sought him not in due order.

5. But that a man should not be capable of eating unworthily, except by such
disorderly receiving? or that all the unworthy eating of the Corinthians,
should be their disorderly eating; or that this should be the only sin for
which they were punished with death.

These things we cannot digest without some good Arguments to crowd them down.

1. Because the Apostle chap. 5. had told the Corinthians they could not keep
the Feast with the old leaven of malice and wickedness, and bidden them purge
out the old leaven, ver. 7, 8. and not eat with one called a Brother who should
be a Fornicator, an Idolator, etc. And again chap. 10. ve. 21. had told them,
They could not drink of the cup of the Lord, and of the cup of Devils, and that
they could not be partakers of the Table of the Lord, and of the Table of
Devils.

2. Because it seems very absurd to us that a man who should offend but in a
point of order should be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, and eat and
drink damnation to himself; which are the two things predicated of the unworthy
Receiver, and he who comes reaking with the guilt of scandalous sins should not
at all be guilty or liable to Gods Judgments.

Thirdly because we cannot conceive, that God should be so unlike himself as to
look upon one legally unclean unworthy to eat the Passover under the old
Testament, and yet look upon one morally unclean as worthy under the New
Testament.

We therefore humbly conceive (till Mr. Timson makes the contrary appear to us)
that the Subject of those propositions 1 Cor. 11.27, 29* viz. He who eats and
drinks unworthily, must be expounded as well by the fi^th and tenth chapters,
as by what precedeth in this; and that those did as well eat and drink
unworthily, who kept the Feast with old leaven, who did partake of the Cup of
Devils chap. 10. as those who came in disorderly parties to the Lords Table and
mingled that Feast with their Love Feasts. And that they were as well punished
for the former as the latter sins. I have done with his four first Quaeries.
His fifth and sixth quaeries are,

What Remedy the Apostle prescribes, whether the most ignorant person, owning
the true religion and the unregenerate might not use it so far as to prevent
the Judgments and receive benefi^.

Mr. Timson says the remedy propounded is by Instruction and Direction.
Instruction, to which purpose he remembers them of the Institution. True, he
does so, but whether as a mean to convince them of their sin, or a Remedy, I
think may be a question.

2 Then says he, he directs them to examine themselves, and to tarry for one
another. True but is this all? in case there be scandalous sinners in the
Church, are the ministers and officers of the Church to do nothing else but bid
them examine themselves? This we are told indeed ( Mr. Boatman told us so too I
remember) but I hope in the fifth chap. the Apostle had told them of another
Remedy; Not keeping the Feast, not eating with them; does it follow that
because the Apostle does not repeat it again here, therefore that is no remedy?

Self-examination is a personal Remedy, but there are other Church remedies
which the Apostle commands the use of as well as this. Mr. Timson quaeries
whether the remedy be not such (I suppose self examination is that he means) as
the most ignorant and the unregenerate may make use of, so far as to prevent
the judgment threatened, and receive benefits thus he opens himself in the
seventh quaery. So then this query amounts to this,

Whether a man be bound before the Sacrament to examine himself any otherwise
than an unregenerate person, and the most ignorant person professing and owning
true Religion may do, about the mere notion of the Sacrament, the institution,
etc.

The Question is here concerning the nature of that self-examination, which is
the duty of him who would partake worthily at the Lords Table; for when we have
determined that, we shall easily judge whether an unregenerate or ignorant
person be in a capacity to do it.

Page 21, 22. Mr. Timson is strongly inclined to believe that they are only
bound to examine themselves concerning the premises; and that Divines stretch
this precept too far to expound it of any other, because he conceives the
Apostle suits the remedy to the malady.

Mr. Humfry submits his Judgment to other Divines in this thing in his
Rejoinder p 6. 7. only subjoineth three honest cautions.

I cannot subscribe to Mr. Timsons inclinations, that the self-examination
mentioned 1 Cor. 11.28. must be limited by the premises.

1. Then it will follow that the Apostles mind is a communicant should only
ask himself,

First, Whether he takes his own Supper before the Lords Supper, v. 21.

Secondly, Whether he knows that what he does is Christ's institution, v. 23,
24, 25.

Thirdly, Whether he knows the Lords body from common bread (as Mr. Humfry and
Mr. Timson expound that phrase of discerning the Lords body) v. 29. so let a
man examine himself and he may come, thinks Mr. Timson; this indeed is short
work. But surely,

2. The word (...) will not be satisfied with such a jejune interpretation;
whether it be verbum forense, as some would have it. Surely Magistrates examine
malefactors more strictly, or verbum mecchanicum, as others will have it, The
Goldsmiths trial of his Gold is a more searching trial; the Apostle expounds it
2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether you be in the faith or no, prove your
selves.

3. That another kind of Examination is here required, has been the concurrent
Judgment of all Divines, especially those of the reformed Churches, which
makes Mr. Humfry tender the leading the way to this loose interpretation, and
to submit to their unanimous judgment, I heartily wish he had showed himself as
tender concerning the business of suspension which he might have done upon the
same principle.

4. But if they be to examine themselves no more than whither they discern the
Lords body, we conceive it enough, for it will ly upon Mr. Humfry and Mr.
Timson to prove that the discerning there meant is no more than the distingu
shing betwixt that feast and their Love Feasts; discerning must imply
knowledge, I cannot discern the Lords body from another thing if I do not know
it. I must know it as a body sacramentally; 2. as the Lords body: it will
necessarily imply a knowledge of the sign, and of the thing signified in the
Sacrament, a knowledge of the two natures in the Lord Jesus Christ, and of what
he has done and suffered for me, and of the nature of the Sacrament, and what
is held forth in it to the soul. And from hence will easily follow an answer to
Mr. Timsons 6. query; That Ignorant persons though (pro forma) they do own the
Christian Religion, yet are not in a capacity to examine themselves, so as to
prevent the Judgment or receive the benefit.

Mr. Timsons 8. query is, Whether a careless neglect, or incapacity to perform
this duty, does excuse and give a writ of ease from that precept, Do this in
remembrance of me.

1. When Mr. Timson has proved that that precept is an universal precept that
concerns every individual person that is baptized and in a capacity to exercise
reason, we may possibly tell him, that his incapacity or careless neglect makes
him doubly guilty, and so does not give a writ of ease but only lays another
action upon him. We conceive that precept only to concern the Disciples of
Christ, and none but true disciples. Though I do not see what Mr. Timson can
make of it, if we say all within the Church are obliged by that precept in
sensu composito, that is first to examine and then to eat; but not in sensu
diviso. Nor will it much trouble us which Mr. Timson says p. 23. where he
says, The Apostles were bound to call upon those to whom they preached to
observe all that he had commanded. Either that Argument will prove, that they
were to call upon Pagans, children, etc. to come to the Sacrament, or else it
says nothing but this, that we are bound to call upon all to observe such
things as he has commanded them respectively, and then it still remains to
prove that Christ has commanded an ignorant profane person while such to come
to the Sacrament.

For Mr. Timson's query p. 24. Whether any instance can be given, of any under
the Law admitted to the other Ordinances yet debarred the Passover; we
conceive there may. It will pose Mr. Timson to prove that those who had touched
the dead body of a man might come at no ordinances but we can prove that they
might not come at the Passover, Number. 9.

Nor is that whimzy of his p. 25. at all better, by which he would prove the
receiving the Sacrament a duty incumbent upon all because included in the first
table. For besides that it will pose Mr. Timson to prove that the specifical
duty of receiving of the Lords Supper is commanded in the first Table: If it
were, yet I hope preaching the word is so also, which yet is not a duty
enjoined to all, but those only who are appointed thereto.

Whether it be sense or no I cannot tell, sure I am it has no great strength
of reason that he says self-examination is a private duty, and so subordinate
to the Public. Who denies it? but if he means that we must not neglect the
publiqu because we cannot perform, or have not performed the Private; Besides
that we question whether upon such an incapacity or neglect the public be a
duty, we conceive that where a private duty as commanded in order to prepare us
for the public, we cannot without sin perform the public before we have
performed the private; cleansing was the unclean persons private duty: yet till
it was done, we think he might not come to the Passover.

For his notion p 27. that the Receiving the Sacrament is the End, and
Self-examination the means, it is so far from making for him, that it will
conclude that he who cannot or has not examined himself, can no more receive
the Sacrament without sin, neglecting the due means to make him a worthy
receiver, then Mr. Timson can prove the wicked ought to receive without
Scripture or reason, or write another book without an hand, pen, ink of paper;
I had thought due means must be necessarily supposed to the end.

His 9. query is, Whether there be any thing in the nature, language, actions
or end of the Sacrament in 1 Cor. 11. or elsewhere, incongruous to the
unregenerates receiving.

Whether in 1 Cor. 11. there be any thing there or no, I shall not dispute. I
have said something to that already, and it is enough if we find it elsewhere,
and we conceive there is something contrary to the receiving of the ignorant
and scandalous, which is the question, for the Church judges not of secret
things.

1. In the institution for Christ gave it to none such:

2. In the nature of it, for it is strong meat, and the seal of the
righteousness of faith.

3. In the language of it for the ignorant cannot do it in a notional
remembrance of Christ, nor the scandalous in a practical remembrance of him.

4. In the actions required, for we conceive the communicant is spiritually as
well as corporally to eat and drink, viz. to exercise faith.

5 In the end for we conceive it was instituted, not to convey faith but to
seal it.

But before Mr. Timson can tell us his mind, he must lay down six postulata,
and if we will grant them he will do something.

1. First he conceives, that this Sacrament is instituted for the good of every
particular member of the Church. We conceive so too; therefore they have jus ad
rem, but how does this prove that therefore every particular member ought in
his present state to come to it, and coming ought to be admitted. 1. Was not
the Passover so appointed, yet I think the unclean persons might not come
during their uncleanness. 2. I know many reverend men think the excommunicate
person is yet a member of the Catholic Church, and I am sure we shall not
baptize him again upon his repentance, and he yet possibly owns the Christian
Religion. So that he is a baptized person owning the Christian Religion, and so
a member of the Church Catholic, and doubtless (supposing his Repentance) the
Sacrament is instituted for his good: but I hope it will not therefore follow
he ought in his state of Excommunication to be received to that Communion.

2. For his second, we will grant it him that the Church confists of good and
bad.

3. And his third, That the unregenerate are the proper objects of the promise
of first grace. Though that must be understood with a grane of salt, and I had
rather say that the unregenerate are the only objects of first grace; then the
only objects of the promises. For the promises profit not any without faith,
and how the unregenerate should exert an act of faith, to apply a promise I
cannot tell, and I doubt whether it be truth to say any promises belong to men
as unregenerate for if they belong to them as unregerate, they may apply them
as unregenerate.

4. His fourth thing is, That the whole administration of the Covenant belongs
to those in the Church who are the immediate objects of the absolute promise^:
they being of years of discretion to use the same in order to the Lords putting
the promises into execution.

How [those in the Church] and [being of years of discretion] comes in, I
cannot tell, unless it be to prevent an answer for if Mr. Timsons argument be
good it is fetch from the right, which an interest in the Covenant promises
gives one to the Seals of it. And then it must hold universally* and if the
unregenerate out of the Church be is much objects of the promises of the first
grace, as those within there is no reason for that restriction.

But to speak to his Argument.

To those to whom the absolute promises of the Covenant belong, to those the
whole administration, and so the seals of it belong.

But to the unregenerate in the Church and of years the promises belong.

Ergo,

If Mr. Timson will clear this Syllogism from the fallacy of 4 terms, the
answer will be easy. Let but belong in each propofition be understood in the
same sense, and the argument is weak.

If by belonging he means no more then this, that the unregenerate are those
only upon whom God shines with first grace, or to whom God has declared he
will give first grace, we deny the major; for by this argument heathens may
come.

If by belonging, or being the objects, he means that those are they only who
by faith can apply them and make use of them for their salvation or
consolation, his major is true; but his minor is false; for no promise does so
belong to any unregenerate man, viz. as his portion which he may claim and make
use of in his unregeneracy.

To his fifth, That the Sacraments being visible representations of the death
of Christ on which those promises are founded, and by which they are confirmed;
The use of the Sacrament does belong to those whom those promises do respect.
To this I answer;

1. That the promises are founded upon Christ's death, and confirmed by it, I
grant.

2. I grant also the Sacraments are visible representations of Christ's death.
But that is not all, they are seals as well as signs.

3. It is false, That the use of the Sacraments belongs to such as the promises
of first grace do respect. For then the use of it belongs to heathens; but the
use of it belongs to those only who by faith apply the promises.

6. That those in the Church whom we cannot exclude from Covenant relation
[being of year] must not be excluded from the Sacrament, because they are seals
of covenant love to that people that are i^ possession of Covenant
administrations.

I wonder again how that term [being of years] comes in, for the argument is to
prove a right for covenant Seals for such as are in covenant relation, now
children are in covenant, relation. That exception plainly implies that
covenant relation is not enough. I know if Mr. Timson had thought of it too, he
would have excepted mad men; for they are in covenant relation, and this
argument pleads their right: the upshot is, Mr. Timson grants here by excepting
those not of years, that covenant relation is not enough to give right to
covenant scals, so he has answered himself. For his argument fails if covenant
relation be not enough, and we still demand what must be superadded? if he says
only years, then mad men have a right, if he adds a capacity to exercise reason
too. 1. Let him show us Scripture for these ^ things to be added. 2. I spoke to
it already.

He tells us the elect before conversion are in the writing, and in the Church,
therefore the Sacraments seal to them. That the elect are enrolled in the
everlasting covenant I dare not deny; but that they are fully in covenant is
false, Christ indeed has covenanted for them before they believe; but they are
not said to be completly in covenant till upon the tender of the covenant to
them in the Gospel they have accepted the condition. And the Sacrament does not
seal to the everlasting covenant, but to the acceptance of the covenant to
which faith must be supposed. For what Mr. T. says about baptism has been
answered again and again. He thinks it hard to say any in the Church are not in
covenant. Concerning the everlasting covenant, I know none will say it de
individuis; yet surely Judas was out though a member of the first church, but
those who are in a state of unbelief, though they may be objects for Gods first
free grace, yet surely are not in covenant.

In the 2 or 3 next p. he puts us in hope of 2 or 3 new arguments, I would fain
see them, for I have not seen one brought in this case many a day. H^s first is
from the nature of a Sacrament; That it is a visible Gospel representing Christ
crucified to all the senses: what then? therefore the unregenerate have need of
it. Bravely concluded! he was afraid if he had concluded, Therefore they have
right to it, we should have denied the consequence. The unregenerate have need
of Christ and all his grace and glory, but have they therefore a right to him?
This argument is as old as Paul's steeple too. But from need to right is wide
concluding. His second is from the end of the Sacrament. viz. To remember
Christ; what then? The Sacrament is to be observed in remembrance of Christ by
all those who profess hope of being saved by his death. If he had put in lively
hope, or will grant me that he means those who having that hope purify
themselves as God is pure (which is the evidence of that hope) I yield it,
otherwise I quaery. But how if they be ignorant of what Christ was or did? How
shall they do it in remembrance of him? or how if they by profane oaths and
blasphemies profane his blood? how shall they do it in a practical remembrance
of him? Thirdly, he argues learnedly, They have an hand to take and a mouth to
eat. This argument will prove a Monkies right to it; I had thought the taking,
eating and drinking must be spiritual by faith: he asks how we will prove it?
if he pleases to compare Jo. 6.54, 53, 56. with v. 40, 35.50.51, 53. Ephesians.
4.17. Jo. 3.36. he may find proof for it. 4. The language of the Sacrament runs
in general, he says, for many, for you, and who were they? Christ's disciples.

It sounds very harsh he says to say the Sacrament is not a converting
Ordinance. How harshly it sounds in Mr. Timsons ears I cannot tell. Mr.
Gillespy has proved it is not by 20 arguments, which M.T. has not answered,
and it will be more hard for M.T. to prove, That Christ appointed it for an
ordinary means to convert souls. His argument is worth nothing because it is an
essential piece of the Ministers work, and because it was appointed to show
forth Christ's death. Let him prove the consequence of these that therefore
Christ has appointed it for conversion; if it were appointed to that end,
doubtless they exco^mmunicate should not be debarred.

3. His thread bare argumnt p. 40. has a great hole in it. For though the word
and prayer are means of conversion, and they do constantly attend the
Sacrament, yet it does not follow that the Sacrament qua a Sacrament is so; nor
is there any need for conversion that the unregenerate should be at it; for
they may hear and pray and not receive. But M. T. tells us if bare presence
answer the end, much more would receiving. We cannot promise them their
presence will do them good, but we are sure their receiving will not, and
therefore M. Ts. consequence is naught. In his 3 next pages he falls upon the
Doctor who is able to speak for himself. In the other part of his book. I find
nothing in thesi to prove the right of the ignorant and scandalous, he is
altogether dealing with the Doctor and the Glocestershire ministers, answering
what they have said against promiscuous communion. I am afraid my Preface will
swell too much, I shall therefore turn him over to my elder Brethren.

I think I have endeavored to loosen the Foundation upon which his whole
building stands; and if I mistake not these rotten pillars uphold it.

1. Church membership with a proportion of years, and a capacity to exercise
reason gives one full right to the Sacrament.

2. Any superficial examination, if we know the nature of the institution is
all required.

3. Those who are in any covenant relation have right to all covenant seals.

4. The Sacrament is a converting Ordinance.

5. Do this in remembrance of me, is an universal precept, which concerns all
in the Church, yea and they are bound to do this, though they cannot do what is
prerequisite to it.

6. Receiving the Sacrament in remembrance of Christ is, nothing but a bodily
eating the bread and drinking the wine, and a notional remembrance of the
history of the passion of Christ.

7. The Sacrament belongs to all believers, and in Scripture sense there are no
unbelievers in the Church, p. 48.

These are the rotten principles of divinity, which he makes his heads for his
arguments, which how contrary they are to Scripture, to reason, to the
Judgment of all Divines, enquire and judge.

Being past these I shall leave the remaining Structure, Suis and ipse viribus
liber ruit: If these principles be false his book has not much truth in any
one page of it.

I shall now dismiss thee from my porch; only let me give thee a caution or
two. Thou will find many slips either of my pen or the Printer, for which I beg
thy pardon: Some I have noted in my first part, yet two sheets of the preface,
and two at the end of that escaped me; and in the other sheets some also
slipped me after twice reading over, besides Comma's and Periods, and other
stops misplaced, for which I must beg thy pardon; possibly they might be my
faults writing in have.

I hear of some intentions in M. Brabourn to reply to me. He has nothing else
to do. I have. I am assured in that he will do nothing to the purpose; he is at
ten or twelve pound charge to get an answer printed; it is pity, that it should
not be worth so many farthings when it is done, and that he should not have all
the advantage given him can be to help him off with his copies. If with a good
conscience I could, I should be willing to answer him out of charity to help
his book to sell, but that were the way to make the sent of his book spread it
self further. I shall therefore promise thee nothing but silence. If but a
rational Schoolboy shall send me word that he judges me answered in any one
point, it is ten to one but I may vindicate my self, otherways I shall think
him more an object of pity than any revenge; for this age tells us there are
some who both want wit to write, and discretion to hold their peace.

And now (my dearly beloved friends) I am almost ty^ed with Polemical writing,
and I will not promise you much more of that nature. I have endeavored in two
or three treatises to vindicate some truth, viz. Concerning the Divine
Ordinance and Office of the Ministry, in my Vindic^ae Ministerii Evangelici,
and answer to Mr. Sheppard.

2. The preheminecy of the Lord; day above Christmas day in my answer to Mr.
Fisher, etc.

3. The divine right of Church Government in the hand of the Ministers and
Elders against Mr. Brabourn. And now this divine ordinance and ancient practice
of suspending the ignorant and scandalous from the Lords Supper. These
scufflings have hindered me from some things (possibly more profitable) I have
part of a discourse near ready, which I have promised the world, concerning
Temptations, if my adversaries disturb me not. I shall in the next place apply
my self to that work; I have been willing to let it sleep while I dispatched
this, because by this I hope I may be useful to the whole Church, and in that
but to particular souls, which I desire may be my excuse to you.

But I fear lest the City should run out at the gates. Bowing therefore my
knees to the God of peace and truth, that you may be guided into all truth, and
established in the right ways of the Lord, I rest,

Chaplyfield-house in Norwich July 16. 1654. Your Cordial friend and servant in
the work of the Gospel, I. COLLINGS.

To the Right Worll John Mann Esquire Mayor of the City of Norwich.
Much Honored Sir,
AS the Influence which that eminent place in this City, to which God has
called you, and the Engagements which your goodness has laid upon those few
Ministers in it, who have labored against great opposition, to promote an
Ecclesiastic Reformation, have justly challenged our observance to you; so
your eminent appearing, not only for it, but in it, accepting the Office of a
Ruler in one of the Congregations of it, and your appearing for the restoring
of that eminent servant of Christ to his Pastoral charge there again, where
these unhappy flames of our division have kindled (which by the piety and
prudence of that Reverend man would have been prevented) has challenged for
you the more special Dedication of this Tract. What you shall find in it, the
Preface will tell you; And the Preface is that alone, which needs your
Patronage, nor should that stand in need of it, if some men had not the
confidence to deny that the Sun shines at noonday, whether what is there
related be truth or no, your self can in a great measure satisfy the
Enquirer. For the substance of the Book, when you have examined it, I shall be
content you should dismiss it your protection, and shall my self attend the
vindication of it from its adversaries, who are ordinarily more clamorous then
argumentative. If my pains may contribute any thing Sir to encourage your
perseverance in that good work to which the Lord has quickened you to put your
hand, as it will be a great matter of encouragement and joy to all of us who
are working for the Lord in the refining of Sion (while we are almost stifled
with the dross which the corruption of former times has begot) so it will be
a great addition to your crown in the day of the Lord, and a great crown to him
who is,

Chap^yfield house, April. 19. 1654. SIR; Your most humble and much obliged
servant in the Lord Jesus, J. COLLINGS.

The PREFACE.
To my Christian Reader.
IT is grown into a fashion for him who entertaines the world in a Book, to
parley first a little with his gueft at the threshold: And although the
righteous Judges of Areopagus needed no such complement, yet I cannot but judge
it a little necessary in this sinful time, and the more in regard of the
different complexions of men's persuasions, disposing them to faction, and to
judge unrighteous judgment, from the dictate of some particular prejudice. What
thou art into whose hands my Tract shall come, I cannot tell. I shall only
endeavor to clear thy eyes from the mist, that prejudice, and particular
affection may have cast before them, and be ambitious no further to reconcile
thee to me, then unto truth. It treats of an unpleasing subject, The divine
Right and Primitive practice of suspending such from the Supper of the Lord,
who as yet have not their senses exercised to discern between good and evil,
and cannot discern the Lords body, such as were the (...) of old, and such who
since their Baptism have returned with the dog to the vomit, and are yet with
the Swine wallowing in the mire of their lusts. This is the great bone of
contention in the Church of God this day, every one would be fellow commoner
with the Saints at the Table of childrens bread, and those who have not grace
to make them worthy, yet want patience to bear a being judged unworthy of the
highest Gospell-priviledges. Reader, I suppose thou can not be so unjust to
thy own reason, but to think that if the godly Ministers of England durst
consult with flesh and blood, that could furnish them with strong Arguments,
drawn from the augmentation of their livelihood (in places where it is
arbitrary) and from the universal love of their people to compel them into
Master Humfryes or Master Boatmans faith. Alas! what do we get by our stricter
dealings, with the souls committed to us, except the frowns and reproaches of
such whom we durst not cast the holy thing of the Sacrament before. It is Gods
will that Religion and humane Policy should now and then divide, and we humbly
submit to God, and desire rather to be faithful Stewards for him, then
providers for our selves, and ours. Surely there is so much ingenuity at least
in some of the godly Ministers of England, as would entitle them to a desire of
the love of all, and so much earthinesse in all their hearts as exposes them
to some temptations, to use all endeavors for a comfortable subsistence in
this life. If any of them neglects both that and this, and choose rather to
venture the begging of their own bread, then to throw the childrens bread to
dogs, rather to prostitute their own names, and lose their interest in the
hearts of some people, then to prostitute the Lords sacred Ordinance, and give
his name to a reproach, as in this they come short of Chrysostom, who
professes, he would rather give his own blood to the profane, then the body
and blood of Christ; and of Ambrose, who ventured the loss of his head as well
as the love of Theodosius: so it will not need much of thy charity, to
interpret their actions, conscientious pieces of self-denial, for the interest
of their dear and blessed Savior, yea and of their souls too who are kept
away, it being certain, if Judas were at the Sacrament (which can never be
proved) the next work he did was to hang himself, through horror of
conscience, and for that sin of unworthy receiving in the Church of Corinth,
Many, says the Apostle, were sick and weak, and many fallen asleep. How
unjustly therefore we are raged against, who durst not give the blood of Christ
to those to drink who are in a burning fever of open lusts, and so dangerous
a knife into the hands of those whom we see distracted with sin, and in a
spiritual Delirium. We hope, any equitable standers by will judge and measure
our actions, by the duly and orderly practice of Physicians in bodily tempers,
considering we are ready as to such Patients, to allow them what they will
drink of the Barley water of Repentance (which we conceive more proper for
them) and are ready to restore their knives to them, when they shall (by any
moderate account given us) let us know that God has restored them so much of
his Image, in spiritual wisdom, that they will not murder their precious
souls with them. And we doubt not, but if ever the Lord shall give them an
heart to repent, and restore their desperately distempered souls to health; in
that day it shall be no more grief of heart to them, that they have been kept
away, then it is to the recovered Patient, that his Physician denied him flesh,
and wine in his fever, or a knife in his distraction, and at that time we
shall expect their thanks, in the mean time we shall bear their rage and
reproach with paience, knowing it is for the Lord we suffer it.

For the Lord, who suffered more, in the shedding of his blood for us, then we
can do in the vindication of it, and preserving it from being profaned by
unhallowed mouths.

If it pleases the Lord they dye in their spiritual distempers, and go raging
to their graves, we must be content to expect our thanks from our Lord and
Master at the great day, and our vindication there, except Reader thou will
show thy felfe so ingenuous and judicious as in thy thoughts to acquit us.

As to the subject of this Tract, the truth is, so much has been said in the
defense of what I plead for, of old, by all the Schoolmen, and since by Calvin,
Vrsin, Zanchy, and by Reverend Beza, and Master Rutherford in answer to
Erastus, and by learned and Reverend Gillespy in answer to Master Prynne,
besides what has been spoken by Master Philip Goodwin in his excellent Book,
called the Evangelicall Communicant, and by many others; that were it not for
the importunate clamours of those who would get that by their importunity, and
clamorous tongues and pens, which the justice of their Cause, and strength of
their Arguments, will not allow to them, nor gain for them, both my self and
others might have had an eternal supersedeas for this Work. I scarce find any
thing in Erastus and Beza, but what I meet with in the Schoolmen, nor any thing
in Master Prynne, or Master Humfry considerable, but what I find in Erastus:
That if our Brethren of the contrary persuasion, would not have troubled the
world with their opinions, without answering first what had been said against
them: we had long ere this time had our Quietus est; for I durst undertake to
yield him the cause, who sufficiently answers but one Book wrote upon this
subject, viz. Master Gillespies Aarons Rod blossoming; so that the truth is,
the advantage our opposites have of us in this point, is mostly upon such as
have not knowledge of what has been said against their opinions, or are not
supplied with money to buy the Books, nor able to gain time to read them, or
upon such whose particular engagements, and overmuch love to the whimzies of
their own brains, or malice, or prejudice at least to the truth, or love to
their cursed lusts, which yet they would keep and have the Sacrament too, and
be thought unworthy of no Gospell-priviledge: has outlawed their Reason, and
so stopped their ears, that they are made incapable of a boaring with the
sharpest and most convincing Arguments, that Scripture and Reason can afford;
and thus they only captivate those, who are first led captive by their own
lusts. Possibly thou will be inquisitive, to know what has made me write, if I
have judged enough already said: I must crave a little of thy partience to
satisfy thee as to this.

I have often thought that it would be a rare expedient in order to the ending
of all controversies of these times, relating to the order of the Church; if
some judicious man would out of all the considerable Books wrote upon each
Controversy, within these twelve or thirteen years, heartily state each
Controversy, and transcribe the Arguments relating to them, with the
Exceptions and Answers given to any, digesting them in a due method, and it
might please the civil power then to Enact, That no one should write more upon
any of those Questions, but should be engaged either to bring New Arguments on
the part he would defend, or vindicate those brought on the part he would
defend from the various Answers given to them. Were this task but imposed upon
new Scriblers, the world would be less full of impertinent Discourses, and
Disputes would not run as they do in infinitum. I do not pretend a specimen
of such a Work, I have neither purse nor Library, nor time, fit for it. But
the truth is, as I find in Mr Humfry, and hear from Mr Boatman, nothing more
then Erastus long since said, and has been more then once already answered; so
I have not studied for a new Argument, but out of several Authors have rallyed
up an old force, and have heartily told thee what has been by any, whom I have
met with, said against them, as also what has been answered in their defense:
All being admitted to the Passover (as some conceive) John Baptists universal
Baptism; Judas his being admitted to the Lords Supper; The general invitation
to the Wedding Supper in the Gospel; some being drunk at the Lords Supper in
the Church of Corinth. No evident testimony in Scripture for Suspension, (...).
These are all old tools, and scarce newly whetted.

Yet what has Master Humfry said, or what does Master Boatman say more? But
for the more particular occasion of this Tract,

I must desire of thee (Reader) to understand, that in this great City there
are, as I take it, about thirty Parishes within the Walls, to none of which
(excepting only two, one of which has about thirty pounds per annum) is above
ten or twelve pounds a year certain legal maintenance; The most of the
Parishes have nothing at all. Scandalous Livings are always the nests of
scandalous Ministers; The Parishes being little, and the maintenance Arbitrary,
and many of the people seasoned with the old leaven of ignorance and
superstition, many, if not most of our Parishes have been either without any
Minister, or filled with such who were cast out of other places, or at least no
friends to Reformation.

For those Parishes in which were a more considerable number of godly and well
disposed people, some of them were better supplied; but in all the City we were
able to do very little to promote the work of Reformation: Some of the
Congregations either wanting godly Ministers, or persons fit to be chosen, as
Helpers with them in Government, and the people in others wanting an heart to
choose; yet through much opposition, in two or three Parishes we procured an
Election of Elders, amongst which Peter's was one, being the most considerable
place in the City, and furnished both with persons fit to be chosen, and a
people willing to choose, and a Reverend Pastor, Mr Carter.
fit to go in and out before them.

But the yoke of Jesus Christ (which is always easy to a gracious heart)
does always gall the necks of those who have made their lusts Lords, some of
the people who had the taste of the flesh pots of Egypt yet in their mouth,
began to kick at this supposed burden; some withdrew their stipends, in short,
some one way, others another way, tired out their Reverend and Learned Pastor,
who after several thoughts of removal from them, about May last resolved upon
it.

About that time, one Master Boatman (sometimes of Hull) was commended to them;
we who were Ministers of the Gospel in the City, conceived it our duty, as we
had opportunities, to enquire of him (to whom ere long it would be expected
that we should give the right hand of fellowship.) Amongst others, my self, as
I had occasion offered, (...), made some Enquiry concerning him, soon after
speaking with a Minister, who sometimes lived in Yorkshire, I asked him if he
knew such a Minister in their Country, and what he was. He told me he knew him
very well, and he was a man who would preach frequently, and was a great enemy
to Sectaries, but himself was neither Minister nor Graduate. Soon after, a
Reverend and Godly Minister of Lincolneshire coming to see me, I asked him the
same Questions, who confirmed the same things. Concerning the thing established
out of the mouths of two witnesses, I imparted it to two friends, one a
Minister, the other a judicious Christian inhabiting in the Parish: And this I
did the rather, because I heard they were about to invite him for a
Probationer, and I my self (having a Month to spend in the University) was to
be absent, that so if he came, these things might be enquired after. While I
was in the University, I (occasionally at dinner at the Vice-chancellors
chamber, and being at supper the same nightwith one of the Proctors) met with
two Ministers, one at each place, both of Lincolne-shire, where I knew Master
Boatman had his residence, they both confirmed the same things, adding
something more (which I shall spare, except Master Boatman provokes me to
speak it) being desirous rather to vindicate my self then to asperse him.
While I was absent, some of his friends had sufficiently branded me for saying
he was no Graduate, when as he was a Reverend man, a Batchelour of Divinity
(forsooth) of Katherine Hall: One of them fell upon me face to face at my
return, I told them I would not be over-confident, because it was but a
Report, but I would soon satisfy them as to that point. Thereupon I wrote a
Letter by the next Post, to a Learned friend, Fellow of that House, who
certified me, That he knew him very well, That by admission he was two years
my junior, That for degrees, he was three degrees beneath a Batchelour in
Divinity, having never commenced at all, nor staid in the College above a
year, or a year and half at utmost. Some other things he certified me, which
I shall conceal, intending only my own vindication.

This was the only Letter I ever wrote to enquire of him, (and that in my own
vindication too) though I hear he has told his friends, he has Copies of
several Letters I wrote to that purpose.

Soon after this, a Reverend Brother in this City had another Letter from a
godly and learned Minister, who was of his year and College, to omit other
passages in the Letter, he told him that he never commenced any thing but
junior Sophister.

By all this we gathered, That an -- Harry Sophister was the height of his
University-Commencements. It was now about July, when the Anabaptisticall party
began to rage against Vniversity-Learning, and Degrees. We who were Ministers
in this City, were a little sensible, (if we had been satisfied concerning him
upon other accounts) what an ill sound it would make in the world, to be heard,
that the greatest Congregation in so famous a City as this, and a Congregation
which ever had either a Doctor in Divinity, or some very reverend man in it,
should now be supplied with one, who had given no proof in any Universitie of
his abilities, or proficiencie in his Studies, nor so much as taken the lowest
degree in the Schools.

This made some of us, do what in us lay, to move those who were our sober,
pious friends in that Congregation, to act deliberately in so weighty a work;
in which the glory of God; the good of the City, the interest of their souls,
and their credit and reputation would be so much concerned; and that before
they agreed to his Election, they would enquire concerning his later
conversation, and be satisfied that he were a Minister in Office at least. We
thought, considering that juncture of time, and the eminency of the place, it
would also be fit, that at least he should be Mr of Arts.

At last he came to the Town, and a party of the people elected him as their
Pastor (one hundred and eleven having before subscribed Master Carter a new
Call, promising to wait a year for him.) Diverse godly people dissented from
the Election openly, and the rather, because he refused to satisfy them
concerning his Ordination. I shall refer to my Reader to enquire other
passages concerning his Election. About three weeks after Michaelmas he came to
reside, but before this he had declared himself for Episcopacy something
plainly; (we suppose he was of another judgment when he preached at Hull.) He
had also by this time declared himself to a Reverend Minister in the City for
promiscuous communions, and within a day or two after told a godly man,
pinching him upon that point, that he should well see he was not for
promiscuous communions; soon after his coming to reside, we had heard he had
declared himself privately against Ruling Elders;

Presbyter, haud ame te, nec possum dicere quare, Hoc tantum possum dicere, non
amo te. For his judgment in that point, or indeed in any other, it is not much
considerable; for we do not think he is (...), and we can easily believe that
we have more to say, yea that more has already been said to prove the divine
Right of that O ficer in the Church, then Mr Boatman can answer.

About the beginning of December after, about six weeks residence amongst a
people, he had never seen before (except as a guest for a forthnight) nay, and
as I remember of that six weeks he was absent for a fortnight too; He declares
he intended to administer a Sacrament on Christmas day, some honest people of
his Congregation being dissatisfied at it, went to him, and told him so, in
regard of the superstitious conceit of that day, which many in this City have.
One of his friends told me, they had prevailed with him so far, as that the
next day he would unbid it again, but in stead of it, the next Lords day, in
stead of unbidding it (girding at those who had received this offense) he
openly proclaims four Sacraments together. The first upon the eighteenth day
of December; the second upon the five and twentieth, etc. and proclaimed
likewise a Fast Preparatory to them upon the thirteenth of December: At which
Fast (Reader) thou must think there was much people to see which way he would
row, (though they needed not, if they had considered the wind and tide) For my
self, I was not there, having with some other of my Brethren refused to hear
him, who refuses to let us know by what Authority he preaches, and conceiving
that the Pastoral Right to that people belongs not to him, (besides other
things which discover him to us to be no friend to any kind of Reformation. At
his Fast he preached on Romans 14.12. His discourse in the forenoone was
harmless, in the afternoon he disgorged himself.

I shall give thee a short account of that part of his Sermon which concerns
this business, as it was taken (and given me by an ingenuous judicious
Scholar) from his own mouth in short hand; and by one who was (before that
Sermon) much his friend.

An Account of the latter part of Mr Boatmans Sermon preached at St Peter's in
Norwich, upon the 13th of December, 1653. upon Romans 14.12. -- being a perfect
count of his Sermon from his last Use; With short Animadversi^ns upon it.
SIxthly, and lastly, (though I said (but rather forgot when I said) that that
should be the last) Take this Lesson from the point, all in general, viz. the
Apostles advice, 1 Cor. 11. Judge your selves, consider your selves aright, lay
things aright to heart. condemn your selves else God will condemn you. Pass
a particular account with your selves, but that you will say is impossible. Who
can tell his errors, or number his infirmities? Do it as far as you are able,
and in a general way take the whole burden on your souls, lick the dust,
cry out with Job, I am exceeding vile, humble your selves in dust and ashes --
And let me make the last Use more particular, to alarm you to a preparation to
the great Ordinance of the Lords Supper, if you must give an account to God (as
you have heard) of all your carriages, and enjoyments of all the precious
Ordinances of the Gospel (of which the Word and Sacraments are not the least,
but of the highest nature) then put your selves into a posture of humiliation,
think with your selves; O God! how often have we eaten unworthily? -- It is
not one of the least serious thoughts I have entertained a great while together
in relation to this Ordinance, the general want of it amongst the people of
God in the Church of God: it fills me with wonder that it has been so long
suspended, and almost all the Pastors of the Church of Christ so amused; either
their minds disturbed, or their hearts hardened, or by one way or other
diverted, that it has been too void of the spiritual food of the Gospel: The
world dictates and cries out, one against such a Pastor, others against such
and such persons; but will you have my verdict? The sin of Pastor and people
in the enjoyment of that great Ordinance, is the cause and ground that God has
found out away, and by away of his own finding out, which a man would have
thought at first should never have prevailed, which has hindered the people of
the enjoyment of that great Ordinance of the communion of the body and blood of
Christ. Let this humble us.

This Paragraph contains little in it to the present purpose, hitherto he is
making way for his work; but yet in this loose discourse, to pass by the
Tautologies and Grammatical Errors, here are some passages that speak not much
of a Divine, as to say, That God has found out ways to hinder people of his
Ordinances. God indeed does sometimes give up his people to spiritual
judgment; but it is scarce truth to say, God finds out ways for men to walk
contrary to his will in, surely man finds them out, though God suffers them to
walk in them. But let us hear a little further.

And you of this Flock, I beseech you by the mercies of Christ look to it, as
you will answer me at the great day, nay (which is more) to Jesus Christ
himself, how you appro^ch; Look to your souls hearts and consciences, you
have lived under the Ministry, and Administrations of able Pastors so long
together, and should you be ignorant of the rudiments of Religion? (I would not
for a thousand worlds attribute so little to your constancy, and your pains,
especially in such times, nor in former) viz. so much as makes you capable of,
and fit for the Sacrament. For my own particular, I question not your duty,
but beseech you according to the knowledge you have received, seriously to
prepare your selves; take heed, be think your selves, humble your selves for
your miscarriages heretofore in the enjoyment of it, go home and say. O how
often have I gone hand over head? and carried an envicus heart, a lustful,
wrathful heart, full of indignation to thy holy Table? I have gone with
prejudice, with resolutions of revenge to the communion of the body and blood
of Christ, which should keep the unity of the spirit, and the bond of peace. If
I could but prevail with you to set your selves thus beforehand, and judge
your selves, I dare secure you in your approach to that Table.

Let me speak to two sorts of men; some look upon themselves as they suppose
to have tasted of the powers of the world to come, and have drank full
draughts of that new wine which Christ has prepared for his children in his
Kingdom. Blessed be God! All honor, praise, glory be to the name of God in
your behalf. I beseech you by the mercies of God look to it, take heed how
you approach unpreparedly, u^charitably, and prejudicially; lay aside all
malice, envy, and as newborn babes, desire, and come, and drink the new wine
in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Another sort of men perhaps the world count loose and profane yet they
profess the faith of Christ, they own his name, they tell the world they are
Christians, and they will be angry if you will not believe them so. Take the
advice of the Spirit of God, whatsoever you are (for I know none) Let him that
has stolen steal no more, he that has sworn swear no more, he that has
been a frequent and common drunkard, and has blasphemed and broken the
Sabbath, despised Ordinances, scoffing at holiness, and the profession of
Religion, scoff no more -- so resolving and so doing, you may safely approach
to the blessed Ordinance, and on terms of true repentance, enjoy communion
with Christ. But says one, Must every one have the Sacrament? Will you give it
to all? I confess I do not intend to give it to a Jew, a Turk, nor a Pagan,
to none of all three, but to every Christian.

Yea but there are some profane Christians; I know here lies the grand
objection. I Will seriously give you my thoughts, and I Will engage you into one
Society before we depart: Church Communion will engage you all to be Saints. 1.
If any of you be profane I know not. But Sir, you cannot but imagine, that in
such a Congregation there must be some: it is not possible but there must be
some. Secondly therefore, unless by one or more he be brotherly dealt withal,
by private and serious admonition, and after that according to Christ's rule by
one or two more, and after excommunicated. I really profess, notwithstanding
the Learning of all the Ministers on earth, no power on earth has the least
seeming or semblable Authority to keep such a one from the Sacrament, consired
before that he be baptized, and not a Jew, but one that makes a Ve^ball
profession of the Faith, and that desires the enjoyment of the Ordinance. I say
he must be so deal^ withal as Christ has prescribed legally, according to
Law; He must be excommunicated or else cannot be kept from the Sacrament. I
say, It is a dream of the Pharisees invented the business of Suspension
distinct from Excommunication. I say, It is a Pharisaicall invention that has
found out an absolute distinction etc. Nay more then that, I humbly desire, yea
I almost durst (though with great humility) challenge any man to show me the
least footsteps in the whole Book of God, to keep any man from the Sacrament
if he will press to it upon his owne-score. I speak not besides my Book: for
Reasons I have some anon which peradventure will strike some of your
consciences into amazement.

Here Is now a mess of stuff must be taken notice of. 1. It is ell-wide
charity which he discovers there, where he tells us, he would not for a thousand
worlds think that amongst eight or nine hundred Communicants (after his
reckoning) for so many that Congregation consists of, there should be none
ignorant of the rudiments of Religion; he does well to smother it up, by
telling them he will not question them, for if he did he might be convinced
every one were not so knowing.

But in the third Paragraph he comes to his work: To pass by his large
character of visible Saints (which may be also visible Devils) It is worth
enquiring what he means by his application of that of the Apostle, Let him
that has stolen steal no more. If he means that no sins shall keep a man
from the Sacrament after repentance evidenced, we agree with him: but if he
means, that though one has been scandalous by theft, drunkenness, blasphemy,
swearing, Sabbath-breaking, scoffing at holiness, etc. and that very lately,
and only says he will do so no more, but has evidenced the change of his
heart by no contrary conversation for any time, yet he should be admitted, we
think him a strange Steward of Gods Mysteries. We are sure the whole Church of
God in all Ages have been of another mind, and rather erred on the other side,
by setting scandalous sinners, after a verbal profession; some 2, some 3, some
7, some 10, 11, 15, 20 years, to evidence their repentance for such sins
before they admitted them to the Lords Table: Those who read Basils three
Canonical Epistles to Amphilochius, v. Basilii can. ep. ad Amphil.
or any of the Primitive Councels, will see evidence enough of it.

He tells us he will not give the Sacrament to all (so indeed he told some godly
Christians at his first coming, who feared him in that point, that they should
well see he was not for promiscuous Communions.) But who will he keep away,
Turks, Jews, Pagans, such as he has none of in his Parish. 2. Such as will
never come to him for it. But he openly professes he will give it To all
Christians. So then, if the Papists will they may have it. But he is afraid
some will think him too free to give it to all profane persons. To this he
answers in the first place;

That if any be profane he knows it not] I cannot tell how he should, having
not resided amongst that great people two months; but with what conscience
does he openly proclaim four Sacraments together, and appoint two hundred to
come at a time, when he professes that he does not know his people? I have
heard of a Gentleman, who being to make a speech, first shut his eyes, and then
told his Hearers he was in the dark. I would know whether Master Boatman took
a course to know them; whether he called the Eldership of the Congregation (as
was his duty) and enquired of them the state of the flock, possibly they might
have told him of some that were profane. Or if (as I hear) Elders be an
abomination to him, whether he visited them all (...), from house to house. I
am sure he did neither of these, and it is no wonder he did not know them then.
But he walks by another rule, for he professes here, That except the profane
be first admonished, then excommunicated (which he knows now they cannot be,
except by Elderships, which his judgment is not for belike) no power on the
earth has the least seeming or semblable Authority to keep any from the
Sacrament, yea, and this is his Say (notwithstanding all the Learning of all
the Ministers on earth: yea and he tells us so again, (...). For Suspension, it
is a dream of the Pharisees who invented it, yea a Pharisaicall invention.
How? a dream? a Pharisaicall dream? a thing not to be maintained by the
Learning of all the Ministers on earth? No Authority for it, neither seeming
nor semblable? Bona verba quaso. Surely less Learning will be enough to deal
with so young a Rabbi, and to maintain so ancient, so divine, so ration all an
institution, at least against such an adversary. Softer words would have been
better for one that had no harder Arguments for his opinion.

Nay more, he desires, nay he challenges (with as much humility as we can
think he has, after he has so boldly charged all the Churches of God, as
Dreamers, Pharisaicall Dreamers, etc.) any to show him the least footsteps for
it from the Word of God. This challenge he shall see anon is accepted. We will
try what a combatant our Goliath is, he tells us he speaks not besides his Book.
I know not what is in his Book, but I shall prove anon he speaks besides Gods
Book, and besides his Book too, if it were the Bible he had in the Pulpit (but
possibly it was Master Humphrio's Rejoinder.)

But he tells us he has Reasons anon shall come forth, yea and those terrible
ones too, such as shall amaze our consciences. Let us see what they are.

Trace the footsteps, and they are very rare in Scripture too that Christ has
laid down in such a case as this, and till you have searched them, believe
that a great deal of pride, and more uncharitableness, and worse then both
has been the cause of suspending so great an Ordinance so long, and maring
such a breach in the Church of God. I find but once in the Book of God, that
it speaks directly in it, and then it speaks of no other remedy for all
exorbitances committed in the Church, but, Let a man examine himself, etc. If
you find any, show them. It is a moore Dream, and Invention of men, which they
pretend, to implode the Scriptures, and lay a barden on our shoulders, and an
intolerable yoke. I say a Pharisaicall invention, and I speak plainly and
home. When the Aprstle had taken a survey of the great enormities of some, he
speaks Not a Word more, and that upon a fault which I believe not any man was
guilty of in the English Church, viz. They were drunk at the Sacrament, and we
do not sind that he did suspend them, cast them out, or excommunicate them,
only the Apostle fatherly, and Apostolically advises them to take a better
care for the time to come. 2. Secondly (admit what some pretend, that there is
just reason to suspend some from the Sacrament, whom it would never trouble the
wisest heads in this Age, for it never entered into the heads of former Ages to
tell) what distinct crimes they are, for which any are to be suspended. You are
mistaken if you think for every whimzy gimeracke, or trifle that comes in a
man's head, a man must be kept fram the Sacrament. The Apostle indeed advises
the Corinthians to excommunicate the incestuous person; but the business was
so highly aggravated, that the sin was not so much as named amongst the
Heathen. It is not every trifle because a man is not of such a man's opinion in
point of State-affaires, though I hope you are all of a mind now; therefore he
must be kept from the Sacrament, not because such or such a Pharisee says a
man keeps company with Publicanes and sinners, and so one himself (but not so)
though called so, therefore he must be debarred from the Sacrament. What is all
this from God? I dare safe^ier say, from the Devil. What, out of a private and
particular prejudice, and he has has taken it has a little power that way,
and interest in Admission, therefore the Party must be kept from the Sacrament.
Quis talia fando? I had almost spoken something that had been a Solecisme. Did
ever the Lord Jesus Christ think on earth this should have been done in his
Church? and I tell you, the Holy Ghosts strain. No, either he must be
convicted and adjudged, or I dare pronounce of him that denies it him on any
other score, That he is a bold intruder on Christ's Authority.

Are those the amazing reasons we heard of I wonder! Here Is amazing language,
and boldness, and confidence; here is nothing looks like a Reason, but only
that the Gentleman does not read that the Apostle in 1 Cor. 11. that the
Apostle gave no other order, but, Let a man examine himself: But what if
Christ himself gave other order, Mat. 7.6. and by his own example, admitting
none but his Disciples, and the Apostles, Acts 2 admitting none out such as
were pricked at the heart etc. And what needed the Apostle in the eleventh
Chapter give order further, when in the fifth Chapter he had plainly forbidden
them to keep the Feast with old Leaven? viz. scandalous sinners, as ver. 6. and
to eat with any called brethren, that should be fornicators, covetous,
idolaters, railers, drunkards, extortioners; for the Corinthians being drunk
at the Sacrament; There is nothing but our Translation serves Master B: and we
translate the same word otherwise, John 2.10. (of that more afterward) But he
tells, It will pose the wisest heads to find out for what sins any should be
kept away; that is another dispute. We are now disputing whether any should or
no, according to Master B's: Doctrine, if a man had sinned the sin against
the Holy Ghost he should not, this is all that looks like Reason, and here is a
poor pittance of it; but besides this Reader, 1. Here Is an impudent falsehood
affirmed in a Pulpit, That it never entered into the heads of former Ages to
suspend any, thou will find I have proved it the constant practice of the
Churches of God in all former Ages.

2. Here is a bold expression of Suspension. He tells us again, that it is a
mere Dream, an Invention of men, a Pharisaicall invention.

3. Here is an impudent aspersion cast not only upon the eminent servants of
God in former times, and Churches and Councels, but upon the generality of
godly Ministers in this Age, whose judgment and practice has been to suspend
the ignorant and scandalous from the Lords Table. Master Boatman tells the
people that They go about to implode the Scriptures, to lay a burden and an
intolerable yoke (so all Christ's Ordinances are to men captivated by their
lusts) on their shoulders: That they make themselves wiser then any former
Ages; That they are bold intruders on Christ's Authority. Do thou think
Reader that he has not said to himself, My tongue is my own, and I will
speak? The best of it is we think it no great slander, Let it run to its
excess of riot.

Fourthly, here is a malicious insinuation, That we keep men from the Sacrament
for whimzies, and gimeracks, and trifles, and differences in State-matters, and
particular prejudices. Those who do any such things are engaged to speak for
themselves: I know none but abhorres these calumnies. But yet I am at a loss,
for the reason should amaze our consciences.

Another Reason (which few understand, but I would many did who suspend the
Sacrament, it would make them look to it, and about them) is, That the Church
of Rome has got more these two years by suspending the Sacrament in the
Church of England, then ever it did in Queen Mary's days. To my own
knowledge, of the persons the Arguments they use, the place, and County, I
refer you to: It Is Lincolneshire, they say, where is your Church of England
now? where are the marks, the Word and Sacraments, (which the Orthodox, and
Ancient accounted the only true marks of the Church) You have indeed Preaching
and Baptism, but where is the Lords Supper? no where, unless (as the Papists
private Mass) here and there, in a corner. There are none but may see, and
understand; does not the Church of God lose by this? Is it not the Popes
harvest? Nay in time the suspension of this great Ordinance, will take men off
from hearing, unless it be a company of men which come to hear for novelty,
and so none will own the Church of Christ. This is the great Reason (besides
the Authority of Scriptures, whereby I have proved it) persuading me to the
Administration of it. They cannot have the Sacrament, they can have the
Eucharist at Rome, they will go thither; nay more, I have known particularly,
and could name them that have been first amused, then amazed, and after by
subtle and ingenuous cheats drawn to the Church of Rome. Now I have no desire
you should be Papists, and therefore have a great desire to entertain you as
members of the Church of England.

Now we have got the conscience-startling Reason, Master Boatman must give the
Sacrament to all, and he thinks we would do it too if we did but consider, 1.
That the neglect of this Ordinance has given occasion to the Papist to say,
where is your Church? where are your Sacraments? But in the first place, Est
inter Tanaim quiddam socerumque Viselli.

1. Cannot we set up courses of Sacraments, but we must keep open house for all
profane persons? This aims only to urge a necessity of administering the
Ordinance, it proves nothing against suspension of the unworthy.

2. The Papists are very busy to ask indeed where is our Church? Chamier,
Whitaker, etc. have told them where it is; it is well we have some better
Doctors, I see to answer for us, then Master Boatman; for he thinks the
Question unanswerable, if Sacraments be not constantly administered in every
part of our Church, and every one admitted to it. Well, by my consent, he shall
never be appointed to answer Bellarmine.

3. No wise man ever thought, That the suspension of the Administration of the
Ordinance of the Sacrament in a corrupted Church, till it could be set in
order, (the Church yet in judgment defending the Ordinance, and thirsting (for
a time) to administer it orderly) did unchurch a Church: where was then the
Church of the Jews for 40 years together wanting Circumcision?

Surely one might tell a Papist, the Sacrament is administered constantly in
some hundreds of Congregations in England, in the Churches in London,
Lancashire, Suffolk, Essex, etc.

5. What makes Master Boatman cry, it is no where, except as the Papists
private Mass, here and there, in a corner. I cannot tell, surely London is no
corner; but many of his hearers thought that by that he reflected upon my
Administration of it, in the Chapel belonging to this Noble Family. If he
did, he may please to know, the Lady in whose Chapel it is, is an Earls
eldest Daughter, and now the Widow of a Noble Gentleman, who was Knight and
Baronet; in either of whose Rights the Law allows her a place of Public
Worship, and a Chaplain, and makes her Chapel a place of Public Worship,
her house especially, being distinct from all other Parishes, and an entire
Liberty within it self. But we must tell him, his carrying the Sacrament the
other day to a private chamber for a Viaticum to a sick person, was a great
deal more like private Mass, or if you will, carrying The Host.

We (says Beza, Bezae tract, de coena Domini contra Joachimum Westphalum in
oct. ex edit. S^eph. 1559. p. 160.
speaking in the name of Protestants) do not use to administer the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper privately, to our sick people, nor do they desire it; for
they are so well taught as to know, that their salvation does not depend upon
their receiving the Sacraments, a privation of which is not damnable, but a
contempt only. Now they to whom the Lord has denied liberty to come into the
public Congregation cannot seem to contemn the Ordinance; So Aretius. Illud
autem omni defensione justa caret, quod ad aegros desertur, tanquam viaticum
morituris; qui mos inolevit, ut opinor, cum persuasum esset plebi, quosdam pie
mori, non posse nisi prius coena^ Domini sumpsissent, etc. Arist Probl. loc.
82. Chrysostom. in Mat. Hom. 3.
The administration of the Sacrament (says he) is a public action, and for
private Sacraments they seem to us to be repugnant to the nature of that
Ordinance which is a Communion. -- So Aretius also.

Lastly, surely a wise Protestant would tell a Papist, That if we had one
Sacrament too few, they have five too many; which would argue as much against
the truth of their Church, as the want of one could against the truth of ours.
Thus you see the Papists (Mr Boatman is so gravelled with) may be answered
without a promiscuous communion.

But 2. he thinks, Many will turn Papists if they may not have the Sacrament
here. Would there not be fine Communicants think we, that are so ready to
turn Papists upon every teach?

2. But so long as Sequestrations hold, I think we need not fear men of
Estates turning Papists, the consciences of such as we must deny the Sacrament
to are not so strict, for others indeed there may be some fear.

3. But is this a good Argument think we? Suppose a debauched swearer or
drunkard should come to us, and tell us, If we will not give him the Sacrament
he will turn Papist, must we therefore profane Gods Ordinance? Chrysostom
tells us he would sooner give his body to death, and his blood to be shed, then
he would pollute Gods Ordinance by giving it to scandalous sinners. Suppose an
impudent Queen should come to one and tell him, if he would not marry her, she
would turn whore; were this a good Argument think you to persuade a Gentleman
to marry her? or rather, ^o nomine to refuse her? Master Boatmans reason is
just such another. Now Reader thou see what the startling Reason we heard
comes to; a mere poker, in reality just nothing.

Again to the Exhortation, I beseech you make no evil use of what has been
said, because it is the truth, and nothing but the truth of God. And I say
again, that it is not in the power of any particular Minister, or
Congregation, without clear conviction and Condemnation, to keep a man from
the Sacrament, if he will rush, no man has any thing to do with him. And if
you will rush, do, your blood be on your own souls. I have quitted mine hands
this day before God, and his people. Look to your selves, if your consciences
tell you that you have not owned the Gospel, that you have been ashamed of
Religion, that you have walked in evil; If your conversation bespeake your
irregularities, I beseech, you reform, refrain. It would be the greatest
happiness and joy that ever I met withal in all my life, to have that scoff
become a real truth, that you might prove all Saints at St Peter's, that I
might be able to present you to God (as your Pastor) an holy, and unblameable,
and peculiar Congregation. Brethren, I beseech you labor (as much as in you
lies) by considering, and laying to heart what has been said, to refrain from
those lusts which have been prevalent in your spirits.

In the next place to you that have not run into the same excess of riot; and
I bless God with, and for you; but I have one exhortation to give you, that
you would be pleased to fill your souls with charity. Look to your selves,
believe every man his Brother better than himself, this is Evangelicall
counsel. Some will say, I see such, and such profane, advise them; have thou
done that? If not, thou have sinned against the Gospel, and his sin is not so
much his as thine; do thou cry out of him, and have not prayed for him?
particularly admonished him? and soberly? that for the time to come he would
take a better course; have thou done it with moderation, meekness, sobriety,
tenderness, and seasonably restored thy brother overtaken? Rail not, revile
him not, cry not out against him; make not his private sin public, let not
every one take notice of it of which thou take notice, do not sin against thy
Brothers soul. -- But some are not yet satisfied if the profane be admitted,
and the Sacrament be administered promiscuously the Ordinance will be defiled. A
pretty dream! Is not the Word as soon defiled because a profane man hears
it? As soon that may as the Sacrament; what is another man's receiving unto
thee if thou receivest worthily? I do not remember the Scripture tells us, that
any man got any hurt by the man that came without the wedding garment; nor did
any man ever the more shun the room or cast him out, only indeed the Master
came, and he turned him out. Let the profane take heed left they be turned out,
Christ may find them out. For this cause many are sick, and weak, etc. and he
may cast them into utter darkness. But although Christ has this authority, I
know no Minister has any such. What have we to do if it be thus? Only these
two things: and I desire you, especially of this Congregation, to join with me
in an humble and serious confession to God of our former practices. 2. As
heartily to renew solemnly your Covenant made in Baptism against the flesh,
the world, and the devil, you know how guilty you have been all of the breach
of it. That once done, I will take upon me on good grounds to call you holy to
the Lord, and seriously invite you to this work.

In this last Paragraph, the greatest part of it is something better than
ordinary; men of this Gang could not so securely rail against examination by
Eldeships, and enquiries after the flock, if they did not pretend for a great
deal of zeal for private examination. There were some of old, that to devour
widows houses the better made long prayers. I wish that all the pretended
strictness of some, for selfe-examination, be not only a vizard to mock the
world with, while they rob the Church of the divine Ordinances of Presbyteries,
and Suspension, etc. But yet in this Paragraph

First, he ownes all that he has said before, and tells his people, It is the
truth, and nothing but the truth of God; apply this to all he had said before:
That Suspension was a dream, a mere dream, a pharisaic all invention, for
which was not the least footstep in Gods word; that no power under heaven has
any seeming, or semblable authority to keep any from the Sacrament that will
press to it on their own score. That those who do it are proud, uncharitable,
intruders upon Christ's Office, that former Ages never thought of it; all this
is the truth, he says, and nothing but the truth of God: yea, and he says it
again, That it is not in the power of any particular Minister or Congregation,
without clear conviction and condemnation, to keep any away; what he means by
Conviction and Condemnation he told us before three or four times over they
must be Excommunicated.

Whether a single Minister has power or no is a question some make, but Mr
Boatman has no reason (for he owneth no Eldership) and the Rubric allowed it
to a single Minister in some cases: but he had expounded himself before: No
power on earth can do it. And in the very next words here, If he will rush, no
man has any thing to do with him. And now he tells his people, If they will
rush they may, their blood he upon their souls, he has quitted his hands,
etc. Thus Mat. 26.24. Pilate when he had condemned Christ, took water and
washed his hands, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person, see
ye to it. It is a good wish he wishes, that the scoff might become a real
truth that all were Saints at Peter's. The scoff he refers to we know not,
unless it were one raised by one of his own friends, who having got their
Pastor amongst them to a cup of Sack and a pipe of Tobacco, merrily told an
honest man, that such a night their Pastor and some of Peter's Christians were
at such a place conferring together; whence some called those who frequent such
meetings Peter's Christians. But the wish was good.

His next counsel is good, only he should have told his people, that if the
offense be notorious and public that private admonition shall not need
precede; Him that sins openly rebuke openly (says the Apostle.)

He fears some will think the Ordinance is defiled if the profane be
admitted; this he calls a pretty dream, and says the Word is as much d^filed,
etc. To this I shall speak hereafter, with Mr Boatmans leave, though the
Ordinance be not capable of any intrinsecall pollution, yet the Communion is
defiled by enduring profane persons in it, 1 Cor. 5.6. (if the Apostle knew
what he said) yea, and the people that communicate are defiled if they do not
their duty, admonishing them, informing the Church, etc. to be sure the
Officers of the Church are defiled, for it was their duty to have hept them
away.

But Mr Boatman does not remember any man got hurt by the presence of him that
wanted the wedding garment, nor shunned the room for him, only the Master came
and turned him out.

1. Before this will prove any thing to the purpose, he must prove that the
Supper, there mentioned, was the Lords Supper, otherwise this is (...).

2. Secondly, he must prove, that that Guest did not only want the wedding
garment, but that he wore an open filthy garment; an hypocrite wants the
wedding Garment, yet I know none say, the presence of hypocrites defiles a
Communion; why? because man cannot judge the heart; but the question is whether
the presence of gross sinners defiles the Communion or no?

3. None says, the bare presence of ascandalous sinner defiles the particular
soul of a private member, but it defiles the Officers, and the Communion.

4. Mr Boatman does remember the Master turned him out. So it is Christ's will,
belike, none should be there but such as have the wedding garment; and the
question is, whether he (now he is ascended) has left us sufficient power to
do his will as to such wanters of the wedding garment as our eyes can discover.

5. Holy Mr. Ambrose thinks that Christ, Ambrose his Media. p. 260.
turning out him who wanted the wedding garment, is a good Argument for to
evince our duty to turn away such as appear to us to want it, (we being, in
Christ's stead, his Ambassadors, Stewards, etc.) But Mr Boatman tells us again
we have no such authority; we will anon join issue with him in that point. In
the last place, he exhorts his people to confession, and renewing their
Covenant, and then he pronounces his people all Holy to the Lord. I hope he
meant in the largest sense of holiness.

This Reader is a perfect account of that whole part of his Sermon which gave
occasion to this ensuing Tract. I confess, for my own part, I heard it not, no
more did scarce any of our Ministers, some of us being resolved first to be
satisfied, That he has authority to preach (which we have very good grounds to
suspect he has not;) but these notes were given me, upon my desire by an
ingenious young man, who is a Scholar, who took them in short hand from Mr
Boatman's mouth, and gives me leave, Reader, to tell thee that he will
justify, that they are a true account of that part of his Sermon, to Mr
Boatman, or any other. I saw the several other Notes, taken by others, though
more imperfectly, because taken in long-hand, which yet have the same passages
concerning Suspension, and those who practice it. If they be denied, thou shall
have them in the next attested by six or seven more.

In the mean time I appeal to such Christians in this City, as heard that
Sermon, whether those passages, concerning Suspension, and those who practice
it, be not faithfully recorded.

My self was that day employed in a meeting with other Ministers of the City;
I was no sooner returned home at night to my Study, but there came to me four
or five honest men, exceedingly troubled at the Sermon, one of them almost in a
rage, professing he never heard so much audaciousnesse in a Pulpit; they were
(indeed) all very much troubled, and read me their Notes. The next day was my
Lecture day, in which I was to preach a preparation Sermon to the Sacrament;
perceiving that we had been so boldly challenged, and so rudely reflected upon,
I thought it my duty to take notice of it, and in my Sermon in thesi spoke to
it.

1. Proving that Suspension of the ignorant and scandalous from the Lords Table
(though they were not Excommunicated was justifiable from Scripture.

2. Proving that it was so far from being a pharisaicall dream, that it had
been the judgment and practice of the Servants and Churches of God in all
ages, and of our own ever since the first dawnings of Reformation amongst us
in the days of King Henry 8.

This was carried to him, and I hear that on the Lords day (which was his
first Sacrament day) he was taken up with admiring the bold face of them who
should say any such thing, etc. and that he quoted the Discipline of the French
Church as a witness against Suspension, (how truly we will examine anon.) By
this time the spirits of his friends were up, and a great cry there was about
the Town, that we could talk, but durst not dispute, with this new Champion,
he had challenged us all, etc. and in particular this was laid to my charge. I
confess I had so much pride as to think him an adversary something below me;
but yet to stop his friends mouths, and especially to vindicate the truth, and
Ordinances of God, and our own practice from him, by the advice of two or three
Reverend Ministers, upon the twentieth of December, I drew up this ensuing
Letter in the presence of two Reverend Ministers, and read it to them, and they
approving it, upon the 21. I sent it to him by the hands of two honest men, his
Parishioners. The Letter follows Verbatim.

Sir,
I am credibly informed, by the mouths of more than two or three witnesses,
(which yet had been enough to have established the thing) that in a discourse
this day seven-night you did first confidently maintain,

1. That Suspension distinct from Excommunication was a dream of the
Pharisees. Secondly, as confidently

2. Challenge any Minister in the world to show you any ground for it from
Scripture.

And had these things been spoken but once, charity might have judged them
Lapsus linguae, but being repeated again, and again, and with a great deal
of difference, and averred, and renewed since in private, (as I am assured) all
must conclude them errores mentis. Nor have I heard it only as inculcated from
your self again and again, but from diverse others, (who possibly (some of
them) had need be of that large persuasion) that you offer to dispute with any
in the defense of it.

Sir, I know not wherefore God has set me in this City but to stand up for his
glory, and for the defense of his truth and Ordinances; and though I have not
been a man of war from my youth, yet I must not now stand still and hear you
defy the Churches, and Servants, and Ministers of the living God as
Pharisaicall dreamers, and this day after day. These are therefore to let you
know, that I accept your challenge, and (in opposition to what you said) shall
be ready when, and where you please (so it be before a competent number of
witnesses) to maintain against you,

1. That the suspension of some persons from the Sacrament, besides Turks,
Jews, and Heathens, and those who are cast out of the Church by Excommunication
is grounded on the Scripture, and deducible from it.

2. That it is so far from being a pharisaicall dream, that it has been the
constant judgment of the Servants of God in all times of other reformed
Churches, and our own ever since the beginning of reformation.

Either of these (Sir) I shall maintain against you, either in a more public
or private dispute. More privately, (if you think fit) before as many
Ministers as will come and twelve private Christians, chosen by each or more,
(provided the number chosen be equal on both sides.) Or more publicly, in the
Church, and in what Church you please; (such Laws being first agreed on as are
fit to regulate such a dispute.) If you accept either of these, let me know the
time and place, (provided it be not on my Lecture day) and I shall be ready to
appear in this cause of God against you. And to this I expect a sudden answer,
otherwise I shall think my self bound to let the world know, that as your
Charge favored of too much Pharisaicall pride, to condemn so many as
Pharisees, dreaming Pharisees too. So your challenge was but the noise of an
impotent Bravado, and to deliver the Truth and Churches of God from your
Scandalls, in a way commensurate to the offense.

Only I desire you to remember, it is not my challenge, but an accepting of
your challenge, and that I shall contend not for Masteries, but for truth: and
in themeane time be

Subscribed, For Mr John Boatman present these. Your friend in what I shall not
dishonor God, and prove the truths adversary, J. C.


When my two friends brought him this Letter, and told him the import of it,
and from whom it came, he taking the Letter, satis pro imperio, bid them tell
that Trifle he would answer him, at at his next turn bid them tell that simple
Fellow he would answer him, insomuch that one of the Messengers (a little
troubled at the rudeness of his language) bluntly told him: Better words would
become his mouth. They come away, not doubting but he who was so big in words,
and to whom we were such Trifles, would have shown himself something in deeds,
and have thought that his rude Language at least would have engaged him to
dispute. That night he sent me this Letter, Superscribed

These for Mr John Collings Batchelour in Divinity.
Sir,
YOur unchristian incivilities have been so many to me, a mere stranger, that
they might easily have provoked a very patient man; yet I have forborne, and
they shall work no other effect upon me for the future. I will not gratify
you, nor your backbiting companions, so much as to be angry. For your Charge
(in your terms) it is all false; and for your foul language I shall say no
more but the Lord rebuke you. What I delivered I shall justify; then you shall
see that there was neither the lapse of the tongue, nor an error of mind; For
the dispute you mention I do not intend, magno conatunugas agere, (which must
needs be, considering what a strange Spirit you show your self to be of) I
have seen often enough what issue these public contests have had. If you
write, and appear in public (for such a thing you intimate, which I know you
love to do) if any thing there sufficiently reflect upon me or truth, I know
what I have to do. In the mean while, till I have satisfaction from you for
your gross deportment, which concerns me as a Gentleman, a Christian, and
which is more, a Minister of the Gospel, I shall avoid you as a wrangler, and
one that loves contention, which is very much against the spirit of

John Boatman Pastor of St Peter's in Norwich.


-- teneat cornicula risum?

Reader! I hope thou will judge this Letter did not deserve an answer, and if I
durst not have trusted thee with my credit against this adversary, thou
should not have seen it, but I perceive it misrepresented in the world, and
cried up as the meekest, humblest Letter, etc. Now read, and I shall make thee
(who ever thou art) my Judge, only take a few notes to help thee better to
understand it.

1. I did a little wonder at the Superscription that he should own me under the
Notion of a Batchelour in Divinity. I confess, I have performed the exercises
required of him who takes that degree in our Schools, and the University has
pleased to give me their Seal, to let others know that they have been pleased
to confer that degree upon me; but for Mr Boatman, sure indignus est qui
dicat, of all men he should have taken no notice of it, having so liberally in
the morning called me Trifle, simple fellow, etc. especially considering that
himself is not yet Batchelour of Arts.

2. In the beginning of this Letter he tells me of unchristian incivilities I
have offered him. I never yet came in his company, how I should use him so
uncivilly I know not. My nature does dispose me to as much civility I hope as
another, and I would be loath to be uncivil to mine enemy, much less to a
stranger. I profess, Reader, thou have heard all I have been ever guilty of,
and I refer it to thee to consider, whether it were uncivil for a Minister
of the Gospel in a City, hearing of one called to a place of eminency in the
City, as he had occasion to enquire of him, especially being one who lived at
three or fourscore miles distance, and was not known in these parts, and to
inform the people faithfully what he heard. If I, hearing the man was no
graduate, no Minister, nay, far more which I shall conceal, (though as to
other things I shall not desire to asperse him) did persuade my friends amongst
the people to be deliberate in their choice and first to enquire. I hope this
was so far from incivility, that it was my duty. I appeal to all the world to
charge me with any other incivillities than these which I apprehend my duty.

3. Thou see, Reader, he denies the charge, how justly judge by the Notes of
the Sermon before; surely he has a great measure of confidence to deny what he
so often inculcated, but he adds, he denies it [in those termes] what terms he
means I cannot tell. Logical terms are proper to a question, and so the
terms are two. The Subject, Suspension. The Predicate, that it is a dream of
the Pharisees. I think thou will find these the terms in his Sermon. But
perhaps he means Grammatical terms, Letters, and Syllables, and words, if he
did, it is a pitiful shift.

4. But it had been enough to me for him to have eaten his words, but that he
licks them up again, and says, What he said he will justify, and I shall see
it was neither lapsus linguae, nor an error of the mind. So the business is
to prove he said so only, for he will avouch what he said; that he said so, I
have proved already, and if it be openly denied, I will undertake to prove it
by more than three or four witnesses; and I appeal to those who heard him
that day for witnesses.

5. Disputing he does not love; no, he tells us, he will not take a great deal
of pains for trifles. Thus, Reader thou see it is easier to make a challenge
than to defend it: Who I wonder would have challenged him? I know no Ministers
in this City but would have looked upon him as an improper match for them, had
he not openly challenged us, and loudly enough charged both us, and the
Churches, and Servants of God, as Dreamers, pharisaicall Dreamers, bold
intruders upon Christ's authority, such as do things contrary to all former
ages, who devise things to implode Scriptures, etc. Thus he talks, we turn
again to give him battle he runs away, and tells us, he will not bestow pains
to so little purpose; valiantly done! Is it not think you?

6. But he tells me, if I appear in public, etc. he shall then know what he
has to do. In obedience to him, and conceiving him at some little loss as to
that point, I have wrote; what he will do now I do not know nor care.

7. He charges me sufficiently thou see, as 1. A Companion of Backebiters. 2.
One who has given him foul language. So foul that it puts the good man to
his prayers. 3. One of a strange spirit. 4. One who loves to appear in
public. 5. One who have grossly deported my self to a Gentleman, etc. 6. A
wrangler. 7. A lover of contention.

Who are my Companions is sufficiently known in this City; and I hope those who
observe Mr Boatmans Companions and mine will not think his so far excelling. I
desire to be a Companion of those who fear the Lord; who are his Companions
let others observe and judge, I shall not judge any.

I think the rule good, -- Noscitur ex socio qui non dignoscitur ex se, that a
man who is not known of himself is known by his Companion, which lays a
little obligation upon me, besides what Gods Word lays.

For the foul Language in my Letter, read, and judge how just the Charge is,
if it were just, I hope he has fitted me. -- hoc sumus ergo pares.

For my strange spirit, Indeed I am one of those who know not what spirit I am
of; the Lord sanctify me yet more in body and mind and spirit.

For my love to appear in Print, I can say something to vindicate my self. I
have Printed nothing but three or four practical discourses, at whose
solicitations, and after how many solicitations, some very near me can tell;
and I have some Letters from very Reverend mento testify. And two or three
polemicall discourses the glory of God required them of me in these sinful
times. I know not what should make me so love that work: not honor sure. It is
almost a scandal in this Age to be seen under the Press, so shamefully is it
prostituted. Not Gain. I never yet sold a Copy to my Stationer; nay, besides
fifty or sixty Copies, given me for my friends, I have been forced to buy
usually as many more. Surely it is no pleasure. Those who know what it is,
first to study, then to transcribe a tract, then to review the sheets, and to
make Tables, find it no pleasant work. It was not to employ my self. Those
who know me, know I have work enough, and those with whom I live, know, that
all the time almost I can get for any such eccentrick work I am forced to
steal from my sleep.

8. For my gross deportment I am charged with, Reader, thou have the truth,
and the whole truth: Be thou my Judge.

For his other charges, it is no new thing for the adversaries of truth to
fasten such terms upon the Patrons of it. Mr Boatman must impudently defy the
Truths, Churches, Servants of the living God, but no body must call him to
account for it but they must be wranglers, etc. If that be to wrangle, we must
wrangle more.

He aggravates my gross deportments (as he calls them) because they concern
him as a GENTLEMAN, a Christian, and a Minister.

For his being a Christian, I never heard any say he was not baptized, nor ever
said any thing tending to that purpose.

For his Gentlemanship -- I was altogether ignorant, (having not seen his
Pedigree) so that I have Paul's excuse, who when he was accused for reviling (as
they called it) the High Priest, excused himself by saying, I did not know it
was the High Priest; he was never reported to me under that notion; (I confess
I am not skilled in Heraldry,) I think Gentility comes in by Consanguinity,
not affinity. But however I do not know that I said or did any thing against
him which touched his Gentleman-concernments.

For his being a Minister, all I can say is He is confidently reported to me to
be none, and that by Reverend men, who know what they say, and take heed to
their words. If he has been made such by some Irish Bishop, or the like, in a
corner, since the first came hither, so it is, but I know no reason we have to
believe it, till some credible persons see his Letters of Ordination, nor can
we (at least till then) eye him as such.

In the last place he tells us, To love contention is very far from the spirit
of John Boatman Pastor of Peter's in Norwich.

For his being Pastor of Peter's in Norwich, we cannot own him as such, till we
know at what door he came in, having great grounds he climbed up some other
way; besides, there are some sheep of that flock that will not hear his voice,
nor follow him, looking upon him as a stranger; whether he loves Contention or
no, let those who read his Sermon judge.

But thus much shall serve for his Letter.

After the receipt of which I was resolved to have done no more but to have
betaken my self to my Study, to see if the Church of God had been in an error
these 1500 years about Suspension. And to my Bible to search the Scriptures,
to see whether it were so in very deed as this Doctor had told us that there
was no footsteps there to keep any not excommunicated from the Sacrament. But
(notwithstanding all this.) I heard his friends in the Town kept up their old
Note, and decried us, as if we were indeed such Trifles, and simple fellows,
that none of us durst grapple with this Champion, and none could induce a
persuasion in them, that we durst dispute, or had made any offer to that
purpose. Perceiving no other way so probably effectual to satisfy people,
upon a Lords day soon after, my Sermon being done, before a great Congregation
I made a short and mild speech to my people to this purpose;

That they had known, that it had been the judgment and practice of us who
labored in the work of the Gospel amongst them, to suspend the ignorant and
scandalous from the Supper of the Lord, for which we conceived we had
sufficient ground from the Word of God; and in it we acted but in a conformity
to the practice of the Servants and Churches of Christ in all Ages, to the
practice of the most reformed Churches, and this was the declared judgment of
our Church ever since the very beginnings of Reformation. But in opposition
they had lately heard it delivered in this City in a public Auditory, that for
Suspension it was a dream, yea, a Pharisaicall dream, an invention of men to
implode Scriptures, and those who practiced it were openly charged as such who
would implode Scriptures, lay an intolerable yoke on men's shoulders; such who
were intruders on Christ's authority, and did that which entered not into the
heads of wiser Ages, for which was no authority in the Word of God etc. and an
open challenge was made to us to defend the known judgment of our and other
reformed Churches, the truth of God (as we hoped it would prove) and our own
practice. And I perceived people would not be satisfied that any of us durst
encounter him who had so defied us, though enough had been done to satisfy
them. Considering therefore that it lay upon us, especially in these times, to
vindicate the truth, and our practice, and in some measure our persons from the
reproach of men. That their mouths might be stopped, I would read a Letter to
them which my self had sent him, and the answer which the (over-confident)
Author of the Challenge returned, by which they might judge whether or no we
durst appear in the defense of that piece of truth which we believed, and
according to which we had walked, desiring them to make no other use of the
Letter than this, to which purpose I read it.

After this, I read the Letters, how his uncivil Letter was resented there are
enough to speak who were present.

After this we heard no more of their Brags, only some were so simple as to
tell their friends that Mr Boatman scorned to dispute here, but if I would
dispute at the University in the Schools he would then answer me, either not
knowing the order there, or forgetting that Mr Boatman is not in a capacity to
dispute there, except in a Sophisters Gown, upon some philosophical question.

This is, Reader, the true Story of this Contest: I shall refer thee to judge
in it; what could we do less than accept his Challenge? And what milder
Message than that in my Letter could be sent to let him know I was ready to
accept it?

Since this, I must confess, some of his friends have been with me, and told
me, that he disclaimes that he holds any such opinion: As that none ought to be
kept away from the Sacrament but those who are excommunicated; and that if I
write against that opinion it nothing concerns him; I shall but feign my
self an Adversary, etc. we have nothing to do with what he says in private,
his public declared judgment and practice is contrary; what he said thou have
read, and he says, he will justify what he said. Nay, upon my knowledge he
has maintained it in private too to those he thinks he is able to grapple
with. I know he has in like manner told some Reverend Ministers, and godly
people, that he has conversed and is acquainted with all his people; that he
turns away many, and admits none without examination, but such as have before
approved, etc.

But how notoriously false this is (and so very unworthy of one who calls
himself a Minister) we who are upon the place know, and could give him
instances (if need were) of some notoriously scandalous admitted, but none who
were refused, (so far as I ever upon the strictest enquiry could hear of) and
of some who told him they were never at the Sacrament before, but were examined
no more than what is your name? Where dwell you? Are you single or married? And
then they were told, That he hoped they were fit, and so they were dismissed,
(which form of questions is merrily called by some Mr Boatman's Catechism.)
This is the ground of my present undertaking. Now let me tell thee what thou
shall find in the ensuing Tract.

I have divided it into a Discourse upon three Questions.

Quest. 1. Whether Juridicall Suspension, distinct from Excommunication, be
dedueible from Scripture? I have proved that it is by several Arguments, upon
some of which I have enlarged. In the last Chapter, on the first Question I
have put four or five Arguments, which some Reverend Authors have brought, I
do not insist much on them, we have no great need of them. I have sent them out
only as Probationers, with their Letters of Recommendation from some Reverend
men, one of them is the issue of my crude thoughts concerning the nature of the
Sacrament, which I apprehend strong meat.

In the handling of that Question thou will find one Chapter containing a
digression, tending to prove, that Judas was neither at the Supper, nor at the
eating of the Paschall Lamb and that he had not then made his compact with the
the High Priests. And to prove that Christ kept the Passover, and instituted
his Supper two nights before the Jews that year, and that he suffered the
second day after his apprehension. Possibly in that discourse (which thou
may judge over critical;) thou may find some new Notions; know I am not
confident of them, though I see nothing against them, but much seemingly for
them: If they hold, I hope we shall be told no more of Christ's giving the
Sacrament to Judas, or of his eating the Passover, or compacting with the High
Priests before that time; and so being (supposedly) scandalous, (though a
secret compact would not make him so) since I finished that discourse,
communicating it to a Reverend friend; he lent me a critical discourse
concerning the day of Christ's celebrating the Passover, wrote by Ludovicus
Capellus, Ludov. Capel. (...) ad amicam inter se, and Johan. Cloppen.
Collationem, etc. p. 120.
in answer to Cloppenbu gius, I have read it over. He determines Scaligers and
Causabons opinion most probable, that Christ celebrated the Passover that
time, not the same day the Jews did, the grounds of which he shows, p. 61, 62.
ad p. 74.

Some new Notions he has about the reason of the Jewish Translation of the day
that year, etc. But I find nothing in him either to establish, or (rationally)
to destroy my opinion. I leave it to thee, Reader, to judge if I have not
probabilities on my side, and demonstrations will hardly be produced on any
side. My Arguments are most of them old, only newly reinforced, and vindicated
from Erastus, Mr Prin, Mr Humfrie's exceptions; Mr Boatman had the discretion
to take notice of very few Arguments against him, so that I have had little to
do with him as to the point of answering his Arguments, or Exceptions to ours,
(though my whole discourse be directed against him (as its proper Antagonist)
not against any of the other) whom I desire thee to take notice I only speak
to as they come acrosse me, leaving Mr Humfry to his proper Adversaries, (with
whom he will find enough to do) I must confess, when I first entered upon the
work, I intended it against none in hypothesi, only in thesi, to vindicate our
practice, and the practice of other eminent servants of Christ, yea, and of the
Churches of God in all Ages, especially our late reformed Churches, not
meddling with Mr Boatman, nor did I want persuasions to it from some learned
men, who wondered what I would answer, considering he had only Magisterially
maintained his opinion, basely aspersing the servants and Churches of God as
dreamers, imploders of Scripture, etc. and had not brought any thing toward
the proof of it, but a few loose passages which you could not go about to
mould into a Syllogism, but you would scare them out of common sense.

This made me at first resolve only to write against the opinion, and to have
pleaded the cause (...), without any preamble, (as they were wont to do at
Areopagus.) But others were of another opinion; yet this course had I taken,
considering he made it his work so constantly to deny that privately which he
had spoken publicly, and to disown his opinion as often as he met with any
godly Ministers of another mind; (this he did to Mr Corhet of this Country, and
to diverse others) who told me of it again. In the mean time in his own
Congregation he still cries it up, and sufficiently bespatters us who were of
another persuasion; witness his Sermon, preached the fifteenth of February
1653. at Peter's, upon Rev. 3.17. from which Text he had taken a great deal of
pains to teach his people how to know others that were hypocrites (an Art, I
believe, few Divines but himself are much skilled in.) In that Sermon he gave
them several Notes to know Christians that were spiritually proud: his second
note was this:

They cannot endure that any body but themselves should have any
Gospell-priviledges allowed them, unless such as are common to Jews, Heathens,
and Pagans. Indeed they may hear, and they may come to those common
promiscuous Ordinances (as they call them) but they must have no right to the
Sacrament. That must be for such, and such, and many times none in the world
worse than they; I speak to those that are guilty of these crimes, not to
those who are not; doubtless many a man is unsatisfied, and we must bear with
the weak.

If this be not plain enough I know not what is; here are at once all the
eminent Servants and Churches of God of former Ages, and our Age, branded as
spiritually proud hypocrites, because they durst not admit all to the
Sacrament; yea, and all Christians branded who are tender of their Communion in
that Ordinance. Some of them are such as there are none in the world worse than
they; The rest are weak, and only to be borne with. Reader, I shall refer it
to thee to judge whether our silence now were not a cowardly deserting the
cause of God, and of all Reformed Churches. I might tell thee more, that it is
much suspected by some, who fear God, in this City, that it is the whole design
of his preaching, to stir up animosities in a profane Party against those who
are of stricter Principles, and to brand all strict Christians as Hypocrites
and Formalists, (the usual Alehouse-termes for those against whom they have
nothing else to say;) What mean else these unsavory passages in his several
Sermons? Some have an art to squeake out Jesus Christ; (by that neat term he
expounded Luthers crepare Christum,) which I had thought had been to crack, and
make a vain boast of Christ. And again, The whining Christians are those who
have been the ruin of Religion. And again, Pride and Covetousness are the
Saints great Sins. And again, For a drunkard, or debaucht wretch I could hug
him in my bosom, when I would spit in the face of an envious Professor. I
confess I hear none of this stuff, but I shall refer thee to those godly
persons, who have sometimes heard him, to enquire whether these things be true,
I have heard them again and again, some of them have scared away some of his
godly Auditors, and others of them have frighted away others. Besides, that
ordinary expression which is his usual complement with his people before a
Sacrament: They shall not be dealt with in the pharisaicall way. These things
are not spoken in secret, but in a Pulpit, yea, and in the greatest
Congregation of the City. The Lord in mercy look upon us, our condition is sad
enough. I shall add to all this one thing yet more.

A Reverend Brother in this City, begging my assistance, to preach his Lecture
the twenty third of March last, he having before entreated me, that if I had
any thing ready on the Subject, I would preach something about Suspension at
some time in his Congregation. I that day preached for him, and for my Sermon
took that Text, Mat. 7.6. and preached my first Argument on the first Question,
there thou will find all the doctrinall part of my Sermon. I left out every
Syllable which might make my discourse unpleasant to any, and (as all my
hearers will judge) I had not the least reflection upon any; only having proved,
That that Text was not to be restrained to this or that Ordinance, but to be
understood of all Ordinances, all which are there forbidden to be dispensed to
such as the Scripture calls dogs or swine in other places, (excepting only such
Ordinances as the Scripture elsewhere expressly allows to be given to dogs,) I
concluded by way of Application.

I inferred, If that were truth, then there was a plain Scripture-prohibition
(though not (...), yet (...),) to suspend some (who yet might be in the Church)
from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. 1. Because it is a pearl, and an holy
thing. 2. Because there is no other Scripture allows the giving it out to dogs.
3. This Scripture forbids, etc.

The Lords day after I heard Mr Boatman intended to confute me the next
Tuesday; some occasions drew me out of Town, but upon the Tuesday he aimed at
it, taking my very Text; how well he confuted me, my Reader may judge by
reading my first Argument on my first question, and then his Sermon which I
have annexed at the latter end of my Tract, and my Notes upon it. I believe
there was never such a business delivered in order to a confuting; yet for
fear that a clamorous party should cry it up confuted, I have annexed it,
having the Notes of it given me by a learned and judicious man, who was his
Auditor that day, and took the Sermon from him, and will justify the Notes.

These things, Reader, made me take up a resolution to give thee an account of
the whole business, and openly to engage Mr Boatman as my proper Antagonist;
and the rather, because Theophilus Brabourne has sent me word, that if I will
write, he will defend Mr Boatman; (for every one he says is not fit for
disputing, but he will do it,) one would think he were not very fit that
should read his last books. I sent him answer, I hoped to find him work enough
to defend his own; but if he be so good at it, he shall find we are able to
employ him. That therefore Mr Boatman may know what he has to do, and Mr
Brabourne may have something to do (now he has taken his hand from the Plough,
which many, I confess, never thought him f^t for, though the Bishops judged
otherwise) I have engaged in this Controversy in the defense of all the
eminent Saints and Servants of God of former Ages, other Reformed Churches, and
our own Church, and of that Reverend Assembly, so boldly aspersed both by Mr
Boatman and Mr Brabourne, in which my self knew so many holy, and learned, and
Reverend men, that I believe, since the Nicene Council, there was never so
many, and so holy, and learned men met in any Ecclesiastical Council: Some of
whom I know would not turn their heads in any point of Divinity from the most
learned Heretics that are, or ever were in Christendom; and having such an
opinion of that eminent Assembly, I hope thou will pardon me, Reader, if I take
their part in what was their declared Judgment, especially against two such
Adversaries as these are, with whom it is far more fit that some of their
youngest Sons should dispute than themselves, leaving those Fathers to grapple
with more learned and considerable Adversaries. I am one of the youngest sons of
those Reverend Prophets, but yet I have a little duty for them, and shall
engage for Norfolk or Norwich, to attempt at least their vindication from any
who shall in these parts appear in public against what was (according to Gods
Word) agreed upon by them, (if he has not a proper Adversary, and if I be not
over-powred by Legions of Pamphlets.) But I return to my former Discourse.

The second Question I have spoken to, is: Whether Ministerial, or privative
Suspension be justifiable or no? I have on purpose spoken to this, partly,
because I hear some say this was Mr Boatman's meaning, (though he restrained
not himself so by any passage) and if it be, how does he tell others that he
does keep away some himself? But that he might not have this refuge, I have
spoke a little to that. I confess, it is a tender point which many godly men
are dis-satisfied in, Whether, in case there wants a Presbytery in the
Congregation, the Minister may keep back any by his own power, or rather ought
to administer it to all?

In the first place, I desire my Reader to observe, that those who are of the
Episcopal persuasion, and own no Congregationall Presbyteries (which is Mr
Boatman's judgment they say) make not this question, but always took the
Affirmative for granted; witness the Schoolmen, Canonists, etc. the Rubric to
the Book of Common Prayer, the Canons agreed on in the Synod at London, 1603.

Some of my Reverend and learned Fathers and Brethren of the Presbyterian
persuasion indeed scruple it, because they think all Suspension is an act of
Rule, and the Rule of the Church belongs to the Minister and Elders, amongst
whom is Reverend and learned Mr Jeanes, (whom though I know not, yet I honor
for his learned Tract on that Subject, and for his Midwifry in helping into the
world that last piece of our great and learned Twisse.) I crave leave to
dissent in this point from those few of my Brethren who are so persuaded, and
conceive, that to avoid promiscuous Communion, the Minister may in some cases
suspend his own act, though not formally pass a Censure, yea, and I think he
ought. Though I confess, when the state of the Church is such that this cannot
be done without a necessary and great breach of the peace of it, the case is
more disputable, because the Amity and Edification of the Church is the high
end of all Church Censures. Augustine in his third book contra Epistolam
Parmeniani, and in many other places thinks Church Censures should be spared,
when the Major part of the Church is corrupted, and the execution of Censures
may cause Schisms, and much he says for it.

But I must confess, I am of Peter Martyrs mind. -- Iste Augustini timor
nimius videtur, quasi debeamus verbum Dei relinquere, ut schismata and tumult
us evitemus: sequamur quod praecipit Deus, eventus autem providentiae illius
committamus. He answers all which Augustine says for his opinion, and
concludes, That it were better to have lesser Churches than so large and ample
ones defiled. But I shall not dispute that business.

3. In the last place I have enquired what has been the judgment of the
eminent Servants and Churches of Christ in all Ages. Having first enquired our
Fathers mind, the Judgment and practice of our Elder Brethren is not
inconsiderable, especially when we are charged with Innovation, and doing that
(which never entered into the heads of wiser Ages.) I have proved, that it has
been the practice of the Church in all Ages, the Judgment of our Church,
before, and ever since the Reformation, and of all reformed Churches in the
World, some Churches of the Protestant Switzers only excepted.

And now (Reader) I shall cast my self upon thy Charity. I hope thou will
excuse me for my undertaking. The zeal of the Lords house for the precious
body and blood of Jesus Christ has eaten me up, as to this point. Had not we
been openly challenged, the judgment and practice of the Churches and Servants
of God openly aspersed, I should have found other work to do besides engaging
Mr Boatman. I have given thee here a faithful and impartial Narrative of the
Original and Progress of this Contest. If Mr Brabourne be at the Charge to
reply, I desire thee not to expect my answer; I believe thou will (whoever thou
art) be able thy self to answer what he can say; I shall leave him to one more
fit for him, (having been sufficiently chidden by some learned Friends for
losing so much time as to meddle with his other piece.) But if Mr Boatman
answers, and either denies any thing here said as matter of fact, or makes such
a reply to any Arguments as any Licencer of the Press will let pass, I shall
reply to him, and prove whatever shall be denied, and make good my Arguments,
provided he confutes them better than he did my Sermon.

I shall keep thee no longer in the Porch, but give thee leave to enter; Read,
and then judge, and pray for this poor City, where are so many thousand
souls, and so few fit to take charge of them. The Lord keep thee (Reader) in
these evil times from the errors of them, and an ever lover both of
Gospell-purity, and Unity. So prays

Chaply-field-house in Norwich, April 18 1654. Thy mean unworthy Servant in
the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ JOHN COLLINGS.

Errata.
Reader,
I Cannot own these sheets till thou have corrected these following erra^aes in
them.

In the Title page read ob hoc vel maxim.

In the Preface p. 3 l. penult. r. duty. p. 9 l. 16. r. (...). l. 27. r.
considering. p. 13. l. 10. r. December, after. l. 12. r. fortnight. p. 15 l. 2.
r. account. p 16. l. 25. r. judgments. p. 22. l. 10. dele never. p. 23. l. 1.
r. are these. l. 5. dele that the Apostle. r. gave other order. l. 20. r. tell
us. p. 27. in marg. r. Aretii Phoblem. l. 16. r. would not these. p. 31. l. 30.
r. (...). p. 39. l. 15. dele at. ib. r. return. p. 39. r. us. p 41. l 25. ^.
there were. ib. l. 33. r. the people.

In the book. p. 9. in marg. r. (...). and ib. 36^. p. 11. l. 3. r. I doubt. p.
12. l. 32. r. not. To. p. 14. l 9. r. Reverend. p. 15. l. 6. r. Thus we see. p
16. l. 13. r. first for. p. 18. l. 4 r. swine are. p. 22. l. 29. r. having
appointed. p. 24. l. 12. r. yet these. l 13. r. hear men. p. 26. l. 26. r.
some such in. p. 28. l. 4. r. jure. p. 28. l. 29. r. be might. p. 29. l. 1. r.
rush p. 32 in marg. r. edit. Lutetiae. p. 35. l 12 r. is chiding p. 37 l. 20 r.
(except at that time.) l. ult. r. observes. p. 39. l. 31. r. purged: For. p.
40. l. 25. r. three things. p. 41. l. 25. r. it for. p. 42. l. 13. dele that.
p. 43. l 25. ingenuous. p. 48. l. 21. dele so. l. 22. r. things forbidden. p
49. l. 2. dele may be true. l. 2. dele it. l. 15. r. true in. l. 28. r. untied.
l. ult. dele first. p. 53. l. 16. r. (...). p. 54 l 32. r. nay it. p. 55. l.
13. r. he has. p. 57. l 6. (if but baptized.) p. 71. l. 11. r. was to be eaten
in. p. 72. l. 4 r. was caten. p. 73. l. 10. r. art. p 74 l. 32. r. the twelve.
p. 76. l. q. r. be did not. p. 77. l. 32. r. fourth d^sh. l. 33. r. rest:
Immediately (says the Doctor.) p. 78. l. 9. r. Aphicomen. l. 19. r. did cat.
l. 28. r. the Doctor. p. 79. l. 9. r. ingenuous. p. 82. l. 31. r. fourth cup.
p. 83. l. 21. dele secondly. p. 84. l. 1. r. with it: one. p. 87. l. 9. r. keep
pure. p. 95. l. 24. r. If a grossly, etc. l. 35. r. (...). p. ^1. l. penult.
r. one bread. p. 113. l. 33. r. of the elements. p. 121 l. 1. r. conecssions l.
16. r. releeve me. l. 18. r. I shall. l. 27. 1. Eldership judge. p. 125. l. 1.
r juridicall. p. 128 l. 7. r. the Constitutions and some, etc. p. 129 l 2.
Catechumeni. l. 10 r, (...) p. 130. l. 2. r. (...). l. 4. r. (...) l. 7. r.
(...) l. 10 r. (...) l. 33. r. de-la-Barre. p. 131. l. 4. r. (...). p. 132. in
marg r. (...). ibid. r. (...) p. 133. l. 14. r. of none of. p. 134 l. 12. r.
Binius. i. 29. r. in this Century. p. 137. l. 33. dele to. p. 140. l. 3. r.
demonstrandam. p. 141. l. 10. r. that he should be. p 143. l. 12. r. that some
p. 147. l. 23. r. penitus deploratos. p ^48. l. 13. and in marg. dele Anthony.
p. 155. l. 24. r. Dr de-Lawne. p. 161. l. 29. r. (...) l. 31. dele And. l. 33.
r. constitutions. p. 166. l. 12. r. augeatur. l. 25. r. minding. p. 167. l. 12.
r. (...).

CHAPTER I. Containing the State of the question.
QVESTION I.
Whether the Suspension of some persons from the Lords Supper, be deducible
from Scripture or Reason.

THE terms of this Question are two.

1. Suspension of some persons from the Supper of the Lord; that is the subject.

2. Deducible from Scripture or Reason, that is the predicate in question
betwixt us.

1. As to Suspension of some persons from the Supper; we mean no more then a
denial of that Ordinance to some. This suspension is usually distinguished
into Juridicall and Pastoral, or privative and positive.

1. Positive suspension, which is called Juridicall, is an act of the Officers
of the Church, whereby (having had due cogrisance of the party that desires the
Supper of the Lord, and finding him unfit, or unworthy) though he has formerly
been admitted; Yet they by virtue of the trust reposed by Christ in them, warn
him to abstain from the Lords Table, and deny the Ordinance to him if he
intrudes.

2. Privative Suspension, which I also call pastoral, is an act of the
Minister of the Gospel, whereby he alone (the Church wanting other Officers)
finding some persons (though formerly admitted) not able to examine themselves,
or unworthy in respect of open scandal to come to that Holy Table, does not
only as their Pastor, admonish them to forbear, but withholds the elements
from them, if they presume to come to the Lords Table.

God willing I shall anon speak to the second of these: whether privative
suspension be lawful or no. But that is not my present business. But
supposing there be an eldership constituted in a Congregation, whether this
eldership may keep away any from the Lords Table, for ignorance or known
scandal, if he be a Christian, and not de facto, Excommunicated. This is that
which Mr Boatman calls a Pharisaicall dream; an usurpation of Christ's
authority, a thing not deducible from Scripture. That which he humbly (and
boldly) challenges all the Ministers on Earth to make good. (if he durst have
stood to his word)

2. Nor could his meaning be any thing else; For in his Congregation there is
an eldership established according to Ordinance of Parliament, by a due
election of the major part of the Congregation present after public notice
given three Lords days each after other, which he has thrown down, and
publishes this Doctrine, that he might prepare his people for a prostitution
of that sacred Ordinance.

As to the second term, Deducible from Scripture, I take it for granted, that
my indifferent Reader will grant me that to be sufficiently deduced and proved
from Scripture, which is evinced from it by necessary consequence, if it be
there either (...), or (...), though not (...). If Mr Boatman or any other will
deny me, that any thing is to be proved from Scripture, but what is there (...)
and (...), He makes our Savior a very insufficient Logician, who thus proves
the resurrection. Mat. 22.31, 32. Mat. 22.32, 33.
and his Auditors very weak, who (the Evangelist says) were very well
satisfied with the proof. And those who agree with the Anabaptists in that
whimzy, will be bound to reconcile that of St James ( James 5.4.) to truth,
James 5.4.
by showing us where the Scripture says (...): The spirit that dwells in
you, lusts to envy. Yet the Apostle says, the Scripture says it. But I will
suppose Mr Boatman so rational, as to grant me this, or else he will be bound
to deny the Sacrament to all women, Baptism to all children, and the Lords day
to be a Sabbath. So that the question is this: Whether supposing a Church have
a Presbytery, it be in the power of that Presbytery, The Question stated.
having found some persons (baptized and not excommunicated) grossly ignorant or
scandalous, in the name of the Lord Jesus, to warn them for a time to forbear
communicating at the Lords Table, and if they press unto it, to deny it to
them, by declaring the Church has no Communion with them; or the like, -- etc.

In the proving the affirmative part of this Question,

1. I shall not trouble my self to prove they may do it. I shall sufficiently
prove that, in proving They ought to do it; for though a thing may be lawful,
and yet not expedient; yet a thing cannot be necessary and yet unlawful. Nulla
necessitas peccandi, we are not necessitated to sin.

2. I shall not enter into a particular enquiry, what degrees of ignorance
render a person obnoxious to this censure, nor yet what vicious qualifications
in point of scandal do it; it is enough for me if I prove it concerning any,
(how notoriously ignorant or erroneous, or scandalous soever, (provided they be
not absolutely excommunicated) for if any one sort of sinners, either ignorant,
or haereticall, or scandalous (except Turks, Jews, Heathens and excommunicate
persons) may have this Ordinance denied to them, though they press to it, Mr
Boatman's confident challenge will be answered, and he engaged to make it good,
or recant for his rashness and presumption. The question being thus stated; I
accept this Bold challenge, and shall prove it by this principal syllogism,
which shall be the head of my ensuing Arguments.

To those to whom it may not lawfully be given, it may lawfully be denied. But
there may be some Baptized persons in the Church, to whom it may not lawfully
be given. -- Ergo,

The Proposition cannot be denied, except we will say that we are necessitated
to sin; for if there may be some, to whom we can neither lawfully give the
Ordinance, (though they come) nor lawfully deny it to them; we are obliged to
sin, there being no medium between them two. I shall therefore prove the
assumption by several Arguments. viz.

That there may be some Baptized persons, not yet absolutely cast out of the
Church, to whom the Sacrament of the Lords Supper may not lawfully be given.

CHAP. II. Containing the first Argument, from Mat. 7.6. From whence is proved,
that this Ordinance is an holy thing, and so not to be given to Dogs, nor cast
before Swine.
My first Argument is this;
Holy things may not lawfully be given to Dogs, nor Pearls lawfully cast
before Swine.

But the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is an holy thing, and a Pearl, and
there may be some in the Church, who in Scripture phrase, are Dogs and Swine.
-- Ergo.

THis is no new Argument; Erastus pretends to answer it, so does Mr Prinn, and
Mr Humfry.

The sum of all I meet with answered to it is this;

1. Say some, The Sacrament is none of the holy things there spoken of.

2. All sorts of sinners that are scandalous, are not the Dogs and Swine there
meant: so that the Argument as they say is a fallacy, a dicto secundum quid ad
dictum simpliciter: To reinforce it against all their weak Cavils, two or
three things must be opened.

1. What holy things are here spoken of. 2. Who are the Dogs and Swine here
spoken of. 3. To whom this precept is directed.
Let us examine all these three a little.

1 Q. What holy things are here spoken of.

It is a good rule, Where the Law does not distinguish, we should not. Our
Savior Jesus Christ speaks not of this or that Holy thing; but says (...)
and (...); and it is a bold presumption in us to restrain it without
Scripture-warrant.

I think therefore every sober Christian will grant me these two things.

1. holy things and Pearls are here forbidden to be given to Dogs, and cast
before Swine, which the Scripture does not elsewhere plainly allow to be given
to Dogs or Swine; else they will be obliged to show us another ground of
restraint.

2. it will easily be granted to concern such holy things as God has
betrusted us to give out: for it is to men Christ speaks.

Things are called holy in Scripture, upon a fourefold account.

1. In respect of consecration, when a thing is set apart for Gods service.

2. In respect of inherent purity. Thus God is holy, and his grace as holy.

3. In respect of a divine signature and impression upon them. Thus every
command and every Ordinance of God is holy.

4. In respect of a designation, and subserviency of it to an holy use or end;
in this sense also are all the Ordinances of God holy. And doubtless, these
are the holy things here spoken of: and so all grant.

Upon the two last accounts, (says Chemnitius) the Ordinances of God are
rightly called holy. Now the Ordinances of God are of two sorts.

1 Private. 2 Public. Chemnit. harm. cap. 51.


Private Ordinances are institutions of Christ to be performed by private
persons, either in order to Gods glory, or our brethrens good, such are private
instructions and exhortations each of other. Private prayer; private
admonitions, frequently commanded by God in Scripture. The public Ordinances
are, public preaching and expounding Scripture before the Church, performed by
persons in Office to it, public Prayer, Church censures, etc. It is without
all question, that the Ordinances of God, are the Holy things here forbidden to
be given to Dogs, or cast before Swine. But the question is, whether all these
Holy things be forbidden here to be so cast, or only some?

I say there is no reason, but we should understand all those Ordinances, which
in other places of Scripture, are not commanded to be given to all. My reason
is this; because it is boldness in us to restrain what God has not limited.

And hence I perceive, that some, who have been inclined to think, that some
one Ordinance is especially meant here; yet dare not exclude others.

So Mr Jeanes, Mr Ieanes. p. 125, 126. 2 ed. of his book entitled, The want of
Church Government, etc.
though he thinks admonition and reproof are chiefly meant; (supposing the
words not to be a complete precept in themselves, but to relate to the
precedent words) yet he tells us, he will not deny, but it may be extended, and
applied to the giving of the Lords Supper.

And Chemnitius determines it an unjust restriction to restrain it to
reproof. Besides that, admonition may be given to Dogs, yea to such Dogs as
are shut out of the doors of the Church. 2 These. 3.15. He is not to be counted
as an enemy, but admonished as a Brother; with whom we ought to have no company
that he may be ashamed. Erast. Explic. Graviss. quaest. these. 94.


I know Thomas Erastus tells us it must be meant of Preaching the word. But
besides that, there is no ground in the Text for this, there is less in other
places of Scripture. For the Word must be preached to Heathens, Mat. 28. and
much more to them who are but as Heathens; and to scandalous sinners; Nor is
there any reason to appropriate this (...) to the word only.

It seems to me, that our Savior had an especial eye to Sacramental
Ordinances, not only because in other Scriptures there is an express command,
to admit the most sorts of Dogs to hear the word: but also because if any one
Ordinance may be called more holy then other, it is this of the Supper; which
is, The new Testament in his blood. The Communion of the body and blood of
Christ. But to say this Ordinance is excluded, is not only to speak contrary
to Scripture, but to common sense too. Which made Erastus in the same thefis,
think it safer to insist upon a distinction of Dogs, then adhere to his first
distinction of holy things.

This Scripture therefore using a general term, which is not restrained by
any preceding or subsequent words, and no other Scripture plainly allowing of
the holy thing of the Lords supper to be given to Swine and Dogs, I conceive he
that desires his words, may go along with the truth, and bear a proportion to
his own reason, (if he be endued with so much as an humane soul, does entitle
all but mad men and fools unto) will not say but that the Lords Supper is here
couched at least in the number of the holy things and pearls here specified.

Especially when I shall have made it evident, by the different applications of
this Scripture amongst the Ancients, and large expositions of it, by Modern
sober Writers; That they thought not the holy things here spoken of, were
Admonition or Preaching only, but other holy administrations also.

Clemens Alexandrinus expounds it generally for all the flowings out of living
water. (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 2. ex edit. Lutet. 1629 p. 368. (...)
Athanas. in dial. 1 de Trin. sub initio. p. 138. t. 2. impr. 1606 in offic.
Commetiana. Tertul. 9. l. 2 de matrimony cum Gentilibus. c. 5. lib. de
praescrip. contra haereticos. cap. 26. lib. de Baptism cap. 17. v. Cypr. opera
ep. 26. lib. contra Demetrianum sub initio l. 3. Testim. ad Quirinum. Chrysostom.
in 1. Hem. in cap. 7. Math. in prologo ad expos. Iohannis. Homil 20. in 10 cap.
Heb. lib. de compunctione cordis. Immundis impuritatibus, sacra consortia non
imperuenda
(...); which surely are in all divine Ordinances.

Athanasius makes use of this Text to justify himself, in not giving an
account of his faith to enemies of the Truth. In his first Dialogue concerning
the Trinity, inter Orthodoxum, Anomoeuns, and Arrianistum. In the beginning of
it, Anomoeus asking Orthodoxus whether he was a Christian or no? he tells him,
yes, he was. Anomoeus going on, and asking him what Christianity was, he tells
him, it was necessary for him to tell him the first, but not safe for him, to
tell him the latter. Anomoeus asking him why? he answers him, that if he did
not know who he was that asked, he might give Holy things to Dogs, and cast
Pearls before Swine.

Tertullian in his second Book concerning the marriage of Heathens with
Christians, applies this place, as forbidding Christians to marry with
Heathens, because their conversation was an holy thing which must not be cast
unto Dogs. Yet it is plain he does not restrain it; for in his Book de
praescrip: contra haereticos, he plainly applies it to the Preaching of the
Gospel; and in the 17 Chap. of his Book de Baptismo, he applies it to
Baptism. By which it is plain, he understood it in general of all holy
things.

Moses and Maximus and Ruffinus, in their Epistle to Cyprian, understand it of
absolution, and all divine Ordinances. Cyprian himself makes use of this Text,
to justify his not writing to Demetrianus, a wretched enemy of the Truth; and
how he uses it elsewhere, may be seen in l. 3. Test. ad Quirinum, where he
brings it to prove this head, Sacramentum fidei non est profanandum. Basil (the
Great) applies, but does not restrain it, to preaching the Gospel, Chrysostom
in his first Homily, on the seventh Chapter of Matthew, applies it to the
Preaching of the Word, to warrant him (if he saw his hearers negligent) to shut
up his book. So he does in his Prologue to his Exposition of the Gospel of St
John. And again in his Homily de cruce dominica. But in his twentieth Homily
upon the tenth Chapter to the Hebrews, he applies it to the Lords Supper. And
in his Book de compunctione cordis, to all the mysteries of our Salvation, and
from this Scripture takes occasion to chide those Ministers, who gave out the
Sacrament promiscuously; and says this was the reason why they were trampled
upon, and rent by the wicked (according to this Text.) Hierem calls the holy
things, the childrens bread, and the Gospel Pearls. I might also weary my
self and the Reader, with many quotations out of Ambrose, Gregor. Mag. Origin;
which plainly show their expounding this Text in a latitude, Isid. Pelus. l. 4.
n. 181. ep. ad Hieracem and l. 1. ep. 143. Aug. in Sermon. in monte l. de fide,
etc. Hieron. in Mat. 7. Chemnit. harm. c. 51. c. 66. n. 8. Alex. Halenfis sum.
theel. p. 4. q. 11. art. 1. soct. 4.
not restraining it to this or that holy thing. The judgment of Isidorus
Pelusiota, and Augustine, may be read in many places, the latter of which
(though once he applies it to fraternall correption) yet has many different
applications of it. Chemnitius in his Harmony ^^on the place tells us, that the
Word and Sacraments are the holy things here meant; And in the 66 Chapter of
his Harmony, n. 3. tells us that wicked men are to be kept from the Lord's
Table, upon the command in this Text. Alexander Halensis, brings this Argument
to prove that our Savior did not give the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to
Judas, because he should have then have acted contrary to his own precept in
this place, where he forbad holy things to be given to Dogs; whether that
Argument be good or no, I doubt he answers it; but it is plain, he thought
that by holy things, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was meant in part.
Rutherfords divine right. c. 5 q. 1. Gillespy Aarons rod. l. 3. cap. 15.
Learned Rutherford makes an Argument of this Text, for this very purpose, and
vindicates it from Erastus his Cavils. Gillespy stands upon the same Argument,
and vindicates it from Erastus and Mr Prin. By all this is plain, in what
sense the eminent servants of Christ have in all ages understood this Text,
though some of them, Piscator ad loc. Gualther ad loc. Pareus ad loc.
Rutherford ib. ut prius.
as Piscator, Gualther, Bucer, and others, think that admonition is chiefly
meant; and Pareus, that the Preaching of the Gospel is chiefly meant, yet none
of them durst exclude the other; nor was there any reason, when (as Learned
Rutherford observes) the word was ordained to be preached unto Dogs and Lions,
to make them Lambs and Converts, Is. 11.4.5, 6. Is. 2.3, 4. And Christ
himself commanded the Word to be preached to Pharisees and Sadduces
persecutors, who had sinned against the Holy Ghost. Mat. 12.31, 32. John 9.39,
40, 41. John 7.28. John 8.21:

I have done with the first thing, and showed that the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper is amongst the holy things which are there forbidden to be given to
Dogs: But the next question will be

Quest. Who are Dogs and Swine?

1. That by Dogs and Swine here are not means those Beasts we call so. I
suppose will easily be granted me by any, that considers how needless such a
prohibition would have been.

2. We must therefore acknowledge a Metaphor, and that the creatures to whom
(in this place) holy things are here forbidden to be given, are some persons,
men and women, who propeter vitia canina (as Musculus says) for some moral
depravations of mind, which have transformed them into the resemblance of Dogs
and Swine, in their natural dispositions are so called here by our Savior.
All the question will be, what those vicious qualifications are upon which our
Savior calls some here Dogs and Swine.

3. Every one knows how dangerous it is to strain Metaphors, therefore it
will be most safe to keep to a Scripture interpretation of them; and say, those
are here meant by Dogs and Swine, whom the Scripture either here characterizeth
by some vicious qualifications, bearing a proportion to some natural
dispositions in those beasts; or whom the Scripture elsewhere expresses under
this notion.

4. If we can find them sufficiently characterized here, we need not seek
elsewhere, if we cannot, we must either say all such wicked men are here called
Dogs and Swine, Respondeo Christum de illis loqui qui Margaritas contemnunt, ac
pedibus calcan^ and conversi nos laniant, hoc est, de Evangelij hostibus, de
quibus nequaquam agimus.

-- Praeterea loquitur hic Christus non de sacramentis, sed de doctrina
Evangeli^ canibus, and porcis, hoc est nolentibus and conculcantibus non
propononda. Explic. Graviss. quaest. thesi. 64.


as the Scripture expresses by that Metaphor, or only some of them.

5. If we say some of them only, surely some sufficient reason must be given
for it.

These things therefore premised, let us now come to a strict enquiry for the
meaning of this place.

Erastus thinks, that the Dogs are sufficiently characterized in the Text.

To this purpose he tells us, that Christ speaks of them who despise Pearls,
and trample them under their feet, and turning again tear us; that is of the
enemies of the Church. For whom he says he pleads not to the same purpose I
perceive. Those reverend men also speaking, who understand this Text chiefly of
the preaching the Gospel, and of Admonition.

But I shall propound a few considerations.

1. That persecutors are Dogs and Swine, none will deny; but the question is,
whether they be the only Dogs here spoken of.

2. According to Erastus; if there be in the Church then, one that is an enemy
of it, one who contemnes the Ordinances, and persecutes the servants of Christ,
he ought to be suspended the Sacrament, (though not excommunicate) Then
according to Erastus, there is such a thing as suspension.

3. Though Persecutors be properly called Dogs for their rending and tearing,
yet for this they are not properly called Swine, for Swine do not use to
tear, but we must not cast Pearls before Swine. Who are the Swine says Mr
Rutherford, and his learned Countryman.

4. If they be described in the Text, Gillespy. Aarons rod. c. 15.
it is by a double character. First, trampling upon the holy things. Secondly,
turning again, and rending the givers. The first is proper to Swine, the
second to Dogs. So then we are not to give holy things any more to such, that
will trample them under their feet, then to them who will turn again and
tear us.

5. We desire no more should be suspended, then will come under these two
notions; such as will but trample the Ordinance under their feet, or such as
will turn again and rend us. All unbeleevers will do the first, we are sure.

Lastly, There are those that doubt whether the latter part of the Text be
Exegeticall of the former, and say, the term lest does infer a commination or
threatening to those who give holy things to Dogs and Swine, wherein the Lord
threatens, that if they do it, the issue will be, 1. Those persons contempt of
the Ordinance. 2. Turning their Ministers enemies, and tearing them, being
(through the just judgment of God) the Avengers of his holy Ordinance upon
them. Who shall so presume to prostitute it.

I confess I did not so much value this interpretation of the words, Chrysostom.
in Homil. de compunctione cordit.
(though I know they will bear it) till I found Chrysostom expressing so much
as if he had some such thoughts of them, and fetching a reason from this Text;
why the Ministers of the Gospel in his time, were so lamentably despised and
persecuted, because they had given the holy Sacrament to profane persons; and
while I had this Notion in my head, A Revered Brother in this Country was with
me, and told me he had found it true in his own experience, in a woman of the
Parish, of which he was Minister, who lately dying in a sad condition, and
under much (supposed) guilt, charged his administration of the Sacrament to
her, as the great means of her hardening in sin, which was no little wound to
this godly man's spirit. Since, A Merchant of London has told me of Mr Simmonds
(sometimes of Iron-mongers Lane in London) going to visit one that was sick,
and to whom he had a little before given the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and
questioning with her, about her eternal Salvation; she asked him upon what
account he came now to question her upon that, whereas himself a little before
had assured her that the body of the Lord Josus Christ was broken for her;
which (says my Author (as I remember from Mr Simmond's mouth) so wounded him,
that he had almost suncke down in the room, (which two stories may answer that
one which Mr Humfry has borrowed from Mr Fairclough, and printed in his
rejoinder to Dr Drake) we need not go so far. What makes the profane and loose
party in most of the congregations of England this day, so hate and revile
their godly Ministers this day, and endeavor to get them out, (because they
dare no more give the Sacrament to them) But this their former sin in giving
the holy thing of the Sacrament to these Dogs and Swine formerly. I would feign
know says Mr George Gillespy, what fruit godly Ministers find of their former
promiscuous administrations, but ageneral hardening of heart amongst their
people, and a blessing of themselves in a supposed good condition, because they
are administered to all the privileges of Saints, etc.

7. This we see, if these Dogs and Swine be to be interprated by the following
words of the Text, they are such, as can or will make no other use of the
Ordinance, then to trample upon it, and who will tear the Ministers who give
them unto them; If the last sense of the words be admitted, we must seek for
the interpretation of the Metaphor in other places of Scripture, where these
terms are used to express wicked men or women.

8. I find men and women in Scripture, calling themselves, or others Dogs; and
the Holy Ghost calling some dogs upon six accounts.

1. Upon an account of worthlesnesse, and inconsiderablenesse. In this sense
Goliath says to David, am I a Dog? etc. 1 Samuel 17.43. David calls himself a
dead Dog. 1 Samuel 24.14. Abner asks if he were a Dogs head. 2 Samuel 3.8.
Mephibosheth calls himself a dead Dog, because unworthy to sit at David's
Table. And Abishai calls Shimei a Dog. 2 Samuel 16.9.

2. Upon an account of cruelty; either cruel actions, in which sense, Hazael
says, Am I a Dog that I should do this? 2 Kin. 8.13. And David prays to be
delivered from the Sword and the Dog. Psalm. 22.20, 16. and says ver. 16. Dogs
had compassed him about. So Jer 15.3. or cruel words and threatenings. So the
wicked are said to bark and make a noise like a Dog. Psalm. 59.6, 14.

3. The false Prophets are called dumb and greedy Dogs, because they were
greedy of filthy lucre, and could not speak the Lords word. Isa 56.10, 11.

4. Wicked men are both in the old Testament, Pro. 26.11. and in the New. 2
Pet. 2.22. called dogs, because as the Dog filthily licks up his vomit; so when
they have made some seeming confession of sins, or pofession of faith and
holiness, they forsake it and return to their old wickedness.

5. Heathens are called Dogs by our Savior. Mat. 7.27. because they were none
of Gods Family, or Children, but aliens to the Common. wealth of Israel, and
because they abounded with filthy lusts, as the Apostle tells us. Romans 1.

6. Sinners in general are called Dogs. Phil. 3.2. Beware of Dogs, Musculus ad
loc.
where he means false Teachers, rightly called Dogs, says Musculus. For
first, their greediness of filthy luere, Isa 56.11. 2. For their barking
against the true Apostles. 3. For their returning to their old vomit, because
they barkt only to get food for their bellies, Calv. ad loc.
says Mr Calvin. So Rev. 22.15. Without are Dogs, etc. That is, all sinners,
(at least all not enumerated afterward)

For the term Swine; I remember it but once more in Scripture. (taken
Metaphorically) 2 Pet. 2.22. where wic^ed men are compared to Sows, for
wallowing in the mire and filth of sin. Ravanella in verbo Porcus.
Ravanella tells us that by Swine here are meant Infideles, impij, homines
desporatae malitiae, and impuritatis, quibus sordet verbum Dei, Epicurciprofani.

We have heard how the Scripture uses the metaphor; now to apply it.

9. I conceive, except sufficient ceason can be showed to the contrary, by Dogs
and Swine here must be meant, all such wicked persons as the Scripture
elsewhere expresses under that notion.

10. If it may be expounded according to the first, or second, or sixth
acceptance, we desire no more, then that holy things might not be given. 1. To
any scandalous sinners. 2. To any unworthy persons. 3. To any who after
profession in Baptism, return with the Dog to the vemit, to their old
wickedness. For the third usage there is no color; for it is not said, give
not holy things to dumb Dogs or greedy Dogs.

11. If any say that by Dogs here are only meant persecutors, according to the
second usage. 1 They will be bound to show reason why this Text should be
expounded rather by David Psalm. 22.16, 20. Psalm. 59. then Solomon. Pro. 26.11.
or Peter. 2 Pet. 2.22. (which will be hard to assign) 2. I have proved before,
that the word (which they say is the holy thing) ought to be preached to them.
3. For the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, if that must be denied to persecutors
not excommunicated, then there is suspension distinct from excommunication, as
to such yielded.

12. If they say that by Dogs are meant Heathen, as Mar. 7.27. 1. Then either
those only, or those amongst others. (2) If they say to those and some others
we yield it, but it is nothing to the purpose. (3) If they say that the Heathen
are the only Dogs, to whom holy things should be denied, then they ought to be
given to persecutors, and excommunicate persons. (4) The Word ought to be
preached to Heathens, therefore the Word cannot be the holy thing then. (5)
There was no great probability of Christ's Disciples giving the Sacrament to
Pagans. (6) The Heathen are called Dogs, not only because they were aliens to
the Commonwealth of Israel, but for their (vitia canina) beastly lusts, which
others may have, and therefore by a parity of reason meant here in this
general term.

Indeed I find expositors, who would restrain the holy thing, and pearls to
some one Ordinance; as admonition or preaching, generally lost in seeking the
Dogs or Swine to whom they must not be given. Chemnitius who (though he grants
the Word and Sacraments to be the holy things here meant) yet seems to incline
to think this Text chiefly forbids the preaching of the Word to some here
characterized by the metaphor of Dogs and Swine; yet is miserably lost, in
determining who those Dogs and Swine, Chemnit. harm. cap. 51. Pareus in 7 of
Matthew.
to whom the Word ought not to be preached; and I doubt whether what he and
Pareus at last determine, concerning refusing to preach the Gospel to some, be
truth, and believe it may be proved, that Christ and his Apostles preached the
Gospel to some such, as they determine against; and I think the same of what
Gualther determines, Gualther ad loc.
who expounds the place, as chiefly meant of admonition: The excommunicate Dog,
must be admonished as a Brother; who yet if he would have heard the Church
admonishing, should not need have been excommunicated. Bullinger ad loc.
Nor does Bullinger, who preceded Gualther, better satisfy, who seems to
understand it of private admonition, yet dares not determine whether it may be
denied to any, as a Dog. And Bucer concludes that the spirit of God must guide
the Minister in such cases, Bucer ad loc.
to whom to preach, and to whom to refuse to preach the Word of God. But surely
we must find the Dogs determined in Scripture, before our consciences will be
warranted to justify our practice in denying the Gospel to them. Theophylact
says, Theoph. ad loc.
(...), that Heathens are Dogs, and Christians, that live filthy lives, are
Swine, Chemnitius says, We are all by Nature Dogs, and Swine. Bucer and
Gualther both confess, that sinners of impure lives, and unclean
conversations, are Dogs and Swine; so says Bullinger. But the Word, or
admonition must not be denied to all such I am sure, and I know no ground for
their restriction. The Lords supper indeed must, which makes me think, that
that Ordinance is chiefly here meant, though not fingly. It is the only
Ordinance is to be denied to all known Dogs; and herein I agree with my
Learned Rutherford. Rutherford divine right. 254.
(si non major sit quam ut meus d^ci possit, as he uses to say of our
incomparable Twiss.) Brentius in his Commentary on the place, tells us,
Brentius ad loc cum autem in oculis ecclesiae sit poenitens non est vel
ministri, ut eum contumeliose a coena rejiciat, etc. ib. Conrad. Pellicanus in
loc. Musc. in loc.
the Word and Sacraments are the holy things, and that wicked and impure men
are Dogs and Swine, though he rightly concludes, that the Word is not to be
denied to all Dogs, nor any (though Dogs in Gods sight) to be kept from the
Sacrament, (if penitent) Conradus Pellicanus expounds it with Musculus, of all
Gospel mysteries, -- Nolim Evangelicae sapientiae mysteria sine delectu tradi
dignis and indiguis, and tells us that those are Dogs who abhor holiness, and
those are Swine who wallow in filthy pleasures; he seems to think the Gospel
chiefly to be meant; but pinching himself with the perplexing question, what
Dogs those are to whom Christ would not have his Gospel preached, he concludes
with Bucer darkly -- Nemo sine spiritu patris recte intelliget. Salmeron tells
us, Salmeron t. 5. trac. 60.
that this Text teaches us how we should preach the Word, and Administer the
Sacraments, and that by Dogs and Swine are meant Infidels, Hareticks, and
carnal Christians, and (though a Papist) yet determines honestly, That the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is to be given to none but him who has duly
tried himself, and proved himself, and says, it is thought by many Judas was
not at the Sacrament of the Supper, if he were, he was a secret sinner, not
scandalous. Which is also Alex: Halensis his answer. But I have said enough to
prove both from Scripture, Reason, and the consent of Learned men, that as the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is one of the holy things here meant; so, if we
may either from Scripture or Reason, or the judgment of Holy men, conclude any
thing; impure sinners are here meant by Dogs.

After all this, what Mr Humfry says, Mr Humfry 's vind. free admission.
is not worth taking notice of. -- He will have those only to be Dogs and
Swine, who are so in the public esteem of the Church, viz. Juridically
censured. So that with him; Give not hely things to Dogs and Swine, is, Give
not holy things to excommunicate persons, and this seems to be Mr Boatman's
sense too, who excepts only excommunicate Christians from the Lords Supper, and
it is likely he plowed with his Heifer, not only by his commending of that
loose Pamphlet to his Disciples, but by his bold censure of Suspension, as a
Pharisaicall dream, which amounts to Mr Humfrie's non est inventa in baliva
nostra p. 82 which made me merry when I read it, (that being the usual return
that Sherriffs make, who have never looked for the party, no more then I
believe Mr Humfry has done for this Ordinance, or else, when they have looked
for him, with a resolution to overlook him.)

The truth, is both Mr Humfry, and Mr Boatman, had it from Erastus, Erast
thesis. 64.
or the same spirit at least. He was the first worker in this sort of Brass;
and what they say amounts to the same with his -- Quos ecclesia ita judicavit.
But let us see to how little purpose this is said.

1. The Text is plain, that holy things are not to be given to Dogs or Swine.
Now, I never knew that the shutting of a Dog out of the house, made him a Dog,
I had thought he must have been a Dog first, before he had been shut out of the
house, but this Mr Humfry grants, only not used like Dogs before.

2. Our question is, what are those Dogs here spoken of, whether these who have
vitia canina, the beastly qualities of Dogs, or those only who have the ill
hap of Dogs, Petitio principij
to be turned out of doors. I had thought that this Text had been brought to
have proved, that those who have the nature and beastly qualities of Dogs,
should be used like Dogs, and not have childrens bread given to them.

3. If excommunicate persons be meant here, surely this Text, or some other
must justify the usage of this Metaphor, in that sense. But let Mr Humfry show
us but one Text of Scripture, where this term Dogs is used to express
excommunicate persons, or let him show us any thing in the Text to enforce it
here, otherwise we must tell him the Scripture calls all profane siners Dogs,
those who return with the Dog to the vomit, and with the Swine to wallow in
the mire, are Dogs and Swine in the Scripture sense; but I find excommunicate
persons called so no where upon the account of their excommunication.

4. Nor is there any one Author on his side, that ever I met with, so that his
interpretation is contrary to Scripture, Reason, and all Expositors.

But yet we say, though the Sacrament be denied to Dogs and Swine, because they
are so, not because they are shut out of the household of God by
excommunication, yet in regard that man can judge but according to the outward
appearance, they must first appear to be so, before the Ordinance can be
denied to them. Secret things belong to God. But to say that by Dogs here are
only meant persons actually excommunicate, is a mere shift to avoid a strong
argument, and but an idle dreams, which has no reality of truth in it, and is
justifiable neither from this Text nor any other Scripture.

But these men who are so zealous for the profanation of an Ordinance, are
observed very lazy as to the preserving the purity of Ordinances. They must be
excommunicated, before you keep them from the Sacrament, (says Mr Boatman) so
says Mr Humfry, but why doc not these tender men then, take a course to
declare such to be Dogs and Swine, as are so, and to cast them out? Mr Boatman
has an Eldership established in his congregation, why did he not first call
them together, and inquire the state of his flock, and cast out such as might
have been found Dogs or Swine? if he thinks they must be excommunicated first,
(we are not so hasty in that dreadful sentence.) What is Mr Humfries case I
cannot tell, but their principles (and the practice of one of them at least)
makes some think that they will never take any course to find out who be Swine
or Dogs, and declare them such: (except such Dogs as have lost their tails,
and cannot fawn enough on them) But very zealous they are to declare that all
Dogs (that are not hanged by excommunication) must be fed with the childrens
bread. The Lord forgive them this iniquity.

3 We have seen what is meant by holy things, and have proved, that there is no
reason to exclude the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. We have also showed, who
are meant by Dogs. There remains only to be considered, to whom this precept
is given. Surely all will grant me; To those who have holy things to give,
those whom God has betrusted with the dispensation of his Ordinances unto
others. I ask no more, and will not enter into a debate here, who these are;
whether the Minister alone, or the whole Presbytery, etc.

So then the sense of this place is this;

You whom I have betrusted with the dispensation of my holy Ordinances, take
heed you do not dispense any of them out to impure sinners, who will but
trample upon them, and tear you, excepting only such of my Ordinances as I
(appointed them as proper means for their conversion) have other where
expressly commanded you to give unto them. Nor is that any unjustifiable
interpretation for that precept, thou shall not kill, must be understood with
exception of those, whom as Magistrates executing Justice, or Soldiers
fighting Gods Battles, are commanded to kill, and the whole Word of God is his
Law, no piece of which contradicts other.

So that the Argument from this Text will hold, till Mr Humfry or Mr Boatman
do show us ^^om other Scriptures, where God has commanded this Sacrament to
be given to all but excommunicated persons; which will be hard to find.

Learned, and Reverend Gillespy has observed, Erast. l. 3. cap. 5 Gillespy
Aarons rod. p. 551.
that this Argument gained so much upon Erastus, that he restricted himself to
the admission of such only to the Sacrament, as acknowledge and confess their
sins, and promise amendment, and desire to use the Sacrament rightly with the
rest, so far as we are able to judge; which concession (as he says rightly)
will go very far. And I find as much in another place of Erastus, Tertium est
nos de illis solis loqui, qui doctrinam intelligunt, probant, amplectuntur,
peccata sua se cognoscere vero ajunt, and Sacramentis secundum institutionem
Christi, cum ecclesia uti cupiunt. il^d. Erast. confirm. the sium. in praefat.
where he tells us, that he only speaks for such sinners who understand, and
approve of, and embrace the doctrine of the Gospel, who affirm, that they do
truly acknowledge, and abominate their sins, and desire to enjoy the Sacraments
with the Church, according to Christ's institution. We desire but one thing
more; for let it but appear to us, that any do thus much, and let them be
content further, (if their sin have been scandalous) to give us some proof by
a better conversation, that this profession is in truth. And none of those I
plead for, will suspend him from the Ordinance.

But Erastus his Scholars, are something more loose then their Master; Mr
Humfry does not know what to say for ignorant persons, because of Heb. 5.2.
(but the Apostle could determine those unworthy, 1 Cor. 11. who discerned not
the Lords body.) And for the scandalous, they must be admonished twice or
thrice first. (Oh how tender the good man is, lest he should offend Jesus
Christ in not giving his blood to one who profanes it by swearing by it every
day!) Mr Humfry's vindicat. p. ^1.
But it would be enquired whither Mr Humfry be as careful to enquire into the
state of his flock, and to admonish scandalous sinners, as he is to plead for
the Lords Supper for those,) be they what they will, who are not first
admonished twice or thrice. Conscience is uniforme, and will oblige him sure,
as well to the latter, as the former. I neither know him nor his people, and
have no reason either to judge them scandalous, or him negligent; but it is
usually observed, that those who pretend a great deal of tenderness of
Conscience in this point: Oh they durst not keep any from the Sacrament, except
they were excommunicated: (which they know they cannot be as our Church stands
at present) But these men durst be in company with scandalous sinners, and
hear, swear and ly, and jeer at Godliness, and yet never admonish them, (no,
there they must use Christian prudence) admonition is an holy thing must not be
given to Dogs; but the Sacrament (is none belike) that may. There are two sorts
of men in the world, are very large in their principles, as to admissions to
this Ordinance.

1. Such as pretend conscience against those Officers in the Church, whom the
Scripture calls ruling Elders.

2. Such as profess their judgment for them.

1. Some profess their judgment against ruling Elders; as Judges of
communicants fitness with the Minister. (though Deane Nowell tells them they
were Officers in the Primitive Church, used to that purpose in his Catechism.
Gr. Lat. of old Edit. as is yet to be seen in many Copies, and especially in
the Latin Copies of it, in 4to; though some have unworthily left it out in the
late Edit.) Now, would these men themselves, take upon them the strict
inspection of their flock, and make it their business to go from house to
house, and take account of their peoples knowledge, and strictly to observe
their lives, and admonish them for their miscarriages, and not admit any
notorious sinners to the Sacrament, before public satisfaction in causes of
public scandal, either taking upon them themselves, (according to the old
Rubric) to put them by, or finding some other course to have them debarred?
though my judgment would condemn them as neglecting an Ordinance of Christ,
yet my charity would bear with them, till they were further convinced.

2 Others profess their judgments to stand for Presbyteries, but they know
not how to get any; yet they think they are bound to administer the Ordinance.
Would these men first do what in them lies, to set up the Government of Christ
in the bands of his proper Officers, and in the mean time: 1. Not only in the
Pulpit exhort, etc. but endeavor to be acquainted with all in their flock,
going from house to house, and taking account of their spiritual estate, and
observe (and enquire concerning) their conversations; and 3. Pastorally
admonish those that they find ignorant of that great sin of Affected ignorance,
and unprofitablenesse under the means of grace, and this not only in the
Pulpit generally, but (...) personally, and particularly, I could say something
to excuse them at least a tanto, for administering the Ordinance without a
Presbytery, and they might have a little plea made for them, though they kept
away none, (as the state of our Church stands) though for my own part, I durst
undertake to justify them in withholding the Sacrament, from known scandalous
sinners, who after pastoral admonition, (where no more can be) shall yet
presume to intrude.

But I hear Mr Hum^ry and Mr Boatman cry they must be excommunicated first,
and the latter cry, he knows none ignorant nor scandalous, if they were, yet
they both agree, that they must be juridically excommunicated. But do these
tender men set up this same Court, in which the scandalous and ignorant should
be first judged? or do they by enquiry of others, or observation or
examination, first endeavor to know such as they invite to the Lords Table,
and not administer the Ordinance, till they have done what in them lies, to
know whether there be none in their congregations that are ignorant, or
excommunicate de jure. For one of them I can say something, though nothing, to
persuade me or any other, that it is from a tenderness of conscience he is so
free.

I shall now shut up this first Argument, it amounts to thus much.

The holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is one of those holy things which our
Savior Christ in Mat. 7.6. forbids us to give unto Dogs, or to cast before
Swine. They have the nature of holy things, there is no reason to exclude them;
Expositors generally have so judged. Men of impure lives and conversations, are
Dogs and Swine in Scripture phrase, and such as will trample upon the
Ordinance.

It will be an easy conclusion. If God has required those whom he has
betrusted with his holy things, not to give them out to such as his word
describes to be Dogs and Swine, then (though there may be some in the Church
not yet excommunicated) yet they ought not to have the holy thing of the
Sacrament given to them. But I have proved this to be the will of Christ from
this Text -- Ergo

If Mr Boatman can find out a medium betwixt, not giving the Sacrament to
them, and denying it to them, I shall listen to him, otherwise (by his leave)
here is a Scripture-prohibition for some to be kept away, who are neither Turks
nor Jews, nor Heathens, nor excommunicated persons, and he needed not have
challenged all the Ministers on the earth, to this task.

CHAP. III. Wherein a second Argument is brought to prove suspension distinct
from excommunication, from 1 Cor. 10.21.
A second Argument is this.
It is unlawful to give the Sacrament to those who cannot eat^r drink it. But
there may be some in the Church (not excommunicated) who cannot drink of the
Lords cup. -- Ergo

I will prove both propositions. 1. For the major.

BEfore I prove it, it will be necessary that we consider in what sense the
Apostle uses this phrase, in the place I allude to. 1 Cor. 10.21. (...). the
question is, what Impotency is there meant.

1. That it is not to be understood of the want of a Physical power, is plain
enough, for so they might eat at the Table of the Lord, and the Devils Table
100.

2. It must therefore be understood in a moral sense, Id tantum possumus
quodjur possumus. You cannot, that is, lawfully, and warrantably, you cannot
drink of the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils. Grotius minceth this (...)
too small, v. Grotium ad loc.
when he expounds it by (...). And Pareus observes against him well, that it is
a manifest depraving of the sense; v. Pareum ad loc.
the Apostles design being to show a plain inconsistency betwixt a fellowship
with Christ in his Ordinances, and with Devils at Idols Feasts, not a mere
indecorum in it. This is one of the senses which Musculus gives of the Text.

3. Musc. ad loc.
I find indeed a third sense of the words hinted, by some reverend Expositors.
You cannot drink of the cup of the Lord, and of the cup of Devils. You cannot
eat of the Table of the Lord, and of the Table of Devils. That is, (say they)
though you may enjoy an outward Communion in the Ordinance, yet you cannot
enjoy an inward spiritual Communion with Christ in it. As Augustine (supposing
Judas was at the Lords Supper) says that he did eat Panem Domins, but not
Panem Dominum. But I think Learned Beza says something against this sense,
when he tells us, that by the Table is meant the Elements upon the Table, and by
the cup, the wine in the cup. If the Apostle had said, you cannot eat the
flesh, and drink the blood of Christ, if you have fellowship with Devils, the
Apostle might possibly have been so interpreted, but his Argument is plainly to
prove the unlawfulness of their coming to the Table, being guilty of such
sins.

But the sum of all amounts to this; that those who cannot drink the cup, and
eat at the Table of the Lord, (in the sense of this Text) are either,

1. Such as God has forbidden coming to that Ordinance.

Or secondly such, as if they sush upon the Ordinance, yet can have no
Communion with Christ, no benefit by it. I will take it in either sense, and I
say

It is sinful for any to administer the Ordinance of the Supper to those whom
he knows to be such, as are forbidden to meddle with it, or whom he knows to
be such as considering their present state, cannot have Communion with Christ
in it. This I hope will easily be proved.

For surely it will be granted, that it is sinful for any to give it to those
to whom he is not commanded to give it, for he is the steward of the mysteries
of God, and must expect his masters order before he deals them out, nor will
it be enough to say he is not forbidden, for his very Office forbids him, and
in that he is not commanded he is expressly forbidden.

Now, a Minister is not commanded, any where surely, to give it to those who
are forbidden to receive it. To say no more in this case: I hope we have all
too reverent thoughts of the wisdom of God, to think that he should lay his
Minister under an obligation to administer his Ordinance to those whom he has
warned upon pain of damnation not to take it.

Though this were enough, (for those who incline to the other sense, do
clearly yet grant, that those who partook of the Table of Devils, are here
either forbidden that Table, or the Lords Table, which (if it be true, as
questionless it is) our Adversaries must maintain that they are commanded to
give the Sacrament to those whom the same God forbids to take it) yet possibly
the other part may be more disputable, viz.

Whether a Minister of the Gospel and his Eldership, way without sin admit any
to the supper of the Lord, concerning whom they know, that in their present
state, they cannot have Communion with Christ in the Ordinance, etc.

I will try whether I can prove the Negative.

None can without sin, knowingly expose the Ordinance of God, to necessary
abuse and profanation.

But who ever administers the Ordinance of the Supper to those concerning whom
he or they know, they cannot have communion with Christ in the Ordinance,
exposes the Ordinance to a necessary abuse and profanation, -- Ergo.

The major is plain enough: the minor is as clear, if we consider when or how
an Ordinance is profaned or abused. Her Priests have violated my Law, and have
profaned my holy things, they have put no difference between the holy and the
profane, neither have they showed difference between the unclean and the clean.
Ezekiel. 22.26. A thing is then abused when it is not turned to a right use; but
surely he can never turn the Ordinance to a right use, that cannot have
Communion with Christ in it. I come to the minor.

I think enough is said to prove the major; that it is sin for any to give the
Lords Supper to those that cannot eat and drink there; (that is) to such either
^s are forbidden that Table, or such as cannot have Communion with Christ in it.

But there may be some known in the Church, who are forbidden to come at the
Lords Table, or who cannot have Communion with Christ in it, -- Ergo.

That there may be some such in the Church, I suppose none will deny; but the
question is, whether there may be some in the Church that may be known to be
such? I prove there may.

If there may be some in the Church, who may be known to have fellowship with
Devils, and to drink of the cup of Devils, then there may be some in the
Church, who may be known to be such as cannot drink of the cup of the Lord, nor
eat at his Table.

But there may be some in the Church, who may be known to have fellowship with
Devils, and to drink of their cup. -- Ergo.

The consequence is plain from the Apostle. 1 Cor. 10.20, 21.

And the assumption is as plain, for there were such in the Church of Corinth.
-- Ergo.

If any object;

(...) we grant it; but I have already proved, Cor. 5.11. (of which place more
hereafter (God willing.)

But will some say, this was for an open horrid sin,

Admit it; yet thus much we have gained; that Idolaters though they be not
excommunicated, yet they may be denied the Lords supper, as well as
persecutors, by Mat. 7.6.

But secondly let us observe what fellowship these Corinthians had with Devils;
they did not make a compact with Devils, they did not worship the Devil as
some Idolaters; the business was only this: They being Members of a Gospel
Church, did eat at Banquets of those Meats, which were before sacrificed to
their Idols, they did not sacrifice with them, but only (...), they did (...).
After the Idolaters had been sacrificing, they came to their Feasts, simply to
eat the meat was nothing, nor had the Idol made it worse, and had it been sold
in the Shambles the Apostle determined before, that they might have bought it,
and eat it; that which altered the case, was only the show that it made to the
Idolaters of their complying with them, and the circumstances of time and
place; yet the Apostle determines this a fellowship with Devils and Idolatry,
such a sin as they who are guilty of it, could have no communion with Christ in
this Ordinance. Suppose they had made a compact with the Devil, or gone and
worshipped the Idols, surely the Apostle would much more have said it of such.

3. I cannot see but every scandalous sinner, every Drunkard, Swearer,
Adulterer, etc. has as great a fellowship with Devils, as the Corinthians had.

One thing I desire you to observe. There might be latent grace in these
Corinthians hearts, and doubtless was, yet while they lay under this scandal,
the Apostle determines that they were such as could not eat at the Table, nor
drink of the cup of the Lord. Whence I conclude, That there may be such in a
Church, concerning whom it may be known that they cannot eat at the Lords
Table, nor drink the Lords cup. It will not be enough to say, that God may give
them repentance for ought we know at the time, or upon their receiving. In the
mean time, till their repentance be evident, they may be known, and ought to
be judged by us, as such as cannot eat at the Lords Table, nor drink the Lords
cup.

It is clear, Clem: Alex. in paedagogo. l. 2. p. 143.144. edit. cut. 1629.
Tertullianus spectac. l. c. 12. Cypr. in ep. 10. queest ad Clerum l. de lapsis
non procul ab initio.
that the Ancients thought this having fellowship with Devils, was of vast
extent; one applies it to all such as intemperately use the Creatures;
Tertullian applies it, to forbid any kind of presence at, or countenancing of
any superstitious practices, though but a looking on, in his book de
spectaculis. Cyprian, in his Tenth Epistle, chideth the Presbyters by virtue of
this very Text, that they would admit to the Lords Supper, such as had
sacrificed to Idols, (through fear) before they had sufficient evidence of
their repentance, and tells us that the Church in in his time for lesser
offenses, was wont to require satisfaction before Communion was allowed to the
sinners: And in his book de lapsis, he does sadly lament the hasty admission of
such to the Sacrament. Gualther ad loc.
Gu^lther observes from this Text, the vanity of those who maintain that any
sinners how notoriously wicked soever, might yet partake at this holy Table.

I shall add no more to this second Argument. If it be unlawful to give the
Sacrament to such as are known to be such as God has forbidden to take it, and
as cannot have Communion with Christ in it, then it is unlawful to give it to
some such, as may yet be within the bosom of the Church. But I have proved the
former unlawful. -- Ergo I proceed.

CHAP. IV. VVhere'n a third and fourth Argument is brought to prove that
suspension distinct from excommunication is deducible from Scripture; and the
Argument is vindicated from the exceptions which Thomas Erastus, Mr Prin, Mr
Humfry, etc. have made to it.
ARGUMENT 3.
It is unlawful for the Officers of a Church, to give the Sacrament to such,
with whom it is unlawful for themselves or their breehren to eat.

But there may be some in the Church not cast out, with whom it may be
unlawful for the Church to eat -- Ergo.

THE major is clear. The minor I will prove by an Argument or two.

It is unlawful to keep the Feast with the old leaven of malice and
wickedness. But there may be such old leaven in the Church. -- Ergo

Here I have two things to prove.

1. That there may be some such in the Church as the Apostle calls old Leaven.

2. That it is unlawful to keep the feast of the Lords Supper with them.

Let us first enquire what the Apostle calls old Leaven. 1 Cor. 5.7.

Erastus is very loath to tell us what he means by it; Certe quicquid per
f^rmentum intelligamus, etc. thesi. 17.
only like a good d^sputant, he denies the conclusion, that excommunication is
not spoken of in that Text; but that is the (...).

It is a plain case that the Apostle there, as chiding the Corinthians, that
they did not cast out the incestuous person: and amongst other Arguments he
uses this. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.: what the english of that
is, I cannot tell, if it be not this. A known scandalous person amongst you,
polluteth your Church; It follows immediately, Purge out therefore the old
leaven; is not the meaning of this think we, purge out the incestuous persons?
ver. 8. Lot us keep the Feast not with the old leaven, neither with the leaven
of malice or wickedness. Surely he that has not so sacrificed his reason to
Erastus, that he is resolved jurare in verba Magistri, must say by the leaven
of malice and wickedness here, is meant scandalous sinners. The leaven that
leaveneth the lump; (of which he spoke before) and this is the primary sense,
though I easily grant we are also here forbidden coming to it with malice and
wickedness in our own hearts. Beza de Presbyterio and excom. p. 89.8. a. Nam
and nos de illis solis disputamus qui peccatum suum, agnoscunt and meliora
promittunt. Erast. lib. 3. cap. 7.
And of this mind is Learned Beza (I am sure) in his answer to Erastus, and
thinks that he who denies it, would deny the Sun to shine at noon day too (if
need were.) And this Argument so far prevailed upon Erastus, that in his reply
to Beza, he tells us he pleades for none to be admitted to the Sacrament, but
such as acknowledge their sins, and promise reformation. And Mr Humfry is angry
with Dr Drake, Mr. Humfrie's rejoinder. p. 21.
that he should interpret him otherwise then of such to be kept away, as are
excommunicate de jure or de facto: if I understand Latin or School-termes; one
de jure excommunicate, is such a one as is scandalous and pertinacious,
either-refusing conviction or reformation; we ask no more then this is. But the
misery is this; these men tell us so, when they are put to a p^^ch. But as Mr
Ruthersord notes of Erastus so the reader may observe in Mr Humfry,
Rutherford's divine right of Presbyt. p. 363.
that all their Arguments in other places conclude for the admissions of such
as are de jure excommunicate. Else Mr Humfry was not in his right wits, when he
returned ^ no^est inventa upon suspension, only I cannot allow Mr Humfrie's
exposition of de jure, restraining it to such jail sins as he does, (surely
the man thinks he has the Law in his own hands, or else he would describe
such to be excommunicated de jure, who according to ^he Law of God, ought to be
cast out of the Church, and those are all such as will not hear the Church,
Mat. 18.18.
though their scandals be less then an incestuous mar^age, or an act of
adultery. But to return, we have ^ound ^ut the old leaven to be scandalous
si^ners. Now, that such may be in a Church besides this proose from ^he Church
of Corinth, our own Church is suffici^nt evidence.

It remains for me to prove that it is not lawful to communicate with such.

That I prove by those words; Let us therefore keep the Feast, not with the old
leaven, nor with the leaven ^f malice and wickedness. From whence is easily
gahered, that Christians ought not to keep the Feast with candalous sinners.

All the question here is, whether the Feast of the ^ords Supper be there
intended. thesi. 17.
Thomas Erastus ^aith no, for then it would follow that men might be wicked at
any other time, Beza de excom. page 90.91.
only then they must abstain. Learned Beza tells him of a fallacy in his
argument; for the Jewish 7 days signified our constant conversation, and as
they were to abstain from their leaven seven days; so we are to abstain at
all times from the leaven of sin and wickedness. But besides this,
Rutherford's divine right of Pres. page 349.
Mr Rutherford has sufficiently answered this cavil

But I admire at Erastus his consequence, or the force of his Argument.

For admit that by leaven here is meant scandalous sinners, I see no hurt of
his argument; we will y^e^d him, that a Christian is not only bound to avoid
communion with scandalous sinners at the Lords Table, but all the year long.

2. Suppose that by leaven be meant sin and wickedness, not considered with
aggravation of scandal, how it will follow, that because we are bound to purge
it out when we come to the Lords Supper, therefore we may let it alone all the
year long. Beside, that time poseth my Logic, except Erastus thinks that
because the Jews never meddled with leaven but then. Therefore (the similitude
running on all four belike) we must do so so; which if he does Beza has
answered him.

2. But what feast is this? Ruth. ibid.
By this Feast I understand Church communion in the dainties of the Gospel
which are set forth to us under the similitude of (...) east Matt. 22. Lu. 14
16 17, 18. Pro. 9.2, 3, 4, 5. Cant. 5.1. (says Mr Rutherford.)

This place cannot be restrained to the Lords Supper only, says Reverend Gill
s^y, Gillespy ^arons rod. l. 3 c. 7
but the Lords Supper must needs be comprehended as one, yea, a great part of
the meaning.

And surely there is all the reason in the world it should, considering what Mr
S. Rutherford observee that Christians have no solemn spiritual Feasts but
that, Rutherford divine right. cap. 11.9, 7. Gil. loc. praed.
especially if we add (says Mr Gillespy) the Analogy of the Passover, there
much insisted upon.

But I add further, what Feast is here meant I wonder? Surely the Apostle does
not speak of any civil ordinary Feast, nor any of the Mosaicall Feasts. It
must then be of some spiritual Gospell-Feast. Let us consider how this
metaphorical expression is used elsewhere. I remember but two places in
Scripture, where this term Feast is used in a metaphorical sense. Pro. 15.15.
A good conscience is a continual feast, that is, a good continual cause of
joy and rejoicing. The other is, Ravanella in Verbo. Festum.
Is. 25. (of which by and by) Ravanella ranks all the usages of the term in
the Old Testament, where it is taken for the whole or any part of the Jewish
Worship, under the metaphorical acceptance; and tells us that Zach. 14.16, 18,
19. it is taken for all the Gospell-worship: For the Jewish worship all their
service almost might properly be called a Feast, because they had literal
Feasts at them. -- But it is certain the Apostle here does not exhort the
Corinthians to keep the Jewish Feasts: Nor can feast be taken for joy and
mirth, as Pro. 15.15. for then the sense is this; Let us keep a Feast of joy;
which any reader will see, was not the Apostles meaning.

It remains therefore that we expound it by. Is. 25.6. where the Lord promises
to make a Feast of fat things. By which he promises all Gospell-Ordinances,
and a Gospell-Communion with his people. God makes the Feast in giving us
Christ and his Ordinances: we keep the feast in waiting upon God, in all the
duties of Church Communion. Let us keep the Feast is, Let us walk in a
communion in Gospel Ordinances. Let us enjoy Gospel Ordinances, and worship
God together under the Gospel. Not with the leaven of malice and
unrighteousness, not in a scandalous communion, etc.

Thomas Erastus says that by feast is meant here, Confirm. these. 1. cap. 6. So
Mr Humfry 's vind. p. 85 v Chrysostom. in or atione contra eos qui novilunia
observant, and and Homil. 40. c. in 12. cap. Mat.
a Christians whole conversation. I confess I find some Reverend Expositors of
his mind (though it may be not wholly. Chrysostom is the most Ancient, who in
his Oration against those who observed new Moons, and brought dancings into the
City; expounds it thus against them, teiling his hearers, that a Christians
whole life is a Feast, and to be so spent. And he says as much (as I remember)
in his fourth Homily, on the twelth Chapter of Matthew. Theophylact follows
him, and yet neither of them restrain it to that: No more does Beza, Calv. ad
lo.
who yet stretches it to that latitude. Calvin also hints it, but adds. Si
Christi carne and sanguine pasci velimus, afferamus ad hoc epulum sinceritatem
and veritatem; whence may easily be gathered, that Mr Calvin. thought the
Sacament of the Body and Blood of Christ was also here intended; which is
enough for me.

I acknowledge many reverend Expositors expound it of an holy life; Ego vero
soli scripturae hunc bonorem deserendum censco, etc. H^eron.
it is enough for me that they do not exclude the Lords Supper, and I must be
excused if for the reasons before specified, I think it chiefly meant; For I
have learned (with Hierom) to give this honor only to the sacred Word of God,
to believe what it says, because it faith it. First therefore I say

1. The Lords Supper is a part of the Gospell-Feast, and the only proper Feast
of it.

2. The relation this Text has to the Passover seems to me to prove it.

3. It was doubtless chiefly in reference to this Communion that the Church was
to be purged for some civil Communion, and some Communion with an incestuous
person in other Ordinances may be allowed.

But if we should admit this, that the meaning were, that we should not in our
conversation have Communion with scandalous sinners. I see no harm at all
would follow upon it. For surely if we ought not to converse with such in our
civil conversation, much less is it lawful for us to have Communion with such
at the Lords Table. And surely if it be unlawful for Christians to have
Communion with such (though in the Church) it is unlawful for the Officers of
the Church to admit such to Communion with them. But this we shall fall in with
anon, in the mean time I maintain that the clear sense of that place is, that
we ought not to have a Communion at the Lords Supper with scandalous sinners.

But I shall come to a second Argument.

If there may be some in the Church not yet cast out by excommunication, who
are Fornicators, or Covetous, or Idolaters, or Railers, or Drunkards, or
Extortioners, then there may be some such in the Church, with whom a Christian
ought not to eat the Lords Supper. But there may be such in the Church, -- Ergo.

The minor will be easily granted. The major I ground on 1 Cor. 5.11.

All that can be said in the case, is, that the eating there forbidden, is not
eating the Lords Supper. So says Thomas Erastus, Confirm. thesi. p. 258. l. 3.
c. 8. vind. p. 83.84. Mr Prins vind. of 4 serious questions. p. 9.
so Mr Prin, so Mr Humfry. To this two things have been already answered, and
except I see need, I shall add little of my own.

1. That it can never be proved, that it is not meant of Sacramental eating,
but of civil eating.

2. That there are grounds for the contrary opinion.

3. That admitting it, yet the Argument stands strong.

First, I desire to know a reason why our adversaries will needs restrain that
Text to a civil Communion. Erastus gives these reasons.

1. The Apostles precept concerning denying Communion, must not be so
interpreted as to contradict Christ's precept. But Christ commanded all to
receive. Beza grants both, Beza de Presh. and excom. p. 70.
and answers that Christ might command his Apostles to do that which
considering the time he did not.

But although I reverence Beza, yet I think he has granted too much, and
besides that, his answer is not to the objection, which is founded, not on
Christ's practice, but his precept. I deny the Assumption therefore, and demand
of Erastus, and all his followers, Erast. theses. thesi. 26.27 28.
where Christ commands to give the Sacrament to all. Erastus tells us he has
proved it, but where, none knows, all that I find in him looking that way, is
but a negative argument. Christ did not forbid any, nor do we find that he
left his disciples any such order, nor ever reproved any that they did come to
the Sacrament; all which comes short of this, that Christ did command the
administration to all, thesi. 30.
and it is too weak that Erastus has thesi. 30. that Christ said drink ye all
of it, for those all were all visible saints; though Judas was there (which
shall never be proved) yet Judas was not discovered to the communicants: It is
worth the observing, that Christ did not so much as call up the Jews in the
same house, which he would have done probably, if he had intended for all.
Erastus says, page. 249.
Christ inviteth all to repentance -- Ergo to the Sacrament. If the syllogism
be put in form says Mr Rutherford, the major is blasphemy; Ruth. divine
right. page 362.
for by the same argument might be proved, that God invites Pagans to the
Sacrament. -- See more in him.

Erastus has another Argument. If the Apostle did here forbid these scandalous
sinners the Sacrament, he had contradicted himself. -- But he does not
contradict himself. The major lies upon the Doctor to prove.

His loose lines must be thus formed.

He that should here forbid scandalous persons the Sacrament, Etenim paulo
post licentius viventibus non interdicit nec interdicere jubet Sacramentorum
usum^sed judicium Dei proponit. Erast. confirm these. p. 249
and a little after, cap. 11. not forbid loose livers the Sacrament, only set
before them their danger, contradicts himself.

I will go no further, here is enough to be denied. Is it a contradiction? I
wonder if I should write a letter to my friends, and in the beginning of it
say, I will not have you come in such a gamesters company and a little after in
the same Letter, tell my friends, I hear some of them have been in gamesters
company, and God will be revenged of them, if they follow such courses, I have
not eyes to see it if it be. This is the very case here, must Paul needs forbid
that, cap. 11. that which he forbids cap. 5. or, does he contradict himself?

This is all that Erastus has to say for it, which is to little purpose.

That learned and worthy Gentleman (whom I am loath to name in this cause)
pretends to give three reasons why the Sacramental eating is not here mean^.

First, because there is not a word of receiving the Lords Supper in this
Chapter, Vind. p. 9.10.
and in the 10 and 11. Chapters he says no such thing (though he professedly
treats of it.)

His Learned Adversary sufficiently answers him. 1. Gillespies Aarons rod. l.
3. c. 7
Desiring him to prove that the 7. 8. verse of this Chapter, is not meant of
the Lords Supper 2. Telling him that in the 24 page of his book, himself
confesses from this Chapter, that the Passover and the Lords Supper are the
same for substance, and that Aretius so expounds it. Aret. prob. loc. 80.
To that I have spoke already.

Mr Prinn objects that 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. the Apostle says they were all
partakers of one bread; yet in he Church of Corinth were some scandalous, some
druntards that came so to the Table, etc.

Mr Gillespy answers him, That the word all can be of no larger extent then
visible Saints, such as were those to whom the Epistle was directed, and surely
visible workers of iniquity, cannot be visible Saints.

Says Mr Gillespy, he shall never prove that those that were drunk at the
Sacrament, in the Church of Corinth, came thither such, (...).
or were drunk the night before, or known drunkards; if they were drunk, it
was there, which the Apostle could not know before they came; where by the way,
I desire my Reader to take notice of the invalidity of this plea of Mr
Boatman's, for the admitting such as are known before hand to be scandalous
sinners. Plus satis bibit. G^otius ad loc Quanquam ego non existimarem de ea
sermonem fieri qua homines alienati a sensu and mente fusi jacent, sed potius
de larga compotatione ita ut liberalius bibendo plus aequo exbilarati essent.
P. Mart. ad loc.


I add further, that he shall never be able to prove they were drunk; the word
there used is (...), which does not always signify to drink drunk, but often
to drink liberally and well. So Io. 2.10. The sense is only this, you come to
the Table of the Lord in parties disorderly; first one company comes, and they
drink liberally, more then they need, then the others come, and they have none
to drink. Nor is this a new notion, I find it in Peter Martyr, Grotius, Estius
ad loc. Beza in Io. 2.10. translateth this word affatim bibere, and why he
might not have done so here, if it had pleased him, I cannot tell. This Dr
Drake hinted Mr Humfry of, and Mr Humfry in his late vindication, is so
ingenious as to allow it. So I hope now it may pass current, and we shall
hear this pleaded no more by Mr Humfry or Mr Boatman, that drunkards were
admitted to the Sacrament in the Church of Corinth.

4. Especially considering, (what Mr Gillespy has already said) that although
it could be proved that there were drunkards, and other scandalous sinners
there, yet it can never be proved that they were admitted to the Sacrament.

5. I will add one thing more, the Apostle does not say, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. you
are all partakers of one bread, (which if he had, it would have been something
more to have proved that the scandalous sinners in the Church of Corinth were
admitted to this Ordinance, but he says no such thing, he says we are all
partakers of one bread; that is, while we (who are Saints) wair upon God in
that Ordinance, we partake of one bread, and are one body; yea, and that he
says they were one body, he plainly proves that the scandalous sinners did not
partake of that one Bread. But of that more anon.

6. Lastly, suppose this were true, that some of the Corinthians were
notoriously scandalous. 2. That these were admitted to the Lords Supper, that
St Paul does not in so many words command their suspension, how does this yet
prove, that scandalous sinners ought to be admitted, till Mr Humfry or Mr
Boatman have proved 1. That the Church of Corinth did nothing amiss. 2. That
because the Apostle did not (...) in so many words say, drunkards keep away,
therefore he did allow them to come; any more then it will prove women ought to
keep away, because Paul no where says expressly, you believing women come, as
well as men? So that this reason which is purely negative, though urged by
Erastus, Mr Prin, Mr Humphry, and Mr Boatman will never infer that it is
lawful to administer the Sacrament to all, much less prove that Sacramental
eating is not meant in the Text.

Mr Prins second Argument is, because if we should so expound it, most of our
members must be excluded.

But Mr Gillespy has told him, Aarons rod. p. 426.
this is nothing to the purpose; it is quickly answered. 1. Let God be true, and
his Word true, (though men be found liars. Fiat justitia, pereat Mundus. 2. We
hope most of our members are not scandalously under those qualifications. Man
judges by the outward appearance.

Mr Prins third and last reason is, because it is clearly meant of civil
familiarity. So says Erastus, Vind. 4. serious quest. p. 10.3. Erast. confirm.
these. l. 4. cap. 3. vind. p. 84. Rejoinder. p. 261
so Mr Humfry; so many others which we will allow, if they will not understand
it exclusively. But let us see how they can prove it, that it must needs only
be understood of civil eating.

1. Says Mr Prin, he had expounded it twice before, by that very phrase not to
keep company, Gillespy p. 427
that phrase is indeed twice before; but says Mr Gillespy, having twice before
forbidden that, it appears here he means something more.

I meet with one reason more in Mr Prin (says he) it cannot be meant of eating
at the Lords Table, ibid 4.
because this precept extends to those out of the Church also who were such as
appears by v. 10.11, 12, 13. compared together.

I answer, Sol.
that those who are Christians should not have any Communion with Heathens that
are profane I grant.

2. That they are forbidden here I cannot see.

Thirdly the Apostle says, ver. 5. If any man be called a brother, and be such
or such, etc. and plainly tells them ver. 10. that his meaning was not that they
should altogether forbear company with the fornicators of the world.

Fourthly admit this, though not equally as Mr Prin confesses, yet how does it
follow that the not eating here cannot be understood of Sacramental eating;
indeed it will follow it cannot be meant of that only which we do not contend
for.

I meet with no more pretended reasons. Mr Humfry has magisterially told us he
is of this mind, but has given us no reason; neither in his vindication, nor
his rejoinder.

I have done the first thing, showing you that there has not yet been made
appear by any sufficient ground that the not eating here is to be restraind to
civil Communion, if it were, it would be to no great purpose, only it would
make us make use of this Scripture as a radix for an undeniable Argument,
whereas yet we plead for a direct literal prohibition; but of that in the
third place.

I come now to my second task,

1. I shall show you some grounds which may make us probably judge, that the
Sacramental eating, was the chief thing here intended.

2. Why civil Communion should not be the only thing here forbidden.

As to the first, take these grounds for my opinion.

First, Feast before mentioned, ver. 8. he meant the Sacrament, this
immediately follows: That by the Feast v. 8. the Sacrament is meant I showed
before.

Secondly, people are to eat one with another but this, and when the Text
contradicts not other Scriptures, doubtless it is not to be expounded by a
figure.

The business of the Apostle was,

The first is positive, A solemn delivering up the obstinate person to Satan.
This he commanded before ver. 3.4. The other is privative, and consists in
denying of the excommunicate person intimacy of civil Communion. 2. Church
Communion in some Ordinances; as for the first he had forbidden it, in these
words keep no company with such a one. As to the second; he forbids here. -- No
nor eat with such a one.

I no where read, that the excommunicate person must not be preached to, for
though he be as an Heathen, yet not in a worse condition as to that sure. I
read he must be admonished as a Brother. I read not that we may not pray with
him. But we must have no Communion with him in such Ordinances which do belong
to a man as a member of the Church. The chief of these is the Sacrament of the
Supper, therefore the Apostle forbids to eat with him, that is, at the Lords
Table, and so he has given a perfect command for executing a sentence of
excommunication on him, in all its branches, which he sums up, ver. 13.
Therefore put away from amongst you that wicked person.

Fourthly,

If the first or the last, it is all we ask.

I shall now prove the second thing.

2. That it it not probable that civil eating is here forbidden.

1. Civil Communion was twice forbidden before, under the notion of keep no
company.

2. Civil Communion so far as eating goes, is lawful for Christians sure,
with a Drunkard, a covetous person, or the like; or else as the Apostle tells
us, we must go out of the world. This Erastus, and the worthy Gentleman (so
often named) foresaw, and therefore spent much pains to work themselves out of
this hedge of difficulty. But I shall not digress to follow them; the Reader
may see Mr Prin (who says most) sufficiently answered by his learned
Antagonist. Gillespy Aarons rod. l. 3. c. 7


I come to my third task.

Admit that the meaning of this Text were what they would have, only to
interdi^^ Christians a civil Communion with scandalous sinners, yet it is
nothing to the business, for thus we argue.

If from that text it may be concluded unlawful for Christians to have civil
Communion, Quod si multorum testium va^ ria and consonanti monitione docemur,
cum del^ q^entibus fratrious cibo ne quide^^ vesci, quanto magis debeat and a
sacrificio Christi arceri. Cyp. in l. de aleatoribus. Erast. theses thesi 66.
vind. 4 serious quest. p. 11. vin. free admission. p. 85. Beza in lib. de
excom. and Presb. page 95.
and to eat at their own Tables with scandalous sinners, then it is much more
unlawful for them to eat at the Lords Table.

But it is granted that it is unlawful for them to have civil Communion with
them.

This Argument has troubled Erastus, and Mr Prin, and Mr Humfry to answer. Mr
Humfry is sorry to see any gravelled with such a fallacy. Well if it be a
fallacy, I hope we shall have it discovered.

1. Some tell us that there is no such Argument, not to have company, and not
to eat, are both the same, so here is no comparation.

1. To this I answer.

1. That Beza has well observed, that the particle here used does import such
an argumentation, where the lesser being denied, the greater is much more
denied. Brastus himself is so sensible, that (...) where it divides, argues
two things spoken of so that he is forced to confess that there are two
things. 1. Intimate familiarity with such. 2. Eating with them.

But surely the man forgot himself, Vetat ergo duo primum ut non habeant
arctam cum talibus consuetudinem, deinde ut ne quidem edant cum eis. Erast.
confir. thesium lib. 3.
for is it not lawful for us to eat with a covetous man at our own Table think
we?

But secondly, I answer, this is nothing to the purpose, for we, supposing the
Apostle speaks of civil eating, raise our argument by consequence from that
Scripture foundation.

Secondly therefore the most intelligent say, that the Argument is falsely drawn
to conclude the prohibition of the greater from the less: Erastus gives us
some rules, and Mr Prin, and Mr Humfry some, to regulate these argumentations.
Their rules are these. (I will examine the truth of them as I go along)
Propositions therefore wherein the greater is proved to be denied, because the
lesser may be true.

1. Erastus says it may be true in gifts, In donis non autem in poenis.
Confirm. these l. 3. p. 250.
but not in punishments.

Mr Rutherford tells him, it is true enough for us, if it be true in gifts, for
fellowship with the Saints is a gift and privilege, and surely if one may
have not the lesser privilege, he may not have the greater. Rutherford's
divine right of Presbyt. p. 366.
2. It must also hold in punishments, when the lesser is inflicted for the
cause of the higher: is it not a good argument think we, such a man condemned
to die, must not come into the Castleyard, till his Execution. Ergo much less
may he go where he list about the Country.

Secondly says Erastus, Erast. ibid. Mr Prin. p. 11.
this Argument is true i^ things of the same kind, but not in things of diverse
kinds. So Mr Prin, so Mr Humfry.

If this be true (says Mr Gillespy) the Scripture is full of false Logic. Number.
12.14. If Miriams father had spet in her face, Gillespy Aarons rod. l. 3 c. 7
Rutherford proves both these of the same kind. lib. praedi^. ib.
should not she have been ashamed seven days; how much more when God has
smitten her with leprosy? Hag. 1.4. You have built to your selves ceiled houses
how much more ought you to have built the Lords house Jo 3.12. If I have told
you earthly things, and you believe not; how shall you believe, if I tell you
heavenly things. 1. Cor. 6.3. Know ye not, that we shall judge Angels, how
much more things that pertain to this life. Now mark Reader, how Mr Humfry
has united this knot by accusing God himself, Jesus Christ, his Prophets his
Apostles, all of false arguings.

Thirdly, says Erastus, Erast. ibid. Mr Prin. ibid.
it must be in things that are free, not in such things that are not of our
own power, one being commanded of God, and the other not, as these are.

But first, Erastus should have done well to have told us first, where we are
commanded to eat with scandalous sinners at the Lords Table.

Secondly, ibid.
says Mr Rutherford, he should have proved, that it is a thing free to us to
do or not to do, to have civil Communion with scandalous sinners, we
always thought we had not been free in that point, but enjoined to a negative.

Lastly, says Mr Gillespy, what becomes of that Scripture Argument then,
Gillespy ibid.
How much better is it to get wisdom then Gold, and understanding then Silver?
Wisdom surely is not in our own power to get.

4. Mr Prin ibid.
Mr Prin adds another case, wherein he thinks this Argument not concluding, in
case the two things compared, fall not under the same precept, which is the
case here. But Mr Gillespy rightly tells him, this is new Logic; for not to
reproach Gods name, is forbidden in the third precept; not to reproach man
under the sixth and ninth. But I hope this is a good Argument, if we may not
reproach our neighbor, much less may we reproach our Maker. My Gil. l. 3. c.
7.
And it is surely as good, if we may not have an intimacy of civil Communion
with scandalous sinners, much less may we have the nearest Church fellowship
and Communion with him.

Thus have I done, (what indeed was done before) at least gathered together
what have been said by diverse more able to strengthen this Argument.

CHAP. V. Wherein a fifth Argument is brought whereby is proved, that hitherto
none bath brought any Scripture precept or president, sufficient to warrant
promiscuous administration of the Lords Supper.
I proceed to a fifth ARGUMENT.
What the Officers of the Church have neither any precept obliging them to do,
nor president to justify them in doing, that in the worship of God is sinful
and unlawful for them to do.

THE proposition stands upon this bottom, That nothing is lawful in the
worship of God, but what we have precept or president for. Which, whosoever denies,
opens a door to all Idolatry and superstition, and will worship in the world.
Besides the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, being a piece of instituted worship,
we are in the Administration of it, to be guided according to the precepts,
given upon the institution and for the Administration of it, and according to
the example of the Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles. The example of Christ
who first instituted it, and gave us an example for the perpetual celebration
of it, and of the Apostles, who being the first who celebrated it,
questionless did it in the purest Order, and most conformely to the will of
Christ, with which they were best acquainted. Now I assume;

But for the Officers of the Church, to give the Sacrament to such as are
visibly scandalous, (though they be not excommunicated, is for them to do that
in the worship of God, which neither any precept nor example of Christ, or his
Apostles, will justify them in doing -- Ergo.

It is enough for us to affirm the minor, till our opposites produce some
precept or example of Christ or his Apostles, justifying them in this practice.
In regard some are pretended; I shall turn aside a little to examine the
precepts or examples offered in the cause.

1. Some think, that our Saviors words, Mark 14.23. Drink you all of it,
contains a command given by our Savior to all, to drink of the Sacramental
cup, and so vertually a command to his Ministers to give it out promiscuously.
But let us before we grant this, examine who those All were. The twelve says
(Mr Humfry) (we will examine that more strictly anon.) By all there, out of all
question are meant no more then all present, and these were no more then the
twelve, (if all of them) which wants proof too. But suppose all the twelve
were there, yet not one of them was discovered to be a scandalous sinner, but
even Judas himself was both in the Disciples eyes, and in Christ's eyes,
(acting not as an omniscient God, but as a Minister of the Gospel) a visible
Saint. Which was the answer as I remember of Bonaventure, I am sure of Halensis
and Salmeron, long since, and is the general answer of our Divines to that
cavil. Nor has Mr Humfry in his Rejoinder, said any thing to prove Judas then
scandalous, for though (as Erastus noted before him) he had then treason in his
heart, and supposing that to be true, which Erastus and Mr Humfry so much
plead, (but I searce believe) that he had before covenanted with the High
Priests, yet all this was secret, and he was not discovered, till upon Christ
giving him the sop, he asking, is it I? Christ said, thou say it; and that
reply of Christ was before as some think. Grotius well observes, that Christ
did but whisper it to him, for it is plain, from John 13. that the Disciples
knew it not till then, and he then having received the sop, went out (...)
(says John) which by the way, as I shall prove more anon) was both before the
eating of the Paschall Lamb, and before the institution of the Lords Supper
too.

It is worth our observing, that Christ did not so much as call up those of the
same house, which it is more then probable, that he would have done, if he had
intended it for a converting Ordinance, or for all promiscuously. Nay surely
Christ had more disciples then the twelve, but the twelve only (if all of
them) were present.

2. Some think that they have a precept for promiscuous administering this
Ordinance, from Mat. 28.19, 20. where we have our commission in these words;
Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, the Senne and
the Holy Ghost.

1. To that I answer.

1. There is nothing expressed concerning the administration of the Lords Supper,
and our opposites who are so nimble at every turn to call for (...), should
remember, that by it they oblige themselves to do the like.

But secondly, admit that there is an implicit precept likewise for the
administration of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, yet surely by the same
rule that the Apostles (notwithstanding that precept) did not think themselves
obliged to baptize any, but such as believed, and confessed their sins; we may
also expound the included part of the precept, and must administer this
Ordinance to none but such as are able to examine themselves, and to discern
the Lord Body. So that this will not serve their turn.

Thirdly, Erastus, and Mr Humfry, and Mr Boatman, make a great stir with the
wedding Supper, Mat. 22. to which all were invited, etc. But,

1. They should remember that old and true rule, Theologia parabolica non est
argumentativa. No argument can be fetched from Parables, but from the general
scope of them. v Mr Humfrie's rejoinder. p. 52.53.54.
Now he that runs may read, that our Saviors main scope in that Parable, was
not to show who might, or might not come to the Lords Table, but to show how
angry God was with the Jews, for not coming to Christ, by which unbelief of
theirs, they procured destruction to themselves, and God would now call in the
Heathens, and those who before were not his people, to be his people, and to
fill up his Feast.

2. If Mr Humfry or Mr Beatman think they may argue, from any of the four
feet of that parable, as to this cause, they may prove it to be their duty, not
only to stand in a Pulpit, and invite all the Lords Table, but to go into
high ways and hedges too, and bring in all they meet with, yea and to compel
them to come in. Now it will prove too, that they ought to fetch in Pagans (who
are chiefly meant in the latter part of the Parable) And thus they shall not
need to want company at the Lords Table.

3. Doctor Drake answered Mr Humfry well I think, when he told him, that Christ
is the Feast meant in that Parable, and although all be invited to the Feast
[Christ] yet the question is, whether all be invited to eat of that dish in the
Feast, viz. Dr Drakes B^^ to free admission. p. 30. Mr Humfries rejoinder. p.
54.
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as well as they are invited to hear the
Gospel. Here now M. Humfry has a mind more to show his wit then his honesty,
thus he answers him p. 54. This is something ingenuous, but whoreas he applies
this, that a man may be invited to a Feast, yet not to the dish in the Feast;
it is very fine, etc. then he tells us a tale of the two eggs, and concludes, let
us have the dishes of the Feast, and what will become of Mr Drakes Feast.

How falsely has he abused Dr Drake, let the Reader judge; Dr Drake does not
say they are not invited to any dish, but they are not invited to every dish,
and if the dish of the Sacrament be removed, there will a Feast still remain.
But the truth is, it was properest for Mr Humfry to abuse his Adversary, when
he could not answer him. If this, and other passages of the same nature in that
unworthy book, be not enough to make it stink in the nostrils of conscientious
Christians, let them but read his language, p. 269. and the application of
Scripture, to serve his nastie intentions, and they may help a little toward
it.

4. I never heard of any more Scripture precepts pretended, only that, 1 Cor.
11.24. where I desire the Reader to consider.

1. That the Apostle does but repeat the words of our Savior, which were spoke
to none but visible Saints.

2. The Apostle delivers the same words to them, he bids them, Do that, etc.

Which (by the way) is not a command to their Pastors to administer it, but to
the Church to receive the Sacrament, and surely does not concern those who in
that Chapter are commanded to examine themselves, etc. and are not able to do
it.

The question is, whether the Apostle v. 24. does command them to receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, who could not examine themselves according his
rule v. 28. nor discern the Lords body; or who if they did partake must
necessarily eat and drink their own damnation, and make themselves guilty of
the body and blood of Christ: Surely this was very absurd to say; If not this
precept is nothing to the purpose, sounding no more then this; you that are fit
to do this, do this.

We are now come to examine if they have any examples. I never heard but of
three pretended, indeed they are great ones, and enough, if they be made
appear for their purpose.

The first, that of Christ, who admitted Judas as some think.

The second Mr Humfry mentions. Acts 2.41.42.

The third is of the Church of Corinth.

I will speak of the latter two first.

The first then is Acts 2.41, 42. in the 41 verse, 3000 souls were added to
the Church; verse 42. it is said they continued steadfastly in the Apostles
Doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayers.

To this I answer.

1. I should put our opposites hand to it, to prove that the breaking of bread
here spoke of, was the Sacramental action. I could tell them of many who are
of another mind. A phrase like this Luke 24.30. he took bread and blessed, and
brake it, etc. is used to express common eating at our own Tables.

2. But I confess, I incline to to think it was Sacramental breaking of bread,
and so the Syriack version reads it. So the phrase is used. 1 Cor. 10.16. But
who were those that brake berad together? such as verse 37. were pricked at the
heart, and had cried out, v. Mr Palmer^ answer to Humfry. p. 51.
Men and Brethren, what shall we do? such as continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine, and fellowship and prayers, such as durst own Christ in
those first and furious times. What Is this to prove that all ignorant scandalous
sinners, of but baptized, and not excommunicated, ought to be admitted to the
Lords Table?

2. In the next place, the example of the Church of Corinth is produced, where
we are told, there were some came drunk to the Sacrament, or were drunk at the
Sacrament; Fornicators, Covetous, Extortioners, Idolaters, yet all were
admitted.

1. I have before showed, that there is no color to say that any drunkards
were in the Church of Corinth, such at least as came drunk to the Table, and if
they were so there, it must be proved that they did not repent, and yet came
again the next time, or else nothing is said, Rejoinder p. 48.
but instead of this it cannot be proved (as I have shown) they were drunk
there, and Mr Humfry does not disapprove it.

2 The Apostle plainly says, that some of this Church were Foruicators, I
dolaters, Adulterers, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.
effeminate, abusers of themselves with mankind, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards,
revilers, extortioners; but now they were washed, justified, sanctified, with
what face we can say they were so after, let any judge.

3. There was an incestuous person, but they are bid to purge him out, not to
eat, not to keep company with him: how this proves he was admitted, I cannot
tell.

4. Supposing such were admitted, the Argument comes to nothing, for though the
Apostles example binds us, yet every Churches example does not in all things,
especially when the Apostle writes to them, and tells them, they could not
partake of the cup of the Lord, and of the cup of Devils. If they did admit
Drunkards, ibid. p. 48.
Mr Humfry himself will acknowledge they did amiss, for he tells us, that he
holds the Drunkard unintelligent, and fit to be turned away from all
Ordinances, at least for the present.

3. Erast, thesis 28.
But the greatest example is that of Christ, who they say, admitted Judas a
reprobate, one whom he knew to be the son of perdition, etc. This Erastus
tells us of, and Mr Humfry, iterum atque iterum.

Here are two things to be proved.

1: That Judas was a scandalous sinner.

2. That he was admitted to the Lords Supper.

We shall fulle of the first proose, Beza de ^resb. and excom. p 26.
Gillespies Aaronsrad, l 3. c. 10
which was Beza's answer to Erastus long since; and learned Gillespies answer
to Mr Prin, viz. That Judas was no scandalous sinner, nor was his compact with
the High Priest, known to the Disciples, and as for Christ's knowledge,
(supposing he had not gone out) he acted as a Minister, Martyr in 1 Cor. 5.
Gerard. loc. comd. 5. p. 181. Algerus de Saeram. Halensis sum. th^ol. p.
4.9.11. art. 1. sect 4. Dr Drakes Bar, etc. p. 9. Mr. H^mfries rejomd. p. 1516.
and not as an omniscient God, and those who peruse that Chapter in Mr
Gillespies book, will find that this was the opinion of Peter Martyr, Gerard,
Algerus, Durantus, Alexander Halensis, Ioannes Baptista de Rubeis, etc. The
same answer Dr Drake gives Mr Humfry, all that his Adversary says, is but the
same over and over again. He had compacted with the High Priest, (but this was
secretly) Christ he says, had revealed it. But that's false as to a particular
discovery, for it is plain, that till he gave the sop to him they suspected
themselves rather then him. The business is this.

Jesus Christ there, as Arch Bishop and first Bishop of his Church, at once
both institutes the Ordinance, and intends to set us a rule for the
celebration, he therefore takes none but his disciples with him, whether Indas
was there or no, all the time of the action, is uncertain, (supposing he was)
this we say, though Christ knew his secret compact with the Pharisees, yet it
was not known to the Disciples, but to him as omniscient, and to teach us that
we must not judge hearts, but actions, he turns him not away.

And Mr Gillespy says well, Gil. l. 3. cap. 10.
that if it could be proved that Judas was present, yet it would no more prove
that we ought to admit all seandalous sinners to the Ordinance, because Christ
admitted Judas, (as is supposed) then it would prove that we ought to admit any
notorious Drunkard, Whoremonger, or other sinner, who is openly known to us to
be such to the Office of the Ministry, because Christ admitted Judas to the
Apostleship, who he knew was a Devil, which may stop Erastus and Mr Humfries
mouth, for the time to come, as to this Argument, except these can prove Judas
was so scandalous, as Jesus Christ, (merely as man) might have discovered it.

But secondly, that Judas was there at the Supper. I question whether at the
eating of the Lamb or no, and I will anon show you some ground for it. Beza
tells us, Beza de Presb. page 27. Erast. theses th. 28. Mr Prins vind. 4 ser.
quest. p. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
that he assents to those that think he was not there. Erastus himself
discovers no great confidence in this Article of the new Creed. Mr Prin quotes
many Authors in the affirmative. Origin, Cyprian, Ambrose, Chrysostom,
Nazianzen, Cyrill, Augustine, Victor Antiochenus, Theodoret, Remigius,
Rathertus, Oecumenius, Algerus, Theophylact, Bernard, besides Canonists,
Schoolmen, and Protestant writers.

Mr Gillespy shows him his mistake in many of the quotations, Aarons rod. p.
456, 457. p. 451 452, 453, 454.
and the ground of some of the Ancients mistake in this (taking the sop for the
Supper. And further tells him, that Gerard and Brockman, and Theophylact, all
confess it a disputable business, and with all gives him account of diverse
who were of another mind; and that Chrysostom and Theophylact, etc. jointly
agree, that scandalous persons were to be excluded. But let us examine
Scripture and reason in the case. Mr Gillespy gives these reasons in the
negative.

1. Gillespy ibid. Dr Drakes Bar, etc. page 6. Mr Prins vind. p. 24. Gil. p.
441, etc. Rejoinder p. 9. p 446, 447.
Saint John says, John 13.30. That he having received the sop, went
immediately out. This is likewise Doctor Drakes fourth reason. To this Mr Prin
excepts, but is sufficiently answered by Mr Gillespy. Mr Humfry like wise
excepts, that the Supper, John 13. was not that, at which the Lord instituted
the Sacrament, but two days before, (though the best authority he has for it,
be a marginall quotation which surely was not wrote there, by the infallible
finger of God.) It is a material exception, we will scan it anon.

2. Mr Gillespies second Argument was, because it was not probable Christ would
have said to Judas, this is my body which is broken for thee. This Argument he
vindicates from Mr Prins exceptions.

3. Dr Drake. p. 6. ibid. ibid.
A third Argument he uses (which is Dr Drakes fifth Arg.) is, because all
those comfortable expressions Christ used while Judas was there, were with
exceptions, John 13.10, 11. You are clean, but not all. So ver. 18. ver. 21.
which were left out at the Supper. To these Mr Humfry replies, what all, did
Christ never speak graciously to Judas amongst the rest? Rejoind. p. 9, 10.
Pray see at leisure. We may look long enough, where after this time, he spoke
comfortably to him, we desire Mr Humfry to show us. But as for John 13.10, 11,
18, 21. he says it is not in him (to answer them I suppose he means) God
shall give an answer rf peace.

But he tells us, Christ says he is a Devil, but I have chosen him, to what?
to be an Apostle; he was not apparently so, when he chose him. He says that
Christ says Judas was not clean, yet he washes his feet; but the Text says it
not. 2. Suppose he did, this was but to teach him humility and charity, not to
entitle him to the Lords Supper.

4. Dr Drake adds. Because Christ knew him to be a reproba^e. To this Mr Humfry
only endeavors (to little purpose) to fasten a contradiction on the Dr,
because the Doctor had said before, supposing he had known him to be so, yet
Christ as a Minister (probably) would not exclude him. Let the Doctor speak for
himself.

5. Dr Drake adds a fifth. Because Christ's blood was shed for the remission of
those who received.

Mr Humfry answers, 1 John 2.2. And not for ours only, but for the sins of the
whole world, that is, the Pagans as well as the Jews, viz. such of them as
being fore ordained to life, should believe; but what is this to the purpose?
What Mr Humfry means by holding universal redemption as to the visible
Church, so far as reaches to the tenor and tender of the conditional
Covenant, though not of the absolute, is too profound for me to fathom.
Universal redemption; Conditional Covenant. Two Convenants, one absolute,
another conditional, are notions in Divinity I do not understand, and think
them hardly reconcilable to truth, (if to sense) they are the canting language
of those that would supply Franciscus de Sancta Clara's place, as to
reconciling us and Arminians, and are no better then Arminianisme minced for
the better digestion.

Dr Drake also has another Argument, (which Mr Gillespy also hints) because
Christ promised to drink new wine in his Fathers Kingdom, with those who
received.

To this Mr Humfry answers. But he does not say with all. Let him remember
that, and show us where it is said, that all the twelve were present at the
institution of the Supper.

There is thus much spoken, all which possibly will not compel, but surely in
good natured people it will induce some little persuasion of a probability that
Judas was not there.

Let us now hear what is pleaded on the Traitors side.

1. Mat. 26.20. It is said he sat down with the twelve, Mar. 14.17. He came
with the twelve, Luke 22.14. He sat down, and the twelve Apostles with him.
Here Is three Evangelists asserting it they cry.

But what do they assert? that at their first sitting down the twelve were
all there, who denies it? the question is not whether they sat down together,
but whether they rose up together, whether they are the Sacrament together?
John telling us that Judas went out as soon as he had eaten the sop, John 13.30.

But Luke tells us, that after the institution of the Supper, Christ said,
behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me, is with me on the Table, and Lukes
Gospel is true.

Dr Drake answers, that there is (...). Luke puts a piece of the story behind,
which should have been before. Mr Humfry, out of his pretended zeal for Saint
Luke who (he says) could not else speak truth, says, that though the
Scripture sometimes puts a whole story after another, which in order of time
was before it, yet where shall we find such an histerology, as to take a piece
of a former story, and join it to another as a part of it, Mr Humfries
rejoind. p. 12, 13.
to which ^f it be taken as belonging, it becomes a manifest f^lshood, and
says we will not abate a jot or tittle of the truth of Saint Lukes Gospel.

That those words of Saint Luke should have been placed before, is plain.

1. From St Luke himself, for their hands were now all off the Table the
Supper done, and the last cup drunk; besides he adds ver. 23. that the
Disciples all wondered who should do the thing; now surely they knew before
this time, or else Judas (as Mr Humfry would have him) could not be scandalous
at this time, his fact not known to his Disciples.

2. St Ma^thew plainly places them before the Administration of the Supper.
Mat. 26.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. So does Mark chapter 14 18, 19, 20, 21. So Saint John,
Io, 13.21, 22. which plainly proves it an histerology in Luke.

3. Nor is it as Mr Humfry would insinuate, a taking a piece of one story, and
joining it to another, which would make it false, but only a misplacing of a
piece of the same story, which is no unusual thing amongst the Evangelists.

4. Nor will it amount to so much, as an invalidating the truth of Lukes
Gospel, (which we desire to be as tender of as Mr Humfry) any more then the
order he pleades for, would invalidate the truth of the other three. Lukes
being dictated by an infallible spirit, does not oblige us to believe every
punctilio of order, to have been as he describes it, contrary to the testimony
of the other three. -- Besides, John says plainly he went out.

But he tells us, we are mistaken in John 13. for that was a Supper (I know not
when nor where) two days before the Passcover, and for this he cites a
marginall quotation in our Bibles, pointing him to Mat. 26.2. which he bids us
look.

1. I must confess this well proved would be something to his purpose, it
would plainly prove that the sop was eaten by Judas two days before the
Passover was celebrated, or the Lords Supper instituted, and that Judas two
days before was discovered scandalous to all the Disciples, and that two days
before, he deserted Christ and the other Disciples; only if Mr Humfry could
prove this, it would stand him in hand to prove his coming back well, to eat
the the Passover or the Supper.

2. But we will yield him nothing, he bids us look the margent of our Bibles,
the place we insist upon, is, Io. 13.30. where our ordinary Bibles have nothing
in the margent, so that in obedience to him, we must tell him we have enquired,
but non est inventum in Bibl^is nostris. Indeed to the first verse of that
chap. is affixed in marg. Mat. 26.2.

But thirdly, he dreams that the Supper spoken of, where Judas had the sop,
was a Feast two days before the Passover. Indeed we read Mat. 26.1, 2. Mar.
14.1. of some consultation of the Chief Priests, two days before the
Passover, to take Christ. But that there was any supper besides this at the
Passover, will pose Mr Humfry to prove.

CHAP. VI. Containining a digression, in which there is an attempt to prove
that Christ did, eat the Passover two days before the Jews did eat it that
year, and that he was not crucified till the second day after he was
apprehended, and that at the Passover there was but one supper, as is plain by
the comparing the Jewish order of celebration, with the story of the four
Evangelists concerning this, and that Judas was not present at the Passover
nor the Supper.
IT seems to me very conducible toward the clearing of this matter of fact,
whether Judas received the Supper or no, to find out 1. What day Christ
celebrated the passover and instituted his supper.

2. To examine the Jewish order of celebrating the Passcover, and to compare it
with what the Evangelists have, concerning Christ's actions in it.

Toward the first, I shall offer these following considerations.

1. It is clear from Scripture, that the time God set for the celebration of
the Passover, was the 14 day of the first month at even. Ex. 12.18, 19. Lev.
23. v. 6. Number. 28.16, 17.

2. It is as clear, that it was to be 7 days, in all which time they were to
eat no unleavened bread.

3. Dr Lightfoots Temple service. cap. 12.4.
The Lamb (at least for the first Passover) was taken up the tenth day,
whether this held or no, is doubted, and by many denied, it was at first, Ex.
12.7.

4. It is clear, that the Jews reckoned the beginning of their day, from the
setting of the Sun the night before.

5. When the days of unleavened bread should have begun, it is clear. Lev.
23.6. on the fifteenth day, they were to eat unleavened bread, that is, from
the evening succeeding Sunset the fourteenth day. Therefore Ex. 12.18, 19. it
is said on the fourteenth at evening you shall eat unleavened bread, which
fourteenth at evening, was the beginning of the fifteenth, and that is clear,
for they were to end the 21 at even, and to hold but seven days. Grotius in
Mar. 6. Dr Willet in Ex. 12.9, 7.
Grotius says there were eight days of unleavened bread. So Josephus tells
him. But Dr Willet tells us, Josephus must not be credited in it, it being
expressly against Scripture. Rupertus is in the same error, but we must not
yield it.

6. Yet because on the fourteenth day they killed the Passcover, and at even
began the first of unleavened bread, it is plain they called the fourteenth
day the first of unleavened bread, Dr Light. Tem. service. cap. 12.
and so says Dr. Lightfoot, it is called in Scripture, in the New Testament,
and so it is called both by Mark and Luke. The first day of unleavened bread,
when the passover was killed. Saint Luke, when the Passover ought to be killed.
So that in strict account, the days of unleavened bread began not till the
Sunset of the fourteenth day, yet in vulgar reckoning they began before, and
the whole fourteenth day was so called.

7. And I conceive for another reason, ibid. Bux^. synag. Iud. cap. 12.
which both Buxtorf and Dr Lightfoot hint us, and that was a custom the Jews
had, to send an Officer as soon as ever Sun was set on the thirteenth day, to
search for leaven in all houses; which he did narrowly with Candles, and this
search continued till the next day at noon, at which time they threw what they
found this way and that way. Hence I conceive the whole space of time from the
thirteenth at Sunset, till the fourteenth at Sunset, was called the first of
unleavened bread, not that it was strictly so, but that it was called so from
this fashion. And in this, Grotius in. Mat. 26.17.
Grotius agrees with me, though not upon this reason. It is plain both by Mark
and Luke, that the fourteenth day is called the first of unleavened bread,
which fourteenth began at Sunset the thirteenth day.

8. For the time in which Christ celebrated the Passover, and instituted his
Supper, it is plain from the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.23. it was the same night in
which he was betrayed.

For the day wherein he was crucified; Beda de ratione temporum. Dr Will. in 12.
Ex. qu. 11.
Beda tells us, that no Christian must doubt but it was the fifteenth day of the
month; Dr Willet says it is the received opinion. But Learned Scaliger with
others, conclude the contrary. It is certain, that the day whereon he was
Crucified, was the day, or day before the preparation to the Jewish Passover
and Sabbath. Mat. 15.42. Luke 23.54. John 19.14, 42.

9. Scali. de emend. temp. l. 6. p. 566.
That he was Crucified before the noon of the day, is clear, from Mar. 15.25.
it was about the third hour. And Mat, 26.45, 46. after he had been some time
on the Cross, was the sixth hour when the darkness began. Now the Jews
reckoning their hours, from our six to six, the third hour was nine of the
clock, at which time says Mark, he was Crucified, and the sixth hour was
twelve of the clock, at which time the darkness began, and lasted till three.

10. For the better finding out therefore of the night wherein he was betrayed,
(in which he instituted the Supper (says St Paul) Let us consider what the
Gospel says was done, from the time of the institution of the Supper till his
death.

Some think that excellent Sermon John 14.15, 16. was preached in the chamber
where he administered the Supper. Some think it was, as he was going to the
Mount of Olives and Gethsemane. Certain it is, it was after the Supper. On the
mount of Olives he sings an hymn; after this he goes to Gethsemane, and is in
an agony, prays thrice (besides that prayer John 17.) After this, Mat. 27.1,
2. Mar. 15.1, 2.
Judas comes and apprehends him, he is carried before Caiphas the High Priest,
there he is kept in examination till the morning, then the Priests consult what
to do with him, they resolve to send him to Pilate, there he is largely
examined. Mat. 27. ver. 11. to ver. 27. Pilate resolves to fend him to Herod
the King, he is examined before him, mocked, crowned with thorns, etc. Then he
is sent back again to Pilate; Pilate examines him again, scourges him, and
delivers him to be Crucified. Two things observe, or three. 1. It was the
morning before he was sent to Pilate at all. 2. It is said Pilate sat in
Judgment on him at the sixth hour. John 19.14. which was twelve of the clock.
3. he was examined in two several Courts, and twice in one of them.

11. Which (to speak the least) makes it seem probable to me, that the night
wherein Christ was betrayed (which was the night wherein he instituted the
Supper) was not the immediate night before he died, for then you can allow him
for his two trials before Pilate and Herod, Mar. 15.25.
but from the morning till nine of the clock, at nine says Mark he was
Crucified. It was the morning says Matthew and Mark, before they carried him
to Pilate. Nay more, John says, John 19.14.
that at the sixth hour Pilate fate in judgment on him, which could not be if
he were Crucified the same day, for says Mark at the third hour he was
Crucified. Gerard. Harm. in pass. cap. 11.


12. I know learned Gerard endeavors to untie this knot, and to that purpose
tells us, that as the Jews divided their night into four watches, each
consisting of three hours, so they divided their day into four quarters; The
first from six a clock, which was their first hour, to nine, which was their
third hour; The second from nine their third hour, to twelve their sixth
hour; The third from twelve their sixth hour, to three their ninth hour; The
fourth from three their ninth hour, to six their twelfth hour; and he says,
that when it is said Pilate sat in judgment at the sixth hour, John 19.14.
it must be meant not precisely at twelve of the clock, but at some time between
nine and twelve. And when Mark says he was Crucified at the third hour, it
must be meant the third part of the day between twelve and three of the clock.
But besides that, this is not warranted from Scripture. I do no where find,
that they called their third quarter of the day, the third hour. H^sto.
Eccles. Magd^h. l. 1. c. 10 m^censor ^^de natal. cap. 10.
Though indeed the Magdeburgenses, and others, mention their division of the
day into four parts, yet I do not find that they called their second division
the second hour, much less the sixth; nor their third quadrant the third.
Mark says expressly, it was (...). Besides though some indeed say, that the
Hebrews divided the (...) into four vigils for the night, and four quadrants
for the day; yet Scaliger seems to contradict them, he tells us, Totum (...)
Hebraei in quatuor parts dividebant quas vigilias vocabant, Scali. de emend.
temp. lib. 1. c. de horis, etc.
prima vigiliaerat a vespere, secunda a media nocte, tertia a mane, quarta a
meridie. But besides, we read in Scripture twice more of the third hour. Mat
20.3. in the Parable of the householder, sending laborers into his vineyard, he
sent some at the third, some at the sixth, ninth, eleventh hours; where the
third hour cannot be meant of the third quadrant, no more then Acts 2.15. for
it was no wonder men should be filled with new Wine by twelve of the clock, or
betwixt 12 and three. Now surely the third hour in Mark is the same with the
third hour. Mat. 20.3. Acts 2.15.

But if we may allow that he suffered the second day after his apprehension,
we can put a fair interpretation, both upon John 9.14. saying Christ was tried
before Pilate, about noon the day after his apprehension, and the next day was
crucified about nine of the clock the third hour, (as Saint Mark calls it)
and about twelve of the clock the same day the praeter-naturall Eclypse began,
and lasted till three, about which time he died.

13. This I am induced to believe, considering that the Jewish morning began at
six of the clock, Mat. 27.1, 2. Mar. 15.1, 2.
at which time says Matthew and Mark, the High Priest and Elders met to take
counsel to put him to death, and agreed to carry him to Pilate, who was the
Romish Governor, and we can hardly imagine him to be upon a Judgment Seat
before eight or nine of the clock, and though the Jews were hasty to put him
to death, yet no such thing appears in Pilate, he was loath to do it, Mat.
27.19.
as appears by the story, and spent some time in examining witnesses, was a
little hindered by his wife, Lu. 23.9, 10, 11.
then sent him to Herod, who being so great a man probably did not presently
hear him; when he did, we must allow him some time. After this he was sent to
Pilate again, who sat in Judgment upon him at twelve of the clock, John
19.14.

14. If this be true, the night wherein he administered the Supper, must be two
nights before his passion. It is plain, he suffered the day before the Jewish
Passover, as I said before, not on that day (as some fondly think) for
besides that, Scali. de emend. temp. l. 6.
the Passover was that year on the Sabbath. Scaliger well observes, that it
was too high a Festival for the Jews to do any such work in.

15. That the Jewish passover was to begin on the evening after the Sunset of
the fourteenth day, is plain from Scripture. Exodus 12. Lev. 23. So then Christ
should have suffered on the fourteenth day of the month, which was their (...),
the day of their preparation; and in vulgar account, the first day of
unleavened bread, as I said before.

16. But it is plain Christ did not suffer on that day, for all three
Evangelists agree, that this day his Disciples came to him saying, Mat. 26.17.
Mar. 14.12. Luke 22.7.
Where will thou that we prepare the Passover etc. And the night following he
did ^at it; they plainly say, it was the day wherein the Passover was to be
killed. How then did he dye on the preparation day?

17. Paulus Burgensis in his Annotations on Lyra, Paulus Burgensis in Annot. in
Lyram. Sebast Munster. in edit. Evang. Mat. Heb. c 26 Beza in Mat. 26. Grot. in
loc. Bucer in loc.
tells us, that by an Ancient tradition of the Rabbis, which Sebastian Murster
says, was a Law made under the a Temple, by the Jewish Sanhedrim; and
delivered to Rabbi Eliezer. The Jews in case the Passover day fell out any
year on the eve of the Sabbath, put off the Passover and kept them both
together. This Beza approves of, though it distasts Grotius; and I find Bucer
thus untying this knot. So then according to this rule, the day of the
Passover so falling out this year, they began their Passover the sixteenth at
even, and killed their Lamb the fifteenth; so that this year strictly the
fifteenth day was the day of their preparation, in which Christ dyed.

18. I refer it to the Learned to enquire, whether when these cases happened,
that the Passover was kept the sixteenth day, (being their Sabbath) they began
to search for leaven the fourteenth day at Sunset? or whether in this case
they did not keep two days of preparation, and began their search for leaven
at their usual time, only putting off the Paschall Supper; if they did, which
I am apt to believe, then the first of their days of unleavened bread,
according to vulgar account, began as usually the beginning of the fourteenth
day, viz. immediately after Sunset on the thirteenth, and was two just days
before the Passover, (as that year fell) though in ordinary years but one
day: this I confess to me seems very probable.

19. Or else the Evangelists must be understood thus. The Disciples came to him
the first day of unleavened bread, that is, that day on which the Passover
ought to be killed, according to Gods Law, in the evening precedent that day,
which in ordinary years was called (...), and the day preceding the Passover
(though it were otherwise that year.

20. It is certain that in a strict sense, it cannot be true that his
Disciples came to him that day, on which the Passover was killed that year,
for then he must either be Crucified the first day of the Feast of the
Passover, or after; and then that night in which they should have are the
Passover, the High Priests were consulting to murder him, or else the
Scripture must be denied, which says, he died before the Passover.

21. Christ doubtless died on the fifteenth day, (let Scaliger say what he
please) which 15 day should have been according to Gods Law, the first of the
Passover; but was not that year, because of their tradition. Our Passover
was thus on the true Passover day offered; this fifteenth day they that year
killed their Passover; and I am apt to believe that the Evangelists speak of
that day, Mar. 14.12. Luke 22.7.
not wherein the Passover was killed that year, but wherein it ought to have
been killed. Therefore Luke calls it the day (...); which day was the
fourteenth, and began the night before at Sunset.

22. Yet here Grotius and Piscators (...) must help us; for if he eat the
Passover the fourteenth at even, that is, the evening after Sunset, how could
his disciples come to him the fourteenth day, to know where they should
provide. Piscator says, Piscator ad. loc.
we must understand it of the day before, in the afternoon of the thirteenth
day, when the fourteenth day, which was the (...) was just at hand, then the
Disciples came to him, and said, Where will thou that we prepare the Passover,
etc. And that night which was the even of the fourteenth day he came and did
eat it, which was two full days before the Jewish Passover that year, and
the time when in former years they began to search for Leaven.

23. So we say, that Christ did that year anticipate the time of the
Passover, both the Jewish time that year, which according to their tradition,
was two days after, Scali. de emend. temp. l. 6. Grotius in Mat. 6. Pis. in
Mat. 26.
and the true time which was the night after. Scaliger and Grotius, and others,
grant, he anticipated the Passover. Piscator grants, that he anticipated the
Jewish day that year. I believe he anticipated it two days, that so he might
die that very day, which according to Gods Law, was to be the first of the
Passover, and so show himself the true Passover. Grotius gives us a good
hint, that Christ gives a reason why he antedated the time of the Passover,
Mat. 26.18. bidding his Disciples tell the Master of the house, my time is at
hand, I will keep the Passover; that is, I know I shall be apprehended this
night, and shall not be in a capacity to keep the Passover at the due time,
therefore I will keep it this night; which was after Sunset the thirteenth
day, in the beginning of the fourteenth, and then he dyed the fifteenth, which
was as I said, usually their first great day, but this year, the preparation
to the first day of the Passover.

24. I am far from thinking, that this notion of mine is liable to no
exceptions, but I desire those who shall except, to think of a better way to
reconcile those Texts, which plainly prove that he died upon one of their
preparation days. Mat. 27.62. Mar. 15.42. Luke 23.54. John 19.42. with those
Texts, which say, his Disciples came to him, saying, Where shall we prepare the
Passover, on the first day of unleavened Bread. whether in regard of their
double Feast, they might not have that year a double preparation day? I refer
to be enquired. I am apt to believe, that both the fourteenth and fifteenth
days were both days of preparation, that year, because of John 18.28. John
19.14. compared with John 19.31, 42.

My opinion is, that on the thirteenth day of the month Nisan in the afternoon,
two full days before the Jewish Passover that year began, the Priests met to
consult how to take Christ, and put him to death, of which we read Mat. 26.3.
Mar. 14 1. Luke 22.2. and that toward Sunset that night the Disciples came to
Christ, saying, Where will thou that we prepare the Passover. Christ directs
them; and that night which was the even of the fourteenth day he came with
twelve, amongst whom was Judas.

Thus much for the time, now let us consider the order of the whole action,
which is fully described by no Evangelists singly, but by comparing them one
with another.

Luke expressly speaks of two cups that were drank by him Luke 22.17, 20,
John, as we have translated him, seems to speak of two Suppers. John 13.2, 21,
ver. Hence Saint Augustine of old, Aug. de consensu Evangelist.
thought he did eat of two Suppers, the one the Paschall Supper, the other a
common supper. Arias Monta. in Mat. 26. Scali. de ^mend. temp. p. 571.
Of these we are also told by Arias Montanus, Grotius and Scaliger, Pelargus
and Gerard, think there were three Suppers, upon which Mr Humfry from Godwin,
puts an unlikely. (supposing they might eat as much as they would of the Lamb)
Grotius has likewise another fancy, viz. Grotius in Mat. 26.
That Christ that year did not eat of the true Passover, which he calls
(...), but only of a Passover, Gerard Harm. cap. 170. Pelarg. qu in Mat. c^ 3
sect. 2. Rejoinder. p. 9.
the Jews had devised in the Babylonish Captivity, which they called (...),
because it only served to keep alive in their memories, their deliverance out
of Egypt. But -- Credat Judaeus Apella; Grotius shall never make me believe,
that Christ kept a mock-Passeover, which had no Basis of divine institution,
especially considering how little a friend Christ was to their traditions, and
that he was now at Jerusalem, where the true Passover might be observed, and
ought so to be.

Yet I must confess, I am apt to believe, that Christ and his Disciples, did
not keep the Feast of the Passover, according to all its legal formalities
that year, for (besides that, I conceive he kept it the night before the Jews
killed it at the soonest, admitting they killed it at the usual hours on the
fourteenth day) had he kept it in every formality of it, he must about ten or
eleven of the clock with his Paschall society, have been at the Temple, and
then killed it, and offered the fat, and sprinkled the blood; now he was that
day absent from Jerusalem, and came not till the evening, which makes me,
though I think he did eat Paschall Lamb, and not keep the Jewish (...); only
yet I believe he did not keep it according to the Jewish rites, the temple
standing, but rather according to the order of the first institution, Exo. 12.
differing in that he did eat it standing.

But if I mistake not, a due consideration of the whole Jewish solemnity, in
the celebration of the Passover will let us in sufficient light to expound the
story of the Gospel about this Supper, without feigning two or three Suppers.
Let me therefore 1. Turn aside to that, and then 2. See how we find what the
Gospel tells us of this solemn celebration suited to it.

I find the celebration of the Jewish Passover, excellently described by
Buxtorfius, Dr Light. Tem. service. cap. 13. Bux. synag. Iud. cap. 13.
in his Synagoga Iudaica. cap. 13. And also by our learned Countryman, Dr
Lightfoot, in the 13 chap. of that excellent book of his, wherein with
abundance of Rabbinicall learning, he discovers to us the whole Temple service,
as it was amongst the Jews in Christ's time, and in his 13 chap. digresseth to
give us an account of their manner of celebrating the Paschall Supper in their
private houses. The order they say was this.

1. On the fourteenth day after their evening sacrifice, which they called
Mincha, they went into their Schools, ibid.
(says Buxtorf.) and spent the time till it was dark in prayer and praise, not
eating any thing (says Dr Lightfoot) in the mean time says Buxtorfius, ibid.
the women at home were dressing up their houses, laying out al their fine
things, preparing their tables and their seats, etc. for the poorest must sit
(says Buxtorfius.)

2. Late at night they come home, and every one sat in such a posture, that he
might lean upon the table, Dr Light. ibid. Buxtorf. ibid.
by that posture, showing they were now no more slaves, but free men. In this
Buxtorf. and the Doctor both agree; this is hinted to us, by John's leaning on
Christ's bosom. John 13.23. and (as our Doctor observes) does expound it, he
leaned on the Table next to Christ, with his back to his breast: Herein they
differed from their posture at their first Passover in Egypt, which may cure
the mistake of those, that think the Supper in the Gospel must be distinct
from the Passover, because they conceit that was to be eaten standing, which
is true of the first in Egypt; but no more as Buxtorf. and Doctor Lightfoot, Dr
Willet in Ex. 12.
and Dr Willet, and many more affirm and prove.

3. Buxtorf. says the Table was first furnished, before they sat down, Dr
Lightfoot says after; but they both agree that the first thing they did, when
they were set, was, they drank off one cup of Wine, over which they praised God.

4. After this they both agree, that in the next place they washed their hands.

5. Then faith Dr Lightfoot, the Table was furnished.

1. There was set on a dish with two or three cakes of unleavened bread. 2.
Then the Paschall Lamb. 3. Then a Sallet with bitter herbs, Lettice, Endive,
Succory, etc. 4. Then a dish with thick sauce, which they called Charoseth. 5.
Then another dish or two (says the Dr) of other meat which they added.
6. The Table being thus furnished, and one cup of Wine drank, Buxtorfius and
the Dr agree, that the next thing the officiator did, was, he took some of the
bitter herbs in the third dish, and dipped them in the thick sauce in the
fourteenth dish, and eats himself, and gives to the rest immediately, says
the Doctor. The dishes are taken off, and they tell one another, and tell their
children of the bitter affliction they suffered in Egypt, etc. when this is
done.

7. The dishes are brought on again, and the officiator takes the unleavened
bread, and the bitter herbs, and the Paschall Lamb, and consecrates them all
severally, using certain forms of words in the consecration, and washes his
hands again, and uses a short prayer; then they drink a second cup of Wine.

8. Then he takes one of the Cakes, and breaks it, taking part of it, and
laying it upon the other, and the other part he puts under his Napkin for
himself, says Buxt; but Dr Lightfoot says it was for the Aphicosin, the last
bit, they were wont so to close their supper as the Dr says. Buxtorfius tells
us this breaking of the Cake was before, but doubtless it is a mistake, for it
could not be before the consecration of all. When he has thus disposed of the
one piece, he takes the other and gives it to the company, who eat it.

9. After this says Dr Lightfoot, they give thanks, and eat their flesh-meat
of the Paschall Lamb, to the quantity of an Olive; yet because this eating
should be to satetie, he says they usually eat something before, then they
wash their hands again, and say grace over a third cup of Wine, (says the
Doctor) and then drink it off; this says he they usually call the cup of
blessing, in allusion to which, Saint Paul calls the Sacramental cup so. Luke
22.17.
1 Cor. 10.16. And this (says he) is the first cup spoken of by Luke.

10. Buxtorfius (to whom I must return again, to see what becomes of the
Aphicomen, or piece of unleavened bread, which Dr and he too, told us the
officiator, even now laid under his Napkin) tells us, that now supper being
done, Temple service. page 161.
that is taken by the Master of the family, and given to the rest. With this
likewise the Doctor agrees, telling us this was the bread which Christ took
after the third cup, and blessed and brake it, and give it to them, saying,
Take eat, this is my body, etc

11. Lastly, both the Dr and Buxtorf. agree, that after all this, at this
supper they drank a fourth cup of Wine, called the cup of Hillell, at which
they sang some Psalms, having begun over their second cup; so they concluded
with praise and prayer; of which see more in those two learned books.

This was the Jewish order at their private Passeovers, now let us see how
Christ suits this in his celebration.

I hope any ingenious Reader will grant me, that Christ was not tied precisely
to any piece of this, that had no basis, but tradition. This supposed, I say
that the Jewish Passover being that year on the sixteenth day, or the
fifteenth at even, (which is all one) because of the Sabbath, two full days
before this, viz. The thirteenth in the afternoon, Mat. 27.1, 2. Mar. 14.1, 2.
the High Priests took counsel how to kill our Savior; Judas had not then
bargained with them, for then that counsel had been needless. That very
afternoon near Sunset, (at which time began the first of unleavened bread, in
ordinary years according to vulgar account) Christ sends his Disciples to
prepare the Passover, and when it began to be dark, he and the twelve, came
and found all prepared for them. There Is the first thing.

1. He came in the evening with the twelve. 2. They all sat down. So say all
the Evangelists.
Now Saint John goes on, John 13.2. (...) or (...). Supper begin ended; so we
translate it. So Tremellius and Beza, Tremel. Bib. Beza verse. Test. Tig.
Versio. Pisc. in. loc. Erasm. Versio. Gerard Harm. cap. 170.
but the Tigurine Version and Piscator translate it better; Coena facta, Quum
Coena fieret; while they were at Supper, which indeed the phrase properly
signifies: and Gerard quotes the like in the Septuagint. Erasmus agrees with
the Tigurine Version, while they were set at this Paschall Supper, the Devil
put thoughts into Judas to betray his Master. Verse 4. Christ rises from
Supper, (it was not ended then) and lays aside his garments, and takes a
Towel and washes his Disciples feet. This action of Christ's, troubles
Expositors, some would have it before Supper, (expreslely contrary to
Scripture) some after the Paschall Supper, some after all. But let who will say
it, they shall never be able to prove, that it was an ordinary usage amongst
the Jews, either in supper time, or after supper, for the Mr. to rise, and
wash his guests feet, much less at the Passover. Though washing of feet were
usual amongst them before they sat down, when they came newly into the
house, and washing of hands usual at the Passcover, as I said before.

This action of Christ's therefore, was questionless extraordinary, to teach
his Disciples those two great lessons of Humility and Charity. I am apt to
believe that whereas the Jews at their Passover, when they were sat, and had
drank their first cup of Wine, washed their hands. So when they came to this
action, (to which Christ was not tied, being no piece of the Law) he rose up
and washed all their feet, and this was instead of the fourth action in the
Passover, before observed in the Jewish order; for the third, the drinking the
first cup of wine, whether they did it or no, is not much material, if they
did, no Evangelist speaks of it.

According to the Jewish order in the next place, the table was furnished,
during the time of Christ's washing their feet, and their setting dishes on the
Table, we may conceive all that spiritual discourse passed betwixt Christ and
his Disciples; which you have, John 13.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17 verses. Whether Judas his feet were washed or no, is not expressed. Surely he
was there.

Though the Author of that piece, Cypr. op. l. de ablutione pedum sub initio.
in Cyprian's works de ablutione pedum denies it, yet I can see no ground for
it.

The Table being thus furnished; the next thing we observed in the Jewish
order, was the Officiators taking some of the Sallet, and sopping it, and
giving to the rest. This you have excellently described by St John, chap.
13.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. With which agrees, Mat. 26. v. 21, 22,
23, 24, 25. Mar. 14. v. 18, 19, 20, 21. Luke 22. v. 21, 22, 23. Christ first
tells them, one of them should betray him, to fulfill that Scripture, Psalm.
41.10. at this Christ was troubled. John 13.21. Then the Disciples were
troubled looking one upon another; Peter beckens to John, who leaned nearest
Christ's breast, to ask him who it was, he asks, Christ would give no other
answer, but it is he to whom I shall give the sop when I have dipped it; upon
this he dips it, and gives it to Judas; upon this, Jud is asks, Is it I
Master, Mat. 26. he says, thou say it, John 13.27. Satan presently enters
into him. Christ bids him, what he did do quickly, none knew wherefore he said
it, says John, which makes Grotius think, he whispered Judas when he said,
Thou say it, John 13.30. Judas having received the sop, went out
immediately, hitherto, this Paschall society were only, 1, Met at night. 2.
Sat down. 3. Possibly the first cup of Wine was drank off. (if they drank it
all) 4. In stead of washing their hands the Lord had washed their feet. 5. The
Table was furnished. 6. The Herbs sopt in the sour sauce were given. -- Now
is Judas gone out; suppose about seven or eight of the clock at night, the same
night which followed the afternoon, in which the Elders and Priests had been
consulting to murder Christ; nor do I believe that till now, Judas had
compacted with them; for it was at supper the Devil put these thoughts first
into Judas heart. John 13.2. and Luke 22.3. Judas his going to the High
Priests, is made a subsequent action to Satan's entering into him, which says
John was upon his receiving the sop. I know in the other three Evangelists, his
going to them, is set before. But I believe it an histerology, they not so
punctually, as John, des^ribing the former part of the supper: It was but in
the afternoon, that these wretches were at loss, and taking counsel how to
take Christ, which (as Gerard notes, to another purpose) argued Judas had not
then compacted with them. But now, Judas knew where he was, he leaves them at
supper; the Chief Priests were in the same City, he goes to them, and quickly
makes a bargain, and comes again to take him.

In the mean time, this Pas^hall society, Christ and the eleven Disciples went
on with the supper. Their next actions, according to the Jewish order, was for
the Officiator to break the Cake, and give a part, and reserve a part, then to
drink a second cup of Wine, then to eat their Lamb: Of all this, there is
nothing in the four Evangelists; John breaking off with the sop, and the other
saying only they sat down and did eat; Except we should say those words, Luke
22.15. were spoken by Christ, while they did eat the Lamb. -- Their next work
was to drink a third cup of Wine; this in all probability, is that first cup
Luke mentions, Luke 22.17. To which the Apostle alludes, 1 Cor. 10.16. Their
next work was the eating of the unleavened bread, reserved for the Aphicomen,
the last bit, and their last, the drinking of the fourteenth cup of Wine, the
latter was when the supper was done. Now, this bread and cup Christ did eat and
drink and with them instituted his supper; these are not mentioned by John,
because so sully expressed by Luke, Mark, and Matthew. Thus you see, the supper
was but one, and perfectly reported by John, and the other Evangelists; John
reporting the first part, the other the second; you see also how many pieces of
the Jewish order, are evident in the celebration.

Whether I have caught the bird or no, I know not, confident I am, my Reader
will judge I have been long enough beating the bush, and if this notion prove
true, it will follow.

1. That Judas had not so much as compacted with the Chief Priests, when his
hand was with Christ on the Table.

2 That he was gone before the Lord instituted his supper; yea

3. That he was not there at the eating of the Paschall Lamb.

I have but proposed my thoughts, and shall submit to better reason, having
learned to attribute nothing (...), and being prone to think the worse of any
notion which I judge my own, I know I dissent in this, from very many Holy and
Learned men. But secondly, it is no matter of Faith or Practice, but a piece of
Order in Holy Story. 2. I see they cannot agree amongst themselves 3. I shall
peaceably dissent. 4. I shall keep an ear open for better proof against me;
in the mean time I desire my Readers Charity, they are some of the Scriptures
(...) I have been enquiring into, some Histerologies must be allowed in the
Gospel.

I see not, but with such allowance, this my sense may pass.

And now to shut up this discourse of Judas.

I could wish our Masters of the opposite persuasion, would allow us but the
favor, that ordinary Fencing Masters will allow their scholars: First they
will take up one weapon, and try them with one while here, another while there;
if they see they cannot hit them with this trick nor the other, they will lay
down that weapon, and take another, not the same again, to no purpose, but
merely to tire out their Scholars.

For this weapon of Judas his being at the Sacrament, with which they think to
knock suspension, Erastus tried it at Beza, Beza defended himself. Mr Prin
tried it at Mr Gillespy, Mr Gillespy defended the cause, that he never touched
it with a Cudgel. Now Mr Humfry has got it up, and Dr Drake defended himself
the same way which Gillespy and Beza had done. Mr Humfry has made never a new
stroke. Let us lay down this weapon: let us hear what they say to prove Judas
was there.

Object 1. They all sat down together. This does not prove they all rose up
together.

Object 2. Christ says, the hand of him that betrayeth me is on the Table.]
That is at the sop, but John 13.30. immediately upon that Judas went out, which
was before the Sacrament.

Object 3. Christ speaks nothing, John 13. of the Sacrament] But he speaks of
the Passover, which was before it, and says at the beginning of that, he went
out.

Object 4. O but we have many Authors of our side, that he was there; Origin,
Cyprian, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Victor, Theodoret, Remigius, Paschasius,
Oecumenius, Algerus, etc. 1. This question they did not speak purposely to. 2.
God knows whether the places quoted, be spurious or no. 3. We have matches for
them too. Dionysius Areopagita, Maximus, Pachimeres, Ammonius, Talianus,
Innocentius, Hilary, Salmeron, Kellet, Mariana, Gerard, Turrianus, Barradus,
Danaeus, Musculus, Piscator; Cum multis aliis quos nunc perscribere longum est.
Let Us have done therefore with this Cudgel, and blot no more paper with saying
what has been said over and over, and over again, and can never be cleared on
our adversaries side. I have tried something on our side. I shall add no more
to this Argument: I conclude there are no precepts to command, nor presidents
to warrant general admissions of scandalous persons, though not
excommunicated. -- Ergo.

CHAP. VII. Containing a sixth Argument, drawn from the duty incumbent upon
the Officers of the Church, to keep the fellowship of the Church pure.
I am come now to a sixth ARGUMENT.

I still keep my principal syllogism, which was this;

If the Officers of a Church may not lawfully admit some to the Sacrament, who
are not as yet de facto excommunicated, then they may law fully suspend some
from it. But -- Ergo.

MY sixth Argument to prove,

If there may be some in the Church, not yet cast out, with whom the communion
of the Church in the Lords Supper cannot be pure; then there may be some in the
Church not yet excommunicated, whom the Officers may not without sin, admit
to the Lords Supper.

But there may be some in the Church, (not yet excommunicated) with whom the
communion of the Church in that Ordinance cannot be pure. -- Ergo.

I will prove the major first, then the minor.

First for the major.

If it be the duty and business of the Officers of the Church, to keep the
communion of the Church, then it is their duty to keep its fellowship pure in
that Ordinance; and consequently not to admit such to it, with whom the
communion of the Church cannot be pure.

This proposition stands upon these foundations.

1. That it is the duty of the Officers of a Church, to keep the fellowship of
the Church pure. This none will deny, that is but mentis compos, if any be
inclined to deny it, he should do well, first to think to what purpose the rod
of discipline is else put into their hands. 2. How to expound 1 Cor. 5.7, 13.
and those many other Texts in Scripture, which look this way.

2. That it is their especial duty, to keep the fellowship of the Church, as
to this Ordinance, pure.

As this was proved before, upon the opening of the 1 Cor. 5.8. So upon the
concession of the former, it is no less clear from reason. It is apparent,
that of all other Ordinances, this Ordinance alone is appointed for such as
have something of Grace in them. The Word is called the bread of life, and it
is to be offered to dead souls to quicken them. Heathens were ever admitted
to hear, those who are the profanest persons, are the objects of Discipline,
the excommunicate may, and ought to be admonished as Brethren. I know not
wherein the Officers of the Church can have a work to keep the communion of a
Church pure, if not in this Ordinance, and as to this, which the Scripture
plainly says, cannot be partaked of worthily, without examining our selves,
and being able to discern the Lords Body.

For the minor proposition, That there may be some in the Church, not yet cast
out, with whom the fellowship of the Church in this Ordinance cannot be pure; I
prove.

If there may be some in the Church, who apparently are not fit subjects to
receive this holy thing, then there may be some in the Church with whom the
fellowship of the Church in this Ordinance cannot be pure.

But there may be some in the Church, who apparently are not fit subjects to
receive this holy thing. -- Ergo.

He that denies the major must maintain, that a communion of such as are
appearingly fit for it, and appearingly notoriously unfit for it, and unable to
it, is a pure communion, and by that time he has proved that he may have
proved, that a communion made up of a Saint, a Hog, a Dog, a mad man and a
fool, is yet a pure communion. Surely the appearing purity of a communion in
this Ordinance, lies in the appearing capacity and worthiness of all to
receive it.

But (I say) there may some in the Church, who apparently are not fit subjects
to receive this holy thing.

This I easily prove. Those that cannot examine themselves, that cannot
discern the Lords body, or that do partake of the cup of Devils, are
apparently not fit subjects to receive the Lords Supper. 1 Cor. 11.28, 29. 1
Cor. 10.21.

But there may be such in the Church. -- Ergo.

Object. Mr Humfry's vind. p. 35.36.
But Mr Humfry tells us this is false Logic, to argue from men's inability to
our duty. 2. Most men are incapable to hear and pray; yet they must do both.
3. Every man must do what he can. 4. There is a difference between worthy
receiving, and receiving worthily.

To this Doctor Drake has sufficiently answered, Dr Drake's Bar, etc. p. 114,
115, 116, 117. Scripture Rail, p. 92, 93, 94. etc
page 114, 115, 136, 117, 118. And Mr Palmer, etc. 62, 93, 94.

Dr Drake tells him, that visible unfitness is the rule of suspension.

Now, with Mr Humfrie's leave, we must say, that it is good Logic to argue,
from the visible inability, unworthiness, and unfitness, of the Person that
would receive the Sacrament, to our duty, who are to give it: Otherwise, for
ought I know, we might feed Hogs with those Mysteries. Will any one (not mad)
say, That it is not the duty of us, whom God has betrusted with the dispensing
of those Mysteries, not to give them to such as are apparently such as God has
declared unable, unfit, and unworthy to receive them? Let any but consider,
that we are but Trustees with Gods Ordinances, and not to deliver them out to
any without our Masters Order, such as he gives us command to give them to, and
then this will follow, according to Mr Humfrie's Doctrine: Either,

1. That God has given us order, to give them to those whom he forbad, under
pain of damnation to receive them; nay, who have the Marks of such as cannot
take them. Or secondly,

2. That it is Gods will they should take whom his Word declares to be such as
cannot take them, and if they do, they are guilty of the body and blood of
Christ. Or thirdly,

3. That which we say, That if there be any such in the Church they ought by
the Officers to be suspended.

The two former are little less than blasphemy, implying an inconsistency of
the Edicts of the Divine Will each with other.

But Mr Humfry has a trick for us; Rejoinder, page 159.
For in his rejoinder he tols us, it is not a visibility of real worthiness
is the ground of admission, but the visibil^ty of Relative worthiness; (it is
well he asks pardon for that new term,) though we understand not the Notion,
yet the Interpreter he has sent along with it makes it speak thus: It is men's
being within the external Covenant; Baptized, and in the Church that gives
them the right, etc. I always thought this had been the (...),

Whether all baptized persons might be admitted to the Lords Table, though
ignorant, or scandalous, if not cast out of the Church? Or whether, if such,
they ought to be suspended?

We say, they ought to be suspended not admitted, and argue from their
unworthiness their real unworthiness, and incapacity visibly appearing to our
duty in denying the Sacrament to them; What says Mr Humfry to this?

Says he, they are not unworthy relatively, though they be visibly unworthy
really. Strange Language, say we, what spells it? Says he, they are Baptized,
and not excommunicated; if this be not petere (...), I know not what is; for we
brought our Argument to prove, that a visibility of real unworthiness made a
relative unworthiness. So that Mr Humfry says this in short: They are not
unworthy, because they are not unworthy. For what he says else upon this Head,
I shall not meddle with it, it little concerns my business. I leave him to
his proper Adversaries.

Object. But will some say, by this Argument you will conclude, that the
presence of scandalous persons pollutes those who are worthy, and pollutes the
Ordinance, and this is ridiculous. This Mr Humfry and Mr Boatman both laugh at.
So did Erastus, their Master. Mr Humfry 's vind. p. 77. Erasti theses, thesi.
67. Beza l. de excom. and Presbyt. 68.


Sol. To this Beza answered long since.

It is an easy thing thing to make a man of straw, and then pelt him with
stones.

First, I know none says, that the Ordinance is polluted: I think that
predicate cannot in any case be properly and strictly predicated of a divine
institutions the Ordinance is holy, and though it may be abused and profaned,
yet it is not capable of intrinsecall pollution.

Secondly, It is vanity to say, that the presence of a scandalous person can
defile a private Member, who has discharged his duty toward him, and toward
God. Christians have incumbent upon them, 1. A duty toward God. 2. Toward
their Brethren; if a Communicant has examined and prepared himself, and
discharged his duty toward scandalous persons, viz. 1. telling them of it. 2.
Then taking two or three with him, and admonishing them. 3. Then informing the
Officers of the Church; I believe such a Christian may lawfully communicate
with a scandalous person, it is nothing can defile him but sin in not doing his
duty. But with Mr Humfrie's leave, and Mr Boatmans too, that Christian who
knowingly partakes with scandalous sinners (not having done this duty to them)
is defiled, not by partaking with them, but not having done their duty to them
before; where by the way we see what snares these Patrons of promiscuous
Communion run their godly Communicants into; when it may be for one godly
person they have ten scandalous communicate with them. How impossible is it
they should do that duty which is requisite from them to discharge their own
souls, without the doing of which they cannot without sin communicate with
them.

Mr Humfry heales the wound of the Daughter of the Lords people slightly,
Rejoinder, page 263.
when he says, If thy conscience tells thee it is a sin thou art to repent of
it, by resolving to take the next opportunity to do it, and so come.

1. So then, not doing our duty, in order to scandalous persons, is sin or not
sin, according as Conscience tells us. This comes up to the Ranters Atheism,
Nothing is sin but what a man thinks sin. I should have thought that that If
should have been lest out, for it is plainly our duty, Mat. 18.18. and the
neglect our s^n.

2. I doubt whether a man, lying under the conscience of any sin against his
Neighbor, can lawfully partake till he has done what in him lies to satisfy.
Suppose a man has stolen, I should think he must not only resolve, but, if
he be able, make restitution before he comes to the Lords Table.

3. It is a question, whether any lying under the guilt of any sin, not
quotidiana incursionis, be bound in duty to come to the Lords Table before he
has evidenced his repentance by the contrary practice. To me the negative is
out of question.

But in the last place,

Though the Ordinance be not polluted by the presence of a scandalous sinner,
nor the conscience of the worthy Communicant, who has prepared his own heart,
and done what in him lies toward the reformation, and suspension of the
scandalous;

3. Yet the Officers of the Church are polluted, because they have not done
their duty, for they should have admonished him, and being under censure
suspended him till he had satisfied the Church. Lastly,

4. The Fellowship of the Church in general is polluted; the Apostle teaches
us, 1 Cor. 5. that the continuing of one scandalous person in the bosom of the
Church leavens the whole Lump; the neglect of a private member redounds indeed
but to his own guilt, and defilement, but the neglect of the Officers of a
Church redounds to the guilt and defilement of the whole Church, and justly. 1.
Partly, because they are the representative part of the Church. 2. Because it
is in the Churches power to remove them; if not in the power of a
Congregationall Church, yet in the power of a Synodicall Church. But I shall
enlarge no further on this Argument.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein, by a seventh Argument, the lawfulness of suspension is
proved, because there can lie no Obligation upon the Officers of the Church to
give the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to such as visibly are not bound to
Receive.
ARGUMENT 7.
Either it is lawful for the Officers of the Church to deny the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper to such as they find ignorant, and scandalous, and impenitent.
Or they are bound to give it to such. But they are not bound to give it to any
such. Ergo,

THe major is unquestionably evident. The Minor is to be proved, which I prove
thus:

The Officers of the Church are not bound to administer the Ordinance to those
who they know are not bound to receive it.

But grossly ignorant, and impenitent scandalous sinners are visibly such as are
not bound to receive it, -- Ergo.

I shall first open and prove the Major, and then come to the Minor.

1. I grant that the Minister of the Gospel may be bound to administer an
Ordinance to such a one as is not bound to receive it; because he may otherwise
appear to him, and his unworthiness may be hid from him. We are bound to hold
out the Promise as an object of faith to all, who appear to have their hearts
smitten with the sense of sin, though some of them be Hipocrites, we know not
who are so.

2. But it seems strange to me (considering that a Ministers giving the
Sacrament, and the peoples receiving are relate acts) that a Minister should be
bound to give to such as he knows are not bound to receive; can any one think
that there should lie an Obligation upon us to preach to our people, if it
could be proved that there lay no Obligation upon them to hear? Now I assume,

But grossly ignorant, and impenitent scandalous sinners are such as visibly
appear not bound to receive the Lords Supper. -- Ergo.

That a grossly ignorant, and scandalous impenitent sinner (while such) is
bound to receive, then he is bound; To make himself guilty of the body and
blood of Christ. To eat and drink his own damnation; To run upon the hazard
of being made sick and weak, and falling asleep; which are all strange things
for a man to be bound in conscience unto.

Let none think to avoid this Argument by saying, they are bound first to
repent, and then to receive. So that their sin does not lie in receiving, but
in not repenting.

This is plainly (...). The question is, whether the ignorant, and impenitent,
(while such) if not cast out) are bound to receive, and it is a begging the
question to say, they sin in not repenting, but not in receiving; In receiving
(says the Apostle) they make themselves guilty of the body and blood of
Christ, and they eat and drink their own damnation.

And surely if such sinners be not bound to receive, the Officers of the Church
cannot be bound to give the Ordinance to them, the ceasing of their Obligation
in reason must also suspend his.

CHAP. IX. Wherein an Eighth and Ninth Argument are brought to prove that
Suspension distinct from Excommunication is justifiable from Scripture, and
sound Reason.
ARGUMENT 8.
If none may be suspended from the Sacrament but those who are Excommunicated,
then none must be kept away but those who are contumacious.

But some may be kept away that are not Contumacious. -- Ergo.

THe Major is plain: 1. From Scripture, Mat. 18. none must be accounted as an
Heathen, or a Publican, but he who refuses to hear the Church: Thus also
Divines generally determine. So Bonaventure, Estius, Aquinas, Suarez, Durandus;
besides a numberless number of Protestant Divines.

The Minor only needs proof.

1. Surely those that are under admonition ought to be kept away, though as yet
they declare no Contumacy, and it be uncertain whether they will or no.

2. Suppose one should come to the Minister, the morning he were to receive,
and blaspheme Christ, and tell him he came for nothing but to abuse the Church,
ought this man to be admitted think we? Suppose one should come drunk, shall
he be admitted? Mr Humfry says no; what Mr Boatman thinks in that case I
cannot tell; if he shall not then there is Suspension distinct from
Excommunication. Suppose a Minister should know one of his Communicants had
committed Murder, Theft, Incest, Whoredom the night before, according to M
Boatmans Doctrine he must be admitted to the Lords Table, for Suspension of any
person, not Excommunicated, is a Pharisaicall dream; Suppose a Minister, upon
examination, found that his Communicant did not know whether Christ were God or
Man, a Man or a Woman, nor any thing of the Story of the Gospel, must he be
admitted too? He is neither Turk, nor Jew, nor Pagan, nor Excommunicated
person. -- Ergo, He is holy and must come. A Doctrine sure that every one, who
has any thing of God in him, will see the folly and filth of; and which no
sober, pious, or learned man ever yet durst undertake to defend; and it is a
shame it should be named amongst Christians.

If profane, scandalous persons, though Circumcised, and not cast out of the
Jewish Church, nor legally unclean, were yet to be debarred from some
Ordinances, and the Passover, then such, though Baptized, and not
Excommunicated, may be suspended from the Lords Supper.

But profane scandalous persons, though Circumcised, and not cast out of the
Jewish Church, nor legally uncleanes yet were to be debarred from the
Passover, and other public Ordinances.

The strength of the consequence appears, not only in the Analogy which is
betwixt the Passover and the Lords Supper: But also in our Adversaries
continual arguing against us from a supposition of a general admission to the
Passover. This Argument was the best shast in Erastus his quiver, Erasti
theses these. 12, 13. Mr Humfry 's vind. p. 4.
and the very best Mr Humfry has.

The Minor therefore only needs proof with those with whom we have to deal.
And for the proof of that

Beza proves it against Erastus from Ezra 6.21. Beza de Excom. p. 19, 20.
where none did eat the Passover but such as were separated from the filth of
the Heathen of the Land to seek the Lord; And from 2 Chronicles. 23.19. where
Jehojadah, restoring the Worship of God, set Porters to keep out of the
Sanctuary those who were unclean in anything. Mr Giltespy proves it against Mr
Prin, Mr Gillespie's Aarons rod, etc. l. 1. c. 9.
and Erastus too: 1. From the testimonies of Philo and Josephus; and answers
the two objections from Luke 18.11, 12, 13. and Joh. 8.2, 3. and proves it by
seven Arguments in that Chapter; and follows it, Chap. 10.11, 12. in the
twelfth Chapter he proves it by fourteen Arguments, which Mr Humfry should have
done well to have answered, before he had told us so confidently that all were
admitted to the Passover. Dr Drake's Bar, etc. p. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
M Palmer, etc. answ. to Mr Humfry vind. Presb Govern. p. 62.
Dr Drake has likewise sufficiently proved it against Mr Humfry. Mr Palmer,
etc. has done the like from Number. 15.30, 31. Ezra 10.8. Joh. 9.22. Ez. 22.26.
Ezekiel. 44.7, 9, 13. The Province of London prove it from 2 Chronicles. 23.19. Ez.
44.7, 8. Lev. 10.10. Ez. 22.26.

I do not think it ingenuous, wittingly to pass by any thing I hear objected
against an Argument, therefore though for the maine I leave Mr Humfry to his
proper Adversary, yet because he comes acrosse me, here I must give him a
meeting.

First he adds to his Argument (from his supposed general admission to the
Passover, Mr Humfrie's rejoinder, p. 43, 44, 45, 46, 47.
) the example of Judas; but besides that I have before proved he was not
scandalous, I have also said enough to make a rational man believe he was not
there. Dr Drake had argued a concesso. Mr Humfry granted, that those who were
legally unclean were not to come. Dr Drake asks the reason, why? Surely
because they polluted holy things. Mr Humfry says, he would not answer so
sillily; well, what will this wise man answer I wist? He tells us, Because it
was Gods positive command they should not come. But this is too short: For let
a Christian but enquire further, Why should the Lord command, that one who is a
leper, who has touched a dead body etc. should not come to his Ordinance?
Surely his reason must tell him, because he is an holy and pure God, and will
be worshipped in a clean and pure manner. And can we think that a pure God
should determine him, who had a leprous sore upon him, unfit for his Sanctuary,
etc. and yet admit him as worthy, who was a profane swearer, blasphemer, etc.
that he who had had Nocturnam pollutionem involuntariam was to be judged
unclean, and the same God should judge him clean who had polluted himself
with an Harlot in the night?

A second place which Mr Humfry would answer is 2 Chronicles. Page 45.
23.19. and he tells us, that neither the Passover, nor Suspension, nor Moral
uncleanness are there spoken of.

1. Whether the Passover only be there spoken of is nothing to the business;
There were Porters set to keep some that were not excommunicated from the Gates
of the Lords house. So that Suspension of some from some Ordinances who were
not excommunicated is there proved.

2. Mr Humfry boldly says, they were not to keep out the morally unclean; the
Text says, they were to keep out the unclean Lecal Dabar in any thing; so
that if there were such a thing as moral uncleanness, and such persons as
morally unclean persons, they were to keep them out. Nor is it any thing to
the purpose that Mr Humfry says, the Levites in such a concourse could not try
and examine them, for by the same rule they should not have kept out the
legally unclean; but surely those words signify something, they were
therefore doubtless tried and judged before, (for it was the Priests, not the
Levites work to judge or try the legally unclean.) But what Mr Humfry says
in the last place, that the Levites could not hinder the unclean from eating
the Passover, for it was eaten in private houses, Either argues he has a mind
to cheat his credulous Reader, or that he was not so well acquainted with the
Jewish Customs as he might have been. It is true, Dr Lightfoots Temple
service, c. 12.
the Passover was to be eaten in private houses, but it was to be first killed
in the Temple, where the fat was to be burned, and the blood sprinkled; and if
the Levites kept them from coming to kill it, and to sacrifice it, I think
they kept them from eating it as a Passover too; they might eat a Lamb
indeed in their own, but no Paschall Lamb.

As to the maine places to prove that there was a Law to seclude the morally
unclean from the Passover, Ezra 6.21. Ez. 44.7, 8. Deuteronomy. 23.18. a minori ad
majus. Jer. 7.9, 10, 11. Psalm. 118.19, 20. Psalm. 15.1. as they are urged by Mr.
Gillespy, page 90, 91. Ez. 22.26. Hag. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. (which proves that
moral wickedness was uncleanness then as well as now.) Mr Humfry has the
discretion to say nothing to them. But I have said enough to establish this
Argument.

CHAP. X. Wherein some other Arguments are mentioned, but not largely insisted
upon.
THese are but some of those many Arguments brought by the learned and eminent
Servants of God, both in this Generation, and also in those before us, to prove
the divine right of this Ordinance. I will name two or three more which have
been brought by others, not insisting upon them, because I think these are
enough, and possibly some of them may be more disputable, and not generally
allowed, by those who are (...) with me in this point.

It is sin in a Minister to declare those one visible body who are not one body
visibly; But scandalous sinners are not one visible body with visible Saints;
and he that gives the Lords Supper declares those to whom he gives it to be one
visible body. -- Ergo.

This Argument holy Mr Buroughs urges in his book, called Gospell-Worship, it
is founded on 1 Cor. 10.17. Mr Gillespie's Aatons Rod, l. 3. c 7 p. 425. V.
etiam Hieron. Z^nen. Epist. l. 1. in epistola quae inscribitur ad illust. Prin
Fredericum de excommunicatione.
and (says Mr Gillespy) I shall never be persuaded that the Apostle Paul would
say of himself and the Saints at Corinth, we are one body with known
Idolaters, Fornicators, Drunkards, or the like. Those two eminent servants of
God thought there was something in this Argument; there are these three
Questions in it.

1. Whether the Minister declares all to whom he gives the Supper to be one
visible body? That the Apostle determines, 1 Cor. 10.17.

2. Whether it be a sin in a Minister to declare those one visible body who are
not so? Reason will easily determine that affirmatively.

3. Whether visibly scandalous sinners be one visible body with visible Saints?

Visibly scandalous sinners have a visible different head; But it is a
question, whether that distinction of Membra in Ecclesia, and Membra Ecclesiae
has any thing in it; and whether Christ be called the head of the visible
Church, only as it is taken conjunctim, or viritim of every member in it, and
that will bring us to question, whether the Church, as to the community of it,
be Corpus homogeneum, or het erogeneum. I shall not entangle my self with
these disputes, but shall desire (...) as to this Argument, and leave it to
wiser heads to consider.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper is not to be given to any who are not
Christ's Disciples;

But scandalous sinners are none of Christ's Disciples. -- Ergo.

This is Mr P. Goodwins Argument, Evangelicall Communicant. p. 5, 6, 7, 8. V.
Zanchium in ep. praed.
and I refer the Reader to him to make it out; there are these two things to be
questioned in it:

1. Whether Christ's example in admission be a rule of ours.

2. Whether Christ admitted any such Disciples as were actually scandalous? I
think I have proved the contrary.

Those who if they were Heathens might not be baptized, V. Zach. Urs. doct.
Christ. p. 2. de clavibus q 3. sect. 11.
though they be baptized, and in a Church, ought not to be admitted to the
Lords Supper.

The reason is this: 1. Mr Humfry himself confesses; In adult is eadem est
ratio utriusque Sacramenti. 2. Besides, it is against reason to say the
contrary.

But those who are ignorant and scandalous, if they were Heathens, should not
be baptized. -- Ergo.

I do not say, the children of such ought not, there is another reason for
them; but that they should not, has been granted by the Universal judgment
and practice of the Primitive Church. Erast. Thesis. 14 Mr Humfrie's vind. p.
10. Beza de excom. p. 23. Aarons rod, l. 3. c. 16. Mr. Palmer, etc. against Mr
Humfry, p. 49. Dr Drakes bar to free admission p. 32, 33. Rutherford's divine
right of Presbyteries, c. 5. q. 2. Arg. 13.
I know Erastus and Mr Humfry tell us, John baptized all who came, yea some
whom he calls Vipers; but Beza (long since) and Gillespy more lately mind
Erastus, that John baptized none but such as confessed their sins, Mat. 3. Mr.
Palmer etc. and Dr Drake have told Mr Humfry too as much, to which he has
discreetly replied nothing.

This is one of that (incomparably learned) Mr Rutherford's Arguments in his
Divine right of Presbyteries.

Strong meat belongs to those who are (...), who have made proficiency in the
ways of God, and are of full age, who by reason of an habit have their senses
exercised to discern good and evil, Heb. 5. w.

But the Sacrament is strong meat. Therefore it does not belong to those who
are Babes in knowledge, and consequently (though of the house) not to be given
to them by him, who is the Lords Steward to give all in the Family their
Portion in the due season. Luke 12.42.
The major is a general proposition given by the Apostles. Requirit igitur
coena domini, quatenus est mystica, convivas, qui sensibus exercitatis iuterna
mysteria ab eo quod oculis patet, distinguere valint. Musc. Loc. Com. de coena.
A Physical maxim applied in a spiritual case, and holds as well to any
strong meat as that which he there speaks of, for he does not say, This strong
meat.

That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper is strong meat is evident.

That meat which is of hardest digestion, and concoction, and requires the
strongest operations of the stomach to turn it into nourishment, and which,
not duly digested, proves most pernicious to the body, is strong meat in a
physical sense.

But such is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

The spiritual stomach must be more extraordinarily prepared for it, 1 Cor.
11.28. It is not tasted nor digested well without the knowing of the greatest
mysteries in Religion in some measure, viz. the union of Christ with the
Father. 2. The Union of the two natures in the person of Christ. 3. The
mystical Union of the soul with Christ. 4. The mysterious exercise of faith
in applying the Soul to the Promise, and the Promise to the Soul, while it
sits at that Table. Not duly received it proves most pernicious: The Soul
seals its damnation, becomes guilty of the body and blood of Christ, eats
judgment to it self.

It is unlawful to partake of other men's sins, Ephesians. 5.7. Mr Ambrose his media.
p. 260 Rutherford in his Divine right, etc. c. 5. q. 2. and in his peaceable
plea. cap. 12. Gillespie's Aarone rod. l. 3. P. Goodwins Evang. Com.
Vindication of the jus divinum of Presbytery.


But he that gives the Sacrament wittingly to an ignorant or scandalous person
partakes with him in his sin. -- Ergo.

This Argument is urged by Learned Rutherford, Reverend Gillespy, (in the two
sore-mentioned books) and holy Mr Ambrose, to whom I refer my Reader for fuller
proof.

Many Arguments more might be produced in this cause, but the truth is, scarce
any but what are to be found either in Mr Rutherford, or Mr Gillespy, or the
London Ministers Vindication, or Mr Philip Goodwin, or Mr Ambrose. M Ambrose
his Media, p. 260.
If any one has a mind to write on this subject against us, they should deal
ingenuously to answer all the Arguments produced in those books against them;
and when they have done that, it is like that either the Reverend Authors of
those books, or some of their Brethren, will undertake their vindication. But
if they take Mr Humfrie's course, to publish books to divulge opinions,
confuted long since by solid Arguments, and take no pains to answer any thing,
or if any thing, first to make their Adversaries Arguments weak by
curtilation, and imperfect proposal of them, and then to scoff instead of
answering. Or think it enough, with Mr Boatman, to cry down suspension as a
Pharisaicall dream, and a Pharisaicall way of dealing with people, and the
Patrons of it as Usurpers of an undue authority, intruders upon Christ's Office,
Pharisees, Bedlams, Hotspurs, Spiritually proud, Hypocrites. This is but
barking, and grinning for want of teeth fit to bite; and thus they may vapor a
little under the protection of an impudent forehead, and proclaim their want
of learning and breeding too to the world, and show their teeth against Gospel
reformation, and deceive some poor filly souls, first led captive with their
own lusts; but they will not deserve any sober man's taking further notice of
them, then when he goes to God to say on the behalf of their poor souls,
Father forgive them they know not what they do.

See many more Arguments shortly propounded in learned Zanchies Epistle ad
Fredericum tertium, de Excommunicatione, as also in Vrsini compendium doctrinae
Christianae, p. 2. de clavibus, q. 3. sect. 11.

CHAP. XI.
QUEST. 2.
Whether ministerial, or privative Suspension be deducible from Scripture yea
or no.

I Opened the terms of this Question before. In short it is thus:

Whether in no case it be lawful for the Pastor of the Church (not having a
formed Presbytery,) if he knows any of his Church to be ignorant or scandalous,
to deny to them the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, (though they be not
excommunicated, nor juridically censured.)

Before I speak to this Question (that I may not be mis-interpreted) I will
crave leave to premise some few things.

1. I grant, that the most regular and orderly way of administering the
Ordinance of the Lords Supper in Congregations, is by the trial and judging of
all the members by a Presbytery, consisting of the Minister and Ruling Elders:
I look upon Elders as an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, and Officers equally
betrusted with the Minister in all acts of jurisdiction, and to a regular and
ordinary suspension questionless an act of Jurisdiction is required.

2. I plead not for the sole power of Jurisdiction to be in the hands of a
single Minister, this were to set up an Episcopacy, yea, more than an
Episcopacy (almost a papal power) in every Parish; as I think Ruling Elders
are equally with him betrusted with the power of Jurisdiction and Government,
so I think they must join with him in juridicall suspending, etc.

3. I speak this and the sourth as my own private judgment, and shall not go
about to impose such a persuasion upon others, not knowing what upon further
thoughts, I ^y self might judge in these cases, but at present only thus
limiting my question.
I plead not for Ministers power in such places where are persons fit to be
chosen as Officers who shall refuse the Office or people who shall refuse to
choose, I think in such a case a Minister may lawfully forbear the
administering the Ordinance, and giving Gospell-Priviledges to those who despise
any Gospell-Ordinances, or shall deny any Gospel duty; yea, I cannot tell
whether a Minister could discharge a good conscience in administering at all to
such a people till the Lord had changed their hearts, and convinced them of
their duty, and their sin in refusing it, being a scandal to all well ordered
Churches.

4. I would not plead strongly for his power in this thing in a Congregation
who had none fit to choose, but were situated so nigh to some rightly
organized Church that they could conveniently go and partake there; I rather
think it the Ministers duty in such cases to persuade those who in his
Congregation are fit for the Ordinance to join themselves to such a Church,
(as to that Ordinance) and were it my own case, (if I saw that Church walked
orderly, and kept the Ordinances pure) I my self would not only persuade my
people so to join, but my self rather so join than set up any extraordinary
course.

5. In case there were a formed Classis of Triers, either established by the
Civil power, or by a voluntary agreement of the godly Ministers in a County,
which used to meet so near the Congregation that the godly people could go and
submit to their trial, I do prefer this before a Ministers single Examination
and Judgment.

But in such a case as this now Where there is in a Congregation a godly
Minister, and a competent number of godly people to make up a Communion at the
Lords Table, and these people are willing to do what in them lies to put
themselves in order, and to choose Elders, and wish from their souls that they
had some to choose, but at present they have none, nor are like to have any
suddenly, nor are nigh any Organized Church with which they can enjoy the
Ordinance, nor any Classis to which they can approve themselves: Whether now,
in such a case as this the Minister may not administer the Ordinance, and not
only admonish the ignorant and scandalous to keep away, but take account of his
peoples knowledge, and take all due courses to be informed of their lives, and
if he finds any ignorant and scandalous, that, notwithstanding admonition, will
presume to come whither he may not; yea, whether he ought not to deny the
Elements to him?

6. I heartily wish, that either by the Civil power, or a voluntary act of the
people, parochial Congregations were so united, that in every Precinct there
might be found persons fit for Officers.

7. I think in such cases a Minister should act with a great deal of
prudence; I would in such a case do nothing (as near as I could) without the
satisfaction of the Community. I mean, not being acted by their vote, but
stating the business to them first at some meeting, and if it were possible
gaining their consent and approbation.

And these things premised:

I humbly conceive, that a Minister of the Gospel in such a cause, may, by
virtue of his Office, (wanting a Presbytery) deny the administration of the
Elements to any such as he shall judge ignorant, and be able to prove so
scandalous, as if he had a Presbytery, he might be juridically suspended.

I shall humbly propose my grounds for my opinion in it (which yet is not mine
alone.)

In such a case as this a Minister may either wholly omit the Ordinance, or
else administer it promiscuously to all, be they never so ignorant or
scandalous; or else thirdly by his own power thus deny it to such as he finds
so. But in such a case he may not wholly omit the administration of the
Ordinance, nor secondly administer it promiscuously. -- Ergo.

The disjunction cannot be denied, for there is no fourth expedient can be
found but the way of our dissenting brethren, (and but some of them neither)
that all the members should have power, which I can never yield to till they
can tell me whoshall be the Ruled if all be Rulers: But of my Brethren, who are
of the Presbyterian persuasion, there are two different opinions.

1. Some think, that in such a case he is bound wholly to omit the
administration till he can have a Presbytery. I must crave leave to dissent
here.

And I think Mr Jeanes has said enough to prove that the total omission of
the Ordinance in a non-presbyterated Church cannot be justifiable.

1. All Christ's Commands are to be observed in a non-presbyterated Church. Do
this, do it often, etc. are Christ Commands as well as any other.

2. Christ himself, and his Apostles, Act. 2.41. administered it in a
none-presbyterate Church.

3. Here are fit Communicants, and here is a Minister, and this is an Ordinance
of Christ for the perfecting of the Saints.

4. Christ's death ought to be remembered in a non-presbyterated Church, and the
Saints should grow in grace there as well as elsewhere.

These, and the rest of Mr Jeanes his Arguments, I must confess, do much
prevail with me to make me think that the bare want of Ruling Elders in the
Church cannot warrant a Ministers total neglect of the administration of this
Ordinance. Besides the ill consequences which would doubtless be of such an
Omission. Such as 1. Peoples running to separate Churches. 2. Christians decay
in grace, and spiritual weaknesses for want of that great Ordinance for
strength and quickening. 3. A blotting out of the memory of Christ's death, or at
least of that Ordinance out of Christians minds; these things make me conclude
it sinful for a godly Minister, who has people fit for a Communion, wholly to
omit the Ordinance. So that a Minister cannot be bound to that.

2. Nor ean a Minister be bound to administer to those whom he knows to be
ignorant and scandalous.

This most of my former Arguments prove.

1. He cannot be bound to give holy things to dogs, and cast pearls before
swine, directly contrary to that Precept, Mat. 7.

2. He cannot be bound to give it to those, whom he knows cannot drink the
Lords Cup, for then there would lie an Obligation upon him to profane the Lords
Ordinances.

3. He cannot be bound to give it to those with whom it is unlawful for him to
keep that feast, or to eat, 1 Cor. 5.8, 11.

4. He cannot be bound to declare those one body, and make those one breast who
visibly are not one body.

5. His Obligation must be from Scripture precepts or presidents: but I have
showed there are none to that purpose.

6. He cannot he bound to any act by which he is guilty of making the Communion
of the Church impure.

7. There cannot lie an Obligation upon him to give the Ordinance to those who
visibly appear to be such as are not bound to receive.

8. He cannot be bound to give the Sacrament of the Supper to such as he might
not lawfully baptize, in case they were not yet baptized.

I made good these Arguments before, and they conclude as well for ministerial
privative suspension as for positive suspension.

These two parts being such as he may not take,

1. He must either put the power of jurisdiction into the hand of the
Community, and so by their major vote, suspend, or admit, or

2. He must by his own power (during this state of the Church) put by some not
juridically censuring and suspending them, but suspending his own act as to
such persons.

The former of these he may not do.

1. For Christ never committed any such power to them: they are no Officers in
the Church.

2. That were to make Gods house an house of confusion: the body all one
member, all head to rule, etc.

It remains therefore that himself in such a case being the alone Officer of
the Church, and bound virtute officii to know the state of his Flock, and to
take care of their souls, do what in him lies: 1. To warn the ignorant and
scandalous to abstain. 2. That he deny the Sacrament to them if they presume
to come.

That now in such a case, the Minister may, and ought to take an account of his
flock, and pastorally to admonish the scandalous, and to deterr the unworthy
what he can, is easily granted me. Mr Humfry will yield this, yea, and
something more, that he may deny it to notorious sinners, such as he calls de
jure excommunicati (by which he only means such as are fit to be hanged.) Mr
Jeanes likewise will yield this, though he is not clear in allowing to the
Minister more than a doctrinall power to keep away any. But all the question
is, Whether the single Minister in such a case, if the ignorant and scandalous
person will not keep away, may deny the Ordinance to him.

1. That he cannot formally pronounce a Church censure against him I yield.

2. That he cannot take him and turn him out by head and shoulders, I grant
too.

The question therefore is narrowed up to this.

Suppose such a Minister knows one to be notoriously ignorant or scandalous,
who has given no evidence of his repentance, and this wretch, notwithstanding
his Pastors admonition of him to keep away, will yet when the day of
administration comes, press in amongst the Communicants, whether the Minister
shall sin (if he delivers it from hand to hand) in passing by such a one, and
not giving it to him, or if he delivers it at once to all, and sees such an
one there, and declares either more generally, that the Elements are only
provided for, and given unto such as have approved themselves unto him: Or, if
he thinks fit, to declare particularly, that whereas there are such and such
there whom he has found ignorant, or have been scandalous, and as yet given no
satisfaction, he does not intend them, or any of them, in his general delivery
of the Ordinance, I maintain the Negative, that he shall not sin, yea, that he
should sin if he should not do it, it being the only course he can take to
fulfill Christ's command, and not be guilty of giving holy things to dogs, etc.

To the forementioned Arguments I shall add one more.

If in such a case the Minister of the Gospel cannot show himself a faithful
Steward of Gods mysteries: except he does deny the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper to the ignorant and scandalous (though he wants an Eldership) then he
may (in case of such a defect in the Church) deny the Lords Supper to such.

But though there be an Eldership wanting in the Church, yet if the Minister
gives that Ordinance to the ignorant and Scandalous, he cannot in it show
himself a faithful steward of Gods mysteries. -- Ergo.

To prove the consequence, I shall need but prove these things:

1. That a Minister is steward of the mysteries of God.

2. That the Sacraments are some of those mysteries committed to his
Stewardship.

3. That he must be faithful in his stewardship.

1. That a minister is a steward of Gods mysteries, is clear; they are the
words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.1.

2. That the Sacraments are some of those mysteries, is clear; 1. By
considering that (...) is the known Greek word to express a Sacrament, if not
the only one. 2. From that which is generally granted, that none but the
Ministers may dispense them.

3. That they must be faithful is plain, not only first from reason, but
secondly from the express words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.2.

All the Question lies upon the Assumption:

Whether a Minister of the Gospel cannot discharge the faithfulness of a
Steward, if he delivers the Lords Supper to one that is ignorant or scandalous.

That he cannot I prove:

If the faithfulness of a Steward lies wholly as to the distribution of his
Masters goods) in this, Praeceptum natural est ut dispensator qui bona domini
dispensat sit fidelis ac prudent in dispensand^, ergo praeceptum natural est
ut non dispenset homini indigno contra voluntatem, and institutionem suidomini;
quia hoc esset contra fidelitatem, and prudentiam quam in dispensand^ debet
servare, etc. Becanus in tertia p. de sacram. in Com. cap. 5. q. 8.
that he does dispense them to such as his Master has Commanded him to give
them. 2. That he dispenses them to no other, and the Minister be a steward,
and the Sacraments the Lord his Masters goods, and he not commanded by his
Master to deliver them to the ignorant and scandalous, then he cannot show
himself a faithful steward in giving them to such.

But the Antecedent is true. -- Ergo.

To prove the Assumption I must prove these things.

That the faithfulness of a steward, as to the dealing out his Masters goods
betrusted to him to distribute, lies chiefly, if not only, in this: that he
gives them out to such, and none other but such, as his Master commands him to
give them to.

This is so evident to reason, that none can deny it but will be posed to
assign any other thing wherein he can show his faithfulness more, or so much.
Surely any man's reason will tell him, that if his Master gives him a thousand
pounds to distribut amongst such and such people, his faithfulness lies in
distributing it to such, and none but such though they ask it.

2. It is already proved, that the Minister is the Lords Steward and the
Sacraments are Christ's goods, committed to him to distribute to others.

3. It is as evident that he has no command from Christ his Master to give
them out to such as are apparently scandalous or ignorant.

Surely it were very absurd to say, that Christ should command me his Minister,
to give out his Ordinances to such as he lets me know are forbidden upon pain
of damnation to receive. Saint John says, That for such as we know have sinned
the sin against the Holy Ghost we should not pray, 1 John 5.16. Why? Because
Prayer can do him no good, because we know God will not hear our prayers: And
shall we think that we are bound by Christ's Command to administer the Lords
Supper to such as we know it to be the will of God they should not take it.
Indeed, if we do not know it, the case is otherwise; but for such as we know
cannot discern the Lords body, and such as we know are Drunkards, Fornicators,
etc. we know the Ordinance can do them no good, and we know it is the will of
God they should not take it. I shall refer it therefore to the judicious Reader
to consider, whether it can be reasonably judged that when Christ said, Dri^ke
you all of it, he means, all you, whom I have elsewhere told, that if you do
drink you shall drink your own damnation, and become guilty of my body and
blood; and you, who if you do eat and drink there, I will make you sick, and
weak, and fall asleep for it.

I confess, Mr Jeanes p. 124, 125. edit. octo.
I find Reverend and Learned Mr Jeanes speaking something to answer this
Argument; two things he says, 1. By way of retortion; That the faithfulness
of a Steward lies in going no further than his Masters Commission, and he
conceives, we have no Commission to keep back any, but the Commission is
directed to us and others. 2. He tells us, that if we understand by the will of
God voluntas signi, It is not the will of God, viz. the Command of God that we
should keep away any.

But I humbly conceive this is little better than petere (...). For this is the
question:

1. Whether we have no command to keep away the ignorant and scandalous, though
at present the Church be not presbyterated? We conceive we have, and to that
purpose we bring that Text, 1 Cor. 4.1. where we are required to be faithful
as Stewards.

2. He says, the faithfulness of the Steward lies in going no further than
our Commission, that is but half the truth, for it lies in going so far as
well as no farther. Now we say, we should not go so far as our Commission, Mat.
7.6. if we should administer it promiscuously we plead to go as far as that
extends.

3. If he means we have no Commission, (...), where the word Sacrament is
used, we grant it; but we have proved, that we have a Commission (...),
according to sound consequence from Scripture, and that it is voluntas signi,
Gods Command, at least implicit, if not explicit.

4. We desire, where (...), (if he stands upon that) he can show us our
Commission from Scripture for suspension to be directed to us and others.

5. We say, that if we should give the Ordinance to any known ignorant and
scandalous, we should, in Mr Jeanes his sense, go beyond our Commission, having
neither precept nor president for it.

I shall need add no more though I might add the concurrent Judgment of
Divines ancient, and modern; But I will refer that to the next question, where
I shall prove, that Mr Boatman's tongue ran a little too fast when he said,
Suspension was a Pharisaicall dream.

CHAP. XII. Wherein are answered the Objections brought against privative
Suspension by the single Minister.
I Acknowledge, that as I have a great many with me in the Affirmative of this
Question, so have I some very Reverend men who are otherwise persuaded: some of
which rather think, that in such cases as these the Ordinance should be wholly
omitted. Others that the Minister in such cases has discharged his duty if he
has delivered the truth doctrinally, and used his spiritual Rhetoric to
deterr or dissuade the ignorant and unworthy, and these Reverend Brethren are
not without some considerable objections: I must add a word or two in answer
to them, so far as I am able. The whole question is,

Whether the Minister, in such cases, has a moral power to deny the Ordinance
or no?

I plead he has: for the same precept that says to him, give not holy things
to dogs, Minister Sacramentorum per se loquendo habet proprium ac speciale
praeceptum quo prohibetur indignu ministrare Sacramentum. Becan. sum. tertia p.
tract. 2. cap. 5. q. 8.
that commands him, as a Steward of Gods mysteries, to be faithful; that
commands him, as well as others, to keep the feast not with the leavened bread
of malice and wickedness, and forbids him to eat with brethren who are
fornicatours, etc. gives him power, etc. But it is objected:

Ob. 1. Suspension is an act of Jurisdiction. Acts of Jurisdiction belong to
the Church: Now the single Minister is not the Church. --

Sol. 1. That Juridicall Suspension is a Church Censure, and an act of
Jurisdiction I yield: but whether this suspension of which I speak be, I
question. Mr Jeanes thinks the Schoolmen are out in determining that it is
not, but I cannot wholly close with him. Juridically suspension is a positive
Act of the Governors of the Church, determining the party at present unworthy
of that Ecclesiastical Communion: This is but a Negative or privative Act,
wherein the Minister, not passing any formal censure upon him, but referring
him for that to the Presbytery to be judged at present forbeares his own act of
administering the Ordinance to him, judging him in his own conscience such a one
as is de Jure to be suspended, and being ready to submit himself to any
Superior Presbytery, to whom the Party shall appeal.

2. It is granted, that in Ecclesia constitu^a, in a formed organized Church,
no kind of Censures should be past but by the Presbytery, the Eldership of the
Church; but in a disordered Church, I humbly conceive some acts may be
justifiably done that may look like Censures by the Minister, Plebe non
rationaliter dissentiente, at least by the consent of the Church, or the Church
not dissenting upon good grounds.

3. That the Minister is not (in one sense) the Church, viz. all the Officers
that belong to a rightly ordered Church is granted, but whether in some cases
of necessity the single Minister may not be the Church, viz. the whole ruling
part of it, and in power in such cases to some acts of rule, I think may be
questioned; All will grant that he is a ruling, as well as a teaching, Elder.
Now if there be such a case that through death, removal, or any defect, that
he should be lest alone, and have no Elders, I cannot think that his power of
rule must wholly sleep till his fellow-Rulers be recovered. So that in some
sense he may be called the Church I conceive, which is no more (by
interpretation) than that he is at that present the whole ruling part of the
Church.

4. Tell the Church, Mat. 18. is chiefly meant in order to the great
Excommunication, in which the sinner is made as an heathen and publican.

5. Again, Admonition is a Church Censure, yet we allow not only a private
fraternall correption, but also a pastoral admonition, which is quiddam majus,
and I see no reason why (in such cases of necessity as these, where either such
a course must be taken, or this great Ordinance wholly omitted or profaned) we
may not also allow of pastoral suspension.

Object. 2. A second objection Mr Jeanes makes, viz. That all our Arguments to
justify the unlawfulness of a Ministers giving the Sacrament to such as he
knows to be scandalous, will fail us in two cases in Presbyterated Churches:
1. In case the major part of the Eldership will acquit the scandalous sinner,
then he says, we grant the Minister may admit them. Or 2. In case the scandal
be known to the Minister alone, and no proof can be made, and the party will
not confess.

Sol. I must confess these are two hard cases, and the only hard cases I know
which can be put as to this point.

1. But who are they that have been so free of their confessions to grant, that
in cafe an Eldership, will contrary to the judgment of their Pastor, and
directly contrary to the rule justify the wicked, the Minister ought to give
the Sacrament to them, I cannot tell. Suppose one be proved to have committed
Incest the night before the Sacrament, and stands to justify it, and the
Minister calls his Eldership and proves the fact to them, and they in a faction
will acquit him, shall this Minister be bound to administer the Ordinance to
this wretch? I hope Mr Jeanes shall never persuade me to that faith. No, but it
is my duty in such, or such like evident cases to forbear any administration,
and appeal from the Congregationall to the Classical Presbytery, and if that
will not relieve him, from thence to the Provincial, and from thence, if need
be, to a National Assembly; it is to be hoped that by some of these he will be
relieved, if not I should think it my duty to submit to their censure rather
than profane Gods Ordinances: and wait till God reformed such Churches; if the
case were doubtful, the matter differs: but where the rule plainly judges,
men's neglect of their duty will not justify me in sinning against mine.

2. As to the second case, I know no reason but in such a cause the Minister
may stand as a witness and the rest of his Eldership; I am sure it will be
more justifiable than for him to give the Sacrament to one manifestly unworthy.
Therefore I say, there is no necessity urging a Minister in any case to give
the Lords holy things to dogs and swine; we may conceive necessities, but
sinnings of this kind will prove our free acts.

Object. 3. A third Argument against us. Suarez in tertiam p. Thomae disp. 67.
sect. 4.
I find in Mr Jeanes, he says he has it out of Suarez in tertiam partem Thom.
disp. 67. sect. 4. he urges it thus.

It is requisite for the common good, Mr Jeanes p. 116, 117.
and convenient order both of Church and Commonwealth that all common favors
which are publicly to be dispensed and distributed according to the dignity of
private persons should be dispensed by public persons designed thereto, not
according to the private knowledge of this or that man, neither of that
Minister, but according to a public and notorious cognizance, and whosoever
does, by his offense against God, This is not a literal translation of Suarez.
lose his right and interest to the holy things of God, he must lose it in the
face of the Church before it can be denied him in the face of the Congregation,
and he is to be judged as in all other cases, not by any man's, nor by any
Ministers private knowledge, but according to proofs and allegations; for the
common good necessarily requires that such public actions of this nature
should be regulated by a kind of public, not private, knowledge, which once
admitted into judicature would soon fill up the Church and State with a world
of scandals, injuries, and inconveniences, for hereby a wicked, or a peevish,
and pettish Minister may without control publicly disgrace, and repel from
the Supper whom he please etc.

Sol. To this I answer: First, This Argument is but merely rational. And if a
Ministers duty in this be (as we have endeavored to prove) expressly concluded
in Scripture, it is not to be considered against Scripture Precept. Aqu.
Rations contra fidem sunt derisibiles. But secondly.

Let us consider the strength of this Reason: As it is brought by a Schooleman,
so it is determined by a Schoo^eman insufficient. Gabriel Vasq. l. 2. in tertia
p. Thomae disp. 209. q. 80. art. 6. cap. 40.
Gabriel Vasques says,

The invalidity of the Reason appears in this. The due execution in Law is a
common good in the Commonwealth, and doubtless ought to be (ordinarily)
administered to all impartially, according to the letter of the Law, it is every
man's common favor. But now put the case, that two witnesses came and swear
against the life of such a man: that he did such a murder on such a day in
such a place, and the Judge knew that this man was at that time one hundred
miles off that place, and were with him, and he should tell the Jury so, yet
they would find this man guilty of the murder, will any man say, that it is
the Judges duty to condemine him whom his certain knowledge justifies in his
cons^ience as wholly innocent? Exemplum etiam judicis quod in confirmationem
allatum est, non putamus in universum verum, quia accidere potest interdum, ut
ipse non possit uti scientia publua, sed propter scientiam suam privatam alio
remedio uti deb^at pro salvanda vita innocentis, etc. Gab. Vasq. ib. There is a
double right, i^us hereditarium, this they have common, as baptized persons. 2.
Jus aptitud^narium, this they have not in common.
If man's Law should lay any such Obligations upon the public Minister, surely
Gods holy Law does not. So that the Maxim is not always true, that common
goods must be dispensed or denied, according to common public cognizance. For
if the executing of the Law (which is a public common good) must tend to the
breach of the divine Law, or does evidently appear against the end of the Law,
if there should be a proceeding according to the strict rigor of it. The Judge
may lawfully, yea, and ought to suspend his own act, and submit himself to the
judgment of another Court.

2. Things that are common goods must be dispensed out to none but those who
have a common right. It will easily be granted, that the ignorant and
scandalous have not a common right with those who are knowing and holy. Let any
but make out that they have a common right, (which, by the way, only says in
Christ can give them) and I know no Minister will deny them the Ordinance. The
benefit of the Law is a common good, and to be denied to none that are Natives.
Suppose a Stranger comes and demands the benefit of it, none knows but he is a
Native, only the Judge knows, or at least has vehement grounds to suspect he
is none, shall not the Judge require him to prove that he is a native
Englishman, or naturalized before he gives him the benefit of the Law.

3. For the disconveniences may come through the Ministers peevishness, etc. I
confess, there may be some, but I know not how they should be prevented; they
may in some measure be cured by a liberty of appeal for the party, who shall
conceive himself injured. to higher Presbyteries; If there be none such, I
know no remedy while the Church is in that disorder.

I have met with no more Objections, and shall need enlarge no farther upon
this question: only I think Mr Jeanes his fourth Argument is considerable.

The power of administration of the Lords Supper is wholly committed to the
Minister, the Eldership cannot deal it out. Now it is very improbable that the
Lord should have left the administration wholly to them, and not a sufficient
power to them in such exigents as these to preserve the purity of it.

Besides, it is easily evidenced, that in extraordinary cases something
preter-regular and extraordinary may be done, yea, and ought to be done to
preserve the purity of Ordinances; 2 Chro. 30.2.
at Hezekiahs Passover, because the Priests were not sanctified, the Passover
was deferred to the second month, ver. 17. The Levites killed the Passover,
yet the Lord accepted the service, ver. 20. God himself for the purity of his
Ordinance, and his peoples Communion, dispensed with the Order which himself
had instituted, Ex. 12. as may be seen Number. 9.

It is true, we ought to be tender of Gods Order, but some points of order may,
for purity sake, be dispensed with for a time.

CHAP. XIII.
QUEST. 3.
Whether Suspension (juridically or ministerial, privative or positive)
distinct from absolute Excommunication, be a dream of the Pharisees or no, or
whether it has not been the constant judgment and practice of the Servants
and Churches of Christ in all ages?

MAster Boatman tells us, he says it, yea, and again he says it, that
Suspension distinct from Excommunication is a dream of the Pharisees; yea, and
it was a Pharisaicall dream that invented it. It is no matter what he says,
the question is whether it was so or no.

1. If he means by the Pharisees that particular Sect amongst the Jews so
called, he scar e speaks sense, for they never owned the Ordinan^e of the
Lords Supper, and how they should invent Suspensio^ from it I cannot tell.

2. He speaks it ancient enough, as old as Christ's time.

But because I am willing to believe he thought he spoke sense, I conceive his
meaning was,

That it was an invention of some particular men, who were of proud
pharisaicall dispositions, and would bring in their inventions to mingle them
with Gods Ordinances.

If he spoke sense, this was his meaning; and if it were, it was one of the
most bold and ignorant slanders of the Churches and Servants of God in all Ages
that has been heard, and as impolitickly spoken for his own credit; when any
one, who has either looked into Fathers, or Schoolmen, or Divines of any sort,
Papists, or Protestants, and those of any persuasion, Episcopal, Presbyterian,
or Independent, as to Church Government, is able to say, that either he spoke
against his knowledge, or else never read any of them, (the latter of which
(out of charity to him) I am most apt to believe.) But if they were Pharisees,
and dreaming Pharisees too, they were many of them holy and learned dreamers.
And the Church of Christ has from Christ's time been in a dream till Mr John
Boatman awakened it; and we hope to prove anon that this confident Gentleman
was the Dreamer himself, whose tongue ran (like a wild fancy in a dream) when
the eyes of his understanding were sealed up with lamentable ignorance of the
general practice of the Churches of God: It was bad enough for Joseph's eleven
Brethren to call him Dreamer, but surely it had been worse for him, the
younger, to have called all them so. If Mr Boatman had been some grave Doctor
in Divinity, some Bishop, or Archbishop, or Pope, the Censure had savoured of a
great deal of more ignorance, and boldness, than judgment, or discretion;
but for one who never so much as took the lowest degree, not staying at any
University half so long as is required of him that would commence Bachelor of
Arts, and if he had taken his degrees, had not yet been Master of Arts above
four or five years standing, to censure so many Reverend Fathers, Learned and
Acute Schoolmen, so many holy and Reverend Divines of all sorts, yea, and so
many Churches, all as Dreamers, Pharisaicall Dreamers too, was enough to let
the world know the Character of himself. But let us a little examine how many
this young Rabbi has at once called Dreamers, Pharisaicall Dreamers, bold
usurpers of Christ's authority etc. I shall only premise this one thing.

That I shall not undertake to prove their judgment as to this, or that sort
of Suspension, whether by the single Pastor, or the Presbytery. For although
there be sufficient ground in Scripture to prove the divine right of Ruling
Elders, and sufficient Record to prove that they were in the Primitive Church,
as our Learned Brethren of the Province of London have proved out of
Tertullian, Origin, Basil, Optatus, Vindication of sus divinum, p. 12. Tert.
Apol. c 39. Orig. l. 3. cont^a Celsum. Basil in Ps. 33. Optatus. l. 1. adv.
Par^^n. A^b^spin. ibid. H^er. in Is. ^.2. Aug. ep. 137. l. 3. con. (...). c.
56. Sermon. 19. in Psalm. 3^. Greg. Mag. l. 11. ep. 19.
Albaspineus, Hierom, Augustine, Gregorius Magnus, etc. And our learned
Countryman Mr Brinsly has proved out of Deane Nowels Catechism, which
quotation is evidently true from the ancient Copies of that Catechism Greek
Latin printed, as also in the Latin Copies, yet I know there are many that do
question the divine right of the Ruling Elder.

But it is enough to me if I can prove that in all Ages some have been kept
from the Lords Supper (by whom matters not whether by the Pre^bytery or single
Minister, who yet were not excommunicated.

And this I hope to do; which i^ I do, let the world judge whether it be such a
dream as we are ignorantly told it is.

And with what humility my Antagonist has condemned Fathers, Schoolmen,
Divines of all sorts, in all Ages, of all persuasions, yea, all reformed
Churches, and our own ever since the first reformation, as dreamers, and
usurpers of a new authority.

As for the first Century, or one hundred years after Christ, we have no
writings extant but those of the Apostles, except the constitution of some
Canons of the Apostles, and some fragments of Clement, and of Dionysius
Areopagita: (who was an ancient writer but judged by most long after) and some
few Epistles of Ignatius, who according to Helvicus and Eusebius was made
Bishop of Antioch one hundred years after Christ.

There is little credit to be given to the Canons, or the testimony of the
pretended Areopagite, as to matters of fact in the first Century; for it is
upon very good grounds supposed, that the Canons were made long after, and that
Dionysius lived long after, but yet their writings being all the record can be
pretended, let us examine what they say.

For Clements two Epistles I want them, and cannot examine what they say. In
the pretended Canons of the Apostles, I find it sufficiently proved Canon 130.

If any Clergy man, (...), Canon. Apost. Canon 13.
or Lay man, excommunicated or suspended, go to any other City, and be received
into Communion there, let him that receives him, and he who is received be both
excommunicated.

Here is plainly Suspension distinct from Excommunication asserted; there were
some (...) as well as (...).

For the pretended Areopagite, I see reason enough to believe he lived not in
this Century, but admit he did, and he speaks plain enough.

Here he tells us, that the Catecumeni, (...). Dion. Areop. cap. Y. ex edit
Morellii octavo. 1562. p. 141.
and the Poenitents, and Energumeni were excluded from the Lords Supper, which
he tells us was administered to none but those who had perfect eyes to discern
the Lords body, etc. This is sufficient, but this is not all.

For presently after he subjoyneth, that if Penitents ought not to be admitted,
much less ought profane persons, who lived in lusts, and testified no
repentance; who he says should be admitted to no other Ordinance but the
preaching of the Word. I will transcribe the place.

(...), Ibid p. 144.
(...), This quotation being so full to show what persons in the Primitive
Church were suspended, yet not excommunicated, though it were something too
large, yet I have transcribed it all.
(...), etc.

I have been willing to transcribe this passage fully, because it speaks so
fully to our case. Dionysius in this Chapter does professedly treat concerning
the Lords Supper, and here concerning the order of administering, in the first
place he tells us, some were put away, or went away. 2. Then the Administration
proceeded.

Now who were they who were enjoined to go away? he reckons several sorts:

1. (...), those who were yet not made complete members of the Church, that had
never yet been initiated in those holy mysteries; doubtless, by these he
means the Catechumeni, such as God had begun to work upon, and they had
evidenced some good affections to the doctrine of the Gospel, but had not yet
sufficient knowledge to fit them for either Sacrament; In lib. 4.
and this is conform to what Renatus Laurentius de la Far, in his
Annotations on Tertullian, Tert. advers. Mare.
tells us: This order of Converts were likewise by Tertullian and Cyprian, etc.
called Audientes, and Auditores, and they had a particular Teacher. Eusebius. l.
5. l. 6. cap. 3.
Eusebius tells us Pantaenus was their first Teacher, then Clemens Alexand.
afterward Demetrius made Origin their Teacher; and Cyprian tells us, Cypr. ep.
22.
that with the consent of the Presbyters he after made Optatus their Teacher.
Now there were the first sort, which were not come to the Table, says
Dionysius; and so Pachymeres expounds him (...).

2. The second sort excluded he says are (...). Those who had apostatized from
an holy life. By these doubtless he means scandalous sinners who had been
former Professors, otherwise they could not be Apostates. George Pachimeres
expounds it (...), men given up to vile affections, who had returned to their
former lusts.

3. The third sort were those (...), etc. such as through the terrors of
persecutors had been tempted to sin, and fallen into it, etc. There are two or
three other sorts, mentioned by him, who were kept away, such as were
Penitents, that is, who had fallen into sin, and the Church had appointed them
a time of shame, and repentance after the profession of their resolutions to
amend; and lastly, those who were not altogether (...), without any scandal or
spot, these were all removed, says Dionysius, before the Lords Supper was
administered, but surely these were not all excommunicated, here is not a word
of that. Those who will see more may look into Maximus and Pachymeres, the two
Scholiasts upon Dionysius. I have not translated the passage because it was
large. But Dionysius says plainly, that such as are (...), etc. men given to
their lusts, etc. should much more be kept from the Lords Table than either
Catechumeni or Poenitentes.

I know none else in the first Century, but Ignatius, who has left us any
Writings, and it is questionable whether any of these, or his either be (...)
or no. But doubtless Dionysius was ancient, though I believe not thus ancient;
his Scholiast Maximus lived within the fourth Century. Let us see what we have
in the second Century, ad annum Christi 200.

In this Century we have Justin Martyr, who has something considerable extant
to tell us the practice of the Church in his time, and he has spoken fully
enough to our purpose in his second Apology for the Christians, (...). Just.
Mart. Apol. 2. ex edit. Lutet. Paris. 1615. p. 97, 98.
which Helvicus says he wrote about the year 160. where he tells us, how in
those days they administered the Ordinance of the Supper, and has these words.

This nourishment (says he) is with us called the Eucharist, of which none may
partake with us but he, 1. That believes our Doctrine to be true. 2. He that is
washed with the Laver of Regeneration for the remission of sins. 3. He that
lives so as Christ has Commanded.

We desire no more than the recovery of this ancient Discipline of the Church,
viz. that none may be admitted to the Lords Supper but such as first are
baptized. Secondly, Such as believe the Doctrine of the Gospel, which they
must know before they can believe. 3. Such as do not live according to the rule
of the Gospel; but if none else were admitted in Justine Martyrs time,
questionless there were some suspended who were not excommunicated.

In this Century also lived Tatianus, Melito, Ireneus, Theophilus Antioch.
Policarpus, Apollinaris, Athenagoras, Clemens, Alexandrinus, Pantaenus,
Tertullian, etc.

If testimonies could be produced out of these it were to little purpose,
Justin Martyr having sufficiently evidenced for that Century. But the truth is,
some of them have nothing extant, and others very little, and upon restrained
subjects, in the handling of which they were not led to this theme. And in
those pieces of Clemens Alexandrinus and Tertullian I find very little spoken
concerning the discipline and order of the Church. Something there is in
Tertullian, but Justin Martyr has already spoken enough for this Age
considering the occasion of his speaking, it was in an Apology for all
Christians in his Age, and Apologizing for them he sets out their pure
worshipping of God, and inoffensive practice.

From the year two hundred to the year three hundred.

In this Century were several Synods, but none of which we have any Record but
only a Provincial Synod, called Consilium Anchyritanum by Gratian. Genebrard
in his Chronology puts this Synod anno 298. Helvicus anno 312. Caranza and Mr
Gillespy anno 308. certain it is it was either in the latter end of this, or
the beginning of the next Century. I shall with learned Genebrard account it
into this. Caranza says it was before the Oecumenicall Council of Nice, but
in what Emperors time is not determined. But in that Council we find
Suspension established with a witness. That for some sins, if any committed
them before he was twenty years old, he should spend fifteen years in
penitence before he should be admitted to pray with the Church, and five years
he should have no more than a communion in Prayers with the Church, and
afterward be admitted to the Lords Table. This Canon may be seen in Caranza,
p. 28. can. 16. I find the Greek Copy thus elsewhere.

(...); (...).

I neither justify this Council, nor this Canon of it in all things, but if
there were such a Council, and so ancient as we are told, it plainly shows us
Suspension distinct from Excommunication was so ancient in the Church of God;
the same is also confirmed by the 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Canons of that Council;
the Copies of which may be seen either in the book called (...) Greek-Latine,
or Latin in Caranza and Benius, etc. The two most Famous Fathers in this
Century were Origin about the year 202. and Cyprian 250.

Origin has some, not obscure, hints of the judgment of the Church in his
time. O^ig. in Levit. Homil. 23.
-- Cibus iste Sanctus non est communis omnium, nec cujuscunque indigni sed
Sanctorum est.

Several other hints are in Origin, though he no where speaks directly to the
case.

For Cyprian, he that reads his tenth Epistle ad clerum de Presbyteris. etc. or
his book de lapsis, will find enough: I had thought to have transcribed some
passages: but I am prevented by Mr Gillespy in his Aarons Rod l. 3. cap. 17.
where the Reader shall find them quoted.

From the year three hundred to four hundred.

In the Century, besides other Councils, was the famous Oecumenicall Council
of Nice, and for Ancients, Arnobius, Athanasius, Hilary, Macarius, Optatus,
Basil, Greg. Nyssen. Nazianzen, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Hierome,
Austin; Some of these will doubtless tell us the practice of the Church in
their times.

For the Council of Nice we have an imperfect Record, but if those Canons,
which are printed as theirs, be so, they speak plain enough, Can. 11.

(...). Council. Nicen. Can. 11.


Reader, this Synod was questionless the most glorious Orthodox Synod that
ever the Church of Christ could glory in. Here were 318 of the most eminent
servants of Christ, in the work of the Gospel, which the world then afforded.
These all determine, that such sinners as were scandalous, though they had
sinned through temptation, for fear of their lives or estates, (worshipping
Idols, I suppose they meant) though they did profess repentance, yet they
should give three years proof of it before they should have any communion
with the Church; if in this time they were found not to contradict their
profession, they were admitted to some Communion, but no otherwise than
penitents for seven years more, after these ten years they must have no
nearer communion than in prayer for two years longer; here was a Suspension of
ten years for scandalous sins, distinct from Excommunication: were all these
dreamers think we? For the length of time I do not justify them, nor can I
altogether condemn them, considering the juncture of time, and state of the
Church then.

In this Century, they say, was Concilium Neocaesariense, if it were so, and we
have a true account of their acts. In their second Canon they decree, that if a
woman marry two brothers she should be rejected to her death; (...), yet it is
plain she was not excommunicated so long, for in the same Canon they determine
she might have the Sacrament given her in her dying hour.

In the same Century was Concilium Gangrense, who in the preface to their acts
do plainly distinguish (...), one who is denied Communion with the Church, and
one who is quite separated from it.

What the Council of Arles, determined in the same Century is plain.

The first Council of Arles Can. 11. Can. 12. Can. 23. plainly establish
Suspension distinct from Excommunication.

The second Council of Arles, Caranza p. 55. a.
in the same Century, determines the Suspension of such from the Lords Supper
for five years, as had, through fear in time of persecution, sacrificed to
Idols. See also Canon 20, 25.

Concilium Elebertinum, in which, Caranza says, were nineteen Bishops, does
plainly distinguish betwixt some sinners, to whom the Sacrament at death should
be denied, and others who should be suspended from it, but yet might have it at
their death, desiring it, which if they were excommunicated they could not, V.
Can. 1, 2, 3, 14, 21, 31, 40, etc.

For particular men in this Century, Aarons rod, l. 3. c. 17.
the Opinions of Basil, Thaumaturgus, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine, are
evident in their several works.

Basil is enough for all, in his Canonical Epistles ad Amphilochium, see Canon
34, 38, 44, 56, 57, 58, 59. for murder, he determines twenty years
suspension, Can. 36. for manslaughter, eleven years, Can. 57. for Adultery,
fifteen, Can. 58. for Fornication, eight years, Can 59. for theft, though the
thief first accused himself, one year, Can. 61. for perjury eleven years,
Can. 64. But if they before gave good evidence of their repentance and change,
they were to be admitted sooner, Can. 74.

It were an easy but tedious work to show that this was the judgment of the
succeeding Councils and Fathers, but if we could not, these were the most pure
and incorrupted times of the Church: and surely the Servants of God were not
all this time in a dream.

For the time of Antichrists prevailing, betwixt the time of the purer Church
and the beginnings of Reformation by Luther and Calvin, we shall easily know
what was the general opinion by the Schoolmen, and by their decretalls and
Councils: the Schoolmen most of them handle this Question.

An peccatori hoc Sacramentum petenti Sacerdos denegare debeat?

Whether if a Sinner desire the Sacrament of the Lords Supper the Priest ought
to deny it him? They generally distinguish betwixt a secret sinner and a
public and notorious sinner, and betwixt his desiring it in private and in
public. Vasq. in tert. par. Thom. t. 3. q. 80. disp. 209. cap. 2. In qua re
scholastici omnes, ut dixi, constanter affi^mant, publico peccatori, nimirum de
quo non constat, ad meliorem frugem fuisse conversum public etiam,
Eucharistiam done gandam esse, ibid.


1. They all generally determine, that if the sinner be a manifest open sinner,
the Priest ought to deny it to him, (though not excommunicated) which is enough
for to prove Suspension distinct from Excommunication.

They are not so well agreed in determining who should be accounted public
notorious sinners: Nor whether the Priest may not in some cases deny the Lords
Supper to Occulto peccatori?

Gabriel Vasquez assures me that all the Schoolmen do agree, that the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is to be denied to an open sinner, of whose
repentance there is no evidence.

I said before, they are not so well agreed who shall be judged a scandalous
sinner. Adrianus, in his questions de Eucharistia, says, he is a public
scandalous sinner if his sin be known to ten persons. Sylvester and Navarrus
think enough if it be known to six. Dominicus Sotus and Vasquez, think that
suspicion is not enough, but the party must appear scandalous, either 1. Per
sententiam, he being declared so by the Judge; or 2. Per confessionem ab ipso
in judicio, or by his own confession in Court; or 3. Per rei evidentiam, when
the thing is evident and cannot be denied. But though they disagree here, yet
they plainly enough agree, as to the granting a Suspension distinct from
Excommunication.

Now that this is the concurrent opinion of the Schoolmen, Bonavent. in l. 4
sent. did. 9. art. 2. q. 4. Duran. in sent. d^st. 9. q 5. Etius in l. 4. sent.
did. 9. sect 4. Vasq. in 3. p. Tho^. 3 q. 8. art. 6. Alex H^len. in 4. p. sum.
q. 11. art. 3. Aquin. sum. 3. p. q. 80 art. 6. Becan. In sum. Scholast. Thcol.
p 3 c. 5. q 8.
I shall prove by referring the Reader to those places in Bonaventure, Aquinas,
Durandus, Becanus, Halensis, Estius, Vasquez; where they professedly handle the
question and give Arguments for it. Vasquez, as I said before, tells me, it is
the unanimous Vote of all his Brethren of the Schools; I am sure it is the
determination of all these (which prove it the opinion of the Schoolmen in all
Ages) Bonaventure, Aquinas, and Durandus being all betwixt 1250. and 1300.
Vasquez (says Helvicus) died 1604. and Estius died 1613. as may be seen in the
account of his life, and Writings prefixed to his Commentaries on the Epistles.

If Suspension distinct from Excommunication be a Dream, these were some of
the learned Dreamers.

It remains that we examine the judgment of others, and it is no great matter
to whom we turn, let them be Papists, Lutherans, or Calvinists, we shall find
them all in this point (...)

As for Papists, I shall not trouble my Reader, with quotations out of them
(though it were a very facile thing to do) partly because the ignorance of some
may judge it one of their superstitious practices, and partly because their
Schoolmen have spoken enough to let us know their minds; to which Salmeron may
be added, who has spoken enough to prove it in a place I have before quoted.
Salmeron. t 5. tract. 60.


For the opinion of the Churches of the Switzers it is not considerable in the
cause, because most of their Churches have no Excommunication at all, and so
could not hold Suspension as distinct from it, yet I observe that none of them
plead for admission of any to the Lords Table, but such as make a profession of
their faith and repentance, so Brentius, Bullinger, Gualther, etc.

Philip Melancthon, who was one of the first Reformers in Germany, has said
enough, as it is recorded by Christophorus Pezelius. Pezelii pars oct. argum
and resp. theol. contexta ex scriptis Melanct. de Excom. p. 409.


In veteribus Canonibus duo gradus sunt poenarum, separatio (...) and
excommunicatio (...). Separatio est poena qua homo per sententiam Ecclesia
cogitur aliquantisper omittere officium publicum, and usum Sacramentorum, ut
exploretur ejus obedientia an volens statim emendaturus sit, and veniam
petiturus, Melancth. in Eth. 287.
an vero contumaciter defensurus errorem. etc.

Altera poena ultima, and summa in Ecclesia est Excommunicatio, etc.

This is plain enough for our purpose.

The next which I shall name of those holy and learned men, whom Mr Boatman
has called Dreamers, etc. amongst the rest is holy Bucer. Bucer in Comment. in
Ephesians. cap. 4.


Et Cavendum est Ecclesiis ne cui causam praebeant sumendi sibi judicium, in
sumendo Sacramento salutis quod faciunt quicunque, absque vera peccatorum
suorum Poenitentia Sacrament is Domini communicant. Quamobrem siqui in gravius
aliquod peccatum incidissent and in manifestum flagitium, ut Corinthius ille
incestus inciderat, eos priscae Ecclesia quae Christi disciplinam adhuc recte
tenebant, ligabant certo tempore ad agend^m, hoc est demonstrandum poenitentiam
per opera, and fructus veros poenitentiae, etiamsi illos jam tum peccati sui
poenitere appareret, id enim erat consentaneum verae poenitentiae de tetriore
lapsu, quae (ut dictum) si vera sit, aliquandiu haeret, tum utile ad cavendum
peccatum tam ipse qui ligabatur quam totae reliquae Ecclesiae, -- Atque hinc
est quod Divus Cyprianus tantopere urgebat, lapsis in persecutionibus, non
ilico dandam esse veniam, sed diu, ac justo tempore eos agere poenitentiam, de
quo v. Epist. ejus 2. and 3. lib. 1. and lib. 3. ab Ep. 14. ad 20. and in
Sermon de lapsis. Item exemplum Ambrosit inlegatione Theodosii apud Theod. l.
3. c. 18. and apud Sozom. l. 7. c. 24. Porro licet abstinendi sint ad tempus
qui gravioribus peccatis Ecclesiam funestarunt, tamen severior debet esse
Excommunicatio eorum qui Ecclesiam non audiunt, etc.

In the next place let us hear what our Reverend Calvin says, Calv. institut.
l. 4. cap. 12. sect. 5, and 6.
and he speaks plain enough. In his fifth Paragraph, having spoken before of
Church Censures, he treats of the three ends which the Church aims at in such
Censures: 1. The glory of God. 2. The preservation of the Churches purity. 3.
The amendment of the offender. In his sixth Paragraph he comes to show the
method and order of the Churches proceedings in Church Censures, that he does
by making use of a former distinction he had laid down between public and more
private sins. By private sins he tells us, he does not mean such as none know
of, such as are the sins of hypocrites, but such whose nature is not so
scandalous, etc. For open, gross, public sins, he tells us the Church need
not proceed so gradually; 1. By private admonition. 2. Then by admonition more
public, etc. For lesser sins the Church takes no cognizance of them till
private admonition be refused when it comes to them; if the offense be lighter,
sufficit verborum castigatio (says he) it is enough for the Church at first to
admonish, and that, says he, must be levis and paterna, quae non exasperet
peccatorem, nec confundat, sed reducat ad seipsum, ut magis gaudeat se
correctum quam tristetur. But if the offenses be of an higher nature, they must
be corrected by a sharper remedy, for (says he) it is not enough if one has
committed a scandalous sin, and grievously offended the Church, should be,
reproved by words, Ibid. Sect. 7, 8, 9.10, 11, 12.
but for a time he ought to be deprived of the Communion of the Lords Supper,
till he has given evidence of his repentance. -- And this, says he, was the
way of the ancient and better Church, etc. But for Excommunciation he
determines that must be done after a great deal of waiting, and with a great
deal of wisdom and caution, etc. thou may read him at large, whose
discourse is too large indeed to be transcribed: This is enough to show thee
that he is one of Mr Boatmans Pharisees and Dreamers too; (we shall have good
company I hope anon.)

In this sixteenth Century were so many eminent men, that it were endless to
transcribe all their testimonies to this truth; thou have, Reader, already
heard what Melancthon and Bucer, and Calvin have spoke, (who were all three
within this Century,) I shall not trouble thee with many more. Zach. Ursinus in
doct. Christ. 2. p. de Coena dom. q. 8.


What Reverend Vrsine thought may be read at large in his eighth Question de
Coena Domini, where he speaks to these two Questions: 1. Qui ad coe^am
accedere debent, who ought to come to the Lords Table. 2. Qui debeant admitti,
who ought to be admitted to it? In answer to the latter he determines;

Those are to be admitted by the Church, who by words and deeds profess true
repentance, and who by the actions of their life express their profession of
faith and repentance, but they are (says he) not to be admitted who barely
say, they believe all things; for he who says he believes, and shows it not
by his works, is a liar, and does in deeds deny what in words he affirms. For
this he gives reasons, and answers objections largely in that Chapter, which
the Reader may see in Latin or English. And that he thought this Suspension
ought to precede Excommunication is plain, for in the same Book in his fifth
Question de Clavibus, He determines that Excommunication must be used as the
last remedy to correct those who are found impenitent. And in the preceding
Question he proves by fourteen Arguments that scandalous persons ought to be
kept from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper (which I wish those who are so
zealous for the profanation of that Ordinance would seriously weigh) possibly
they might amaze their consciences (if they have any) more than Mr Boatman's
startling reason scares us.

I confess, in this Century I find several of the Germane Divines pleading
for promiscuous Communion, especially Wolfangus Musculus; but they are not so
considerable in this cause, because their Judgments are also against all
Church Discipline where there is a Christian Magistrate. The Lord has made
their names upon other accounts exceeding famous, though in point of Church
Discipline they have no name in the Church. God shall reveal this also to
those Churches (as we hope.)

What was Peter Martyrs opinion is plain from his common places, Pet. Mart.
loc. com. Clas. 4. c. 5. sect. 7.
where he tells us in what order the Churches of God formerly proceeded to the
solemn sentence of Excommunication: he indeed tells us, that their several
degrees of Catechumeni, of which some were Audientes, some Competentes, and of
their Poenitentes, of which they had four sorts, (all of which were kept in
the Primitive Church from the Lords Table, at least all but their fourth degree
of Penitents,) cannot be proved from Scripture. But in his fifteenth Section
moving this Question, what should be done in reference to scandalous sinners,
if the community refused to consent to their Excommunication, He answers:
Saltem id curandum esse, ut damnatis atque convictis, de publicis and
manifestis criminibus pastor Sacramenta non distribuat. Care at least must be
taken that the Pastor does not administer the Sacrament to such as are
convicted of gross sins; from whence it is plain, that he judged some that
might be kept from the Supper of the Lord who were not Excommunicated. And that
Reverend man's judgment is not so clearly to be judged from his common places
(which were collected out of his works by others, and by them published) as by
the Book called Reformatio legum Ecclesiasticarum (of which more anon.)

In the next place let us hear what Polanus thought, Polan. Syntag. Theol l.
7. c. 18. Abstentio publica usurpatur, cum coram Ecclesia jubetur abstinere
Sacrae Coenae usu is qui contra privatum interdictum aliis ad mensam domini
accedentibus se ingerit, etc.
whose judgment the Reader shall find in the second part of his Syntagma, l.
7. c. 18.

Where he tells us, that the Public Censures of the Church are three: 1.
Admonitio. 2. Abstentio. 3. Excommunicatio; Admonition, Suspension, and
Excommunication.

Public Suspension, says he, is when in the face of the Church he is
commanded to abstain from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, who either
against a private prohibition intrudes, or whose sin is so scandalous that the
Pastor of the Church cannot, without scandal to the faithful, administer the
Sacrament to him, So Ambrose suspended the great Emperor Theodosius.

Come we now to learned and Reverend Zanchy, who has a large discourse upon
this point in his first Book of Epistles, Zanch. in epist. l. 1. in ep. ad Fred
tert. A^quorum peccata sunt omnibus nota, and quorum etiam pertinacia nemini
est ignot A^bos ex verbo Dei cum tota vetustate and doctissim is quibusque
nostri saeculi contendimus ad Coonam Domini minime esse admittendos ib.
in an Epistle to Fredericus tertius, where he determines that Excommunication
is to proceed only in case of contumacy. But confirms the keeping away of
scandalous and impenitent sinners by thirteen Arguments, and says, they are
egregiously charitable who would have none kept away, and determines the
admission of the profane to be against piety, and charity, and answers the
trite Objections of Judas his receiving, and from that place, Let a man examine
himself; Ergo, none else may examine him, and determines the admission of the
profane; 1. Against the will of God. 2. A profanation of the Sacrament. 2. A
scandal to the Church. In short, says he, For those whose sins, and whose
obstinacy in sinning is known to all, we contend, both in the behalf of Gods
word, and according to all Antiquity, and all the Learned of our Age, that they
are not to be admitted to the Lords Table. He produces the authority of Justin
Martyr, Chrysostom in several places, Cyprian, etc.

In the next place let us hear the judgment of Reverend Danaeus, L^^^bert.
Daneus in Isagoge Christ p. 3 c. 59. p 4. l. 5. c. 53.
and that may be read plain enough in the third part of his Isagoge
Christiana, cap. 59. where he distinguishes the public censures of the Church
into Admonition, Suspension from the Lords Table and Excommunication; and in
his fourth part, and fifth book, cap. 53. he sufficiently proves, that the
Ignorant and Scandalous are to be kept away from the Lords Table, for which he
gives reasons, and answers objections.

Of the same mind is Learned and Reverend Zepperus, as may appear at large
from his Tract of the Sacraments in genere and specie, l. 4. de sacra Domini
coena, cap. 5. where he handles this question, for whom Christ instituted the
Sacrament of his Supper; and determines it was only for his Disciples, who
these are he explaines from Joh. 8.31. Mat. 16.24. Zepperus in tract. de
sacram. l. 4. de sacra Coena, cap. 5.
Joh. 13.35. And determines that the scandalous and obstinate ought not to be
admitted, because they are none of Christ's Disciples, because holy things are
not to be given to dogs, because it has been the constant practice of the
Church to keep them away, this he proves not only from the practice of the
Jewish Church, in reference to the Passover, but from the Writings of
Tertullian, Cyprian, Chrysostom, etc. and answers the objection of Judas his
supposed receiving.

I have a Book wrote in Latin, anno 1574. Ecclesiasticae disciplinae and
Anglicanae. Ecclesiae ab ill a aberrationis plena dilucidatio. p. 127, 128,
129, 130.
by some pious learned man, who I know not, I am informed it was Mr Dudly
Fenners, it is called, Ecclesiasticae Disciplinae and Anglicanae Ecclesiae ab
illa aberrationis plena e verbo Dei and dilucida explicatio; where Suspension,
distinct from Excommunication, is maintained and proved from Scripture and
Antiquity.

What was Bucanus his Judgment is evident enough from his Institutions; in his
44. common place he propounds this as his tenth question: Quot sunt parts sive
gradus Ecclesiasticae correctionis. How many degrees are there of
Ecclesiastical Censure? He answers three.

1. (...), seu (...), admonition.

2. Exclusio seu abstentio, etc. Bucan. inflit. theol. loc. 44. q. 10, etc.
Suspension from the Lords Supper for a time.

3. Excommunication, (of which see more there.)

So that it is plain, he also thought there was such a thing as Suspension
distinct from Excommunication, viz. absolute Excommunication.

Reverend and Learned Beza's judgment is so known, that I need quote nothing
out of him; but yet in regard that I am credibly informed, that M Boatman had
the confidence to quote the French Churches, as if they were of his mind, and I
have met with a passage in Beza, which not only speaks his Judgment, but the
Judgment and Practi^e of the Churches of God in France, I shall transcribe it;
it is in the Preface of the Book which he directs against Erastus, Beza de
Piesbyterio and Excom.
he calls it Tractatus pius and moderatus de vera Excommunicatione and
Presbyterio; In the Preface of that book you shall find this passage.

Consistorium igitur habemus, etc. We have, says he, a Consistory, in which
not only the Ministers of Gods word, but twice as many more, sit as Judges
chosen (out of the lesser and greater Senate) not without public notice first
given to the people, Dissenters as to the received doctrine of the Church, are
first friendly, and brotherly admonished: if they will be quiet, they are
commanded to remain still for the time to come, and there is no further vote
of disgrace put upon them; if they be stubborn, and a second more serious
admonition will not profit, then they are summoned to the Consistory: if they
pertinaciously resist their admonition, then they are forbidden the Lords
Supper, (being the seal of that doctrine in which they dissent from us) and
the whole Senate is informed of them. The same course is taken against them who
discover their profane mind by an open contempt of holy meetings. As to the
manners of the several persons, when faults are secret, we use gentle
admonitions, as the Lord prescribes; nor is any one called to the
Ecclesiastical Judicatory for a private fault, (which is not conjoined with
the public scandal of the Church) unless he contemns private admonitions;
but such as do contemn them, are again admonished by the Church, and being
convicted by due testimonies, if instead of asking pardon they show themselves
obstinate, they are according to the word of God, Mat. 18.17. commanded to keep
from the Supper of the Lord till they declare a change of heart. As for more
manifest and infamous sins, which the Church cannot wink at, he that has so
offended (for an example to others) is summoned to the Consistory; but if he
asks pardon, he is dismissed: but if he be admonished the second time, and
does not acknowledge his sin, and promise amendment, then as one who goes on
scandalizing the Church, he is kept away from the Holy Supper, which is a seal
of our mutual communion with Christ, and each with other, until he has given
evidence of his repentance. In more gross and open sins, which deserve greater
than verbal corrections only, the Church having first had lawful cognizance
of it, those that so sin are commanded to humble themselves before the Lord,
and to keep away from the Lords Table for some time, (in order to public
edification) until it appears that their sin is indeed grievous unto them.
But for open and public Excommunication, denounced before all the
Congregation, we do not use it but against persons altogether desperate and
hopeless, [non nisi in poene deploratos] that is his phrase) yet, says he,
for Apostates, we do not receive them to communion again, though they profess
repentance in the Consistory, unless they also beg forgiveness in the open
Congregation. Thus far this holy, and learned, and Reverend man, which speaks
his judgment, and the French Churches, clearly enough.

Holy and learned Ames speaks clearly enough: Amesii medullae. theol. l 1.
cap. 37. ^. 19, 20, 21.


Excommunication, says he, is not to be used unless to the sin be added
contumacy, n. 19. Mat. 18.17. The sinner being duly admonished must appear
poenitent or stubborn, he that is penitent ought not to be excommunicated,
therefore the contumacio us only.

N. 21. V. Amesium de conscientia and ejus jure and casibus, l. 4. c. 29. q. 8.
When the business can admit delay, it is agreeable to Scripture and reason,
that Excommuni^ation be begun first by Suspension and keeping away of the
sinner from the Sacrament, and other Church Priviledges, this says he, is the
lesser Excommunication.

N. 22. But the Church must not stay here, but urge the sinners repentance by
this way, and in this time of his Suspension, and when they are out of hopes of
that, they must proceed to a complete separation of him from communion with the
Church, this is the greater Excommunication.

Anthony Wollebius, Ant Wollebii compendium Christ. theol. l. 1. cap. 26.
Professor sometimes in Basil, is of the same mind.

Ligationis gradus suns, etc. The degrees of Cen^^sures, says he, are,

1. Severe admonition by the Presbytery, private admonition being rejected.

2. Suspension from the Lords Table, which he proves from Mat. 7.6.

3. Excommunication, by which the Party is cast out of the Church.

4. Anathema, when he is given over as one desperate.

I will add the testimony of Wendeline, Wendelini l. 1. Christianae theo. cap.
23. these. 18.
who in his first book Christianae Theologiae, in his 23. Chapter in his 18.
Thesis, determines, that he who is subjectum Coenae Dominicae, a Subject fit
for the Lords Supper, must be 1. adultus, one grown up. 2. Doctrina fidei
Christianae imbutus eique addictus, one who is endued with a knowledge of the
Doctrine of Christianity, and a friend to it. 3. Vitae Sanctae studiosus, one
who is studious of an holy life; therefore, says he, these must be shut out
from the Lords Table.

1. Infants, because they cannot remember the Lords death. 2. Because they
cannot prepare themselves.

2. Those that are ignorant of the Doctrine of Christianity, or ab ea alieni,
Because, says he, this Sacrament is ordained for none but the Citizens of the
Christian Church: and those who are partakers of the same says, and who
embrace and profess the doctrine of the Gospel; for as nothing is promised in
the Gospel to those who know nothing of Christ, or are enemies to the doctrine
of the Gospel, but the wrath of God is denounced to such: so nothing is sealed
to them, and therefore they are not to be admitted to the seal of the Promise.

3. Lastly, such as are manifestly wicked and profane, and that for three
causes:

1. Because by their impiety and profaneness they profane the Lords Supper.

2. Because they eat and drink unworthily, and so procure Judgment to
themselves.

3. Because the Church admitting such provokes God to wrath against it, casting
holy things and pearls before Dogs and Swine.

This is enough to show the judgment of particular men, who have been the
eminent servants of Christ in all Ages. Let us now take in the judgment of
whole Churches.

And it will be fit we should begin at home, out of our duty to our mother, and
considering that of all the Churches of God, now in the world, the English is
and has been most famous.

The Church of England may be considered either in her state of Virginity, or
of her pollution by the man of sin; or lastly, since her honest divorce from
him.

For our Church, what her judgment was before, Austin the Monk was sent over
to espouse her to the Romish Bishop; we have very little Record, the best which
I know, Concilia Pan. Brittanica, p. 92.
is in the learned book published by Sir Henry Spilman.

Austin came over anno 597.

The first council that learned Knight tells us of, is that of Arles, held in
Constantines time, and at his command, the place of their Session was in
France; it was held, says Binius, anno 326. Balaeus says 350. Baronius says
314. There were present for England at the Synod Eborius Bishop of York.
Restitutus Bishop of London, and Adelfius Bishop of London. Sacerdos a
Presbyter, and Arminius a Deacon.

They made 22. Canons, their third Canon, and fourth, and fifth determine
Suspension of Stage Players, etc. So does their eleventh Canon for young women
married to heathens. -- Placuit ut aliquanto tempore a communione separentur.
Their fourteenth Canon determines a Suspension till death for those who falsely
accuse their Brethren; indeed the words are Can. 3. A communione abstineri.
Can. 4. A communione separari. So Can. 5.11. but by communio is meant the
Communion of the body and blood of Christ only, as is plain from the last
Canon, and from the sins mentioned, Can. 3, 4, 5. not deserving absolute and
plenary Excommunication.

After this time, Page 47.
says Sir Henry Spilman, till Austins time, in regard of the great troubles of
Britain, through the continual inrodes of the Saxons, the Bishops
themselves, being forced to retire into Wales, were very few Synods in England.

In Ireland, says Sir Henry Spilman, anno 450. was a Synod held. He has a
Copy of the Canons agreed upon at it in their fourteenth Canon. They determine
a year for repentance to any who had killed any, committed fornication, or
consulted a wizard, Can. 15. they determine twenty days poenitence in case of
theft; this they distinguish (as is apparent from their other Canons) from one
who is anathematizandus, Can. 19. in case of adultery they determine
Excommunication.

This is all the Record I find concerning our Churches in that time, excepting
only some imperfect Records, mentioning some single acts of Censure; Monricus
was excommunicated for the murder of Cynetu in a Synod at Landaff, anno 560.
another Synod there enjoined King Morcant penance for murdering his Uncle
Frioc; and at a third Synod there, Guidnerth was excommunicated for the murder
of his Brother.

But a more perfect account I cannot find. From the time of Austine the Monks
coming over till King Henry the eighth our Church was Popish, and ruled by the
order of the Romish Church, who we know allows Suspension, as I have
sufficiently proved by their Schoolmen.

In the time of King Hen. 8. Reformation began to dawn; He directed a
Commission to thirty two persons to draw up a body of Ecclesiastical Laws.
Afterward King Edward 6. by his Commission dated November 11. in the fifth
year of his Reign revived and perfected the work. Cranmer, Peter Martyr, Dr
Cox, Dr May, Dr Tailor of Hadly, and some others, being his Commissioners to
perfect the body o^ the Laws, which was called Reformatio Legum
Eccesiasticarum,, and was printed at London anno 1641. In which book the
judgment of those eminent men, the Fathers of our Church (two of which, viz.
Cranmer and Tailor were Martyrs afterward) is evident, p. 151, 152, 153, 154.
they have nine Chapters concerning Suspension. In the second Chapter they show
the causes of Suspension amongst which this they allege as the maine.

Because in lesser offenses Excommunication cannot proceed, Quoniam magra
lequeretur, b^norum pertu^hatio, si cum hujusmodi person is infamibus
Sacramenta communicarent.
and oft-times suspicions of gross sins which may scandalize the Church may
appear where the fact cannot be fully proved, which they say must be taken
notice of by the Church. For it would cause a great disturbance in the Church
if the members of it should receive the Sacrament with infamous persons.

In their fourth Chapter they determine, that he who continues a whole year
suspended shall be Excommunicated, etc.

In their fourth Chapter they determine, that he who continues a whole year
suspended shall be Excommunicated, etc.

Soon after this the Bishops prevailed to have the Common Prayer and Rubric
confirmed, and from thence, as to this, we may know the judgment of our Church
till the year 1641. It is true they were as tender of the business of
Suspension, as they were free of their Excommunications. But yet we have thus
much in the Rubric prefixed to the form for administering the Lords Supper.

If any be an open and notorious liver, so that by him the Congregation is
offended, or have done any wrong to his Neighbor by word or deed, the Curate,
having knowledge thereof, shall call him and advertise him in any wise not to
presume to come to the Lords Table, V. The Book of Common Prayer concerning the
order for the administration of the Lords Supper.
until he has openly declared himself to have truly repented and amended his
former naughty life, that the Congregation may thereby be satisfied, which
before were offended, and that he has recompensed the persons whom he has
done wrong unto, or at least declare himself to be in full purpose so to do as
soon as conveniently he may. The same order shall the Curate use with those
betwixt whom he perceives malice and hatred to reign, not suffering them to
be partakers of the Lords Table, until he know them to be reconciled, and if
one of the parties so at variance be contented to forgive, from the bottom of
his heart, all that the other has trespassed against him, and to make amends
for that he himself has offended, and the other party will not be persuaded
to a godly Unity, but remain still in his frowardness and malice, the
Minister in that case ought to admit the penitent person to the Communion, and
not the obstinate.

Thus you see our Church while it was under Episcopal Discipline, yet allowed
Suspension distinct from Excommunication.

After that Episcopacy was voted down, and Presbytery established, Form of
Church Government. p. 29.
first by an Ordinance for three years, then for ever by the Form of Church
Government past and printed 1648. sine die. All may read the Presbyterian
Judgment for Suspension distinct from Excommunication, a. p. 27. of that book
to the end.

For our dissenting Brethren, it is their practice, when once they have
admonished an offender, to suspend him from the Sacrament till he repent, or be
wholly cast out of the Church. At this time, in this City, is one who has been
so suspended these twelve Months, if he be not lately restored nor
Excommunicated.

Lest any one should not think the Rubric clear enough to show the Judgment
of our Church in Episcopal times, I shall produce a proof or two more.

There was a Provincial Synod held at London anno 1603. where it was decreed,
Canon 26, 27. Constitut. and Canons printed 1628. Can. 26, 27.
That no Minister shall in any wise admit to the Communion any of his Cure or
Flock which be openly known to live in sin notorious without repentance; nor
malicious persons, nor unfaithful Churchwardens; nor such as refuse to be
present at public prayers, nor to any that depraved the Book of Common Prayer,
nor who spoke against the Kings Authority.

Let Reverend Deane Nowell speak, Dr Nowels Catechism. p. 647.
who in his Catechism Greeke-Latine printed London 1573. tells us, That if it
does appear openly that one is unworthy, the Pastor must not admit him,
because he cannot do it without the profanation of the Sacrament; and in order
to the keeping of them away the Deane tells us in well ordered Churches Elders
were chosen and joined with the Pastor, Ibid p. 652.
etc

From all this it is plain, That the Judgment and Practice of the Church of
England in all times, ever since it was a Church, has been to suspend some
from the Table of the Lord, who yet were not Excommunicated.

Let us look now into other Churches. The Reformed Churches are either those in
Germany, or in Holland or in France, or in Scotland.

For the Churches of the Switzers, they indeed practice no Discipline; but we
shall find all other Churches concurring with us.

The Judgment of the Church of Scotland may be known, not only by the
particular Writings of their eminent Gillespy and Rutherford, but by their
form of Church Government, printed 1641. where they tell us p. 39.

All baptized persons when they come to age and discretion are not admitted to
the Lords Table, The Government of the Church of Scotland, p. 39, 40, etc.
but such only as upon examination are found to have a competent measure of
knowledge in the Principles of Religion, and do profess that they are
believers, and do live unblameably, etc. -- But this not-admission to the
Communion is one thing, and Excommunication of heinous, or obstinate offenders
is another thing very different, etc. --

The Judgment of the Church of God in Holland is clear from their Corpus
Disciplinae, printed here anno 1645. chap. 4. Concerning Ecclesiastical
Discipline, art. 8.

He that shall obstinately reject the admonition of the Consistory shall be
suspended from the Supper of the Lord, 1 These. 3.14. that is in case of private
offenses.

Art. 10. He that has committed a public, Corpus disciplinae Engl. pr. 1645.
cap. 4. art. 8, 10, 11, 14.
or otherwise heinous offense, shall also be suspended from the Lords Supper,
though he should give signs of Repentance, according as the Consistory shall
judge most fitting.

Art. 11. He that has been suspended, if after diverse admonitions he shall
show no sign of repentance, he shall be published to the Congregation.

Art. 14. And at length if he does not repent follows the Excommunication,
etc.

I think here is Suspension before Excommunication, and distinct from it.

I hear Mr Boatman has quoted the Churches in France for him, how truly now
my Reader shall see, when I had quoted them against him, a friend of mine
telling him of it, he bad him ask Dr De-Lawne and he could satisfy him of the
untruth of my quotation. I did not quote them by hearsay, but from Reverend
Beza's account, which I quoted before. I conceived they had not altered their
minds, yet I sent to my Reverend Friend Dr Lawn, for satisfaction he came to me
April 9. and 1. assured me it was the daily practice of their Church to suspend
the scandalous. 2. Promised me to send me all the books he had concerning the
Discipline of their Churches to confirm me.

This day he sent me two, having left one with me. the first is called,

The Ecclesiastical Discipline of the Reformed Churches of France, printed
London 1642.

They say so much for it that I cannot transcribe all, let him who doubts read
the 19, 20, 21. p. n. 15. -- If it (say they) befalls, that besides the
admonitions usually made by the Consistory to such as have done amiss,
Ecclesiastical Discipline of the reformed Churches of France, p. 19, 20, 21.
there be some other punishment, or more rigorous Censure to be used, it shall
then be done either by Suspension, or privation of the Sacrament for a time, or
by Excommunication etc. So they go on directing to the execution of either, etc.

Another book is called, Ibid. p. 42, 43. Art. 15.
The general and particular Acts and Articles of the late National Synod of
the Reformed Churches of France, at Charenton 26. December. 1644. Printed at
London 1646.

They plainly and largely determine Suspension, and charge their Consistories
to distinguish it from Excommunication. -- The passages are too large to
transcribe; Let the Reader view that book at his leisure p. 42, 43.

There is yet one book more, containing an Extract of the four National
Synods of the Belgic Churches, viz. that of Embda, 1571. Dort 1578.
Middleburgh 1581. the Hague 1586. the Book is written in Latin, and called
Harmonia Synodorum Belgicarum, in the 36 page having before spoken of private
and public admonition, they determine: N. 8. Let him who has pertinaciously
rejected the admonitions of the Consistory be suspended from the Lords Supper.
Qui pertinaciter Consistorii admonitiones rejecerit, a Sacrae Coenae communione
susp^ndetur. Harm. Syn. Belgie. Si suspensus post iteratas admonitiones nullum
poenitentiae signum dederit, ad Excommunicationem procedet Ecclesia. Ibid.


And again Art. 9.

If he who is suspended, after iterated admonitions, show no sign of
Repentance, then let him be Excommunicated.

I think here is Suspension again distinct from Excommunication.

As for our dissenting Brethren, I spoke something before to prove it their
practice let meadde one thing more.

Our Brethrn of New England are the most pure, and sober, and considerable
Churches in the world of that persuasion, and those who alone would ever give
us a joint account of their faith as to Church Discipline. Let us hear what
they say; in their fourteenth Chupter, having spoken concerning public
admonition, they add,

Which declaring the offender to lie under the public offense of the Church
does thereby withold, A platform of Church Discipline printed London 1653.
Cap. 14. p. 21. n. 2.
or suspend him front the holy fellowship of the Lords Supper till his offense
be removed by penitent confession: If he still continue obstinate, they are to
cast him out by Excommunication.

I think here is also Suspension granted precedaneous to, and gradually
distinct from Excommunication.

There is only one thing to which I must speak a word or two wherein in our
present practice we differ from other settled Reformed Churches: As to the
suspension of any whom we, since the late Reformation, admitted to the holy
Table, we agree both with other reformed Churches, with our own in times of
Episcopacy, and with our Brethren of the dissenting party, we will suspend none
but after admonition for some scandalous sin, and indeed this only is properly
Suspension.

We deny the Sacrament indeed to others, viz. such as will not give account of
their faith, and submit to the order of the Church. But we would not have this
looked upon by our Brethren as if it were a standing principle of ours, or as if
we intended to put Christians to give an account of their faith every time they
come to the Sacrament, the contrary is evident in our practice; we must
therefore be considered as a disordered, and now reforming Church. Had all
those Ministers, who went before us in our Churches, done their duty, they had
saved us our labor. They should have admitted none at first to the Sacrament
but such as had a competent knowledge of the principles of Religion, and such
as were blameless in their lives, the principles of the Episcopal Government
required this.

But we find some of them made no conscience of it, but admitted any body for
his two pence, and cared not how scandalous they were, (ordinarily they could
not be worse than their Parson) we enter now into these men's harvests, and
finding what slovenly work they made, we cannot think it safe for us to work
after their rate: this made the Reverend Assembly propound this expedient, to
put us in order, that there might (pro prima vice) be a review of all those who
had been formerly admitted, and such as were found ignorant kept away, and so
for the scandalous.

Nay, I will add one thing more; Had our Bishops been conscientious in the
business of Confirmation, we had been spared this trouble and odium. For
Confirmation was in order to the trying of peoples proficiency after Baptism.
And as none not confirmed should have come to the Lords Table, so he should
have confirmed no ignorant scandalous persons though baptized: But we see the
clean contrary practice.

And there was no way but this to begin any Reformation amongst us, who by our
way of administration of that holy Ordinance had made our Churches a reproach
to Papists, and a grief of heart to all Protestants, and by it opened a way
for Brownists and Anabaptists, and others, to fill their Congregations with
those who were our strictest Professors formerly, though they quickly taught
them otherwise. And I think this may serve to satisfy any conscientious
Christians.

Nor shall any, how godly soever, or great so ever, have any just cause to
stumble at it that they must be enjoined to give account of their faith; For
besides, that we stand not upon Examination, but shall be as well contented
with a continued Narration of their faith from them, (which we are also ready
to give to them) Christians should consider how much the glory of God, and the
good of others is furthered by their open profession of their knowledge, and
confession of what God has done for their poor souls; and their Reason may
inform them, that we cannot spare them without partiality, which we must not
be guilty of.

And now, Reader, I have showed thee, that the Churches and Servants of Christ
in all ages, have owned and practiced this so much decreed Ordinance of
Suspension: Now judge whether Mr Boatman has informed his people truly, in
telling them it is a dream of the Pharisees, which wiser ages before never
thought of.

CHAP. XIV. Containing a digression, or rather a regression, with an attempt to
clear from the Writings of the Ancients the several degrees of persons not
excommunicated, yet suspended from the Lords Supper.
I Shall return a little to try a little further how far the practice of the
Church in the Primitive times, as to the keeping some from the Lords Supper,
who yet were not de facto cast out of the Church, and kept from all Ordinances,
can be cleared from the Writings of the Ancients, or those learned Atiquaries,
who have laboure'd to find it out before me, and spent their pains to very
good purpose, though their writings be in Latin, and so not so obvious to all;
this I shall do the rather,

1. Because I have heard of some holy and learned men that doubt it. 2. Because
it will expound some passages which I have already quoted out of the Councils,
and the (pretended) Areopagite. 3. Because the clearing of this will plainly
evidence the practice of the Primitive Church as to this point.

All Christians of old were distinguished into three sorts (...). 1. Such as
were Catechumeni under Catechism. 2. Believers. 3. Penitents. Hospites and
viciui fidelium. Raban. l. 1. de instit. cler.
Penitents were such as had fallen into some sins for which they were denied
the privileges of the Church.

The Catechumeni were such as were probationers for Christianity, or
Church Fellowship, and were put under the care of some Teachers to be
instructed in the Principles of Religion in order to it, when this practice
first began in the Church is not certain; the first Master of these Christian
Pupils, which we read of in Ecclesiastical History, was Pantaenus, who lived
(says Eusebius) anno 193. Eusebius. l. 5.6.9, 10. and in Chron. Bellarm. de
scriptor. Eccl. p. 76. Eusebius. l. 6.6.7.
and was Master of a School of them at Alexandria; Clemens Alexandrinus,
Pantaenus his Scholar, succeeded him in that employment (says Eusebius,) he
lived anno 204 says Bellarmine, but Eusebius says 194. which was ten years
before. Origin, his Scholar, was the next we read of, Eusebius reckons him
anno 208. Bellarmine reckons his 226. That the (...) were an ancient order of
Christians is plain from Gal. 6.6. From which place the Magdeburgenses
conclude the Apostles lest forms of Catechism; Centur. Magdeb. Cent. 1. l. 2.
c. 7.
it is probable to me that even from the Apos^les time there were in the Church
(...), and (...), some that were Catechized, and some appointed to Catechize
them, they are both of them Scripture terms. And And if we may admit the eight
books of Apostolical institutions to be wrote by Clement (which I durst not
allow) they determine the case, Constit: Apost. l 7 c. 40.
having a peculiar precept how those Catechumeni should be instituted, but
(leaving them as spurious) it is clear enough from several places of Clemens
Alexandrinus, Clem. Alex. l. 7. strom.
who lived doubtless in the second Century, that they were an order in his
time. Not only from that passage which my learned friend Dr Young has quoted
out of him, (...), which is l. 7. strom. but also from diverse other passages,
as in his 6. strom. (...).

My fore-mentiond, Dr Young in his Dies Dominica. l. 2 c 14. Albaspin. obs. l.
2 observe. 2.
Learned and Reverend friend says, there was of these two sorts: Audientes,
and Competentes. That learned Antiquary Albaspinaeus tells us of four degrees;
I will translate his words, or at least give his sense. As soon as divine
light had shined upon any, and put in his heart to be a Christian;

1. He was taught in some private house concerning the cheats and doting
superstitions of Pagans, but was not yet admitted to hear Gods word, etc. this
was their first degree.

2. Then they had liberty to go a little further, they might come and hear
Sermons; De Catechumenis and Catechizandi ordine vide Rabanum Maurum. l. 1. de
institut. cleric. Cap. 26. and 27.
hence they were called Audientes, these might only hear, not come into the
Church at Prayer.

3. After this they had liberty to join with the Church in Prayer, these were
called Orantes and genuflectentes.

4. When they had been thus far admitted, they were baptized, these were called
Competentes.

I shall not trouble my self to search what privileges each of these sorts
had, it is certain none of them were as yet admitted to the Lords Table, post
sermonem fit missa Catechumenis (says Augustine) manebant fideles. And indeed
the very right understanding of that term fideles determines the business, to
the clearing of which I shall transcribe a passage out of that incomparable
Antiquary.

Fidelis distinguitur a Catechumeno, and confirmato, non enim inter fideles
adsumebantur, Albaspin. obs. l. 1. obs. 25.
qui fidem in baptismo aut qui charismata and dona spiritus Sancti ipsumque
Spiritum Sanctum in confirmatione adepti essent, verum ii solum censebantur,
and appellabantur fideles, qui iis duobus Sacramentis muniti, Eucharistia
insuper donarentur, cum enim ea sit summum Christianae Religionis mysterium
arcanum, and Sacramentum, non cuivis olim temere concedebatur; sed ei duntaxat
qui multo antea morum and probitatis suae specimen exhibuisset, quique se it a
fidum probasset, ut tuto ei mysteria divulgaripossent. Is igitur vocabatur
fidelis, non qui baptizatus, aut confirmatus, sedqui Eucharistiae sacris
participasset. In English to this purpose.

A Believer is distinguished from a Catechumenist, and from one who is
confirmed, V. Etiam Pamelii annot. 256. in c. 41. lib. Tert. de praesc. contra
haeret. Catechumenos -- cui fidelis oppointur, qui jam plene edoctus, and
instruct us erat in fide, jamque receptus, and admissus ad nostra mysteria
percipienda. ib.
for all those who had obtained faith in Baptism, or who had received the
gists of the Holy Spirit were not presently reckoned amongst the Fideles; but
those alone were thought worthy to be called, and were called Fideles,, who
having been prepared by Baptism and Confirmation [which he calls Sacraments]
were surther admitted to the Lords Supper, for in regard that is the greatest
Mystery, and Secret, and Sacrament of the Christian Religion; of old it was not
headily granted to every one, but to him only who of a long time before had
given proof of his honest Conversation, and had approved himself so faithful
that those mysteries might safely be administered to him. He therefore was
called Fidelis, not who was baptized, or confirmed, but who was admitted to the
Holy Table.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, he is (...), Clem. Alex. strom. l. 2. impr. Lut.
1619. p. 371.
(...), who keeps faithfully what is committed to him; (...) (says he) (...).
One who keeps Gods Commandments is Fidelis, in his sense. But as to the
Ecclesiastical acceptance of Fideles, Albaspinaeus has doubtless told us
the truth.

It is out of all doubt, that the Catechumeni were not admitted to the Lords
Table. Tert. cum not is -- de la Bar. l. 4. contra Marcionem. l. de
Poenitentia. Quis Catechumenus, quis fidelis, incertum est, omnes pariter
orant, Tert. de praescrip. con. haeret. c. 41. Alcuinus de divinis offic. I
siod. l. 6. Etymol. c. 19. Raban. Maurus de instit. cler. cap 32. Ino. Epist.
73. Aug S rm. Council. Carth 4. Amb. l. 5. ep. 33. Council. Laod. cap. 19. Dion.
Areop. loc. praed. Athan. apol. 2. contra Arrian.
Renatus Laurentius de la Bar tells us, that -- In templo manebant donec
Evangelium expossuisset Episcopus. Tum clamabas Levita Catechumeni exeunt, vel
siquis Catechumenus remansit exeat; which suits with that of Austin, before
specified. And this is plain from Tertullian, who usually calls them
Audientes, and Auditores, who says, they might wish for the Sacrament of
Baptism, but ought not to presume to it, then surely not to the Lords Table.
Nay, they were not admitted to any Prayers with the Church, subsequent to the
Sermon, whence Tertullian cries out of it as a disorder amongst the Heretics,
that none could distinguish their Catechumenists from their Fideles, for they
all prayed alike; yet I conceive it a mistake of those who conceive the
Catechumeni were present at no Prayers of the Church, for then we must suppose
the Primitive Churches had no Prayers before their Sermons, which out of all
question they had, and the dismission of the Catechumeni was not till the
Sermon was done. Indeed, they might not be present at any prayers of the Church
preceding the administration o^ the holy Communion.

And thus much shall serve to have noted concerning the first order, the (...);
or (according to Pamelius) the second, for he makes the first (...).

Concerning the dismission of the Catechumeni they who desire further
satisfaction may read the Authors quoted in the Margent. Cyril. in Joh. l. 12.
c. 50.
I will sum up all with what I find in Cyrill, in Book 12. Chap. 10. of his
Commentary on John.

Prohibemus enim a sacra mensa Catechumenos, quam vis veritatem jam
cognoverint, and fidem magra voce consiteantur, quia nondum locupletati sunt
spiritu Sancto, qui non habitat in ijs qui baptismate non sunt consummati, etc.

From all this it appears: 1. That they baptized none but were fully
instructed in the Doctrine of faith, and had openly professed repentance. 2.
That till they were baptized, they admitted them not to the Lords Table.

Let us now see whether they admitted all baptized persons.

3. Their third order were (...). Let us examine: 1. Who these were. 2. From
what privileges of the Church they were restrained, Which happily were
originally the way of receiving in poenitents, rather than the degrees of
casting them out. Rejoinder p. 46. Dies dominica l. 2. c. 14.
and how long. 3. When this Order came up in the Church.

I am amazed at that piece of news which M. Humfry suggests in his late
Rejoinder, that the several degrees of penitence might be in order to
admission into the Church, (except he means readmission after falling) for he
is the first who ever suggested any such thing I think, (at least the first I
ever met with who hinted any such thing.) But it is contrary to all I ever met
with.

My highly honored and learned Friend tells us right.

They were such as, having embraced the Christian faith, and being baptized, Dr
Young.
and their names recorded in the Church, had afterward fallen into some open
wickedness, by which they had forfeited their right to the privileges of the
faithful, and were censured by the Church till such time as they should
declare sufficient signs of their repentance.

With him Albaspinaeus agrees, in his l. 2. Observat. Observe. 3. and doubtless
this is the truth.

Of these Penitents, says Dr Young, there were five degrees.

1. V. Dr. Young die. dom. l. 2. cap. 14. Albaspin. in obs. l. 2. obs. 22.
Their first degree was called gradus (...). These might not come into the
Church but were to stand without and beg the peoples Prayers; of this first
degree mention is made by Zonaras, Thaumaturgus, and Ambrose. I will transcribe
Ambrose his words.

Volo veniam reus speret, Ambr. de poen. l. 2. c. 16.
petat eam lachrymis, petat gemitibus, petat populitotius fletibus, ut
ignoscatur, and obsecret, and cum secundo, and tertio fuerit dilata ejus
communio, credat remissius se supplicasse, fletus augeat miserabilior, etc.

Albaspinaeus thinks, that in the two first Ages this was taken up by those
that had fallen spontaneously, afterward enjoined by the Church as the first
degree of penitence. He proves this degree out of Tertullian; Tert. l. de.
poen. cap. 9.
so does Dr Young; but to leave that Critical dispute, it is certain they
were not admitted to the Lords Table.

2. When they had thus continued a while, they were admitted to hear Sermons,
as those of the Catechumeni, who were called Audientes: they had the same
Tutors, the same, and no other privileges then they had, Albaspin. ibid. Dr
Young 's dies dom. ibid.
says Albaspin. the Church by this mending them, that by their sins they had
declared themselves such as again had need of that milk, not of strong meat;
hence are those frequent passages in the Canons of the Councils; Stent inter
Catechumenos. Quicunque annos exigant inter Catechumenos, cum Catechumenis
discedant, Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Ephesians. Sic Hom. 79. ad pop. Antioch.
etc. Chrysostom determines this case in his third Homily upon the Ephesians,
where he tells us, that when they came to the administration of the Sacrament,
the Preacher cried out: All you who are appointed to be Penitents depart; and
in the same Homily tells us, they might no more be there than the Catechumeni.
They might not stay the administration of the Sacrament, nor the prayers
attending it, but they were at any other prayers, as might easily be proved, V.
Liturgiae palm. in missa Basilii.
especially by the Liturgies of the Greek Fathers, if any cried it may be
allowed to them (for which I have little to say.) But it is an unworthy conceit
of us for to think that they had no prayers before they came to administer the
Sacrament, till which time they were not enjoined to depart. This degree of
penitence was called by the Greeks gradus (...).

3. The third degree they called (...), these the Latins call Substrati. when
the scandalous sinner had for some time stood at the Church doors only, and
begged of them who went in to pray for him, and for another time come into the
Porch, V. Dr Young dies dom. ibid.
but no farther, and there heard the Sermons, but when they were done, went
away before any of the latter Service, then they came to be Substrati. That is,
they were admitted to come just within the Church doors, and to stand behind
some Pillar, at some distance from the Congregation, where they one while stood
and mourned for their sin, by and by cast themselves grovelling upon the earth.
Then the Minister came mourning to them, and mourned over them, he and the
whole Church, falling down with them on the ground; then the Minister or Bishop
rises up and lifts them up, and praying for them dismisseth them. The Apostol.
Constit. Constit Apost. l. 8. c. 11, 12.
may be credited as to matter of fact in this case, though not for their
antiquity; they give you the form of Prayer used after which (say they) the
Deacon bid the penitents depart, V. Albaspin. obs. l 2. obs. 24.
and then they went to prayer for the Communicants, and to the administration
of the Supper; when it was said the former sort of penitents might not be
present at prayers, it is to be meant of these prayers, and those that followed
for the Fideles. Council. Arcl. socund. Can. 11.
This degree, says Albaspinaeus, (...), is called poenitentia by the Fathers,
and in the Canons; and this third sort (...) poenitentes, so the second
Council of Arles, -- Triennio inter poenitentes habeantur a communione susp
nsi, that is, inter substratos; and indeed here were most testifications of
humiliations required. Those that desire to be satisfied more concerning the
circumstances attending the penitents of this form, let them read learned
Albaspinaeus, largely Obser. l. 2. Obser. 24. who tells us, they were wont to
stay upon this form some good time, and had some kind of absolution and lesser
reconciliation to the Church before they were removed from it; when they had
done this, and had received imposition of hands for their absolution, they were
judged to have jus Communionis, a right to Communion with the Church, says
Albaspinaeus.

4. Then they might stay in the Church, (after the Catechument were gone with
the three forementioned degrees of Penitents) they might not only stay while
the prayers for the Catechumeni were done, Gradus (...).
(which the Catechumeni themselves might do) and the prayers for the other
Poenitentes, Albaspin. obs. l. 2. obs. 25. Dr Young dies dom. l. 2. c. 14.
Zonar. in Can. 4, 5. Council. Ancyr.
(at which they also might be present) but they might stay and join in the
prayers made for those who were the Fideles, and in complete communion, and see
the Sacrament administered; but they might not themselves receive the Sacrament,
nor offer, nor might their names be mentioned in those prayers, Ambr. ep. 28.
nor might the Priest offer while they were present, whereupon Ambrose refused
to offer while Theodosius, guilty of an unjust murder, was present.

Dr Young reckons another degree of Penitents, which he and others call
Subsistentes, when they were admitted to full Communion: but he tells us he
does not judge it a distinct degree, agreeing in it with Albaspinaeus, Loco
praed. These now were the several degrees of their Penitents, which were all
suspended from the Lords Table, as is evident, yet were they all Baptized. For,
for that penitence which was before Baptism, Albaspinaeus, I think, proves
strongly it was Voluntary, not imposed as a Church-Censure.

But yet there is one question to be spoken to before we dismiss this
particular, viz. whether all these were not first Excommunicated, and so these
degrees of penance enjoined them as testifications of their repentance before
they were admitted again into the Church? To this I answer.

I will not deny, but if any persons were Excommunicated, they might have their
way in their return to the Church lie through these four doors.

But it will easily be made appear, that some were adjudged to this penance
who yet were not absolutely cut off, and cast out of the Church.

1. He who was excommunicated was not only denied the liberty of praying with
the Church, but none might pray with him in a private house, Albaspin. Obs. l.
1 Obs. 1. and l. 2 Obs. 4. Synt. Antioch. 1. Can. 2. Council. Carth. 4. Can. 73.
Council. Arel. 2. Can. 15, 16, 18.
all despised and avoided him as a putrid member; -- (only he was to be
admonished as a Brother) but they might not kindly salute him nor bid him
God-speed, nor trade, nor eat, nor drink with them. But we read of no such
injunction concerning any of those who were Penitents, Can. Apost. 10. a man
was to be suspended if he joined in prayer with an excommunicated person. They
might by no means eat or drink with them, nortalke with them, as any one may
read in a multitude of the Canons of the first Councils.

2. Besides, there are many instances may be produced both from the Councils,
Council. Tol. 1. Can. 3.
and out of Basils three Canonical Epistles, where the time of the penitence
was limited to three, or sour, or five, or six, or seven years, according to
the Nature of the sin; but it was never known that a Church limited a time in
Excommunication, how long the party should so stand.

3. Albaspin. Obs. l. 2. Obs. 4.
Those who were Excommunicate were not censured and adjudged ad agendam
poenitentiam, but did pet ere poenitentiam, as a favor of the Church.

There were some in the Church that were adjudged ad perpetuam poenit entiam,
for some scandalous sin, to their death never to be received to Communion in
the Lords Supper with the Church, but never was any adjudged to a perpetual
Excommunication.

5. Many who were adjudged to some kind of penance for some sin, yet were
admitted to the Laick Communion, as they call it, as Albaspinaeus proves out of
very many Canons in l. 1. Obser. Obser. 4. what that Lai^k Communion, was I
shall not determine. Baronius, V. Pamelii anno^. 37. in Cypr. ep. 52.
Pamelius, and Durantus contend that it was to receive the Eucharist on the
other side of the Railes, etc. others think it was receiving the Sacramental
bread only. Albaspinaeus confutes them both, and sufficiently proves, it was
the fellowship of those Christians who were of the Laity. But those who were
Excommunicated had no such privilege allowed them.

By all this it evidently appears: 1. That although those who were
excommunicated did sometimes petere poenitentiam, crave the favor of the
Church in order to their restoring, that they might be admitted to stand as
penitents, and approve themselves again to the Church. 2. Or possibly when
they desired restoration might by order of the Church be enjoined to come in
by those steps; yet those frequent Canons of the Church, wherein for several
sins men were adjudged to stand as penitents for shorter or longer time, cannot
be understood to concern excommunicated persons, but such sinners as were
guilty of those sins, and yet the Church did not think fit wholly to cut them
off, but according to the rule -- Cuncta prius tentanda, appointed them to be
deprived of a partial communion with the Church for some time, that they might
see whether they were pertinacious, or whether God would give them an heart to
repent, that they might be again restored; and the time of their Suspension
was set longer or shorter according to the nature of the sins which they
committed. V. Council. Binii. V. Basil. Canon. ep.
Those who had been guilty of sins against Nature were suspended all their life
time, (in Tertullian's times) afterward in the Council of Ancyra, they had
time of repentance prefixed; so in Basils times for manslaughter Theodosius
the Emperor was suspended eight months, the Council of Ancyra gave them only
the liberty of the Sacrament sub exitum vitae, when they were near their
death. Basil (as I remember) determines them fifteen or twenty years
suspension. Adulterers before Cyprians time were suspended to their dying day,
afterward they had a shorter time set for to testify their repentance.

3. Now we have seen what the practice of the Church was, let us consider how
ancient this practice was; That it was very ancient is out of all doubt, but
how ancient cannot easily be resolved; Tertullian was the first who wrote
concerning it, who in his book de poenitentia gives us hints of it, and as
Albasphinaeus proves, hints the several degrees of it. Helvicus reckons him
within the second Century. Thaumaturgus, who lived in the next Century, in his
Canonical Epistle reckons up all the degrees, but that Epistle is suspected.
Magdeb. Cent. 2 cap. 6.
The Magdeburgenses tells us, that in the second Century there was a Custom of
setting sinners a time of public repentance. But in the third Century is
evident enough, about the year 210. O^ig. in Jos. hom. 7. Hom. 2. in. 37. Psalm.
and so forward. Origin in his seventh Homily on Joshua tells us, they
excommunicated none but those who were thrice admonished and refused
repentance; and in his second Homily on the 37. Cypr. de lapsis Ser. 5. Tert.
in lib. de poenitentia.
Psalm. gives us some account of their order in public penance. Tertullian and
Cyprian do it abundantly. Gregorius, Thaumaturgus (if the Canonical Epistle be
his) does not only tell us the several degrees, but tells us what places were
assig^ed for them in the Church in their several degrees.

Qui vero excommunicati, Centur. l. 3. c. 6.
aut non excommunicati, grav^ter out idolis sacrificando, aut haereticos
deficiendo, lapsi essent, non nisi post publicam poenitentiam, and confessionem
debite peractam recipiebantur, (say the learned Centuriators in this Century.)
In this Century the time of their poenitence was appointed according to the
nature of the offense; Cypr. l. 4. ep. 2.
we learn out of Cyprian, that those Christians who had eagerly professed the
Christian Faith, and in the time of persecution fell away, had three years set
them, all which time they were suspended; when the time set them was expired,
if the Church judged they had duly manifested repentance, they took their
names, and enrolled them, giving them a Ticket to this purpose: Admit this man
to the Communion, Ib. l. 3. ep. 15, 16. Cypr. ep. 52.
who, having formerly fallen, has shown sufficient signs of repentance, so
Cyprian; after which, as the Magdeburgenses prove out of Cyprian, they were
examined and judged by their particular Churches after which upon their
confession of their sins there also, they were admitted. It is more than
probable, that Novatus his heresy, which was broached about this time, gave
occasion to the Church to mitigate their Censure of Excommunication, and
denying the Communion till death to some scandalous sinners. For Cyprian tells
us, that his Predecessors had refused to reconcile Adulterers at all to the
Church, and, if I mistake not, the same was determined concerning Apostates, I
think Albaspinaeus proves it. Novatus, say some, Albaspin. Obs. l. ^. Obs. 21.
denied that any falling after baptism could be restored by repentance;
Albaspinaeus says, it is a mistake, for his Error was, That he denied that
Christ had given power to the Church to absolve or restore any. In opposition
to whom the Church remitted something of her former severity, and instead of
Excommunicating, or denying the Sacrament till death, (which before were very
frequent (ensures) they determined that scandalous persons should, being
admonished, and approving themselves to the Church by these steps, be restored
to a plenary Communion. And now I have given my Reader as good an account as I
can find of this Primitive Discipline, from whence he may observe.

1. That we who desire the Presbyterian reformamation, in the exercise of our
Dis^^p^ine, require no more than the recovery of this ancient Custom of the
Churches of Christ. It is as clear as the light.

1. That they admitted none to the Sacrament but such as before had approved
themselves to the Church to be (...), enlightened with the knowledge of the
Principles of Christian Religion.

2. Such as were free from all gross and scandalous sins, and if they did fall
into any, they required not only a verbal profession of their sorrow, and a
promise of their amendment, but, that according to the nature of their offense,
they should be kept from the Sacrament, till by an humble contrary walking for
some time they had manifested their hearty sorrow and repentance.

To which purpose they set 1, 2, 5, 10, 15, 20, years for them, we plead not
for such a time, but for a convenient time for them to stand ashamed, and to
evidence their true repentance. And though as to every particular circumstance
we do not justify our Fathers, yet in these two maine things we agree with
them, and insist on no more.

And for the point of examination (so much bogled at) it is only in order to
the settling of our Churches, and the correcting the abuses of corrupt Ministers
formerly, who should have looked to that, to have admitted no blind ignorant
persons to the Lords Table, which I have sufficiently evidenced, was the
Discipline of the ancient Church of Christ.

Secondly, From what has been said the Reader may judge how simply, or
maliciously Mr Boatman spoke, when he told his people, that it never entered
into the heads of wiser ages to determine for what sins any should be suspended
from the Lords Table. It is a sign he never read the Councils, nor any part of
them, nor yet Basils Canonical Epistles ad Amphilochium, he would have seen
there that for Manslaughter, Adultery, Fornication, Perjury, Apostasy, and many
sins more Suspension was determined.

I shall conclude this Chapter with that exclamation of Albaspinaeus, with
which he concludes the two and twentieth Observation of his second book,

O mirabilem sacrosanctae antiquitatis pietatem and religionem! -- O veteris
disciplinae sanctitatem mirabilem! etc. --

O the admirable piety and Religion of sormer times! O the wonderful holiness
of the Church, and strictness of her Discipline then! In those days if a
Christian in the heat of persecution to save his life had but bowed to an
Idol, or offered in their Temple, (though sorely against their will) the
Church did not only suspend him from the Sacrament, but he could not be
restored again till his dying day, or till after seven or ten years standing
as a penitent: Now if Christians give up themselves to their lusts, and not to
save their lives, but to satisfy their beastly lusts only, be drunk,
unclean, swear, lie, etc. yet if they will but wipe their mouths, and say
they will do so no more, they must presently be admitted to the holy Table,
yea, and they usurp Christ's authority that will keep them away (if we may
believe all that is told us.) Basil. ep. Canon. ad Amphil.
Then the Adulterer might not be admitted till by fifteen years holy
conversation he had evidenced his repentance; now we think fifteen months, Ib.
Can. 58. Ib. Can. 59.
yea, fifteen days too much. A Fornicatour must abstain in those days eight
years; two he must only beg prayers; other two he must only hear; other two
he must mourn; a seventh he must stand and merely look on; in the eighth he
might be admitted. If one had stolen and confessed it himself, Ib. Can. 61.
he must have been kept away a year, if he had not confessed it, two years.
Now it is no more, but Let him that has stolen steal no more, and come. Ib.
Can. 64.
If a man had sworn falsely, and forsworn himself, then he must have been
kept away eleven years; now if he swears profanely, it is but a Venial sin,
if he says he is sorry, our charity must shut her eyes and believe him a
visible Saint. Nay, and we must be made believe that all former ages were as
mad, and as loose as we are. No, no, Reader, the fear of God was more upon our
forefathers hearts, they durst do no such things, they rather offended by too
much severity, yet sinners in those days had ten times more temptations to
sin, and those of the highest nature, from the danger of their lives, and
spoiling their goods, etc. we may be as strict as we will, and are not tempted
but when we are drawn away by our own lusts, and enticed. O how inexcusable
shall the Ministers and Elders of Congregations appear before the Lord Jesus
Christ for the exposing his body and blood to profanation; Shall not the Lord
say, Behold here my Servants Tertullian, and Cyprian, how strict they were in
furious times? Behold my Servant Chrysostom, who would rather have suffered
his own blood to have been shed than my Sons to be profaned. Behold my Servant
Ambrose, he was not afraid of the face of an Emperor, Theodosius.
but in a just cause he denied him the Sacrament; you were afraid of the face
of a rich man, afraid of losing ten shillings a year, afraid of losing the
love of those who hate me; what shall we say? How shall we appear before the
Lord? Shall not blushing cover our faces that day? The Lord grant it be laid to
none of our charge.

FINIS.
An Appendix to the former Discourse, containing a Discourse of Mr Boatmans in
a public Lecture at Peter's in Norwich, seeming to answer my first Argument
upon the first Question, by putting another interpretation upon Mat. 7.6.
With some Animadversions tending to prove he said nothing to the purpose in
the said Discourse.
Reader,
I Shall trouble thee a little further: upon the twenty third of March (as I
told thee in my Preface) being entreated by a Reverend Brother in the City to
preach his Lecture, I preached upon Mat. 7.6. My Sermon was the sum of my first
Argument upon the first Question delivered in thesi, without the least
particular reflection. Upon the Lords day after, a Friend told me that he heard
Mr Boatman did intend to confute me the next Tuesday.

Accordingly he took my Text, what work he made with it, thou shall read in
the following sheets, containing a Copy of his Sermon, taken in shorthand from
his mouth by a faithful hand: as to the material passages which I have to do
with, I can prove them by many witnesses. If thou have any faculty in judging,
judge betwixt me and him; how well he confuted me, or proved any thing which he
said in opposition to me, or the truth I delivered, to help thee I have
subjoyned a few Animadversions. There is a clamorous party which cries me up as
sufficiently confuted, etc. to vindicate my self and the truth, I have
subjoyned these sheets. I ask no favor from thee, but only a just, and
righteous judgment. I intend not to meddle with him in the Pulpit, if he has
any thing to reply with his Pen, I shall wait upon it. Or if he will dispute, I
am ready for him: It is an easy thing for a man who has confidence enough,
and conscience little enough, to say, Here was untruth delivered, the Holy
Ghost never dreamt it, it is nothing to the purpose. Here thou have what was
said before thy eyes, read, and judge, and the Lord give thee understanding in
all things.

His Sermon follows,

The TEXT.
Mat. 7.6. Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, Mr Boatman at the
Lecture, March 28. 1654
neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their
feet, and turn again and rent you.


HAving the last day finished the first Doctrine propounded from Luke 7.41.
Paragraph. 1.
I thought it not amiss, before I passed on to the other, to take occasion to
redeem a captive Text, such an one as is led about^ and I may say with holy
reverence, almost by the nose, to assert that which Christ never intended, as
you shall presently see.

The Text is without any connection at all, it seems neither to have reference
to what goes before, or what follows after, and so it may be called a
proverbiall admonition, or dehortation, wherein you may consider these
particulars.

1. A dehortation under a double notion, The Analysis of the Text.
give not holy things to dogs, neither cast pearls before swine. Therein
consider, 1. The Subject, and that is likewise under a double notion that which
is holy and pearls. 2. The Object, laid down Negatively and expressly,
likewise under a double notion, dogs, and swine.

2. The reason of the dehortation: 1. Because, says our Savior, the swine
will trample them under their feet. 2. The dogs will return again and rent
you. Paragraph. 2.


In the opening of the words (not to wind or wrest them in the least) you shall
have the plain scope and intention of the Holy Ghost, and I hope so plain as
he that runs may read it; I shall show you: 1. What is meant by that which is
holy. 2. What by dogs and swine. Then what it is to trample, and by that time
you shall have the full scope and meaning of the Text, and then I shall draw a
Conclusion, which I shall briefly prosecute.

1. Mr Boatman's restrict exposition of holy things and pearls.
sacred truths are meant, but especially, and more particularly holy reproves
and admonitions, and that is the utmost the Text reaches; severe and wholesome
admonitions, and dehortations from evil, these are called holy and pearls for
several reasons. 1. Because of the Fountain whence they flow; divine truths
are of the brea^^ of God, therefore Christ is called the Word, and said to come
from the bosom of the Father, Joh. 1. therefore by our Savior Christ they are
called holy.

Nothing is, or can be more holy. 2. As from the cause, so from the effect; the
Word of God and divine truths set home by the work and spiritual power of God
are effectual to beget grace, and produce holiness in the heart; hence we
find, Romans 1.16. the Gospel is called the power of God unto salvation; and 1
Cor. 5. Spirit and life, all signify not only their power but purity. 2. Why
are these truths especially sacred and wholesome reproves, called pearls? 1.
For their own innate and inward preciousnesse, though none in the world do own
them, or take notice of them, but slight them, yet they are precious. 2. They
are so to them that receive them, and possess them; we find them therefore
called riches, under the notion of wisdom, etc. So that in effect these holy
things in the Text, and pearls spoken of are divine truths, wholesome
reproves and admonitions occasionally given.

The next thing is to see who are the dogs and the swine, one and the same sort
of men in general, yet they speak a distinction between obstinate and wicked
men; in the general none but obstinate and very irreprovable men, these are
the dogs and swine; they are called dogs in relation to their cruelty,
fierceness and rage against the Gospel, when it is offered to them as a check
to their lusts, and restraint to their abominations, as dogs enraged will fly
at a man, when they be whipped and beaten for the mischief they do they will
turn again and fly at his face: So says our Savior Christ, there are a sort
of men in the world, to whom if you speak never so seriously, savourily,
charitably, and holily, yet like dogs they will turn again and rent you, By
Swine he denotes another sort of obstinate opposers, one denotes them furious;
this luxurious -- so as to be grown in love with their filthy ways, their sin
and abomination, that they will not veil to wholesome saving truths, etc.

Now let us see to our Saviors reason, they will trample, and that speaks the
ineffectualnesse of such holy and savoury truths, when they meet with such
incapable Subjects, as if Christ had said, never do it, it is to no purpose,
they will make no more of them, than swine do of pearls when they are thrown
to them, that speaks the uselessenesse of them, and of dealing with such kind
of men. The second is drawn from that injury that may accrue to the
admonishers, when the lusts of obstinate men are reproved, instead of doing
that they should, and saying as David, Let the righteous smite me, etc. they
will return evil for good, they will ruin you (if it be possible) for going
about to save them, they will undo you, because you are so pitiful and
merciful to their erring and straying souls, as to bring them to the right
and true way.

The whole Text briefly amounts to this: Mr Boa^mans sum of the Text, and
pretended vindication of it.
That it is to no purpose to deal with men of irreprovable and dog-like
spirits these are not capable of reproof, and divine admonition, and holy
counsel; you may (says our Savior) do it, but it will be very useless, it
will do no good, it is a folly, it is very dangerous, you will be losers, and
neither God, the Gospel, the truth, or your souls will have gain; you may
have a reward in heaven, not only when you do, but when you suffer for Christ's
sake: yet however take heed of the persons you deal with, and labor to do it
in such a way as may not make sinners seem dogs and swine unto you.

Indeed, I read of some that wrest this Scripture, and among many, diverse of
the Romish Church, they (some of them) expound it thus, and tell us, it may by
consequence be reduced to the Sacrament; and tell us, they are not fit to come
to the Sacrament that will not make auricular confession; ( and it is a fond
trick that is got up again in our days, and some would feign bring into the
Church,) but it has no relation at all to that holy Ordinance; For though
wicked men (which the Scripture calls dogs and swine) unfit receivers may
tremble, when they dare put their hand to the body and blood of the Lord Jesus
Christ; yet notwithstanding to preach such a thing from this Text, is little
better than to speak untruth in the Pulpit: It is not truth, but truth to
purpose that men must speak from sacred Texts of the holy Word of God, else
they fasten that on the Holy Ghost which he never meant, or dreamt; and it is a
dreadful account which a great many men in the world have to give, vainly to
attempt to build any holy foundation on a Text which is either too weak for
it, or which it does not at all concern; It is an easy matter to wring a Text
so long by the nose as to make it bleed again, and all to little purpose. Take
notice, whatsoever may be urged about this sacred Ordinance from any other
place, and at another time, it is not meant here, to speak of it here is to
speak to no purpose, not worth the speaking, it is not the sense of the Holy
Ghost. I come to the conclusion.

The Doctrine which I shall gather hence is this,

It is the duty of every Christian, especially of every Minister, to take heed
to whom, and how they deliver divine truths, lest delivering them to obstinate
and irreproveable men, they labor in vain, and they trample upon them.

This truth is not once only hinted to us in Scriptures, you shall find it was
the care of all the Children of God in all Ages, and the special care of
Christ himself, not to deliver sound and saving truths to some sorts of men;
sometimes look how cautelous holy David seems to be, Psalm. 39.1, 2. he makes
it one of the highest points of wisdom to consider before whom he uttered
words that concerned Gods glory, and did not while the notoriously obstinate,
incorrigible, and irreproveable were present: these instead of understanding
more would turn their backs, hate instruction, be scoffers, and mockers at the
facred truths of God. To this end and purpose we find, how that (unless in
case of special Commission, and God commanded them to speak home with the
hazard of their lives) they were always very wary and prudent to whom, what
of, and how they declared the mind of God; you may see it at large at your
leisure in Isaiah, Jeremiah, Exekiel; you find God speaking of a rebellious
stiffenecked people, bids the Prophet meddle no more with them, pray not for
them, as if he had said, it will be vain and useless, altogether
successelesse; our Savior Christ, when on earth, knowing the inveterate hatred
of the Pharisees against the great truths delivered, light being come into the
world, etc. when he was among these men, many times he would make no answer,
and when he did, it was in dark sayings, at a distance, in Parables as wrapped
up into the third heavens, and all to let us see caution must be used in
dealing with the wicked and obstinate in divine matters, things sacred that
concern Gods glory, and the honor of men.

For Reasons,

First, Truths not wisely dispensed, holy reproves not warlly managed are
trampled on; There is nothing men had need have a greater care of, than the
honor of Divine Truth. Now this is not only hazarded by prostituting sacred
truths to this sort of men presently, but adventuring on, that is the cause
they mock and scoff, and will not be reproved. We by experience find it brings
truth into disgrace, makes them vilify them, and slight them by a nod with the
head, a wink with the eye, a shake of the head, and it will be very well (as
our Savior Christ says) if there be not a spurn with the foot. Now, says
he, never let such precious truths as these be hazarded to contempt and scorn,
take not such holy pains, that might be otherwise employed, and more to
purpose, it makes them look with an evil eye, scorn, and scoff; It renders
Religion odious and ridiculous to them; they cannot see, or rather will not see
or hear; but stop their ear with the adder; and although there be an amiable
luster, real excellency, and an inexpressible virtue and glory in them, yet to
them they appear ridiculous. We have examples enough of this in Scriptures;
John Baptist came into the world and spoke for this purpose, to see if he could
reclaim an erring Generation; It is true, his words were not altogether
ineffectuall, Jerusalem, and a great part of Judea go out to him, yet mark
what our Savior Christ says, he came not eating or drinking, and they said he
had a devil; This was all he got for his pains in abundance, the man was mad,
he was a prating fellow, he looks like one that had lived indeed all his days
in a wilderness, as one out of his wits. Our Savior Christ comes in such a
manner as would win the most refractary and hard heart, and the most obstinate
sinner, with meekness, patience, tenderness, pity; he was ready to do every
man good, none evil, he scorned no man, he disdained not the Society of
Publicans and sinners (though the Pharisees made use of it to his disgrace) so
he might do them good: Mark what he gets from others, a wine-bibber, etc. as
much scorn and contempt as a Pharisee knew well how to put upon a man; hear
St Paul that chosen vessel and Apostle of the Gentiles preaching, and the next
news you hear is, what will this babbler say? That is all he got from another
Generation of men; such are the swine spoken of, and that our Savior knew
before he said this, therefore in his divine wisdom he cautioneth his
Disciples, and those that came after them, etc.

Secondly, They will turn again and rend you; not only scorn and rage; this
is from the ineffectualnesse, successelesseness, and uselessenesse of such
endeavors, thereby they endanger themselves; as if he had said, why will you
do it when God does not necessarily require it, God puts none of his Messengers
upon apparent hazard, unless his honor lies at the st^ke; and a man's life
and the propagation of sacred truths come in competition, he bids no man
venture his life, be wise as serpents -- weigh not only the substance but the
circumstance of your administrations, if you do thus, you may save the truth
and your selves too and hinder a great evil; the hardening of others by the
example of such obstinate ones; they will take occasion not only to sit and
scorn, but to rise up in rebellion against the Kingdom of Christ, and so
render the propagation of the Gospel a great deal more difficult than before,
these are the reasons.

Now it may seem very strange that there should be any such men as these in
the world. I fear they are no where more than among those whose mouths are
fullest of those terms of dogs and swine. I know none that will bite a man
giving them wholesome reproof, or that will neglect or slight serious
admonition. As for those dogs in the Text, I know no such at all; and a man
would think it a strange thing that there should be any such that would ruin
a man that goes about to save them, and yet no question there are such, our
Savior Christ's Precept is not in vain; he foresaw this, had experience of
these, and that is the ground of his advice, therefore he tells his Disciples,
never think it strange that there are such beasts as these men are, etc. It
may seem strange, but it is not so strange as true. I shall therefore give
some reasons how it comes to pass, how men come up to this temper, for it is
wrought by degrees; when the Devil has once set a man onward on sins way, he
will then drive him on as far as he can; sin is little at first, most of all at
last; if a man be acquainted with peccadilloes today, he will not scotch
enormous crimes tomorrow. How do men sin away their light, fear resolutions,
conscience, come to glory in sin, and when once come to that, they sleep in the
scorn and contempt of all sacred truths, and rage against them, and the
endeavors of the godly to do themselves good, and that to all eternity.

The reasons briefly.

First pride, Paul the Doctor of the Gentiles comes with sacred truths to
discover to the Church of Cori^th, etc. There were a party among them which
counted themselves Greeks, and reputed all in the world besides barbarous,
rude, unlearned, he delivered the great mysteries of the Gospel, and what
begets him so much opposition as he meets with, but the pride of those vain
Philosophers in their pretended knowledge and science which they had obtained;
they could not endure to hear this, that there should come a man into the
world wiser than themselves, he tells us the Gospel is foolishness to these;
not so really, but he speaks their language only; They counted it folly, etc.
This was the height of their pride; What made Pharaoh ready to execrte Moses
for declaring the mind of God? This only, who is the Lord? etc. What am I, Lord
over Egypt, the mighty Pharaoh, and shall I stoop to another whom you call a
God, when I know not whence he is, nor whether be is bound? What must I submit
and let go a Nation so serviceable to me? Men's pride, by reason of their
knowledge, pra^es, authority, means, parts, etc. this has made the Sons of
men, in all Ages, storm and rage, Psalm. 2. This is also given as a reason, the
great wise, and mighty men men of great authority, and no small experien^e,
they walked in the ways o^ their hearts, and their own imaginations, when the
Kingdom of Christ comes to to be set up, which crosses all their designs by
such means, and in such a manner, they will not endure to hear of that,
therefore say they, Let us break his bonds asunder, -- What, shall we bow to
such a rule as this? No, our tongues are our own, we will speak what we list,
etc. such men as these cannot endure to be accounted ignorant, or low; no, they
must be at the height, and their knowledge must pass for all the men's about
them; What was the reason Jobs friends were so hot and angry, and accounted him
a fool in his knowledge? All because he would not acknowledge their wisdom
and understanding which they pretended. Doubtless there are a Generation of
men in the word that think they are the men that know all, this is the reason,
that any truth which is declared, that crosses them, they contemn and rage
against.

Take an account of the grand reasons, why our Savior Christ, in the days of
his flesh, met with so much oppo^^tion in the world; he ^ame not as a man that
went about to overturne any one; How orderly was he in his conversation? How
obedient to the Magistrate under Laws and Governments? He paid Tribute, told
them he came to ful^ll all righteousness, a man of a meek spirit; we hardly
find any external sor^e or severity in him, yet what a fa^e of rage was in the
world? the reason was: As the Ephesians were afraid to lose their craft, so
these S^ribes and Pharisees feared Christ would carry all before him, the truth
would be received from him without prejudice, his Sacred and Divine Oracles
would take place; and mark what they say, have any of the Ruler, believed on
him? but ye (speaking of the Vulgar) know not the Law, and are accursed. A
Scribe could not endure any man should be thoug^ wiser than himself, nor a
Pharisee that another should take more place in the thoughts of the men of that
Generation he lived in than himself; therefore let Christ bring salvation,
tender gra^e, yet for all this all shall be contemned, slighted, and he hated
for it; if they can they will ruin him for it, and do as these dogs in the
Text. Though Gospell-truths be never so seriously declared in men's ears to the
conversion of men, yet men of high, carnal, proud, and haughty spirits, how
are they ready to rage and roar, apt to design, and contrive the death of
such a man. When e^proceeded so many Martyrdoms in the days of the Kings of
Judah? Isaiah went under the saw; Jeremiah was in the dungeon; Micaiah was fed
with the bread of affliction; even from the pride of all those wicked Kings and
their officers, they wou^d not be controuled, sic volo -- their will must be
their law, though the will of the God of heaven, declared faithfully and
seriously, were contrary, etc. It would make a man amazed to see Ahab going up
to Ramoth Gilead, Joash smiting Jehoi^da's Sons, Zedekiah breaking through the
Hosts, when the Prophet told him it should be to his ruin, a man would wonder
they are so bold; the reason is this, men of proud and carnal hearts cannot
endure to come under the Power or Government of Jesus Christ, men had rather
break than bend, and be flexible, to divine will, they will run on their ruin
inevitably before they will stoop and that is signified by the expression;
which the Holy Ghost uses in relation to the Kingdom of Christ, Psalm. 2. They
are not flexible inalterable, they well not give way -- if you do any thing to
alter them, you will break ruin them, make them wholly useless; they will
submit to nothing but destruction, thus carnal pride renders stiff souls,
hard hearts, men impenitent, unteachable, they will not, cannot see, there is a
great reason such men as these should be termed dogs and swine.

Secondly, because they delight in their lusts; that is the reason men rage
when as the light comes, Joh. 3.19. What was the reason the faithful Prophets
of God were not honored? Jer. 5. ult. the people love to have it so; What
people? My people. Men love their lusts, and delight in their abominations, and
evil ways their darling Delilah sins, their right hands and eyes, their
corruptions. Now the word crosses all, and cries up self-denial, and cannot
endure their abominations, this is the reason men rage. John Baptist preached
severely to the world, had he come with plain simple sentences, had he been a
Messenger full of grace, peace, and life; had he preached placentia, he should
have been entertained; had he lullabied men in the bed of carnal security, he
had not been disturbed; had he let the Adulterer alone in his uncleanness, the
drunkard in his drunkenness, the Pharisees in their avarice, cruelty, and
hypocrisy, and let them alone in their vain preten^es of Religion, and not
have opened these painted Sepulchers, all had been well; but because he
reproved them therefore they rage, are so stern and are troubled roared
against the Prophet and his Message: all the while the Devil was lest quiet in
those he possessed, he did no great mischief, but here and there one, but
always when he was to be dispossessed and come out, he rent and tare; as long
as men's lusts are let alone, and they sleep secure in avarice, cruelty, and
viciousness with their lusts, and the devil in their bosom, the men are
quiet; but if a man unmaskes them, and goes about to discover them, O they will
storm, and dislike such men as these; all the while they can carry on their
business unmolested, or undisturbed, O how fair, meek, and content will they
be: but come to cross that which they love, and set up in their hearts as an
Idol then they will rage; come and tell such a man of his Delilah, you shall
find he will not be convinced, taken off, or he will follow another fairer than
the former, and then (if you will) away with it; many men have false hearts,
they are taken off one lust, but on to another; they are taken off open
drunkenness, and such profane and debauched courses that make the world cry
shame of them, but then follow lying, falsehood envy, and malice, overreaching
their brother underhand cruelty, racking others, couzenage, cheating, and the
like, cross these and then they will rave. Take heed of such men as these,
(says our Savior) they will scorn you, and look to your selves, you shall
escape well if they ruin you not. As Ahab said of Micaiah, this fellow never
speaks good of me, as wicked as he was he would feign be counted good. -- I
remember a story of Mahomet the great Ottoman Emperor, he was so delighted in
his Sultana, that nothing could move him to part with her, but when he had a
fairer offer, he was content to leave that lust he enjoyed; these men will not
part with their lusts, though never so abominable, odious, and hateful,
unless they can find them more pleasing, profitable, and honorable, else they
will rage, etc.

Thirdly, positive and gross ignorance in the things of God, they are dogs and
swine, have not knowledge enough to make distinction between thing and thing,
but they call light darkness, and darkness light, therefore they abuse,
contemn, and despise all, and rage, Joh. 1.9. there is the reason, 1 Cor.
2.14. though he demonstrated more high mysteries than ever any wisdom
pretended to before in the world, yet they refused, mocked, reviled, hated,
persecuted, -- that is another reason why our Savior calls them dogs and swine;
alas swine know not the price of a Pearl, they see no luster in it; there are
abundance of swine-eyed men in the world; of all Creatures in the world that ye
know, or look on, a swine has externally the worst eye: such men as these see
not, discern not at all, in seeing they see not, as the Prophet says, -- in a
great many men of the world there is much positive and gross ignorance; such
incurable darkness and blindness, that for all the glory of divine truths
that you can show them, (as much as in you lies) and the Creature is capable of
on this side heaven, they will not believe; what was the reason Christ was
scorned, and persecuted of men? Isa. 53.1, 2. they saw no beauty in him --
omnipotency stoopes to theem (as I may say, with reverence) to little purpose;
the reason of all this is, because they are blind -- but O the folly of men!
this makes them as dogs and swine; Well, I shall expatiate no further, but make
application.

First, By way of admonition; The Application. Paragraph. 7.
Take heed you come not within the verge of this reproof, that it does not
reach you, for (as the Apostle says) I hope better things of you; let it never
be said, whatsoever men fasten on you, however you are called dogs and swine,
(bear it patiently) that you are truly so, and in the sense of the Text. Take
heed of despising, refusing of, raging at, and trampling on divine truths. Oh!
when a man comes to this there is litttle hope, and truly, brethren, till he
does there is hope, -- but if a man be once come to this, to an irreproveable
spirit, there is more hope of a fool, (as Solomon says in another case) of a
mad man, I had almost said, of a Devil -- Whatsoever you do take heed of this;
never let it be said you are of such a spirit, as that you will not endure
admonition; mistake not brethren, I say not, from all men you should bear it
patiently, (though it is true, the more patience the better) for a man to be
laden with the importinent, unseasonable, giddy reproves of every hair-brained
man in the world: if thou can have patience well, it is thy honor and
praise, and a great testimony and evidence of grace; but take heed you never
contemn serious, pious, meek, and holy reproves; labor to come up to that
of David, Let the righteous smite me -- breaking the head in such a case is as
good, or better, than a plaster, as a precious balm and ointment, however it
is accounted of with the wicked, and whatsoever some men think in their heat,
a serious well-grounded reproof is a precious pearl: it may be the way to
bring a man seriously to sit down and reflect upon himself, and bless God
for the same. Oh never come to that, if you do, the time will come when you
will mourn, and say, O that such serious inward and holy reproof should be
stormed and raged against, such advice and counsel be rejected and scorned and
slighted that made so directly for my souls welfare -- O beware and take heed
of this, till then I shall hope you are teachable, and in a capacity for the
Word to become to your souls the savor of life, and the Power of God to
Salvation; but if once you come to be irreproveable, and this to be the charge
of your souls, I have little else to say but to take up the Prophets
complaint: Lord, who has believed our report? -- To whom shall I speak? --
And that you may not, take heed of those things which are the cause of this,
down with that devil of pride in the heart, be content to be subjects, slaves,
and vassals to truth, let it command and conquer, there is a power and Majesty
in truth it self, let it be your Arbiter in all things, let its commands,
precepts, and injunctions be unquestionable: never think so highly of your
selves as to scorn to be reproved, checked, and admonished; Take heed likewise
of doting on things; if heaven it self should speak, men sleeping in their
lusts, and on the bed of carnal security, will not awake; if Sampson be in
Dalilahs lap, nothing but the Philistines will awaken him; when the Children of
Israel came once to be in love with Idolatry, the Prophets could do no good
with them; when men come once to be in love with the Idols of their own
brains, they will scorn all that you speak; all the language you shall hear
is, I will and I will not, -- Take heed of being locked up in positive
ignorance; nothing is so sad as for a man not to be able to discern at all the
sweetness, and discover the preciousnesse of divine truths.

Secondly, Paragraph. 8.
this is to warn and admonish good men, how (as much as in them lies) they
render men dogs and swine, incapable of reproves; many a man is made a dog, a
wicked man, that was not one in our Saviors sense, the fault is not so much
his as thine, thou that art the reprover, and admonisher, for he may not be so
to another man, though he may be so to thee, and how comes this to pass? From
nothing but the rashness, inadvertency, and imprudence of men, they undertake
to handle weapons which they are not able to weild; many men in too severe
handling of a faulty person may render him a dog or a swine, incapable of their
reproof; it is sad it should be so, howsoever men express themselves rashly
and unadvisedly, if it be truth they speak, it is sad men will not endure it.
Yet when men be too severely and rigidly admonished, they may be much
exasperated, therefore Christ is wary in this respect. A soft answer pacifieth
wrath, and so does a soft admonition; some men wisely dealt withal will not be
sturdy, who (if too fiercely handled) many admonitions will not serve. There is
a necessity indeed of an holy earnestness in reproving of sin, sincerity,
downright dealing, and plainness of spirit in men, and yet also of a great
deal of prudence; I know not one business wherein the prudence of a Christian
either in his private or public relation, is so concerned as in this of
reproof: If you would prevail with the dogs and swine in the Text, you must
deal with them with wisdom, and observe how men's tempers, and present humors
are, these would be taken notice of, and you should watch your opportunity; a
man's fault may be told him of too rashly; with what wisdom came the Prophet
Nathan to David about Uriahs business, one would have thought it had been very
justifiable had he rushed into the Kings Presence Chamber, and told him, Sir
you are a Murderer or an Adulterer; no, he comes with a Parable, and so winds
himself into the Kings bosom; Sir, I have a case to put to you, There was a
poor man which had but one Lamb, and that lay in his bosom, but the ri^h man
had enough, a multitude, yet when he comes to make a seast he gives his guest
entertainment with this poor man's Lamb; this was a wise way of conviction,
and ye find David convinced now, I have sinned; if he had gone another way to
work, instead of saying, I have sinned, he might have said, Thou (Nathan)
shall dye for being so saucy, so rash, and uncivil. David might have said so,
being a man subject to infirmities, even as Eliah also was; we must in reproof
mind the tempers and the callings of men, this is not minded by a great many
Christians; hence as sometimes they speak not the truth, so sometimes little
to the purpose; and hence many Ministers speak and spend their labor in vain.

Secondly, Do not make known to all a particular case, for many a man will
hear one man that will not hear another; and many a man will hear in private
when he will not hear before another; though you are to speak, yet you must
not speak unseasonably; a word spoken in season is as apples of gold in
pictures of silver; the least reproof, never so precious and excellent in it
self, is not so when out of time; it is not fit for a man to tell another of a
private offense in the market place, or being in company, whom either he is not
willing to have acquainted with his crime, or however it is not fit they
should; thus instead of taking a course to help them forward in good, we are
perhaps a means to carry them on further in evil; to reprove one wicked man
in the presence of abundance more like himself, is the way to make them all
join to scoff, and repudiate (it may be) to go about to ruin you; what a
deal of madness in this respect is the world acquainted with. It is a sad
loss to the Gospel in this relation, which is the next thing; well take heed
you be not the cause, offenses must come in the world, dogs and swine there
will be in the sense of the Text take heed you be not the cause; it is sad when
a man may say, yonder is a fellow gone resolutely and refractorily to hell,
when as if he had been dealt mildly withal, he might have been saved possibly,
I mean in relation to thee and thy admonitions, though in respect of the man
and his capacity it was impossible; this will sadly reflect on thy spirit;
think ye it would not have grieved the father of the Prodigal instead of
receiving his Son seasonably, and taking a fitter time to reprove him, if he
had sent him away a dog, or a swine, if he had sent him away damned without
remedy; what sad reflections of heart might this have caused? The Apostle gives
advice to Fathers to reprove their Children, Masters their Servants; for an ill
servant reproof is necessary, ay, and the rod too sometimes, as Solomon says,
but it must be in season, and proportion, done cautelously and warily. I Will add
but one more, (I shall put them together, because I will wind up fast) if you
would not make them dogs, nor give them cause to repudiate. Take heed, that
what you reproove for be grounded in relation to truth, and pertinent, not
trivial, that makes men not received amongst men; men take occasion to babble
about impertinencies, and fall on a man to reprove him, because he is not so,
and so, according to their fancies, and their wild and haire-brain'd
imaginations; and thus they make a great opposition to more solid and serious
administrations; when men rage in trifles what cares a man what he says in
solid things? That Minister shall never be believed when he speaks in earnest,
who cries hell and damnation in jest; be sure that it be tantum that you
speak, that the fault be commensurate, and not less than your expressions,
yea, above them, at least equal with them. Cure, if possible, by a lenitive
first before you use a corrosive, serious admonition in such a way gains the
advantage of men's dispositions. Nor let it be a hearesay, that is, a lie, fama
mala, we hear a man did so and so, we hear thus and thus of him; you shall
hear a man, some imprudent Christian, come with open mouth, and reprove a man
for such a thing that has been declared to them, and they hear so; this is
the ground of all that uncharitableness, and raging among men in the world;
this makes them dogs to one another, that they will not hear one another;
either men talk of impertinencies, and it is not tantum, whether it be so, or
it be not, I have heard such a man will keep company, my neighbor will be
drunk and swear, when neither is true; thus instead of making a man hear and
being well pleased they give them cause to rage in fastening on them such
aspersions as they are not guilty of: as impertinent, so uncertain reproves
are evil. In a word, I bless God you are not left in that estate and
condition, not of an incorrigible spirit as yet, you are not yet shut out of
Heaven; do you bless God, and I will bless God with you, ye are not yet dogs
or swine; far be it from me to justify any of you in your enormities, in your
sins, profanenesses, and debauched courses, if there be any such, if any be
found guilty of it, thus much I dare say to your praise, (as the Apostle says
in another case) I hope better things of you though I thus speak; I know not a
man among you, of an irreprovable spirit; I have not met with a dog or a swine
that will rage at admonition, or be angry with me for Preaching, unless it be
some selfe-conceited Pharisee, that cannot endure any body should be accounted
holy as themselves. These indeed bark, and bite, rage and rave revile,
scandalize, and asperse. Bless God you are not dogs and swine, beware you be
not so, reproof is precious however, if seriously received. Bless God you
live one among another, and in any respect can build up one another in your
holy faith, reform, refrain, and restrain one another, but do it wisely and
warily. And the peace of God which passes all understanding, etc.

Animadversions upon the preceding Sermon, wherein the Reader may discover how
weakly Mr Boatman that day (though with incredible confidence) ( maintained
that Admonition, and preaching of the Gospel was the utmost meant in Mat. 7.6.
and Mr Collings is vindicated from preaching Untruth in pleading there was no
just reason to exclude the Sacrament from the number of Pearls and holy things
there spoken of.
Reader,
THou have had now a Copy of the confuting-Sermon. I durst trust it to any
learned and judicious Reader to judge how my Argument is answered and doubt not
but a small competency of Learning in any will be enough to make him cry out,
multa dicit, nihil respondet. But as our Savior says. all men have not faith.
so in regard all men have not such a quickness of Judgment, I will help their
eyes by an Animadversion or two: In the first place Reader, I desire thee to
observe the force of my Argument, it lies thus: The Text containing a general
prohibition without any restriction, not saying this or that holy thing, or
this or that pearl, it seems to be a great boldness in any to restrain it.
It is therefore most consonant to reason, that it should be understood of all
those holy things which God has betrusted man with the giving out, which he
forbids to be given out to such persons, as for their vicious qualities are in
Scripture language called dogs or swine. Nor is it to be restrained but by
Scripture elsewhere dispensing with the giving out of some holy things to some
such kinds of sinners. This I think is an equitable interpretation, and so
candid, that it cannot be liable to any exception. Locum unum sacrae Scripturae
exponere per alium, ejusdem Scripturae clariorem optima interpretatio. Aug. de
Doct. Christ. c. 26.
Remembering that golden observation of Augustines, That it is the best
interpretation of Scripture to expound it by it self. And if this be true, it
necessarily follows: Either that the Sacrament is not an holy thing; or else
secondly, That there is plain allowance in Scripture for that to be given to
dogs, though some holy things must not; Or else thirdly, (what I inferred) In
the belly of this general prohibition, is an evid^nt injunction for us unto
giving out the Sacrament to any such as the Scripture calls dogs or swine.

I would feign know whether this proposition may not naturally be drawn from
those words, Mat. 7.6.

Holy things, and Pearls, must not be given to dogs or swine.

The proposition is ind^finite, and reducible to ^n universal or particular;
we plead it is to be reduced to an universal, because the materia is
necess^a^^^. It is a divine precept which we have nothing to do to limit
without express warrant from other Scriptures. Mr Boatman thinks it is
particular, and the sense this, Some holy things, and some pearls are not to
be given to some dogs, etc. And these holy things here meant he says, are only
1. Admonition. 2. Preaching the Gospel. I hope he has good grounds for what
he says. Let us now examine; I have divided this Sermon into two several
Paragraphs, (marked in the Margin to guide my Readers eye) I will begin with
the first Paragraph, where he prefaceth to his work, and (after a fashion)
analyzeth his Text.

He comes out like a man of war and makes a Trumpet to sound before him,
Paragraph. 1.
that he is come forth to redeem a captive Text, such a one as is led about,
and (he may say with holy reverence) almost by the Nose, to assert that which
Christ never intended, as we shall presently see. Thus the Trumpet sounds,
(whether a brazen, or silver one, judge anon.) Let not him who puts on his
barnesse boast like him who puts it off; I am a^raid Mr Boatman's force of
Reason and Learning will be found too weak to rescue it, if it be such a
Captive; and if it be led by the Nose, (as he irreverently says) I hope to
prove that it is resoued but by the tongue. But we shall presently see what he
will do.

The Text is without any Connection at all, (he says) it seems neither to have
reference to what goes before, nor what follows after.

Here he has cashiered at first the best sorce he has, for those who expound
the Text of Admonition (though none I have met with restraines it to that) have
no color for their exposition, but a pretended connection of these words with
the former. Mr Boatman confesses the words are nothing of kin to the former;
this makes me think his Sermon was made in so much haste that he could not
consult with his friends, for surely they would have advised him, seeing there
could be so little said for his opinion, not at first to disclaim what was
most considerable.

He resolves the words into a Proverbiall admonition, and considers in them:

1. The Proposition is, You are not to give holy things to dogs. Q What is the
subject of this Axiom?
A dehortation under a double notion: Give not, etc. Cast not, etc. Therein he
says is considerable, 1. The Subject, that which is holy and pearls; The
Object laid down negatively and expressly under a double notion: Dogs and Swine.

He that runs may read here a sufficient want of Logic. But I shall not be
Critical with him; only it were well, that except he were happier at the use
of Logical terms, he would use plainer phrases, which not only the Vulgar,
but the Learned too would better understand than they do these so made use of.

The second part of the Text he says contains the reasons of the
Dehortation. But I shall pass over that Paragraph, not containing in it any
thing toward the delivering of the Nose of the Text (as he pleases to phrase
it) which he conceits so captivated.

2. Animadv. on Paragraph 2.
In the beginning of his second Paragraph he speaks great words; he tells us,
we shall have the plain scope and intention of the Holy Ghost without winding
or wresting; and so plain it shall be, that he who runs may readit; in short
it is this:

1. That by holy things and pearls are meant sacred truths, and holy
reproves, and that is the utmost the Text reaches; and there he runs a vagary
to tell us why these are called holy. But Reader! how shall he that runs
read this? Or how shall this confident magisteriall dictate of Mr Boatmans be
believed to be the plain meaning of the Holy Ghost? How does it appear to
thee, or to Mr Boatman, that these are the holy things and pearls here meant?
These, and these only. To prove this not a word, only an impertinent discourse
to prove that these are holy things, because 1. They come from God. 2. Because
they tend to make men holy.

1. Does not the Sacrament also come from God, did not he institute it?

2. Does it not also tend to make us holy?

So that by Mr Boatman's own Argument the Sacrament is meant here too, and not
preaching, and admonition only, or else he must give us better reason than this
to restrain it. Does Mr Boatman think we have such a reverend opinion of him
as to believe that what he barely says is the meaning of the Holy Ghost, that,
and none but that? But Mr Boatman sets a face on it, and he says it; that is
enough for his Disciples (possibly) but not for others. The (...) must be more
considerable, to whose (...) we will submit. I think, Reader, I gave thee a
considerable reason to induce a persuasion in thee that our Saviors meaning
was to forbid the giving out of all holy things (not elsewhere dispensed with)
to be given out to dogs; where the Law does not limit we should not, but Mr
Boatman limits and gives thee nothing pretending to a reason for it.

In the next place he comes to tell us who are meant by dogs and swine. I told
thee, it being granted a metaphorical expression, and it being so dangerous to
put our interpretations upon such expressions, I conceived it would be
equitable to determine that such wicked men are here meant as the Scripture
elsewhere expresses under these Notions; I think this was a fair soundation
for finding out the meaning of the Metaphor. Mr Boatman tells us, none but
obstinate and irreprovable men are meant; yet he grants, that by swine are
meant the luxurious, (who are not always obstinate.) But how does he prove
this? Because he promised us to make it so plain that he who ran might read
it.) Not a word for that, if you will take Mr Boatman's word you may, but he
has no reason for to convince you if you refuse. Thus he does not only preach
placentia, but Placets too. Surely he does pretend something to an
Enthusiastic spirit he could never else set off mere says with such a
confidence.

In the next place he comes to tell what is meant by trampling; This he says,
speaks the ineffectualness of such holy and savoury truths. So then our
Saviors Reason is this, Give not holy things to dogs and swine, because they
will prove useless and ineffectuall to them. From whence I argue, If then the
Sacrament will be useless and ineffectuall to profane men, that holy thing
must not be given to them. The reason holds as much for that as any Ordinance,
if not more.

In his third Paragraph he comes to sum up his fancies, Animadv. on Paragr. 3.
(which he calls) the sum of the Text: That it is to no purpose to deal with
men of irreprovable and dog-l^ke spirits, they are not capable of reproof, and
divine admonition, and holy counsel. You may (says our Savior) do it, but it
will be very useless, it will do no good, it is a folly, it is very dangerous,
you will be losers, and neither God the Gospel, the truth, or your souls will
have gain. You may have a reward in heaven, not only when you do, but when you
suffer for Christ's sake, yet however take heed of the persons, and labor to do
it in such a way as may not make sinners seem dogs and swine to you.

Here is a mess of stuff now which doubtless was never well boiled by
premeditation. He makes our Savior Christ speak strange things here or I am
mistaken. Our Savior Christ faith, 1. You may do it; but where I wonder? is do
not give, do not cast, capable of such an interpretation as you may do it.

2. Christ (according to Mr Boatman) says, you may do it, but it is to no
purpose, it is a folly, it is dangerous, you will be losers, and neither God,
the Gospel, the truth, nor your souls gain; Where I wonder does Christ tell
his people they may play the fools, and do things to no purpose? Nay, such
things as neither shall redound to Gods glory, nor their good? Is not this
learned Divinity think we? nay, is it not next door to blasphemy? But mark
what follows immediately: You may have a reward in heaven, not only etc. Just
before, Christ is brought in, telling them, their souls could have no gain by
it; but here (as if the Lord could so soon forget himself) he is brought in
again, telling them, They should have a reward in heaven, in doing and
suffering, etc. But besides, Christ must also say, Take heed how you do it in
such a way as may not make sinners appear dogs and swine, etc. But where is
this in the Text I wonder? Christ says, Give not, cast not, he does not say,
you may give but take heed how you give. And is that man ever worthy to take
the holy word of God into his mouth again, that has so shamefully and simply
perverted a Text as he has done this? For which I appeal to any to judge.

Now he has ordered his forces, he comes to give us battle, and to that
purpose tells us, He reads of some that wrest this Scripture, and amongst many
d^vers of the Romish Church. They (some of them) expound it thus, and tell us;
it may by consequence be reduced to the Sacrament; and tell us, they are not
fit to come to the Sacrament that will not make auricular Confession, (and it
is a fond trick that some have got up again in our days, and some would bring
into the Church.) But it had no relation at all to that holy Ordinance; for
though wicked men (which the Scripture calls dogs and swine) unfit Receivers,
may tremble when they dare put their hand to the body and blood of the Lord
Jesus Christ, yet notwithstanding to preach such a thing from this Text is
little better than to speak untruth in the Pulpit, etc.

Either here is a great deal of ignorance, or malice, or both discovered.

1. Here are pretty odd terms me thinks: he reads of some, by and by they are
many; diverse of the Romish Church, then some of them, again expound it, etc.
the truth is, I believe he does not know either how many, or how few, if he had
he would have spoken more modestly.

2. He would basely insinuate, that they are generally Papists who think this
Text may be interpreted by consequence of the Sacrament, and that they do it to
bring in Auricular Confession. Both which charges are as notoriously false as
can be. I wonder who Mr Boatman thinks Protestants? I think I have already
made it good by testimonies enough, that we have some Protestants are of this
mind. Surely Ursin, Chemnitius, wollebius, Wendelin, Zepperus, with a multitude
of others, were no Papists, yet they all think an Argument may be brought from
this Text for Auricular Confession, (which he seems so afraid of) either he
knows not what it is, or has a mind to bespatter holy and Reverend men with
falsehoods, and scandals.

I am very apt to believe Mr Boatman knows so much of Auricular Confession as
to know:

1. That the Romish Church requires it to be only made to their Priest; and if
there be any endeavor to bring such a thing now into the Church, of all men in
the world Mr Boatman, and men of his strain should hold their peace, for they
are the men bring it in; we plead for an open trial of Communicants before the
Presbytery, they say no, they will try them alone; this comes nearer Auricular
Confession.

2. But secondly, we do not require any confession of secret or more open sins,
but only that they being proved so guilty, they should be unwilling to testify
their humiliation or repentance before they are admitted to the Lords Table; so
that this whimzie amounts to no more than a gird at the godly Ministers of the
Gospel, who would bring sinners to a sense of their sins before they are
admitted to the Lords Table, and it smells rank enough either of ignorance or
malice, and signifies nothing. But Mr Boatman tells us, the Text has no
relation to the Sacrament. How does he prove that? Is not the Sacrament an holy
thing? How proves he it is not here meant? Dr Hammond ad locum.
Dr Hammond ingenuously grants an analogicall relation.

Now he charge me to the purpose. To preach such a thing from this Text is
little better than to speak untruth in the Pulpit. It is not truth, but truth
to the purpose that men must speak from sacred Texts of the holy Word of God,
else they fasten that on the Holy Ghost which he never meant or dreampt; and it
is a dreadful account which a great many men in the world have to give, vainly
to attempt to lay any foundation on a Text which is either too weak for it, or
which it does not at all concern; It is an easy matter to wring a Text so
long by the Nose as to make it bleed again, and all to little purpose; Take
notice whatsoever may be urged about this Sacred Ordinance from another place,
and at another time, it is not meant here, to speak of it here is to speak to
no purpose, not worth the speaking, it is not the sense of the Holy Ghost.

Here he speaks loud enough, and falls upon me pell-mell, but with no other
weapons than his tongue; he charges me with preaching untruth; how does that
appear? Mr Boatman says so, and that is all. He tells us of fastening something
upon the Holy Ghost which he never dreampt of. (No Sir, the Holy Ghost does not
use to dream, though frail man may, he carries no sleepy body about with
him;) he tells us, It is an easy matter to wring a Text about by the Nose; he
is much taken, it seems, with that phrase, but if he will be metaphorical, he
should do well to use handsomer than these, the Holy Ghosts not dreaming, and
the Texts Noses, are phrases Divines have not been wont to use, and which
speaks in the heart of him that uses them small reverence of an holy God, or
his holy Word. Again, we must take notice, that whatever may be urged about
the Sacrament from other places it is not meant here, etc. And for all this you
have Mr Boatman's word. I think I may safely say, I spend as many hours in my
Study, and about my Sermons, as Mr Boatman does, and consider as much, and
consult with as many Commentatours, before I deliver the senfe of a Text, as he
well can do; nor (blessed be God) am I without some natural advantages to
help me. Yet Reader, I desire thee to be of Hierom's mind, Give that honor to
the Word of God only, to believe it because it is his word; and for Mr Boatman
and me about any Text, lay our Reasons in the balance of the Sanctuary,
provided thou forbearest his light gold the allowance of faction, and
particular affection, and let the Scale that is heaviest carry it, I ask no
other favor; I profess I never read such an imperious, magisteriall pack of
Sentences without a dram of reason for his own say since I knew what belonged
to a book.

Now he is come to his Doctrine, Animadr, on Paragr. 4.
which he delivers thus.

It is the duty of every Christian, especially of every Minister, to take heed
to whom, and how they deliver divine truths, lest, delivering them to obstinate
and irreprovable men, they labor in vain, and they trample upon them.

1. If this be the truth, yet I conceive it is not the whole truth of the Text.

2. Mr Boatman should have done well to have kept the terms holy things, and
Pearls, except he had proved by Scripture or Reason that divine truths are the
only holy things and pearls here meant.

3. I hope Mr Boatman will tell us how we shall know a man to be so
irreprovable, that we may be justified in not preaching to him, nor admonishing
him.

But I find it otherwise, he is loath to meddle with that nice Point; but he
undertakes, 1. To prove that there are some to whom we must not deliver divine
truths.

2. He undertakes to give us reasons:

First, he will prove that there are some such; this he thinks he can prove
from Psalm. 39.2. where David says, He kept his mouth with a bridle while the
wicked was before him. -- he held his peace even from good.

Mr Boatman told us even now, that it must be truth to the purpose a man must
deliver, as the sense of the Holy Ghost. That which Mr Boatman has to prove
is, that the Children of God should not deliver to wicked men, who are
irreprovable, divine truth; to this purpose he brings that of David, who held
his peace from good; what good? What, from admonishing them? There is no such
thing in the Text. Mollerus expounds it of his own just and righteous cause the
defending of that; Others expound it in general of good that he was altogether
silent, not in reference to the wicked, in respect of whom he restrained his
passions, ver. 1. but in reference to his trouble of spirit, which was such as
stupefied him.

In the next place he tells us how wary the Prophets were when people were
incorrigible, but he that reads them will find they never left reproving them.
He tells us God bids them not pray for them, that is true, Jer. 7. but in the
same Chapter he is bid to preach to them and reprove them, ver. 2.

He has but one instance more, and that is of our Savior Christ, who, he
says, would sometimes make them no answer; but what is this to the purpose?
did our Savior ever forbear reproving them, or preaching to them. Thus,
Reader thou see how well he has proved his Doctrine, not one instance holds.
Let us come to his Reasons.

He tells us, Animadv. on Paragraph 5.
he will instance in those in the Text: 1. Because they will trample upon them.
So he says they did upon John Baptists Doctrine, and our Savior Christ's, and
Paul's.

There needs no more than this to prove that preaching the Gospel, and
admonition is not here meant only; sor first, the same reason will hold to the
Sacrament, wicked men will trample on that too surely. 2. Though they trampled
on John Baptists, and our Saviors, and the Apostles preaching to them, yet
none of them left preaching the Gospel, nor admonishing them.

The second Reason is: They will turn again and rend you, that is, (as Mr
Boatman expounds it) you will endanger yourselves. I answer, this again proves
the preaching the Gospel is not the only thing here meant; for who knows not
that the Apostles constantly preached the Gospel to the apparent hazard of
their lives? Paul fights with beasts at Ephesus, is whipped, stoned,
imprisoned, at other places, yet he preaches; and the Apostles durst not leave
preaching to any upon any a count.

In the next large Paragraph Mr Boatman makes a digression to take away the
wonder of the world, Animadv. on Paragraph. 6.
that there should be any Christians so bad. Some he thinks there are, but he
has none of them; and he fears they are most amongst them who have their
mouths fullest of such terms. The terms are our Savior Christ's own, I know
none uses them with reference to any particular persons, but only to show,
such ought not to be admitted to holy things. Mr Boatman possibly is angry that
our Savior should so characterize those whom he, it may be, has a more
reverend opinion of; Whining Christians, Squeaking out Jesus Christ, The Noses
of Texts, the dreamings of the Holy Ghost, I think are more Apocryphal terms
than dogs and swine, applied to such as return (after Baptism) with the Dog
to the vomit, and the Swine to wallow in the mire.

I do not well understand how this came into his Sermon, yet it is a third part
of it to show how men by degrees come to be so wicked as not to endure
reproof; (Any scholar must judge that it came in as the man brought in
Hercules.) It is true, had Mr Boatman done his maine work, to prove that
Admonition was the only thing, or Preaching the only thing here meant, he might
have been borne with, recreating himself with such a digression, which yet had
been more proper for the Application.

I am apt to believe, that Pride, and Ignorance, and love of lusts, are the
three great causes of men's not enduring wholesome reproof; but what was this to
Mr Boatman's purpose, who should have spent his time to prove:

1. That Admonition, and Divine truths are the only holy things and pearls
here meant; And when he had done what he could for that, I would have had some
body whispered him in the ear, and told him, surely he was not aware what he
said, for if Dogs must not be admonished; nor preached to, surely they must not
have the Sacrament given them.

2. He was to prove, that Divine truths and admonition must not be given to
dogs, and there he should have described the dogs to whom the Gospel must not
be preached, and who must not be admonished, and have given good warrant from
Scripture, or Scripturall reason for the Exposition, and when he had done that,
I would have had him answered these two Objections.

Object. 1. If Admonition must not be given to dogs, what is the meaning of
that of the Apostle, 2 These. 2.14, 15.

And if any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no
company with him that he might be ashamed; yet count him not as an enemy, but
admonish him as a Brother. An excommunicate person must needs be a dog in the
highest sense; he must be so really, viz. a very profane flagitious person, and
judicially adjudged so in Court, and so turned out of the house for his
dog-like dispositions, he must be pertinacious, and irreprovable, for till he
has refused the admonition of the Church he ought not to be cast out; yet when
he is cast out, though private Christians must have no private Communion with
him, nor the Church any fellowship with him, yet they ought to admonish him to
repent, etc. Excommunication it self being in order to reformation of the
person, not to his destruction.

Secondly, Did not the Apostles preach the Gospel to persecutors, and
irreprovable men? Acts 3. Chapter 7. and in many other places.

Mr Boatman tells us that Pride is the cause of irreprovablenesse in men, and he
proves it well enough from the instance of the false Apostles in the Church of
Corinth, Pharaoh, the Heathen, Psalm. 2. those who opposed our Savior Christ,
the enemies of the Prophets of old; yet it is to be observed, that Moses still
admonished Pharaoh till God took him off; Paul Paul ceased not to reprove the
false Apostles; nor did Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, our Savior Christ cease to
reprove their Adversaries.

He tells us, that love of Lusts is a second cause of men's irreprovablenesse;
this he proves from our Savior, John 3.19. Jer. 5. ul. the instance of John
Baptist. This is true enough, but it is as true, that for all this, neither our
Savior Christ, nor Jeremiah, nor John Baptist ceased to preach to, or to
admonish these wretches who loved their lusts.

He tells us right, that Ignorance is a third cause, Joh. 1.9. 1 Cor. 2.14. yet
surely ignorant persons must be admonished and instructed.

Thus thou see, Reader, how little all this is to his purpose.

Now he is come to the Application: Animadv. on Paragraph. 7.
His first use is (as he calls it) of admonition to persuade his people that
they would not be dogs and swine though men called them so, but endure
admonition. -- but he says not that from all men they should bear it
patiently; -- they may be laden with the impertinent, unseasonable, giddy
reproves of haire-brain'd men.

1. Here he does insinuate, that some called his particular people dogs and
swine; he should have done well to have told them who do so; we say, such as
turn with the dog to the vomit, such as wallow in beastly lusts are so; this I
hope is true in thesi; but we say not in hypothesi, this and that man is so;
No, we leave that to the reflection of every man's conscience, and the Judgment
of the Church. This was but a mere trick to create animosities in profane men
against those who preach the truth of God to them. I wonder who said, those of
Peter's Parish are dogs and swine.

For the maine of the Exhortation it was good, but I think he might have
spared telling them, he did not say, they should bear patiently admonitions
from any, for I think the person is not considerable, but the thing, and cause
of it. Now they have enough to say to justify their stopping their ears
against reproof. The reproof was impertinent, unseasonable, he was a giddy
hair-brained man that reproved me, and our Pastor told us, we need not bear
his reproves patiently.

The last Paragraph contains his second and last use directed to reprovers:
Animadv. on Paragraph. 8.
to persuade them so to order their reproves, that they may not make men dogs
nor swine.

Here he tells us honestly, that though men express themselves rashly, and
inadvisedly, yet if it be truth they speak, it is sad men will not endure it;
but he had told them before, He did not say they should be are it patiently,
here he does say, It is sad they will not; how do these two agree?

Though I do not think this Use proper to any Doctrine can be raised from this
Text, and so is not truth to the purpose (as Mr Boatman lately taught us we
should preach from Texts) yet I easily yield that admonition is a tender thing,
and must be managed with prudence, and he must be allowed all he says upon
that point.

At last he comes to bless himself, and to bless his Congregation, that he
had never a dog in it, (an happy house!) or rather he had met with none; that
may be: There may be dogs enough in the Town, yet I may meet with none of them,
it may be I never regard whether they beso; but he puts in

Unless it be some selfe-conceited Pharisees that cannot endure any body
should be accounted holy as themselves.

Who Mr Boatman means is sufficiently known, such as through tenderness of
conscience, and conscience of Gods Ordinances, cannot swallow promiscuous
Sacraments. These are the only dogs Mr Boatman has in his Congregation.

The Lord make him ashamed with a godly shame.

Now Reader, take the sum of my Sermon on that Text, and of his confuting
discourse.
1. THe Text is absolute sense in it self, and stands in no relation to the
former Verses: This Mr Boatman grants.

2. The Precept is without restriction: Holy things, Pearls, not this or that
Pearl or holy thing.

3. All the Ordinances of God, especially the Sacraments, are holy things
betrusted to men to give out.

4. There is therefore no reason to restrain the sense of this Text to this or
that holy thing, but to understand it of all.

5. Yet the whole word of God, being but one piece, if any part of that
licenseth us to administer some holy things to some dogs, we may do
accordingly, notwithstanding this Text.

6. The Sacrament of the Supper, being an holy thing, it will follow from this
general Precept that it must not be given to such as the Scripture calls dogs
or swine, except the Scripture elsewhere expressly commands us the contrary.

7. To expound it of preaching the Gospel, or admonition restrictively, is to
speak without any ground, and to limit where Scripture does not.

8. Besides, The Gospel must be preached to dogs, viz. persecutors, heathens,
etc. and dogs must be admonished, 2 These. 3.14, 15.

9. It is ridiculous to say, that we are here forbidden to preach to some, and
admonish them, and yet not forbidden to give them the Sacrament, the latter
following upon necessary consequence.

10. The dog will trample upon this Ordinance as well as the other.

11. Here is therefore a general prohibition, from which will follow by a
necessary deduction, that the Sacrament must not be given to such as the
Scripture calls dogs: 1. It being an holy thing. 2. As much included here as
any other. 3. No where else allowed to dogs. 4. Such an Ordinance as they will
trample on.

Now what says Mr Boatman?

1. This Text is wrung by the Nose till blood comes, and I will redeem the
Captive.

2. The utmost of the Holy Ghosts meaning by holy things and pearls is divine
truths, and admonitions.

3. To stretch the Text further is to preach untruth, nothing to purpose, etc.

4. Admonition and preaching are holy things.

5. We must take heed how we give them out to dogs.

6. For the proof of the three first; you must take my word, or choose whether
you will believe it or no. And for answering any Objections, he is not at
leisure.

Read and judge now how learnedly I am confuted. He came out like a man of war,
but what has he done?

The King of France with twenty thousand men
Came to the sea, and so went back again.
FINIS.
Reader, these Books following are Printed, and are to be sold by Richard
Tomlins at the Sun and Bible near Pie Corner.
THe General Practice of Physic, Folio. The Fortune Book in Fol. English.
Pleasant Notes upon Don Quixot, Fol. Mr Collings his Cordials first, second,
and third parts, quarto. His Vindiciae Ministerii quarto. His Answer to Mr.
Sheppard, quart. His Answer to Fisher and Hammond, quart. Dr Holdsworth's
twenty one Sermons, quart. Euclids Elements in quart. Eng. History of seven
Champions, quart. Packet of Letters, quart. Cupids Messengers, quart. The Birth
of mankind, or women's Book, quart. The Perfect Pharisee under Monkish
holiness, quart. The false Jew, quart. Mr Collings Five Lessons for a
Christian to learn, oct. His Faith and experience, octav. Mr Wincolls Poems,
octav. Excellency of Christ, octav. Erasmus Colloquis, octav. Wings and
Libourns Urania Practica, octav. Velitationes Polemicae, octav. Perkins
Catechism, octav. Janua Linguarum, octav. Brinsley's Cordelrus, Octav. Watsons
untaught Bridegroom, Twelves,

