Responsoria ad Erratica Pastoris, SIVE, VINDICIAE VINDICIARUM. ID EST, The
Shepherds Wanderings discovered, in a Revindication of the great Ordinance of
GOD: Gospel-Preachers, and Preaching.

By way of Reply and Answer to a late Book, called, The Peoples privileges,
and duty guarded against the Pulpit and Preachers encroachment. And their sober
justification and defense of their free and open exposition of Scriptures.
Published by William Sheppard, Esquire.

Wherein Mr Sheppards pretended guard, consisting of ten Propositions and ten
Arguments, is examined, and found to wear nothing but wooden Swords. And all
his Replies to Mr Tho. Halls Arguments, and Mr Collinges Arguments in his
Vindiciae Ministerii, brought against Not ordained persons ordinary preaching,
are found but cavils and too light. And the Truth still maintained, That those
that dig in the Lords Vineyard must be sent; in that, Preaching and expounding
Scripture publicly, are proper acts to Gospel-Officers; not common to all.

Wherein also the great question, How far the Spirit of God (that dwells in all
the Saints) does or does not enable them to understand Scripture, is opened.
And in it is plainly discovered by Mr Sheppards wrestings and mis-applications
of Scripture: that himself has not such a spirit of Scripture interpretation
as is fitting for them that publicly open the Scriptures; and in the Preface
is showed how much the holy Spirit of God is abused in these evil times.

By John Gollings, M.A. and Preacher of the Gospel in Norwich.

Is. 28.20. For the bed is shorter then that a man can stretch himself on it,
and the covering narrower then that he can wrap up himself in it. Quis enim
mediocriter sanus non facile intelligat, Scripturarum expositionem, ab iis
petendam esse, qui earum doctores se esse profitentur. Fierique posse inermo id
semper accidere, ut multa indoctis videantur absurda, quae cum a doctoribus
exponuntur, eo laudanda videantur elatius, quo abjectius aspernanda videbantur
and eo accipiantur aperta dulcius, quo clausa difficilius aperiebantur. D. Aug.
de moribus Eccl. Cathol. and Manichaeorum; t. 1. operum impr. Col. Agrip. p.
286. col. B. I. London, Printed for R. Tomlins at the Sun and Bible near
Pie-corner. 1652.

A PREFATORY DISCOURSE CONTAINING, The Authors reasons of his undertaking this
work; and several things of moment are discovered in it, concerning the
motions and impulsions, and workings of the Spirit; tending to the trying of
the Spirits. And humbly directed To all such (in England) as fear the Lord,
and desire to make his Word a Light unto their feet.
Dear Friends!
IT is now Twelve months since I presented you with my Vindieation of the
Gospel Ministry: Some discouragements I had in that work; for when my notes
were finished, that very week came out Mr Halls Book of the same subject,
Pulpit guarded
and I heard of more (Elaborate labors) then ready for the Press, upon the
same Subject. The nature of my Subject spoke for me, that I sought not in it to
please Men: but to show my self a Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ's. The
Jezebel of Libertinisme looked out at the window, and I apprehended the Lord
Jesus Christ calling, who is on my side? who? since which time I have met with
none that have opposed the truths I endeavored to maintain, except one
Collier who encountered the Pulpit-guard. Pulpit guard routed, by I. Collier.
Two things silenced my Pen as to him. 1. He only mentioned me in the last
lines of his Book; but bent his force against a stronger adversary, who I knew
was able to encounter him. 2. But my chief Reason was, my sight of his
blasphemous Discourse at Axbridge; which satisfied me concerning him; that as
his Tongue was little Slander to our cause: so it was little credit to that
which he pretended to Manage; this made me resolve to let him alone, lest I
should be like unto him, or make him wise in his own conceit. In which
resolution I was after confirmed, meeting with Mr. Jerribies reserve,
Pulpit-guard relieved, by Mr. Jerriby.
which I saw was enough to deal with his beggarly reason.

Some twelve days since there came to my hands Mr. Sheppards Book, called, The
peoples privilege and duty guarded. Though I have little time to attend
Reading or answering Pamphlets, and am the meanest servant of the Lord Jesus
Christ in that work, yet several things prevailed with me, to the present
undertaking of which I will give thee a brief account.

Credit of the Gentleman that wrote it, William Sheppard, Esqu. Sounds more
them Tom Collier.

Sobriety of the Gentleman's spirit. Had he been one that had so far got the
mastery of his conscience, as to have railed on Ministers and Ministry: I
should only have spread his railing paper before the Lord, Is. 37.14. Jude 9.
and have said, The Lord rebuke thee. But I perceived him of another spirit,
and as much contending for some truth, as disputing against others.

A Third was, that he had done me the honor now and then to name me and my
Book: and so engaged me in the quarrel, as one of those Preachers which he is
pleased to reflect upon as encroaching upon the peoples duty.

A Fourth was, the present juncture of time. Error and Ignorance, that he is
loath Truth should prevail too fast. And for the continual exercise of his
Saints in all Ages, the Lord Jesus has been content to dispute his ground by
inches with the Devil (as the Devil has raised up some in all ages to oppose
truth; one truth more then other in every Age: so the Lord has raised up some
Servants of his in all Ages to appear in the defense of the Lord Jesus Christ
and his Gospel. Mr. Hooke^ in his Preface to Survey of Church Discipline.
Herbert Temple sacred Poems, 188.
It was holy and learned Mr. Hookers notion: that the Devil had been
undermining the Lord Jesus Christ in his three Offices, and it was that divine
Poets to it though in a little different way, before him.

As Sin in Greece a Prophet was before,
And in old Rome a mighty Emperor:
So now being Priest he plainly did profess, Church militant.

To make a jest of Christ's three Offices.
God had an Arc under the Law, in which was locked up the Golden pot that had
Manna; and Aarons rod that budded, and the Tables of the Covenant: Heb. 9 4.
Exodus 16.21.4.20. Number. 17.10. Exodus 16.33.
And over this were the Cherubims of Glory. The Lord has his Ark under the
Gospel: over which the Cherubims of glory stand, and three things are laid up
in it: 1. The testimony of the Gospel Covenant: the pure doctrine of the Lord
Jesus Christ. 2. The Manna of divine worship: Gospel worship, and Ordinances.
3. And (the second) Aarons rod: the Gospel Government of the Lord Jesus
Christ. These things are laid up in the Gospel Arc, and to attend the Church
of Christ, the true Church in all its motions. The old Thief, that knows
these are the Churches Palladium and life guard: which while a Church keeps,
the gates of hell cannot prevail against it: Has made it his work to attempt
the robbing of the Church of this treasury in all times. His first design was
to rob it of the great fundamental Gospel Doctrines of the truth of the
Divine and humane nature in the person of the Mediator, and of the great truths
of the Resurrection of the body. To the latter purpose, he stirred up the
Sadduces, Acts 23.8. the Epicureans and Stoics, Acts 17.18. Paul and the other
Apostles were stirred up by God, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 27 28. l. 7 c. 23. Anno
Christi. 60. 90. Epiph. t. 2.
to oppose those heresies. Ebion and Cerinthus were mustred up against Christ
by Satan, and the Lord stirs up St. John in his first Epistle, to defend the
Mediatorship of his Son. After them Basilides and Saturninus, Valentians,
Marcion, Cerdo, the Gnostics. Iren l. 5 here is. anno 270, 276, 280.
Against the latter of which the Lord stirred up Ireneus, and Tertullian. After
these Sabellius and Samosetanus, Manes: and Arrius, anno 320: Macedonius and
Photinus Aetius, Eunomius, Nestorius, Pelagus, Eutyches, against those the Lord
stirred up Athanasius and Augustine, and Greg. Nysnus, Basilius. Greg. Naz.
St. Ambrose, and others to maintain his great truths, relating to the Unity of
the divine essence, The trinity of the persons: the divine and humane nature of
Christ in one person, the freeness of divine grace etc. Within 500 years or
little more the Devil laid these Instruments aside. Truth prevailed, and
although after times have produced a Servetus, and some others: yet they never
came to any considerable head, but came up as single weeds, and were quickly
pulled out. In our times the Devil has had one or two of these we ^^s Best and
Collier etc. but they come to no great height: Discourse at Axbridge.
these were the Goliaths of those times; and the contrary to these the truths
which were the truths of the times: in the defense of which God stirred up his
David's; when the old thief saw the Testimony of the Covenant was out of his
reach, he attempts to steal Aarons rod, putting the Scepter that belonged to
the Lord Jesus Christ into the hands of Popes and Cardinals, and General
Councels: crying up their infallibility etc. And thus he flourished a long time
till God stirred up Wickliff and Hus, and Luther, and others: anno 1520 etc.
and set them to watch this; Calvin also was sent to their assistance: these had
a long combat, they and their successors to wring the Scepter of the Lord
Jesus Christ out of the hands of Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, Archbishops,
Lordbishops, Priests, and to put it into the hands of Pastors, Elders and
Deacons, Christ's right proper Officers. This was the work of latter times, in
which also the Devil was nibling at fundamental truths by Socinus in Polonia
some of the Pelagian stamp, and the Arminians in the Netherlands; of both
which he sent some into England, against whom the Lord stirred up Bradwardin
here against the Pelagians, others against the Socinians, and a Synod of Dort,
besides diverse single hands; among'st whom learned Twisse against the
Arminians. But the great controversies of the times seemed to respect the
Government of the Lord Jesus Christ. Likewise Dr. Ames, and Mr. Owen.
The old thief seeing that this Rod of Aaron is not to be got every one
decrying Popes, Cardinals, Arch^^^^ps, Lordbishops etc.

He is now laboring for the pot of Manna, to spoil the Church of Gospel
Ordinances. And the great question of these times seems to be whether the
Ordinances of the Lord Jesus for his Church be his or no? whether they shall
hold or no.

This is a controversy to which former times has not been a stranger to.
Erastus was before our days, so were the Anabaptists in Germany. But the
Devil seems to me to have an eminent design at all the Ordinances of the
Lord Jesus Christ now; and to manage this not by a single Erastus, but
bringing all his force, into the field. Nor is this his only design for there
is not a fundamental truth of Christ that he is not quarrelling for, nor are
his endeavors all done against his glorious Scepter. He rages, surely his
time is but short, I think sometimes that he is about to fight his great
battle upon which he will venture all. But his old legions of Heretics are
more out of Heart, and keep in the Rear; the Van of his Army seems to be
against Gospel ordinances and worship in our days: and indeed he may venture
all against that, for if he can but destroy the Practick of Truth, he needs do
no more. The Lord Jesus Christ has left his Churches several Ordinances. 1.
Gospel Officers, these are his Ordinance. Ephesians. 4.11: 1 Cor. 4.1.
to these belongs the preaching of his Gospel and administering his Sacraments,
and all acts of Church Government: For the authorizing of these he has
appointed.

2. His great Ordinance of Ordination, 1 Timothy 4.15.
Acts 13.1.2, 3. Acts 6.6. Titus 1.4. 1 Timothy 5.22. 1 Timothy 4.14. and has
ordained that those that administer his public Ordinances should be able and
faithful, such as are able to study the Scriptures, and give themselves wholly
to them, that such should have the Gospel committed to them, 2 Timothy 2.2. and
be solemnly set a part by fasting and prayer, and laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery. Acts 13.1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 4.14.

3. He has, instead of his great Ordinance of Circumcision, left his Ordinance
of Baptism to be administered to all Nations, Math. 28.20. to Believers and
their children, Acts 2.38, 39.

4. He has instead of the Passover ordained the great Ordinance of his Supper
Luke 22.18, 19, 20. to be administered to his Disciples, to those that can
examine themselves, discern the Lords Body, eat and drink worthily, 1 Cor. 11.

5. He has left us (as a sink to cleanse his Church, which is his house) the
great Ordinance of Excommunication, Math. 18. to be executed upon Heretics,
Titus 3.10. and profane persons, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Cor. 5.4.

6. For the benefit of his Church he has left us his great Ordinance of
Magistracy, to be a terror to Evil doers, Romans 13.3. such as work the works
of the flesh. Adultery, Fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, Idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strifes, seditions, Heresies,
Gal. 5.20, 21. These are the great Ordinances of the Lord Jesus, against which
the Devil is this day mustring his Armies. 1. In the forlorn hope he has a
ragged Regiment of Ranters who deny all Ordinances, See Law of freedom, by
Winstanly, a p. 65. ad p. 63.
these are led on by Jerrard Winstanly and several others of that stamp;
these are no great Number, yet a Regiment or two may be found of these marked
with the greatest marks of Blasphemy and lewdness. 2. In the next place come
on his Regiments whose Motto is no Magistracy, these are the Levellers, and of
these there is no small number, men of desperate spirits and principles. 3. In
the third place come in some Regiments as will acknowledge a Magistracy, Their
Motto is Christiano Magistratui nihil cum sacris.
but with clipped wings, such as should have nothing to do with the glory of
God, and the interest of Christ and his Gospel, but must have their hands tied
up from meddling with Idolaters or Blasphemers, or any though never so dangerous
heretics.

These pretend themselves friends to Magistracy, P. Mart. loc. com. clas. 2. c.
4. Melancton in loc. com. de Magistratu civili. Pareum in Romans 13. Gualther. in
ep. ad Gal. c. 4.
but would destroy the end for which God has ordained them, and that is, that
his Elect might live under them Godly and quiet and peaceable lives, that they
might be a terror to evil works, these are to be the Guardians of his Church,
in this wilderness. Can any Christian Magistracy think that the great God who
made all things for himself and for his own Glory should ordain Magistrates
(one of his highest Ordinances) for so low an end as only to keep men from
quarrelling one with another, as if the office of a Christian Magistrate were
no more then the office of a Keeper of Bears. No, no, God forbid it should
enter into their thoughts; he has said they are Gods, and their design should
be higher then merely to keep civil peace, even to advance Christ, to cut
them off and cast them out from the Lords heritage who spit in the face of his
glory. 4. A Fourth Regiment he has whose Motto is no Gospel Ministry, Scim^^
contemptum ministerii esse nocentissimam pestem. Luther. in cap. 12. Genesis
Erastus and Socinus first commanded these, and these are as dangerous as the
first; for it must follow then no Ordinances: he has several ringleaders of
this faction in England this day.

It were infinite to muster up all his Regiments, he is the Prince (...) says
the Apostle, he has great powers in the air.

Now there are many that are not sworn servants of Satan in this design, but
are under high temptations this day, and though they think and mean not so,
yet they serve him very far in this design of rooting out the Ordinances of
the Lord Jesus Christ. 1. Such as are for general admissions to the supper of
the Lord. 2. Such as are against Baptizing of Children. 3. Such as cry down
the ministry of England as Antichristian. 4. Such as cry out so loud against
Elders in Churches. 5. Such as plead against Ordination. Many of these may be
holy and gracious, but Doubtless the Lord Jesus Christ is little beholden to
them in point of defending his Ordinances and the purity and power of them.

If all should be admitted to the Sacrament of the Supper, surely Christ would
not only have admitted his Disciples and balked them in the same house, sure
he would have bid his Disciples go and give my supper to all Nations, surely
the Apostle would not have bidden men examine themselves, etc.

If children should not be baptized, surely they should not have been
circumcised, the promise should not belong to them, Acts 2.37, 38. surely the
Covenant of grace is not straightned under the Gospel.

If the Ministry of Christ in England be Antichristian, what are all those that
are converted and baptized by that ministry, where are our Fathers that died
under that ministry? how come we to be Churches; being not baptized persons. If
I, says Christ, by Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do your children cast
them out?

If Elders be no Officers in the Church of Christ, who are they we read of, 12
Romans 7.8. 1 Timothy 5.17.

If Ordination be not Jesus Christ's Ordinance for ordaining Gospel preachers
and Officers, why did the Apostles use it, Acts 6.6. why did God call for it,
Acts 13.1, 2, 3. why is Titus left in Crete for that purpose, Titus 1.3. why
was Timothy ordained, 1 Timothy 4.14, and commanded not to lay on hands suddenly:
1 Timothy 5, 22.

There are some others, who acknowledge a Ministry to be the Ordinance of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and that Preaching is their work, but think that any
others, though not Ministers, may Preach publicly and constantly. Many there
are of these; whom I desire to honor for their grace and sobriety, conspicuous
in many things, but if I mistake not, as, by this opinion they are more then
ordinarily serviceable to Satan in his present design to destroy all Gospel
Ordinances, so they are in a great error in this very thing.

1. First I say, I take them to be too serviceable to Satan's design in these
days, which I apprehend to be, The bringing of this great Ordinance of God
into contempt, and making it useless: and the destruction of all the
Ordinances of Christ, Primum and summum opus praedicatoris docere fidem.
Lutherus loc. com. c. 4. p. 30.
what made Moses and Aaron contemned, but Corah, Dathan and Abirams
apprehension, they had as much right to draw nigh to God as they had Number. 16:
And I cannot see by what reason we can say, that any may Preach, but it will
hold a pari, yea a fortiori, they may administer the Sacraments too, and then
farewell Ministry, yea, farewell at once all the Ordinances of Christ, to the
essence of which belongs an Officer of his to administer them, or they are no
longer his Institutions, but mere humane ordinary acts worth little or nothing.

In this error (Christian Reader,) I have found this (sober Gentleman) with
whom I am dealing: I call him sober, because I find him very sober in many
things, yea, Soberly managing this point, not in opposition to a Ministry, but
pleading for it as a Co-ordinance of God, and in Partnership with the
Ministers. Now this being a truth of the Times, (as I conceive opposed) I was
the more willing to Engage in the Quarrel.

5. A Fifth and great reason was, my consideration of the Foundation upon which
he built his opinion, which I humbly conceive is rotten: it seems to be this.
That all the Saints of God having the spirit of God, which is the spirit of
interpretation, dwelling in them, they are forthwith enabled in some degree or
other to understand the true meaning of Scripture so far as to be able to
deliver it, and Preach, and apply it to others. This made me more willing to
undertake it, that I might speak something in the Vindication of the holy
Spirit of God so much this day abused: It is one of the most dangerous things
the Scripture tells us of, either to deny the true and proper workings of the
Spirit of God, or to force any thing upon it; both of these sinners blaspheme
in a very high nature.

I should be loath to come within a suspicion of denying any influence of the
holy Spirit, I am sensible how sad a guilt they come under that say, that he
that casts out Devils by the power of God does it by the Prince of Devils. But
I persuade my self that there is not a greater cheat under Heaven this day, by
which poor Christians are deceived, and do deceive them by pretenses of the
Spirit; give me leave therefore to speak a little of this so necessary a Theme.

1. First I take it for granted, that the souls of the most holy servants of
God under Heaven, may be under temptations and prevailed upon by temptations.
Jesus Christ himself was tempted, which of his servants then can think to be
exempted? and being liable to Satan's temptations are capable of receiving
impressions from him. Now

2. There is nothing more certain then that Satan is in all things (so far
as his power extends) an exact imitator of God and his spirit, that look as the
holy Spirit of God works, so the Devil will endeavor to work also, mocking
the holy Spirit as the Magicians did Moses.

1. Both the holy and evil spirit agree in this, that they both work, per
modum afflatus, as Spirits work, by making inward impressions upon the Spirit
of man.

2. As the Spirit of God dwells in the Saints and works constantly and
effectually in them; Ephesians. 2.
So the evil Spirit dwells in wicked and ungodly men, and works also
constantly and effectually in them.

3. As the spirit of God has some ordinary and constant workings, others that
are more rare, that it does not always do, so the evil spirit has. The
Spirit of God always dwells in the Saints, and is always working in them, but
it is not always putting forth it self in some manifestations.

It is always in the Saints as a Spirit of Grace and Supplication, and
Sanctification, not always as a Spirit of Consolation, sealing, etc. So the
evil Spirit is always working in the wicked, as a Spirit of unbelief and
wickedness, hardening and defiling their hearts, but it is not always alike
and equally working in their hearts, nor endeavoring to deceive the Elect.
There are some more extraordinary puttings forth of the good spirit, and so
also of the Evil Spirit which imitateth the spirit of God: Illuminando.
1. As the Spirit of God does more especially work in his Saints sometimes by
enlightening and illuminating the mind; so the evil Spirit does at some times
more especially irradiate the minds of others, and endeavor with his
counterfeit light, to cheat the understanding of the Saints; thus some think
the Devil enlightened Balaams eyes, although others ascribe it to God as his
extraordinary work, Revelando.
in order to his own glory. 2. As the Spirit of God does more immediately
manifest it self sometimes in discovering to the souls of his Saints things
to come, Hunc nullum illuminat super nos cum ex to effulget animabus nostris,
hoc est, in superioribas viribus animarum nostr^rum splendour alicujus novae
revelationis, aut gratiae al^e ius; and quia raro hoc fit and ipsi soli
creatori natum est quando h^c e^ plac^at sac^re, dixit signatum esse lumen
ipsius vulius super nos, id est, clausum, quia non fiunt hujusmodi
irradiationes nisi cum hujusmodi lumen se aperit, and effandit, ad modum
coruscationis que fit ex mediis tenebris: vel propter hoc dixit, signatum, hoc
est, clausum, quia ignotum; paucissimi enim sunt quibus lumen illud se
^pa^uerit and innotuerit, and qui tantam propinquitatem ipsius ad animas
nostras noverint vide icet ut non fit mediam inter ipsum and animas nostras,
medium d co naturalis interposition s; quod enim interdum mediatoris inter
ipsum and nos sancti Angeli sunt, in causa interdum est, quia non-sumus idonei
splendore ipsius immediato irradiari. Gul. Parisiensis de universo. 2. parte^.
c. 20. D. p. operum. 993.
making impressions of them upon the Understanding as to his Prophets of old,
and some under the New Testament, and so here and there one (since that time)
in some eminent time.

Now I say as the Spirit of God does this some times, though but rarely, so
does the Devil, Divinatio deitatis quaedam imitatio est juxta intentionem
propriam nominationis istius. Licet usu certissimo sola malignorum spirituum
Revelatio divinatio nominetur; neque enim beatos illos ac sublimes spiritus
divinare dicimus, sic neque prophetas sanctos divinare ullus hominum dixit, sed
magis prophetare, n^q^e divini sed p^ophetae sancti vocari consueverunt, cum
aliqua de secretis Creatoris revelant hominibus. Vulgariter autem divini
nominentur, q^i ex revelatione malignarum secreta ^iqua vel occulta loquuntur.
Gul. Paris. 2. p. de universo. p. 3. c. 18. operum p. 989. col. a. B.
who having a fuller knowledge of things when first existent in their natural
necessary causes, and being through his experience and wisdom more able to
make a judgment of consequences and effects by his knowledge of counsels and
means, etc. does sometimes for his advantage communicate this knowledge to
wicked men, and may do it to Gods people (if God permits him) to gain
himself further advantages: thus doubtless the Astrologers and soothsayers of
the Caldeans were inspired by the Devil, and so also the Magicians of Egypt
etc. So the witch which Saul went to.

But as the Lord does thus seldom reveal himself to his people, so does the
Devil very rarely for his credit sake.

Impellendo.
3. As the Spirit of God does sometimes manifest it self by Extraordinary
impulsions and motions to some things; So does the Devil: I have known some
murderers confess they could never be quiet till they had done their deed of
wickedness; others under Temptations to self-murder, have confessed the Devils
impulsions were so strong that they could not resist them. The Devil always
moves sinners, and is often laboring with the Saints, but sometimes he moves
more faintly, sometimes more strongly. Even as the holy Spirit always moves
the Saints to good, but the Saints sometimes are bound in the spirit so moved
that they can do nothing till the thing be done; the Devil moved David (a man
according to Gods own heart, (...) Dirigendo.
to a sin, a great sin. 1 Chronicles. 21.1. It is the same word used: Job. 2.3.

4. As: sometimes the spirit of God does manifest it self to his people by
extraordinary direction upon seeking him in a doubtful case. So does the evil
Spirit; a full instance of this we have in the Egyptians, and Caldeans and
Romans, sending for their sorcerers and wise men upon all occasions to
counsel them and they did so.

Suadendo:
5. As the Spirit of God sometimes extraordinarily manifests it self in
creating persuasions and confidences in the hearts of his Saints concerning
truth, and some things present or future, thus the Spirit seals our
justification and faith and hope of glory, and hence it fills the Soul with
comfort; so the evil Spirit persuades sometime concerning errors and
wickedness, making impressions of persuasion and confidence upon the spirits
of those whom the Lord permits him to seduce: thus the evil Spirit persuaded
Ahab, 1 Kin. 21.21, 22. Thus I have shown you how Satan works either
ordinarily, hardening the heart and polluting the soul, and drawing it out to
sin, or extraordinarily in his servants and children, enlightening their minds
strangely, revealing to them things to come by extraordinary motions and
impulsions, and directions, and by creating extraordinary confidences, and
persuasions of things present or future. And having this physical power of
working, though the wicked be his ordinary subject, yet by Gods permission when
he gives up formal professors to strong delusions, or when he would try his
Saints, he may play these tricks with the Saints, they being his highest
temptations, God thereby proving them and others, 13 Deu. 1.2, 3. this is my
third (...), the devil is Gods Ape.

4. Fourthly, Sunt enim daemones quos pios appelles, ad templa hi compellunt,
ad preces adigunt sed suo lu^re. Drexel. t. 4. c. 3.
such is the subtilty of Satan the tempter, that as he will suit all persons
with temptations suitable to their natural and moral dispositions, so he does
the Saints of God.

5. Fifthly, The Genius of the Saints being sanctified, and standing toward
near communion with God and his spirit, there cannot be a more suitable
temptation to them, then if the Devil can turn himself into an Angel of
light, and counterfeit the Spirit of God in its great workings to their souls:
and make their souls take impressions, and revelations, and illuminations, and
persuasions, and direction from him and his evil Spirit, instead of the holy
Spirit.

6. Nor can there be a more dangerous temptation, or more dreadful sin, then
for the Soul to receive impulsions and directions from Satan, and obey them;
to receive impressions and persuasions from the Devil, and believe them, as if
they came from the holy Spirit; and to call such irradiations, persuasions,
impulsions, the appearances and manifestations of the blessed Spirit. For thus:

1. Faith and obedience, the two great homages of of the soul to God, are
given to the Devil, his great enemy.

2. Thus all lewd irregular actions and opinions which are the works and
doctrines of Devils, shall be fathered upon the holy Spirit in one of the
highest degrees of blasphemy.

Spirituum diversa sunt Genera: est Spiritus carnis, -- andmundi, -- and
diaboli.
And the holy one shall be entitled to blasphemies against himself, and actions
of highest natures intendency, to the dishonor of his holy name.

7. Hence I conceive it is, That the Apostle bids us not believe every spirit,
but try the spirits, whether they are of God, 1 Jo. 4.1. And the Thessalonians
are commanded not to be troubled by Spirit, or word, or Letter, 2 Thessal. 2.1.
And in regard that it is possible the Devil may enlighten, direct, Iam vero non
facile arbitror posse discerni quando noster ipse loquitur spiritus, quando ve
loquentem alterum audiat de trib^^ i^is. Sed quid refert quicunque loqu^^u^ dum
unum and idem sint? quod loquuntur, quid refert loquentis nosse personam, dum
constat pe^nitiosum esse quod loquitur? D Bernardus sermon. de septem spirit.
operum impr. Parifii 1586. p. 491.
persuade, reveal things to come to the servants of God; and make his
impressions upon their spirits, I conceive it one of the highest pieces of a
Christians duty, that has, or hears of such Revelations, Illuminations,
extraordinary impulsions, persuasions, and confidences, etc. to examine

From what Spirit they come, whether from his own Natural Spirit: or Gods Holy
Spirit, or this infernal Spirit.

And it would be a good work for some more eminent servants of God to undertake
a Tract of this Nature, to deliver those many that are taken in this snare, and
cheated with this dreadful cheat, I have not ability or room to speak much
here; only let me

1. Give you some few General notes, to know impressions, revelations,
persuasions, and directions, extraordinary impulsions, whether they come from
God or the Devil.

2. I will discover a little concerning the Spirit of God, how far it is
ordinarily or extraordinarily a spirit of illumination to enlighten a Christian
in the understanding of the revealed things of God, and how it works that
work in the Saints.

Whatsoever impressions that are made upon our spirits, either persuading us of
any notion, 1. Rule. Ex part materiae inspiratae considera an visiones and
revelationes, and quicquid tibi inspiratur sit consentantum divinis literis.
or of the warrantablenesse of any action; or whatsoever impressions of
direction are made upon them: or whatsoever impulsions or strong motions we
find in them, to believe or do any thing contrary to the word of God, cannot
come from the spirit of God: whether it be contrary to any particular precept,
-- Nam si non fuerit, scire debes non esse inspirationem divinam, sed
illusionem daemonis; Vnde Christus salva^or omnes tentationes sibi a daemont in
deserto factas quia non congruebant cum divinis literis testimoniis ca undem
rejicit. Busidus. (...). p. 133.
or any general precept, or the scope of it. The Reason is plain, because the
holy Spirit cannot say, and unsay like men, men are liars, that is a spirit of
Truth. Now all Scripture, says the Apostle, was writ by Divine Inspiration:
Holy men wrote as they were inspired by an holy Spirit. If therefore thou
hear others say, that the Spirit has persuaded them that their souls are
in a safe condition, and yet thou see their lives such as the Scripture
speaks, children of wrath: or if thou hear others vent notions for truths:
and pretend the Spirit has told them so: and thou find their notions
contrary to the word of God; -- Sciat me illud Apostoli libenter audire; Omnia
probate, quod bonum est retinere; and salvatoris verba docentis estote probati
nummulatu, ut siquis nummus adulcer est and figuram Caesaris non hab^t nec
signatus est moneta publicae, reprobetur. D. Hieron. t 1. ep. 152. p. 375. H
If thou hear of, or see any doing strange unscripturall actions, and then
pretend the spirits impressions, suggestions, impulsions, and the things are
contrary to Scripture, or if thou find in thy self a strong persuasion, or
impulsion, or motion of this nature, and thou think it comes from the
Spirit, know, they that say so, blaspheme the true and holy and pure Spirit;
and thou art under an high temptation to blaspheme that Spirit, if thou find
thy self inclined to believe such Notions truth, or that the Spirit of God
gives thee any such directions, or puts thee upon any such actions. Take for
this two scriptures, Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if thy
Notions, V. Valdesso divinae consid. consid 86.
Impulsions, Motions, Persuasions, be not according to that, there is no light
in them, no, they come from the spirit of darkness. Take yet another plain
Scripture concluding this case, 1 Io. 4.1, 2. Beloved, believe not every
spirit, Sensus verborum Apostoli est, non temere omnibus credendum esse, qui
doctrinae suae spiritus sancti authoritatem pretexunt. Id si demonstrare velint
dei verbum proferant oportet; quosi destituuntur, varis erit omnium quorum
testimoniis nituntur authotas. -- Memorabilis omnino and diligenti
consideratione dign ssimus locus. -- Voluit autem paucis verbis universa
Christi mysteria comprehendere Johannes. V. Gualtherum ad loc.
but try the spirits whether they are of God, because many false Prophets are
gone into the world, hereby know ye that the spirit is of God. Every spirit
that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God. v. 3. And
every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not
of God, etc.

Whence I gather: 1. That the motions, impulsions, persuasions which we have,
are to be tried whether they be of God, for there may be such not from God. 2.
That all such motions, impulsions, persuasions, etc. as are contrary to the
great truths of the Gospel are not of God.

From whence it is plain, that a pretended Spirit is not to be believed
against a written word: indeed we have two cases in Scripture contrary to this,
God moved Abraham to sacrifice his son, Genesis 22. and that other of Phinehas
killing Zimri and Cosbi, contrary to the revealed will of God: V. Dr. Willet,
in Gen 22. v. 1.
before the Law in Cains case, and after the Flood to Moah, Genesis 9.6. and under
the Law, to that Commandment, thou shall do no Murder. Many things are said
by the learned in both cases, I think a little will serve the turn. Had not
holy Wit revealed to us Gods immediate command for the first, and his immediate
approbation of both, we could have said neither of them had come from Gods holy
Spirit.

to any thing that is besides the word of God, Posteri sugiant and detestentur
revelationem novarum doctrinarum and custodians mandatum illud coelest^. Hunc
audite, id est, Evangelistas, Apostolos; Hos legani and audiant^ -- Quod si
praeter hoc aliquid revelatur, oportet ut habeat analogiam fidei, ut sit
revelatio intell ctus Scripturae, alio qui est diabolica. Luther. loc. com. cl.
4. c. 20.
that motion or impulsion is very suspicious, the reason is this, because the
word is a light to our feet, and there is no action of man, but if it be
lawful, it is commanded or allowed by some General or particular precept, the
word is a sufficient rule; and if I think my action is a case, there is
nothing about it in that Book, this is my temptation, and the Devil probably
is about a design, to draw me to an action against the word, and as his policy
in order to effect that he tells me, my case is not to be found there, but I
must seek for an immediate Revelation to this purpose, that he might meet me
and reveal his mind to me. Romans 14.23. Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin, now
not sin or motion to it can be from God.

Faith must have Gods word for the Object, nor can any action be of Faith which
is not done out of a praevious persuasion from the word of God that it is
lawful. If we be in the dark, as to an action, we may go seek God, that his
Spirit would show us his rule in his word, but I would never trust any voice of
the Spirit that should not be seconded by the word, though I could see nothing
in the word plainly forbidding me.

3. We may judge of the pretended, motions, inspirations, revelations, etc.
much from the persons that pretend to have them, and here I shall give you a
note or two: Consider:

1. If the persons be any way distempered in their brain in some fits of
phrensy or the like, if they be, V. Gul. Patisiensem. 2. par. de Universo p. 3.
c. 13. p 981. 4. col. and p. 989. c. 18.
they may merely come from their disordered natural Spirit or from the
Devil, and so if they be much gone in melancholy, the Devil oft-times abuses
such tempers, their natural Spirits being most disposed to it, yet melancholy
is often made Gods servant too: but in such cases the impression or persuasion
is very disputable.

2. If the person be a woman, the Revelation or impression is also very
disputable (says Eusaeus) and truly I think not without cause, for you find
Gods Revelations to women very rare in the old Testament, in this extraordinary
way. I mean it of extraordinary impressions by way of prediction; or counsel
and direction, or the like; for such impressions as tend to the private
salvation of the soul, doubtless women have them as frequently as men.

But for any other they are very suspicious (says Busaeus) ever since Eves
time.

3. Such motions impressions, Eas vero cogitationes quae justitiae and
veritatis nos admonent tota devotione suscipientes divinae d gnationi gratiam
habeamus. Bernar. t. 1. 493. B.
and persuasions, etc. are very suspicious, if made to wicked and profane men,
if the Lord thus discovers himself to any, these are his secrets, and Psalm.
25.14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. The Spirit of God
may make impressions upon the spirits of wicked men etc. move them but to what?
To Faith and Repentance. The Spirit of God has no near intimate communion
with those that fear him not; yet two instances we have in Scripture (if no
more) of Gods revealing himself to men of whose piety we have no Evidence, to
Pharaoh, Genesis 41. and to Nebuchadnezzar, in Daniel: Dr. Willet answers these
very well: Willet, in Genesis 41. q. 7.
that Joseph and Daniel had the Revelation, not Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezzar:
they only saw sights and could make nothing of them. 2. God indeed for his
own wise ends, did to these great Princes manifest himself in visions, that
they might be better friends to his Church, V. Pareum ad Genesis 41.25.
but they were no ordinary persons, neither was Gods mind interpreted to them.

4. Fourthly, Impressions and revelations, and impulsions etc. coming in
extraordinary obsolete ways, Significat non amplius esse causam cur
expectationem novae revelationis simus suspensi. Calv. ad loc.
are very suspicious. The Apostle says, God who at sundry times and in diverse
manners spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, Has in these
last days spoken to us by his Son, Heb. 1. v. 1, 2. God was wont of old,
before his word was fully written, to speak by visions and dreams: but now
his word is a full rule; and he seldom speaks any other way. It is a great
question, whether God now speaks to any of his Saints by visions or dreams.
S^mnia sunt fatu^^ veritates Alexander ^b Alex. Non debemus expectare
revelationem vel externam vel internam ubi ministerium adest. Luther. loc. com.
cl. 4. p. 35.
The Poets tell us of Somnia Eburnea et Cornea; the Schoolmen of Somnia divina,
Physica, Diabolica. Experience tells us, that Alexander ab Alexandro was
mistaken, when he told us, dreams are truths to come: and Aristotle argues
against divine dreams. All determine, it is a very hard matter to know an
impression made by God in a dream from one made by Satan, or arising from the
vapors of a disturbed body, and a disordered head: God did thus heretofore
reveal himself, but now he has spoken by his Son: Hear him.

Impressions, Impulsions, Motions, etc. coming Saint Augustine tells us, how
in a conflict of spirit, not being able to gain comfort from the Scripture, he
set himself to prayer; and he heard as it were a voice from ^he other room,
Take up and Read, Toll and lege, Toll and lege.
take up and ^^^d: he took up the Bible, and Read; and from the first portion
of Scripture he read, his Soul received comfort; it is very possible that a
Christian may think he hears the voice of the Spirit immediately, Tantum audio
conciones, lego Scripturam, and utor Sacramentis nullas apparitiones angelorum
hab^^. I^therus.
foretelling him things to come, persuading him of this or that truth, sealing
to him his hope in the Lord Jesus, putting him upon some action. But if it be
the voice of the Spirit, it says, Take up and Read; it directs him to some
promise which he closes with for comfort, or to some prophecy, which it
persuades him of the fulfilling of; or to some precept, to the practice of
which it obliges him; and seals unto him a true and congruous interpretation
of that Scripture, which shall not cross other Scriptures, nor the Analogy of
Faith.

Impressions made upon Christians spirits concerning things to come shall
undoubtedly come to pass, for that is omniscient, and does not work in us
persuasions of a lie. But they may come to pass, and yet not be wrought by
Gods spirit; that this is so, is plain, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. and the Reason is
plain; because the Devil certainly knows many things that shall come to
pass, being in their natural necessary causes, and can guess at more, by his
vast knowledge of all motions and translations past, and being in the world, of
all humors and dispositions of people and their several counsels, etc.

7. Seventhly, I conceive that Impressio^^ made upon our Spirit after prayer
are not always (...) trusted. It is generally thought that those that seek
God, if after prayer they find impressions to do the action, concerning which
they enquire of him, these must be looked upon as coming from the holy Spirit.
I humbly conceive this may be a gross mistake in these cases.

Pastum feci cum domino deo meo ne vel visiones vel somnia, vel etiam Angelos
mihi mittet. Contentus enim sum hoc dono quod habeo Scripturam sanctam quae
abunde docet and suppeditat omnia quae sunt necessaria cum ad hanc tum ad
futuram vitam. Luther.
If a Christian, having a sufficient rule in Gods word, to guide or forbid him,
shall yet either neglecting to look that out, or not being willing to follow
it, go and ask counsel of God, whether or no he should do an action which God
has in his word plainly forbidden him to do, this is like Balaams going to
God to know whether he should curse Jsrael or no. I conceive we must look the
word, to know what to do in an action, and then seek God to guide us in the
doing; and for the matter of our actions we are only to seek God, to show us
his mind in his word.

Secondly, in case an action be to me doubtful, that I cannot see the word
directing me to, nor forbidding me expressly; but I think there are some
general rules, which I think may warrant me; and I upon that go and seek the
Lord, it may be after my first prayer, I find my spirit relucting against it,
and it may be some piece of Gods word seems to me against it: yet for all this
I am so biased to the action, that I will go seek God again, this is now a
tempting God; and in such a case the Lord may give the Devil leave to give a
man his answer, as in Balaams case.

Thus Christian! I have given thee some rules by which thou may know whence
those motions, impressions, suggestions, impulsions, persuasions, which thy
self or others have come, whether from the spirit of God, Valdesso consid. 25.
or no. I find some other notes given by Valdesso and others: But not being,
as I conceive certain, I have omitted them. This was a task fitter for a more
able head and pen, then mine (Christians) but I may say as Elihu, Job. 32.6, 7.
I said I am young and you are very old, wherefore I was afraid and durst not
show you my opinion; I said days should speak, and multitude of years should
teach wisdom: But there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty
gives him understanding. I expected that some of my Reverend Fathers should
have discussed this necessary point, and appeared in the vindication of the
most holy Spirit, I waited long, but I saw none: But continually heard of lewd
opinions, and vile actions fathered upon the holy Spirit, as the perswader of
them and instigatour to them: this this made me, that for the Lords sake, and
for his Spirits sake, and for the precious souls sake of many of Gods Saints,
I could be no longer silent; to hear men foretell things to come, vent errors
and Blasphemous and ridiculous and erroneus opinions, and father them upon the
Spirit.

Nor may the heterogeneus nonsensicall interpretations of Scripture, which come
in these days from many that pretend to be Saints, be with less blasphemy
fathered upon the Spirit of God; I come therefore now closer to the matter, to
speak of the Spirit, how far it assists the Servants of God, in the
interpretation of Scripture: and how a man may be known to have had his
guidance in interpretations of Scripture from Gods most holy Spirit, in order
to which observe as truths.

1. That all Scripture was of divine inspiration, holy men spoke as they were
inspired by God, says the Apostle.

2. That all Scripture being dictated by the Spirit, the Spirit of God is best
able to interpret it, and to guide others in the interpretation of it.

3. That in the want of means, and to supply the necessities of the Church, in
the primitive times.

God was pleased miraculously and immediately, enabling some that were
illiterate, and not at all versed in the study of the Scriptures, to know his
meaning in the deep miseries of them that they could not only foretell things
to come, but also eminently open and infallibly expound Scripture: and this was
that prophesying spoken of in the new Testament, 1 Cor. 12. chapter 13. chapter 14. and
was an extraordinary manifestation of the spirit, by which God supplied the
necessities of his Church in those first times: this continued from the days
of Pentecost some years, and decrease^ ^owards the latter end of the Apostles
days, (...) is not to be expected now.

4. That the spirit of God (now dwelling in all the Saints) does enable them so
far to understand the meaning of God in his holy word, as is necessary to
their Salvation; and by its special work in the Saints, gives them a reflex,
special knowledge, that the promises are their portion, and Christ is theirs,
showing them their particular right, upon their hearing of the word Preached or
Reading of it, or seeking him by prayer: yet this latter it does not
constantly, but sometimes.

5. That in the understanding of the meaning of the Letter of Scripture, the
Spirit of God does by a common work, help those that with humble hearts wait
upon him for such assistance.

6. That this help of the Spirit is added to the use of means, and given us
so; such means as are the knowledge of Tongues, studying the Scriptures,
prayer, comparing Scripture with Scripture; and not by immediate inspiration,
without means.

7. That thus the Spirit helps, by enlightening our understandings and
judgments, raising up our natural parts, bringing to remembrance what we have
heard, parallel Scriptures, or the like.

8. That although the Spirit in the use of means does thus help us: yet not
by such an infallible help, as a Christian may always be assured he does not
mistake, though sometimes he may have (...) a full persuasion, much less so as
he may (...) ^ver his judgment to others as infallible; except they see it
agree with other Scripture.

Nunquam enim Deus fortunat laborem eorum qui non sunt vocati and quanquam
quaedam salutaria ad serant, tamen nihil aedificant. Lutherus.
9. That the Spirit of God in this way of assistance does most accompany, and
may be most expected of those, who most use appointed means, and who are
called of God to this public work; the Spirit of God being most promised to
such and using to assist all in their callings and things necessary for them:
not those who act out of the sphere that God has set them in.

10. That those that do use means, and are by office to interpret Scriptures,
and are learned, may not have the assistance of the Spirit, through their own
negligence, or curiosity, or neglect of seeking God, or want of an humble heart
in serving God, and seeking of him, all this, Christian, is truth, and old
puritanisme.

But now this is that which is denied.

1. That the Spirit of God, which dwells in all the Saints by virtue of that
inhabitation, does enable the Saints to understand the Scriptures, so as to be
able to expound them to others.

2. That the Spirit of God does by any such immediate way help Christians to
understand Scriptures, as he did help the Saints in primitive times by by the
gift of prophecy.

3. We deny, That the spirit of God, in times when the meaning of his word may
be understood by means, does enable the Saints without means, (yea and out of
their callings too) to expound the holy Scriptures to public auditories;
indeed were there a case of necessity, that the Church of Christ could not be
supplied otherwise but by some that could not use due means to gain the
meaning of Scriptures, the assistance of the spirit might then be looked for in
an extraordinary way, but when there is no such necessity but God has
liberally supplied his people with means, both to gain the knowledge of
Scriptures, and ordaining some to that office, we deny that any have any
promise for any such extraordinary assistance, nor have any such granted to
them: This is that I deny.

Now every error, Christian, is founded upon a mistake of some truth, an
Error, being a monstrous production, being begotten by the Devil upon a
crotchecall head, or an ignorant head and a proud heart: and as every monster
has something of the species which it represents, in respect of which it is
either deficient or redundant, so has every Error. The truth's something of
the species whereof is kept in this Error, thou have heard, and also wherein
this appears to be a monster, being a redundancy to those truths, and
something more then they hold forth.

And indeed it is necessary that one of those three last mentioned should be
held (as a substratum) to this irregular practice of unordained men's Preaching.
For if we should lay that truth aside, that all that publicly Preach must be
in office, and only hold the other, That all that expound Scripture must have
a gift and ability to do it, (which Mr Sheppard grants) yet we should have
enough against the Preaching of the most, and one of a thousand Christians
would scarce be found fit according to that to be a Preacher, if we still hold
this truth.

That this gift is not common to all Saints by virtue of the spirit given
them, viz. the sanctifying spirit, but only given by the use of means, by the
studying of Scripture, weighing the Original, considering parallel Scriptures,
weighing coherences and consequences, still it will follow,

That those only may preach who are enabled to do this, who can search the
Originals, consider parallel Scriptures, and judge if they be paralells; who
can understand and weigh coherences and consequences, etc. and this would argue
very few guifted men fitting. Being neither:

1. Enabled to allow themselves times to do it, nor yet,

2. Having natural or acquired abilities to do it, if they had time; therefore
it stood Mr. Sheppard in hand to maintain the other notions: That they have an
immediate assistance to it by the Spirit, dwelling in them as Saints. An
opinion as much ridiculous as dangerous; for if this were true, then as I have
urged,

1. None but such, as have the spirit thus dwelling in them and are Saints,
could give a true interpretation of any portion, the contrary to which is
evidently true.

2. No Saint could err, in any interpretation of Scripture or application of
it; why? because this act of his proceeds from the immediate virtue of an
unerring Spirit. Thus should nonsensicall and ridiculous interpretations of
Scripture, which he that runs may read to be false, be fathered upon the spirit
of God. And herein (Christians) I cannot but observe how God has made Mr.
Sheppard to confute himself; for you shall any of ye be Judges, whether an
unerring Spirit guided him when he interpreted James 4.5. to be the holy Spirit
dwelling in us, and applied it to that purpose.

And the like I might say of forty Scriptures he has brought and applied in
his Book, that have no kind of relation to the thing, he brings them to prove;
take his Book, examine the Scriptures he quotes, well observing for what he
quotes them, and thou will find it very true. Now I think it were no less
then blasphemy for me to bring James 4.5. The Spirit that dwells in us lusts
to envy, to prove that the holy Spirit dwells in the Saints, if I should say,
The spirit guided me to that interpretation; Besides,

3. Of necessity: A Saint (if this Doctrine be true) can never alter his
opinion in any one Scriptures interpretation, for surely the Spirit cannot
guide a man contrary to its own former guidance.

4. If this gift comes from the spirit as the spirit that dwells in us; Every
one in whom the spirit dwells must be able to expound Scripture to others. In
short, Christians, so many gross absurdities would follow this position as
would easily evidence it to be as far from truth as hell is from heaven. And
yet if our brethren cannot say this, they can say nothing at all to justify
their abilities to expound Scriptures, and so consequently their practice in it.

Now that I might vindicate the holy Spirit from being the author of those
lamentable wrestings of Scripture, nonsensicall interpretations, and absurd
senses which many put upon it, I have undertaken this discourse, one thing more
especially moving me.

6. The dangerous consequences, which, I apprehend, would be of this opinion
and practice, and especially at this time, I shall mention but a few.

1. A dangerous puffing up of Christians, with the opinion of their own parts
and abilities, no Scholars are so proud as those that have least Scholership;
Hoc tantum scio me nihil scire. Non est calamitosior homo in terris quam
superbus Doctor, Rex, Princeps. Lutherus.
men of knowledge see such a vast knowledge before them, that it makes them cry
out, they know nothing, nor any Christian so ready to be puffed up with a conceit
of their own knowledge as those that know least; those that have rare abilities
to expound Scripture see so many difficulties, and meet with so many
considerable questions and objections, that it makes them judge themselves very
insufficient to this great work, who is sufficient for such things? observe
(Christians) where there are such preachers, whether thou do not ordinarily
see them men puffed up with self conceit and opinions of themselves, thinking no
texts too hard for them to open, no difficulties too hard to unty.

2. We live in an age when the worst of men are much prejudiced against the
ways of God and his Gospel Ordinances, and in which many such men there are
that are very learned and critical. Now whether this be a probable way to
ingratiate the Ordinances of God to people, to send out Preachers, that through
want of abilities shall make the Ordinances of God nauseous to carnal hearts,
let any prudent Christians Judge. Surely in such times those should be sent out
who are of most eminent Abilities, and furnished even with humane Art, to
persuade in the most moving way, and to insinuate themselves into the hearts of
their hearers, otherwise the Ordinances of God shall yet be made more
contemptible. And for ordinary people, how much they are prejudiced against the
ways of God, all know; and whether it be a way to propagate the Gospel of
Christ amongst them, to send out such whom they have formerly known to be of
their own rank or below them, let experience witness; when Jesus Christ
himself (who surely had better gifts then our brethren have) preached where
the people could say, Is not this the Carpenters son? the son of Mary, the
brother of James and Joses, and of Judas and Simon, and are not his sisters
here with us? Mar. 6.3. It is said v. 5. Jesus Christ could do there no mighty
works, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick persons and healed them,
whereupon he went down into the Villages and preached; and shall we think
they are likely to be great Instruments in doing good? When the people shall
say, Is not this the Cobbler that mended our boots the other day? or rather will
it not be a way to harden people in their contempt of the Lords Ordinances.

3. Thirdly, do we not live in a time, when Christians are grown to a very
high degree of knowledge, that ordinary notions will not serve their curious
palats, They must have good sause as well as meat, and all that Ministers can
do by their most elaborate judicious Sermons is scarce enough to keep alive in
Christians a good opinion of Ordinances; and will it not be a ready means to
make them wholly to slight them, to have their ears continually tired with
raw, and indigested Notions and vain tautologies, with discourses in which
shall be nothing to win the affections, Doctores non solum aedificare, sed
etiam desendere debent. Tempore pacis docendum est. Belli autem tempore
pugnandum and resistendum Satanae ac haereticis. Lutheri loc. com. cl. 4. p. 34.
and entice the hearers ear?

4. Do we not live in times in which the Socinian and Arminian heresies are
spread over the Nation; that there is scarce any body of professors but some or
other of them are poisoned with this leaven? And is this a time to send out
such wooden instruments to deal with them? will a guifted brother that has
no learning, nor any way improved his reason be able to graple with a subtle
headed Socinian; or rather shall he not (probably) be seduced by him into his
Blasphemies?

5. Will not this practice make way to render the office of the Ministry
useless, and the Ordinance of Ordination useless? For to what purpose should
these continue, if it be every ones duty to Preach as well as they; nay, and in
time thus shall all the Ordinances of God be made useless, for they that bring
arguments to prove this, may if they will bring better from this concession to
prove they may baptize and give the Lords Supper, and then what need of
officers for any?

I might instance in many more, but in short my apprehensions are such, that I
believe, if the Devil were to ask a Courtesy of a State, he should ask no
more then, 1. An universal toleration, and 2. an uncontrouled liberty for
every one to Preach and expound Scriptures.

By an universal toleration he should get a protection for his friends he has
already; By the first the devil would secure his servants from the Sword of the
Magistrates; by the second from sword of argument, the two edged sword of the
word.
by this libertas prophetandi he would make more unlearned men wresting the
Scriptures to their own destruction, and the destruction of them that hear
him. If he could but procure these two things, he should have the Magistracy in
a snare for neglect of their duty in reference to the truth and glory and
ordinance of Christ, he would have the Ministry under his feet (those great
troublers of his Kingdom) yea and the third part of the stars of Heaven
would be drawn down, being by this means seduced into error, or carried up
above ordinances, and he would harden the hearts of others against the means
of Grace. My soul trembles to think what the issue of Either or both these
will be. The Purity and truth of Ordinances would be lost, and the power of
Godliness lost too. I say the first will be lost; the Ordinance of Ordination
gone? have we been so zealous against a trifling ceremony, Christians, because
it has not been commanded, and shall it be now so light a thing to us to make
the commands of the Gospel (yea so many as are for ordination) of no effect?
Have we strained at a Gnat, and shall we swallow these Camels? have we been so
zealous against an Apocryphal Bishop or Archbishop, and shall we so tamely
admit those things which are far more Apocryphal? shall any dare to say that a
private Persons sprinkling water upon the face, and naming the holy Trinity is
that Ordinance of Baptism? or the breaking a bit of Bread, and pouring out a
little Wine (using the words of administration) by the same hand, the great
Ordinance of the Lords Supper? and is their prophesying (as they call it) any
more the great Ordinance of Preaching? no sure, thus shall Ordinances be all
one after another laid aside. And for the power of godliness (dear
Christians!) look into other places where there has been an universal
toleration, and see how much of it thou find there. In short, Christians,
you can remember the time when the Ministers of the Lord Jesus Christ Preached
the Gospel powerfully and plainly; and Christians heard it reverently and
humbly, and were wont in their families to repeat and examine Sermons, to
search the Scriptures for the truth of those things which the Ministers said,
were not the Christians of those times noble Bereans? did not the power of
Godliness thrive under this order? were there not more souls converted by
far then now; were not those Christians more humble, sincere, cordial,
united, sound Christians then those of our times? had we not more Christians
when we had fewer Preachers? and since this unbridled liberty has been taken,
have not Christians been more loose and wanton, more crotchicall, and
scepticks rather then Christians? O that the Lord would please to teach his
people sobriety to distinguish between the budding rods, and those that he does
not make to blossom.

I confess (Christians!) I was the unfittest of ten thousand to undertake this
great controversy, not only in respect of my few days and little abilities
of learning and Judgment, but in regard of my much work, it is now but
fourteen days since this Authors Book came to my sight or hands, and I have
had the task of seven Sermons to study and Preach in the time, so that thou
can not expect I should have approved my self very exact in my answer, which
was dispatched in ten days (my Preface having taken up the other four.) But I
could not hold my peace (not for my own sake) for I durst have trusted the
weakest judgments to have judged betwixt Mr. Sheppard and me, whether he had
sufficiently answered my arguments, but for the Lords sake, and for his glory
sake, and for his truths sake and Saints sake: and for his glorious Ordinances
sake, that they might not be trampled under foot; I say for these causes I have
undertaken this Gentleman. And now I beseech you (dear and precious friends)
in this day of reproach, to witness to the ordinance of the Lord Jesus. This
Gentleman has so far appeared for the Lord as to plead with people to
maintain the great Ordinance of the Ministry. The Lord make him in that to
prevail with them. Several things the Devil has devised in these sinful
times to prejudice the Spirits of Christians against the Ministers of the
Gospel that are the messengers of the Lord to their souls, Non amo te Sabidi
nec possum dicere quare: Hoc tantum possum d^cere non amo te.
yea, against those of whom they cannot say, they have either complied with the
superstitions of former times, or that their conversation is not as becomes the
Gospel of the Lord Jesus; they can only say this against them, that they care
not for them.

But I say some things there are that the Devil has put into some professors
mouths to defend their revilings of them, and shameful contempt cast upon them.

1. First, They are disaffected to the State, I could not but observe this
great subtilty of Satan, when Church differences through much waiting and many
disputes were almost brought together to find out this new way to divide. But
my dear friends! is this enough think you, to justify not hearing the
Ministers of the Gospel, or laying them aside. Blessed be God that unhappy
cause of division is almost now taken away. But was there nothing that in point
of conscience might stumble the Ministers of God in reference to our great
change? or were all Saints that were most complying? I speak not for my self,
I confess I was from the first more satisfied in point of Engaging, then many
of my Reverend fathers, but I could not but from the first think, and still
do think hundreds of them that durst not, were more conscientious then my
self, and had the fear of God more upon them then my sinful soul has, and
were I either in Parliament or Army, I trust I should the more love and honor
that man for ever, whom I should observe holy and conscientious in all his
ways for opposing me, and venturing any frowns to do it, where he observed
me doing any thing that he in conscience should think I did amiss in, though
I were fully satisfied I did not. But I hope that business is determined by
the great God, O that no grudges for differences relating to it might yet
remain, but that there might be in all that fear the Lord an heart of
Oblivion as well as an Act of Oblivion is past in it.

2. A Second great objection against the Ministers is: they are Presbyterians,
and the Devil has so far prevailed with many as to make it in their hearts
Anathema esse Presbyterum. It has been the lot of the Saints heretofore to be
stigmatized with Apocryphal names, Lollards, Hugonites, Calvinists, Puritanes,
Non conformists, yet they bare their names with Glorying, because it was for
the Lords sake. Blessed be God that he has now taught our enemies a Scripture
name: Presbyter is a name of the Lords own coining. Tit. 1.5. 1 Pet. 5.1. 2
Ep. Jo. v. 1. 3 Ep. v. 1. etc. I confess Christians that name next the name of
Christian is my glory, and the next Scripture name for the Ministers of the
Gospel and officers of the Church. After that way which they call Presbytery,
I desire to worship the Lord Jesus Christ in Gospell-order. And if this be to
be vile, we must be more vile: we cannot but look upon Pastors, Elders, and
Deacons, to be the Church officers under the Gospel, and think that the
government of the Church is to be in such hands, and that Synods are Gods
Ordinance to which Churches ought to be subject, and that errors and heretics
are not to be endured, nor public Ordinances to be administered by private
hands, nor the great Ordinance of the supper to be given out promiscuously, and
these are the great things that Presbyterians differ in, both from some of
their dissenting brethren, and the Episcopal party; and whether this charge
will be enough to justify your hatred of the Ministers of the Gospel, and
dividings from them in the day of the Lord Jesus (Christians!) I beseech you
seriously to consider.

3. But Thirdly, the Ministers are bitter, Nos sic sapimus omnia prorsus ^sse
reprehendenda, arguenda, consundenda, nihil excusandis ut medio stet campo
libera, and aperta and pura veritas. Porro aliud est eos quos corripueris summa
mansuetudine suscipere, tolerare, juvare. Hoc jam ad charitatis and officii
exemplum pertinet, non administerum verbi: charitas est quae omnia sustinet,
omnia suffert, omnia sperat; fides vero seu verbum prorsus nihil sustinet, sed
arguit, devorat, seu ut Jeremias dicit, evellit, destruit, dissipat, and
maledictus qui facit opus domini fraudulenter. Lutherus loc. com. cl 4. p. 75.
I could never yet understand this charge when a Minister might be said to be
bitter, or upon what score this charge lies upon them; was not John Baptist so
bitter when he called the Pharisees a generation of Vipers, and Jesus Christ so
bitter when he called them rotten painted Sepulchers? do they reprove sin
harshly, and is it not their duty, to Cry aloud and not to spare? I would feign
Fathom this Notion of bitterness, when you have considered it, Christians
examine whether it be not Zeal in opposition to Lukewarmenesse, that you put
this scandalous name upon: if it be known that whatsoever you think of it,
they think it a dreadful thing to be spued out of the Lords mouth, for being
neither hot nor cold against heresies and Errors, and for the glory of the
Lord Jesus. If I rightly understand this notion, it is this, such a Minister is
bitter, why, he inveighes sharply against an opinion or practice which is
mine, and I am persuaded many Saints of God are of it. But Christians! surely
you will be ashamed to own this before the Lord Jesus hereafter, or in a
discourse here. Is the Minister an holy conscientious man? do thou think
that he verily thinks thy opinion or way is a sin: if thou do, Christian,
surely thou should love him that he will not spare thee: was not Jesus
Christ thus bitter when he said to Peter, get thee behind me Satan, and Paul
thus bitter when he rebuked Peter to his face? Could David say concerning a
wretch that charged him with blood and usurpation, when he so shamefully railed
on him in the streets, Let him alone perhaps God has bidden him curse? And if
thou have an humble heart, shall not thou say when an holy servant of God shall
not rail, but from Scripture reprove, not in the streets but in the Pulpit,
where God has set him to reprove sin, possibly God has bidden him reprove,
possibly my soul may be guilty, however doubtless he speaks what he thinks
the Lord has bidden him speak. Let the righteous smite me and it shall be
like oil that shall not break my head, yea it shall be a kindness for yet my
prayer also shall be in their calamities. Psalm. 141.5. E^si me Lutherus
Diabolum vocaret, ego tamen illum insignem dei servum agnoscam. Calv.
Mr. Calvin heard that Luther railed on him, what says he to it, says he,
though Luther should call me a Devil, yet I would acknowledge him a famous
servant of the Lord Jesus Christ. But Calvin's Doctrine and Spirit too is much
forgotten.

4. But the Ministers Preach nothing but damnation, they Preach legally and
Preach nothing but duties, they should Preach privileges. Isa. 30.8. Now go,
write it before them in a Table, and note it in a Book, that it may be for the
time to come for ever and ever. That this is a rebellious people, lying
children, children that will not hear the law of the Lord, which say to the
seers see not, and to the prophets prophecy not unto us right things, speak
unto us smooth things, prophecy deceits, get you out of the way, turn aside
out of the path, cause the holy one to cease from before us. There are no
conscientious Ministers but will preach the privileges of the Gospel, but
they know that there are a thousand sinners and hypocrites to ten true Saints,
Read Mr. Sheppards Sincere Convert. Mr. Hooker on humiliation. Mr. Fenners
Books: and holy Rogers and Bolton. See if they did not preach terrors, as well
as comforts, yet who are now such instruments of God to convert souls?
they know there are many wanton loose professors to one strict humble close
walking Christian, and therefore they think it their duty to preach the Law as
well as the Gospel, did not John Baptist preach law. Math. 3.7, 8, 9, 10. And
Jesus Christ preach law. Math. 25.41. And St. Paul write law to the Saints.
Romans 2. v, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. etc. and 2 These. 1.10, 11. Profane persons had need
of law to humble them, and hypocrites to convince them, and loose professors to
make them humble and strict. But my Pen runs too far. (Dear Christians!) the
Lord keep you humble in these wanton days, and sober in the midst of this mad
generation, and under an holy aw of his precious ordinances in this day of
their reproach, and tender of his Ministers by whom you have been brought in
to Christ in this day of their contempt, and zealous for Christ Jesus in this
Lukewarm time. And the Lord Jesus keep you all blameless to the day of his
coming. This is the Prayer of,

Your meanest servant in the work of the Lord Jesus JOHN COLLINGS.
From my study in Chaply-field-house. in Norwich. April. 26. 1652.
ANIMADVERSIONS By way of Reply, to a Book, entitled, The Peoples privilege
and duty guarded, By WILLIAM SHEPHARD, Esquire.
CHAP. I. Wherein the Authors method in his Answer is laid down.
AS this sober Gentleman has in his first Chapter set down his method: so I
shall do mine, that the Reader may not be tired with an indistinct discourse.

1. I shall examine his second Chapter; and show how far we have, or have not
granted; and how we have granted what he there mentions.

2. I shall examine his third Chapter (in several Chapters, because it is very
long:) there I shall examine whether he has sufficiently proved his ten
Propositions he lays as a foundation, or the eleventh; which is his main work.
I shall examine the last more strictly; and reply to his several (pretended)
arguments, for the preaching of such as are not in office.

3. I shall examine his fourth Chapter, where he answers our arguments: and try
whether he has done it sufficiently; and reply upon his pretended answers.

4. Possibly I may add some short notes to his last Chapter, which is not
argumentative, but only practical, and therefore I shall not speak much to it.

CHAP. II. In which part of the Authors Second chapter is examined: and the
Preachers grants are opened, how far, and in what sense they have granted the
things mentioned.
THe Author is pleased in the first Chapter to tell us, that he grants these
things:

1. That that there are or ought to be in all the Churches of Christ regularly
constituted, certain Officers called Preachers, Pastors, Teachers, or Elders,
etc. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 12.29, etc.

2. That no man may take this office upon him; but he that is called, and set
apart to it, according to the Gospel way and rule 1 Timothy 5 22. Lay hands
suddenly on no man. Acts 13.3. When they had fasted and prayed, and laid their
hands on them, they sent them away.

So that he grants the Gospel rule for Gospel Preachers to be that those that
take the Office upon them should be solemnly set a part by fasting and prayer,
and imposition of hands.

3. That these officers are to be heard, acknowledged, submitted to, honored,
maintained, countenanced, and furthered in their office by the people. 1 These.
5 12. Ephesians. 5.21, etc.

4. The opinion denying the Ministry, is as bad as that denying Magistracy:
and both of them heretical, dangerous, and damnable.

5. He grants, that the public and common preaching the word by such officers
in the Church of Christ is the special, and great standing Ordinance of Christ
now under the Gospel for the gathering to, and perfecting Saints in the Church,
there to continue to the worlds end, Ephesians. 4.11. Matthew. 28.20. Romans 10.17.

In the close of that Chapter he says:

We utterly dislike therefore all opinions and practices that tend to the
derogation or prejudice of this Office, Ordinance, and Ministry, which must be
kept safe, and untouched; and we may not endure it to be spoken against. Thus
much we grant to the Preachers.

(Sir,) Although we believe that Gods word does oblige you to believe and grant
this, and all this: yet we have cause to thank you, that in this erroneous and
backsliding age (wherein so many have lost their first love) you will thus far
bear witness to the truth of God. This is much more then those that usually
handle your subject will grant: and I suppose enough (if well improved) to
bring you to close with that other piece of truth, against which you contend,
viz. That Public preaching the Gospel amongst professors is a proper and
distinct act of these Officers.

In this second Chapter you come to tell us, what we have granted you, and
there you confess we grant you twelve things.

"1. That such as have not been brought up in the University, or want
School-learning, may (being duly called) become public preachers.

This indeed I have granted, in my Vindiciae, p. 14. but in these terms only:
that School-learning is not absolutely necessary. So that doubtless in cases
of necessity, when the Church of God cannot be supplied enough with men of
learning, this may be done (and I conceive this is our case and part now) for
truly, I judge a godly gifted man, duly ordained and set a part to the work
(though unlearned in part) far fitter for the Ministry then a profane wretch
(though the greatest Scholar in Christendom. Quoniam non omnibus forte etiam
nullis ea donorum ubertas obtingit a spiritu, quae Apostolis. Nulla fuerit
impietas quod donis illius diminutum est supplere disciplinarum adminiculis
Erasmus. in Ecclesiast. edit. Froben. An. 1554. Hodie quum plusquam necessaria
fit linguarum cognitio, and Deus hoc tempore mirabile beneficio eas ex tenebris
in lucem eruerit sunt nunc magni theologi qui fuoiose adversas eas declamitent
quum certum sit spiritum sanctum eterno elogio hic ornasse linguas, colligere
promptum est quonum spiritu agantur isti censores. Calu. in c. 4. 1. ep. ad
Corin.
) Thus far now this is granted. Yet withal I cannot think that God would have
supplied miraculously the first preachers of the Gospel with an extraordinary
gift of tongues; and an infallible spirit in expounding Scripture: if he had
not in his wisdom thought that it was most fitting for one that were learned
in the Original Tongues to interpret Scripture publicly.

A second thing you say we grant is, That the Ceremony of imposition of hands
is not necessary to the making of a Minister.

But who has granted this I know not. I have not, for p. 76. I say, that I
cannot think it can be omitted without sin in an ordinary orderly ordination:
and I give reasons for it. Nor can I find any place where my reverend brother,
Mr. Hall, has been so free in granting away Scripture precepts. Nor is it much
considerable who has granted it; for who ever they are, they have granted away
a truth was not theirs to dispose of. The word of God has not granted it; and
we cannot grant you away any piece of that, unless you can bring us a ticket
under Christ's hand. Nay, you your self will not grant it, for p. 2. you say,
they must be set apart, Non est minimum iota legis a quo non magni montes
pendent.
according to the Gospel rule. Now what that is, you tell us, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay
hands suddenly on no man. And Acts 13.3. To the Law, and to the Testimony,
(Sir,) Is. 8.20. Except we could find some ordinations there, without this we
cannot make so slight a business of it, especially when the holy Ghost lays
so much weight upon it as to express the whole ordinance of ordination by it.

3. A third thing you say was granted is, That such as intend the ministry, and
are to be set apart for it, may as probationers preach publicly, and that
Batchelours of Art may commonplace in a Chapel, to the end that their
Abilities may be tried and judged.

This indeed is granted you by Mr. Hall, Pulpit guarded p. 4. Vindiciae minist.
17. V. Mr. Rutherford, Due Right p. 281. 305.
and by my self, upon that ground of Scripture, 1 Timothy 5.22. yet not without
due limitation. 1. As Probationers. 2. Before the Elders, or the Church in
which he is constantly to preach. So Mr. Hall limits it.) I have added, 3. Not
without the approbation of the Presbytery that is to ordain him. 4. Not to make
a work of it, but to do it some few times. And (Sir) these are Scripture
bounds. For the text only says, A minori ad majus affirmandi.
Lay hands suddenly on none, and Let him be first proved (which is spoken of
Deacons, but holds a fortiori, to preachers. So that all his preaching must be
in order to a proof, and a securing of Timothy from laying on hands suddenly.
Now (Sir) the means must be proportionate to the end; Reason tells you with
these limitations, it is granted, sir.

4. You say we grant, that ordaining is not the only thing necessary. We grant
it indeed, for there must be before this ministerial gifts, 1 Timothy 2.2. and an
inclination to the work, 1 Timothy 3.1.

5. We do grant you, That in extraordinary cases, as when no regular
ordination can be had, nor any possibility of obtaining it, as in case of
persecution, or the like; or when people are dispersed into Countries, where no
Minister can be had, or where a Church is to be planted amongst Infidels; and
so in the infancy of the Church. Also in the corrupted collapsed estate, and
general disorder of a Church. So when the Church is in any danger; as in case
of lack of a Pilat or Captain, when the ship is in danger, or the Soldiers
assaulted, the Mariners or Soldiers may appoint a Captain or Master of the
ship: so may the people in these and such like cases set apart, and appoint one
of themselves to this office, and here (as they say) God does call immediately
and extraordinarily.

Si itaque hic factum est in us qui immediate sunt vocati, etc. V Chemnit. l.
com. p. 3. p. 137. Edit. fol. V. Calv. Instit. l. 4. sect. 14. Necessitas non
habet legem.
That same word such like comes in unhandsomely after your large enumeration of
all the necessary cases, I know or ever heard of. Yea, you reckon one too many.
For suppose a Church be to be planted amongst Infidels, I think Gods way is
the best way to do it in. So it was Acts 13.3, 4, 5: he did not send merely
gifted persons to do it, but calls from Heaven to his Church to set a part
Paul and Barnabas, before they went; which they did by fasting and prayer, and
laying on of hands: yet both of them were extraordinarily gifted. Indeed if
such ordination cannot be had) we grant it.

6. You say we grant, That every private man may in his "own family read and
apply to his own family something from the letter of Scripture.

Expounding is not a proper term for their ablities. Otherwise we grant it.

7. You say truly we grant, That any private Christian may privately and
occasionally, exhort, teach, admonish, reprove or comfort his brother.

8. You say we grant, That any private Christian may write "upon any Scripture,
and teach another by pen.

No (Sir) we only say, able orthodox private Christians may.

9. We freely yield, That private Christians occasionally "meeting together,
may repeat Sermons, relate experiences, and confer one with another.

10. We grant that private persons may make an open confession "of their faith,
if called to it, or forced to it.

11. "That Magistrates may give public charges, and make speeches and
exhortations to the people; we yield it.

12. That any man may make a public apology or defense to clear himself
from unjust accusations we grant, if he be called to it in seasonable time, and
convenient place he may do it; but not to justle out an Ordinance of God.

You say, "We will make further use of this afterward. We will wait upon you
for that (Sir) In the mean time let me make a little.

And now (conscientious Reader!) if thou be of an humble learning spirit,
judge betwixt us the ministers of the Gospel, and Mr. Sheppard. Is there not
room enough in these grants for a Christian in his own private family, or in a
private meeting (if he be of an humble and sober spirit) to exercise all the
gifts he has? but the Pulpit must needs be made big enough for him to sit in,
even with the Ambassadors of the Lord Jesus Christ? and to preach in their
place? Judge, I pray thee Reader, whether the Preachers of the Gospel of
Christ in England be so guilty of smothering the brethrens gifts, as Mr.
Sheppard would make them to be p. 12, p. 74, 75. of his book, and see how those
pages and these agree.

CHAP. III. Animadversions and an Answer to the fourth and fifth page of the
book, stating the business in difference; together with an account of the ten
propositions he brings in order to the guard.
THis Gentleman comes now to his third Chapter, and in that, having already
showed wherein we agree both, he comes to state the business in difference.

And in his first lines, he says right that the Preachers do affirm (yea, and
must stand to that affirmation too) till better arguments be brought us, then
this book will afford us) That private persons (though gifted and called,
Question stat.
i. e. d^sidered by the people) may not ordinarily open and apply Scriptures in
the public assemblies of a constituted Church, without a solemn setting apart
to that office.

My brother Hall puts in a Call. I balk't that word purposely, because I knew
what our brethren call a Call, and I meant something more.

This point (says this Gentleman) The people deny and oppose. (That Is no great
matter, if they cannot disprove it. But in order to the mannaging of their
opposition, he brings us ten positions (which he calls truths) which well
proved, he thinks will guard this privilege.

I hope he intends them not for a Lifeguard to the pretended truth; if they
were they should stand nearer to it. For, for the first four, I will undertake
for him, that shall oppose the intended truth, which chiefly lies in the
fifth, sixth, and seventh. He shall cut the throat of them, if he will, and
neither a one of the first four shall check him. So the Vanguard stands for
little, but to make a show. Yet it will not be amiss to examine these (for
fear they should have a dagger more then any one sees) and be more in the
Authors meaning, then they are in common view and apprehension.

The Vanguard then consists of these four notions. 1. "That the Scripture do
as well belong to the people, as the Preachers. Quid inde? what then? or who
denies it.

2. That the people, as well as the Preachers, are to read and study the
Scriptures. God forbid but they should read and study them; but what of that?

3. "That the Exposition of the Scriptures, as to the right use and
understanding of them, is necessary to the people, as well as the preachers. I
observe a scurvy term, As well as, in every proposition. If there be not a
snake in that word, I see nothing of falsehood in this.

4. "That the people, as well as Preachers, are to abound in the knowledge of
the Scriptures. [As well as] again? Surely the cheat lies in that term; we will
search it anon. But admit it rightly understood.

After these, comes in the Tripartite notion, called, the privilege that
should be guarded.

1. That the gift of Scriptures exposition (being a part of that prophecy which
does now remain) is a gift common to all people of Christ out of office, as
well as the Preachers of Christ in office.

"2. That the people may as well use the gift of expounding Scripture, as the
Preachers.

"3. That it is the duty of all people of God, as well as of the Preachers to
expound Scriptures.

In the last place comes in the Rear-guard, consisting of three other
positions: which are innocent truths, if they have no daggers under their
shirts, more then a common Reader will see (God willing) we will search them
anon.

"1. That all Gods people may and ought to expound Scriptures to themselves,
and one to another.

Query. What the Author means by expounding. 2 By one to another? If by
expounding he means speaking of the Scriptures, or telling their thoughts; or
what they have heard, or read, or observed of the sense of the Scriptures; and
by One another, he means privately. It is granted.

2. That such as have any singular gift herein above others, are to exercise
it, as may be most for the profit of others.

This is true enough: only adding, that they keep the limits by which Gods
Word, and their calling bounds them.

3. That these expositions of Scripture of the people one to another have been
frequently blessed of God for the begetting and increasing of faith in the
hearers.

This I fear will prove anon to be barely proved; yet we dare not limit the
holy one of Israel; nor say, but that they may have sometimes been so blessed:
although I believe you might have left out the word frequently, I fear you
will want Scripture proof anon for that word.

These are his ten Propositions.

Now, Sir, although I could grant you, and easily do grant you several of
these positions to be true (if rightly understood) yet I shall examine what you
have said to all them. Partly, because I have a suspicion upon some words in
them not to have so honest a meaning, as they have a look. And partly, that I
might see whether you have been guided by the Spirit in your applications of
your many Scriptures to prove the points for which they are brought. I will
begin with the first of your Vanguard.

CHAP. IV. Wherein the fifth, and part of the sixth page is examined: and the
first proposition is scanned, and opened, viz. That the Scriptures do as well
belong to the people, as the Preachers.
THe first proposition is, That that the Scriptures do as well "belong to the
people, as to the Preachers.

This point the Gentleman, first proves. Secondly, cleares from objections.

1. He proves it (he should have done well to have opened it first.) Those two
terms, 1. Belong. 2. As well as, are not clear. We may say, the government of
the City belongs to the people of it; but how? quoad exercitium actus? as to
the exercise of the acts of government. Are the keys of government theirs? no
sure. Then farewell Magistracy, and welcome Levelling. But it belongs to them
as it is for their good, and peace, and order, as that under which, and
according to the rule of which they are to live.

If this Gentleman means by belonging, what the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 3.16.
That the Scriptures are profitable for all, for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness. That the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. God forbid but we should
grant it; and this belonging is proved by Deuteronomy. 29.29. and Ioh. 5.39. and Jude
3. and many other places.

But if this Genleman means, that they should belong to them as the keys to
the Steward, to open and apply them to the people, he both contradicts
himself, for he tells us in other places of this book, That they cannot expound
and apply Scriptures authoritatively; and he contradicts the Apostle too, 1
Cor. 4.2. Mysterium distribuimus in verbum Dei and Sacramenta. P. Martyr ad loc.
Let a man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and Stewards
of the mysteries of God. Of which mysteries the Gospel is one, Col. 1.16. And
if he does not mean, that the Scriptures thus belong to the people

1. He says nothing to the purpose.

2: His second objection is little worth (of which more by and by) for suppose
we argue thus: If the Scriptures be for the peoples use, and belong to them for
reproof, correction, doctrine, instruction in righteousness, then the people
may expound and preach them publicly.

He says: They are committed to Preachers, and yet not so as excluding the
people, -- But The Preachers are especially, Natura enim omnes jubet mutuo esse
custodes ac defensores salutis nostrae and alienae, maxim very fratres.
Pareus. Immo quod tibi frater est and proximus, ideo es illius custos and tibi
illius salus est a deo commendata. P. Martyr.
and by public office, and the duty of their place to take care of them; but
this hinders not, but that every Christian is by duty bound in general to take
care of the souls of his fellow Christians, and so of the truth.

We easily grant that private Christians are in the general bound by the Law
of God and nature to take a private care of their brethrens souls and bodies;
and of the truth, so far as to keep it in their own hearts, and propagate it
in their own families; yea and to admonish, reprove, and exhort one another: to
watch over them, if standing: if any brother be fallen through infirmity, to
endeavor to restore him in the spirit of meekness. But (Sir) they are not to
take a public care of, nor are they put in a public trust concerning their
brethrene souls. Neither are the Scriptures committed to them to teach others.
Quicquid enim ingenio humano ex cogitatum assuitur Scripturae ut pro divinitus
revelato habeatur mendacium est. Pareus in Apoc. c. 22.
1 Timothy 2.2.

What the word of God does not say in reference to the Ordinances and worship
of God, that we must not say. For if we do we shall add to the Scriptures.
God must order every pin in the Tabernacle.

But the word of God no where says, that the people have the glorious Gospel
of God committed to their trust, to teach others out of it, as 1 Timothy 1.11. 1 Timothy 6.20. 2 Timothy 2.2. and therefore we must not say, the people have it
committed to them. The Scripture warrants no such speech, it is not the
language of Canaan. And so (Sir) in point of public trust they are excluded,
as much as a Commission to his Excellency to be Lord Deputy of Ireland,
excludes others from being so, though it be not said so (in the letter) in the
Commission. In point of use indeed the people are every where included, but
they are no where called Stewards, etc.

And (Sir) for your distinction between committed, and so committed, it is
Apocryphal. The Scripture no where says, they are at all committed to them.
You must remember (Sir) your own marginall note which you give, as p. 29. Vbi
lex non distinguit, non est distinguendum.

But to justify what you say, you tell us that it is committed to the people;
for, In 1 Timothy 3.15. the Apostle says, That the whole Church, not the
Preachers only, is the pillar and ground of truth.

Any one may see a Non sequitur (without spectacles) in the Argument. And the
Gentleman's proofs will none of them prove this, nor any thing like unto it.

In the next place he comes to clear his point from two Objections. He frames
one from Revel. 2. Where the Epistles are directed to the Angels. To this he
answers: 1. The Angels are taken collectively for the whole Churches, as Exodus
4.2. Israel my son. 2. He says, It is clearly expressed, Revel. 2.7. He that
has an ear to bear let him bear what the Spirit says to the Churches. To
which I answer.

Though I should never have made this objection, but think there is very little
strength in it, and the Gentleman only brought it forth to try his skill about
it, yet I conceive his answer is too short in it: and seeing the argument is
weak, it is charity for disputation sake to take its part.

1. It will hardly be proved, that Angel is taken any where collectively; that
Israel is, is plain enough from more places then one. The term Angel, I take
it, is scarce found but to signify an Angel by nature, or by office. Now it is
absurd to say, that all the people in a Church are sent, and in office: which
is the appellative signification of the term.

To his second answer.

2. The Spirit spoke to the Churches. Although the Epistles were not directed
immediately to all the members, doubtless they were directed to their Officers
for their use. And thus the holy Ghost speaks to us in speaking to the Jews of
old: and to the Jews, and Christians in the new Testament. Else neither the
Scriptures of the Old, nor the New Testament belong to us.

He frames a second Objection, p. 5.

Ob. The Scriptures are committed to the trust and care of Preachers in Office.
1 Timothy 1.11. 6 20. 2 Timothy 2.14.3.14. Tit. 1.3.

The bringing of this objection makes me think, he understood by [as well) that
the Scriptures did equally belong to people as Preachers, and are alike
committed to them. For if this objection opposes the doctrine, he must mean by
belonging, a belonging to them as the Lords Trustees and Commissioners in the
Gospel. And then his position is false, and these Scriptures which he here
quotes unanswerably prove it so. Yet he pretends to answer.

Sir, As to that text, 1 Timothy 3.15. it is a very disputable text, who the
Apostle calls there, the pillar and ground of truth, is not so well agreed, as
you presume. Some refer it to Timothy. Mr. Calvin says, V. Deodate ad loc. V.
Leigh ad loc. Calv. ad loc. V. Leigh ib. Engl. Annot.
Elogium hoc ad ministerium verbi pertinet. That it is to be applied to the
ministry of the Word. Others understand it of the living God, who is indeed the
pillar and ground of truth. So Cameron, and others.) To bar either of these
interpretations, you have nothing but the poor credit of a comma or two; and
those that knew any thing, know that the Original copies generally are both
without stops and distinction of verses. For my own part, I should understand
it of the living God, and supply (...), [who is] and then your proof fails.

But admit it be the Church, it is gratis dictum, and not proved, that by
Church he mean all the individual members. The Papists generally contend, that
the Church is there called the pillar and ground of truth; and thence
Bellarmine and Estius, V. Estium ad loc. V. Calv ad loc. Beza ad loc.
and others conclude it cannot err. It is also disputed, whether it be meant
of the Church Universal or particular. Protestants maintain it of the Church
Universal. And doubtless if it be to be understood of the Church at all, it
must be of the Church Universal, and not of every individual member of that.
And then it is to be considered in what sense the Church is the pillar and
ground of truth; and it is concluded, that the Church is the pillar of truth,
because in that truth is to be found. As Proclamations hang upon pillars, so
the Church is the Pillar of truth; but (Sir) you prove nothing, if you do not
prove that the Individual members of the Church are speaking pillars, which
will be an hard task for you. Indeed they should be pillars of truth, to bear
the Law of the Lord upon their hearts and conversations. And they are, as you
say, from Jude 3. to contend for the faith. But the question is, whether God
has committed the doctrine of faith to them to preach? No such thing is proved
from that text in Timothy, nor that in Jude neither. And in earnest (Sir) if
every gifted brother be to be a pillar of truth, truth has lost its
uniformity. Many of them have been pillars upon which the devil has hung all
the errors and blasphemies of former times; not one of many a pillar of truth.

In short, I shall dispatch your first proposition granting you, that the
Scriptures belong to all, to be exercised in them, to search and examine them,
and their own hearts by them; to read in them, and meditate in them day and
night. But they do not belong to all to preach them publicly.

CHAP. V. Wherein the sixth and seventh pages are examined, and the Authors
third proposition is scanned, and his proof of it enquired into, etc.
FOr your second proposition, viz. That the people as well as the preachers are
to read and study the Scriptures. I grant it you to be a truth, and wish it may
be practiced. But it concludes nothing to the business in hand, unless you
will conclude thus: They that are to read and study the Scriptures, are also to
expound and preach them. -- That is denied.

Your third proposition is p. 6.

That the exposition of Scripture (lying in the opening of the true sense of
the words and sayings thereof: and the applying of them in that sense to them
that hear it, and read it, as to the right use and understanding thereof, is
of necessity to preachers and people. This you prove p. 6 and 7. by seven
particulars.

But Sir, before you had proved your doctrine, you should again have opened it,
for the meaning is not clear.

1. Whether you mean that it is necessary they should have the Scriptures
opened. Or

2. That they should open the Scriptures themselves. Whether you mean necessary
as to salvation, or to the been esse, and further edification of a Christian.

If you mean that it is necessary to salvation that one have the Scriptures
opened to him, I cannot grant it, nor have you proved it. If you mean in the
other sense necessary, I grant it; though I think another word would have
better expressed it, especially if Varro's notion for the Etymology of necesse,
Necesse est quod nec esse aliter potest. Varro. Haec a me perstricta sunt ut
intellige es te in Scripturis sacris fine previo and monstraente semitam non
posse ingredi. D. Hier. ep. 103. c. 6.
or necessarium (from whence our English word comes) be true. Necesse quod
necesse aliter potest. But I easily grant you, that the exposition of Scripture
is an ordinance of God, and of singular advantage, though such things as are
necessary to salvation may be understood without an expositor, the wisdom of
God having so compounded the Scriptures, that there is milk for babes, and meat
for strong ones.

But I am afraid you mean something else: that it is of necessity to the
people, that they themselves be able to expound Scriptures. This you must mean,
or you have spoke little to your purpose; and then I deny it: for every
Christian (according to your own principles) has not the gift: and God has
denied no necessary gift to any of his Saints. But you go on to prove it
necessary, in what sense I know not.

1. You say God does command it, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures. I easily
grant (though that speech be directed to the Pharisees) that it concerns every
Christian to do what in him lies to find out the meaning of the Scriptures,
and so indeed it is necessary necessitate praecepti. But I am not of the mind
that your second place, 1 Cor. 14.1.39. Covet to prophecy, proves it. They are
to search the Scriptures for their own use. But prophesying is an extraordinary
gift which they were to covet in those times; and that precept is a special
precept relating to them, prophesying being now out of date; of which more
hereafter. And although, as you say right, I believe the neglect of the study
of the Scriptures is a sin: yet I do not think it is contrary to that Negative
precept, 1 Thessalonians. 5.20. Nor do I think it the prophesying there meant, we will
argue that hereafter. In the mean time let me tell you, that those places you
quote here to prove it, 1 Cor. 14.3, 24. prove it not at all. V. 4. He that
prophecyeth edifieth the Church. V. 24. If all prophecy, and there come in one
that believes not, or one unlearned, be is convinced of all, be is judged of
all.

Let us now argue from hence, it must be thus: In secunda figura^ exduabus
affi^mantibus non conciuditur.
He that prophecieth (says the Apostle) edifieth the Church.

He that ordinarily expounds Scripture edifieth the Church.

E go, Prophesying and edifying the Church are the same.



By as good Logic (Sir) you may prove the Moon is made of green Cheese, as we
say.

Green Cheese is a creature. The Moon is a creature. Ergo The Moon and Green
Cheese are the same
If I should argue so (Sir) you would tell me there were more creatures then
one; and so I must tell you, He that administreth the Lords Supper edifieth the
Church, does it therefore follow that it is all one to expound Scripture and
administer the Lords Supper?
there are more ways by which the Church may be edified then one. The Church
was edified by prophesying, and by the gift of tongues: it does not therefore
follow, that both these are continuing gifts to the Church of Christ; or that
our opening and expounding Scripture is the same with the prophesying so often
mentioned in the New Testament. The thing you say is a truth, That Christians
are to search the Scriptures, and to covet the best gifts; To desire to be
able to understand the meaning of Scripture. But you have not proved it by your
second reason, nor do you prove your third reason well by 1 Cor. 14.3 I grant
you your fourth, that Christ and his Apostles made much use of this way of
expounding Scriptures, and doubtless his Ministers ought to do so still. Your
fifth I grant, that there are many hard things in Scripture, (...).
that had need of explication. And that place in Peter which you quote, 2 Pet.
3.16. proves the unlearned very unfit to open them; and your other place, Acts
8.30, 31. shows whom God has appointed to that work. The Lord did not send
one of the guifted brethren to do it, but Philip, one ordained, Act. 6.5. and
so in office a Preacher, Act. 8.6. and that had extraordinary gifts given to
him; one that had power to baptize, and give the Holy Ghost, Act. 8. For that
place you quote, Job 33.22. I will not dispute the meaning of that place with
you, whether it does prove there are many things hard in Scripture to be
understo^d. The Interpreter there spoken of seems to me to be one rather that
should interpret visions or revelations, or Gods providence, read V. 14, 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. and see what they speak of the Scriptures being hard to
be understood. But (Sir) admit it, that the Interpreter there spoken of be
meant One that should interpret hard places of Scripture, Buxtorfius, ad verbum.
mark what a one he must be. 1. He must be (...) a Messenger, an Angel. Qui
sic dicitur a functione quam deus ipsi imponit, called so from his office
(says Buxtorfius) The Prophet Malachy has his name from this word, and he
must be one of a thousand. Nec enim ego ^anctior sum hoc Eunucho nec
studiosior, qui de Aethicpia, id est, de extremis mundi finibus venit ad
templum, reliquit aulam regiam: and tantus amator legis divinaeque sapientiae
fuit ut etiam in vehiculo sacras literas legeret, and tamen cum librum teneret
and verba domini cogitatione conceperat, lingua volverat labiis personaret
ignorabet eum quem in libro resciens venerabatur. Hieron. ep 103. c. 5.
So that, Sir, although it is true, that those places 2 Pet. 3.16. and Act
8.30, 31. prove there are some things in Scripture hard to be understood; Yet I
desire you to take notice by the way, that he that opens them must not be one
unlearned, for (says the Apostle) he will wrest them; but he must be a Philip,
an Angel, (says Job) and one of a thousand. What else you say, p. 7.
concerning the profitablenesse of the exposition and application of Scripture
in general, I grant you: only I think Heb. 3.12. proves not that you bring it
for: the words are these, Take heed brethren lest there be in any of you an
unbelieving heart to depart from the living God. I suppose you intended v. 13.
But exhort one another daily. But although you did, yet you cannot from thence
(except your Logic be better then mine) conclude this truth, that The opening
of Scripture is like the breaking and bruising of Spices. And yet you add, see
for this Matthew. 23.16, etc. Heb 3.12. I have done with your third position, and
my Marginall notes upon it; only I wonder you speak so much of the excellency
of Application, and make so little use of it; but I suppose we shall have the
uses anon. In the mean while having helped you in the exposition of your
doctrine I have granted you it in the same sense wherein the Scriptures you
quote prove it, though I suppose not in the same you would have it.

CHAP. VI. In which Mr. Sheppards fourth position is examined, and his proof
of it scanned.
YOur next, and in order your fourth position is this, That the people as well
as the preachers are to abound in the knowledge of the Scriptures. This you
prove, 1. Because it is commanded, Col. 3.16. 2 It is commended, To. 15.14. 3
It was prophesied and promised it should be so.

This doctrine should have been expounded a little too before it had been
proved: that term [as well as] upon which the whole strength of your design
lies, is not proved by any one Scripture, nor can I well tell what you mean by
it. For if you mean,

That not only the Preachers, but the people are to abound in the knowledge of
the Scriptures, I grant it you, and that you have proved it, though to very
little purpose, in order to the design of your book.

But if you mean, that it lies upon the people in point of duty, to be as much
busied and versed in the Scriptures, as the Preacher is bound to be, I cannot
yield you that: For that God has no where said to them as to Timothy, (...).
Theophylact. ad loc.
1 Timothy 4.15. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them. I
suppose you believe a Preacher shall not sin against God, if he spend his whole
time in order to his abounding in the knowledge of the Scriptures; but, I
suppose those who are not in that Function should. But I easily grant you, that
every Christian ought to abound in the knowledge of the Scriptures; and that
because, as you say, God has both commanded and commended it. I grant you
also, that a fuller measure of knowledge is promised and prophesied, Joel 2.18.
Dan. 12.4. Is. 11.9 Is. 33 6 and possibly that place in Joel may be a proof
in some part for you, viz that under the Gospel God would pour out his Spirit
in a larger measure then before. Here you frame an Objection that some make,
viz.

Ob That some say, that text in Joel is to be referred only to the very time
of the Apostles, and to the miraculous gifts of that time. To this you answer,
1. This restrained sense is against the coherence of the Text.

2. The words themselves import a further matter and time.

3. The gift has been given to some in all times under the Gospel.

4. The same and like words are used in other places in the larger sense, Lu.
4.17, 18, 19, 20. Matthew. 8.21.

5. Some sound and learned interpreters take it in this larger sense, etc.

6. There are other parallel Scriptures speak the same thing.

Concerning this text, I have already noted to you in my Vindiciae, p. 49. that
if this text proves, that persons not ordained may preach, All flesh.
it proves 1. That all have the gift, and may do it. 2. That women may do
it, v. 28. 3. That they may preach by dreams and visions too. That according to
this place there need no election or probation: or any such thing.

For the restraining of it to the days of Pentecost, the Apostle has
warranted it, Act. 2.16. This is that which was spoken, etc.

Whereas you say, it is against the coherence of the words, you shall do well
to show it us, and then we shall reply to it.

Whereas you say, the words do import something further, I cannot find it out
in respect of time, there is no term but afterward; what you can make of that
I cannot tell. Whereas you say, that the gift has been given to some in all
times, it is but petitio principii, a begging of the question. Fourthly, you
say the same and like words are used, Luke 4 17, 18, 19, 20. I have searched
that place, and find it a prophecy fu^filled in Christ, and applied by
himself to himself; neither are there any such words there, as I will pour
out my Spirit upon all flesh. And your sons and your daughters shall prophecy.
Your other place is, Matthew. 8.17. the words are these, That it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by Isaias the Prophet; Himself took our
infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. Now, where are the same or like words in
the text? I think there is not one word the same in the text, nor any like.
Indeed the two places in the margent are something nearer, Is. 43 3. Zach.
12.10. Both those speak of a pouring out of the Spirit, but neither of them
speak of the Spirit of prophecy, nor of sons and daughters prophesying. The
latter speaks of the Spirit of grace and supplication. But what is that to the
spirit of prophecy? But in the fifth place you tell us, Some sound and learned
Interpreters so understand it, but who those are you spare mentioning I answer
first, who ever they be St. Peter is to be preferred before them, and how it is
to be understood he has told us, Act. 2.16. Let us hear a little what
Expositers say: Oecolampadius upon the place has these words.

Et nunc in sequenti versu eximium illud donum quod est concessum discipulis in
Pentecostes die praedicit, Oecolamp. ad loc.
and Actorum se cundo Petrus ipse testatur haec per prophetam Joelem esse
dicta, unde nemo verba ista in alienum sensum rapere conetu^ quam ab Apostolo
adducta sunt and interpretata. -- Spiritum promittit omni carni sed non
propterea prophetiam omni carni -- Hoc omnibus fidelibus concedit ut pio cord
ferantur in Deum non quod propterea promittit omnibus scientiam omnem and
Scripturae sensum.

That is, And now in the following verse he foretells that excellent gift which
was given to the Disciples in the days of Pentecost. Peter himself says that
that was foretold by the Prophet Joel, whence (says he) let no man go about
to wrest the words to any other sense then that to which the Apostle brings
them, and in which he interprets them. -- He promises the Spirit to all flesh,
but not prophesying to all flesh. This God gives to all to have their hearts
made heavenly, and carried up to him. But he does not promise to all, that they
shall understand all knowledge, and the sense of Scripture.

In the next place let us hear what learned Mercer says. Nunc prophetia de
Spiritu Sancto quam die Pentecostes fide dignus testis Petrus impletam dicit
misso Spiritu Sancto, Mercerus ad loc.
qui fecit ut Apostoli magna virtute testimonium darent resurrectioni Christi,
qui antea id docere immo ne in publicum quidem prodire audebant. De sententiae
ergo tempore, and modo impletae prophetiae constat.

This prophecy, says he, is concerning the Holy Ghost and Peter, who may be
believed, applies it to the day of Pentecost, when the Holy Ghost was sent, the
Apostles by his great power gave testimony of the resurrection of Christ, who
before durst not teach it, nor come out in public. Concerning therefore the
meaning of the prophecy, the time and manner of fulfilling it is plain.

But let us enquire a little further, (for I would feign know that man that
would pretend to a better judgment in expounding Scripture then St. Peter had;
or after he had said, This is that was spoken of by Joel, would presume to say,
No, it is another thing.) Let us hear what Gualther upon the place says.

Gualtherus. ad loc.
Initio de Spiritus Sancti missione vaticinatur. -- Post haec effectus Spiritus
Sancti Joel commemorat, -- Prophetiam nimirum; sub qua donum linguarum quoque
comprehendi ex Petri interpretatione patet. Prophetare antem dicuntur qui de
arcana dei voluntate, and de rebus futuris differunt, Paulus verbi hujus
significationem latius extendens, eos quoque prophet^re dicit, qui vel
Scripturas ipsi exponunt, vel aliorum interpretationes attenti audiunt. In
praesente tamen ac vaticinandi dono and penitiori mysteriorum Scripturae
cognitione Joel loquitur. Prophetabunt, inquit, filii vestri and filia vestrae,
id est, ex illis passim orientur qui futura praevideant, quique Scripturae
arcana eruendo illa commune omnium institutioni and consolationi accomodent. --
At quae hic promittuntur mox post ascensionem Christi praestari caeperunt,
quando Spiritus Sanctus super Apostolos delapsus visibili specie illos and
Scripturae sacrae and linguarum cognitione ita illustravit, ut hostibus quoque
admirationi essent qui illos homines idietas and illiteratos esse sciebant.
Eosdem quoque visiones vidisse, and in somniis de rebus gravibus and
necessariis admonitos fuisse Petri and Pauli exempla satis testantur. Iidem
quoque futura praedixerunt, quales nimirum novissimi saeculi mores futuri sint,
utque Antichristi tyrannis Ecclesiam horribili modo sit vastatura quo totus
Apocalypseos liber referri debeat, quid quod Philippo quatuor filias pr
phetantes fuisse Lucas tradit? Nec Apostolorum modo tempore prophetandi donum
floruit, verum etiam aliquot saeculis deinceps sicuti historiae testantur and
Theodoretus Episcopus suo tempore aliquos fuisse scribit qui singulari Spiritus
dono instructi futura praedicerent. Quia vero donum hoc singular fuit, and ea
Scripturis abunde jam tradita sunt quae nos scire necesse est donum hoc ut and
alia pleraque cessavit.

First (says he) he prophecieth of the sending of the Holy Ghost. -- Then
(says he) he speaks of the effects of this Spirit, -- to wit, prophecy;
under which it is plain from St. Peter's interpretation, that the gift of
Tongues is comprehended. They are properly said to prophecy, who discourse
concerning the secret will of God, and things to come. Paul does extend the
signification of this word further, and says, that they prophecy that expound
Scriptures, or attend diligently to others expositions. But here the Prophet
Joel speaks concerning that gift of prophecy, in the more accurate knowledge
of the mysteries of Scripture. -- Those things, which were here prophesied of,
began to be fulfilled immediately upon the ascension of Christ. When the Holy
Ghost descended upon the Apostles in a visible shape, and did enlighten them
with the knowledge of Scripture and of the tongues, so that they were an
admiration to their enemies, who knew them to be illiterate men, and idiots.
The examples also of Peter and Paul witness, that they saw visions and were
warned by God in dreams of things weighty and necessary to them. And they
foretold things to come, as what should be the manners of the last times; and
how the tyranny of Antichrist should waste the Church in a dreadful manner --.
And Philip had four daughters prophetesses. -- Neither did this gift of
prophecy only flourish in them very times, but some ages after, as Histories
witness. V. Theodoret witnesses that there were some in his time who were
furnished with this singular gift, and foretold things to come. But because
this gift was singular, and now those things are delivered in Scripture which
it is necessary for us to know, this gift as also many others is ceased.

Petrus secundo capite Actorum dicit hanc prophetiam amplectam fuisse quum
missus est Spiritus. -- Deinde hic prophetae non loquitur de publico munere
docendi, etc. Calv. ad loc.
Mr. Calvin upon the Text says, that Peter witnesses that this prophecy is
fulfilled; and says, that Joel does not here speak of the public work of
teaching, for he calls those Prophets that were not called to that, but were
enlightened with such a degree of knowledge that they might be compared with
Prophets.

Haec de Spiritu Sancto misso in Apostolos in die Pentecostes dicta dubitare
non possumus, cum habeamus ipsorum Apostolorum principem expositorem. Ribera ad
loc. St. Hierome rests upon that interpretation, that St. Peter makes, and
spends his time only in proving the coherence of the words before and after, to
that sense.

Deodate restraines it to certain times, and certain persons, Acts 2 17.

Indeed I find our own late Annotations, and one single Pareus; the latter of
which speaks it expressly, the other in effect, That (they think) it is to be
restrained to the day of Pentecost. But suppose those two were two hundred,
what were they to one Peter? who long since told us. This is that that was
spoken of by the Prophet Joel For the former part of the verse, I will pour
out my Spirit, I will easily grant you a truth, that God under the Gospel does
grant a larger measure of his Spirit, then he did under the Law, viz. his
Spirit of grace, and supplication, and sanctification: but for the prophesying
spoken of, God has fulfilled his word (says Peter.) Whereas you say sixthly,
that other parallel Scriptures speak the same in effect: you have quoted none
that does. You have indeed brought in many, but you have brought them in
against their wills, so none of them speak to prove what you would have them,
viz. that it is any where prophesied, that the gift of prophesying and
understanding the mysteries of Scripture, by an extraordinary inspiration of
the Spirit, should abound under the Gospel as a standing gift to all the
Saints. Indeed most of them prove an increase of saving knowledge, practical
experimental knowledge of God, and of things necessary to salvation, and
possibly of the knowledge we are speaking of, to be acquired by ordinary means
and ways; but none of them of such an immediate inspiration, to make them
understand the Scriptures so as to be able to expound them where they are
dark, and their sense not obvious. Nor does that place quoted by you Mat.
11.11. prove any thing at all, it being clearly to be understood of Christ,
whom the Jews counted least in the Kingdom of Heaven (...). Theophyl. in loc.
V. Dickson in Matthaeum.
.

You bring another reason p. 9. to prove that the people are to abound in the
knowledge of the Scriptures as well as the Preachers. Because they have many
uses to put it to, viz. to teach, reprove, exhort, etc.

But all this they may do, though they have not so full a knowledge of the
Scriptures as Preachers are and ought to have. I grant you they are to labor
for a knowledge in the Scriptures, but not that they are tied by duty to seek
for such a measure of knowledge as the Preacher is bound by duty to seek after.
But I hasten to your fifth proposition, p. 9

CHAP. VII. Wherein is examined Mr. Sheppards 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 pages, and his
fifth proposition, scanned and examined.
YOur fifth proposition is this: That the gift of Scripture exposition and
explication being a part of the prophecy which does now remain in the Church,
is a gift common to all the people of Christ out of Office, as well as the
preachers of Christ in Office.

This now well proved were worth something to your purpose. Here are two things
to be proved:

1. That the gift of Scripture exposition and explanation is a part of the
prophecy which does now remain in the Church.

2. That it is a common gift. I am mistaken if I find either of these well
proved. You should have proved the former first, but you begin with the latter;
and I will follow your method. Now to prove that this is a common gift, you
would prove,

1. That all Gods people have Gods Spirit, Jam. 4.5. 1 These. 4.8. 1 John 4.13.
Romans 8.9.

2. That this Spirit is a Spirit of illumination, and Scripture interpretation,
Zech. 12.10. Romans 8.15, 26. Ephesians. 6.18.

3. That by this they are or may be enabled to see the sense and meaning of
Scripture, 1 Cor. 2 12. Ephesians. 1.17, 18. Jer. 31.33. Psalm. 40.7, 8. Jo. 3.27. Jo.
10.26. Jo 6.44, 45. Matthew. 13.11, 12, 16.

This is the substance of your ninth and tenth pages.

For the first, I grant it, that all Gods people have the Spirit. But (Sir)
surely you were not guided by this Spirit in the interpreting of Scripture,
when to prove this you quote Jam. 4.5. The words are these. Do you think that
the Scripture speaks in vain, The spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy.
Is that meant of the holy Spirit of God, think you? But the thing is truth:
that all Gods people have the Spirit now let us make it into an argument.

Whosoever has the Spirit of God has the gift of expounding Scripture. -- But
all Gods people have the Spirit of God.

Ergo, they all have the gift of expounding Scripture.

Nego majorem. Prove (Sir) your first proposition: and to this purpose I
suppose you bring your next medium, and tell us that this Spirit is a spirit of
illumination and Scripture interpretation, in all that have it. Your Logic is
this.

If the Spirit of God in all that have it be a Spirit of Scripture
interpretation, then whosoever has the Spirit has that gift. But the Spirit in
all that have it is a Spirit of Scripture interpretation. Ergo. Nego minorem.
The latter proposition is false. I grant you that the Spirit is a Spirit of
interpretation, that is, that the Spirit can teach a man the meaning of
Scripture; for all Scripture is dictated by the Spirit, and ejusdem est
interpretari ac condere. Yet let me tell you, you are beholden to me for
granting you this, for you have not proved it. You indeed bring in (against
their wills) the Prophet Zachariah proving it, Zech. 12.10. where are these
words, I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem the spirit of grace, and of supplications, etc.

Here is no mention of the Spirit of Scripture interpretation. Your other place
is To. 8.15, 26. v. 15. For you have not received the Spirit of bondage again
to fear, but you have rceeived the spirit of adoption whereby you cry Abba
Father: v. 16. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know
not what we should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit makes intercession for
us, etc. Here is plain mention made of the spirit of bondage and adoption, and
supplication, and intercession. But you are a better Logician then I, if you
can from any of these Texts prove that the Spirit is a Spirit of Scripture
interpretation; though the thing be a truth, (Sir) yet, I say, you are
beholding to me to yield it you in arguing.

Nay, I will grant you a little further, that the Spirit of God in whomsoever
it dwells does so far enlighten their minds in the knowledge of the
Scriptures, that they may see all that is necessary for them to know in
reference to their own salvation. But this the Spirit does upon their reading
and hearing, imprinting a persuasion of the truth of what they hear and read
upon their hearts.

But though I yield you easily that the Spirit is a Spirit of Scripture
interpretation; yet I deny that it is in all, so. Nay, I shall question whether
it be in any so as you would have it.

I grant you in these: 1. That the Spirit does dwell in all. 2. That the Spirit
can interpret Scriptures. 3. That it does do as I have said. But I conceive
that which you would have is this, That the Spirit by a secret immediate work
does enlighten men (without the use of ordinary means) such as are the
understanding the tongues, weighing consequences, considering coherences, etc,)
in the understanding of the Scriptures. That a Saint qua a Saint, by virtue of
the Spirit dwelling in him, is able to interpret any Scriptures, so as to
expound them to others. This is a false and dangerous opinion; I shall
therefore spend a few words to show you what assistance the Spirit of God
ordinarily gives men in the opening of Scriptures.

That the Spirit of God has by such an immediate work shown its power in
enlightening the minds of his Saints heretofore is true, so he did in the
Apostles days. But thus the Spirit does not now.

Eam f^cultatem humana partim industria superveniens uberior spiritus gratia
non dissolvit nec absolvit, nec adimit sed adjuvat qui sicuti naturae ^otes
egregias nactus, magnificentius per eas exercet energiam suam, non aliter quam
insignis artifex li^entius and accuratius ostendit artem suam in splendida
tractabilique materia, ita nostram industriam adeo non aspernatur spiritus ille
coelestis, ut exigat etiam, nec indignatur sua dona nostro vicessimi studio
adjuvari, tantum absit impia nostri fiducia. Erasmus de ratione concion. l. 2.
p. 202. Edit Froben. 8.
But thus far the Spirit assists: God has allowed us means to find out the
meaning of his word, we have ways to come to the knowledge of the Languages in
which they were writ, and the labors of many eminent servants of God who have
taken pains in it, we may by study consider the coherence of the words and
parallel Scriptures. Now whosoever he be that with an humble heart takes up the
book of God, and in order to the finding out of the will of God in any portion
of his word, shall first seek God by prayer, that he would open his heart to
understand the wonder of his law, and then give up himself to study the word
of God; Sint castae deliciae meae Scripturae tuae nec sallar in eis nec sallam
ex eis. -- Vide pateaspice and approba and placeat in conspectu misericordiae
tuae invenire me gratiam ante te, ut aperiantur pulsanti mihi interiora
sermonum tuorum. -- q^i illi servo tuo dedisti hoc dicere da and mihi haec
intelligere. D. Aug. confess l. 11. c. 2. etc. 3. Optimus interpres hic est qui
sensum e scriptura potius retulerit quam attulerit. Hilari^s l. 1. de Trin.
using the means that God has afforded him, considering the scope of the
penman, and of the words precedent and consequent, and other parallel places;
and shall bring to this enquiry not discutiendi acumen, a disputing head, but
discendi pietatem a pious heart, desirous to be instructed. This man shall be
assisted with the Spirit of God. 1. Raising up his natural parts of reason and
judgment to comprehend the will of God. -- Secondly, Possibly bringing to his
mind such Scriptures as may parallel the place he seeks about, and help him in
the interpretation of that Scripture, for the meaning of which he seeks. 3.
Working in him persuasion of necessary truths. But for any other assistance, I
know not where it is promised, nor how it can be expected.

1. Nor do I take the two first to be any special work of the Spirit, for
then it were incommunicable; but we find that not only Saints, but such as
have left little evidence of the work of grace in their hearts, have yet left
us judicious and sound expositions of Scriptures, which we have cause to bless
God for. And besides, secondly,

2. If the Spirit by such an immediate work inspired Saints as Saints, Hoc
perpetuo debet animo observari homines illos fuisse carne circundatos nostri
similes qui in multis labi potuerunt and revera lapsi siat, and ^^ Hyperius de
ratione studii theolog. l. 4. c. 9.
then it were impossible their interpretations of any Scripture should be
false; but how much the holiest servants of God have erred in some expositions
of Scripture and do err, former times have evidenced enough. And Sir, I hope
the Spirit of God dwells in you; yet as I hinted before, it did not thus
assist you in the application of James 4.5. or Zech. 12.10. or Romans 8.15, 16.
p. 9. There might be a quick experience of this: Take a Saint and turn him to a
difficult place of Scripture or two, and try if he can give an infallible
interpretation; which he must do if it proceed from the immediate work of the
Spirit that dwells in him.

3. Further yet, if this were truth, Let twenty Saints expound the same
Scripture, and they must all agree, if all their interpretations proceed from
the Spirit; that does not dictate to me this to be the sense, and to another
another sense. But the contrary of this we see by daily experience. Quot
sancti, tot sententiae.

4. If this were a truth, The same Saint could never alter his judgment upon
any one text. But I believe you will see cause, Sir, to alter yours (as many
Saints before you have done theirs) in the application of some Scriptures which
you have made use of; and we live in times when most eminent Saints give this
to be the sense of a Scripture now, and another a twelve month hence.

5. Nor do I see how you can shift granting, that every Saint must have this
faculty; for in every Saint the Spirit dwells. But if this be true, you do well
in the eleventh page to give us reasons why it does not appear. But you tell
us there that your meaning is, That there is in all the people of God a
seminall virtue and power more or less enclining and enabling them hereto,
some spark of the heavenly fire of Gods spirit herein. 1 Jo. 20.27.

If you meant by seminall power and virtue, an habit of reason, and some degree
of judgment. etc. I grant it you; but you mean I perceive something else, viz.
a spiritual ability, a spark of the heavenly fire of Gods Spirit herein; that
there is something of the Spirit in them I grant, there is some sparks of that
heavenly fire, showing them things necessary to salvation, Quod autem omnia
dicit novisse, non universaliter capi sed ad praesentis loci circumstantiam
refer debet. Calv. ad loc. V. Deodate ad loc.
and showing them the things freely given them of God (yet not that always
neither) and serving to burn up their lusts, and to inflame their hearts for
God; but the word herein I question, yea, and deny that in every Saint there is
such a Spiritual ability. Nor does that Text you bring, 1 Io. 20.27. prove it.
The knowledge of all things there spoken of, must not be taken in the latitude,
for so we know the Scripture would not be true. The meaning is, all the parts
of doctrine necessary to salvation, says Deodate; but the interpretation of
all the Scriptures, or an ability to do it is not necessary to salvation. But
you will quarrel with me if I leave behind what you have p. 9.

That all the Saints are or may be enabled by the Spirit more or less to see
and open the sense and meaning of Scriptures, 1 Cor. 2.12. Now have we received
not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we may know
the things that are freely given us of God. This proposition now is so
mollified, that I know not how to touch it. First, it is minced with are or may
be; who can deny that so long as there is an Almighty God. Then it is minced
with more or less; it were hard else, if there should be any Saint, that
should not be able to tell the meaning of one line in Scripture. Then I meet
with the term Scriptures, which I know not whether I should understand it of
the Scriptures generally, or so much of Scripture as is necessary for them to
know in order to salvation: If in the latter sense, it is true enough; if in
the former sense, the Author will understand it, still he will save himself in
the arms of his are, or may be: or else of his more or less. But to prove this
he brings 1 Cor. 2.12. only he fears it will be objected against. How he has
warded it we will consider by and by; only by the way I could have told him of
a fitter place to prove this proposition, which would have put it past
disputing; it is that Mark 10.27. With men it is impossible, but not with God,
for with God all things are possible. This proves his may be. But let us hear
what he concludes from 1 Cor. 2.12. the words I quoted before if he can argue
from hence at all, it must be thus: Those which have received the Spirit which
is of God, that they might know the things freely given them of God: those have
the Spirit given them to interpret Scriptures.

But the Saints have received the Spirit which is of God, that they might know
the things which are freely given them of God. Ergo.



Number igitur ex his concludemus eos qui Spiritum Christi habent omnia noss^?
fatebimur sed quadantenus, ut a deo condita sunt ad ejus honorem faciunt and ad
nostram salutem conducunt, etc. P. Martyr ad loc. V. Pareum ad loc.
The Minor is unquestionably true, but the Major is false; and is sick of that
fallacy that Logicians call Fallacia a dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter. The Spirit does not teach all Saints all things that are freely
given them of God. Many Saints do not know they are justified or sanctified,
that Christ or Heaven is theirs, and yet are real Saints; and the text (says
Mr. Leigh) is to be understood chiefly of that knowledge. All that the text
proves, is this, that the Saints may know by the Spirit the things freely given
them of God. It does not prove that they do know all of them the things given
them of God: Nor that, they do know all the things given them of God.

But a word more, Sir, before you and I part with this text. Does not this text
look as if it were to be understood of a reflex knowledge: such a knowledge by
which a man knows that he knows. The original word is (...), and does signify
a certain and infallible knowledge; so Col. 3.24. Col. 4.1. and if it so
signify here, you do ill to apply it to a direct knowledge. The words seem to
argue such a knowledge as is infallible; and thus surely every Saint does not
know the Scriptures. I perceive you were afraid we should tell you, that the
things here spoken of are those good things which God has prepared for them
tha^ love him, So Pareus understands it.
as indeed the coherence tell you, v. 9. and the knowledge spoken of an
infallible persuasion of our right unto them: And to defend your self you tell
us,

That these things cannot be revealed to the soul but in and by the Revelation
of the G^spel and word of God.

I am glad to hear you of that mind; that God has grounded you in his truth
against Enthusiasmes. But sir, I must tell you, they may be known to us by the
hearing of the word of God opened to us, and preached to us, and usually are
so. And therefore it will not follow, that a Christian in order to his
knowledge of them must have in himself the spirit of interpretation. You
further tell us.

"That the promises are the things freely given us of God; (some of them at
least.) 2 Pet. 1.20.

Truth, Sir; and the Spirit must make us to know that these promises belong to
us: but does it therefore follow that every Christian must have an ability to
open all the Scriptures? Many of the promises, those especially of greatest
concernment, are so plainly written, that he that runs may read and understand
them. Some of the promises indeed are darker. Nor do I think every Christian
has an ability to understand all the promises fully; but God is pleased to
enable his Saints to understand the promises, so many of them, and so far as
they are necessarily to be understood in order to his salvation. But we (Sir)
that are as much versed, I believe, and something more, then those not in the
Ministry, with the workings of Christians spirits, find it by experience, that
Gods dearest Saints often times put strange interpretations upon the promises:
which is evidence enough, that the Spirit does not enable all Saints to know
the true meaning of them. But I return again to the 11. and 12. pages.

Having laid down for a position, that all the Saints have a seminall virtue
enabling them to expound Scriptures, you come to enquire the cause why it does
not appear; and you are pleased to charge it upon us, saying, The Preachers
preach, and the people believe there is no such power in them, nor to be
exercised by them: and therefore the people never look after it.

Upon this you dilate, p. 12, 13. showing how gifts are improved by exercise,
and lost by neglect of it (a thing no one ever denied, that I know.) And there
you take upon you to give us a fatherly advice.

Let the Preachers tell the people there is such a seed in them, and press
upon them the necessity of improving it. To all this impertinent discourse I
shall answer briefly. That the Preachers are charged falsely: we do desire all
that fear God to stir up the gift that is in them, to be much in reading and
studying of the Scriptures, to meditate upon them, to instruct their families
out of them. Indeed we do not press them to preach; for if you mean by gift
(...), the office, in which sense the Apostle uses it, 1 Timothy 4 14, we believe
according to that Scripture, that that gift is given them by the laying on of
the hands of the Presbytery. [That is] that by ordination they are empowered to
the exercise of that Office. But you tell us, That such as have this fire
within them, cannot well forbear, for it is like new wine, or material fire
within them, which cannot be kept in, but will break forth, Amos 3.8 Acts 4.20.
Jer. 20.8, 9. Psalm. 39.2. Joh. 1 41, 45. Jo. 4.28, 29 Job 32.19, 20.

Several Scriptures, but strangely applied; as if Saints under the Gospel had
generally such a spirit of prophecy as Jeremy and Amos, Why do you put rules
and restrictions upon them then Sir, in your 78, 79, 80. p. 25.
and Peter, and John had: but indeed it seems they cannot forbear, for the Law
of God cannot restrain them, their pretended spirit is like new wine indeed
(that has intoxicated them.) And like fire (for it has broke forth, to the
burning up of a great part of the Lord heritage.) But (Sir) you are mistaken
in saying that we do not persuade them to refresh themselves with their new
Wine; we only wish them to forbear Ivy bushes, except their Wine were better,
and to keep their bottles for their own use, and not to make their gifts means
of others drunkenness. We do persuade them (...), to blow up their fire
only, we advise them to keep it within the chimney.

But y^u think it would be an excellent means to make the sparkles flame, if we
that are Preachers would but press upon them the improvement of their gifts.
I suppose you mean publicly, or else you both charge us falsely, and say
nothing to the purpose too. But (Sir) we must find God commanding us to do
it, before we durst take your counsel. But yet your experiment has been
tried, and is (God knows) too much. There is a liberty enough given to men this
way, and the people are ready enough to take it. Nor are there some wanting
that have bidden them God speed. The Socinians and Arminians of old, after them
the Brownists, and lately some of our more valuable reverend dissenting
Brethren; and I believe any time these ten years in several places this
liberty has been pleaded. But where is the flame, Sir? or what is the fruit of
it? is not T. Colliers spark blown into a flame? see his blasphemous discourse
at Axbridge. It is indeed miserably true, that their sparks are blown into
flames, but they are such flames as have consumed the Church of God, and
endanger the Elect: the blowing up of these sparks hitherto in all places in
the world where they have been endured, has proved a sad flame. Enquire of the
Churches in New England, did not Mrs. Hutchinson, and the rest of her followers
sparks come into flames? Ask the Churches in Holland what pretty flames these
sparks made; did not the Yorkshire Sadlers sparks make a flame too in Mr.
Oxenbridges Church (if I have not been misinformed.) I believe our judicious
brethren will soon see if this practice go on, that they will be troubled with
such flames that they will hardly be able to quench. We have seen these sparks
by blowing grow into flam s of Anabaptisme, Vbi Africa eversa fuit per
Manichaeos mox secuti sunt eos Donatistae, qui and ipsi inter se dissentientes
divisi erant in tres sectas -- Ita secta semper parit sectam and alia aliam
damnat. Lutherus.
Antinomianisme, Blasphemy, Ranting, Divisions, etc. These are the best fruit
we or any of the Churches of Christ ever saw of it. But to pass this discourse
which I believe will hardly please you.

I perceive you are afraid that the Apostle, 1 Cor. ^2 10. saying that all men
have not gift of prophecy, has thwarted your large maxim. Now to this you
answer.

1. That that Text may be meant of extraordinary prophecy, which is now ceased.

Very right; but surely it is the same prophesying spoken of in all that Chapter
and the two following; and if that be extraordinary, you have lost the best
string to your bow. But it seems you have two strings to it. For secondly you
tell us, If it be to be understood of that prophecy which does continue, it is
not against your point; for then it is to be understood of a great degree of
Scripture exposition and application. Every one that has the gift of prophecy
has the gift of expounding and applying; but every one that has a gift to
expound and apply Scripture, has not a gift to prophecy, that is, to speak in
public assemblies.

The latter clause is unquestionably true; but, Sir, I must mind you again of
your marginall note, p. 29. Vbi lex non distinguit, non distinguindum est, you
force a sense here upon the Apostle. In short, to turn this trifle out of the
way, your sense is this, Every one has the gift of prophecy, but every one
has not an eminent gift to prophecy; then, Sir, the sense of the foregoing
words must be this, Every one has the gift of healing, but every one has not
the eminent gift of healing? Every one has a gift to work miracles, but
every one has not an eminent gift to work miracles; every one has the gift
of Tongues and interpretation of Tongues, but every one has not an eminent
gift of Tongues, and interpretation of Tongues. Is this the Apostles sense
(Sir) think you? if it be, bring forth your linguists, and your miracle-working
Saints; or else show us a reason why the Apostle in the words before and after
should speak de re, and in those words only de gradu. -- Et eris mihi magnus
Apoll^. And now I have done with your fifth proposition.

CHAP. VIII. Containing an Examination of the sixth and seventh positions: and
a scanning of Mr. Sheppards proof of them.
YOur sixth point is this, Page 14.
That the people may as well use the gift of expounding Scriptures as the
preachers.

This you prove, 1. Because the use of this gift is no where confined to any
certain men ^fficers of the Church nor others, But to every one as the Spirit
wills, 1 Cor. 17.7. Romans 12.6. Act. 17.11

2. The people have the same gift of the Spirit in some degree as the
Preachers have, 1 Jo. 2.27. Acts 17.11. To. 12.5, 6. and by this they did
interpret in the primitive times, 1 Cor. 14.26. Acts 18 26. Acts 8.4. Acts
11.19.

3. All men that have this gift are commanded to use it to Gods glory and the
Churches good, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.

It is reasonable you say they should use it, for they have occasion to use it
as the Preachers have, etc.

2. They are given and directed to the people to be used by them.

"3. The Scriptures exposition is as of great concernment to the people as to
Preachers.

This term as well troubles me again, if you mean by it as publicly, and as
often and ordinarily, and as warrantably; I deny it.

To your first reason I answer, that the public use of this gift is
confined. Christ did not say to all the Disciples, but to the Apostles and
their Successors only, Go preach and baptize, Matthew 28, etc. and what though
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 12 7. that the manifestation of the Spirit is given
to every man to profit withal; Datur unicuique ergo nema solus habet
u^niversa. Pareus ad loc.
he opens himself v. 7.8 and shows that he means not, that the several gifts
of the Spirit are given to every one, but one to this Christian, another to
another; something to all, v. 29 Are all Prophets, are all Teachers, are all
workers of miracles? That very Text, 1 Cor. 12.7, 8. is witness enough against
you. Nor does Romans 12.6. prove that the use of this gift is not confined: for
it is confined to them that have it, and those are only such as are Officers,
(if you mean by prophesying ordinary preaching, which I perceive you take for
granted, though I shall show you anon you have no reason to do so.) For your
third place, Acts 17.11. that only proves that searching the Scriptu^es is not
confined to officers but people also may do it, and this none denies.

Your second reason to prove that they may use the gift is, because they have
the same gift the Preachers have. The Argument is thus: Those that have the
same gift with others, may use it as well as others.

But the people have the same gift.



Your Minor is undoubtedly false of the most Saints. But suppose it were true,
you Major is fallacious. If you mean using it in their places, and relations,
none denies it; if otherwise, your Major is false. For by such an argument, I
would prove that every one that has the gift of a Soldier may exercise the
Office of a Colonel or a General. For the Scriptures you bring to prove they
have the same gift, I have answered them before. But you say, by this gift
they did interpret in the Primitive times, and for this you quote, 1 Cor.
14.26. Acts 18.16. Acts 8.4. Acts 11.19. Here, Sir, you beg a question, which
is so great a piece of truth that I cannot give it you upon alms; you must
purchase it by a solid proof, if you have it, viz. that the Prophecy spoken of
in the New testament was not an extraordinary, but an ordinary gift. That they
did preach, I deny you not, but what their gift was, whether ordinary, or
extraordinary, we will argue anon.

But thirdly, you tell us that reasonably they should use the gift, because
they have occasion to use it, to reprove, exhort, teach, comfort. This you told
us before p. 9. I told you then this proves a private use, but not a public
use of their gifts.

But you tell us fourthly, that God has commanded them to use this gift, 1
Pet. 4.10.11. I have fully answered this place, I mean this false gloss put
upon it, in my Vindiciae p. 57. to which I refer you.

You tell us, That some say, Page 15.
none but those that are skilled in the Tongues can interpret Scriptures, some
places in it are so difficult.

To this you answer: 1. That Preachers grant, that such as want
School-learning, being duly called, may be public Preachers.

2. You agree that somethings in Scripture are very hard to be understood, but
others easy.

3. You take it, that the knowledge of the truths of Gods Word is a gift of
God, attainable by the Spirit only, and not by any humane power and strength:
and this you promised after to show.

This is to set up a man of Straw, and then to spend time in undressing him. I
know none say that none can interpret, or rather know the meaning of any place
of Scripture, but such as have skill in the Tongues. In omni copid Scripturarum
sanctarum pascimur appertis exercemur obscuris, illic fames pellitur, hic
fastidium, Aug. t. 1. p. 16. E.


This indeed we say, that none are so accomplished by means to do it, as they;
nay further, that there are some Scriptures, to the right interpretation, and
full interpretation of which a knowledge in the Tongues is necessary. Other
Scriptures there are which need no interpreter, he that runs may read them;
and the coherence is evident enough.

But you say we grant, That such as are not skild in the Tongues, Nam quan^o
Scriptura, non habet vivam vocem, quam audiamus, utendum est quibus dam medus
quibus investigemus quis sit sensus, quae men's Scripturararum: si enim Christus
ipse nobiscum ageret: si Apostoli, and prophetae inter nos viverent, eos adire
possemus ut sensum illorum quae ab iis, scripta sunt nobis indicarent: sed cum
illi abierint, and libros tantum suos reliquerunt, videndum est quibus medits
ut verum Scripturae verborumque divinorum sensum inveniamus. Ecclesia enim
semper mediis quibusdam usa est. Whitaker. de Scrip. l. 5. c. 9.
if duly called to it, may be public Preachers. If there be such a necessity
that the Church cannot be otherwise supplied, and these be otherwise qualified,
we grant it.

To your second, it is granted that there are some places of Scripture easy,
and these need no Interpreter.

But for your third, viz. That the knowledge of the truths of Gods Word, is a
gift attainable by the Spirit of God only, and not by any humane power or
strength; You have delivered it ambiguously. I know not whether you mean a
practical reflex knowledge, or a notionall direct knowledge. If you mean the
first, we grant it you; but it makes nothing to your purpose. If you mean a
notionall knowledge, we deny not but that the Spirit can and does teach us
that: but it is (Sir) in the use of means, of which the knowledge of the
Tongues is one. If your meaning be, that an enlightening our minds in the
knowledge of our Scriptures, upon our searching of them, meditating, studying
of them, and using all other means is a gift of the Spirit, none denies it;
but this is nothing to your purpose. But if you mean, that the Spirit by a work
of special grace enlightens the minds of his Saints only in the understanding
of Scriptures; and that (I know not which way) without the use of those means
he has allowed us, in order to that end: As it is a pernicious opinion, so it
is as false and simple. For how many have been able to expound Scripture, that
never had the Spirit of grace? what think you of Judas? And what strange
nonsensicall erroneous interpretations do many make of Scriptures, that think,
and others think too, that they have much of the Spirit in them. But you
promise to prove your assertion hereafter. You had need open it too.

I am now come to your seventh point: That it is the duty of all Gods people,
as well as Preachers, to expound Scripture. This you endeavor to prove,
saying, 1. It is their duty to do many things which cannot be done without
this.

2. They have the gift of Scripture exposition given them. 1 Cor. 2.12, 16. 1
Cor. 12.7.

3 It is their duty to make the best use of Scripture they ean, but this they
cannot do but by expounding it.

"4. It has been commended in them that have done it. Act. 17.11. 2 Pet. 1.19.
Romans 15 14. Tardior est stultorum (ut ait ille) Magistra experientia, and
quemadmodum mauspicatus est medicus; qui occidendo homines discit mederi, ita
non est optanda prudentia quae laedendo discit prodesse, si quis in negotiis
privatis multum putet tribuendum experimentis cum hoc non admodum pugnabo.
Caeterum in functionibus publicis in quibus levis error haud levem perniciem
populo affert, non oportet saepius audire vocem illam non putaram. Eras. de
rat. concion. l. 2. 203. edit. Frob. 8.


"5. It is in effect commanded to all the people of God. Jo. 5 39. Deuteronomy. 6.7. 1
Pet. 4.10. Col 3.16.



What you mean by expounding Scripture I cannot tell. If you mean by it
searching the Scripture, to find out the will of God in it, for the advantage
of their own souls, and to furnish them to the duties of their relations and
callings, it is granted you. But if you mean by expounding, undertaking to
deliver to Congregations, this to be the meaning of the Scripture, you have
neither proved it is commanded nor commended.

Your five reasons which have served almost all your Doctrines prove it not. To
the first I answer: What ever duty lies upon private Christians to do, may be
done by them to their brethren, without speaking to them out of Moses chair.

To your second I answer: You have not proved that they have the gift of
Scripture exposition; if they have the gift, yet they must have the Office
too. Those two places, 1 Cor. 2.12, 16. 1 Cor. 12.7. I answered before.

To the third, I deny that they must be able to expound them themselves, to
enable them to make the best advantage of them. The best use they can make of
^^m, is to search their hearts, and order their lives by them; And this they
may do upon the hearing of others expound them. 2. For their own uss they
ought to apply them.

To your fourth, I say, that this was never commended by God. Indeed searching
the Scriptures, to see if it be true that Preachers say, is in that place Act.
17.11. commended: but for that other place which you quote, 2 Pet. 1.19. I
admire at your application of it. The words are these, We have also a more sure
word of prophecy, to which ye shall do well if ye take heed, Exhortatio est ad
legendas Scripturas propheticas. Estius ad loc.
as to a light that shines in a dark place, till etc. The words are in
themselves a precept, indeed they carry in them a commendation of them that
Take heed to the word of prophecy. But (Sir) what do you think is meant there
by the word of prophecy? Private brethrens expounding Scripture? Doubtless the
Apostle never called this a light shining in a dark place. No, no, the Apostle
means the Prophets, V. Calv. ad loc. Beza ad loc. Deodat. ad loc. Lorinus ad
loc.
and word of prophecy in the Old Testament. See Calvin, Deodate, our late
Annotations. Beza, he call's this a more sure word, (...). More sure, not in
respect of it self, but because the Jews, to whom he wrote, had it in a very
high estimation. So Beda, Aquinas, Hugo, Erasmus, etc. yea, and St. Augustine
so understands it, De verbis Apostoli, Ser. 27. Quis enim nostrum non miretur
delata voce de coelo certiorem propheticum sermonem ab Apostolo dictum esse,
etc.

Who would not wonder (says he) that the Apostle should say, Aug. ser. 27. de
verbis Apostoli.
that the words of the Prophet are more sure then the voice from Heaven. He
says indeed it is more certain, but he does not say it is better or more true,
for that word from Heaven was as true and good and profitable as the word of
prophecy. What therefore does he mean by more certain, but that the hearers
would not undoubtedly believe: and why so? because men were unbelievers, and
detracted from Christ, saying, that what he did he did by Magic; therefore
unbelievers might refer the voice that came from Heaven to Magic arts by their
humane conjectures, and unwarra^^^ble curiosities. Thus that holy man. And
further to the same purpose, T. 9 tract. 35. in Joan. T. 9. tract. 35. in
Johannem.
So that this place, Sir, is nothing to your purpose.

Your third place to prove it is commended, is Romans 15.14. where the Apostle
says, that he was persuaded they were full of goodness, full of all
knowledge, able to admonish one another. Here he commends them, that they were
full of all knowledge; but how does he commend them here for expounding
Scripture, that is a piece of practice. Nor does the Apostle mean, Scilicet
eorum quae ad fidem pietatem and salutem sicat piis necessaria. Pareus ad loc.
they were filled with all knowledge in all kinds and degrees, for 1 Cor. 13
12. he says, that himself knew but in part: he means therefore all necessary
knowledge.

Lastly, you tell us, they are commanded to expound Scriptures: but where, sir?
You tell us, Jo. 5.39. Deuteronomy. 6.7. 1 Pet. 4 10. Col. 3.16. For that place, Io.
5.39. they are indeed commanded to search the Scriptures; but what is that to a
practical expounding of them?

In Deuteronomy. 6.7. we are commanded to teach our children the Law of God, and to
talk of it in our house: but do you think (sir) every Jewish householder was to
expound the Law, or that there have not been many old Christians have taught
their children and families more of the Law of God heretofore, then professors
usually do now, and yet never expounded the Law to them. But suppose they may
hint to their families some obvious observations from the Scrip^^^es they read
(though I do not think that is commanded there) yet neither is this an
expounding Scriptures, nor that which you plead for.

For the third place, 1 Pet. 4.10. I spoke to it before: There is nothing but a
general command to Christians, to use the gift of God bestowed on them; which
general must be restrained by other Scriptures, to manner, time, and place.
Your last proof is 3. Col. 16.

There indeed Christians are commanded to let the word of God dwell in them
richly, to teach, and admonish one another. But (sir) all this may be done
without expounding Scripture: so that this place proves nothing to your
purpose. And thus I have showed you the insufficiency of the proof of this
proposition, though if you mean no more, Then that it is the duty of Christians
privately to read, search, and study the Scriptures, to endeavor to find out
Gods will in them, I grant it you. But then this seventh proposition amounts to
no more then your fourth, and you might have spared your self and me this
trouble.

CHAP. IX. In which the 16 and 17 pages of Mr. Sheppards book, containing his
eighth and ninth positions are examined, and his proof of them scanned, etc.
Page 16.
I Am now come to your eighth position, viz.

That all Gods people, as well as the Preachers, may and ought to expound
Scripture to themselves, and one to another. This you prove by six Reasons,
which I will examine apart. (...), says the Proverb. We have had this said
over and over again; it was the substance of the seventh proposition. Let us
see if it be better proved here.

1. Your first reason is, because the Se^^^ure by exposition is made more
useful and profitable. This does not prove (sir) that therefore they ought to
expound it to themselves, or one to another. This proves indeed that it ought
to be expounded to them.

2. Your second reason, because they are to be always teaching, reproving, and
comforting one another: and this cannot be done without expounding, etc. How
often shall I answer this crambe? 1. This may be done by applying to themselves
and others plain and easy Scriptures, for which there needs no expounding. 2.
By applying to themselves and others the sound interpretation of those that God
has called to that office to interpret his will.

3. Thirdly, you say, Every private Christian has in him a gift more or
less, and this is not to be hid. To prove that they have a gift of Scripture
interpretation you bring again, 1 Cor. 12 17. I am sick of this tautologizing,
this is the third time I have met with this, but I must look I see instead of
strength of arguments, for to be served with a flood of words, I answer again
you have not proved they have all a gift. 2. If they had they must be called
to the exercise, or else, every Soldier that has the gift of warlike prudence
might be a Colonel.

4. They should covet more then this (you say) viz. to prophecy, 1 Cor. 14.1,
5. and to speak with Tongues too v. 5. They are as much bound to one as the
other. But (Sir) it was their duty to covet those gifts, because then they were
not ceased, but not ours alike now: the like may be said to that place, Number. 11
29. Prophecy was an extraordinary gift of God then in date, now ceased, Moses
did not wish they were all Priests.

5. Your fifth reason is the same with the fourth you say: All the people of
God as well as the Preachers, are commanded to labor for the highest degree of
this gift, and wherefore are they to labor for it if not to use it when
attained, 1 Cor. 14.1, 39. 1 C r. 12:31. 1 Cor. 14.20.

1. The substance of this was answered before. 2. The second as well as, upon
which all your strength lies, is not proved (but I perceive you take great
pains to prove that which none denies. You say Io. 4 39. Page 16. (...)
I suppose you mean Io. 5.39. We are commanded to search the Scripturet, and
Mr. Loigh te's you it is a metaphor taken from them that dig in mines, and if
so, it notes four things. 1. The breaking in pieces of the earth. 2. The
taking out the precious matter. 3. The careful laying of it up. 4. The
employing it to the use to which it serves, whence you infer p. 17. That it is
the duty of all Christians industriously to study the word of God, to break it
in pieces in his meditations, draw and take out the spiritual sense and truths
thereof. carefully to lay up these in his soul, and then bring them forth upon
occasion for the profit of others, and so no doubt it is, Psalm. 1.2. Col. 3.16.
Acts 17.11. Deuteronomy. 6.7. Mat. 13.51 Psalm. 119.11.

Nihil necesse est ut similitudo aut Analogia quadret per omnia. Erasmus de
rat. conc. 428.
To your four particulars and your inference, I answer shortly.

1. I perceive you are good at making similitudes run on four feet contrary to
the known maxim, I shall mind you of a rule in Divinity. Theologia
parabolica non est argumentativa, and a Latin Proverb, Similia ad pompam, non
ad pugnam.

2. You are out in your metaphor, for usually those that dig in the Mine are
neither they that lay up the oar, nor Mint it, nor employ it.

Similitudo legitur proverbiorum. 11. Monile aureum in naribus porci est mulier
formosa -- magnum sane disc^imen inter porcu^ and mulierem. Hyperius de rat.
studii Theol. l. 2. c. 19. Ob. 5.
3. The care is to be purified in the furnace too, and to receive a stamp
before it be current, but Gods word is purified seven times.

4. I grant all you say to be a Christians duty, but what Christians? and when,
and how, this is the Question, he that digs in the Mine must have a spade,
Christians must have gifts to do it with; and do it by means, and then
employ it according to the rule, as the righteous man, Psalm. 1.2. as the
Colossians chapter 3.16, and the Bereans, Acts 17.11. in their families, Deuteronomy. 6.7.

6. You add: By this means especially Christians may as salt season
themselves and others, keep them from corruption and destruction, and they and
their works made savoury to God and good men, and as a candle they will give
light to all the family of God about them, Math. 5.13, 14, 15.

By this means? what means by unlearned men's expositions of Scripture? Saint
Peter thought otherwise, for he says they will wrest them to their own
destruction, 1 Pet. 3.16. there is no speaking against experience (Sir) we have
seen this a means to corrupt and pervert others to draw men off from
Ordinances and duties, and to a contempt of the messengers of the Gospel and
means of grace, instead of giving light they have been like thieves in the
candle, eclipsing the light of truth and holiness, a little more time will
convince you Sir of your mistake; in this surely a diligent attendance upon the
preaching of the Gospel by Christ's commission officers, were a better means
to these ends.

I am now come to your ninth position:

That those that have received any special gift of prophecy or Scripture
exposition are to exercise and use it so as may be of most advantage to the
Church. Primo termi ni axiomatis explicandisunt -- Chapel in Meth. conc. 133.


Your not opening your proposition, makes you speak very darkly, and puts me to
much trouble, you should have told us.

1. What you mean by gift of prophecy.

2. Who are those that have that same special gift.

1. If you mean by gift, office, as the Apostle has it, 1 Timothy 4.14. it is
granted, but then it makes nothing to your purpose.

2. For the gift of prophecy, none has it now.

3. For the gift of expounding Scripture, those that have it are bound to
exercise it in their place and calling, otherwise it cannot be for Gods glory
or the Churches good.

But I suppose your meaning is, That there are some not in office that have an
ability to expound Scripture, and they are bound to use it as shall be most
advantageous to the Church Keeping the rules of Gods word and the bounds of
their callings, I grant it you. You say, 1. It is given them for this purpose:
Right.

2. God requires it (you say) 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.

You are afraid we should say that that Text is only to be understood of gifts
given to men in office only, and to prevent it, you tell us, it is improbable;
for,

1. You say the Epistle was written to the Jews amongst whom were as you
think few regular Churches.

2. The words are general, and so not to be restrained.

I know none says that the gift there spoken of is to be restrained to gifts
given men in office, but it may much be questioned whether the gift there
meant, be not ^ffice, (...).
it is the same word there used that is used. 1 Timothy 4.14. and there office is
plainly meant, and then it follows, as stewards of the manifold grace of
God; now stewards is a name of office, applied to Ministers and officers. 1
Cor. 4.1. Tit. 1.7. and no where in Scripture applied to private persons not in
office. But you think there were no regular Churches amongst the Jews, and so
no officers, what think you (Sir) of the Elders mentioned, 1 Pet. 5.1.2. that
are commanded to feed the flock of God amongst them, taking the oversight
thereof not by constraint, etc. Was not that flock of God under the oversight
of Elders a Church think you?

But the words are general, and therefore to be understood of all Christians
and all gifts? Truth (Sir) if there were no other Scriptures to limit them, nor
are the words general neither, if Christians have not (...), there spoken of.
I pass over your other five reasons as proving nothing that I have denied, nor
any thing to your purpose.

CHAP. X. Wherein Mr. Sheppards 18, 19, 20, 21 pages, are examined, and his
tenth position, and what he has said to prove it, is scanned.
I Am come to the last of your Lifeguard, your proposition is this:

That opening and applying Scriptures by private men one to another, in a way
of teaching, reproof, Admonition, Exhortation, and comfort has been
frequently blessed of God for the begetting of grace in the hearers, and
increase of it.

Now you have done us the favor to tell us, what you meant all this while by
expounding; for your position, I only am troubled you have not told us, when
and where and how, and that you have used the word frequently. For the proof
of this you appeal to experience, saying,

Let the Converters and Believers of our days be asked by what means they were
brought into Christ? and what it is that does edify them in the faith of
Christ? and doubtless they will tell us of other means also with
Pulpit-preaching, and by other men as well as Preachers in ^ffice. To all I
answer:

1. (Sir) if you mean that God has pleased to bless the private labors of
his people in their private exhortings and reprovings of one another to
increase Grace in the souls of his servants, I doubt it not.

2. But if you mean that God has frequently blessed the public preachments
of persons not called to that office for the conversion of souls, I doubt it
very much.

3. You make a very ill appeal to the Converts of our age. Perverts there are
many, but the Lord knows few converts, and very strange believers and
professors; appeal (Sir) to the old puritanes of forms ages, ask them by
whom God spoke to their hearts.

4. Gods making use of such means, as private admonition or reproves to
convert souls, does not prove that this is Gods great ordinance, for that end
Waldus the father of the Waldenses confesses his conversion to a sudden death
of a friend or companion of his, but yet none will say sudden deaths are Gods
ordinance for conversion.

5. God may sometimes possibly begin a conviction by a private reproof, but I
believe he usually makes use of his word Preached to beget Faith, and to
perfect the work.

Lastly, I say the holy one is not limited, but I believe you would be posed to
bring me one good instance of a soul converted from a loose and profane life
to an humble, close, strict walking with God in truth and uprightness that
has sat under no means but only the Preaching of a private person, that not
being called to the office of the Ministry has yet set upon that work, it were
easy to bring you five hundred that have been perverted.

I appeal to all the Heretics and Blasphemers in England, all the
Antinomians, Antiscripturists, Antitrinitarians, Ranters, where did any of you
learn your principles? was it with constant hearing of the Ministers of the
Gospel, or rather was it not with hearing men that without any call but upon
the pretense of their gifts undertook to expound the mysteries of God.

And (Sir) if three have been this way converted and edified, and the souls of
five hundred perverted and destroyed, what becomes of your proposition, or to
what purpose is it brought us?

To your proofs, That God does hold forth those duties and ordinances as
means of Grace, 1 Cor. 7.16. Math. 18.15, 16, 17. Jam. 5.19, 20. we grant it,
and they are so when performed regularly; the woman may be an instrument to
save her husband. 1 Cor. 7.16. But not by Preaching to him, but by carrying her
self as a believing wife before him, Math. 18.15, 16, 17. proves it concerning
private admonition, but prove Sir, by any Scripture. That the teaching Brother,
not called to the office has a promise made to him.

"You tell us secondly, that it is the word that does regenerate.

Yea, and this (very controversiall truth doublesse) you prove by a whole line
of quotations. Fewer would have served the turn (you should lay most proof
Sir upon the weakest cause) He that dispenses it, is but the conveyance or
conduit-pipe by which it is carried, 1 Cor. 3.5. Very much truth doubtless;
but to what purpose does any speak otherwise? hence you infer, that the word is
the same in a private, as in a public officers mouth; True Sir, it is so
materially, but not formally; the one speaks with authority, the former only as
a Scribe, the one as Christ's messenger particularly entrusted, the other
without any such commission.

By this time your conscience checks you, that the Apostle To. 10.14, 15, 16.
and you in this doctrine are not of a mind and p. 19, 20, 21. you spend, to
answer that unanswerable place.

1. You grant that the Preaching of the word by a Preacher in office is the
special and common way of gathering in men to Christ, and a singular ordinance
for increase of men gained and converted, yet this is not the only means, nor
all the Ordinances of Grace, for there are many more that men are to attend
upon for their edification and growth in Grace as well as this.

(Sir) for this concession we thank you, for we are beholding to any one that
in this erroneous age will give an assent to any truth of God, and to requite
you, we grant you that Preaching of officers is not the only means of
edification, which is all you say.

But you conceive that that place, To. 10, 13, 14, 15. is mistaken, and
therefore you have favored us with a kind of loose paraphrase, p. 19, 20. But
Sir to keep you close to the business, what sending is there meant? the
Apostle plainly says, how shall they preach except they be sent? your
paraphrase has not touched this passage; I suppose you were shy of it
wittingly, for this is the only passage in the Text that galleth you.

You tell us negatively, p. 20.

"That it is not to be taken in a literal and restrained sense, for then these
things would follow.

1. That by hearing the Scriptures read by a Preacher in office, men may (I
suppose you would say, may not) be brought to believe. But you think men may be
converted by reading, or hearing them read by any.

2. That men are not brought into or nourished in the faith of the Gospel by
reading Scriptures, Epistles, good books, conferences, etc.

3. That it is as impossible for a man to have Faith without hearing a called
Preacher, as to be saved without Faith, or to have Faith without the word of
God.

It is easier to say what is not meant then what is, but p. 21. you tell us.
That the Text is clear enough that by Preachers sent is meant any one that God
by his providence shall send to tell men the glad news of the Gospel; by the
subsequent words, v. 15. and the two Texts, Nahum. 1.15. Es. 52.7.

2. Page 20. You tell us, that when a gifted brother does preach the doctrine
of the Apostles and prophets, the hearers hear the Apostles and prophets, who
were preachers sent.

3. If the Scripture it self without any preacher speak, then it may be heard
without any other preacher, then he that first preached it. If the works of God
have a voice and speak, as they have, and do preach, Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3. Micah
6 9. If the works of men speak as Heb. 11.4. Abel being dead yet speaks,
that is teaches the world to imitate him, how much more then may Gods word be
said to speak.

4. That the Apostles did preach by their writings as well as by their voice
and speech.

This is the substance of all you say over and over again; it comes to this
little pittance of truth, that preaching is taken in a proper and in a
figurative sense, that a man may be sent providentially as well as
authoritatively; but Sir:

1. We will allow that gifted brethren may Preach, as the works of God are
said to preach, Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3. Micah. 6.9. And as dead Abel spoke, but (Sir)
these preachers were not (...) Gods heralds, as those spoken of, Romans 10.

2. Gods word (Sir) does speak, but it does not preach (in Scripture phrase)
nor is its speaking the ordinary means of God to convert souls to Christ. Mr.
Perkins tells you there is a difference between reading and preaching a Sermon.
Mr. Burroughes in his Gospel Worship says the latter is under a more special
appointment for conversion of souls then the other. God has said, Hear and
your souls shall live, Not, Read and your souls shall live, though we grant
reading to be a duty, and of singular use.

3. For your new Nonneno of second hand hearing, the Scripture allows no such
distinction, that is but a cheat put upon the reader, will not any one think
him mad that should interpret, Faith comes by hearing, that is, by reading, and
how shall they preach, that is, how shall the Scriptures preach, except they be
sent?

4. By the same foppish fancy I would avoid all places of Scripture that plead
either for preaching or hearing. Go preach and baptize, what is the meaning of
that, go preach by an holy life and baptize, or go write books and baptize;
but having showed you the folly of your quibles, I come to your answer. As you
cannot avoid the strength of this place by distinguishing of preaching, the
preaching there meant, being the preaching of words not of works, and
writings, and dead letters, but the preaching of them that make reports of God
to the soul, v. 16. those that have feet, and bring glad tidings of peace, not
the Gospells preaching, but the preaching of the Gospel, v. 16. such a
preaching as has a sound go with it, v. 18. and correlates to hearing.

So neither can you avoid it by distinguishing upon sending, I demand what
sending is meant? you tell me a providentiall sending, and this is clear
enough by these subsequent words, v. 15. Nahum. 1.15: Es. 52.7.

So say the Socinians and Erastians, but it is a miserable shift.

1. The Original word is (...) which signifies to send as an ambassador
(says A lapide) to send with power and authority (says Chamier.)

2. But secondly I am at a loss to understand this blind notion of a
Providentiall sending, when may a man be said to be Providentially sent? And
indeed it has posed better heads then mine to fadome this Notion, how shall
one know if he be providentially sent, will you say, if God has furnished him
with gifts, and he meets with an opportunity to exercise them? then a
Blasphemer may be a sent preacher, for he is providentially sent, the
providence of God permitting him to play his game, but surely the Apostle never
meant such a sending as might be from the Devil directly, and from God only
permissively; yet such are providentially sent; but I have cleared this Text
from this Erastian gloss in my Vindiciae Ministerii, p. 42, 43, 44, 45.

3. Thirdly, let us see what sense you have made of the Apostles words by your
gloss: how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard, that is,
either by the writings of good men; or by reading of the Scriptures, or by
considering the works of God, or by making use of the Examples of dead Saints
(for this fourfold hearing you will have) and how shall they hear without a
preacher, that is, how shall they read the Scriptures if they have no
Scriptures to read? how shall they consider the works of God, if they have
none to consider? how shall they read good books, if none write any? how shall
they imitate such men as Abel if there be none to imitate? And how shall they
preach except they be sent, that is, how shall any man speak to another, if he
does not come where he is? Sir, I am of the mind the spirit never guided you
in this interpretation, by which you have justled out the two great ordinances
of the Gospel, Preaching and hearing, and have pleaded fair for the Papists
who tell us of their pictures preaching, and making laymen sermons. But
fourthly:

4. Sir do you think the Apostles were no more then providentially sent? had
Isaias no more think you, nor the 70 any more? V A fuller answer in Gillespies
Miscell. quaest. p. 40.
it is plain that they are spoken of, v. 15, 16 17, 18, had Christ no more? he
is spoken of Nahum. 1.15. so that the following, verses and those two Texts,
Nahum 1.15. Is. 52.7. are so far from being clearly for you, that they are
fully against you, and argue more then a providentiall sending.

5. The providence of God orders all our motions and actions, Hananiah, Ier.
28. was providentially sent, but was he sent to work faith in the hearers think
you.

6. It is such a sending, as it must be a duty in us to hear them that are so
sent, but providentiall sending is no such sending, the seducers mentioned 2 Timothy 3.6, were providentially sent, (how came they there else?) but yet surely
it was not a Christians duty to hear them, but to avoid them, v. 5. So that
Sir, what sending soever the Apostle means, it was not a mere providentiall
sending, you must find out a new distinction, or you cannot avoid this place.

But you say, Page 20.
the Text cannot be understood in a literal and restrained sense: what that is
you do not mention. I suppose you mean, That none may preach but those that
are in office, So you expound your self in your three answers.

I am glad to hear you grant that the literal sense of Sent, is one in office,
Whitaker de Interpretatione Scripturae q. 5. c. 2. Etsi enim verba vary
accommodari and applicari possunt vel tropologice, vel Allegorice, vel
Anagogice, vel alio aliquo modo, non tamen ob id sunt varu^ sensus variae
interpretationes and explicationes Scripturae, sed sensus tantum unus est,
idemque literalis, qui vary potest accommodari, etc. ib.
now sir I will give you a noiion of Reverend Whitaker in his controversies.
Says he, though words may be variously referred and applied, Tropologically,
Allegorically or Anagogically, or any other way, yet there are not various
senses of Scripture, or various interpretations and explications of Scripture,
but the sense of all Scripture is one, and that literal, which may be variously
applied, and out of which many things may be gathered.

It is Basils note, that the literal interpretation, if it can be admitted, is
never to be rejected. Ex verbis sensum sequamur, ex sensu rationem and ex
ratione veritatem apprehendamus. D. Hilarious de Trin. l. 5. V. Hyperium. de
rat. studii. Theol. c. 35.
But you tell us it cannot be admitted here, and why? I pray it will follow
then you say.

That by reading the Scripture or hearing it read, men cannot be converted.
This is the substance of your first and second cavil which are both the same,
but you have not writ your book by the rule of frustra fit per plura quod fieri
possit per pauciora.

3. You answer, that then it will follow, that it is as impossible "for a man
to be converted and have faith without hearing a sent preacher, as it is for a
man to be saved without faith.

1. To these three cavills I answer, that it is not ordinary for a man to be
converted by reading, or hearing the Scriptures read, nor by hearing those that
are not ministers of the Gospel. To God all things are possible, nay, I
believe an hundred are saved without actual faith, to one that is converted by
a gifted brother, or any way but by Gospel-officers; for what shall we think
of children of believing Parents dying in their infancy. But secondly:

2. According to your own interpretation no man can be converted but by a
Preacher sent providentially; so that for your objection concerning Reading and
conversion that way, V. Gillespy Miscell. Qu.
it will fall heavy upon your self, and when you unty it for your self, we
shall have the liberty to make use of your distinction for us we hope.

3. Preaching is as necessary as hearing, and a sent preacher as necessary as
either, yet all only mentioned as Gods ordinary means to which he is not tied.

4. They are all necessary, not by absolute necessity, God can save those that
never called upon him, nor actually believed nor heard, but he does not
ordinarily convert or save those that have opportunities to hear preachers
sent, Gillespy Miscel. Quest. p. 41.
and time of believing, and refuse those means of grace which he has
appointed: It will be hard to prove says Mr. Gillespy that any believe who can
hear the Gospel preached by Ministers lawfully called and sent, and do not
hear it.

5. Lastly, it is possible that by reading the Scripture, or hearing it read,
or by conferences, or private exhortations, or reproves, or the like, God may
create in some souls, reflections upon themselves, and begin convictions, but
the question is now, suppose these Christians should never hear a minister of
the Gospel preach, and yet might do it, whether a continued Reading were
enough to carry on this work to a full work of conviction and contrition, and
to a clozing with Christ in sincerity. I doubt whether one instance of this can
be brought or no. (Sir) every slighty conviction and reflection of ones Spirit
upon it self, that may be in order to conversion is not formal conversion.

And now, Sir, having examined your lifeguard, I come to the great proposition
which you lay down p. 21.

CHAP. XI. In which the main Question is stated, and Mr. Sheppards Extensions
and Limitations of it are Examined.
THis great point of controversy as you call it, you lay down p. 21. open it
p. 22. I will be thrifty of my paper, and take you at the second rebound; in
the close of the 22 page you tell us, The sum of what you hold is this,

That a man out of office, gifted indeed and fitted to the work, may lawfully
in a public way expound and apply the Scriptures to the people in a settled
Church, without any external call of the Church enabling and authorizing him
to the office.

That is without Election, Ordination, or confirmation, (as you expound it
before) this proposition you, 1. Extend. 2. Limit. 3. Pretend to prove. 4. And
to Vindicate from objections. In this Chapter I will examine your Extensions
and Limitations. For your Extensions, you say it may be done,

1. In some cases ordinarily and constantly, what cases these are we cannot
learn from you, you instance only one, viz. where no preacher in office can be
had: this we grant you, necessity has no law.

2. It may be done you say by taking Texts, raising observations "and
doctrines, and making applications thereof.

"3. It may be done on the Lords day, or any other day.

"4. In the public Assemblies.

5. In the public meeting place.

6. In the Pulpit.

We grant you all this where there are no preachers in office can be heard; it
may be done as you say ordinarily and constantly, and he that does it may
expect a more extraordinary assistance of God, in regard the ordinary means
fail. But (Sir) what kind of constituted Churches are these that have no
preachers in office belonging to them. I take it, a constituted Church must be
a body of Christians united, and under the inspection of a Pastor.

Extraordinarily and occasionally, if on the Lords day the congregation be met,
and the Minister fails through sickness or otherwise, and there be no
preaching Minister near to whom the people may go, we agree with you, that a
private person, if prepared and truly gifted, may either in the Church, or in
some other place, according to his gift, discourse of the Scripture to the
people, though we think he might spend the time as well in repeating a Sermon
to them, and they spend their time as well in going home and searching the
Scriptures, and meditating and praying privately.

It is true that you say, that there were exhortations in the Jewish
Synagogues, but the places you quote, Io. 16.20. Acts 18.28, 13, 15, 20, 9.
prove only that Jesus Christ so taught, and Paul and Apollos (called by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.5. a Minister, and ranked with Paul) so exhorted, none of
these were mere gifted brethren.

Page 24.
You would have such men as these, viz. Naylers, Tailors, Bakers, Weavers. p.
22. have leave and encouragement to visit Parishes destitute and unprovided,
and exercise their gifts; and doubtless you say this would do more good then
setting up mere Readers.

I answer: 1. Provided that first all those be first employed who are more fit
for it, being more eminently gifted with learning and the knowledge of the
Tongues, being also sober and godly.

2. Provided that according to the Apostles rule, these same Nailors leave
making Nails, and the Tailors leave stitching, and the Cobblers cobling, and
the Weavers weaving, or else I am afraid that rule of the Apostle will be
broken, which he gives to preachers, 1 Timothy 4.15. Meditate upon these things,
give thy self wholly to them, and that v. 13. Give attendance to reading, to
exhortation, and to doctrine. Surely you will not say, that those rules
concern only preachers ordained, that are pastors: for then it must follow.
That it is Gods will that the pastors of Churches should meddle with his word
reverently and seriously, and speak of it premeditately: but the gifted
brethren have a privilege to prate at random and ex tempore, and that curse
denounced on them that do the work of God negligently belongs only to
pastors in office.

3. Provided that they be called and sent out, and ordained according to the
Gospel-rule, else they will not be able to answer him that questions them, who
gave you this authority? it will be no Scripturall answer to say: the State
gave it me, with these provisoes, I grant you what you would have, especially
considering your excellent limitations, and your sober reproof of extravagant
members in p. 24. 25, 26, 27. Against which I have nothing to say, but easily
grant you that all Gospel-preachers must be limited by those rules. And I am
glad to hear from you so sober a check of the lawless preachers of this
sinful age.

But yet (Sir) you must pardon me, if I yet after all this say to him that
would be a preacher (...) one thing is yet wanting, if you be an ordinary
constant preacher, viz. A solemn setting apart to the office after Probation
by fasting and Prayer, and laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, without
which his constant preaching will be a constant sinning against God in the
rules of the Gospel. This now you oppose by 10 Arguments, from the 27 to the
50 page of your book: I come now to the strength of them.

CHAP. XII. In which Mr. Sheppards first Argument for Guifted brethrens
preaching ordinarily, is examined, and answered.
YOur first argument is (ex concesso) you say, we grant you:

1. That private persons may, and must read the Scriptures, Catechize their
families, and that they may expound the Scripture to their families, Deuteronomy. 6.7,
8, 9. Col. 3.16. and they which tell you that every Master is a Prophet, a
Priest, and a King in his family. And

2. -- That we give you leave privately, occasionally, extraordinarily, and by
way of discourse to reprove, admonish, encourage, teach, exhort, comfort,
support, feed, out of the texts: Leu. 19.17. Heb. 3.13. Es. 2.2. Mal. 3.10.
Gal. 6.2. Job 2.17. Acts 18.26. Pro. 20.23. And

3. -- They also allow you to make an open confession of your faith, or an
Apology for defense against unjust accusations, or being a Magistrate to give a
charge to the people, and this they warrant by other Scriptures.

4. And that in case of planting or decay, or corruption of a Church, and where
a Church is not regularly constituted, that in these and such like cases a
gifted man may ordinarily and publicly preached and that without a solemn call.
And

5. That they may preach as probationers, and by writing. "Nay

6. We do admit strangers to preach, of whose call we are not "assured.

Here is now an huddle of arguments together, all taken out of our own
concessions and practice; for my better answer I will observe this method.

1. I will show you how far we have granted those, or any of those.

2. I will examine, quid inde? what this Gentleman can conclude from those our
grants.

3. I will answer what he says in the enforcing his argument.

1. Therefore I confess I have granted him, that private persons must read the
Scriptures, Catechize their families, and they may observe what God discovers
to them of the sense and meaning of the Scriptures. This I have granted from
Deuteronomy. 6:6, 7. and the usual notion that every one is a Priest, Prophet, and
King in his family, in my Vindiciae, p. 19. 20. but not that he may un^y the
difficult places of Scripture, or meddle with the (...); see my limitations of
this grant, p. 20. for Col. 3 16. indeed my Brother Hall quotes it as a proof
of this, but I have not, being not I think so clear and conclusive; but suppose
we do grant this, if you have any argument from this (Sir) it must be thus.

What private persons may do in their families privately, that they may do in
a constituted Church, and its assembly publicly, but privately they may teach
their Children and servants. Ergo.

I deny your major utterly, (Sir) you may as well conclude that every private
person may rule the Church, because he may rule in his family. God has set him
over his family to instruct that, but not over his Church to instruct that; see
my answer to this trifling argument in my Vindiciae, p. 64. 65.

But you say people and preachers are both meant alike Rev. 1. v. 5, 6.19. 1
Pet. 2.9. -- and therefore the duty and power laid upon them and given them
hereby, is to be performed in other places as well as their own houses.

1. I grant you, that for the term Priests, it does not properly belong to the
Ministers of the Gospel.

2. That it is by allusion applied to both, and the people are called Priests,
and Preachers Priests in a common notion. But yet let me tell you, I do not
think their services are both alike. For:

3. He that Ministered the Gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles
might be acceptable, being sanctified by the holy Ghost, was one that was in
office and had grace given him of God, to be a Minister of the Gospel of
Christ, To. 15.^6. Show me where in that sense the people are called Priests.

You tell us next, that that place Deuteronomy. 6. Does contain and command more then
bare reading the Scriptures, and and preaching of them to a man's own family
only, and to this purpose you tell us, that that Text in Deuteronomy. seems to be a
Metaphor taken from whetting an instrument, by which it is made more sharp,
and so more useful. So the word of God, etc.

I wonder how many words you would have to restrain a Text, here are four or
five, 1. To thy children. 2. In thy house. 3. When thou lie down and risest
up. 4. Upon the posts of thy house and thy gates. Let the indifferent reader
judge whether this Text be not enough restrained.

For your observation of the metaphor, I say nothing, for it is nothing to the
present purpose.

But p. 29. You say, suppose there come twenty or an hundred in of the
neighbors, may you not preach to them also, etc.

Sir, we can give you no license to preach to any. To the law and to the
testimony, if that say you may, you may, if not, you may not; this Text in
Deuteronomy gives you no liberty to preach to them, nor do I know any that
do; you may doubtless, if they come occasionally to join with you in a
family duly) go on with your duty before them, but if you make it your
business to call them into your charret to see your zeal for the Lord of
hosts, I know no Scripture will justify you.

I pass on to our second and third grant, as you say. Scriptures misapplied.


We do, (nay the word of God does) grant you, that you may privately,
occasionally, extraordinarily, and by way of discourse reprove, admonish,
encourage exhort, comfort, support, but we do not grant it you from Pro:
20.22. or Mal. 3.10. there is not a letter in them to any such purpose, no more
is there in Io. 2.17. nor in Gal. 6.2. nor in Acts 18.26. Apollos was more then
a gifted brother, (Sir) indeed we grant it from Levit. 19.17. Heb. 3.13. Es.
2.2. your other five places are shamefully applied to show you that it is not
the spirit of God that immediately and specially directs you in applications of
Scriptures always.

We do grant also, that private persons (if called to it) may make open
confessions of their faith and apologies on their own defense, and magistrates
may make charges: and in them make use of the Scriptures. But now let us hear
what you will conclude.

If they may do this, then they may without any call preach the Gospel
publicly in a constituted Church. I deny this shameful consequence; (Sir) are
families constituted Churches? or meetings of people at assizes constituted
Churches? fie, fie; surely your mind (if we may judge of it by your Logic) is to
abuse, not convince your readers; but to defend your weak cause you tell us,

1. The texts named and duties pressed do as much appertain to preachers as
people, what then Sir? therefore the preachers may also exhort etc. privately,
we do not go to conclude from those Scriptures what you may not do, but what
you may do.

2. You tell us, The preachers have forced these terms, occasionally,
extraordinarily, and privately upon the texts, there being not any one word in
any of them, holding forth any such distinction or intention, only in Acts.
18.26. a place very near to one of their texts, there is this, that Apollos, a
man then doubtless out of office, did mightily convince the Jews; and that
publicly by the Scriptures, proving that Jesus was the Christ. Nor can we
understand what they mean by these terms, or how to make any certain
definition of them, or to give to our selves any certain rules for the guiding
our selves therein, the duties enjoined are common and necessary, the command
general and indefinite, how then are such destinctions warrantable?

3. Let the force and use of the words, and the nature of the duties thereby
enjoined, and the use and sense of the words in other Scriptures, Acts 2.4.
Heb. 10.22, 23, 24, 25. Acts 15, 32, 13, 15, 11, 23. Titus 2.3. Heb. 5, 12. 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8, 19, 6, 7. 2 Timothy 2, 16, 17. be well weighed, and then let the
preachers tell us, if they can, wherein these things do differ from preaching,
and how they may be done without preaching.

"To these cavills I answer.

1. If the preachers have devised the distinctions of Occasionally and
Extraordinarily, and privately, you are beholden to them for it, for you your
self make use of them, p. 23. and tell us, that but in some cases it may be
done ordinarily and constantly.

2. Though the very word privately should not be found in Scripture, yet words
are found that argue the same thing, Heb. 3.13. exhort one another, which is a
term of a private notion and differing from exhorting the congregation.

3. The peoples inquiry concerning the interpretation of Scripture was
privately, Math. 24.3. Mar. 13.3. Math. 13.36. contrary to the practice of many
publicly to dispute with the Preachers when they have done their sermons, or
interrupting them when they are preaching.

4 As the term (extraordinarily) is not put in, so neither is it needful: for
the duties commanded them are, to be done ordinarily, viz to admonish, reprove,
comfort, support, etc.

5. Though it be no where said they must do it only privately, yet withal it
is no where said they may do it in a constituted Church that has public
officers to preach to them.

6. Neither is there any one example of any not gifted with the extraordinary
gifts of the holy Chost, nor in office that did it publicly.

7. If Apollos mentioned, Acts 18.25, 26. were at that time out of office
(which yet by your favor is not doubtless) yet he was no private person, for
it is more then probable, he had the extraordinary gift of proph^^cy, and to be
sure he was to be a minister in office, 1 Cor. 3.5.

8. The very putting in of that term, Acts 18.28. and that publicly argued
that it was not ordinary for private persons or any not in office to speak
publicly in the Synagogues.

9. It is an easy thing for men to pretend ignorance, when they have no mind
to understand; to help you, By privately, we mean not in public assemblies
and congregations: By extraordinarily we mean they may do it. 1. Where no
Ministers in office can be procured or resorted to, till such time as the
congregation can be supplied regularly.

10. The duties enjoined are common and necessary, but those duties are private
exhortings, not public expoundings, for those are neither common nor necessary
to be performed by persons not in office, and the command is general, but not
to all duties.

11. The command to preach is no more common then that to Baptize Math. 28.19.
But your self will grant they may not Baptize, unty the knot for your self,
and you do it for us.

12. What though the same words be used to express the duty of the peoples
private exhortations one of another, and the Pastors public exhortations: yet
this will not prove that their exhortations are to be in the same manner, nor
that the duty is the same. The Magistrate in his charge at an assize may be
said to exhort: yet surely it is not every private persons duty so to exhort
the people.

13. If the use of the same word for both be any argument, then they are not
only bound to exhort and preach but to do it as Apostles and prophets and
pastors, the places you quote will prove this, yet you your self say, p. 24.
that they cannot do it as preachers in office, in an ^uthoritative way, or as
a pastoral act.

14. The same word signifies to Baptize and to wash our hands, or pots and
cups, and by your Logic it will follow, that every man that may wash his
hands, or every kitchen wench, that is by her office to wash a cup, may Baptize
a Christian, why? the word is the same.

But to proceed yet with you p. 30. you say:

We grant that in case of planting, or decay, or corruption of a Church, and
where a church is not regularly constituted, that in these and such like cases,
a gifted man may ordinarily and publicly preach without a solemn call. If so,
we desire them to consider how near our case at this time, at least in some
congregations, comes to this; if our Churches be rightly constituted (you say)
why is there so much labor to alter and reform the constitution of them?

1. Let us see how far this is granted. 2. What you can conclude from our
grant. 3. how you apply it, and cavil from it.

1. I never granted you that in case of the planting or decay of a Church, and
where a Church is not regularly constituted, that in these cases a gifted man
might preach without a call, etc. except the case were so, that none could be
found to ordain, nor none ordained found to do the Lords work.

Nor do I think it Regular. I do not think it the best way to convert
Indians to send unguifted men to them not ordained. But for the Church to set
some apart by fasting and prayer, and send them out to them, with authority.
See M. Firmin^ separation examined, p. 60.
I am sure this is Gods way when he was to send preachers where Churches were
not formed, Acts 13.5. indeed if the case be such that no ordained persons can
be found, nor any Presbyters to ordain them, the case is otherwise. My Brother
Hall in his pulpit-guarded p. 5. 6. durst grant you no more, now what do you
argue from hence.

Those that may preach to Heathens or to Christians where no officers can be
had to preach or set apart preachers, these also may ordinarily preach where
there are preachers in office and more may be made. A miserable consequence,
Sir; apply it to Magistracy, and you will see the absurdity of it.

But you tell us this is our case or very near.

We are beholden to you for this (Sir) are we no better then Heathens think
you? 2. Have we no officers ordained in England? nor 3. Any means of
Ordination? But our Churches are not rightly constituted.

1. The Church of England (Sir) is rightly constituted, here are in it
preachers rightly ordained, and people rightly qualified, and the ordinances
rightly administered.

2. For the particular Churches in England, possibly they may not be organized
regularly, but constituted they are, though corrupted, and so have much need to
be reformed.

3. You have foisted in this term, Rightly, into our grant; we do not think
that every particular fault in the constitution of a Church makes the Lords
Vineyard such a common, that every one may come and dig in it.

But fourthly you tell us we grant you,

That gifted men may preach as Probationers, and by writing in what manner and
method they please, without any call at all -- and that a judge may give a
charge, -- and a Colonel or Captain exhort his Soldiers. -- That a man may
comfort his afflicted friend.

1. The three latter we grant you in terminis as you propound them.

2. We also grant, that men may exercise their gifts as probationers, but not
in what manner and method they please; for their method we deny them not what
they please, but for the manner it must not be ordinarily but once or twice, or
more, in order to Timothies laying on of hands upon them, which must not be
suddenly.

3. These Probationers must not be Naylors, Tailors, Cobblers, etc. but such as
have been approved, as have studied the Scriptures and give themselves wholly
to that work.

4. We say others may write, but we do not call writing preaching.

But what follows upon this grant?

Will you conclude that therefore those that never intend the office of the
Ministry, nor to give themselves wholly to that work, may make it a Trade to
preach every Lords day in a constituted Church, is there no odds think you
(Sir) betwixt our grant and your taken conclusion? we have given you an inch,
you have taken an ell.

But lastly you tell us, that we do constantly admit preachers to preach for
us that are strangers to us, and of whose call we can have no assurance, I
answer.

1. It is no argument to argue a facto ad jus, that because some do it, it is
lawful.

2. But surely none do it, if they know them to be such as are not called, if
we be deceived by report or common fame, or their own words, the sin is not
ours so much.

3. I know none that do it; if there be any, let them plead for themselves. If
such thrust into our places, we give them no leave.

And thus Sir, I have shown you the weakness and insufficiency of your first
argument, which proves too short for your purpose. I come now to your second.

CHAP. XIII. Wherein Mr. Sheppards four next main Arguments are weighed in the
balance of the Sanctuary, and found too light.
I Am come now to the second argument (which you call a maine one.

That it is no where forbidden in the word of God, and then it cannot be
unlawful.

Your Logic is this.

What is not forbidden to be done is not unlawful:

But the ordinary preaching of gifted uncalled men in a constituted Church is
not forbidden, Ergo.

As you deliver your mind we must be forced first to distinguish, then to
answer: 1. A thing is forbidden either generally or specially, either directly
or by consequence.

If you mean that what is no way forbidden in Scripture, neither by any
general precept, nor by any particular precept, neither directly, nor by
consequence, is not unlawful, then we grant you that what is not forbidden in
that sense is not unlawful. But every thing not commanded or allowed is in
that sense forbidden, for Rev. 22.18. It is forbidden to add any thing to the
word of God.

But then we deny your Minor, and say, that the ordinary preaching of persons
uncalled publicly in constituted Churches or public assemblies, if they be
such as have not the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost (which are now
ceased) is forbidden.

1. For how shall they preach except they be sent, To. 10.15. and no man takes
this honor to himself.

2. It is no where commanded nor allowed, therefore implicitly forbidden.

3. Consequentially they are forbidden, for it is an act of office which they
are (by your own confession) forbidden Math. 28.18, 19.

^. If you mean by not forbidden, not forbidden in so many words, we deny your
Major, and say it does not follow a thing is lawful, because it is not
forbidden in so many words. For upon this score the Surples, the Cross in
Baptism, bowing at the name of Jesus: in short, most of the Popish ceremonies
are not thus forbidden.

But you say, this duty is alike necessary with prayer, and you know not any
reason why the same rules and liberties should not be granted in one as the
other, that it be done in all places, and at all times and all manner of ways,
1 Timothy 2.8. Ephesians. 6.18. 1 These, 3.10.

1. We grant you that expounding of Scripture is necessary, but it is not alike
necessary for every private Christian to expound Scripture as to pray, Prayer
is a piece of natural worship, Preaching a piece of Instituted worship, and we
must keep to the Institution, God has bid all pray, he has not bid all preach.

2. The places of Scripture you quote prove nothing for preaching only, but
for praying, which none denies you; yet you set your Scriptures as if they
should prove both, but there is no such matter.

Your third argument is this.

That the word does command it, for it does every where command to exhort, Page
32.
warn, teach, comfort, reprove, edify one another, and this cannot be done
without the opening and application of Scripture, therefore it is commanded,
for it is an undeniable rule; that when any thing is commanded, that also is
commanded, without which the other thing cannot be done.

To bring your argument into form it must be thus.

That which is commanded is lawful, that is unquestionably true. But the
ordinary preaching and expounding of Scriptures by persons merely gifted, not
called to the office in public assemblies and constituted Churches is
commanded. Ergo. This I deny Sir.

You prove it thus:

Where the End is commanded, all necessary means is commanded: but exhorting,
warning, teaching, reproving, edifying one another is an end commanded, and the
ordinary preaching and exp unding Scripture by persons merely gifted not
called to the office in public assemblies, and constituted Churches, is the
necessary means to that end? therefore this is commanded.

1: To this I answer, Sir, that I grant God has commanded private persons to
comfort, reprove, exhort, edify one another, this is an end commanded.

2. That God has allowed, yea and commanded them the use of necessary means
to this end, without which the end could not be attained.

3. I say, that although by public preaching this end is promoted, yet this is
not the only necessary means; but Christians may be edified by their brethren
without this, and therefore it does not follow this is commanded them.

4. Through the ignorance of the preachers, this more probably would be a
means to pervert them: 2 Pet. 3.16.

5. This argument would prove, that they are command^d to administer the
Sacraments too, and do all pastoral acts; for they are commanded, say you, to
edify one another, and these are means of edification.

6. This argument would prove, that all Saints though not gifted nor any ways
proved or approved, may preach and do all other pastoral acts, for they are
all bound to edify one another, and these are means in order to this end. By
this time (Sir) I believe you understand your own fallacy. For what you say,
that the Scriptures have enjoined these duties, and no where restrained time,
place, or manner. I answered that before: there must be a time and place too,
Sir, observed, or else you may prove they are bound to preach, when the
Minister is praying and preaching, as well as what you do, and for the manner
you your self have set down one, p. 25. and pretended to bring Scripture for
it. You say you

Know no reason why they may not speak publicly by exhortation to men, as well
as in prayer and praise to God.

I will tell you Sir. 1. Prayer and praise are both pieces of natural worship,
preaching a piece of instituted worship; in performance of which you must keep
to the institution. 2. The Scripture does not so fully prove, nor indeed at all
prove your duty of public preaching. 3. By this argument the vilest men in the
world may, yea and are bound to preach for they are bound to pray, Acts 8.22.

Your fourth maine argument as you call it is this.

It being forbidden for women to preach publicly in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.34.
1 Timothy 2.12. It is strongly implied that it is permitted for men to do it. As
the forbidding of certain persons the entry into the Congregation of the Lord
does necessarily imply, that all others not forbidden might enter otherwise
that prohibition of the Apostle had been alogether impertinent and useless.
For there were at that time no women in office, but extraordinary prophetesses,
who did and might speak publicly etc.

Your argument is this.

The Apostle forbidding only of women to teach and prophecy gives liberty to
all men to expound Scriptures publikly, but women are forbidden to prophecy or
teach publicly, Ergo. 1 Cor. 13 34. 1 Timothy 2.12.

If any reasonable satisfaction would have served this argument, and the
authors and the Abetters of it, it would never have come halting on to the
stage again: I know of twice it has been beaten off. The Brownists appears
with it first, holy Mr. Rutherford knocked it down, in his due right, p. 301.
Chillenden brought it on again, the Author of the Book called Church Members
set in joint, knocked it down the second time, p. 30. of that Book, to it
therefore has been already answered.

It will infer a liberty for all men as well as gifted men, Church Members set
in joint, 308. Rutherford, due Right, 301.
and if you put in (if they be gifted) why may we not put in if they be
ordained.

2. It will infer that all men may administer the Sacraments too, because all
women are forbidden.

3. It is to be understood of women that had, or pretended to have the gift of
prophecy. This the Author of the aforesaid Book proves, because it is not said
(...), but (...); which particle (...), as he notes from Scaliger, is
determinative.

But to this third answer, Gillespy, Miscell. Qu. p. 75. Filodexter
Transilvanus, p. 30. Rutherford, due Right, p. 302.
that women propophetesses might prophecy publicly; so it could not be meant
of them, for they might speak publikly. So said the Brownists, so says
Chillenden. But it is answered by Gillespy, Miscell. Quest. p. 75. by Mr.
Rutherford, p. 302. of his due right of Presbytery, by Filodexter Transylvanus,
in the Book before named, p. 30. that it cannot be proved that women
prophetesses prophesied publicly in Gospel Churches: nor do any Scriptures
prove it: see what they say severally to this cavil.

4. It is answered by Mr. Rutherford, that the Laws of France forbidding women
to fit on the Throne of France, does not therefore prove every Frenchman may.
To this now this Gentleman replies.

That the law forbidding women, does tolerate any man that has right, and so
our gifted Brother has.

This is a begging the question: we question whether they have right or no, you
prove if they have right they may: that is, if they have right, they have
right. Pretty Logic.

5. To what you say, that the forbidding certain persons to enter into the
Congregation, Deuteronomy: 23. allows all other to enter.

I deny that; it allows indeed that all that are not forbidden there, nor any
where else may, but not that all not there forbidden may: for all the heathen,
and all unclean persons are not forbidden there, yet it is plain from other
places, they might not enter.

6. Lastly I answer, your comparison halts, there is no parallel betwixt
undertaking the work of preaching, and entering the congregation; entering the
Congregation was a thing common; a privilege that nothing but a prohibition
could debar them from; preaching is a public act of office, to which a man
must have a call and mission, or else he can have no warrant to his work.

CHAP. XIV. In which Mr. Sheppards fifth Argument is brought to the Touchstone
of truth, and found Brass, not concluding what he would have.
I Am come to your fifth maine argument:

And that is drawn from an induction of particular examples.

That it has been usually so done, and never disallowed, but rather approved
by God and good men.

To this purpose you bring us the instance of the Elders, Number. 11.23, 24, 25.
Saul, 1 Samuel 5.10. Noah 2 Pet. 2.5. Jehosaphat: 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. Stephen: Acts
7. the 70. Luke 10.1. Simeon, Lu. 2.25, 26. Job and his friends. Anna, Lu.
2.36, 38. Apollos, Acts 24.25. the primitive Christians, 1 Cor. 14.26. Paul:
Acts 29.20, 22. Scribes, Pharisees, and Lawyers: Those Paul speaks of, Phil.
1.18. the custom of the Jews: Acts 13.6. Christ himself, Lu. 2.42.

Dr. Seaman in his answer to Chillenden, prefixed to his (...). Pulpit guarded,
p. 46, 47, 48, etc.
To this argument and every piece of it, is already enough said by learned
Doctor Seaman, the Author of Lay preaching unmarked, p. 11.12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
etc. Mr. Hall in his Pulpit guarded, Mr. Ferriby in his lawful preacher, p.
33, 34, 36, 37. etc. The Author of Church members set in joint, p. 14.15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20, etc. Mr. Rutherford in his due right, Lay-preaching unmaskt, p.
11. 12, 13, 14. Mr. Ferriby, in his lawful preacher, 33. etc.
p. 281. 282, 283. and in his peaceable plea, 255. Mr. Gillespy in his Miscell
questions p. 66. 67 etc.

One would think here have been replies enough to stop the scolding tongue of
this Argument But to be short your argument lies thus:

What has been usually done, and never disallowed but approved by God and good
men, may be lawfully done. Granted.

But gifted men merely gifted, have usually preach'^ and expounded Scripture
being in no office, and that in a constituted Gospel Church publicly and
ordinarily. -- Ergo.

1. This proposition is false enough, 1. You must prove that these men were
merely gifted, as Christians are now gifted, and not in office, nor
extraordinarily inspired.

Your instances of the Elders Number 11.23, 24, 25. of Saul 1 Samuel 5.10. of
Stephen, of Anna, of Apollos, of Paul, of the Scribes and Pharisees, of Christ,
come short here.

The Elders had the extraordinary gift of prophecy, Number 11.23. so had Saul, and
never after so 1 Samuel 5.10. Stephen was ordained and full of the holy Ghost.
Anna was a prophetess, Apollos a Minister. Paul had received the holy Ghost,
Acts 9. The Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses chair says our Savior, and
surely Christ himself was some thing more then a gifted Brother.

2. Secondly you must prove they expounded and applied Scripture, prove this
concerning Eldad and Medad, or Saul, or Noah, or Jobs friends, or Anna.

3. Thirdly, You must prove they did it in a constituted settled Church, in
which were public officers; prove this of Noah, of Saul, of the primitive
Christians that were scattered, Acts 8.

4. Fourthly, you must prove they did it ordinarily and constantly, prove this
of Saul, of Eldad and Medad, of those scattered Christians, Acts 8.

Thus you see Sir what your argument comes to, not one instance holds to your
case, you may see fuller answers to them in the Books which I before cited,
when you have disproved them you may expect an answer from them or me.

For Mr. Simons or Mr. Marston, whose Letters you insert, their words are no
Oracles, and they have neither answered what has been said against it, nor yet
favored us with any arguments for it. Magisteriall placets or friendly
Commendams are worth little to prove a truth, unless you can assure us that
they are in them guided by an infallible Spirit, which I believe they will
hardly say they are, they are Gentlemen I know not, they may be learned and
holy, but as I take it there be ten for one as learned and holy are of another
mind, you are beholden to them for their Letters, but I think the truth of God
and the Gospel of Christ is not much.

Page 35.
In the close of this argument you would know,

What is the difference between Preaching and Orations and common placings,
speeches, Sermons, and exhortations.

O Sir, take heed of paralelling the great ordinance of God to an Oration or a
Speech, this is a very unsavory parallel to come from one who seems to have
so much of the fear of God dwelling in him, as you have given the world cause
to hope you have (from some sober passages in your Book) why do you not as
well say what is the difference between the word of the living God and a good
Sermon-book? Between Reading the Scriptures, and reading a godly book; yet
Luther was wont to say he would burn his books if he thought any one would
make that use of them. Suppose there be not a material difference, but both be
good, yet is there not a great formal difference, is not one the Ordinance of
God to salvation, and are the other public Ordinances under the like divine
appointment: (Dear Sir) take heed of such terms to vilify this great Gospel
Ordinance.

CHAP. XV. Wherein Mr. Sheppards seventh and eighth Argument for Lay-preaching
are Examined, and one of them found not to conclude Logically. In the handling
of the other is examined whether Prophecy, mentioned in the new Testament, be
ordinary preaching and expounding Scripture.
I Am come to your sixth argument.

The Apostle Paul does reprove the irregular use of this gift in the Church, 1
Cor. 1.14. and does direct them in the right use of it. -- Ergo.

Your Logic is thus:

He that does reprove an irregular use of a gift, and direct in the right use,
does grant and establish an use. But the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.14. does reprove the
irregular use of the gift of prophecy, and direct in the right use of it.

Both these propositions are true, I must deny the conclusion which should be
thus, or else it does not conclude what you would have it.

Ergo, The Apostle does grant that gifted men not called to the office, may
expound Scriptures publicly in a constituted Church.

But Sir, if you conclude thus, I will tell you your premises do not prove
your conclusion, and your argument is a paralogisme, all that you conclude is
this: Ergo, The Apostle establishes an use.

We grant it, that in those times there was an extraordinary gift of prophecy,
which the Apostle establishes the use of, and directs those that had it how
to exercise it. But what is this to your purpose? if you look again into that,
1 Cor. 14. you will find that the Apostle does give rules likewise to direct
in the use of the gift of Tongues, but does it therefore follow, that that is a
standing continuing gift?

But I hasten to your seventh argument, for in this you have not so well looked
as to conclude your question in your conclusion, (surely this is not the
argument confirmed Mr. Marston, nor that light that in Mr. Simons Judgment
should convince the world of this truth) for this argument shies at the Monster
and refuses to conclude near it. If I mistake not, I am now come to Goliath,
and indeed it is the best argument can be brought; yet, if I mistake not, in
the strength of God with a sling and a stone, he may be slain too. It is drawn
from: 1 Cor. 14.23, 24, 31, 32.

You may all prophecy, that is (say you) all amongst you that have this
Prophetical gift, [prophecy] that is, use it [one by one] that is orderly one
after another, that all may be taught, etc.

Your argument is this, If all that had the gift of prophecy in the primitive
times, might prophecy orderly, then all that have the gift, may expound and
apply Scriptures now.

But all that had the gift of prophecy then might -- Ergo. we deny your Major:
for two reasons.

1. We say that that gift of prophecy was an extraordinary gift which none now
have, your argument labors of that fallacy which is called Fallacia
equivocationis, we say again.

2. That that prophesying was an act of extraordinary officers.

To this you answer:

1. By telling us there are two sorts of Prophets mentioned in Scripture, 1.
Such as were to foretell things to come, or reveal Secrets by virtue of an
extraordinary calling from God only, such you say were Agabus, Acts 11.17, 18,
19, 20 21. Philips Daughters, Acts 21.9. Barnabas, Simeon, Lucius, Saul, Acts
13.1. Judas, and Silas: Acts 15.32. the twelve Brethren, Acts 19. John Baptist,
Math. 11.7, 9. of such the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 12 8. Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor.
13.2. and they, Math. 7.22, 23. Math. 15.7. 1 Samuel 9 6. All this is true, we
will make use of it anon; by the way, I hope I shall hear of none of these
Scriptures or instances brought to prove the liberty of private brethrens
prophesying. But then you tell us:

There were others that improperly and by way of resemblance called Prophets,
either because God did more reveal himself to them then to others, and they
had a part of the prophetical gift, so Balaam. 2 Pet. 2.16 So Noah was called
a Preacher. 2 Pet. 2.5. so some were called Singers -- so the Angel calls
himself a prophet, Rev. 22 9. So the two witnesses who prophesied, Rev. 11, 3
4. etc. So Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob seem to be called Prophets, Genesis 20 7.
Psalm. 105.15. -- And these were such whether men in or out of office, that had
a gift or skill above others, by their study and labor in the word, and not
extempore or miraculously, and were able to open and apply it to the profit and
edification of others, 1 Cor. 14.1. 1 Timothy 4.13, 15. 2 Timothy 2.15, 1 Timothy 5.17.
And this name we do not find to be any where more applied to preachers then
to the people. But the preachers in office are clearly distinguished from them
as they are from Apostles and Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28. And the
word seems rather to be applied to all, Psalm. 105.15. Genesis 20 3 And the places
urged by the preachers to this purpose, 1 Cor. 14.22. Lu 4.24. Rev. 18.19, 11,
10. do no more belong to them then others, and according to them there was and
is a gift of prophecy, which is nothing else but an ability and skill which
some men have above others to teach or to open, and to expound Scripture, and
to apply it to the edification, exhortation and comfort of others, 1 Cor. 13,
9, 14, 3. and these are the prophets, and this is the prophecy intended
especially, 1 These. 5.20. despise not prophesying, and so Rev. 10.11, 19.20 1
Cor. 14.1. and from v. 24 to v. 31: Romans 12.6. 1 Cor. 13.9. And all those that
are said to witness against the doctrines and doings of Antichrist (are said
to prophecy, Rev: 11.3.6. Some other Scriptures there are which seem to refer
to both these kinds of prophecy, as 1 Cor. 12 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Matthew. 7.22, 23.
1 Cor. 14.31. These Prophets, and this kind of Prophecy, which we have lastly
laid open, are not extraordinary, nor ceased, but have been, and still are in
the Christian Churches. And this gift of Prophecy is, and is to be found in
the Preachers and people, who have or may have it at this day.

Here now is a tedious confused discourse to very little purpose. I know not
well how to unravell it, there is such a jumbling together of things granted
and denied; things true and false, and doubtful. I had best (I think) deal
with it in this last method. And 1. show you what is true, and granted to us.
2. What is false and denied by us. 3. What is doubtful betwixt us. First
therefore:

1. It is true that some were called Singers, that had rare gifts in making
songs, though not one of all the five places he brings proves that any one in
Scripture was called a Singer, but those in Office, 2 Samuel 23.1. Indeed David
is called a Psalmist, because he made Psalms.

2. It is true that he says, That a skill in Scripture must be got by study
and labor and does not come extempore and miraculously.

3. It is true, That the Preachers in Office are distinguished from Prophets,
Ephesians. 4.11. 1. Cor. 12.28. neither were they such Prophets.

4. It is true, The Angel is called a Prophet, Rev. 22.9. and the witnesses,
Rev. 11.3.4. From hence we argue,

If a skill to open and apply Scriptures must be got by study and labor, then
it does not immediately come from the Spirit without any humane power and
industry, as be told us, p. 15. 2. Then those are not to undertake it that
cannot study, or do not labor for it.

3. If the Prophets spoken of, Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28. be distinguished from
Preachers, then their Office is something else besides expounding Scripture and
applying it, that is the Pastors and Teachers work.

4. If the Prophets were so guifted, as Pastors and Teachers are not, then
surely beyond our guifted brethren?

Come we now to what is false in what he has said.

1. It is false that Balaam is called a Prophet, as prophesying is used for
expounding and applying Scripture. He foretold things to come, Number. 24.5, 6, 7,
8. V Calv. ad loc. Deodat. ad loc.
Mr. Calvin says, he was inspired by God. Deodate thinks it was because he was
a witch.

2. It is false that those places, 1 Chro. 25.6. 1 King 10.12. Ezra. 2 65. 2 Samuel 23.1. prove that any are called Singers not in office; and if they did
prove it, it were nothing to the purpose.

3. It is false, that those mentioned, 1 Cor. 14.1. or that prophesying
mentioned 1 Timothy 4 14. were such Prophets as did that thing which you call
expounding, and applying Scripture; or that that was their prophesying, to
expound Scripture upon study and labor. Prove that: for your places, 2 Timothy
2.15. 1 Timothy 5.17. They have nothing about Prophets or prophesying.

4. It is false that the term Prophet is any where in the Gospel either
applied to standing Gospel-officers, or to people.

5. It is false to say, that by that text Psalm. 105.15. Prophets can be applied
to the people, for they are before called the Lords anointed; nor can it be
properly applied to any but the Prophets of the Old Testament.

6. It is false to say, the term Prophet, Genesis 20.3. is applied to ordinary
people, for v. 3. the time is not mentioned, v. 7. it is, Abraham is called a
Prophet, but was he an ordinary brother, think you? he was a Priest, Genesis 22.
he sacrificed, and might every Jew do this? he did it in an extraordinary
time, before the Law was settled for the worship of God; he was called a
Prophet, because God revealed himself to him miraculously.

7. Neither do the Preachers apply any way, but by way of allusion any of
those Texts, 1 Cor. 14.22. Lu. 4.24. Rev. 18 20. to themselves they literally
respect neither people, nor ordinary Gospel preachers.

8. It is false to say, that the prophecy mentioned, 1 Cor. 13.9, 14, 3. 1
These. 5.20. 1 Cor. 14.1, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Romans 12.6. 1 Cor. 13.9 is nothing
else but a gift and ability that some men have above others, by labor and
industry to open Scripture, and apply Scripture for edification. It was a
miraculous extraordinary gift given by extraordinary revelation in that infancy
of the Church, and those Scriptures, 1 Cor. 12.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Math. 7.22, 23.
1 Cor. 14.31. speak only of such a gift, see reasons for it in my Vindiciae,
p 50. 51. how you have answered them we will see anon.

9. It is false to say, that the prophesying and prophets mentioned, 1 Cor. chapter
12. chapter 13 chapter 14, etc. is not ceased, nor do your Scriptures prove it, 1 Pet.
12.10. does not so much as mention it.

There is something doubtful betwixt us: viz.

What prophesying of the witnesses is, Rev. 11.3, 6.

By the way before we pass on, I desire the Reader to consider, how you wind
about the Scripture to serve your turn. He that runs may read, that in the
twelfth, thirtenth, and fourtenth Chapters of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, the Apostle speaks of the same prophets and prophesying, yet you
tell us, that the 1 Cor. 14.1, 24.31. 1 Cor. 13.9, 14, 3. are meant of ordinary
gifted brethrens expounding: p. 42. but 1 Cor. 1^.28. 1 Cor. 13.2. you tell us,
p. 36. are to be understood of revealing secrets; and extraordinary
prophesying, p. 42. you tell us, that perhaps, 1 Cor. 12.6, 7, 8, 9. 1 Cor. 14,
24, 31. are to be understood of ordinary and extraordinary prophecyings: Give
me leave here to argue, Sir, ex concessis.

The same prophets and prophesying rationally, must be meant in 1 Cor. 12.6, 7,
8. that are meant 1 Cor. 12.28. and in 1 Cor. 14.1. that are meant 1 Cor.
14.31. or else you must show us some reason in the Text against it.

But according to your own confession, 1 Cor. 12.28. 1 Cor. 14.31. are to be
understood of extraordinary prophets. -- Ergo.

Answer me this riddle, keeping your own rule p. 29. Vbi lex non distinguit non
est distinguendum.

But (Sir) now the superfluities of your discourse are pared off; the whole
amounts to this, that the prophesying spoken of, 1 Cor. 14.1. etc. is an
ordinary gift still continuing. This you might have said in fewer words: we
deny it, you go to prove it, p. 42. 43.

1. You say it was promised: Joel. 2.18.

To that place I answered before I deny it, that the gift there prophesied of,
was the ordinary gift of expounding Scripture.

1. I have the Apostle Peter on my side, who says it was meant of those gifts
given in the days of Pentecost.

2. Then dreams and visions must be ordinary too.

3. Then daughters must also prophecy, contrary to the Apostles rule, relating
to the order of Gospel Churches.

But you add four Reasons to prove it, let us weigh them in the balance of
the Sanctuary.

Your first reason is this: It is reckoned you say amongst ordinary and
continuing gifts, To. 12.6. 1 Cor. 14 1.

Your Argument is this: That gift which is reckoned amongst ordinary and
continuing gifts, is also an ordinary and continuing gift.

But the gift of prophecy is so reckoned, 1 Cor. 14.1. To. 12.6.

By the same medium I will prove it an extraordinary and not continuing gift,
thus: That gift which is reckoned amongst extraordinary and not continuing
gifts, is also an extraordinary and not continuing gift.

But this gift of prophecy is reckoned amongst extraordinary and not continuing
gifts. Ergo.

It is reckoned with the gifts of healing miracles, diverse Tongues, 1 Cor.
12.9, 10, 28. 1 Cor. 13.1. 1 Cor. 14.1, ^.

So that this argument Sir is too weak, it serves as well for me, as you.

Secondly, You say all Gods people of all sorts, and in all times and places
are earnestly to labor for it, and earnestly desire it; now if it were an
extraordinary gift it were not to be desired, nor could it be attained by
industry, 1 Cor. 14.39.

Your Logic is this: That gift that is to be desired and labored for by all
Saints of all sorts in all times, is an ordinary gift. This is true.

But the gift of propheey mentioned by the Apostle, is to be labored for, and
desired by all Saints of all sorts, in all places. Ergo. This is denied, you
prove it.

What the Corinthians were exhorted to covet and labor for, that all Saints in
all times are to labor.

But the Corinthians are commanded to Covet and labor for this gift. Ergo.

I deny the Major: the Corinthians were to desire that extraordinary gift. (I
read of no laboring commanded) because that gift was then in date, but this
command does not reach us, because it is ceased. 2. They were to desire tongues
and miracles and the gift of healing as well, v. 1. v. 5. they are all
comprehended under the Notion of spiritual gifts: yet surely these are not
ordinary gifts.

Your third reason is this: What is commanded by a standing rule of the Gospel
not to be despised, is a standing Ordinance.

But prophesying is so commanded, not to be despised, 1 These. 5.20. Ergo.

I deny that private expounding Scripture by men ordinarily gifted, is the
prophesying here meant, by prophecyings is meant the Ordinances of God, of
which prophesying was then one, or those expoundings of the mysteries of
Scripture, which were then usually made by such as had received an infallible
Spirit.

Fourthly, you tell us, there are many at this day that have it.

That there are many this day can expound Scripture, we deny not; but we
question whether there be any can expound it infallibly, as those prophecyers
mentioned, 1 Cor. 14. could; being doubtless inspired and guided by an
infallible spirit; or that can expound it extempore without study, as
doubtless they could; and till you prove those two you cannot prove that there
are any now have that gift of prophecy there spoken of, which if you do not
prove, you say nothing to the purpose.

For your other Reasons, p. 43. you do but repeat what you said before, and I
have already answered them.

You see (Sir) what weak proofs you have served us with, to prove that the
prophesying spoken of 1 Cor. 12: chapter 13. chapter 14. this is a common gift. Now you
come to answer our objections.

1. We say those prophets were extraordinary officers, and good reason we have
to say, for they are reckoned amongst such. Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28. and if
Ephesians. 4.11. will prove that Apostles, Evangelists, pastors and Teachers are
officers, it will prove as much for prophets too sure.

But you deny it at adventures and think that they were only some choice men
that had a gift above others in expounding Scriptures.

That they had a gift above others in expounding Scripture is questionless
true, for doubtless they expounded by revelation, 1 Cor. 14.26. and
infallibly. But that they were not extraordinary officers, I cannot grant you,
you offer us several reasons.

1. There were such in the primitive times, as the 70. Lu. "10.1. and those, 1
Pet. 4.10.

I do not know how to expound this term such: if you mean such as could
expound Scripture extempore, and by an infallible spirit, I yield it, but that
these were not in office you have not proved. V. Chemnit. ad loc.
Surely the seventy were, for Lu. 10.1. Jesus Christ appointed them and sent
them away, (...), if Christ could put them in office, they were in office. It
is gratis dictum to say those, 1 Cor. 12.31, 14, 1. were not in office. But you
say.

2. If they should be officers of that Church only, then did Paul write that
Epistle confusedly: not distinguishing betwixt officers and people.

1. I know none say that Prophets were officers of this or that Church, only I
believe their office was larger.

2. Saint Paul (Sir) is of age, let him answer for himself. But indeed:

3. The confusion is only in your own head and Judgment, for St. Paul speaks
plain enough to distinguish, 1 Cor. 12.7, 8, 28.

3. You say this prophesying is distinguished from the Church officer, and his
gifts. -- Romans 12.6, 7, 8 and it is there called a gift.

1. I answer the Apostle there makes a distribution of Church officers; some
are extraordinary, these are comprehended under prophesying; some ordinary,
these are comprehended under Ministering.

2. Secondly it is no more called a gift; then exhorting and ministering,
ruling, and giving and showing mercy is, but surely some of these were officers.

3. Though the Apostle does call it (...), yet it does not follow that
prophesying is not an office, no more then that Timothy was not in office,
because the Apostle calls his office (...) by the same name, 1 Timothy 4.14.

4. You tell us the Officers of the Church were but few, how does that appear?
persons extraordinarily gifted and in office, might be many, though officers in
our Church that are standing be not.

But you say, admit the Prophets mentioned be not such as our guifted brethren,
yet the prophesying you plead for is.

Surely (Sir) if you quit the name and the officer, you must also quit the act
too. But let us hear what you say.

"1. You tell us, those that were no Prophets might prophecy.

1. Suppose this were true, yet the question is, whether the prophesying
mentioned, 1 Cor. 14.23 24. etc. be not the act of those Prophets mentioned 1
Cor. 12.28. if it be, you have lost your cause, except you can prove the
brethren such Prophets.

2. You have not proved that any prophesied but Prophets. That is, such as were
by divine exordinary inspiration enlightened; or by mission sent and obliged to
do it. So the high Priest prophesied, Io. 11.51. and Agur, Pro. 30.1. it is
only said that Bathsheba taught her son a Prophecy, Pro. 31.1.

2. You tell us that those that were Prophets in Office might know it, yea and
must needs know it: but the Apostle speaks of such prophesying as they might
but think they had. 1 Cor. 14.37. therefore not of extraordinary prophesying.

1. This is, Sir, but a playing with the English word (Think) the original
word is (...), (...).
which does not always signify a bare conjecturall opinion, Acts 15.28. It
seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us, etc. Did the holy Ghost but
conjecture (think you?) You may as well translate it judge, if you please; and
then your criticisme is worth little.

2. What though true Prophets might know it? might not some that were not so
think themselves so too? now (says the Apostle) if they do think so truly,
they must acknowledge what I say.

But thirdly you tell us, the Chapter and the coherence "thereof is clearly
against this restrained sense. How, I pray?

1. You say, This Epistle was directed only to this Church of Corinth -- and
then the ordinary teaching Officers were but two, and this discourse of the
Apostle cannot intend so few.

1. How do you prove sir, that the ordinary teaching officers in this Church
were so many as two?

2. But suppose they were but two: who says these Prophets were ordinary
Officers. Now extraordinary officers might be many. All that you say besides
has been by me answered again and again.

You tell us, Many learned and godly men have taken this "to be the sense of
the place.

We can tell you, that many more learned and godly men have thought otherwise,
and so we are even with you: yea we have the odds.

I told you that All must be restrained in that passage, You may all prophecy.
You tell me no: for it is contrary to the tenor of the words. Yet in the very
next words you restrain it to your self: to all that have the gift of
prophecy. I ask no more.

There is nothing more in your seventh Argument, but what is repeated over and
over again, and has already received its answer. I come to your eighth.

CHAP. XVI. Wherein the 47, 48, 49, 50 p. of Mr. Sheppards book are examined,
and his two last Arguments found -- Non sequiturs.
THe substance of it brought into form, is this: Those men that are fitted and
furnished with abilities from God to open and apply Scriptures in a constituted
Church publicly, those may do it. For you say, God has done nothing in
vain.

But there are many private persons whom God has fitted and furnished with
abilities to this work, who are not called and set apart: Ergo they may do it.

Hark a little, and tell me how this kind of arguing sounds in your ears:
Those who are fitted with abilities to be Generals of an Army, or Parliament
men, or pleaders at the bar, may do the work of Generals and Parliament men,
and plead at the bar:

But many Colonels in the Army are fitted with abilities to execute the office
of a General: And there be many Gentlemen have abilities to do the work of
Parliament men; and many Lawyers have the abilities to do the work of Judges;
and many that are not called to the bar have abilities to plead: Ergo they may
do all these.

In earnest (Sir) if my Lord General has you to dispute for him, or the
honorable house of Parliament set you to dispute for them, or the Judges or
Lawyers for them, I will undertake in an hour you will dispute them all out of
their places; John Lilburne could not make a better argument against them.

To answer you directly: Preaching (Sir) is an office, and he that may do it,
must besides inward abilities have an outward call, and setting apart; as Paul
and Barnabas had, as Timothy had, etc.

I will proceed to your ninth Argument. You say, There have been, and are many
learned and godly men who have held the lawfulness of the thing. You instance
in Dr. Ames, Mr. Cotton, and the five Apologists.

Logically thus, What some learned and godly men "have held lawful, that is
lawful:

But some learned and godly men have held it lawful for persons merely gifted,
not called and set apart to the work of the Ministry, nor intending it, to
expound and apply Scripture ordinarily; Ergo it is lawful.

1. I deny your major. Surely we do not deny infallibility to the Church of
Rome, and give it some few single persons.

2. I will retort your argument:

What some learned and godly men have judged unlawful, that is so.

Asserimus.) Nec parentum nec majorum errorem sequendum esse sed authoritatem
Scripturae and verbum Dei docent^s. Tertul. Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus.
Cyp^in ep. 63. ad Caecilium.
But some learned and godly men, as Mr. Rutherford, Mr. Gillespy, Mr. Ferriby,
Mr. Hall, Dr. Seaman, etc. have judged it unlawful, Ergo.

I believe you will not grant my argument: yet I take some of these to be as
learned and holy as those you instance in.

(Sir) Dr. Ames and Mr. Cotton, and the five Apologists are learned and
reverent men, but not without their mistakes; and they are all parties in that
case; we are as ready to argue it against them as you: their placet is nothing
to us. Cyprian says right, that it is only to be considered, Quid Christus
qui ante omnes fuit faciendum putavit, what Christ who is before and above all
says.

Your last Argument is this, That which may have very good ends and fruits is
lawful.

But this practice may have very good ends and fruits, Ergo.

I deny your major. We must not do evil (says the Apostle) that good may
come of it. The means must be good, as well as the end.

An Argument is as good against you thus:

P. 48, 49. Quemadmodum inauspicatus est medicus qui occidendo homines discit
mederi, ita non est optanda prudentia quae laedendo discit prodesse. Erasm.
That which may have very ill and pernicious ends, is unlawful.

But this practice may have so, 2 Pet. 3.16.

Yea, how many are led into errors, and heresies, and blasphemies thus, let
this age witness. You reckon eight good ends and fruits of this: I do not
think it a probable means to any one of them ends.

1. You say the Church may be edified by it, and unbelievers converted. And
(Sir) may not the Church be thus destroyed and perverted? Consider experience a
little: show us where God has laid this prophesying (as you call it) under a
divine appointment to this end.

2. You say hereby men may be fitted and tried for the Ministry. How (Sir) by
preaching publicly and ordinarily; or rather by studying the Scriptures, and
preaching once or twice, or more, before Timothy, who is able to judge.

3. You say hereby the Doctrine of the Gospel will be kept pure, contrary to 2
Pet. 3.16.

In short, it were easy to answer all you pretend to say in this thing: But,
1. Experience answers it sufficiently that it would have no such fruit. 2. If
in reason we might hope for such an issue, yet Gods ends must be prosecuted and
attained by his own ways.

You shut up this Chapter, by telling us what Arguments you do not stand upon:
I hope I have showed you as much reason (Sir) to quit these you have insisted
upon, which I am sure conclude not what you would have, any more then those
Arguments you have quitted do.

I come now to see if you be better at answering our Arguments, then making any
for your self.

CHAP. XVII. Wherein Mr. Sheppards 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58 pages are
examined, and his Answers to two of our Arguments against guifted brethrens
ordinary preaching, are examined, and found too short.
THe first objection you pretend to answer is partly mine and partly some of my
other reverend brethrens.

We had charged you with this Argument:

What things must (by Scripture-warrant) only be communicated to others in
public assemblies by faithful men, who shall be able to teach others, and to
whom such things shall be committed by Timothies and Paul's; those things
private persons to whom such things are so committed, according to
Scripture-warrant, Vindiciae ministerii, p. 38.
ought not in public so to communicate.

But the truths of the Gospel are such as according to Scripture-warrant are
only to be communicated to others by such as being faithful and able to teach
others, and have those things committed to them by Timothies; and private
persons are not such to whom these things are so committed. Ergo.

To prove the Major I instanced in 2 Timothy 2.2. and showed the force of it p.
40. I alluded to that place, Mal. 2.7. but not as a proof on which I much
insisted.

My brother Hall has not instanced this Argument in his first Edition of his
Pulpit-guard. The other Editions I have not.

Now let us see if you have sufficiently answered this Argument, which is
chiefly founded on 1 Timothy 2.2. though 1 Timothy 1.11.18.6.20. Titus 1.3. prove a
part of it.

1. You answer by way of concession, telling us, that you grant such an officer
as a preaching Minister, and tell us that they are more eminent preachers. And
something is undoubtedly committed to, and required of them, as to the
preservation and promulgation of the Word of God, over and above what is
required of and committed to men out of office.

1. They are bound to it ex officio by their office, others not.

2. They are bound to do it more lively and vigorously then others. To. 10.14.
Es. 40.9. Es. 48.1. To. 9.27. Mat. 3.3. Jo. 7.37, 38.

3. They may preach with authority. Titus 2.15. 2 These. 3.6. 1 Timothy 5.2.

4. They may do it with continuance, they may make it their calling and whole
work, 2 Timothy 4.2. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 These. 5.12. 1 Timothy 3 4.

5. They are to assume the whole office to administer the seals also.

But you say secondly, that the Texts are not exclusive but private men may do
it too.

Thirdly, you spend a great deal of time and paper to vindicate that text.
Mal. 2.7. p. 54, 55. and those places Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.15.

Having thus analyzed your answer, in the next place let me come to examine the
strength of it.

1. From what you have granted us, I gather:

1. That there are to be some Preachers in office, and to these only it
belongs to administer the Sacraments, and these are only to preach
authoritatively, vigorously, ex officio, constantly, making it their work. This
is all a great truth then it seems.

2. That for guifted brethren, they may do it, or they may let it alone, it is
but an act of liberty in them; yet you told us before it was their duty.

3. They may do it coldly, and poorly, and lazily: for the preacher is only
bound to do it vigorously and lively, p. 52. and earnestly.

4. They can only preach precariously, for they have no authority, and cannot
do it authoritatively, Titus 2.15.

5. They must not make it their whole work.

1. Surely our guifted brethren will give you little thanks for your
concessions.

2. Surely all people that are in their right wits will take heed of hearing
these guifted brethren, that at the most can but preach coldly and lazily,
without authority or any vigor, without due meditation and study. Surely the
countenance and blessing of God is most likely to follow those that come in the
name of God, and with his authority, and can command in the Lords name.

But you say that the Texts are not exclusive, though they do plainly hint
that those that preach the Gospel should have it committed to them: yet you
think that some may preach that have it not committed, and so you would make my
argument a fallacy, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum fimpliciter. But sir, I
reply upon you:

1. Neither are any Scriptures exclusive in so many words that you bring to
prove that they may not administer the Sacraments, and that they may not preach
with authority, nor make it their work; yet this you grant us, and upon good
grounds.

2. What the Scriptures do not say, that none may do in the worship of God:
for we must not add to Scriptures.

But the Scriptures (although they say preachers in office may and ought to
preach to others) yet no where say that the guifted brethren may do it. Ergo.

The Scripture plainly says, that those that teach others must not only be
able and faithful, but must have the Scriptures committed to them: See your
own rule, p. 45. Generaliter dictum, generaliter intelligendum.
this (Sir) is exclusive except you can bring another Scripture that proves
they may teach others, though they have not those things committed to them: And
besides the Apostle plainly speaks de re of the thing, not de modo of the
manner of performance, the Apostle says teach others, you put in
authoritatively, vigorously, etc. Bring us a Scripture that says that gifted
brethren may teach others publicly, for that is plainly meant there, if you
cannot, this Text is proof enough against you. Your similitudes prove nothing.

By your answer I would infer, that all the Acts of Church officers may be done
by private persons, because the Scriptures, that say they ought to do them,
do not say, others ought not.

The third part of your answer lies in a vindication of that Text, Mal. 2.7.
The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and the people should require the
Law at his mouth.

To this you answer:

1. Critically telling us the words are better read, the Priests lips did
preserve knowledge, etc. and so some read them.

2. That it is not exclusive.

3. That the case of people under the Law and Gospel differ. For my own part I
was aware of your last answer, and therefore did not insist upon that place;
yet now you have brought it upon the stage, let me take its part a little, and
see if you have done it no wrong.

Whereas you say that those words, Mal. 2.7. which we translate. The Priests
lips shall preserve knowledge, are read by some, The Priests lips did preserve
knowledge, and this reading best agrees with the coherence of the words
antecedent and subsequent, I answer:

1. It is true Piscator does so translate it, and make the sense what you say,
but he is the only man I find doing it: Tremellius, and Calvin, and Gualter,
and Ribera, and Oecolampadius, the Septuagint, St. Hierom. Our late
Annotations, etc. Translate it shall or should, and this is agreeable to Haggai
2.12. (which St. Hierome quotes as parallel.) Thus says the Lord of hosts,
ask the Priests concerning the Law, etc. So that you see for one authority,
for you, we have found seven against you. But let us enquire the Hebrew.

2. (...). The word is there in the future tence, and properly to be
translated, shall, or will, or should, and although it be a truth that the
Hebrews do sometimes confound tenses and we often translate their future
tense by the preterperfect, yet (with submission to those more learned and
critical in that language) I conceive it should not be so translated, except
the sense inforceth it, the primary and proper signification being otherwise.

3. Neither do I see such a necessity for the coherence sake so to translate
it there; V. Our Annot.
for might not the Prophet as well set out their impiety by their declination
from their duty, as well as from the piety of the Priests formerly.

4. Nay under favor (Sir) the coherence is both against you and Piscator too,
the very next words are, -- for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts; now
let any judicious man judge whether the sense be better as you would have it
thus.

For the Priests lips did keep knowledge, and they did seek the Law at his
mouth, for he is the Angel of the Lord of hosts, or as we read it,

For the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law
at his mouth. For he is the Angel of the Lord of hosts: or the messenger of
the Lord of hosts for the same word signifies both: this is the reason given
why the people should enquire the interpretation of the Law at his mouth,
because he is the Messenger* he is one authorized and sent and appointed by God
to open the Law.

5. But Fifthly, suppose we admit your reading, it alters not the case at all,
for you grant that the Priests lips did keep knowledge, and the people did
require the Law at his mouth: and this in the purer state of the Jewish Church,
and this was a piece of their sin that they were deviated from this practice,
this is as much as we desire, surely the Jewish Church order was not altered,
but by their corruption in Malachies time, if we take your sense it amounts to
this.

In the old time, The Priests lips did preserve knowledge, and they did require
the law at his mouth, who was the messenger of the Lord of hosts. But now the
Priests are ignorant, and the people profane, they care for no Priests* but
think themselves best able to interpret the Law of the Lord, (for they were
deviated as well as the Priests.) v. 11.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Have not you warded
this Text well think you (Sir?) It is as if we should say of England.

In the Prelates times the Ministers of the Lord Jesus preached plainly and
powerfully and constantly, they preached Law and Gospel reproves, and
exhortations, and the people heard the word of God diligently and reverently,
and were content to teach their families, and to repeat Sermons, and then the
power of godliness increased, and Christians kept in the Unity of the spirit
and the bond of peace, and walked humbly with God, and hated Arminian and
Socinian, and familisticall Errors and Blasphemies, and were kept under an aw
of Ordinances.

But now many Ministers are come to preach notions, and allegories, and
whimzies, to read Sermons instead of preaching, to lay aside preaching duty and
reproof, and to preach nothing but privileges and mysteries and nonsensicall
notions, and to preach once a fortnight. And the people they are come to
neglect and despise Ordinances, to think themselves as much preachers as the
Ministers, and to know as much as they can tell them, and hence they are puffed
up with pride, and are taken in the snare of the Devil, and are continually
rending and dividing one from another, and running into error and blasphemies;
and the whole Nation of professors almost is turned Arminian, Socinian, or
Familisticall.

You have put the interpretation (Sir) upon the Prophets words, I have to
strengthen our argument helped you with a parallel, Quam been convenient.

To your second answer in which you point us to Deodate for a note, but you
have abused him, for he has never a note upon the words you quote. I grant you
the words only held to us, Analogically; but where is the Analogy, if not
here? as the Priests were the only ordinary persons that had the knowledge of
the Law, betrusted to them to communicate it to others, and the people were not
to go to seek it at an ordinary Jews mouth, but at the public officers
mouth, so the Ministers of the Gospel are the only ordinary persons under the
Gospel, that have the Gospel committed to them to teach others out of it, and
Gospel Christians are not to require the opening of those Mysteries at one
another mouths, but at theirs.

But you tell us thirdly, the Case is otherwise under the Law and Gospel. I
grant you all you say there, only I do not find that Is. 61.8. the people of
God are called Priests, nor do I believe that all people generally come under
those promises: you mention only Saints, and I turn your argument upon your
self thus.

If under the Gospel people be generally more full of knowledge then under the
Law, then they had need have more eminent able teachers, that should give them
strong meat.

And these, Sir, had need be such as are able to search the deeps of Scripture,
to dive into the hidden mysteries.

Besides, as knowledge increases, so in some wantonness will increase, and
the Gospel preachers had need be such as shall be able to oppose those that
gainesay their doctrine, in opposing those that contradict a truth.

Those that maintain a dispute either for a truth, or for an error, had need
have some more abilities then unlearned gifted brethren.

A late experience of this I could tell you in the gathered company at Bury,
where were many thought themselves able enough to Preach, but being challenged
by the Reverend pastor of the Presbyterian Church, to dispute a point, which
they might have been well versed in (for I believe the persons have been
studying it, and practicing it these seven years) whether the Ministers of
England be true Ministers: they were glad to send for some of their Norfolk
Brethren for help, and some of the gifted brethren went, and when they
returned (being miserably bafled) by their own confession they said they
wanted a Scholar, yet I suppose they thought they had the spirit of God, but
God will convince men, learning is his Ordinance to enable men both to expound
Scripture and defend his truth.

In the last place you come to the Commission, Math. 28.19. Mar. 16.15.

From which both my Brother Hall and my self urged you to say:

"1. That the word may be read, go make disciples, Jo. 4.1.

"2. There is no negative Clause in it.

"3. In common reason it does not exclude others: and to the last purpose, you
serve us with our usual fare, Similitudes instead of proofs, it is for want
of better Arguments sure Sir.

4. You tell us the people have a commission to teach.

5. That the native sense of the place seems only an enlargement of the former
commission. Mat. 10.1, 2. Lu 10.1, 2.

6. That the force of the word lies not so much in enabling them to the act
which they might have done before, etc.

1. To your first cavil, V. Novar. ad loc.
that the word may be translated Go make Disciples: I answer, and it may be
read Go preach: it may be translated, Go be Disciples, V. Scapulam ad loc. But
because a word has many significations, does it follow that any of them may be
the sense of that place where it is used?

2. But suppose it should be translated so: how is one made a Disciple, but by
conversion? and when is a man converted, but when he is brought to believe, and
faith comes by hearing; then from hence will follow that the same thing is
meant, yea and something more. That those that the Lord intends ordinarily to
honor with the conversion of souls to himself, must be commission-officers
in the business of the Gospel.

To your second cavil, that the Commission is not literally exclusive.

If it excludes them from baptizing, it excludes them for preaching; but you
grant the former.

To your third, that in common reason they are not excluded. What you mean
(Sir) by common Reason, I cannot tell. Socinian and Erastian reason will not
exclude them: but sanctified reason that teaches the soul to take heed of
thrusting its name into a commission, and doing any thing for which is not
plain ground in Scripture, this will exclude them. But you tell us,

Though a Commission be given to some to be Justices of the peace, yet does not
this exclude others from keeping the peace.

1. Your similitude is no proof.

2. It halts shamefully. Preaching is a piece of instituted worship, where the
rules of institution must be kept; but keeping the peace is not.

3. It is false, and the fallacy lies in keeping the peace. Every one is bound
to keep the peace, as to his own private practice, not to be riotous: but every
one is not to command others to keep the peace.

4. Constables (Sir) are officers, and so bound by office to keep the peace,
and see it kept, and may do something more then Justices. But your guifted
brethren are no officers at all.

Christ (you say) gave his Apostles commission to heal the sick, Mat. 10 8.
might not others therefore that had this gift heal them?

1. It is not proper to say, healing the sick was an office, and the Apostles
had a commission, it was a rare gift to which they had a power.

2. Supponis quod non supponendum est. No other had that gift.

3. If any other should have gone to a sick person and pretended to heal
miraculously, saying as Peter, Act. 3.6. In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ
arise and walk, he should have sinned against God.

I am sick of your similitudes: to go on therefore to your third Cavil, viz.

"That the people have a commission to teach, etc.

What then Sir? The commission 1 Timothy 22. to teach others. Matthew. 28.20. to
teach all Nations. Show us where they have such a Commission. They may teach by
private exhortations, by an holy life; not by public expositions and
doctrines: show us where their commission to this lies.

To your fourth cavil. Suppose it were but an enlargement of the Apostles
Commission, yet it was the first commission that authorized them to preach the
Gospel to all Nations, or to any but Jews; and the original copy of the
Gospel preachers commission. Thus much your self confess, we ask no more.

To your fifth cavil I answer: That the force of that word lies in enabling
them to preach the Gospel to any sort and condition of people, and in
establishing a perpetual standing office of Gospel-Preachers, with whom Christ
promises to be to the end of the world; not as you would seem to hint, only
in laying it upon them as a duty, which yet was the liberty of all besides
them. Your places, 1 Cor. 9.16, 17. Ezekiel. 3.17, 18. serve to prove what none
denies you, that we must preach; but they will not prove that all may preach,
nor that the force of that word Mat. 28.20. is no more then you would have it,
for they have no reference at all to that place, warranted by Scripture.

But you tell us, That Ministers must attend to preaching, and make it their
work; which guifted brethren are not bound to do.

They are beholding to you for justifying their lazy preaching; but God and his
word are not much beholding to you for this patronage of lazy, idle,
unwarranted extempore preachers.

Thus (Sir) you may see how slight an answer you think to stop the mouth of our
first Argument with.

Our second objection as you say is, That men that have not skill in the
original Tongues cannot understand, much less interpret the Scriptures, much
less can they divide the word of God aright.

To this you answer: 1. That we grant, that although they be not skilled in
School-learning, if called, they may preach.

2. That many of the Preachers in office this day do not understand the
Tongues.

3. That something in the Scripture may be understood without the knowledge of
the Tongues.

"4. That many great Scholars see little of Gods mind in them.

5. That the knowledge of heavenly truths is attainable only by the Spirit of
God, not by any humane power or strength 1 Cor. 2.14. Upon which you enlarge,

6. That many that have little of this learning, yet have much divine Learning,
and a large understanding of the Word of God.

7. That to divide the word of God aright, is to divide to every one their
portion from the word, and to fit it to the several estates and conditions of
people that hear it: and this may be done without much humane learning.

To all this I answer, 1. Generally. 2. Particularly.

Nunquam quis rectius assiquitur alterius mentem and germanam sententiam, quam
qui ips^^ loquent^ voces and proprium sermonem audit intelligitque. Hyperius in
rat. studii theol. l. 1. c. 9.
1. Generally. This is none of my Argument. My brother Hall does hint it, p. 19.
but Sir, (if you mean him) you wrong him, for his proposition is this: Those
that want learning, both humane and divine, cannot be sound interpreters, nor
solid disputants. You have set up a man of straw, and then fall to pushing of
him. I know none that say, that it is simply unlawful for those that
understand not the original Tongues to interpret Scriptures.

2. But secondly, this we say, That the extraordinary and miraculous Revelation
of the Spirit now ceasing, no man can so soundly and well interpret Scriptures,
as he that knows the Languages; without doubt it is no despicable means.

The Papists partly to justify their ignorant Priests, and the authority of
their vulgar translation, and to justify the Churches authority, V. Calv. in
1. ep. ad Corinth. c. 14.
as the pillar and ground of truth, are much of your mind, that the knowledge
of the Tongues is not necessary, and therefore have blotted out a passage in
Erasmus his Adages out of the late Editions, which I find in Froben Edition
fol. the passage will let you know his mind.

Aut se divinas literas interpretari conetur Graecae Latinae and Hebraicae
linguae, denique and omnis antiquitatis rudis and imperitus fine quibus non
stultum modo, verum impium est Theologiae mysteria tractanda suscipere. Quod
tamen heu nefas jam passim plerique faciunt qui frigidis aliquot instructi
syllogismis and puerilibus sophismatis deum immortalem? quid non auderit? quid
non praecipiunt? quid non decernunt? Qui si possent cernere quos risus vel
potius quem dolorem moveant linguarum, and antiquitatis peritis quae porienta
proferant, in quam pudendos errores subinde prolabantur, nimirum puderet illos
tantae temeritatis and vel senes ad primae literarum elementa redirent. --
Nullus unquam sententiam alicujus intellexit ignarus Sermonis quo sententiam
suam explicavit, proinde Divus Hieronymus, cum constituisset arcanas
interpretari literas, ne illotis ut aiunt pedibus rem tantum aggrederetur,
quaeso number sophisticis nugis instruxit ingenium? Erasmi Adagia edit. Bafileae.
1526. p. 298. Cent. 9. Chiliadas 1. Adagio 55. tit. Illotis manibus.
Number Aristotelicis decretis? Number his etiam Nugationibus? nugis minime. Quid
igitur? in aestimabili sudore trium linguarum peritiam sibi comparavit. Quas
qui ignorant non Theologus est sed sacrae theologiae violator, ac vere manibus
paeriter ac pedibus illotis rem omnium maxim sacram non tractat, sed
prophanaet conspurcat, violat.

I shall not English it, supposing you understand Latin, I could furnish you
with many more of his mind. But I say, I cannot say that a knowledge in the
Tongues is absolutely necessary to me to interpret any Scriptures, but thus
much we say.

1. He that has not skill in the Tongues must take the credit of expositors
and translators, and if they quarrel, he will scarce know which side to take.

2. He will never know the full Emphasis of Scripture, many sweet notions of
truth lie in the various significations of the original words, which
Translators could not hint us being to give the word only one translation: v.
Hyperium de studio theol: c. 9.

3. There are many mistakes in translations and expositors.

4. There are many proper idiomes of Languages: which translators cannot
express. But for an absolute necessity in all cases I do not hold it. Though
I could heartily wish that all preachers might be able to understand the
Original Languages, and I think something this way is hinted us by Gods
furnishing the first preachers of the Gospel with the gift of Tongues.

And as light as you make Sir of humane learning, if you come to argue a
Scripture against an opposer, that is learned, he will make you believe you had
need of the Tongues, and of Logic too, and that preacher is worth little that
durst not appear, or is not able to defend his own doctrine: nor do I think
such for constant ordinary preachers are Gods Ordinance: indeed cases of
necessity have no Law. Better have one only to read Scriptures then none
either to read or preach, and so better have preachers that can but preach
other men's Sermons and Expositions, then no preachers at all: This I answer
generally: now to your Cavills.

To your first I answer:

1. We only say, it may be in cases of necessity, when such as are more fit
cannot be had, then let such be ordained as have not such skill in
School-learning. But let even these labor for it, and the more they preach,
the more they will see the need of it.

2. To your second I only answer.

-- Pudet haec opprobria dici,
Et dici potuisse et non potuisse refelli.
It is a shame to England that it has so many such preachers, those that
ordain now, ordain only such as have a knowledge or solemnly engage to study
the Tongues: get a statute to enjoyne all Ministers to be skilled in the
Languages after some certain time, (for it is fitting the present necessity
should be supplied) we will thank you for it.

To your Third cavil I answer two things:

1. I know not one Scripture can be understood without understanding the
Language it was wrote in, but he that expounds it must take the credit of the
Translator, and we know Translations are not (...); suppose it be the plainest
Scripture how shall he know whether the words be rightly Translated, Non omne
quod verum est Scribentis mentis consonat. Tolet. in Johan. 1.
and so consequently the mind of God, by comparing it with the Analogy of
Faith; thus indeed the thing may be known to be true, but not a Truth in that
Text; shall he know it by the coherence? and how shall he understand that
without a skill in the Languages, except he takes it upon trust, suppose there
be no coherence, as in the Proverbs.

2. Surely a preacher should be able to open the whole counsel of God, not
this or that single Text.

To your fourth cavil. viz. If humane learning be such an help to the
knowledge of Scriptures, what is the reason that some yea many great Scholars
look into Scripture and see little of Gods mind in it, and how comes it to
pass that many who are without humane learning have so large a knowledge and
understanding hereof.

I answer, for great Scholars knowing so little of the mind of God in
Scripture, you mistake non causam pro causa.

1. Their learning and knowing of the Tongues in which they are written is not
the cause, but there may be many reasons.

1. Their laziness or negligence, Ex eruditis igitur labi contingit alium
quadam oscitantia and supinitate, etc. V. Hyperium de rat. studii theol. c. 9.
l. 4. Alius errat ob verborum, aliu^ ob rerum imperitiam; -- Aliqui in errorem
incidunt quadam animi perturbatione aut vitioso affectu impulsi. -- Quidam
errorem amplectuntur magis authoritate and reverentia aliorum, quam judicio and
veritatis inquisitione promoti etc. V. pluta, Hyperius de ratione studii theol.
l. 4. c. 9. Fiunt subtilia ingenia postquam a verbo se patiuntur abduci and
minu^^tur suo sensu. Lutherus c. 4. tit. 767.
not making it their business to improve their learning and knowledge this way.

2. Their crotchicall fancies bringing to their interpretations not discendi
pietatem, a pious heart to learn, but only discutiendi acumen, a critical
humor.

3. Their unsanctified undertaking their work without prayer, and seeking of
God by prayer that his spirit may guide them in the use of their learning, ut
nec decipiant nec decipiantu^, that they may neither deceive themselves nor
deceive others.

For the second part of your cavil, I answer:

1. I know very few men that want humane learning that can expound Scriptures.

2. They may have a large understanding and knowledge in the Truth of God
revealed in Scriptures necessary to salvation, by considering the scope of
Scripture, hearing the Scriptures preached and expounded, and the Spirit of God
persuading their hearts of the truth of what they hear.

Fifthly you tell us: That the preachers will grant you what is so clearly,
and plainly held forth that the knowledge of heavenly truths in Gods word is
the gift of God attainable only by the spirit of God, and not by any humane
power and strength, 1 Cor. 2.14. Romans 8.5, 6. Jude 19. Jo. 7.15, 16 Jo. 6.44,
45 Acts 13.48. Acts 16.14. Math. 11.25. Mat. 13.11. Jo. 16.13, Lu. 12.12. Jo.
14.26. Is. 50.4 5 Psalm. 25 14. Jo. 7.17. Gal. 1.2, 14, 15, 16. 1 Cor. 2.1, 2,
10. Math. 16.17.11 25, 27. Rev. 3.18. Lu. 24 45. 1 Cor. 1.19, 20, 22, 25, 26,
27. Jo. 7.47, 48. Phil. 3 7. 1 Cor. 3.18, 19, 20.

Here are many Scriptures brought, I wish they be not wrested. But this is
usual* I saw a Pamphlet lately had ten times more to prove a man might
lawfully beat his wife.

To answer therefore, I will tell you how far we grant you.

1. We grant you that a saving practical experimental and a comfortable
reflex knowledge of God, and of the truths of God can only be from the spirit,
that is the spirit can only teach the soul to come to Christ, and lay hold
upon him, the spirit can only teach the soul experimentally and effectually,
that its condition is an undone condition, that there is a sweetness and
excellency in Christ above ten thousand worlds, this those Scriptures you
bring, 1 Cor. 2.14. Jo 6.44, 45. Acts 16.14. Math. 11.25. Math. 13.11.

2. We grant you that the Spirit can only teach the Soul reflexively,
Reflexive. V. D. August. t. 1. confess. l. 11. c. 3.
the Minister teaches that God has promised that whosoever comes unto
Christ shall not be cast away, but is elected, justified, sanctified, etc. This
some other Scriptures prove, Psalm. 25.14. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12.

3. Thirdly, Persuasive.
we grant you that the Spirit only can teach perswasively, we may beseech, God
alone can persuade Iaphet to come and dwell in the Tents of Sem, we may teach
people that it is Gods will they should come to Christ, but the Spirit alone
can persuade them to come, Jo. 6.44, 45.

4. Fourthly, we grant you that the Spirit does guide us in the interpretation
of Scripture, upon earnest seeking, Ego fateor charitati tuae solis iis
Scripturarum libris qui jam Canonici appellantur, didici hunc honorem
timoremque defer, ut nullum eorum authorem scribendo aliquid errasse
firmissime credam, etc. Aug. t. 2. ep. 19. cap. 1. Spiritum Sanctum esse summum
Scripturae interpretem dicimus, quia ut nos certo simus persuasi de vero
Scripturae sensu, oportet nos per Spiritum Sanctum illuminari: alioqui nunquam
illam, quae fidelium mentibus inest, (...) assequemur, etsi omnibus mediis
utamur. Sed haec est interna tantum persuasio and nos ipsos tantum attingit,
alios enim hoc modo non cogimus. Quod vero ad externam persuasionem attinet:
dicimus ipsam Scripturam esse sui ipsius interpretem ac proinde ad externum
ipsius judicium veniendum esse ut aliis persuadeamu^: in quo utendum est
mediis. Whitakerus de Interpret. Scrip q. 5 c 3 ad finem. cap.
but this may be but a common work, and is in the use of means but he did
infallibly guide the pen men of Scripture and the first planters of his
Gospel, Jo. 16.13. and still he does guide humble hearts, yet not all Saints
that undertake the expounding of Scripture publicly, for then all their
exposition should be infallible, and so no preachers exposition is, though
never so holy, never so learned, indeed St. Hierom thought his was, as it
seems by one passage in Apolog contra Iovianum, Vbicunque scripturas non
interpretor, sed libere de meo seosu loquor, arguat me quilibet, but St.
Austine otherwise in Ep. 19. ad Hieron. c. 1. Learned Whitaker in q. 5. de
Interp. Scrip. c. 3. does determine against the Papists, that the holy Ghost is
the highest interpreter of Scripture, because says he, we must be enlightened
by the Spirit of God, that we may be persuaded of the true sense of Scripture;
for without this, says he, though we should use all means, yet we shall never
attain to that full persuasion which is in the Saints hearts; but this says
he is but an inward persuasion, and only respecting our selves, for we do not
thus persuade others. But now for the outward persuasion, the Scripture is its
own interpreter, and we must go to the Scripture to judge, if we will persuade
others, and in that we must use means.

Lectio inquirit meditatio invenit oration postulat contemplatio degustat;
quaerite legendo and invenietis meditando, pulsate orando and aperietur vobis
contemplando. Aug. V. Whitakerum. ib.
Thus, Sir, the spirit guides into truth: 1. Persuading us infallibly sometimes
of those truths of God necessary to salvation: 2. Guiding his people in the
search and enquiry of truth, yet not giving them such a special infallible
assistance in expounding Scripture always that they cannot err. 3. Nor doing
of it extraordinarily, but in the use of means, what those means are, Dr.
Whitaker tells us excellently c. 9. of the same question. 1. Prayer. 2. The
understanding the Tongues. 3. A consideration of the words, whether they be
proper or figurative, limited or not limited. 4. A consideration of the scope
of the place, the matter, the pen man, the time of writing, etc. 5. Comparing
Scripture with Scripture, like with like, and unlike with like. Qui his mediis
sic uti valet and opinionis sue perversitatem ac praejudicium partiumque
studium deponet (quo multi in omni causa utuntur) poterit ille quidem
Scripturas si non in omnibus locis et in plerisque, si non statim ac tandem
aliquando intelligere. Whitakerus ib.
6. A consideration of the Analogy of faith. Lastly says he:

Because the unlearned cannot use these means right: they should go to the
learned, read their books, consult their common laws and expositions, argue
with them, thus, says he, St. Hierom, and St. Augusti^e and the Fathers did,
and (says he) they must take heed they do not give too much to them, and
think the exposition is true, because theirs, but because it stands upon the
authority of Scripture and sanctified reason; he concludes.

He that will thus use these means and lay aside the perverse opinion and
prejudice of his own wit and parts, which many use upon all occasions, he may
understand the Scripture, if not in all places, yet in most, though not
presently, yet in some time.

Thus, Sir, the spirit does guide into the knowledge of all truth, yet not so,

1. That any one may or ought to take any exposition as infallible.

2. But so as, that it often works in me an infallible persuasion of this or that
truth.

3. But this the Spirit does upon the use of means, not without humane power
and strength.

4. The Spirit does help us to the knowledge of much truth, by bringing to
remembrance what we have heard, Jo. 14.26.

5. We grant you, none are so fit to preach and expound Scriptures, as those
that have the Spirit of God: if they also have a capacity to use all other
means which God has appointed, and that humane learning meeting with a
conceited proud soul, may prejudice a Christian in understanding and seeking
the will of God.

All this some of your Scriptures prove, though let me tell you some of your
Scriptures prove neither what you would have nor this neither, nor any thing
like it, as Romans 8.5, 6. Jude 19. Jo. 17.15, 16. Acts 13.48. But what is all
this to prove the two great things.

1. That the Spirit of God dwelling in us only can teach the soul the proper
and literal meaning of the Scripture and capacitate one to expound it to
another, though indeed to that there must be a common work of the spirit, as a
spirit of illumination. Or Secondly:

2. That the spirit does this without means, without humane power and strength.

Not a Scripture of all you bring, prove either of these, and so you have said
a great deal to little purpose, your sixth cavil is the very same with your
fourth.

To your seventh I answer: It is indeed part of the meaning of that phrase
dividing the word of God aright, to give every one their portion, but how shall
the unlearned do this, if they do not know what portion the word has for
them, and how shall they know that, if they do not know the sense of the words.

2. Surely the understanding the parts of the Chapter, and several things
contained in the Text, must go to dividing the word of God aright. I have done
with this; I come to your reply to the Third objection.

CHAP. XVIII. Wherein Mr. Sheppards 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64 p. are examined, and
his Answers to our third, fourth and fifth Arguments are proved very weak and
insufficient.
OUr Argument is this, who so preaches or prophecyeth must be a Prophet or a
Preacher.

But all are not prophets nor preachers, 1 Cor. 12.30. 1 Cor. 12.9. Ergo. all
must not preach and prophecy.

To this you make a tedious reply, p. 59 60. Had you been a little more skilled
in humane learning, you might have said in very few words what you say in many
lines; This is all.

You think that it is that fallacy which Logicians call Fallacia
aequivocationis.

That there is a preaching as an act of office, and an ordinary preaching of
others, so though it be true that whosoever preaches or prophecieth is a
preacher or prophet, that is one that does the act of a preacher and of a
prophet, yet it does not follow, in the sense we understand it, that he must be
by office a preacher or a prophet, this is the substance of all you say, your
similitudes from Tailors, Bakers, Watchmen, Schoolmasters, Judges, Lawyers,
amount to no more then this poor notion; and if I should run after them, they
would all halt and lie down, and confess they came for nothing but a show.
But (Sir) you are not like to escape us thus. Give us a Scripture command for,
or example of any that had not the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, or
were not in office, that ordinarily preached and expounded Scriptures in a
settled constituted Church. If the law of God does not mention these same out
of office preachers, your distinction is worth little, the Scripture knows no
preaching by ordinary persons, ordinarily gifted and out of office, except in
cases of necessity, persecution or the like, they are Apocryphal preachers
(Sir.) But you tell us again, that all have the gift of prophecy spoken of by
the Apostle; but in regard you say no more to prove it then we had again and
again before, I shall refer you to my former answer.

In your 61 page you come to another objection of ours, but indeed it is the
same.

In my Vindiciae, p. 33. I charged you with this argument.

For any being officers to take upon them acts of office is sinful.

But for private persons how well gifted and qualified soever to take upon them
in public assemblies where a Church is constituted to preach, interpret, and
apply Scripture, is for them that are no officers to take upon them Acts of
Office, Ergo. The Major I proved, 1 Cor. 7.20. 1 Cor. 12 14. Romans 12.4. My
Brother Hall hits upon the same thing in several places, and makes use of the
instances you quote, I shall meddle with your answer only so far as it
concerns me: for although I think an argument might be brought and managed
from those instances of Vzzab, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, Saul, etc. yet I
desire to make no further use of them then this, to prove that proper Acts of
office may not be done by persons out of office, which I suppose you grant, yet
let me tell you not one of your Scriptures proves plainly.

1. That the burning of Incense upon the altar was forbidden, all the Jews
except the Priests, though indeed the thing be true, it was forbidden because
the work was assigned to others; and the like we say for preaching. In one or
two of the places, strangers are forbidden, but the Jews are no where in those
places in so many words forbidden to offer incense; if you say by consequence
they are, we grant it: so are you forbidden public preaching by as good
rational consequence.

But Sir if we could not show it were forbidden to warrant your practice, you
must show it us allowed and commanded, if it be a piece of worship.

But in the next place you will undertake to set out our office, telling us.

1. What it is to be in office. 2. Wherein our office lies. 3. What it is to be
in the Preachers office. 4. What is an usurpation upon the office.
All this is toward the proving that preaching is not a proper act of office.

1. You tell us what it is to be in office, and in this description I agree
with you, and so shall not repeat your words having nothing against them.

2. You tell us what are the parts of the preachers office.

"1. Public praying for the people. "2. Public reading of the word. "3.
Writing of Books and Epistles. "4. Public Preachings. "5. Administering
Sacraments. "6. Church government.
Some of those you say are incommunicable, and to be done by none else: some
communicable.

To all this I answer, we only speak of Proper acts of office, and those are
such as belong to him and none else, and so Prayer, Reading, Writing, and
Church government are not, Christ never said, go Read and Baptize, or Write
and Baptize, or Rule and Baptize, though we grant all those to belong to him,
yet they are not proper Acts of his office qua a Gospel Preacher, so he has
but two proper Acts that I know, viz 1. Public preaching. 2. Administering the
Seals, those that are for Episcopacy add a third, but we conceive that
belongs not to him alone (except other officers be wanting.)

Thirdly, you come to tell us what it is to be in office as a Preacher: so you
say.

"1. He must be lawfully called and authorized thereto.

2. He must be over some people being duly called to them, for if Minister and
people be Correlatives, then can there be no Minister in office until he be
engaged to some people. And till then he seems to be only in the Nature of a
gifted man.

To this I answer, that it is true that Minister and people are correlates, but
to what people is a Minister a Correlate? what to this or that Church only? I
deny that: he is in office as a Gospel preacher, to any people in the world;
pastors and teachers are in office, for the whole body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11.12.
when he is engaged to a particular people, he is but appropriated, not by that
constituted a Minister, for if a minister be only in office to his own Church,

1: He can administer the Sacrament to no single person that is not a fixed
member of his Church.

2. He can Baptize none but such.

3. He can preach by authority to none but such.

See Mr. Firmins and Mr. Hudsons arguments for this novell fancy. See Mr.
Firmin against separation, p. 61, 62, 63. Mr. Hudsons vindication. 138, 139,
etc. Baronius t. 4. l. 26. D. Hieron. ep. 61:
It is true there is thus much said for it from antiquity, that Bishops were
not usually ordained fine titulo, but,

1. This was not to show, that they were only in office to this or that
Church, but to prevent vagrant itinerary preachers.

2. St. Hierom contested with Paulinus the Bishop of Antioch when he was
ordained, and would not be ordained to any particular Church: if we may either
believe Baronius or Hierom himself in his 61 Epistle ad Pammachium.

But to make have, p. 63. you tell us five things which you conceive
usurpations of the Gospel preachers office. I agree with you in all of them,
only I must still maintain:

That preaching is the proper Act of a Preachers office, and so incommunicable,
and if I make good what I have said to this purpose, you are condemned out of
your own mouth.

To this purpose, in my Vindiciae I produced three Arguments, p. 34 35, 36, 37.
you have answered not one of them; only you say,

We say that it is as much his proper act as Baptism; Truth, I did so, and
proved it, because the same commission authorizeth to both. 2. Saint Paul
seems to lay more upon it then upon Baptizing, 1 Cor. 1.17. to neither of
these do you say a word.

A second argument I urged you with was this, The proper acts of Elders,
Bishops, Stewards of the mysteries of God, Heralds, Ambassadors, Watchmen,
extraordinary Deacons, Pastors, Teachers, are acts of office,

But this is their proper act, see Scriptures, p. 24.

Third Argument, Either this is their proper act, or they have no proper act.
But God did not ordain an office with no act proper.

You have nothing to say against this, unless you say Baptizing and giving the
Supper is their proper act, and then I require one Scripture to prove either of
these a more proper act then preaching, see Vindiciae, p. 37. To none of these
you answer.

So that for all that you have said, our argument stands strong, and will do so
till you bring us a plain Scripture, or a good argument from Scripture to
prove that God has appointed Gospel preachers, some acts that are more proper
to them then preaching.

CHAP. XIX. In which Mr. Sheppards 65, 66, 67 pages are answered, and his
answers to our sixth and seventh Argument found too short.
THe next argument you pretend to answer is my 1 argument, and the substance of
my Brothers Halls second, eighth, and ninth.

You say, we say you may not do it because you are not called and sent by the
Presbytery, as To. 10.15. 1 Timothy 3.10.4, 14.5.22, 2.2, 3. It is the Scripture
says so. (Sir) not we only. To this you answer,

1. That you will not now dispute the Presbytery, nor thus call to the
Ministry, no (Sir) it is not your best course, believe it, Swords and Pistols,
will serve you better in that work then Scripture and Reason.

2. You agree that preachers in office must be duly called, none of them
Scriptures say (Sir) preachers in office, but those that preach must be sent,
To. 10. those that teach oothers must be not only faithful and able, but have
the Gospel committed to them, 1 Timothy 2.2.

But you hold it convenient if not necessary; Jesus Christ (Sir) is beholden to
you for drawing out duties into conveniences, I suppose you hold it convenient
too, that the Gospel should be Preached and people hear and be saved, it will
be found necessary one day (Sir) Jesus Christ will make you ashamed of that
same if not.

But the places only speak of a call from God: and then a man is sent of God
when he is fit and able to teach. 2. has a willingness in his mind to give
himself to the work. 3 when providence disposes him to a call to exercise
his gift.

I profess I tremble to read and hear men professing to the fear of God so
boldly contradicting his word, trampling upon his plain precepts, and all to
exalt carnal corrupt reason. But to answer a little.

1. If that be a call from God which you instance in, I beseech you Sir, with
what face of a Christian can you say, most of the Scriptures quoted speak of no
more? there are but five Scriptures in all, 1 Timothy 3.10. And let these also be
proved? who should prove them, good Sir?) 1 Timothy 4.14. With the laying on of
the hands of the Presbytery, is there no call from men think you? The third is
1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man* what is that meant of Gods immediate
sending, think you, does he lay hands on any? the fourth is 1 Timothy 2.2. -- the
same commit thou to faithful men who shall be able to teach others, is God
meant by that thou think you (Sir?) the fifth place quoted first is Romans
10.15. that indeed is not so plain, but carnal reason has more room to
cavil; but I have spoke enough before to clear that from the Socinian gloss
of providentiall sending: you tell us p. 66. you have cleared that Text, and
shall add no more. But truly (Sir) except you had spoke more to the purpose
before, you might have added your pleasure: but you say,

If these places be admitted in the sense we would have them, then it would
follow that none might preach in any case but such as are examined and approved
by the Presbytery, and that we dare not affirm, for we admit it in diverse
cases.

In none but in cases of necessity (Sir) and in such cases your note is false,
for though believing actually be the ordinary means of salvation, yet infants
may be saved without it.

Your answer to our argument, that it is forbidden, is not worth taking notice
of, what is not commanded in divine worship in any essential part of it, is
forbidden, especially there being rules set down for some doing of it, and
none for others.

But (Sir) if you will do any thing, answer my argument formally, as you have
it in my Vindiciae, p. 23, 24, 25 26, 27.

You come to answer one of my arguments, Page 67.
to prove preaching a proper act of the preachers office, viz.

If they may preach they may baptize, etc. I gave two reasons for it, Math.
18.19. It is in the same commission. 2. The Apostle makes it rather the
greater act.

To this now you pretend to answer and say, 1. You deny the consequence and
collection, nor will that Text, 1 Cor. 1.17. make it out, but seems rather to
hold forth the contrary. Very well answered Sir, and with abundance of Reason:
Secondly you say.

2. The words Math. 18.19. I will be with you to the end, may as well be
applied to the doctrine as the persons of the Apostles, and to those who shall
be wrought upon by that doctrine as the Apostles.

What Is this to the purpose, I plead the Commission, you expound the promise.
By this argument you prove they should Baptize too, if the whole commission
extends to all Saints. You say,

3. You agree, that such as teach by office may Baptize, but gifted brethren
do not teach by office.

You add to the Scripture (Sir,) by office is not in the Text, so that this is
nothing to the purpose. You say,

4. You deny gifted Brethren have power to Baptize, because they never did, but
they have power to preach, because they ever did it and were never forbidden,
but in effect commanded.

Your base affirmings and denyings it are but poor empty words, that come to
no more then wind.

1. Though they never did it, yet if they be commanded to do it, they ought to
take up their power.

2. Neither did any of them not called to office, or extraordinarily gifted
with the gifts of the holy Ghost now ceased in ordinary times, when the Church
was not under persecution, ever do it.

3. I have proved before they are forbidden, and neither commanded directly nor
by consequence. You tell us.

5. That you cannot agree, that preaching in a greater work then baptism
rightly done with preaching and prayer.

No matter whether you agree it, or no, you should do well to prove that it is
necessary that all Baptism follow or immediately go before preaching; we
grant it convenient, not necessary that Baptism be administered with Preaching,
though you read of the Gospel being Preached, Acts 2. Acts 8. before the
Baptizing of the 3000. and the Eunuch, yet you cannot prove I suppose that
those Sermons were intentionally preached in order to Baptism.

I cannot tell how you will prove what you say here, that praying is a more
spiritual work then preaching, I am sure neither in respect of the Subject,
object, matter, or end, nor in respect of the right manner of performance. You
say,

6. Grant it be the greater work, it does not follow, that because the people
may do that, they may do the less, which is Baptism, for -- if a commission
be granted to Commissioners to hear and determine lesser offenses.

1. But Sir the people have no commission granted them to preach.

2. If there be a Commission granted to persons to hear and determine Treasons
and Felonies, I suppose it is a good argument to prove they may hear and
determine the Felonies; because they may hear and determine the Treasons, and
they are both in the same commission. This is the case (Sir) Christ Jesus has
granted commission to certain persons to preach his Gospel and Baptize, if
you say and prove they may Preach. I will prove they may Baptize; why? they are
both in the same Commission.

3. I observe that you say nothing to 1 Cor. 1.17. where the Apostle says,
Christ sent him not to preach, but baptize. The words cannot be understood
absolutely, for St. Paul did baptize the household of Stephanas, by his own
confession. The meaning must be, that he looked upon preaching as his chief act
as a Gospel Officer. This you are not willing to take notice of.

CHAP. XX. In which Mr. Sheppards 68, 69, 70 pages are examined, and his answer
to our eighth and eleventh objections found too short.
IN the next place you answer our Argument drawn from the inconveniences and
evils will come of it.

This you have up p. 68, 70, 71. You divide it and make two objections. I will
reply to your answers in both places together.

It is my brother Halls twelfth Argument, p. 26. edit. 1. and it is a good
Argument, thus formd.

The tree which constantly and naturally brings forth corrupt fruit, is a
corrupt root. This is our Saviors Logic, Mat. 7. not to be denied.

But this principle and practice brings forth naturally very corrupt fruit. 1
Pet. 3.16.

Ergo, It is a corrupt root, a plant not of our fathers planting.

The Minor is proved by an induction of particulars:

1. It confounds offices. 2. It breeds disorder. 3. It opens a door to error.
4 It destroys preaching in office, Vindiciae ministerii, p. 35. 36.
and makes it contemptible. The first of these I u^ge, p. 33, 36. 5. Many of
these Lay preachers deny Scriptures, Ordinances, Duties, Magistrates, Sabbaths,
fastings.

I am sure the Argument is good enough, if we prove those two things.

1. That naturally, and ordinarily, and necessarily those are the fruits.

2. That constantly they have been.

The Apostle proves the first plainly, 1 Pet. 3.16. That the unlearned wrest
the Scriptures to their own destruction. Experience proves the latter. Let us
hear your cavils.

1. We say, Offices are usurped and confounded by it.

To this you say nothing more then you said before: that they do not preach as
officers; that's the substance of all, and the drift of your similitudes from
Bakers and Brewers comes to no more. We answer:

1. That you cannot prove any preaching in Scripture, but what was an act of
office.

2. If a man bake his own bread, or brew his own beer, I know none has any
thing to say to him; but suppose he bakes for all will buy, what becomes of the
bakers office then Sir? this is our case. But your similitudes are generally
miserably lame.

3. We told you before, Reading was no proper act of the Preachers office; and
therefore you argue miserably to say, because peoples reading the Scripture
does not confound offices, therefore their preaching will not.

4. To what you say, that these Ordinances rightly used may stand together, we
answer, that we desire you to prove their preaching publicly to be an
Ordinance, and then produce the Scriptures directing to the right use of it.

5. For the Trial you say is made, and no such inconveniences appear. We
answer you in several places, such has appeared: ask the Churches in New
England and Holland, etc. I remember Sir, the Fable in Esop, that the Snake did
not presently sting him that took it into his bosom. Tell me some seven years
hence.

Our second ill consequence we charged it with, was "That all would then
preach, and there would be disorder, and God is the God of order.

To this you say, That all never had, nor will have this gift. Yet you told us
before, that all the Saints having the spirit dwelling in them, and this spirit
being a spirit of Scripture interpretation, all have this gift, more or less.

2. All are bound to exhort one another privately, and you lay much strength
upon that Argument.

3. If all do but think they have it, it is enough, who shall judge? You tell
us,

"Order must be taken to regulate the exercise of it. By what Scripture rule?
there is a rule indeed for Church officers being proved, but as you have
exempted gifted men from the other rules given to Gospel preachers, viz.
Meditating, giving themselves wholly to it, making it their work, so surely
they are exempted from this too; except you produce your rule, the rules about
prophesying were applicable in this case, which they are not, there is no
restriction, only that they shall not all do it together, as if the Bells
rung auke.

Besides (Sir) is not order broke, when one body has ten or twenty tongues,
yea as many as Argus had eyes? the Apostle compares the Church to a body
natural; truly it should not be all tongue.

The third ill fruit mentioned was,

That it would be a ready way to let in all Errors and blasphemies.

To this you reply:

1. You do not believe it.

Do you believe Scripture? 2 Pet. 3.16. Superbia ut Augustinus verissime ait
^st matter omnium haeresium. Lutherus. Ne^esse enim est ut prius sit judicium
quam eloquium prius sapere quam dicere. Erasmus. Nisi enim verba intelligamus
quomodo sensam reperiemus? Whitake. de Scrip. q. 5. c. 9 V. illum ib. showing
many pieces of Scripture translated, that according to the translation we
cannot answer Heretics.
that says the unlearned will wrest Scriptures; prove it is meant of
practical learning. Do you believe Reason? Reason will tell you and so does
Scripture too. 2 Timothy 6.4. that there are two fathers of Heresy, Pride, and
Ignorance, Pride is a great cause of learned men's errors, when men are of
crotchicall heads, and then of proud spirits, conceited of their own fancies.
2. Ignorance, when men cannot understand the Original or weigh parallel
Scriptures, etc. but either wrest in the lesser or run mad in Allegories and
figures; but you tell us,

"The greatest learned men have been the greatest heretics.

It is true many learned men have through pride been dangerous heretics,
Arrius, Apollinaris, Pelagius, and Socinus were all learned men: but Sir what
think you of John a Leyden, Knipperdolling, Becold, and many others, and what
think you in our times of Collier and others?

Will you believe experience? enquire where you hear of any nests of Ranters,
Antinomians, Familists, etc. whence they came first? so that there are others
of that opinion besides Papists.

But errors the more public they are, the less harm they will do.

Pretty Religion! and a pretty argument for an Universal toleration, let
Christ's face be spit upon, as much as it will, that his friends may wipe it
off; is the Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ no more precious in your eyes Sir?

'But the Preachers give all leave to Print.

No such matter (Sir) Mr. Bachelor indeed was wont to do it, but Presbyterian
preachers have learned Christ better, and tender his glory more.

"But the abuses may be prevented and the right use retained.

1. That which you call right use (Sir) is an abuse.

Zanchius in quartum praeceptum.
2. Zanchy in quartum preceptum gives a good rule, In rebus non necessariis si
modo abutantur, tollendus et usus and abusus, every body can say as much as
this comes to for a Popish holiday. There is no necessity any should preach
without a due call.

But you tell us, p. 70. that to avoid an error on the left hand, we must not
run into one on the Right.

First prove it an error (Sir) to hold, that only persons duly called and set
apart to the office may ordinarily and publicly interpret and apply Scriptures
in a constituted Church.

You tell us, That we are not to believe and take up all the Evil reports we
hear of the people of God, many have been branded for Heretics who are now in
Heaven, etc.

What Is this to the purpose? (Sir) you dare not deny but there are errors and
heresies, Gal. 5.20 What if Papists and heretics brand the Saints with those
names? are therefore none rightly so called? what think you (Sir) of Pelagians
and Socinians and Antitrinitarians, of such as think, we are Godded, and there
is no Angels, no Devils, no Heaven, no hell, read Jerrard Winstanly his
platform of Freedom, dedicated to his Excellency, a p. 55. ad. p. 63. and
tell me if you think him a Saint of God? yet there are not one or two, but one
or two thousand (rather) such in England, most of which, if you enquire, you
will I believe find either have been Preaching Brethren, or their hearers, and
where ever they are met they have a Brother to preach to them; and defy a
Minister of the Gospel, etc.

I have heard of some that would never believe there were any witches till they
or some of their friends were bewitched; (Sir) I trust (If you have any) you
have a more virtuous yoke fellow, but if you had a wife that with hearing a
Cobbler preach for the Community of all things, had been so convinced as to
have made her self common, and have gone from you and joined with a party of
those principles, and two or three years after come home with a Child or two
more then you had seen before, (as some I could tell you of in the world this
day have been served) you might then possibly believe there were Heretics,
and yet these persons were high professors and pretended much to the Spirit.

In the next place, p. 72. you tell us, God will discover Hypocrites in ^he
last days.

What then? must we therefore permit heresies? or means directly tending to
them, or would you infer from hence, that in order to this discovery gifted men
should be permitted to preach.

You say, we might as well have reproached Christ and the Apostles, for Judas,
Peter, Ananias, and Sapphira, Demas.

You are very unhappy (Sir) at making parallells, you tell us here of a Saint
of God under a temptation, and a son of perdition and three profane wretches.
2. Nor are Heretics so thin amongst us as amongst the Apostles. 3. Nor did
Christ and the Apostles use a direct means to propagate errors, as we argue
this would be.

But you tell us, where the spirit dwells, it leads into truth and not errrur.
This is truth (Sir) but to what purpose? hence I conclude therefore, they that
are led by the spirit neither lead others into errors, nor are led themselves,
but unlearned preachers do both, 2 Pet. 3.16.

2. The evil spirit may sometimes lead those into error in whom the spirit
dwells, this is a temptation Saints may be under, and it is one ready way to be
brought into it, to usurp acts of office, and run before they are sent, when
they run out of Gods way the spirit of God leaves them.

The fourth ill consequence we urged was,

That by this means Preachers and preaching in office would he useless and
contemptible.

To the latter you answer:

1. The same might have been said of the Priests under the law.

Right; and was it not so? see Number. 16.3. what Corah, Dathan and Abiram say,
you take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are holy every one of
them, and the Lord is amongst them, wherefore then lift up your selves above
the Congregation of the Lord.

2. You say you do not believe it, because you have seen the "contrary in
your own experience.

None so blind as they that will not see (Sir) I durst undertake for one that
you can show me, that being a private person gifted, and a public preacher,
that yet continues with an humble sober heart under the aw of Gods ordinances,
and honoring the Lords public officer, I will show you twenty that are either
above Ordinances, or slighters and contemners of the Ministers of the Gospel.

3. You tell us, This is certain, Those that honor God, God will honor,
that is our comfort (Sir) and we doubt not but God will do it here or
hereafter, Dan 12.3. but that is no warrant for our spitting on them.

You say, This will not make the preachers office less use^ full and necessary:
for God in his wisdom and mercy will have some, whose office it shall be to
take care of the souls of his people, etc.

Right (Sir) God will, but man would not, and what you have here said will be
an argument against you.

If this be Gods Ordinance and will, surely he would not have all usurp the
peculiar acts of his office, as this does. See my Vindiciae Ministerii, p. 96
37.

CHAP. XXI. In which Mr. Sheppards 70, 71, 72, 73 pages are examined and
answered, and his answers to eleven objections scanned and found very weak.
Pulpit guard. p. 25, 26.

YOu are now come to answer my brother Halls eleventh Argument, which was this:

They which have no promise from God of divine assistance, cannot comfortably
or succesfully undertake the work.

But private persons turning preachers without a call, have no such promise:
Ergo.

To this you answer, 1. By denying the Minor; and you tell us there is a
promise to a right hearing. Truth sir, but this is not a right hearing, for how
shall they hear without a preacher, and how shall they preach except they be
sent, To. 10.15.

2. You say, There was a blessing followed the preaching of "those scattered
upon the persecution of Stephen, Acts 8.1, 4. Act. 11.21. I answer:

1. You are to prove, 1. That they were not in office.

2. That they had not the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost.

3. That they preached in a constituted Church ordinarily, when the people
might hear such as were in office. You will come short in this proof.

3. It is false that you say; we may as well say, there is no promise made to
private teachings, and exhortings of one another. They are commanded duties,
which when rightly performed, have promises annexed constantly.

In the next place you come to my brother Halls 17 Argument, p. 48. and my
seventh, p. 46.

My Argument was this:

It is likely that that tenet which the Churches of Christ have in all ages
rejected; and that practice which the Churches of Christ in all ages have
decried and avoided, is not a truth of Christ.

But the Churches of Christ in all ages have rejected and decried this opinion
and practice. Ergo.

Now let us hear what you say against this.

1. You say, You are to live by Rule, not by example.

1. Truth sir, but you can show us no Rule for you.

2. Neither is there any Rule that has not been put in practice by some of the
Churches of Christ.

3. Where you can only say, It is not directly forbidden, not that it is
absolutely necessary. Example (Sir) if general, or of the most, is not to be
despised.

4. Surely the Apostle said something, when he said, we have no such customs,
nor have the Churches of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.16.

You say it was not so in the primitive times. Prove that; "Nor so every where
this day. What Is that to the purpose? we have generally sad examples in this
age.

We told you, That many of these Lay-preachers were such "as denied Scripture
ordinances, Duties, Obedience to Magistrates, Sabbaths, Fastings.

To this you answer:

1 None that are led by the Spirit do so. They do, it may be, "speak against
the abuse of duties, and peoples resting on them, and performing them carnal.

Sir, (notwithstanding this shameless insinuation) we would have you know we
are as much against, and preach as much against resting in duties (that high
idolatry) and carnal performance of them, as any others can or do.

2. You say, None that are led by the Spirit do so. But many guifted brethren
do so. -- Ergo.

Again we say, For Magistracy, you appeal to all the world, who more alienate
the peoples affections from our present governers, the preachers, or the
guifted brethren.

1. What Is this to the purpose? do preachers in Office preach down Magistracy?

2. Any one is good when he is pleased. Suppose our Parliament should forbid
private persons preaching; or severely punish errors and heresy; what would
you do then? we can tell you when the guifted brethren were not such friends to
the Magistrates or Magistracy of England.

3. What if some Ministers (not all, Sir) were for a while unsatisfied in the
late change? was there nothing in it (Sir) that might startle a tender
conscience?

4. We believe that our Parliament does, and in seven years time will more
think them like to be best subjects who most fear an oath, and are most
tender of doing any thing which might make an appearance of the breach of it.

Another Objection you say we make is,

"It is against Gospel precepts and order. 1 Timothy 5.1, 22. Act. 13.3.

You aim here I believe at my first Argument, p. 23. But you are so wise as
not to put it in the form I put it. To this you answer nothing, but
Magisterially deny it.

A 13 Objection which you pretend to answer, is drawn from 1 Cor. 7.20. Let
every one abide in his calling.

This I think is one of my brother Halls Arguments.

You answer, That guifted brethrens preaching is a piece of their general
calling. But (Sir) I have already proved, that public preaching is a proper
act of a particular calling, and no such act can be an act of our general
calling.

A 14 Objection. This was to be committed to others, 2 Timothy 2.2. This is now a
bit of my fourth Argument. (Sir) you are a shameful disputant. You should
repeat my Argument, and then deny a proposition. But you tell us,

"That place is meant of the office of the Ministry, which you contend not
for.

Truth (Sir) but you contend for a proper and chief Act of that office, as I
have already proved. Whereas you say that the word is committed to the whole
Church, 1 Timothy 3.15. I have answered that place before.

In the next place you pretend to answer a fifteenth objection, which is my
fifth Argument, p. 40. of my Vindiciae.

Whosoever may lawfully preach the Gospel and interpret Scriptures ordinarily,
etc. may warrantably require a maintenance competent for them, of those to whom
they so preach.

But this guifted persons cannot etc.

You grant the Minor, and tell me the Major is a Non sequitur.

You deny the plain words of the Apostle (Sir) 1 Timothy 5.18. They that rule
well, are worthy of double honor, (countenance and maintenance, viz.)
especially such as labor in the Word and Doctrine. Matthew. 10 10. 1 Timothy 5.18.
Gal. 6.6. He that is taught in the Word is bound to communicate to him that
teaches in all good things.

1. Prove this is meant only of such as are in office.

And then 2. That any are to preach that are not in office, or else you tell
the holy Apostle his words are false.

A 16 objection you pretend to answer is drawn from that of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
12 Where the Apostle to show that there should be order kept in the Cburch of
Christ, that one should not be dissatisfied at the excelling gift or office of
another, compares the Church to a Natural body, wherein are several Members,
and all have their several offices, etc. some eyes, some ears, etc. and hence
proves, that in the Church all should not be ears, eyes, etc. they should not
usurp one another places, nor envy one another for them.

To this you answer, Who denies this, or what have we "said against this?

You deny it (Sir) when you say God has ordained all to be Tongues.

A 17. Objection: Then women and boys may preach.

You tell us: 1. Women might if they were not forbidden. I deny it, they must
be commanded, or else they might not; this was the old Popish plea for
ceremonies, they were lawful because not forbidden.

2. You say women did it, 1 Cor. 11.3. That place (Sir) is to be understood of
being present at prophesying, or of extraordinary prophesying, or else the
Apostle contradicts himself in the same Epistle 1 Cor. 14.34. which I hope you
dare not say.

3. You say, Boys may if they have a gift, and to prove it you tell us Christ
did, Lu. 2.46, and Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.42.

1. You have put a pretty uncivil term upon our Savior and upon Timothy,
surely they were no ordinary boys (Sir) I perceive you have not read
Aristotle, he would tell you there is a Juvenis aetate and Moribus, young men
in respect of age, or manners and abilities. You come to an

18. Object. This gift of opening and applying Scripture, "especially hard
places, was only temporary and now ceased.

This you say (if true) were something, but many have it at this day.

You say right (Sir) this is something, and before you condemn it for false,
answer the Reasons to prove it extraordinary, which I have gathered out of
several learned and holy men, and presented you with in my Vindiciae
Ministerii, p. 50. 51. and when you have done that well, tell me what you
think of men having that gift in these days.

19. Object. Whatsoever is not of Faith is sin.

This is one of my Brother Halls arguments, and all you can say can never
answer it, for it will not serve your turn to prove it is of faith, because it
is not specially forbidden.

But you tell us, it is warranted by Scripture, where (Sir?) this is all you
will say to this argument, I believe it scared you, and you made have to quit
your hands of it.

20. Object. There are two ordinances of Parliament in force against it.

In answer to this you grant

"1. That it is a practice restrainable by Authority.

Now see (Sir) how obedient our gifted Brethren are to Magistrates.

2. You say Authority does connive at it.

Connivence (Sir) does not frustrate public acts nor warrant disobedience to
them.

3. But you hope in time the Parliament will repeal them.

It is possible, but if they do not do it till they find them inconsistent
with the laws of Christ, they will be in force long enough.

4. You grant it irregular and inconvenient for them to preach till authority
does command or allow it, then I see our Brethren though they may have the
Spirit are not infallible, in their principles and practices they may be
irregular.

But I cannot but observe how upon all occasions, our brethren are more
beholden to you then our God is: you grant Magistrates in this case, have power
to command and restrain, To. 13.1. Let every soul (says the Apostle) be
subject to the higher powers. -- v. 2. Whosoever resists the power resists
the Ordinance of God, and receives to himself damnation, this is undoubtedly
true of resisting true and lawful powers in things which they may command and
restrain, yet you mince it prettily, not sinful and unlawful, but irregular
and inconvenient when it concerns the gifted brethren.

I have now done to the doctrinall part of your Book, and have proved your
doctrine false.

The Application (if such as it should be) must only be the conclusion from
these premises. I have denied the premises, I need not deny the conclusion, I
will only in one Chapter note a note or two.

CHAP. XXII. Containing some short notes upon Mr. Sheppards fourth Chatper, p.
73. to the end of his Book; Concluding with a short application unto him.
1. YOu chide the preachers, p. 74. that they never press upon the people
their duty to interpret Scriptures, we must (Sir) first know it is their duty
and not their sin, you go on, p. 74. 75, 76. in some things scandalously
aspersing, in other things unwarrantably reproving the Ministers, impertinently
applying and shamefully wresting Scriptures, and lastly calling away our people
from us as from Babylon, Rev 18.34 -- Bona verba quaeso. As is a man, P. 78.
so is his tongue, Causa infirma est semper querula, here is hard language
enough (Sir) but your arguments before, and your sense here, is as soft as a
bulfist; Sir we hate Popish superstitions with as full an hatred as your self.

Then you turn to the gifted brethren, and give them eight wholesome rules,
against which I have nothing to say, but only think there is one wanting, viz.

That they submit themselves to Examination and Ordination, much else there is
of good in the latter pages of your book, but nothing argumentative.

I shall here close; I have not Sir (I think) aspersed your person, you are a
stranger to me, and (if I may judge by some things in your book) one that
professes much to the fear of God and the honor of Jesus Christ, whom I
desire to fear, and in whom alone is my hope, and whom I desire to serve in my
spirit; If I have made my self merry with your Logic sometimes. -- Hanc
veniam damus petimusque vicissim.

Now I beseech you (Sir) by the Love of God, and by the Lord Jesus Christ,
seriously to weigh this thing, and to consider,

1. Whether there be any Gospel precept or plain president for this practice?

2. Whether there is not ground enough in Scripture to think this act of
preaching a proper and restrained act, when as it is plainly betrusted to
officers in so many Texts?

3. Whether, these things considered, it can be an act of Faith in them to
preach who are not so called?

4. Whether usually such preachers be not puffed up with an opinion of their own
parts?

5. Whether most of the heresies and blasphemies by which the precious name of
our God is dishonored this day, be not branches from this root and still
maintained by it.

And (Sir) let us not contend for Masteries but for Truth. Can you think Sir
that (as the polluted state of Englands professors now is) this is a way to
reform us? can a gifted brother convince a gainesaying Socinian or Anabaptist,
or Arminian think you? are not some of these in every corner of the Nation? Is
not a gifted brother more likely to be seduced by their subtilities, then to
convince and oppose or answer? shall not the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ
suffer when a public preacher of it shall turn his back upon an adversary?
(Dear Sir) I beseech you by the Lord Jesus Christ consider these things, and
take heed of pleading for Baal, no, let him plead for himself; I beseech you
to peruse Dr. Seamans Book: Mr. Halls Pulpits guarded, Mr. Ferribies answer to
Collier, the Book called Church Members set in j^ynt, and that called Lay
preaching unmask't, and (if you will stoop so low as to read my Vindiciae) you
will find there collected what Mr. Gillespy and Mr. Rutherford (those two holy
and learned men) have said in answer to all arguments. For my part I am
resolved to take up pen no more, except I find something more objected that
these Reverend Fathers and Brethren have not answered, but if you say any thing
that one of them has not answered, or invalidate their answers. I will promise
you a sober reply. But (Dear Sir) strive not for Masteries Magna est veritas
and praevalebit, the great God and his truth shall one day conquer all. Believe
it (Sir) I could heartily wish all the Lords people were Prophets, O that their
knowledge might be doubled if conjoined with Sobriety and humility and the
fear of God, let me be accursed that day that I desire any thing that my
conscience tells me should tend to Eclipse divine light, no let it Triumph
till the Prince of darkness be driven out of every corner, till our
understandings be fully enlightened: thus far Sir, I hope we agree. The Lord
guide us into all truth:

So prays Your Friend and servant, though in this thing your adversary, and
the meanest Servant of the Lord Jesus, in the work of the Gospel. J. COLLINGS.
Ap. 20. 1652.
FINIS.
Reader,
THrough the Printers have, and the remote distance of the Author from the
Press there are more Errata's then will stand with the credit of the book: The
Author desires thee to correct these and to pass over mistakes of stops or
accents.

IN the title page, l. 19. for in that, read and that, for inermo, r. immo. In
the Preface and Book, p. 2. l. 17. read Mr. Ferriby, p. 3. l. 12. for there is,
r. this is, l. 27. dele to it, p. 4. l. ult. read Valentinus, p. 5. l. 5. read
Pelagius, p. 6. l 6. read right and proper, l. 26. dele to, p 9. l 10. dele
these are, p. 13. l. 11. read then, p. 15. in marg. l. 1. r. Hunc ergo vultum,
l. 16. in marg. r, Gul. Parisiensis de Vniverso. 3. part: c. 20. p. 16. l. 26.
r. nature, in tendency, p. 18. in marg. r. Busaeus, for publicae r. publica,
for divino consid. r. divine consid p. 19. in marg. for varia r. vana. l. 28.
r. holy writ, p^ 24. in marg. r. our expectatione, p. 26. l. 6. r.
transactions, p. 27. l. 9. r. Christian! p. 28. l. 28. r. to enable, l. 30. r.
mysteries, p. 43. l. 14. r. if it be, know, p. 55. l. 7. r. skirts, p. 57. in
marg. r. vero fratres, p. 68. l. 38. r. differunt, p. 69. l. 4. r. communi, p.
70. l. 35. r. not to be restrained, p. 74 l. 14. dele in these, p. 97. l. 9. r.
1. Jo. 2.20, 27. p. 81. l. 5. r. (...), p. 84. in marg. r. nemo, p 90. l. 12.
r. (...), p. 91. l. 26. r. Leigh, p. 95. l. 3. r. converts, p. 99. l. 24. for
these r. the, p. 106. l. 7. r. to try the strength, l. 17. dele which, l. u^t.
r. preach, p. 109 l. 18. for on, r. in, p. 118. l. 31. r. appeared, p. 127. l.
29. r. term, p. 128. l. 20. r. what the prophesying, p. 131. dele this, p.
136. l 11. r. reverend, l. 138. l. 1. r. are not so committed, p 141. l. 18. r.
the Hebrew (...) l. 30. dele as well.

Reader, there may be some more, for as it was written in have, so it has been
perused in far more. I beg the allowance of thy charity for these or any other.


