GODS Truth is faithful in what it speaks unto Sin and Death: It gives it
not too bad a name, because truth is justified by him, which is just; therein
it has a crown of Life, and shall have, though death like swarms of Wasps are
reund about it.

Wirtten by one called, John Cole-Venman.

London, Printed in the year, 1658.

THere is much talk of Christ being a Savior, without understanding what the
Soul must be saved from and unto; the soul being under deceit and torment, it
stands in need of truth and rest; the Savior by placing truth and rest in
the soul, will level so that none shall possess more then they want, he will
first level the inward by casting out the thief-mind, then these outward riches
will fall into necessities possession: its the souls necessity that must be
joynt-heir with Christ in possessing. Its father has power to bruise the
Serpents head and body, which does withhold from necessity to its lust; which
lust or thief-minde is instituted by the Serpent to do all wickedness, he
causes some to strain at a gnat and swallow a camel, and they do falsely assume
they sin not, when some of them have many slaves and acres of land, houses,
horses; linen, woollen, corn, wine, oil, and flocks of cattle, and all manner
of the fruits of the earth, that necessity is kept in slaveri^ from them. This
murderer and thief does act all evil in scorn and contempt of truths union,
which it has in it self, and it will fill the soul with it self, to the downsal
of that young Harlot that does strain at a gnat; which gnat nature has a lust
in it, and it does swallow all that it can from the slave necessity to its
self destruction; that which is in more haste for the true Sun for to shine,
then it hastes in it self to shine, must be by its beams consumed. Its a
common thing for the young Harlot to say, Mind the light in thee; now says
Truth; thy ly-light must be putout, nay, says she, I am sent of God to
fore-warn thee of evil, and to turn thee to the light. This false lye-light in
its coming in exhortations does assume perfection therein.

Truth-union does hold some souls from the mother of Harlots, and her
daughters, so that their threatening wooing exhortings is all as rubbidge in
their way.

The young Harlot does transform her self like truths appearance in words, and
in straining at a gnat: there is no straining in truthunion, the straining is
in that which does dress or shape its self like truths government, that it may
the more bewitch that which can be bewitched.

The young Harlot falsely loves or lusts for to have all her kindred for to
commit adultery with her, calling them harlots and bastards if they do not.

The true Spouse has been very often wooed to commit adultery with her, she
saying, she was the Spouse of Christ, and did loath to commit adultery.

The mother of Harlots have many daughters as bad as her self, all the
daughters do fall out one with another, and with their mother, crying, Harlot,
harlot, harlot Truth knows that she that is a shaping her self like it in
words, is the beautiful young Harlot which will stand against the union-nature
longer in some ^ouls then others. None that live with God do lodge with her:
Them that true union does hold, they can be bold all her evils to unfold,
without being by her power controld. Her Mother and her Sisters do all cry her
down, saying she is not worthy to live; they all hate her for her beauty,
because she is almost like the Spouse of Christ in words, not in deeds.

The young Harlot can but mend evil old Adam; by her exhortations and
instructions, and wooings and threatenings, she does fright some unto her
obedience, in setting them to look to her Ly light in them.

This Harlots power is the tree of good and evil: and this is the cause why
it is called a tree of good and evil; it rejoices some, and it wounds others:
it starveth some, it seedeth others: it gives some too much of the earth and
its fruit, and others too little: it gives some the best of things, and others
the worst: it makes some great Landlords, and others Slaves: it causes
sickness and health to its people: it causes some to depart out of the body,
and some to live its life therein: it causes its slave Necessity to come to
its tyrants, to say with his hat in his hand, What curious works shall I do for
you? alas poor Necessity, thou have a hard Master, its not long that he shall
reign over thee.

At the first fall this tree or power did exalt some of its fruit-eaters higher
then other; so that those exalted ones did thieve from the rest the greatest
part of the earth, and its fruits, and did cause them to make Laws which yet
are in force by the same tree or power, to the oppression of all poor men.

This gold and silver ticket they caused to be quoined in opposition to the
want of poor men, so that they was quite shut out of all, unless they would
come to be their slaves, and tenants, then they should have some of the fruits
of the earth, or their ticket of gold or silver, or any ticket that was in
force.

Its so yet, that the gold and silver ticket are the devils Ticket, and true
wanting necessity is Gods ticket, for it shall purchase of him whatsoever it
needs, one day without the Devils ticket; yet for present its ordained, that
(...) necessity so long as its in its enemies country, it should carry its
enemies ticket.

This was and is contrary to the tyrant, for he made Laws that they should not
have his ticket, or any of the earth, or its fruits, without being his slaves:
the tyrant said and does say to necessity, if thou will not be my slave thou
shall not eat: Now says Necessity, thou have stolen from me all that thou
possessest, that is more then thy Necessity want. Now says the tyrant, I
have made a Law for thee, if thou take any thing back from me, thou shall be
hanged till thou art dead, and if thou will not work for me but go a begging
thou shall be whipped Thus is poor Necessity the Devils slave, unless the God
of uprightness does take it into his blessedness; his blessedness is thus,
Need thou truth and rest, or any of the earth, or its fruits, he will supply
thee one day without thy death-obedience, for its not to him that death obeys.

The young Harlot says, she is Christ, God life, light, and all good, when he
which is so savoureth nothing of her, he savourelh life unto life, or a clean
soul.

All her inward and outward preachings are uncertain; for they do not give to
the soul the union-nature of God, but are enemies to it.

The young Harlots threatening and exhortings does evilly reform the Egyptians
minds, but its righteousness that must lead them to Canaan, not any thing of
that mind shall enter therein, because its Reformation makes nothing but lies.

When the tree [or power] of life shall give the soul its word-conjunction,
then this tree or power of life goes forth in Ministration to fulfill its words
effect, then down goes this tree which is good and evil in its self, to its
self, and it must be a prisoner to the tree of life, then all those souls that
are its slaves shall go free: So sure as God ever did answer any expectation of
his promise made, so sure he will answer the expectation of his promise now
made to some souls that have received of measure of his mind.

The young Harlot and her children does scorn to own their kindred, they scorn
to say Grandmother, Mother, Sister, Aunt, Cosen, but do call Whores, Harlots
and Bastards.

If any of her kindred do lack ^ood or raiment, she is no more free of her
superfluity then any of her kindred are. Some of her next Sisters are more
kinder to all the kindred then she; for they have often wooed the Grandmother
for her Grand children, and for their young sister, telling her, Our sister and
her children are the greatest sufferrers for Christ on earth: the old Harlot
answers, It Is not so, they are disobedient to me and Christ, yet being much
wooed she lets some of them go.

This Harlot appears where the Divine Nature does, and does shape it self as
near it as it can in all its appearances: if I meet with this Harlot, she
loathes me, because I do not commit Adultery with her, she saying, That I will
be made to do that which I call Adultery: She has many hangers on her that
would be very much falsely refreshed if that she would let them commit Adultery
with her in her secret chamber.

She has many that were once of her body, that do now grieve her, yet they
are not espoused to Christ. There are some of her falsely reformed Kindred, that
love her for her beauty, that makes the Harlot proud. Some do think she is not
sent of God, but do very much disturb her in her adultery, in tormenting her
by her mothers and sisters power, and she answers them with the like, though
self-righteousness cannot see it.

God tormenteth no soul, but brings the tormemtore into subjection to him,
and delivers is to himself: The cormentors are evil Angels, that do not
carry fleth, but do govern some soulessences by ingrafting their nature in them
to do what they please, unless the redeeming Angels do prevents by their
ingrafting their nature; which nature it all goodness and true strength,
without is the soul is dead. I do not say the most beautiful Harlot is the most
abomination of the earth, but the will be when the is cast out of those souls
that are to be the first fruits to the redeemer; for present her mother, and
some of her elder danghters under her, are the most obomination of the earth,
yet their mother does keep all of them in subjection to her as much as she can.

When the mother is cast down, the daughters will strive who shall be
greatest, and this strife will be till all be down, but the youngest sister
then the will be the abomination of the earth, and will rule over all souls
that are not espoused to Christ, the will be the last Harlot that shall
adulterate the soul.

This is very little minded to wit, The redeeming Angels have a greater
ministration on the evil Angels to subject them, then they have on their
captives to redeem them.

The young Harlot speaks of redemption and subjection, and knows not where the
true power places either.

The true Angels act is redemption to the soul, and subjection to the evil one
that does ingraft his sin against the soul Angel or Essence.

The young Harlot does speak much against the carnal Libertine called Ranter,
some of them are now her Proselytes.

Where that loathsome, filthy Harlor called Ranter, deceived one, thee will
thousands, when the is cast one of those souls, that are to be the first fruits
to redemption.

The true Sponse shall very much rejoice in being alone with Christ.

The young Harlot, and some of her sisters do say, they deny self, they being,
but self cannot do it: When Christ cameth to them, he will show them that
neither they nor the soul can do so; nothing but him can deny self, the poor
soul can do nothing; its like a dead thing carried from death to life. When the
breath of life shall breath on the soul, so that it does consume all the breath
of death that was there, then it may be said of a truth there is a living soul.

As some souls now are, they are part in life, part in death, yet they go not
forth in the true powers ministry, till they be as lively as the power of life,
then they have its word-conjunction, till then the soul it a middle nature
betwixt the oppressor and the redeemer.

Blessed is that soul that has Gods look to see what is his, else all is
vanity.

Man in his best estate in being governed by the evil Angels, is worse then
vanity: for whom they bless, in the event it does prove the greatest curse.

Vanity as it stands out of vexation of mind in this or that, so that it does
not abuse any in the inward principle, or outward things, that do belong to its
or their necessityes. Sure eternity is near to this vanity, and will bring a
consummation on it suddenly. Then to the wonderment of all perishers, eternity
will appear with an army of souls with its word in their mouths, which power of
eternity will effect in their speaking: Our fathers host when they appear, no
Beelzebub can hold up their armies against them; no evil angels can stand
unsubjected before them: no captives will they make afraid of them, but the
evil Angels that are not in flesh will so far as they can ingraft fear in
opposition to their souls redemption. These belzebubs, make their own people
afraid of one another, and of the lover of their souls. At the first, these
belzebubs were all as one in their first fallen union, and so did continue a
space of time, but at the last they did fall out one with another, and ^id
raise their creation in armies, and did cause them to fight: who should have
most of the earth and its fruits, for their false right; as the length of time
these belzeebubs will Join again in their first fallen union, at which shall
stumble every one: so far as they stand out of true union. They will cause all
their people to agree as one, to make war against the lamb. The young harlots
head it distinct from her body, and it does commonly commit adultery in a more
secre^ manner then her body does know of; her heads secrecy will be the height
of abomination when it shall come forth in its practice, it will blast all
deceit but itself deceit, and will incompass all souls that are not espoused to
Christ.

This harlot is in some souls that God will have to be his first fruits.

When this harlots power shall receive all bolzebubs into conjunction with it.

As it was at the first beginning of the fall: then thee will be the head of the
devils captives in flesh the evil one will dress and shape her so that none
shall know her but gods light.

Nothing can see but light, nothing can live but life; nothing can love but
love nothing can abide Christ's coming, but the soul; if it has any thing in it
that is not as upright as Christ, that shall not abide there.

This young harlot does hang forth a sign, and death sweep before her door,
that makes her very much respected by her devout kindred: thee will as much as
she can furnish her house with that that is like trve good, whereby she may
invite all that pass by her to come and feast with her, inward and outward
Idolatryes, thee Calling them by the name of trve goodness; she is always
assisted by the father of her intrest to work her design against the soul,
and trve union in it; she and some of he sisters are the theiues that go
before Christ with their ministryes, in biding men look to them to be an
example or pattern This harlots nature is so proud, saying she Rules in heaven
and hell: its but her own fathers heaven and hell that she can or ever must
live in.

For ever, all false minds shall be shut cut of the hoaven of heavent.

Thus says truth, trust not him that would be trusted, till his soul is
ascended into the holy angels word and pewer, in conjunction to redeem from
deceit, torment and destruction.

He that has an ear to hear cannot but hear.

When nature has received its Change, it will not be tied unto any Crab-tree
neither will it that forest range, where nothing but crab-trees g^^w, because
every thing that it meets withal there, its the souls so.

The decei^er does assume a ripeness in the soul, in opposition to
righteousness, and all harlots are acters theirin to adulterate the soul; when
the beauty full harlot is cast out of some souls, and nothing but Christ there,
then his minisry is a clean sw eeper of souls and will bind all devils that
did foul them in the inward principal, in giving some a mind to inslaue the
necessity from its proper right.

Many harlots have spoken against the beast, saying they were sent from God,
but he would not beleiv them, but keeps them in subjection, and shall do till
Christ has his most powerful ministry in for^^, thou the beast and all
harlots and false prophets shall join with him that will drag them along to
fight against the lamb and his army.

READER, its the true spirits spy-right mind that gives life to word, And makes
known what the 24 Letters do afford, Either in the single letter, or in the
compacted word.

The Lord comes to confound all men's talk, because when they talk they do not
understand name or nature which of they talk. The spi-right of truth is the
confounder. Whosoever has the spi-right mind, that shall not be confounded.
There is a great deal of talk of taking God his name in vain: all do take his
name in vain, but the spi-right mind in men, which sees all vanity in them.
The unfaln Angels, will have the government of veiled soul from the deceit
which they are veiled with, by subjecting of the deceiver, to have no freewil
to deceiv or destroy, but to become their footstool. God does cleanse away the
evell mind, then he speaks into the soul and it receives him. God will have
all cleansed before him, as he is clean. The body of man is a Figure; the soul
in it is a subject or essence, carrying or bearing the body about. This subject
is to be no subject to that that gives it any self carnal mind, or subject to
any other affliction; it is to be a s^^ to life, and not subject to death. When
the unsallen power has raised it by his spi-right mind up into himself, then
man is in the eternal nature: There is the unfallen undeceiuer, and the fallen
Deceiuer, and the fallen deceived; these are distinct one-from another. The
undeceiver is Minister of his spiright to the soul, that lies under the alter
or carnal mind; which spi-right in it being set up, does see or spy all that
is perishing, and that which is everlasting.

The Lord will have nothing to worship him but the spi-right in the soul, which
does worship him discerning what it does, the man called Christreceivd the
spi-right without measure into his soul, which did spi-right-to all truth and
lies; therefore it was said, the Godhead in him dwelt bodily.

There is but one minister of the spi-right into men, which does by its
ministry discover all Babell in them to its self, within its self in them.

Nothing in man can receive the spi-right mind, but the soul, it being cleansed
of all that is contrary to it, it receives says in God, or spi-right of God,
which is the single eye, everlasting truth. The Father of the spi-right mind
and soul will purge out the carnal mind, and let nothing inhabit in his
kingdom but spi-right.

Thus says the spi-right that does spy, all truth and all lies in men, or in
that power that is in combination to deceive his own whole creation, that
lives within his own inclination; he cannot deceive the spy, for in it thore
must live no ly, or inclination to ly, for it does a ly defy, saying; thou
shall be reprobated for ever, never to live in union with God the true
spi-right to all false, no spie-right or seer of truth, which is the son of
perdition, that would be prying into all that the spi-right says, that he may
be the nearest likeness as he can be to truth, calling himself spi right, when
that he does abominate the true spi-right that does behold him in all his
actions, then he is in rage and madness, and would not lose his cloak. The
spi-right mind says, all in the soul but me is a reprobate: I do see with my
single eye into thee, whosoever thou be; this is no mystery to the true spy;
but it is unto the ly, that does wonder and perish eternally. All that ever did
wonder, was and is the reprobate at his self, and at the everlasting truth. The
spi-right sees all things and there is no new thing to it.

There is a great deceit in the interpretation of this saying, no new thing
under the sun. Some say, all things ever were as they are, and that is the fool
that does expect any change in the world; one generation goes, and another
comes, and so it will be for ever, as it is now with men, living as they do,
in all manner of wickedness. There is a truth in that saying, but for this
interpretation; it is not of the spi-right of truth; for the spi-right says,
that as darkness does abound in men, so that the light is not in them. Thus
says the spi-right, Light shall so abound in men, that darkness shall not be in
them. The spi-right is true all men are liars.

There are two sowers, two seeds, one ground. The true sower is the sower of
the spi-right mind into the soul. The false sower is the cumberer of the soul
or ground with a false conception of a carnal mind, having in it the false
sowers inclination to all manner of his evils. The carnal mind, it is the
Bondwoman that must be cast out of the soul; which soul is to be the
Freewoman, when she has received the spi-right, without any darkness in her.
Then the soul does not groan in the strange wilderness of sin, but is set free
into Eternity, where nothing but spi-right shall inhabit; there she is caught
up into the Heaven of Heavens out of sin his sight, which once with her did
fight.

There is God spi-right.

And after the soul bath received the spi-right mind into it, and the carnal
mind done away, then there is soul spi-right that sees God it being the life
of faith that it lives, which is one with God in all things, seeing him face
to face, without any shame or disgrace.

There is a savor of death unto death, which must be ashamed of his savouring
of death, because the Lord wilraign over the wicked nature: The wicked nature
never did savor truth, nor never shall; the righteous nature never did savor
the wicked nature, nor never will: It is a clean soul that God does savor with
his true mind, which is spi-right, or discern right, or see right with the
single eye which has in its self all light.

It is God the Father of life and light, which does spi-right of all things,
for there is nothing out of his sight.

by J.C.V.
THE END.

