Collections of Notes Taken at the KINGS Trial, at Westminster Hall, On
Monday last, Janua. 22. 1648.
THe Court being sat, Proclamation was made, by the Crier,

Ho yes, ho yes, ho yes, All manner of persons that are to attend this Court,
you are to come in, and give your personal attendance.

Ho yes, Every man keep silence upon pain of imprisonment, and then the Members
of this Court are to answer to their Names.

Then the Court was called, A List of the Names follow.

John Bradshaw Sergeant at Law, Lord President of the Court. Thomas Lord
Fairfax General, Lieutenant General Oliver Crumwel, Commissary General
Ireton, Major General Skippon, Sir Hardresse Waller, Colonel Valentine
Walton, Colonel Thomas Harrison, Collonell Edward Whalley, Colonel Thomas
Pride, Colonel Isaak Ewer, Collonell Richard Ingolsby, Henry Mildmay Esquire,
Sir Thomas Honywood, Thomas Lord Gray, Philip Lord Lisle, William Lord Munson,
Sir John Danvers knight, Sir Thomas Maleverer knight, Sir John Bowcher, knight. Sir
James Harrington knight, Sir Henry Mildmay knight. Sir William Brereton, Robert
Wallop Esquire, William Henningham Esquire, Isaak Pennington Alderman, Thomas
Atkins Alderman, Rouland Wilson Alderman, Sir Peter Wentworth, Colonel Henry
Martin, Colonel William Purefoy, Colonel Godfrey Bosvill, John Trencherd
Esquire, Colonel Harbottle Morley, Colonel John Berkestead, Colonel Matthew
Tomblinson, John Blackestone Esquire, Gilbert Millington Esquire, Sir William
Cunstable, Colonel Edward Ludlow, Colonel John Lambert, Colonel John
Hutchingson, Sir Arthur Hazlerige, Sir Michael Livesley, Richard Saloway
Esqu^re, Humphery Saloway Esquire, Colonel Robert Titchburn, Colonel Owen Roe,
Colonel Robert Manwaring, Colonel Robert Lilburne, Colonel Adrian Scroope,
Colonel Richard Deane, Colonel John Okey, Colonel Rebert Overton, Colonel John
Harison Col. John Desborough, Col. William Goffe, Coll. Robert Duckenfield,
Cornelius Holland Esquire, John Carne Esquire Sir Will. Armine, John Jones Esquire
Miles Corbet Esquire Francis Allen Esquire Thomas Lister Esquire Ben. Weston Esquire Peregrin
Pelham Esquire John Gourdoun Esquire Sergeant Francis Thorp, John Nut Esquire Tho:
Challoner Esquire Col: Alg. Sidney, John Anlaby Esquire Col: John Moore, Rich: Darley
Esquire Will: Say Esquire John Aldred Esquire John Fagge Esquire James Nelthrop Esquire Sir Will:
Roberts, Col: Francis Lassels, Col: Alex: Rixby, Henry Smith Esquire Edmond Wild
Esquire James Chaloner Esquire Josias Barnes Esquire Dennis Bond Esquire Humph. Edwards Esquire
Grego: Clement esquire, John Fry Esquire Tho: Wogan esquire Sir Grego: Norton, Col:
Edm. Harvey John Dove Esquire Col: John Venn, John Foulks Alderman, Thomas Scot
Alderman, Thomas Andrews Alderman, William Cawley Esquire, Abraham Burrell
Esquire, Colonel Anthony Stapley, Roger Gratwick Esquire, John Downs Esquire,
Colonel Thomas Horton, Colonel Thomas Hammond, Colonel George Fenwicke,
Sergeant Robert Nichols, Robert Reynolds Esquire, John Lisle Esquire, Nicholas
Love Esquire Vincent Potter, Sir Gilbert Pickering, John Weaver Esquire, Roger
Hill Esquire, John Lenthall Esquire, Sir Edward Baynton, John Corbet Esquire,
Thomas Blunt Esquire Thomas Boon Esquire, Augustine Garland Esquire, Augustine
Skinner Esquire, John Dickswell Esquire, Colonel George Fleetwood, Simon Maine
Esquire, Colonel James Temple, Colonel Peter Temple, Daniel Blagrave Esquire,
Sir Peter Temple, Colonel Thomas Wait, John Brown Esquire John Lowrey
Esquire, 70 Commissioners were now present in Court.

Then the Crier again made Proclamation because of some noise that was made by
the People in the Hall by thronging in. So the Gates were set open, as soon as
the Court was sat, and by order of the Court.

Ho yes, ho yes, ho yes; my Lord President, and this High Court does strictly
charge and command all persons to keep silence during the sitting of this
Court, and the Captains of the Guards is to apprehend all such persons as
shall make any disturbance.

Then the Sergeant was sent with the Mace for the King, who being brought to
the Bar, Proclamation was made.

Ho yes, every man keep silence upon pain of imprisonment.

This Court does command the Captain of the Guards to take into custody all
such persons as shall occasion, or make disturbance during the sitting of this
Court.

Then the Council spoke to this effect, that he did at the last Court in this
place in the name of the Commons of England exhibit a Charge of High Treason,
and other high crimes, and misdemeanors against Charles Stuart King of England
now p^^sent at the Bar, that the Charge was then read unto him; but he would
not give any answer to it, but disputed the power of the Court: That he did now
in the name of the Commons of England humbly move that he may put in his
answer to the said Charge, and that if he refuse to give answer to it, the High
Court will be pleased to proceed against him pro confesso, And that he may be
proceeded against according to Justice,

Then the Lord President made a speech to the King, Declaring,

That he had (the last Court day) heard his Charge against him. That he then
did refuse to put in his Answer; But disputed the Authority of the Court, he
made several objections, and was as often answered. That the Court have
considered of all that was then said, and what Answers were made, and as for
their Authority, they are very well satisfied concerning the lawfulness
thereof, and desire that he may be satisfied too; and therefore gave you time
until this Day, and do now expect your positive Answer, and therefore desired
the King, in the name of the Court, that he would give in his Answer, and
either confess or deny it: and that if he did deny it, they would proceed to
prove it, by a fair Trial

And the Lord President declared to the King, that now at this time the Court
did expect his answer to the charge.

The King (as he had done on Saturday before) so now appealed to the powers
above, and disputed the power of the High court, and that in relation to his
God, and his people, concerning which he was entered into a set speech, by those
branches, to make further question of their Authority.

Then the Lord President declared that he must disturb the King, in that he did
perceive him, who was then a Delinquent, at the Bar, to undertake to give
reasons against the power of the Court, he being then their prisoner; and
declared that no Court whatsoever would suffer a Delinquent, brought before
them, to dispute against their power.

The King denied that he was a Delinquent, and would have gone on in Arguments
disputing their power. And said that he would be satisfied of their Authority
by Rule, and Reason.

Then the Lord President told the King that he must again interrupt his
speech. And declared that as it is true it is fit indeed, that he should have
rule and reason, so it has been declared unto him already several times, and
that his contempts to the Court must be recorded, and such disputes by him, a
prisoner at the bar not to be permitted.

Then the King replied again, pressing to have his arguments heard; And that it
was but reason, but if they refuse he would demur.

The Lord President then declared to the King that neither he nor any other
would be permitted there to dispute the authority of the Court. But that he had
now answered something, that he could take notice of, and would answer his
demur. Saying the Court does affirm a jurisdiction, and return their Answer.

Then the King offered to speak before the Lord President had done, but he
told him, that he might not interrupt him, for he spoke in the name of the
whole Court, and then proceeded till he had fully declared it.

Then by order from the Court, the Clerk read a paper to the King, to this
purpose.

Charles Stuart King of England, you are here before this Court in the names of
the Commons of England accused of high Treason, and other high crimes and
misdemeaners, will you answer to your charge, if not, it was declared, that
those that brought him thither must take him away again.

But the King still persisted to dispute the power of the Court. And therefore
the Lord President told him, that if that was all he would say, to insist only
on that, that the Sergeant must take him away.

The King again urged to be admitted to give in his reasons to dispute the
Authority of the Court. But the Lord President told him, that he may not offer
any reasons against the jurisdiction of the Court, and told the King, that he
must obey the comands of the Court, or else withdraw, and the Court will
proceed, and perhaps when you are brought hither again, the Court will proceed
to censure.

Then the King spoke as to matter of vindicating of himself, as if he was
always a friend to his people, and was no Delinquent, nor did never take up
arms but for the good and freedom of his people.

The Lord president answered the King, That what a friend he has been to the
people of Englands freedom, the world may judge And the Lord president told him
that the commands of the Court must be obeyed. And the King was sent away.
After which Proclamation was made to adjourne until the morrow.

London Printed by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield near the Queens head Tavern,
1648.

Jan. 22. 1648.
Imprimatur

Theodore Jennings.

FINIS.

