A COLLECTION Out of the Book called Liber Regalis, Remaining in the TREASURY
Of the Church of WESTMINSTER. TOUCHING THE CORONATION OF THE KING and QUEEN
together, According to the usual Form.

London, Printed by R. D. for Charles Adams, at the Talbot in Fleetstreet, over
against Fetter-Lane. 1660.

The Manner and Form of the King's Coronation.
THE place where the King is to be Crowned, is the Church of Westminster,
granted to it by diverse Charters to be Locus Institutionis and Coronationis
Regiae, and Repositorum Regalium insignium imperpetuum.

The Person that is to anoint and crown the King, is the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury.

Against the Solemnity a square Stage is to be set up close to the four high
pillars, between the Queer and the Altar with Railes about it. The Stage is to
be covered with Tapistry, and the Rail also to be covered richly,

There must be two pair of Stairs from the Stages, one to the Queer westward,
and the other to the Altar eastward.

Upon the Stage are two Thrones of Estate to be set up; one for the King, and
another for the Queen, set out richly.

The King's Throne to be higher than the Queens.

On the south side of the Altar is a Chair to be set for the King, and another
not so high on the north side for the Queen, with two stools and cushions for
either of them to pray at.

In St. Edward's Chapel a Traverse is to be set up, wherein the King disrobeth
himself after the Coronation is done.

Where also a Stool and Cushions (to pray at) and a Chair for the Queen to
repose her self in the mean time, are to be made ready.

The Archbishop is to put the King in mind the evening before the Coronation,
to give himself to contemplation and prayer, as in the book, page 6.

The Archbishop is to deliver to his Majesty the Tunica, or shirt of red silk,
which he is to wear over his shirt, to which tunica his Majesty's shirt and
other wearing apparel is to be fitted because of the anointing.

There are to be delivered also these Regalia to whom his Majesty shall appoint.

viz.

For the King.
The Regalia. The Patten. The Scepter with the Cross. The long Scepter.
For the Queen.
The Rod with the Dove and Spurs. The Ivory Rod, with the Dove, The Scepter.
The Crown.
All the other Regalia together with the Ampull, wherein is the Oil wherewith
the Kings and Queens have been anointed must be laid ready on the Altar.

That the Crown, and other Robes which the King puts on after the
Coronation, must be laid ready in the Traverse in St. Edward's Chapel.

The Heir of the Lord Beauchamp of Bedford, Almoner for the Coronation is to
have care that clothes be spread on the ground from the Palace Hall door to
the Stage in the Church.

Decanus Westminster. semper Lateri.

Regis adhaerendo praesens debet esse prodicti Regis informatione in hiis quae
dicta Coronationis concer^unt Solemnitatem.

The Archbishops and Bishops of this Kingdom present; with the Church and
Queer of Westminster are to meet the King at the Palace gate.

Two Bishops appointed by the King are to carry 1. the Regal Crown. 2. the
Patten.


Then three Peers Duces sive comites Regni excellentiores, etc. are to bear,

1. The Scepter with the Cross. 2. The long Scepter. 3. The Rod with the Dove.
After whom 3 Swords born by three Earls, namely, of Chester, Huntingdon,
Warwick.

Then unus de Magnatibus ad hoc per Regem assignatus is to carry the Spurs.

The King goes next, under a Canopy born by the Barons of the Cinque Ports,
four of them at a staff, supported by the Bishops of Durham and Bathe.

After the King do follow three Peers, carrying, 1. The Ivory Rod. 2. The
Queen's Scepter. 3. The Queen's Crown.


Then the Queen under a Canopy, born likewise by the Barons of the Cinque
Ports, supported likewise by two Bishops, her Gown and habit described in the
book.

The King and Queen are received into the Church with an Anthemn or Hymn.

They pass up the body of the Church to their seats of Estate, and they repose
themselves in sede sibi apta, and not in the Thrones.

The King being seated as aforesaid, the Archbishop, (praeeunte Marescallo
Regni) goes to all the sides of the Stage, speaking to the people, ipsorum
inquirens voluntatem.

During which time the King stands up and turns himself as the Archbishop
speaks to the people.

An Anthem is sung.

The Archbishop whilst it is singing goes to the Altar.

The Queen also supported by two Bishops goes after the King to the Altar to a
place provided for them.

The King offers Pallium unum et unum librum auri, and then kneeleth, and
then the Archbishop says a Prayer.

A Bishop then begins a Sermon, which the King and Queen hear by the Altar.

After the Sermon the Archbishop asks the King whether he be pleased to take
the Oath which his Predecessors usually took.

The King willing thereunto, goes to the Altar to take it.

The Archbishop asks the three first questions, and the King severally
answers unto them.

Then another Bishop asks the last question, and the King answers to it in
the words as they are set down.

Arch-bish: Sir; will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to the
people of England the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of
England, your lawful and religious Predecessors; and namely, the Laws, Customs
and Franchises granted to the Clergy, and to the people by the glorious King
St. Edward your Predecessor according, and conformable to the Laws of God, and
profession of the Gospel, established in this Kingdom, and agreeing to the
Prerogatives of the Kings thereof, and to the ancient Customs of this Realm.

The King answers,

I grant and promise to keep them.

Then the Metropollitane shall declare unto the King what the things are that
he shall swear unto.

Metrop: Sir, will you keep peace entirely according to your power, both to
God, the holy Church, and the people.


King. I will keep it.


Metrop: Sir, will you to your power cause Law, Justice, and discretion in
mercy and truth to be executed in all your Judgments?


King. I will.


Metrop: Sir, will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful Customs
which the Commonaltie of your Kingdom have, and to defend and uphold them to
the honor of God so much as in you lies.


King. I grant and promise so to do.


Legatur admonitio sequent ab uno Episcopo coram omnibus clara voce sic
dicendo.

Domine Rex a vobis per donare petimus ut unicuique de nobis et ecclesiis nobis
commissis Canonicum privilegium et debitam legem atque Justitiam concervetis et
defentionem exhibeatis sicut Rex in suo regno debet unicuique Episcopo et
Ecclesiis sibi commissis.

Respondet Rex.

Animo libenti et devoto, promitto vobis et perdono quia unicuique de vobis
commissis canonicum privilegium et debitam legem atque justitiam servabo et
defensionem quantum potuero adjuvam te Domino exhibebo. Sicut Rex in suo Regno
unicuique Episcopo et ecclesiis sibi commissis per rectum defendere debet.

This being done, the King comes to the Altar, and laying his right hand on
the Bible, says these words.

Those things which I have before promised I shall observe and keep, so God me
help, and by the contents of this book. The King returns to his seat of
Estate again, and the Archbishop begins the Himnes. Veni creator spiritus,
etc. and the Queer singing it.

The King and Queen kneel down, and the Archbishop says a Prayer.

After which the Letanie is sung, at the end whereof are Prayers proper for the
solemnity.

The Letany ended, the Archbishop says aloud clara voce.

Lift up your hearts.
It is very meet and right.
Then the King arises and goes to the Altar, and then puts off his other
Garments, and the Archbishop opening the places to be anointed, first
annointeth his hands, saying, Vnguantur manus, etc.

The Queere sings an Anthem, and after it the Archbishop says a prayer.

Then he annointeth his breast, and between the shoulders, and both his
shoulders, the bending of his arm to the Crown of his head.

Then the Dean of Westminster closes his Robes again.

The Queer in the mean time singing an Anthem after the Archbishop says two
prayers.

St. Edward's Ivory Comb is to be used, if the Kings hair after anointing lie
not smooth.

Then the Colobium or Dalmatica is put on his Majesty by the Dean of
Westminster.

After which done the Archbishop says a prayer.

Then the Dean puts on the King The super tunica. Tinsill hose Sandalls.


The Spurrs are put on by a Noble man.

Then the Archbishop, after he has laid the Sword on the Altar, and said a
prayer, he delivers it to the King, saying, Accipe Gladium.

A Peer girteth it about the King.

Then the Armill is put about the King's neck, the Archbishop saying, Accipe
Armillas.

Then the Mantle or open Pall is put on by the Dean, the Arbh-bishop saying,
Accipe Pallium.

Then the Archbishop takes the Crown, and says two prayers, then Crowns
the King, saying,

Coronet te Deus.

The Queer singing an Anthem.

Then the Archbishop takes the Ring, saying two prayers and puts it on the
Kings finger, saying, Accipe Regiae dignitatis annulum.

And then says a prayer.

Then the King puts on the Linen Gloves, which are part of the Regalia.

Then the King takes off his Sword wherewith he was girt before, and goes to
the Altar and offers it, which the chief Nobleman there present by offering,
redeemeth, draws out, and carries naked before the King during the Solemnity.

The Archbishop then delivers to the King the Scepter with the Cross,
saying,

Accipe Sceptrum.

And says a prayer.

Then he delivers the Rod with the Dove into the Kings left hand, saying,

Aceipe Virgam virtutis.

And then blesses the King, saying,

Benedicat tibi Dominus.

The King kisseth the Archbishop, and the other Bishops that assist.

After this the King goes from the Altar up to the Stage, all the Peers
attending.

The Queen singing Te Deum.

Which being done, the Archbishop inthroneth the King in his Throne, saying,

Sta, et retine a modo locum.

Which done, all the Peers do their homage to his Majesty, and then put their
hands and touch the Crown together.

Then the King, for his ease, delivers the Scepter and Rod to whom he
pleases.

These things done, the Archbishop goes to the Altar, and the Queen goes
thither likewise, and kneeleth down.

The Archbishop says a prayer.

The Queen arises, then the chiefest Lady present takes off the Crown, and
then opens her breast, and then kneeleth again.

The Archbishop powers the Oil on the Crown of her head, saying, In nomine.

Then he says a prayer.

The chief Lady then closes her Robes at her breast, and puts on her head a
linen quoif.

Then the Archbishop puts on the Queens Ring, saying, Accipe Annulum.

And then says a Prayer.

Then he takes the Crown, and lays it on the Altar, saying a Prayer.

The Queen arises, and the Archbishop takes the Crown, and lays it on the
Altar, saying a Prayer.

Then he puts the Crown on her head, saying,

Accipe Coronam.

After that says a Prayer.

The prayer being done, the Archbishop delivers the Scepter into her right
hand, and the Ivory Rod with the Dove into her left hand, and says a prayer.

Then the Queen arises and goes forth from the Altar, supported by two
Bishops, up to the Stage, and passing by the King does

Inclinare Regi, ejus Majestatem ut decet adorando.

After which she is led to the Throne, and is placed in it without further
Ceremony.

Then the Archbishop goes to the Altar, and begins a Communion, first
saying a prayer.

The Epistle and Gospel are read by a Bishop.

Then the Nicene Creed.

That done, the Queere sings, in the while the King and Queen come down to
offer; the King goes first to the Altar, and offers bread and wine for the
Communion.

Then returning to his Chair, goes again and offers a Mark of Gold.

Then the Queen goes to the Altar and offers.

Then the Archbishop pronounces over them a blessing.

Which being done, they are brought back to their Chairs hard by the Altar.

The Archbishop proceeds with the prayer, and then with the Confession.

After the Archbishop has Communicated himself and those that assist him, the
King and Queen comes to the steps of the Altar and receive the Communion.

The Archbishop ministers the Bread, and the Dean of Westminster the Cup.

That done, the King and Queen are brought back again to their Thrones, and
there stay until Service be ended.

After which the King and Queen come down from their Thrones in State, and go
to King Edward's Chapel.

There the King takes off the Crown, and delivers it to the Archbishop.

The Queen does the like.

He lays them on the Altar there.

The King withdraws himself into the Traverse there prepared, and the Queen
reposeth her self until the Kings return.

In the Traverse the great Chamberlain takes off King Edward's Robes and
delivers them to the Dean of Westminster.

The King puts on his own Robes Royal which were prepared for him to wear
that day.

He goes forth of the Traverse to King Edward's Altar, where the Archbishop
puts on the King and Queens heads the Imperial Crowns they are to wear that
day.

The train is set in order, and the King and Queen go back in most solemn
manner to the Palace gate the same way they came.

The King and Queen withdrawing themselves, after dinner the Scepter and the
Rod, part of the Regalia, are to be delivered to the Dean of Westminster.

FINIS.

