THE SPEECH OR CONFESSION OF Sir Alexander Carew BARONET: Who was beheaded on
Tower Hill on Monday December. 23. 1644.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bates at the Maidenhead on Snow-hill, near the
Conduit. And J.W.J. in the Old Bailey. 1644.

The Speech or Confession of Sir Alexander Carew Baronet, who was beheaded on
Tower Hill, on Monday December. 23. 1644.
ON Monday December 23. in the forenoone about 10. of the Clock, Sir Alexander
Carew was brought from the Tower, guarded by the Lieutenant thereof, and his
Officers (assisted by two Companies of the Trained-Bands) unto a Scaffold
erected on Tower Hill for that purpose.

After he was come upon the Scaffold he spoke to the Ministers that were with
him, and one Minister desired him to speak somewhat to clear the Justice
against him.

Ca. The greatest enemy against me under the Sun can lay but the suspicion of
the fact against me; I desire not to spin out time, I desire to be at my
period, I have besought God on my knees oftentimes that I might be dissolved,
and God would never grant it me till now, and blessed be God for it.

Min. We may not desire to go out of the World, but upon a true foundation.

Ca. God knows his own, etc.

Lieut. When you went down into Cornewell, these were your words, you bid me,
God be with me, and hoped you should give a good account of your business.

Ca. I Will lay no blame upon any other body, but take all to my self.

Min. You say the only true way to salvation is by Christ.

Ca. I confess it, and I confess my ways, that I am a sinful creature to
God, with all my heart, I acknowledge it before God and all you.

Min. Think not that he will strain your conscience.

Ca. No, God forbid, but i will do that duty which I come here for, I thank you
all for your good admonitions, and it is not now to do, for I have survayed my
self over and over again, and with indignation for my sins, and especially
my Pride, and my stout heartedness.

Min. It is stoutnesse that should trouble us all.

Ca. All that you can lay to my charge is but intention, and no man knows my
intentions better then my self, and they shall die with my self, put me to
what Tortures you please; Sir, this is clear that when I came a shore at
Plymouth, I asked them whether they would believe me what I said, they told me
no. I am in that condition that whatsoever I say is not to be believed, and
therefore I have leave to hold my peace.

Then being demanded, whom he would have stay with him on the Scaffold, he
turned to his brethren, and said, These are my kindred, my ancestors were
counted honest men.

The people calling, and desiring to see him, room was made for him to come to
the front of the Scaffold, where he spoke thus to the people:

GEntlemen, I hope you will (in consideration of my weak body) not expect that I
should speak much to you, neither is it my part to discourse (nor my desire)
of my own actions, and to justify my self, but I shall rather confess as
the poor Publican did, Lord be merciful to me a sinner. I desire your prayers
to God for me, and I pray to God for you, that no one drop of my blood may be
required at any man's hands. I forgive all the world, with as full and hearty
desire as mortal man can, and I beseech God to forgive me mine. The God of
Heaven and Earth, that sees, hears, and beholds, knows that I lie not. I
have desired with unfeigned desire and hearty affection to be dissolved and to
be with Christ, knowing it shall be better for me, being assured thereby to be
freed from the misery of sin, and enter into a better life. It was the last
words and writing of my grandfather, and here of my father, Holding forth a
little Book.
the assurance of their eternal peace and happiness, after the dissolution of
this body of theirs, in which they lived here on earth; it is mine likewise. I
have no more to say, but I take my humble leave of you.

Then he desired the people to join with him in singing the 23 Psalm, which he
tuned, and read himself to the people. The last words of the Psalm being
ended, he added,

And God assisting me, seal my vow with my blood, and rather suffer wrong then
do it.

Then the Executioner spoke to him desiring him to forgive him.

Ca. I forgive thee and thank thee too with Heart unfeigned, and giveing him
money said, prithee leave my Clothes take my Head, and do it handsomely else
thou can not speak Dutch, and say well godon.

J die J thank God rich in Gods favor.

Then bidding his friends God be with you he spoke to the Executioner.

Do thou hear, when I say, Lord though thou killest me yet will J put my
trust in thee, then do thou cut off my head, For it was the last words that
ever my Mother spoke when she died.

And when he had said Lord into thy hands J commend my spirit, he laid
himself down, with his Head over the Block and speaking these words, Lord
though, etc. And then the Executioner did his Office.

FJNIS.

