MEMENTO MORI

skull and crossbones emblem
AN ELEGY Sacred to the Memory of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey Knight; Whose Body
was lately found Barbarously Murdered, and since Honorably Interred, the 31th
of October, 1678.
AN ELEGY! forbear: who ere profanes
This lasting Name with cheap unhallowed strains,
Commits a Murder second to their Guilt,
By whose infernal Hands his Blood was spilt.
So vast a Merit, and so strange a Fate,
Must not be Blazoned at the common Rate;
With mercenary Rhyme, Set-forms of Praise,
Or stale Applauses which bold Flatterers raise
To pin upon some Hearse, whose waiting throng
Mourn only 'cause the party lived so long.
Those customary Sighs have here no part;
We Weep in earnest, and untaught by Art.
Slight Griefs may speak aloud; but those that come
From deep Resentments of our Loss, are dumb.
As when fierce Thunder the Worlds Poles does shake,
Or Winds break Jail, and make the Earth to quake,
Mortals amazed, can scarce express their Fears;
But only court Heavens aid with silent Prayers:
So this dire Fact (which equal Terror brought)
Stifles our Reason, and Benums our Thought.
A Chilling Horror thrills through every Vein;
Each honest man by Sympathy is slain,
Or feels with Him, though not the Death, the pain.
It Is dangerous to be Good: well may we praise
Virtue or Innocence; but who can raise
A power that shall secure them, or withstand
The Assassinations of a bloody Hand?
He whose clear Life might an Example be
Of upright Justice, generous Charity;
That public spirit that laid out his Store
TO employ and cherish all industrious Poor;
And never with any did a Feud profess,
But busy Treason, and lewd Idleness:
Whose Actions were not framed merely for sight,
Like artful Pieces placed in a fit light,
That they may take at distance; but appear
Most fair, when you observe them most, and near.
This LOYAL PATRIOT, by untimely Fate,
And basest cruelties of unjust Hate,
Falls as a Victim for the Church and State.
Could we have seen with what composed Eyes
He entertained th'astonishing surprise;
How he with Christian grandeur did engage
Their sharpest Malice, and their utmost Rage;
T'had filled our minds with thoughts enlarged and high,
And taught unhappy Heroes how to die.
Methinks t'observe how Virtue draws faint breath,
Subject to Slanders, Plots and Violent Death;
How many dangers on best actions wait,
Right checked by Wrong, and ill men fortunate:
These moved Effects from an unmoved Cause,
Might shake an easy Faith; Heavens sacred Laws
Might casual seem, and our irregular Sense
Spurn at just Order, and blame Providence:
Did we not know, there is an adored Will
In all that happs to Men, or Good, or Ill,
Suffered, or sent; and what is Man to pry
Into th'Abyss of such a Mystery?
The Rising Sun to mortal sight reveals
This lower Globe; but the bright Stars conceals.
So may our Sense discover natural things;
But those Divine soar above Human^ Wings.
Then not the Fate, but Fates bad Instrument
Let us accuse, in each sad accident.
Good men must die: Rapes, Incest, MURDERS come;
But Woe and Curses follow them by whom.
God Authors all men's Actions, not their Sin;
For that proceeds from devilish Lust within.
Nor let the barbarous Actors hug their Crime,
Because they lurk concealed for a time:
Heaven sees, and will expose what they have done,
No doubt, ere long, to Justice and the Sun.
Mean time, loaded with Blood, Horror, and Fear,
And that which crowns all Villainy, Despair;
May they possess their PURGATORY here,
And as Cains sin, so his Self-tortures bear.
May they the wounding stripes of Conscience feel,
That lashes Guilt with whips of flaming steel,
So long, till they shall count Deaths pains far less,
And freely come the Murder to confess.
But as when stinking Exhalations rise,
And with black storms invade the purer skies;
They cannot put out the Sun, though hide his Rays,
Which quickly he more gloriously displays:
So these vile hands in their Revenge are poor;
In murdering Him, their Cause they murder more.
Hells Agents do but hasten him Heaven's way,
And Powers of darkness antedate his day.
In vain, in vain, is all their cursed spite:
He still survives in Fields of blissful light,
And with a pitying smile from thence looks down,
Ennobled with a Martyrs brighter Crown;
Whilst at the Interment of his slumbering Clay,
A weeping Nation shall just Honors pay.
FINIS.
H. C.

Licensed, October. 30. 1678.

LONDON: Printed for Langley Curtis in Coat-Court on Ludgate Hill. 1678.


