To the Honorable, the Commons of England in Parliament Assemble(...)
The humble Petition of Abel Carew, an Excluded Doorkeeper from This
Honorable House.
Humbly Shows,
THAT if your Petitioner had nothing to have helped himself, and had no(...)
met with some Friends that employed him in Writing, by which he made a shift to
live, he might have starved for want of Relief, in reference to his Place, ever
since Their Majesty's came to the Crown; for a poor Man's Employment in
reference to his livelihood is as much to him as a rich Man's Employment or
Estate of a Thousand a Year is to him, Isa. 3. 15. so that there is a right
belongs to the poor (...) to well as the rich* but that which is above all,
your Petitioner is for all Men to render unto Caesar the things that are Cesars,
and unto God the things that are Gods; and accordingly as the Kings Honor is
in the whole Nation, so that whatsoever all the Protestants in England can do
for the King and Queen, it is not comparable to that inestimable kindness of
the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's, in securing and preserving the
Protestant Religion against Popery, etc. and as the Convention Parliament
denied the Popes Supremacy upon their Coronation of King William and Queen
Mary; so your Petitioner is for all the Protestants in England to be unanimous
in their denial of the Popes Supremacy, and acknowledge King William and Queen
Mary to be Supreme: But your Petitioner was never against making a
gratification for any kindness that he receiv^s, as considering the words of
King Solomon, Prove. 18 16. A man's gift makes room for him, and brings him
before great men; and accordingly your said Petitioner ^aving now presented
your Honors with the aforesaid vindication of the Protestant Religion, or of
the innocence of the Martyrs against Popery, etc. as being the best of gifts,
so he hopes it will obtain for him the favor, benignity and benevolence of all
you^ Honors above and before any thing of a Sum of Money in buying and selling
of Plac^s, and your said Petitioners vindication of the Protestant Religion, or
of the Innocence of the Martyrs, against Popery, etc. is all the Offense that
he has comm^tted against any person, and is the only cause of your said
Petitioners being kept out of his Door-Keepers Place belonging to this
Honorable House, by the late Sergeant at Arms Deceased, as having yet had no
Relief ever since Their Majesty's came to the Crown, and if it is in the power
of any Officer, attending the Service of this Honorable House to Restore your
said Petitioner either sor Money or without Money, how much more is it in all
your Honors power to Restore and Continue him in his said Doorkeepers Place,
upon his vindication of the Protestant Religion, or of the Innocence of the
Martyrs against Popery, etc. But what partiallity is this, that if a Man gives
a Sum of Money for a Place, and afterward shall be turned out of it, and can
have no Justice showed him for his Money, how will that be looked upon to be,
as bad as picking of a Man's Pocket, but as the Martyrs suffered greater
injustice then picking of a Man's Pocket, so certainly the innocence of the
Martyrs in reference to the Protestant Religion ought to be Regarded.

Therefore your Petioner prostrates himself to all your Honors Mercies,
praying for all your Honors Commiseration (in your Zeal for the innocence of
the Martyrs, or for the Protestant Religion against Popery) to Restore and
continue him in his Door-Keeper's Place, and your Petitioner does now hope that
no Person of Quality whatsoever and worthy Member of this Honorable House that
were formerly his Friends will now be against him; for true Liberallity and
Beneficence is (...) to the innocence of the Martyrs,


