THE ARAIGNMENT OF HYPOCRISY: OR, A Looking-glass for Murderers and
Adulterers; And all others That Profes Religion, and make show of Holiness, yet
deny the Power and Practice thereof in their Lives and Conversations.

Being a fearful EXAMPLE of Gods Judgments on Mr. Barker, Minister of Gods
Word at Pytchley two miles from Ketterin in Norhamptonshire; Who For living in
Adultery with his near Kinswoman, and concealing the Murder of her Infant, was
with his Kinswoman and Maidservant executed at Northampton.

With the strange manner of the Discovery of that horrid Murder; And their
several SPEECHES immediately before their Deaths.

Printed at London by John Crowch and T.W. 1652.

To the Reader.
IT is not unknown to many in Northamtonshire, and elsewhere how strict a
Professor, and how much followed this Minister was by many People who were
termed Puritanes; for his Person and Profession, I shall have that Charity, as
to pass by, But for his crime, which was Adultery and Murder, (being the
reigning sins of these Times) he having already suffered for the same, I shall
only give you the brief Relation thereof, and referr you to his own Speech at
his Death.

He having a near Kinsman, who at his death committed his only Daughter to his
care and Tuition, who growing to maturity, he tempted to his Lust, and got her
with Chide, and the closer to hide his sin, and the shame thereof from the
eye of the World, and his wronged Wife, procured Savin, and gave it her to
destroy her Child, but that failing, he juggl'd so with his Maidservant, that
with the help of the Mother, they barbarously and inhumanly mudered the same.

But God (that will not let Murder go unpunished) discovered the same by a
little Boy, who being in an Apple Tree gathering Apples, saw Mr. Barker dig
the Hole in the Orchard, and the Maidservant bring the Child and put it
therein. Vale,

Thine J. C.

THE Arraignment of Hypocrisy. Mr. Barker's SPEECH.
DEar Friends, I ought rather to fall a weeping over you, then to begin to
speak to you; but I can do neither as I would; for indeed my strength is spent
as well as my time, but yet as well as I may (God enabling me) I will endeavor
to give the world satisfaction in clearing my conscience, speaking the truth in
the discovery of mine offenses: You know, and I think here is none ignorant,
that two things have brought me to this sad, fatal, dismal place, Murder and
Adultery; and for the latter of the two I confess my self exceeding faulty; I
am foully guilty of Incontinency, and I think that in this kind there is not any
like me in the world, so gross an offender have I been, very unclean, and
wonderful vile that way, although those that knew me did not think I had bin
such a wretch. It is my fault I confess that brought these two already dead, of
my family, to their end; so that I may say, I have sinned, I have done
wickedly; but these sheep, what have they done? Let thy hand be against me and
my fathers house; for I have a long time continued in this gross vile sin of
uncleaness, and have many times expressed it by wanton words, thoughts, and
actions, and that to her who was near to me, near allied to me, dear to me,
that was committed to my care by her dearest friends, who hoped better then
what has befallen.

This odious sin I committed with her that professed Religion, that had excellent
parts, that was well proportioned, that was beautiful, that had good gifts,
one that had received much illumination by me, and I received much good by her;
Oh that I might have died to have preserved their lives! But oh! such a vile
wretch I have bin, that although I preached against that sin, yet I lived in
it, though I had many checks of conscience, and many reproofs by others Sermons
that I heard in diverse places, yet I lived in it, and continued so to do, and
so I am persuaded I should have done till I had died in that sin, and been
damned for that sin, if God had not taken this course to bereave me of this
great sin, my Master-sin, my bosom-sin, this abominable sin, for which I now
abhor my self: Oh that I could lament and mourn for this sin, and all other
mine offenses with tears of blood, yea as many as I have done water since my
sinning, and that against such light and knowledge! O that I should live in and
love such a sin so long, that was a Minister, a Preacher, one that was noted
and followed all the Country over, such a man as I in an eminent Calling; but
my Hypocrisy was very great to live in such a sin, such an odious sin, such a
base course of life, under a Cloak of Religion, a mere form of Godliness, so
that it may be justly said of me, What have thou to do to take my Word into thy
mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed? Yet was I taken for a sincere, and
(as the World counts them) a Puritan-Minister, I was taken for a strict godly
man, but alas there was no such matter in me. (Beloved) I fell into this
grievous sin, and all other my offenses, for want of Religion, for want of
holiness, that was the cause of my dangerous falling; for had Religion been in
me in truth? had a good foundation of holiness been grounded and settled in my
soul, I had never so foully miscarried as I have, and been such an offense and
offender as I am? I have been (I confess) a great offense to true Religion, to
the faithful Ministry, and to the holy profession of the Gospel: it is true
that offenses shall come, but woe to them by whom the offense comes, and that
heavy woe has overtaken me, and falls very sore upon me, that I should be a
great means and cause of scandalizing the truth: Oh, how is my mind
distracted! Oh, that I could do God some service, some honor now at the last!
Oh that I could convert all you that hear me! Oh that the words of a dying man
might take impression upon you, to work in you a hatred of all sinful ways!
Oh that I could be an instrument of good to you, to turn you from your sinful
ways! But I know to my grief, my fall is that which some do rejoice in, that
they may hereby take occasion to jeer, sing, and rhyme of it on the Ale-bench:
Well take it from me (and they are the words of a dying man) that the falls of
the faithful are the destruction of the wicked; Christ himself was set for the
fall and rising again of many in Israel; But by one miscarriage they will take
occasion and liberty to sin, although they destroy themselves; Now will such
say, Come man, do not you know how such and such, and such strict dissembling
Puritans have lived themselves? Thus will they encourage themselves and others
in all sorts of voluptuous ways: But consider this I beseech you, that this
your resolved plodding on in sinful ways and stumbling at the falls and
infirmities of Gods Servants, your taking offense at the falls of the Saints,
will break your necks into Hell as it has done mine, if the Lord be not
infinitely merciful to me for Christ's sake; And that woe that falls on me,
will fall on you to your everlasting perdition: Oh, but I have been the cause
of the death of these two already dead, and of a thousand thousand souls,
which I fear will take liberty presumptuously to sin by my evil example: Oh
for Gods sake, as you love your precious souls, do not (I charge you) speak
evil of the truth of God for my fault: Speak as bad as you will of me, for you
cannot speak bad enough, but let me tell you thus much, and I speak the truth,
that all those whom the world calls Puritan-Preachers, Puritan-Professors, are
the best people in the world, however the world does esteem of them, and judge
them. I tell you my grievous fall was for want of true Grace, for want of
embracing the Truth for the love of Truth; Know therefore thus much, That
although holiness and holy men be scoft at, yet without holiness ye shall
never see God; you must walk in the Truth, and abide in that way that is called
Puritanisme, or ye shall never come to Heaven, but shall certainly be damned;
therefore do not say in dislike of Religion, that it is naught, or that Gods
ways be not right; do not say the Sacraments, Preaching, Prayer, Meditation,
Gods Ordinances, holy Duties, are naught, and they are naught that use them,
and that because I am scandalously fallen, do not say they are all such: No,
let it be far from you, let the burden lie upon me, I codfess I was naught, and
so are all such Hypocrites as I am; but I beseech you speak not evil, open not
your mouths against the Gospel or Profession, Gods pure Worship and Service,
for my being a wretch; Gods Service is holy, his ways good, safe and
delightful, and full of Honor; and it is better to be his servant then to be
servant to the greatest Monarch on earth; I pray you then labor to be his
Servants, and to obey his Will and Commands, set down in his Word, go you by
that Rule I have swerved from: Oh that I was assured of being his Servant! How
would it comfort my heart, and cheer up my spirit in the great straight I am
now in! Oh that the Lord would lift up the light of his countenance, that I
might have some little glimpse of his favor! Oh that the LORD would open one
little crevise to me, that might apprehend his love! Oh what is one drop of
Christ's Blood worth? what would I give to have it? He was answered, He might
have it for nothing, the Brazen Serpent Jesus is set forth, Now whosoever can
by faith apprehend his love, and apply it to themselves, are justified and
sanctified before God. Oh then (said he) pray for me as for your own souls, you
that are in Covenant with God, your prayers are prevalent: Oh pray that this
hard heart of mine may be softened! Oh pray that the Lord would be good unto
me, or else I shall be damned presently, I am now going whence I shall not
return, even into eternity of glory or torment, Oh what shall I do! it had
bin good for me I had not bin borne; Death is terrible to all out of Christ,
and the Lord is not reconsiled to me in Christ, hides him self from me, Then
pulling down his hatt over his eyes, he mournfully said, Has God forgotten
to be gracious? has he shut up his tender mercies in displeasure? will the
Lord cast off for ever? will he be gracious no more? These his complaints
occasioned much mourning and bewailing his estate. Then said Mr. Ball, Mr.
Barker I have told you that you have so much dishonored God, that it may be
the Lord will not honor you so far as to manifest his love to you, he reserves
that till afterward. Then said he, I have done with the first, my foul sin of
uncleanness: Now for the Murder, of which I do here upon my death profess, I am
not guilty neither in act ^or in consenting to the death of that Infant; the
Lord forgive, and so do I my violent persecutors with all their bitter and
malicious intendments and proceedings against me; indeed I confess that many
murderous thoughts have gone through my soul; but these, although they deserve
death by Gods Law, yet man's Law takes no hold of them, yet for these bloody
thoughts, and my lustful filthy unclean life, I have deserved this death, and
a worse too, and herein I desire to magnify the just hand of the Lord in
bringing to light my shameful foul offenses, and I desire to magnify all his
holy Attributes, his Mercy, Justice, wisdom, Power, Truth, Goodness, and the
rest of them, in that he has now let me have experience of them all, that in
as much as I have dishonored him, he most justly has dishonored me, and
brought me out, and made me visible by such a Correction as this, for other
Chastisements that were more gentle, would not serve, nor stay me from my
greedy pursuit, and going on in this vile course of life, exceeding vicious, I
that taught others did not learn my self, for which I earnestly crave pardon of
Almighty God, (which he did very fervently, and (I hope) effectually) Then he
sung the 31. Psalm, some of all the three Parts, as much as was convenient for
that occasion. When that was ended, it was demanded of him, that if he had no
hand in the Murder, but were guiltless, why and for what end he made the
Grave; He answered, when he made the hole, it was his Maids and Kinswomans
opportunity, for they told me (said he) it was to receive such things as modest
men and women may easily conceive what. Then he was asked why he did not
diligently inquire further, having such a just cause of suspicion: He answered,
I confess my self too blame and faulty herein. Then he was asked, Why he had a
hand in procuring Savin for his Kinswoman whom he loved so well, and from whom
he had received so much good, and to wbom he endeavored to do so much good? He
answered, therein he did but as he was requested and entreated, and for it he
was but a Messenger for both of them; his Kinswoman and Maid told him, that if
she had some of that to take, it would bring down those things which used to
come monthly, the stopping whereof made her so ill as she said. But (said he)
here is the just hand of the Lord, that has not, and will not spare sin in
any, no not in his own, but will severely punish it in all first or last, as
here you may see I am brought to an end unbeseeming a Minister. I blame not the
Judge nor the Jury, nor the Prosecutors but my self; and therefore (good
People) do not think the worse of God, or of his faithful Ministers for my
sin, I pray you again and again; for if you should, you may condemn the
generation of the Just, for my wretched life and errors do not say they are all
such. Remember you have been told by them that are now dead, and by my self;
You may as well say, that because there was one Judas a Thief, a Traitor among
the Apostles, that therefore they were all Thieves and Traitors, and so you may
utterly undo your souls and bodies by affirming such an untruth, such a false
conclusion; Blame me a sinful wicked man, and lay the fault of this scandal
and offense upon me: Oh that I could do that good as I have done hurt, and
that my life and blood would stop the mouths of the enemies of the truth, who
will say (I know) when I am gone and dead, I knew and saw one hanged as precize
as you; Oh how it cuts my heart that I have been such an offense to my own
calling and Profession! You of the Ministry, I pray you forgive me, and pardon
my offensive life: You that profess the glorious Gospel, forgive me, for I have
made all your hearts sad, I have been a great cause of grief to all of you, and
an occasion for you to have in your dish when I am dead. Alas! good Sirs, what
shall I do? I am presently to appear before the great Judge of all the World;
Oh how bitter are the thoughts of death to me! How shall I do to encounter
with Death! Then he was told that JESUS CHRIST had pulled out the Sting of
Death, which is sin, for all that live godly and righteously in this present
World; Yea, but said he, I am ungodly and unrighteous; What shall I do? He
was answered, That CHRIST came not to call the Rsghteous, but Sinners to
repentance. Oh, (said he) that Repentance and godly sorrow is that which I
want. He was then advised to have (...) course to him that gives liberally
unto all, and respects none.

Then said he, Mine end is reproachful; He was answered, It was not so bad,
nor so bitter as Christ's upon the Cross, and yet he submitted to his Fathers
Will, and further, That it was better to go from the Callowes to heaven, then
from a Down-bed to hell.

God corrects every Son whom he receives. Then he said, How am I pressed with
my sins? How does the burden of them oppress me? He then was wished to accept
of that Invitation,

Matthew. 11.28. Now your poor wounded soul is laden and weary, come unto me, and
I will ease you. Then said he, direct me, and I will be ruled by you, then he
was told, That all those who are saved from hell, are justified freely by the
grace of God, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. The Ministers
told him, That now it was not how many, or how foul his offenses were, if he
had faith to come to Jesus Christ, and to lay hold on him, He that comes to
me, I will in no case cast off. I (said he) but may I believe you, may I ground
upon your words? He was answered, He might take Gods Word, who has commanded
you to believe the Prophets and you shall prosper, and has said, that Christ
loves to the uttermost them that come to him. Then said he, upon this
Foundation will I build, ^ere will I build, here will I rely, and repose my
^elf, though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. And yet ^e said, Oh that I
might see your faces in Heaven, and were as sure to be there as you are! He
was told, They hoped he should, though he went before them. Oh (said he) what a
merry and joyful meeting should we have! He was then told, that this was a
good Argument that he was translated from death to life, because he loved the
Brethren, and wished their salvation. Oh (said he) I do love you, and am loath
to part with you that love and fear the Lord. Then was he told, That the Church
triumphant and the Church militant are such as do belong one to another, the
Saints there, and the godly here, are all of a company. Why then (said he) you
say I must rest only on Christ for Salvation, and upon his free grace and
mercy. Yea (said the Ministers) for God is faithful that has promised, and to
them that truly Believe and Repent, the sinfulness of the sinner does not
make the grace of God of none effect; You know (Mr. Barker) what your Wife
said, That if she had a House full of Gold, she would give it with all her
Heart to save your Life; Why then Mr. Barker (said they) argue thus for your
eternal comfort, from the lesser to the greater, The love of the Creature is
finite, but the love of the Creator is infinite, If your Wife whom you have
wronged so much, does so love you, The love of the LORD passes the Love of
Women. Then said he, I will throw away all my other Foundations, all my Latin,
Greek and Hebrew, it will do me no good, all my Labors and Duties, I cast
them all away, and close with JESUS CHRIST: I come LORD JESUS CHRIST, Oh plead
thou for me, bequeath thy Righteousness unto we; And this must you do all that
hear me this day, You must go out of your selves, and out of your best
Duties, as Reading, Hearing, Receiving the Sacraments, Works of Charity,
Fasting, Prayer, Singing of Psalms, and the like, you must not think to be
saved by them, nor for them, fly you to CHRIST alone, who has left unto us the
Words of Eternal Life, Be continually using holy Duties, and abound in them,
but trust not to them, rest not in them; I, but this new Work is but lately
wrought in me, it is but since yesterday, for before I had a hard stony heart
that could not repent, I deferred to seek God in truth, flattering my self
with vain hopes of life; Surely I had never this Work of Grace in truth, but
since yesterday; Oh Mr. Rogers, the Son of a godly Father, you were an
Instrument of breaking my hard heart, it is not two days since. To this answer
was made, this was but the seed-time, this was but the earnest, the full
Vintage and fruition of grace in glory. Oh Sirs, what think you of me? They
answered, very well, seeing the LORD has so broken your heart, and brought you
out of your self. Why I thank God (said he) I have some Peace, Conscience is a
little quieter, it does not smite nor check me now, whilst I hasten to that
full fruition of glory which the LORD has prepared for them that, love him,
for my time is at an end, and my strength is spent, I now take my leave of
every one of you (shaking many by the hands) I leave you to him that is able to
preserve you blameless till his appearing. And you of the Ministry, and ^^^^ers
that Pr^^^^ the Gospel, I beseech you to walk honestly and circumspectly, you
had need so to do amongst a froward People with whom you dwell; Love the
Faithful Ministers, reverence them; for these are the Mosesses that stand in
the gapp, these are the Lots that defer Fire and Brimstone from Sodom, these
hold up the hands, else Amaleck would prevail; Make much of these Bushes that
stop the Gapps, for if these were taken away, the dropps of Gods angry
displeasure would with their fearful effects be more seen among us then they
are, Have a care hereof;

Once again I take my leave of you (said he) and so giving his Executioner a
Piece of money; he commended his Soul and Body into the hand of the Lord,
saying;

LORD into thy hands I commend my spirit. AND Lord JESUS receive my Soul.

And so was Executed.

The 2 young Women's Speeches that suffered with him, consisted of these Three
Heads.
1 ALl Persons whatsoever were exhorted by their examples to take heed of all
Sin whatsoever, as Swearing, Cursing, Pilfering, Cozening, Sabbath-breaking,
Covetousness, Pride, Formality, Slighting of Gods Servants, Hypocricy; but
Lying, both of them did bewail in special manner, the Maidservant said, It
was her bane; the other said, She played the beast in Lying to the Judge,
thinking to save her life hereby, and it did oppress her very sore, and (said
she) I persuade my self it has eclipsed the light of Gods Countenance from
me, for I lied against my knowledge.

2. That all that have the charge in Childrens Education, would be admonished
to place them in Religious Families: and let none say, So were you placed, and
we see what is befallen you, for (said they) it is the want of true Religion in
our hearts that has undone us.

3. They acknowledged themselves guilty of that for which they dyed, and they
cleared Mr. Barker from having any hand in the Murder, and they did advise all
People to take heed of trusting to any mortal Creature, and of relying too
much upon any friends, or any thing here below, but to cast their care upon the
Lord alone forever.

FINIS.

