Coll. SIDNEY'S Lamentation and Last Farewell to the World.
Being Condemned for High Treason, in Conspiring the Death of His Sacred
Majesty, and Royal Brother.
^ NOw, now too weak, alas! I find our Cause,
To The overruling Powers the King and Laws
The force of our Impregnant Torrent's turned,
The Plots and Shams of our Inventions scorned:
Now I do fear what I could never believe,
Some Powers above does all our Wits deceive;
And laughs at our Assosiatious Vow,
Poor Traitors! where is our Ignoramus now?
II.
These Forty Years I Have Reigned in Roguery,
With kind success, against Lawful Monarchy;
And now must my gray Head be over-reacht,
And my stiff Neck by strength of halter stretched
In the beginning Friends, it was not so,
In Forty-One, now Forty Years ago;
I feared not then no God, nor King, nor Law,
Poor Traitors! where is our Ignoramus now?
III.
On the late King I sat as Judge most stout,
By virtue of our Senate, Rump, and Rout;
Saw him condemned and Murdered at White Hall
His Sacred Blood does now for Vengeance call:
With his own Gold I did Command and fight,
Against his Son, and all Successive Right;
And never repented yet, nor can I bow,
Poor Traitors! where is our Ignoramus now?
IV.
This King returned, which I with arms persu'd
With Tony I for Pardon did intrude;
What e're we asked his Grace did freely grant,
Preferment too, which his best friends did want
My pride in opposition still did show,
A crooked Plant will never straighter grow;
And now too late I grieve all would not do,
Poor Traitors! where is our Ignoramus now?
V.
With Tony, Gray, and Russel, I Conspired
My Princes death, and many thousands hyr'd
To Arm themselves in every Town and Shire,
To Murder both this King and Lawful Heir,
And lay it all upon the Papists backs,
Which with the weight of our own Treason cracks;
And for our Crimes, to murder them allow,
Poor Traitors! where is our Ignoramus now?
VI.
We draw'd in M -- h to advance the Cause
And made him Populer by Fools Applause;
We made his Soul swell big to be a King,
When we alas! intended no such thing:
Now all is Unravel'd, both Cabals and Plot,
My poor old Head must hang and go to the Pot;
Zounds I Would still Rebel did I know how,
Poor Traitors! where is our Ignoramus now?
VII.
At Oxford we were Rampant, over-fed,
The Tail was ten times stronger than the Head;
Yet quite outwitted by too kind a King,
Then we to Rumbolds House our Arms did bring
Yet all was still prevented by strange Fate,
Had I with Tony made a safe Retreat,
Then Ketch had never held up my Traiterous jaw
Poor Traitors! where is our Ignoramus now?
FINIS.
Printed for J. Dean, in Cranborn-street, in Leicester-Fields, over against
Newport-House: 1683.


