COLONEL POYERS FORCES IN WALES TOTALLY ROUTED.

By the Parliaments Forces commanded by Colonel Horton, who took Prisoners,
Major Genesis Stradling. Colonel Philips. Colonel Bulls. Their Quartermaster
General. 2 Lieutenant Colonels. 3 Majors. 140 Captains, and other Officers.
Many Country Gentlemen. 3000 Common soldiers. 4000 Arms. 1200 Horse. Many
slain. All their Colors, Ammunition, Bag and Baggage taken. Major Genesis
Laughorn, and some other Officers escaped, but all that got away were so
dispiersed, that there is not 10 to be found together.


Certified by Letters to the Parliament, ordered to be printed; and confirmed
by the Relation of Major Bethel, and others which were actually in the service.

May 11. 1648.

Imprimatur Gilb. Mabbott.

London, Printed by B.A. MDCXLVIII.

A LETTER Concerning the proceed ngs in WALES
Honored Sir,
ON Monday the 8. of this instant May, Lieut. Genesis Cromwell had a Randezvouz of
those Regments which are designed for him against Poyer, near Glouces^er, and
although at the first there was some discontent for want of money, yet after
some satisfaction given that way, both Horse and Foot were unanimously for this
expedition.

The Lieut. Gen, and the rest of the Field-Officers passed from Regiment to
Regiment, and made a speech, Declaring to the whole Briggade, the grounds and
reasons of their present march, and necessity of joining together as one man,
to suppress that party under Poyer and Powel, who endeavored to begin a new
war, and disturb the peace of the whole Kingdom.

There being at this time present in the field 6500. and odd, horse and foot,
they ecchoed forth with loud voice, and elevated spirit that they would all
with read^ness and cheerfulness march forwards on this design, and adventure
their lives for the Parliament, and preservation of the Kingdom against all
oppo^ers, under the command and conduct of their respective Officers.

All things thus secretly composed in love and readiness, to give obedience to
commands, the whole Briggard was drawn to several quarters that n g^t, having
or^ers given to meet again at 6 of the clock the next morning and so to march
forwards by Monmouth to join with col. Horton, and so to engage the enemy to
fight, or drive them into corners.

This week Letters came hither out of North Wales, setting forth the good
affections of the Gentry in those parts to the Parliament, and inviting his
Excellencies Forces that way, as^uring them, that they will be ayding and
assist ng them for the reducing of Poyer, and those that are joined with him.

Lieut. Genesis Cromwell its thought will be joined with col. Horton w^thin 3 or 4
days; by the ^ext we home to hear good news from thence and at present I
hope this is sufficient to stop the mouths of those which have raised a Report
that the Lieut. Genesis was either in London, or come back wounded to Winsor.

This by way of d gression, from the Intelligence I was writing, but I shall
here return again to that of Wales, wherein this is further to be observed, hat
as Noth-Wales are generally affected to the Parliament and Army (as I said
before) yet South Wales for the most part seem to be quite other way, and a
Declaration is drawn up and published amongst them, to t is effect.

A Declaration of the Knights, Gentry, and Yeomen of the Principality of Wales.
THat we his Majesty's true and loyal subjects for reasons before set forth,
do hereby declare, that we will effectually endeavor to restore the Kings
Majesty and his Royal Posterity to all their rights and privileges, and the
Book of Common Prayer, and the setting of Religion, as it was established in
the time of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and the be^inning of his now Majesty's
Reign, against all that do, or shall oppose the same.

The 9. or this instant May diverse Gentlemen of the town of Reading came to
the Head quarters at Winsor, and acquainted the General, that the malignant
party of that town beat up drums for God and King Charles, that their party was
like to increase, unless some speedy, cours^^ were taken to suppress them,
etc. Whereupon ^is Excellency ordered some horse to go thither, and appease
that tumult, which was done accordingly.

The General is now preparing for the North, from whenc we hear of very sad
complaints. This is all for the present, from

Your assured friend, T. M.
Winsor 10 of May, 1648.
The Copy of a Letter from Newcastle.
Worthy Sir,
Since the taking of Barwick, sir Marmad. Langdale writ a complemental Letter
to Capt. Batten. Governor of the Holy-Island, desiring him to keep the Castle
for the King; the Captain immediately sent a copy thereof to sir Arthur
Hasterigg, who immediately thereupon sent 30 more Soldiers to the Captain, for
better securing of the Fort: the Frigot which was sent to Barwick upon her
coming into the Harbor, discharged two broad sides against the town, which
made them within think all was not like to be well with them; our Governor
likewise on the first instant, mounted a considerable number of musketeers on
horseback, and sent them to secure the Warkworth castle, a strong hold that
belongs to the Earl of Northumberland situate near the Sea, upon the mouth
of the River of Coquet, which runs through the middle of Northumberland.

The popish and malignant party flock apace forth of these Counties, to
Barwick, no doubt Royal Presbyter, where those that hold the town are very
active, sending forth summons, to be at a Randezvouz upon Hedgley Moor, 4 or 5
miles from Alewich, to be there listed for the service of the King Colonel Gray
having also summoned all my Lord Gray of Walk his tenants to join with them.

The High Sheriff of Northumberland and many Justices of peace, are enforced
to fly to Newcastle for the safe^y of their persons, leaving their houses and
goods exposed to the danger of the enemy.

At the meeting last week of the several Northern Counties at Richmond, it is
agreed that some of Colonel Lamberts troops of horse stay in Yorkshire, and
the rest about a thousand to be drawn down to Northumberland and Cumberland.
This town being at a general meeting, desired to declare, whether they would
stand for the Parliament, etc.

Newcastle 6. of May, 1648.
Letters came to the House from Col. Horton, dated May 9. brought by Major
Bethel, certifying that the said colonel Horton and the forces under his
command, had obtained a great Victory against the Enemy in Wales; and after the
letters were read, Major Bethel was called into the house. and made a full
relation of the whole business, which in brief was thus.

Major Genesis Laughorn being come down into those parts, and joining with col.
Horton Powell, who had the command of the field forces which were gathered to
Poyer; they drew their forces together into a body, and marched down this way
through the Country toward Col. Horton at Cardiffe, which is about 50. or. 60
miles on this side Pembroke, and on the last Lords day they began to beat up
Colonel Hortons quarters and gave fire on his Sentinels; and although the
intended aid under the command of L G. Cromwell was not come up to them, yet the
Officers and Soldiers appeared full of resolution and valor. Whereupon Col.
Horton was resolved to fight with them (though far more in number then he) and
on Monday morning the 8 of this instant May, both sides met, and engaged in a
field fight at St. Thego, three miles from Cardiff, where Maj. Genesis Laughorn
commanded in chief the Welsh Forces, and Col. Horton the Parliaments Forces.
And after a sharp conflict (by the providence of God, and the gallantry of the
Officers and Soldiers, Major Genesis Laughorn, and Col. Poyer were totally
routed, and Col. Horton took as follows

Major Genesis Stradling. Col. Philips. Col. Bars. Their Quartermaster Genesis Two
Lieutenant Colonels. 3 Majors. 140 Captains, and other Offi^^^s. Many Country
Gentlemen. 3000. Common soldiers. 4000. Arms. 1200. Horse. Many slain. All
their Callers, Ammunition, Bagg, and Baggage taken. M. Genesis Laughorn and some
other Officers escaped, but all that got away were so dispiersed, that there is
not ten to be found together.
This business is of very great concernment, and for that it is of hard digest
on to many, which doubtless will endeavor to extenua^e the truth of this
Relation. Let such have only patience to hear for the present, and they will
experimentally subscribe hereto within few days, and acknowledge that in all
this action we lost not one Officer of quality.

FINIS.

