A COLLECTION OF Passages, concerning his Excellency and Officers, at the TOWER
OF LONDON: WHERE They Dined yesterday, being Tuesday Feb. 1. 1647 AND Several
Speeches were made by his Excellency, and the Lieutenant of the Tower and the
rest of the Officers.

WITH The disbanding of all his Excellencies Lifeguard.

ALSO The Copy of a Letter sent from his Excellency to all Colonels, and
Commanders in Chief, in the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1646.

A NARRATIVE Of His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX'S Coming To LONDON (to his
House in Queenstreet) and his Dinner in the TOWER: To which his Excellency was
invited by Col. Tit^hburn; Lieutenant of the Tower.
HIS Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax with a few Gentlemen came from Winsor to
London on Saturday January 29 (but had intended a day sooner, only was stayed
to dispatch some business of consequence at the Headquarters,) And lies at
his own House in Queen Street, But the Headquarters continue at Winsor still.

And for the ease of the Kingdom is disbanding of His own Lifeguard, that so
the Kingdom may be put to as little charges as may be.

His Excellency was by Colonel Titchburne Lieutenant of the Tower of London,
invited to dinner to the Tower on Tuesday February the first instant to which
His Excellency granted.

And on the said Tuesday in the morning Colonel Sir Hardresse Waler, Colonel
Baxter, Colonel Whaley and several other Colonels and Officers waited upon
His Excellency at His house in Queen street where His Excellency received,
and answered several Petitions.

About 11 of the Clock His Excellency with the Officers went from his House
and came to the Tower about 12. where His Excellency was entertained by the
Lieutenant thereof, And dined.

His Excellency and Officers with the said Leiutenant were very cheerful, and
had such good discourse of the mercies of God, as may be a pattern to all
others in the Kingdom.

And this may remind us, and His Excellency and Officers also of that sweet
harmony which was in the reciprocal embraces of all at the thanksgiving dinner
which his Excellency lately invited his Officers to, at which time there was a
renumeration of the great mercies of God to them, at which time there was much
of Gods goodness repeated, and what wonderful things God had done for them,
which was a general meeting of above one hundred Officers, with such embraces
and much love, and expressions of mirth and affections.

His Excellency on Tuesday aforesaid came only privately to dinner to the
Tower, and kept no Council there, only with the Lieutenant, and some Officers
viewed the Artillery and the Magazeen, and made some inquiry into the state of
things.

Some speeches passed from His Excellency, from the Lieutenant, and from the
rest, and all tending to love, and peace, and the execution of the Ordinances
and Instructions, from the Parliament and to assist the two Houses of
Parliament against all opposers.

His Excellency gave some instructions to the Lieutenant of the Tower, and
returned back to His House in Queene-streete, but the Head quarters are still
at Winsor.

Dated at the Tower of London Tuesday the 1 of Feb. 1647.
The Copy of an ORDER Sent to every Commander in Chief, enclosed in a Letter
from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of all the Parliaments Forces,
in England and Wales.
BY virtue of a warrant to me directed from His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax
Knight General of all the Forces in England and Wales, And according to, and
in pursuance of, the late Resolutions and Orders of Parliament for disbanding
of the supernumerary Forces under my command, I do hereby publish and declare
the of under the command of to be from hence forth Disbanded, And all Officers
and Soldiers thereof are from henceforth discharged from any further command
or duty relating to each other as Officers or Soldiers of the said Troop, or
otherwise in relation to the Service of the Parliament, And all and every of
them are hereby required forth with to depart and repair to their several
houses or places of abode, or where their several occasions do lie, Given
under my Hand and Seal.

By His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, General of all the Parliaments
Forces in England and Wales.
WHereas in pursuance of several Resolutions and Orders of Parliament for the
disbanding of supernumerary Forces.

I have lately given a Warrant or Order to you directed under my Hand and Seal
wherein under your Command were appointed to be disbanded as Supernumeraries and
all due compliance with the Commissioners of Parliament employed for that
purpose and all ready obedience was required on your part in the dispatch of
that Service.

These are further to authorize and require you That the thing appointed by the
Parliament to be don in Order to disbanding being performed, and so soon as you
shall be there unto required by the said Commissioners you do cause
Proclamation for disbanding to be made and published in the head of each that
is to be bisbanded, to the effect and according to the form here enclosed; it
is to pass in your Name, and under your hand and Seal, as by VVarrant from me.

And upon the publication thereof, you are to cause all Officers and Soldiers,
of the said respective to separate and depart according to the effect thereof,
and for so doing, this shall be your warrant.

Given under my Hand and Seal the first day of February, 1647. To Colonel or
the Commander in chief with His Forces.
FINIS.
Feb. 1. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gil. Mabbot


