Colonel Rainsborowes Ghost: OR, A true Relation of the manner of his Death,
who was murdered in his Bedchamber at Doncaster, by three of Pontefract
Soldiers who pretended that they had Letters from Leiutenant General
Cromwell, to deliver unto him.
To the tune of, My bleeding heart with grief and care.
depiction of two male figures, one in armor, the other wearing a cloak and
hood

YOu gallant Blade^ of Mars his train.
who serve the State for wealth and ^ame,
Such by respects will be your baine.
if only at such things you aim.
My name was Rainsborow slain of late.
whose troubled Ghost can take no rest,
Until some things I do relate,
which to the world must be expressed.
Then know from whence my baine did spring,
vainglory and my thirst of blood,
I hated them that loved my King,
as by his friends was understood.
Witness the bloody fights in Kent,
the Siege at Colchester likewise,
I served well the Parliament,
all deeds of mercy did despise.
For when the Town they did surr^^^,
I plated all against them then:
I quickly brought unto an end,
the lives of two brave Gentlemen.
I would not give the General rest,
till he unto their deaths had sealed,
My troubled Ghost has here expressed.
what to the world should be reveald.
Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Li^^le*
two worthy men whom I did hat^^,
The glory of the British I^^e,
whom I did make unfort^^^t^.
With resolution sto^t they di^d,
and called me Traitor to my face:
It did no whit abaite my Pride,
I saw them fall in little space.
The death of them revenged has b^n
on me, by those that loved them ^ell:
Sweet Jesus Christ forgivve my sl^^,
for by my means those worthie^s fell*
October last the twenty nine.
it being then the Sabbath Day.
Twenty seven Cabaliers combins,
to Doncaster they t^^ke their way.
Those were from Pontefract-Castle sent,
which on their Res^lution stood:
And feining of a fair intent
to speak with me, but spilt my blood.
The Continell did bid the^ stand,
and fain would know from whence they came,
From him they said that did command,
they presently this fence did frame,
The second part, to the same tune.
depiction of two male figures on horseback

FRom General Cromwell we are sent,
with Letters to your Colonel,
This is our business and intent,
the truth whereof to you we tell.
The Centinell did them believe,
which was the cause of this my woe,
To three of them they leave did give,
unto my Chamber for to go.
They entering where I lodged was,
who little thought of any harm,
Nor what so soon would come to pass,
for in my bed I lay full warm.
Where Is Colonel Rainsborow quoth they,
I am the man kind friends said I,
What is your business I pray*
that you come in so haste^y,
Our business you soon shall know,
and wherefore we were put in trust,
As we to you will straight way show,
for Lucas and Lisle dye you must.
At these same words I then did start,
when they to me those men did name:
It then did strike me to the heart,
that I consented to the same.
Rebiling me with v^tter words,
to murder me they did intend,
And then they drew their bloody Swords,
I nothing had me to defend.
Then they did ^ow that I should dye,
for now they had me at command,
Yet I withstood them manfully,
as long as ever I could stand.
Thorough my body eight times they,
with bloody swords they me did gore*
As it was seen whereas I lay,
being found dead upon the flore.
This being done, the door they locked.
and in their pockets put the Key,
Non^ could come in although they knocked,
to they took Horse and rid away.
The Guard mistrusting no such thing,
did let them freely pass along,
Supposing they did Letters bring*
believing their dessembling tongue.
There Is none can tell what men those were
nor yet which way that they did ride,
Themselves they cunningly did bear,
and closely they themselves do hide.
But blood no doubt for blood does ary,
as w^ by daily proof do see
It Is true, and pei^ceth through the sky,
if that my Ghost believed may be.
My Corpse it is to be conveyed
^o London on the fourteen day,
Where in the grave it shall be laid
in peace, and have no more to say.
Printed at LONDON 1648.


