Edinburgh the 12 of May 1696. AT A General MEETING OF THE COMPANY OF SCOTLAND,
Trading to AFRICA and the INDIES.
The Viscount of TARBAT Chosen Praeses.
THE Minutes of the last General Meeting, being read over, The Committee
appointed by this Company, Reported, That, Pursuant to an Order of the 17th. of
April last, The several Proprietors of this Capital Fund, had by themselves, or
their Deputees, on the 7th day of this Instant May, delivered in their
respective Lists, of Twenty Five Subscribers for Directors of the said Company,
And that a Scrutiny being made of the said Lists, and an exact Computation of
the Number of Votes, falling to each Candidate, the Twenty five Persons
hereafter named, Viz. David Lord Ruthven John Lord Beilhaven Adam Cockburn of
Ormiston, Lord Justice Clerk Mr. Francis Montgomerie of Giffin William Hay of
Drummelliar Mr. Hugh Dalrymple Advocat Lieut. Colonel John Aereskine Sir John
Home of Blackader Sir Francis Scot of Thirlestane Sir Patrick Scot of Ancrum
Sir John Maxwel of Pollock Sir John Swinton of that Ilk John Haldan of
Gleneagles Sir Archibald Mure of Thornton George Baillie of Jerveswood James
Pringle of Torwoodlie John Drummond of Newton George Clark Merchants in
Edinburgh. James Macklurg Merchants in Edinburgh. Mr. Robert Blackwood
Merchants in Edinburgh. James Balfour Merchants in Edinburgh. Hugh Montgomerie
Merchants in Glasgow. William Arbuckles Merchants in Glasgow. John Corse
Merchants in Glasgow. William Wardrop Merchants in Glasgow.
were chosen to be Directors of the said Company: Which Election, after reading
an Abstract of the said Scrutiny, was unanimously Approved of by the said
General Meeting.

ORDERED, That the said Directors do meet this Afternoon in order to take such
further Measures, pursuant to the Constitutions already agreed upon, as may
tend to the Interest and Service of this Company, and Adjourn themselves to
such further Times and Places, as to them, in their Discretion, shall seem meet.

ORDERED, That the Minutes of this Meeting be forthwith Printed and Published.

TARBAT. I. P. C.


