Edinburgh, April 3d. 1696.
At a General Meeting of the Company of Scotland, Trading to Africa, and the
Indies.
My Lord BELHAVEN Chosen Praeses.
THE Minutes of the 24th. March last, being Read, and it being moved, whither
the making, and Laying down the needful Rules, and Constitutions, for the
Direction, and Government of this Company, with the Times, Ways, and Manner of
the Choice of the Directors mentioned in the first Paragraph, of the said
Minutes, is so to be understood, As if the Rules and Constitutions to be made
by the Committee be unalterable, or are to be Subjected to, and Alterable by
the General meeting.

Resolved, That the Rules and Constitutions. To be made by them, be proposed to
the first General meeting, to be approven, or altered as they shall think fit.

Conform to the last days Minutes, A Report being made that the Lists were
given in by the several Subscribers, and thereafter a Scrutiny made, the
following Twenty Persons were found to be Chosen for a Committee, who with the
Nominees mentioned in the Act of Parliament, are to Concert the Rules and
Constitutions conform to the first Article of the last days Minutes, which
Election after Reading over the Persons chosen were Unanimously approven of by
the Meeting.

The Names of the Committee.
James Earl of Panmure John Lord Hay of Yester Lord Basil Hamiltoun George
Viscount of Tarbat David Lord Ruthven William Hay of Drumeliar Mr. Hugh
Dalrymple Advocat Sir Archibald Hope of Rankillor Lieut. Colonel John Ereskine
Sir John Shaw of Greenock Sir Francis Scot of Thirleston Sir Robert Dickson of
Sornbegg Andrew Fletcher of Saltoun John Haldan of Gleneagles Sir Archibald
Mure of Thorntoun George Baillie of Jerveswood. James Pringle of Torwoodlie
John Drummond of Newton Mr, William Dunlop Principal of the College of Glasgow
Robert Watson Merchant in Edinburgh.
Resolved that the said Committee do meet upon Tuesday next, the 7th Instant,
for the first time, At 3 in the Afternoon at the Laigh Council House of
Edinburgh: And thereafter to Adjourn themselves to such Times and Places as
they shall judge convenient.

A Report being made that there is already upwards of 300000 Pound Sterling
Subscribed for, and that there was still several Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Royal
Burghs, who live at a distance from this Place not yet come in, occasioned
partly for want of Timeous Advertisement, and through the badness of the
Weather.

Therefore, a Motion was made for enlarging the Subscriptions to four Hundred
Thousand Pound Sterling.

Resolved, that the same be done accordingly, and that the Books continue Open,
for receiving Subscriptions, until the sum of Three Hundred, and fifty
Thousand Pound Sterling thereof be Subscribed for, and thereafter that the
Books shall be closed for such time as the Committee shall think fit, That the
Remotest Places of this Kingdom may have due Notice, before the other fifty
Thousand Pound be Subscribed for*

The times appointed for Receiving Subscriptions hereafter, is to be upon every
Tuesday, and Thursday, in the week in the former place from 10. in the Morning
to 12 And from 2 in the Afternoon till 4 until the said sum be completed.

The Minutes above are ordered to be forthwith Printed and Published


