THE COMMONS Dis-Deceiver: Touching their deceitful delatory evasions of a
desired speedy Treaty with the King; the only Expedient for a wished and happy
Peace in the Kingdom.

CONTAINING 1. Answers to the Reasons of the Commons, which they gave the Lords
(at a Conference July 25. 1648.) against a Treaty. 2. Reasons why the Commons,
rather then the Lords, are against a Treaty. 3. Reasons to show that it is
safer and better, even for the Commons, to adventure on a Treaty, then to
hazard a new War.


PSALM. 26.4. I have not dwelt with vain persons: neither will I have fellowship
with the deceitful.

PSALM. 35.20. For why? their communing is not for peace: but they imagine
deceitful words against them that would be quiet in the Land.

Printed in the Year 1648.

Brief Answers to the several Reasons given by the Commons at a Conference
with the Lords, why they will have the three Bills sent and signed by the King
before a Treaty.
The Reasons, as collected and printed by an especial Order of Parliament, are
these:
1. Reason. IF these Bills be not passed before the Treaty; the Parliament will
leave their friends in such a condition, as they cannot be able to defend them,
who have stood for them.

Answer. This Reason looks only to the defense of their friends, who have stood
for them: and not to the defense of the Kingdom, Church, and People, who keep
and maintain them.

2. They say of their friends in general; not qualifying them by just, honest,
good; but be they what they will, (if their friends, who have stood to them in
their wicked designs, tending to the unsupportable miseries of the People,)
yet these they must defend, be they who they will, or be they never so many.

3. But if these friends deserve, or are capable of, defense, why are not the
Commons able to defend them in a Treaty? the Lords and your selves, for whom
they have stood, being the Treaters or Judges (for the most part) in the case
controverted.

4. Stands this to honesty or reason? that rather then not defend such friends
in unjust ways, you will hazard the declared good of the Kingdom, a Treaty?
Me thinks with wise, just and good men, this should not be urged as a Reason.
But the second happily will make amends for this, which is,

2. Reason. If they prevail who p^esse on this Treaty, such godly Divines who
are placed by the Parliament, shall be put out, and scandalous Ministers
restored to their places.

Answer. Before I answer the Reason, I shall examine some passages in the words
and phrases; as,

1. Why they call themselves not the House, or Houses in Parliament, but the
Parliament it self; which cannot be without the King, who by our Laws, (Sir
Edw. Cook, M. St. John's, Pym, etc.) is the Head, the beginning and end of our
Parliaments.

2. That they whom the one or the other House has placed, are called Divines;
as though they were the only Divines, the learned in that profession: and not
so only, but as though they are the only holy, upright, and therefore called
the godly Divines.

3. But the others whom they have put our, although for no other reason then
that the other might be put in to serve the two Houses, these and all these
without exception, are but Ministers, Servants, and that scandalous too: so
that their Geese are Swans, white, godly Divines, all holy Pharisees; and all
the rest foul black birds, or scandalous, very Publicans.

4. Where they say, these Ministers shall be restored to their places, imply
they not that these places are justly the Ministers, and not lawfully belonging
to their Divines?

But not to insist on words and phrases, what reason is there in this, that
rather then their so called Divines should leave what they unlawfully hold, or
come to a trial (whether they be fitter to hold, or the other Ministers to be
restored) that we shall have no peace nor Treaty? Ahab that idolatrous bloody
Tyrant was more just and reasonable then these Reasoners; for though he
accounted the Prophet the troubler of Israel; yet he would treat, or put it to
a trial, whether Elijah the Prophet, or Jezebels Priests were the better, and
more deserving for Gods Service; and not hazard all rather then put this to the
trial.

3. Reason. If we treat with the King about calling in His Majesty's
Declarations, we give a great advantage to the King against our selves.

Answer. If the Declarations on the Kings part be just, and according to Law,
why not give the King leave to treat, whether he should reca^l them? whereas if
they be unjust, what need you fear, but that they shall be recalled?

2. Nay, what need you fear, when as the King has promised, so a peace may be
settled, that be they never so just and lawful on his part, yet for your sakes
he will recall them?

3. But still see, that as the other two Reasons of a Treaty and Peace looked
upon their friends: so this minds only themselves, and that so far, that they
will rather hazard all, then adventure to give an advantage to the King, (as
they say) against themselves.

4. Reason. If the three Bills be not passed; they give opportunity to have the
power of Parliament questioned for all the blood spilt in the late wars,
which never was questioned by any of his Majesty's Predecessors.

Answer. 1. That the Parliament, (i.) the King and the two Houses have power to
make war, (wherein blood may be and is spilt) is out of question.

2. But grant that the two Houses have without just power spilt so much blood:
must we want peace rather then they shall hear of it, though without
punishment.

3. Or rather then the two Houses should be questioned, whether they have such
a power, must we be without a Treaty and Peace, and so fall into a new war to
the spilling of more blood? and must this stand for a Reason too?

4 When they say the like was never questioned by any of his Majesty's
Predecessors: we usually say a Negative of fact cannot be proved, especially in
such a case, and after so great revolution of years and times: therefore had
the Reasoners said, the like has not for ought we read, or find; it had been
more modest and more worthy of belief, then to say the like never was.

5 But if the like never was, the Reason may be, because the like Rebellion or
War never was in the times of any his Majesty's Predecessors. There has been
wars in the times of his Majesty's Predecessors, between Party and Party, who
should be the right Heir, and so should enjoy the Crown: or between the King
and Barons, for obteining and upholding each others rights; and betwixt the
King and the rascality of the People, when those the Tail would usurp a power
over the King the Head. But the like War as this: when after the King had
redressed all their just grievances by so many Acts confirmed; when after he
had given them more of his own just Rights from his Crown, then ever King in
this Land before him did; when after promise of granting more, and more then
they should in justice and reason demand; yet after all this, to prosecute him
with war; to defame him to the world by black and false aspersions; to draw
away the affections of the People; to imprison and hazard his sacred Person to
the malice or divellish rage of base and unworthy People: I say (and it
appears by our best Histories) that the like of this was never known in the
Reigns of any his Majesty's Predecessors: and therefore in this respect well
it may be said, that the like spilling ^f blood was never questioned by any of
his Majesty's Predecessors. And then from hence, no more in reason can be
concluded, then this or the like; That this act of theirs, being unparalleled,
it may with justice be questioned; though not to punish the present Actors, yet
to keep aftertimes from acting the like. But out of question it stands not
with reason, that rather then it should be questioned, how, or by whom so much
blood has been spilt, that therefore we should have no Treaty, or peace; but
go on, and engage in a war, to the shedding of floods of innocent, and
guiltless blood.

1. And by the way observe, what may in some sort answer, confute, or deny
these to be Reasons: whereas the three Bills to be sent and signed by the King,
are, 1. For the Militia. 2. Religion and Church Government. 3. For the
recalling of his Majesty's Declarations, etc.


That there is not in all, nor in any part of their Reasons, one word, or
syllable, concerning Religion, or Government of the Church; although in their
Protestation, Covenant, and Declarations; they have usually to deceive the
People, put and professed Religion and the Church in the first place, as the
maine piece of their principal care and endeavor.

2 Observe, whether in all their Reasons, there be the least care, or any
mention of preserving the Laws of this Kingdom; of the Rights of the King; or
safety of his Person; or of the Liberty and Propriety of the Subject; or of the
Publke-weale; how to keep the Kingdom in wealth, safety, and honout, and to
preserve the People from effusion of more blood.

3 Observe, whether all and every particular in their Reasons, do not speak, or
tend only to the maintenance of their unjust, unlimited, usurped power in
Parliaments; thereby instead of our good, certain, known Laws, to rule us by
tyrannical destructive Ordinances; which are daily changeable; and certain
only in this, that they tend to the maintenance of the power and profit only of
themselves and their friends, but to the disgracing and debasing the King and
his Subject; and the impoverishing and ruining the People and Kingdom; or to
keep themselves, their wicked Instruments, and Adherents, not only from trial,
or judgment, but from giving any answer, or account for all or any their
unjustice, oppression, pursing the Kingdoms money: but instead thereof, for
want of a Treaty, to be able to defend themselves and their Accomplices, in the
continuance and pursuit of all their wicked courses. And had not the Devil (as
we usually say) owed them a shame, or rather had not God suffered them, for
their many horrible sins of gross hypocrisy, injustice, murder, oppression,
irreligion, to have blinded them, (who are so wise in their generation) could a
man conceive that in all their reasons they would have forgot the Worship of
God; the Government of the Church; the good and safety of the King; the welfare
of the Kingdom? but let all these sink and swim, so they can provide but for
themselves, and for such as they may strengthen to stand by and for them.

1. In conclusion and to sum up the strength of these Reasons: whether or to
what end really do they tend, but selera seleribus tueri, to defend maintain
and continue their former exorbitant courses; by a pretext of securing
themselves and friends; and at the best the holding up of an usurped power
among themselves; which cannot be but by an addition of injustice to injustice,
blood to blood and sin to sin, until sin become unmeasureably sinful;
and such as can expect no better fruit then confusion and destruction?

2. What is the end of all their reasoning, but to prefer the particular
beings, estates and powers of some private persons, before the public worship
of God, the weal of three Kingdoms; which are in hazard, if not in a too
near certainty of ruin by a new war.

3. But that the Commons should be the Reasoners and Judges in this case, is
most unjust and unreasonable; for,

Judges ought to be men knowing the Law, and understand-throughly, and
perfectly the cases wherein they are to be Judges. Now in sober sadness and a
little truth, tell me; are all they who have voices among the Commons, and by
whose voices these actions and reasons are maintained, are they I say all such
known men, in the Laws of God, and man, of right reason, and best governing a
Kingdom, as to be able to distinguish, vote, and judge in such high points?
And if you tell me that for matter of Religion and Church, they have the
Assembly of Divines to instruct them, for matters of Law Gentlemen of the long
robe, and for matters of State some wise and experienced Politic to guide
them, and must I take this for a satisfactory answer that all is well done that
is thus done, and voted by such ignaroes, for is it fit that he shouln sit as
Judge, who wanting knowledge of his own, must rely upon the judgment of an
other, and so make his conscience ride upon another souls back.

But grant that all the Commons were able in point of knowledge to be Judges,
yet can we grant (that which is contrary to all reason, justice, and law) that
parties to be judged should be Judges? and who can deny, but that if not all,
yet 9. or 8. or 7. parts of the whole Commons now voting are parties in this
cause, wherein they take upon them to be Judges? for is not he in all reason,
justice and law, held and taken to be a party, who either has gained, does
gain, holds or hopes to gain by the case wherein he is to judge? For, is it not
presumed, and on good reason, that such a man by his self-love and proper
interest, will forget upright Judgment, and lean to himself in his own
cause? And if this be granted, which cannot be denied, then tell me, how many
either of their Assembly of Divines at Westminster, or of their Gentlemen of
the Long Robe in that House, or of the wise men amongst them, either have not
had, or now have not offices, places or things of profit and power, which they
are unwilling to lose, or be called to question for the holding or abusing of
them? and I dare say, that of each hundred in the House there are not twenty,
but have had, or now have places of profit and honor, held by the power and
continuance of this Parliament, either in Offices, sequestered Estates, Lands of
King, Queen, Prince, or Church, or in Pentions, Salaries, keeping of Parks,
Forests, or the like; insomuch that the words of the Prophet are here
verified, Micha 3.11: The heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests
thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money.

Ob. But some happily will say, if these cases debar the Commons to be the
Judges in this case, then we must leave all to the King, or who else shall be
the Judge?

Resp. I answer, that the right power of judging is known and discerned by the
Commission that grants and directs that power; and the Commission (as it were
in this case) must be the Writ (as it is called) of Summons to the Parliament;
and when the Writ of calling the Commons is ad consentiendum and faciendum, to
assent and do, the Writ as Commission to the Lords is ad tractandum and
impertiendum consilium, and (with the King) ad judicandum de arduis negotiis,
etc. Whence I conceive I may rightly infer, that the Lords, or especially the
Lords rather then the Commons, should be Judges in this case; and if their
judgment may be heard, then a Treaty without sending the Propositions should
be had.

Again, if it be required that Judges should be free from partiality, to be led
by affection, or interest: then I conceive, that though some of the Lords may
be somewhat tainted here with: yet they are not so much infected, or not so
many, and so deeply as these of the Commons are.

If I should grant, that in our cases, or at other times, the Commons in such
or the like case might Judge, as being the Representees of the People in
England: yet if it appear that these Representees have deceived the general
trust, and have acted either to their own private or wicked publike-ends: why
may not the people recall their grant, and resume their own Power to Judge?
add, that the Commons have deceived their trust is apparent, by their
pointblank voting against, and crossing the Petitions of London, other
Counties, and the hearty desire of the whole Kingdom for a Treaty.

Ob. But you will ask if this power of judging what is fit to be done, in this
point of Treaty be taken from the Commons, then who shall judge for the People?

Resp. And I ask, who shall judge for them, the People, but the People
themselves? for the Commons were chosen but as Representees for them; to put up
from time to time, as sudden occasion should be offered, the desires and
minds of the People; who could not at all times, and upon all occasions be
present themselves: Whereas now in this Case, when the People both Understand,
Petition, and call for Relief, if their Representees will not hear, nor move,
nor vote for them; why should they not be heard speaking themselves: and I am
sure in the beginning of this Parliament, it was thus practiced, and not long
since declared by both Houses: That it is the proper byrth-right of the Subject
to Petition, that they may be heard; and accordingly they were, for a long
time, to effect.

But if you now are against this popular way of pleasing the many, by hearing
their Petitions: which at first was held the right way, or the way to guide the
two Houses: then why suffer you not the People to hear their chief
Magistrates, and wisemen, speaking and moving for them: for, can it be
conceived that the People eight years ago (wrought by fear, favor, wine or
money, to choose you their Representees) should be tied and bound up to
defend, do, and suffer; what you, all days of your lives, shall vote; though
it be never so wicked, un-just, or against them or the Kingdom.

Instead then of the Case, as put by the Reasoners, I conceive the Case will
be this: That if no Treaty nor Peace can be had: then unavoidably must follow
a decay of Trade; waste of the Wealth and Men of this Kingdom; the confusion
of Religion, Law, and Justice, the necessary concomitants and consequents of
un-civill-Warre and Arbitrary Government.

And then the question will and must be briefly this: Whether in point of
Religion, Law, Justice and Policy, all these should be certainly and
necessarily brought on, rather then some few inconsiderable persons, who have
transgressed all Law by God and man, by false worship, taking Gods name in
vain, profaning his holy day, dishonouring their parent; by murder, theft,
false witnessing, should be put but in an hazard to answer for their
transgressions? I say but in an hazard to answer their transgressions: For
unless these men shall be wilfully, and obstinately set, to maintain,
continue, and go on in their former wicked ways; they may have hope; nay they
have a royal promise; and themselves are able in the Treaty to make it good,
to obtain a general pardon for all; both for themselves, their friends, and
their so called Godly Divines.

And to make this grant, and pardon the more sure, and binding; they shall not
only have the words, and faithful promise, and the assent of the King to an
act in Parliament; but the concurrence of this, and the other two Kingdoms;
many if not the most of which, are engaged as well, though not so much, as
these commons: So that there is nothing that they can object against this
Pardon, and assurance, but that they cannot; which is indeed, that they will
not trust; and trust they cannot, or will not; that they may hereby hold, and
continue their usurped power, and unjust gain; which in effect is as much as to
say: Rather then they will forgo these by a Treaty and Peace; they will plunge
not only the People of this, but of the two other Kingdoms; not only into an
hazard, but into the certain losses of estates, and lives, and into a waste if
not an utter ruin and destruction of three Kingdoms: which the People of the
three Kingdoms (if God shall please to endow them with Wisdom, Judgment, and
Resolution) will not suffer, but will rise, and join as one man to withstand
and prevent.

2. The Reasons why the Commons are more averse to a Treaty, and so to Peace,
then the Lords; are especially three; which hang upon these three cords, not
easily to be broken (1.) Profit, (2.) Power, (3.) Reputation; in which the
Commons gain, and the Lords, in general, lose.
For the matter of Profit: some of the Commons by their art and power in
Parliament, gain yearly many thousands; diverse get thousands, and very few of
them but by Offices, sequestred-Estates, Pentions, keeping of Parkes, Forests;
enjoying the Lands of King, Queen, Prince, and of the Church, have and receive
good yearly incomes: for it has been the policy of the leading men, to
invite and persuade some few men (once of reasonable Consciences and more
modest Souls) to take such Places and Lands, etc. as before mentioned; thereby
not only to keep them silent from speaking against their Leaders: but hereby
to keep their mouths open to cry I and No: and to so vote for, or against,
what shall be directed by them, or as they hear Joller and Jumper mouth it
first: Whereas the Lords the while (though perhaps the Speaker, the Keeper of
the Seal, some chief Committee Men and others, may gain by Bribes) Yet such
Lords as have great revenues, by the continual Taxes assessed, quartering of
Soldiers, etc. must either abate or allow their Tenants in their rents, and so
at the years end become loosers.

And if you object that this likewise befalls the Commons as well as the Lords.
I answer, that the least part of the Commons have any great store of Lands: and
those who have; either by their power they can moderate and lighten their taxes
laid on their lands; or else they have recompense 3, 5, 10, 20. for one, by
their other places, offices, or ways of getting.

If therefore according to their selfe-denying Ordinance of 4. April 1645. and
their votes of the 10. of June 1647. those Commons should be deprived of those
places, and ways of gaining; and be left to bear their own charge; and which
is worst of all, to stand to the hazard, whether (when all profit cease) they
might at last obtain a pardon? you shall find them forward enough; yea try
them this way, and I dare warrant they shall out-mouth the Lords for a Treaty.

Especially if you can but clip them of that power, which they have in ruling
more then the Lords; or if it be but to take them off the power in ruling the
Lords themselves; for how immensely, might I not say, how infinitely have the
Commons in this Parliament extended their privilege, and power beyond all
measure and bound? not over and against the King, and all their fellow
Subjects; but even over and against the Lords too; for when (as it appears by
their several writs, which give and limit each of their powers) the Peers are
called to advise and council the King; and the Commons to assent and do what
shall be so advised; and when as the Commons, witness Sir Ed. Cook, are but
as the grand Inquest to the Peers; who with the King are the only Judges; yet
is it not so come to pass, that in this Parliament, when the Commons have
first debated and voted; that they then have sent to the Lords, willing them to
concur? and in case that they should not, that then the names of the
dissenting Lords should be transmitted to the Commons, and so by them to be
voted and declared enemies to the State? witness the message sent to the Lords
by an eminent Member of the Commons Jan. 1641. and when all power of judicature
is in the Lords house, by reason of the Kings sitting there; and all Pardons of
high nature does belong only to the King: have not the Commons, witness their
late Order 17. July 1641. taken upon them to give sentence upon the high
insurrection (as they call it) in Kent? and to grant, publish, and proclaim a
Pardon to so many as they please? and all this without the Lords.

And the Commons having thus Lorded it in power over the Peers. it is easy to
conceive, whether the Lords or Commons bear the greater sway? or have the
greater power in pleasing or displeasing, punishing or rewarding either
Soldier, Committee Men or the Subject in general?

Especially when you consider, what is generally observed, that when the
Commons keep to that which they call their Privilege, not to be impeached,
sequestered their places, or judged by the Peers: yet the Peers in this
Parliament have been impeached, sequestered, and sentenced by the Commons.

Which being so, believe it, where the power is in ruling there will the
opinion follow, of honoring and obeying, and by these two advantages of
profit, and power, the Commons have gained to themselves the 3. cord of
reputation, and esteem above the Lords, and therefore will be, as hitherto
they are, more averse to the Treaty, and Peace then the Lords are, or will be,
insomuch as they shall be greater loosers then the Lords by this Treaty and
Peace, and as greater in loss, so more in fear and danger then the Lords.

Not only in that they have over-powred and out-acted the Lords in the highest
breach of Law and Loyalty, but in that they have given one to another such
large sums of the money of the Kindome, which by their own Ordinances should
have been otherwise disposed: and for this in a Treaty, some happily fear a
questioning, and some, if they be able, a refunding: Others may fear, and
justly, that they shall be called to a reckoning for the vast sums of money
by them received, and not accounted for; except perchance in a cursory way one
to another: and what satisfaction can this be to the true man, that the
thieves have divided and accounted each to other the true man's goods? might I
not add that diverse of them are, or justly might be afraid of a Treaty; least
that they hear of the diverse insolences, injuries, oppressions, bribes, yea
and thefts committed by them, contrary not only to law, but to their own
Ordinances.

And may I not yet add, the strange never before heard of like privilege; that
for so many years, many of them have kept themselves from paying their just
debts; yea and hazarding by the length of this Parliament the utter defrauding
of their creditors for ever; there being a Statute of Limitation, 21. Jac. c.
16. which confines all suits to certain years, which this Parliament has
exceeded already: and by this means, all actions against these debtors (being
Parliament men) are frustrate and void in Law; and who can or dare sue a
Parliament Man? least he be either committed to prison, whether the debtor
ought to be sent, or enjoined to release the debt; as some have been
constrained to do this Parliament.

Lastly, The guilt and horror of Conscience is so great and clamorous to many
of the leading Grandees in this Parliament, that they dare not trust themselves
in a Treaty with the King, nor with God, or good men, and not, but only with an
Army, and that of such Soldiers as shall be of their own choice and pay; who
therefore will be ready on all turns, to prosecute their never so unjust, and
divelish commands, be they either against the King, the Kingdom, or God
himself? of all which we have had too great, and too long woeful experience.

3. Some brief Reasons* showing that it is safer and better for this Kingdom
and the two houses in Parliament to Treat with the King, though he will not
sign the three Propositions before the Treaty: then to engage in a new war,
in Case the King should refuse the so joining of them.
For 1. It Is more then probable that the king will not sign the Propositions
before the Treaty: (1) Because he has already declared both his will and
reasons against the so signing of them; and that when he had no such hope or
appearance of help and relief as now he has: (2) Because He knows the
Kingdom of Scotland has protested against his so signing these Propositions;
and that the then Protestation is now again avowed in the late Declaration of
their Estates to be the sense of their Kingdom: (3) Because the English Lords
in this Parliament have given and published many strong and unanswerable
reasons against the sending these Propositions before the Treaty: wherein they
concur both with the King, and the Kingdom of Scotland. (4) Because not only
the City of London, but the greatest and most considerable Counties,
Professions, and conditions of men in this Kingdom join in the pressing a
speedy Treaty, without relation to the Propositions. (5) Because the premitting
these Propositions is urged and prosecuted mainly, if not only, by one Faction
or Party, and is not seconded but by those who are interessed by places of
profit, and honor; or by fear of coming to an account or after reckoning.
(6) Because these two last parties, though joined in one, yet cannot by the
hundredth part answer the number and power of those who will and are ready to
oppose them in the three Kingdoms.

2. And let those who are apt to engage in a new War know, that as the
fortune and success of all, even the best wars is doubtful; so that the
event of this at least on their part is most hazardous; because it is against
the desires, the safety, and good of three Kingdoms: all which will first, or
last join together to maintain their own desired safety and good against that
party; who ever, whose plots, designs, and arts so evidently appear, tending
to the confusion and Destruction of the Church and Commonwealth.

3. But grant that the party, who are for a War rather then a Treaty, should
in a battle or two get the better: yet can they conceive that hereby the war
were ended, or that a peace, indemnity, or safety were concluded on their
parts? No rather this would stir up and inflame the people in three Kingdoms
to more hot and bloody wars: and these must necessarily draw on a decay of
trade, a wasting of the wealth, and men, and thereby hazarding the ruin of
this Kingdom: for it cannot be imagined that three Kingdoms, or the greater
part of them will rest, and ly down to suffer the tyrany of one faction or
Party, because it has once or twice overcome them in battle.

4. Whereas if this party, who are for a war rather then a Treaty, should but
once be overcome and scattered in any one pitched field or battle; it is not
probable that they should ever be able to rise, recruit again, and to stand in
battle against all their Opponents in three Kingdoms; who will be as
careful to keep them, as they were willing to beat them, down?

5. And if this should come to pass, that they were once beaten and scattered;
(1) then in what danger may they be, who have plotted, fomented, and maintained
this war? (2) in what case will all the Monopilizers of Offices and places of
profit be? (3) in what state will not only the Excise and Committee Men be, of
the several Counties? but even they of the two Houses, for the many
insufferable injuries and oppressions laid on their fellow Subjects? (4) How
may it fare with all those who without any account have for so many years
together engrossed the greatest part of the wealth of this rich Kingdom? (5)
Yea, may it not be feared, that not only the Bills which in this Parliament
might have been yielded unto, but those Acts already passed may suffer
question, opposition, or a repeal, as being obtained by fraud or force? (6)
Nay, may it not hereafter weaken the honor, privilege, and power of
Parliaments for ever, when the power of this shall be conquered by the Sword?

6. All which fears and dangers may readily be taken away by Acts of Pardon
and Oblivion; and these may as easily be obtained and granted by a
free-Treaty: I add by a free-Treaty; for if the King cannot obtain Liberty,
nor a Treaty, unless he first sign the Propositions; then neither will this
signing the Propositions be of force to bind him, he being not at Liberty
at the time of signing: nor can the Treaty it self be construed free, because
it was obtained and held per asperte

FINIS.

