THE COMPANIONS OF GOOD CONSCIENCES: OR AN Appeal of MODERATION, JUSTICE, and
EQUITY, OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, PEACE and LOVE (Unfolded in the Law of God and
Nature) To the Consciences of all, both High and Low, Rich and Poor, of all
Societies and Opinions, among all Nations.

With their Mournful Lamention over the unrighteousnesses of men.

WHEREIN Men may as in a looking-glass behold themselves, whether they bear
the Image of God in their Power, Places, Judgments and Callings; or the image
of the Devil: For his servants ye are whom ye obey; whether of righteousness
and obedience etc. to salvation: or of injustice, pride, envy and deceit, etc.
to damnation.

Herein the God of Justice has said, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it,
Every one shall be recompensed according to his deeds done in the flesh,
whether good or evil.

Where then, Lord shall their Unjust, the Oppressor, the Proud, the Covetous,
the Envious, and all manner of Unrighteousness appear? Take it effectually to
thy heart.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, 1653.

May it not be said of a Truth, Whosoever despises the least of these, and
acts and teaches men otherwise; Note.
it were better that a millstone were hanged about his neck and that he were
thrown into the midst of the Sea.
Wherefore O ye Companions of good Consciences consider, and ye Messengers of
glad Tidings, to Men of good will, Go ye into the Country, Cities, Towns,
Villages, and Habitations of this Land; appear ye, if possible, in the hearts
and hands of the mighty and powerful ones, in the hearts and heads of the
Judges, Officers, and Rulers thereof; in the hearts and lives of Superiors and
Inferiors, of the rich and poor; appear ye in and among all people, of all
sorts, knowledges, and opinions; declare and publish the everlasting Gospel,
infolded in your blessed and upright nature of Righteousness, Peace, and Love,
recorded and testified in the sacred Scriptures of our Lord Christ, the
Prophets and Apostles; whosoever hears, and obeys, that soul shall live,
and his life shall be precious in the sight of the Lord; but whosoever
disobeyeth, resists, regards not the same, or hardneth his heart, his name
shall be rooted out of the land of the living; for the Creation of God does
mourn over every man's unrighteousness, and the earth does groan being burdened
with the disobedient man, whose body is a habitation for foul, noisome, and
unclean spirits; therefore verily, verily, it will be easier for Sodom and
Gomorrah in the day of Gods just judgment, then for thee O England, and thy
offspring: If thou resist, neglect, despise, or refuse the proffered grace of
the most high, once spoken from heaven but now made manifest before thy heart
and conscience, the life of Righteousness, Peace and Love. Heaven and earth
shall pass away, but not one Iota or tittle of thy pure Word, and upright
Laws, O LORD GOD everlasting, shall not pass away unfulfilled. Be it O LORD
from thy servants and handmaids according to thy Word and Will.

Says the Scripture, the Devils believe and tremble; where then LORD, shall
that man appear? or in what monstrous shape shall he stand in the presence of
everlasting burnings, whose life is not herewith reformed, or whose conscience
is not once moved, or pricked at the Doctrine of thy Righteousness. Let the
earth which bears him, and the air wherein he does breath, bear witness
against him before the seat of thy Judgment.

To him that has power among men to plead, and to do right, or to him that is
ordained a Ruler and a Judge, for the punishment of Evil Doers, and the praise
of them that do Well.
Behold the words and counsels of the Lord, by the mouth of his Prophet Samuel,
2 Samuel 23.3. etc, The God of Israel said, the God of Israel spoke to me, He
that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God.
O Man, honored and in power among the sons of men, raised up out of the dust
of the earth, by the power of the Almighty, to be a living Creature, that you
might serve your Creator in this your generation, not in Hyprocrisie but in
Righteousness and true Holiness.

For thy sake (O mortal man) this handwriting is ordained and published to thy
view, if possible to withdraw your mind with the cords of Gods unspotted
Righteousness, from the Acts of all Injustice, and from the Guilt of Innocent
blood; or if it takes not places in thy soul, that then in the day of
Inquisition, for works of Unrighteousness, and for shedding innocent blood, you
may appear before the Pure and Just Majesty of God, Angels, and holy Saints,
without excuse. Resist not, resist not the voice of the Spirit of the Most
High, which forewarneth all people and Nations of the earth of their duty,
before the judgments and wrath intended be executed against them; that they
might obey, saying, To day (even in this very moment) if you will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts, as many in power have done, who have tempted the
Lord of Life and Glory, by Oppression, Partiality, Violence, Cruelty,
Bloodshed, etc. on whom the Great and Righteous God has recompensed, as his
enemies, Indignation, Blood and Destruction; and has given to many of them to
taste the bitter cup which they in their unrighteousness have filled for
others, whereby many of them are, and remain unto this day a scorn, a contempt,
and a derision upon the face of Gods earth.

Wherefore (O man, uncloath thine Immortal soul, from the corrupted Garments of
all false Righteousness, and appear in the Righteousness, or Righteousness Life
of JESUS CHRIST, in the place of thy Judicature, that the Truth and the Law of
the LORD may proceed out of thy mouth, hand in hand (and not the Law of men
Lusts, in true and upright Judgment. Disrobe thy self from Envy, Malice, Pride,
base Ends, and Covetousness, whereby, in the Seat of Judgment, the good Law of
Justice is perverted, and the true, plain, simple dealing and upright meaning
therein circumvented, and no further prosecuted, then to serve the base
self-Interest and corrupted wills of high and lofty spirited men. Listen then
(O man) with a right Christian mind to the secret voice of the sacred Spirit of
the most High, and let it enter and pierce through and through thy most inward
and hidden secret part, until it has purified the living spark of thy
immortal soul from all injustice and blood thirstiness, Note
which the water that washed the hands of Pilate could not do; Remember then
that the protection of the innocent from violence and oppression, Note.
the distribution and ministration of Justice, to Superiors and Inferiors,
ought in the sight of heaven to be executed without respect of persons; Else (O
man) remember, thou art an unrighteous Judge in the seat of thy judgment, Note.
which thou can not hide from the through searching, all-seeing eye of God;
therefore will be that formed thee and me, even the preserver of men, whose
eyes are over, and above all his works, beholding both the evil and the good,
behold such men with the eye of wrath, who in judgment respect the person of
the mighty and powerful, Note.
thereby doing wrong.

Verily therefore, that man, whether private person or public Judge, that
shall endeavor to subvert a man's right, or shall act to the destroying of a
man's life or livelihood, upon the ground of any private Interest, grudge,
malice, or discontent; or through fear or affection, shall act in or condescend
to any such Act, not being clearly and manifestly according to the Law of
Righteousness, published in the everlasting Gospel of truth, such men are
declared to be no other then thieves and murderers, who having not the Law of
Equity in the fear of the Lord before their eyes, Hear and tremble, ye unjust
Judges of the earth, lest in eternity you remain guilty of perishing from the
presence of his face.
shutting the counsel and word of Eternal life out of their hearts, have also
no Inheritance in the righteous Kingdom of God, nor part nor portion with
Christ, the Lord, for no unrighteousness, nor unrighteous person shall enter
thereinto, according to the Scripture; against whom the Spirit of the Lord does
signify, that the ways, Acts and Actions of all such unjust men, are an
abomination in his sight, and that blood shall be the portion of blood thirsty
men, For Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord.

Wherefore (O Mortal man) if CHRIST be thy LORD, embrace his Righteousness, be
not pufft up with an imagination of thine own Wisdom, Prudence, Judgment, Note.
The Wisdom of men to circumvent and increase a man in life or livelihood, is it
with is enmity against God, and against the Love and simplicity of CHRIST.
or Understanding; but know this, that you are in the hands of the most high
God, even as clay in the hands of the Potter; and if the hand of the LORD be
but once stretched forth against you, or his wrath never so little kindled, may
not your condition in a moment be as Nebuchadnezzars; or may not that visible
form of yours, which has but a short breathing in the common air, be in the
twinkling of an eye dissolved into dust, and you become a worm, and no more
man? Let then foresightfulness and Moderation be the forerunner of your
Judgment, Note.
or else your Judgment will end in Injustice; therefore let heaven and earth
bear Record and Witness, before the Righteous God, and just Judge of all his
earth; that the process of Christian Judgment, in the true Evangelical
administration of the Law of Right, described by the LORD CHRIST, is not
obscured from your eyes. If therefore you atract to your soul, the guilt of
innocent blood, by accusing or condemning unjustly, then will the blood of
Innocence be upon you and your Posterity. Note.


Cursed are they, who seeing, will not see; and hearing, will not hear; but
will blind the eyes of conscience, if and stop its ears from the dictates
thereof, that Judgment may be perverted to their own wills, and the holy Law of
the Lord lie trod under foot.
Therefore (O man) set not thy Wit, thy Wisdom, thy Subtilty, thy will, nor thy
Power, thy Understanding, nor thy Judgment in opposition to the reasonings of a
good conscience, whereby the hearts of men become hardened, and their eyes
blinded from the true light of the Christian life; but let thy conscience free
to the voice and dictates of Gods Spirit; which will show unto thee, O man, if
thou will hearken thereunto, and obey it, the thing which is right and good,
acceptable and well pleasing in the sight of the Lord, which thou shall find
comprehended in that golden Rule of Righteousness, by the upright Judge of Truth
and Equity, even the perfect Lawgiver, the LORD of Life, for a Statute and Law
to all Nations; how much more to be observed by those who call themselves
Christians! That all men in the fear of the LORD should do to other men as they
would that men should do to them, and that they should so judge of other men as
they themselves would be judged; for says the Just One, with the same measure
ye mete to others, Note.
it shall be measured to you again; verily the mouth of the Lord that created
thee has spoken it, who, believe it, cannot lie; this therefore is the way,
walk therein, so may thy seed, and childrens children after thee, O Man, have a
right to the promised blessing, made to the righteous, through all the
generations of the earth, and thy soul shall be established in Peace, at thy
appearance before the judge of all flesh, to give an account of thy Stewardship.

Remember that the wages of all manner of unrighteousness is death, and that
the reward of envy, oppression, violence, Note. He whose Conscience blinded
perverted or hardened, it is because of his lusts, in whom the God of this
would, the Prince of unrighteousness and worker of revenge in him has power
and dominion.
pride, bloud-thirstiness, etc. is attended with the severe wrath of a just and
righteous God, either in the hardened, or in the awakened Consciences of men,
before whose presence all the Powers, Princes, Rulers, or Nations, are but as a
drop in the bucket, or as a dust in the balance; which wrath of the almighty
God every moment hangs over and about the impious, the unjust and unrighteous
man's head, wherever he is, or in whatever he acts; the same devouring wrath
of the Almighty, is always ready to execute the judgment and vengeance written,
and declared upon and against all unrighteousness, and against the false and
hypocritical righteousness, and against all which withold Gods most pure
Laws, and everlasting Truth, mind and will, in unrighteousness: Even so, Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly, for if thou delayest, at thy appearing, Lord, shall
thou find Faith or Truth, Peace or Love, Righteousness or Justice, Temperance
or Long-suffering, Mercy, or Patience upon the Earth?

From a Well-wisher to the Peace and Tranquillity of all the generation of
mankind, especially to the household of Faith and Love.
Create in Men, O LORD, a new HEART, And renew a right Spirit within them:



To them who are not defiled with a blind deaf, or hardened Conscience; but
that have an Eye to see, and an Ear to hear, and an heart to compassionate and
bear each others burdens, so fulfilling the Royal Law of Christ.
O Ye Men of Good Will, and Moderate minded ones, that are Lovers of
Righteousness, Peace, and Love, that are in your selves Haters and Despisers of
Injustice, Arrogance, Hypocrisy, Envy, Deceit, Variance, Bloodshed, and
Covetousness; Take ye up a Lamentation, and cease not, until Righteous bear the
Rule in the seats of Judgment, and Peace, Mercy and Love obtain a Triumph and
Victory in Men's hearts: for who knows but that your sighs and tears may
prevail before Heaven, and among men, and suddenly turn to your rejoicing, that
your generations to come may reap the fruits of your supplications? and who
knows but that the blessed Age, foretold by the holy Prophets, declared in
holy Scriptures, may become fulfilled in our days? Lament therefore, saying,
LORD, LORD, God everlasting, How long shall the voice of thy holy Angel be
heard in the Heavens, read and testified in the sacred Scriptures giving Glory
to God on high, proclaiming Peace on the Earth, Good Will toward Men, and yet
the joyful sound thereof not once enter nor pierce into the hearts of the
Inhabitants thereof to learn righteousness, because the Honor, Lordliness, and
Pride thereof has stopped their ears; and the deceitfulness of riches, Luxury
and Malice, which works Revenge, has hardened their hearts, that they will
not nor cannot hear, nor understand within themselves to glorify the most high
God by and in all their works, nor understand they aright within themselves the
publishing of the Gospel of a peaceable Life, which is attended and preserved
by Love, and good will among men. O thou immense Power! that by thy
unresistible Word gave a Being to all Being, and broughtest all things into a
creaturely form, that have called the generations of men out of the dust, and
have ordained all things in their kind, to declare thy Wonders, and thy
magnificent Power; O thou omnipotent God, and King of Saints, how long shall
this Earth which thou have formed be without thy Government, and the creatures
which thou have set therein to rule, rebel against thee, in that they will not
suffer thee in thy righteous Laws, Statutes and Ordinances to reign over them?
How long, LORD, how long, shall the beast like natured-men arrogate the Name of
Christians? or how long shall the Name of Christians be imputed unto men, that
trace not the upright paths of Christ, that obey not his Commandments, that
reject the Law of Love, which is of wonderful and large extent, and herein are
become the true Antichrists? for whosoever is not with thee, is against thee.
How long, O thou Righteous One, just and true in all thy Judgments, shall the
judgments of dust and ashes contradict thy Righteousness, and the presence of
thy Glory in the purity of thy Laws be obscured upon the Earth through the
corrupted lusts of men? How long, O thou Lover of Righteousness among the
Creatures, shall the just Cause of the Needy ones, and men of low degree,
perish out of the Earth, and the Power of the Mighty ones destroy their right?
How long shall the rich man be respected in Judgment for his riches, and the
right of the poor and distressed not obtained nor considered, though pursued
with the cries of prayers and tears? Hear, O ye Heavens, and send deliverance,
for the Injustice and Wickednesses of Men are great upon Earth. O thou holy One
of Israel, how long shall the rich sit in thy Judgment seat, because of his
Riches? who doubtless too too many of them have heaped up their Treasure merely
by the sweat, oppressions and ruins of their fellow members, and by their
study and subtle wits ensnare the Innocent and the Ignorant? O when shall
Injustice be removed out of the Judgment seat, that the wills of lofty and
proud insulting spirits, or of men ambitious of power, may no more be a Law
over the lives, liberties and livelyhoods of them who in the right of Gods
Creation are their fellow members and Brethren? O Lord, when shall it once be,
that the Judges of this Earth shall cease the service of Injustice, of Bribery,
of Coverousness and Revenge, and of being men-servers, or serving their lusts,
against the Equity, Justice, and Righteousness of God? O when shall it once be,
that the Judges thereof shall cease to judge for hire or reward, or for fear or
affection, but out of love to Gods Righteousness? How long, O thou God of
long-suffering, how long shall Justice and Equity complain in the Land, and
make her Lamentation in the Country, in the Villages, in the Towns, in the
Cities, and streets thereof, that she is bought and sold, and that no man
obtains her as his birthright? How long, O ye sons of Perdition, and Cainish
minded men, will ye thirst after the blood and livelyhoods of others, to
advance your might and power, not considering the reason why God has created
you, viz. that all men should serve one another in the brotherly love? How long
Lord (righteous and true) shall the black clouds of darkness remain over the
face of the Earth, exemplified in the corrupted minds of men, in and amongst
all Societies, by judging for their own Interest and Party, whereby they bear
witness against Gods Truth and Righteousness, with whom there is no respect of
persons? whereby it is visibly manifest, that the blessed and joyful appearance
of the Sun of thy Righteousness, which brings healing under his wings for all
Nations, is interposed and eclipsed; whose upright Discipline, Laws, Statutes,
and Ordinances, O England, shall give thee Peace in thy Borders, and in the
midst of thy Enemies; uniting the hearts of the Fathers; uniting the hearts of
the Rulers to the People, and of the People to their Rulers; uniting the hearts
of Superiors to Inferiors, and of Inferiors to Superiors; uniting all
societies, and all degrees, both high and low, in one heart and in one mind, to
wish, desire and endeavor the good, the welfare and right of each other; not as
parties in partiality and hypocrisy, but in righteousness and in love, in
submission and subjection to the good Law of the Lord, teaching all men to deny
Ungodliness, Ambition, Covetousness, Envy, Wrath, and worldly lusts; and to
behave themselves obediently, peaceably, lowly, and righteously in this present
evil world. Thus the blessed day of Restoration or Redemption shall be
accomplished, and the Creation of God, which groan under man's oppression, be
delivered, and the joyful time foretold by the holy Prophets fulfilled, That
the Lion shall lie down with the Lamb, and the Leopard with the Kid, and the
young Lion and the Fatling together, and a Child shall lead them, etc. and the
Lord God Everlasting shall be One, and his Laws, Statutes and Ordinances
observed, in a holy and a righteous life, be one, in one heart and in one mind,
by all the Lovers of Truth and Righteousness throughout the Land. Hasten, O
Lord, hasten to accomplish this thy work, and let thy power and long-suffering
once overcome the pride of man, that would resist thee, that we the Inhabitants
of this Land in this our generation may be the glory and the rejoicing of
succeeding Ages, that they in us were ordained and created to see thy
Righteousness flourish and established upon the Earth, to thy praise and honor
among all Nations, O thou Creator and Preserver of Men; so shall we not resist
in our deeds that which Christ has taught, and which with our lips we have
prayed, for saying, Thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done in Earth as it is in
Heaven; for the Kingdoms, the Power, the Glory and Dominions thereof are thine,
thou only of right O Lord art worthy to reign henceforth and for ever in the
hearts of men.

Amen, Hallelujah, Amen.
Ordered, That the pecuniary profit made by the Impression of this Manuscript,
bearing this superscription [The Companions of a good Conscience] be
distributed to the relief of distressed people; and that the propriety hereof
be registered, entered, and amplified in all good Consciences, as becomes the
Rule of divine Order, for a Pattern and a Memorial to future Generations.

Praise ye the Lord God omnipotent, O ye Inhabitants of the Earth, both high
and low; O praise him in works of Righteousness, and magnify him in deeds of
Mercy, Peace, and Love: Be ye silent before him, O ye Hypocrites, that draw
near with your lips only, for your prayers and your praises are an abomination
in his sight. Praise ye him, O all ye his Works, for his Providence is
continually over you. O let every thing that has breath in its kind yield up
its life to the praise of the great Name of the most High; for in him and
through him, by him and for him, all things are and were created; to him alone
belongs Honor, Praise and Glory from all his Creatures. Amen, Amen.
Hallelujah, Amen.

FINIS.

