Concerning the Congregation of Jesuits held at London April 24. 1678. which
Mr. Oats calls a Consult.
AS no one thing seems to have given more color to the calumnyes of Mr. Oats
against Catholics, and allarmed the nation, then a Congregation of Jesuits
held in London, Apr. 24. 1678. where in he swears Treasonable things were
treated; so no one thing can more conduce to the Clearing of those Iealousyes
raised by these Calumnyes, then a true account of the intent of that
Congregation: for this being the foundation of a great part of his
Accusations, if it falls to the ground, the rest can scarce subsist.

Provincial Congregations all over the Society are called in each Province by
their respective Provincialls every three years. Ad eligendos tertio quoque
anno Procuratores. Say their Constitutions, Formula Congreg. Prove. c. 1. p. 51.
And the last year 1678. was of course assigned for them. Hence about that same
time, the Flemish Jesuits held a like Congregation at Antwerpe, the Walloones
at Lile, the French at Paris, the Gascons at Bourdeaux, the Languedocians at
Toulose, those of Champagne at Rhemes, those of Provence and Dauphine at Lions,
and those of Spain, Italy, and Germany, in their respective chief towns, and
Colleges. So that this Congregation was nothing particular to Ingland, but
common to all Europe. And a like Assembly had been held by Inglish Jesuits
every three years, ever since they were made a Province by themselves, under a
Provincial of their onne Nation.

The intent of these Congregations is specifyed in the Constitutions above
cited, viz, to choose as Procurator, one of them to go to Rome, to inform the
General of their particular, and private affairs. Which Constitutions are in
the hands of Several Protestants in Ingland.

The Persons capable of entering into it, are first, Actual Superiors. Secondly
the Procurator of the Province. Thirdly so many of the ancientest Professed
Fathers, as with those others may make up the number of forty persons. That
number is prescribed by the Constitutions: to which, for the Confirmation of
all this I appeal.

M. Titus Oats was not present at that held an. 1678. first because he was all
that time at S. Omers, as appears, by the Oaths of Several persons, who
dwelt with him all that time there. Secondly because he never wore a Jesuits
habit one hour, he never was so much as Novice amongst the Jesuits: And by
consequence was not capable of assisting in such an Assembly. He pretends to
have been capacitated to it by a Particular Patent from the General of the
Jesuits: but this pretense is ridiculous to understanding men, how plausible
so ever it seems to some in Ingland: for first it is not in the power of the
General to act so much contrary to the Constitutions, and secondly if his
Power had reached to that, yet certainly he would never make use of it in
favor of a person, who for his misdemeanors had been turned out of one
College by the Jesuits, and had carried him self so ill in the other, that
upon great complaints, the Superiors were then actually resolved to turn him
out of a another, where he then resided.

The Place for the Congregation was London, rather then any place beyond seas:
because only the ancientest men of their body being to meet, (besides the
actual Superiors, and Procurator) and the greatest part of these being in
Ingland, it could not without very great difficulty, and danger, be held
beyond seas. The present calm, they then enjoyed, through the Indulgence of
the Government, seemed to permit it: yet seeing all their Persons were obnoxious
to the Law, Secrecy was enjoined, as necessary for their security.

M. Tonstall by his Antiquity of his Profession having Ius Suffragii, right to
a voice in the Congregation, Mr Edward Peter's his neygh bour had order from the
Provincial to summon him to it. And this was the occasion of that Letter dated
23. Feb. 1677. But Mr. Oats very falsely makes Mr. Peter's say, that he had writ
to the Jesuits in Warwicks hire, and Worcester shire: for with these he had as
little to do, as with the Jesuits in France, Spain, or Flanders.

This is enough to uncypher that Letter of Mr. Edward Peter's, to Mr. Tonstall,
which was thought so mysterious, and so great a Conviction of the pretended
Plot. I will add a word to explicate the Latin, Least those wise and learned
men, who turned it into Barbarous Language should hereafter use it as another
Evidence of a more Barbarous Conspiracy. The true import of the words are: Tria
pro Domino N. N. (the Person's name) benefactore Provinciae N. Which is the
ordinary form of Commanding Prayers for such persons, who by their Charity to
any part of the Society, deserve such a return of gratitude from the whole
body.

Sir Samuel Baldwin, in the try all of Mr. Irlande page 54. thought it a
Confirmation of Mr. Oats his Evidence, that he hit on the day of the
Congregation, before that letter was found. Yet at S. Omers where Mr. Oats all
that time was, without any revelation, it might be known to all, as soon as
the thing was over: for those who returned that way, made no difficulty to
speak of it, Little apprehending, that so Innocent an Assembly, as to its
end, and the things handled in it, could be so maliciously represented, as
they have since experienced, to their astonishment and the wonder of all men,
who know the Jesuits, and their Government: or that such malicious calumnyes,
could find such credit in a civilized nation.

The place of their meeting was not at the white horse Tavern, nor in the
Strand. I have enquired of Several, who were present: and most said, they knew
not so much, as that there was a White horse Tavern in all that street: all
unanimously assured, they never met there.

The Congregation was ended at the second meeting, on the 26. April. (The first
was on the 24.) and several of those, who met, that same day, the 26. April,
returned toward their Several Residences. The Rector of Liege, who had the
longest Journey yet was at Liege on the 16. May Stilo vet: although he had a slow
passage by sea, stayed one whole day at Roterdam, another at Antwerpe and athird
at Brusselles, on his way. Now after the ending of the Congregation, that is
after the 26. April, nothing Could be don in the name of it, all such attempts
being illegal, invalid, and never attempted by Jesuits any where.

Hence all that M. Oats Says, of the Jesuits dividing into several Clubs,
Treasonable things proposed in them, Resolutions taken upon those
Propositions, Rewards promised to the Attempters, the Execution commended to,
and undertaken by several persons, etc. all these things, I say, are
absolutely false, and improbable: as appears by what is said already, and
shall be further evidenced by undeniable Proofs, both of Authentical
Attestations, and Oaths of honest men, when it shall be required, and a free
hearing permitted, with security to the witnesses.



