A COMMISSION OR, POSITION: Wherein all English Subjects, have their
undertakings and indevours for the restitution of his sacred Majesty, unto his
Throne and Dignity, though without Commission for the same: Proved to be
lawful, and their bounden duty, by the word of God, and the Law of the Land,
and the light of Reason; and that the Statute Law of the Kingdom is their
protection therein.

Intended for the satisfaction of all those, who have engaged, or shall engage
in the said undertaking; and an Answer unto all those that urge their want of
Commission against them.

By a lover of Peace and Truth.

2. Sam. 19.9.10. Why speak ye not a word of bringing the King back?

Printed in the Year 1648.

The Position concerning Loyal Subjects, etc.
In the ensuing discourse, I am not so to be understood, as that I do believe
the most noble and gallant undertakers herein at present do want Commission,
but the contrary, this being intended for the satisfaction of those that
believe otherwise or may doubt the case.
TO grief of heart (dear fellow subjects) hearing it reported by some friends,
some enemies unto the peace of our Kingdom, that it is unlawful and
punishable by the Laws of the Land, to raise force and arms for the
restitution of his gracious Majesty without Commission: My duty toward God,
mine Allegiance unto my Prince, the dictate of a good conscience, and my
service unto the Commonwealth would not suffer me to take rest (for the
satisfaction of the Kingdom herein without ingagem^nt in defense of this
truth, That it is not only lawful, but also the duty and Allegiance of all
and every English man to join and endeavor for the restitution of his sacred
Majesty unto his Throne and dignity, though without Commission for the same:
Where first observe, that my meaning is not to maintain or defend any subjects
whatsoever, their taking up of arms, that is leavying and raising up of Armies
without Commission, and that lawful too, but in case of restitution of his
(now imprisoned) sacred Majesty into his Throne and Dignity, and this (by Gods
assistance) I will make good in dispite of all truth opposers.

By 1. The Law of Nature. 2. The Law of the Land. 3. The Law of God.


1. the Law of Nature makes this good in regard unto 1. His Majesty. 2. The two
Houses. 3. Our selves.


1. It is most necessary and lawful to raise arms for the restitution of our
gracious Sovereign, in a respect unto ^imselfe, because both common policy and
duty, bind the Subject by the Statute Law of this Land, to restrain all
manner of shameful slanders against their King, 5.6. Ed. 6. chapter 11.
and if to defend him from the virulency of tongue and pen, is the duty of the
Subject, how much more to rescue him from the violence of the sword, and
bondage by the hands of Rebels and Traitors? yea and his sacred Person from
all poison and other danger.

2. In respect unto the two Houses (for the Kingdom neither has nor ever had
interest or concernment, in the Army usually in the There is no Parliament
without a King, neither has any Authority to raise an Army in England but the
King: See my kingdoms Remedy.
language of the beast, called the Parliament Army) not meddling with, but
laying aside their Treason and Rebellion, the Kingdom has no ty nor
obligation unto them, because they have betrayed their trust, and have deprived
them by whom they were entrusted, as much as in them lay of every part of their
greatest happiness. viz Their God and Religion, their King and Laws, their
Liberties and Immunities, by Tyranny, Oppression, and Usurpation, and do
refuse and neglect to act and perform any thing tending to their good and
benefit, though their own Oaths, Votes, Protestations, and Covenants, with
their Declarations, and Ordinances, would lead them thereunto; therefore the
Kingdom may and ought, moving though it were but upon their own said
principles, besides the Law of the Land, to join and endeavor for his
Majesty's Restitution, and restoration unto his Throne and dignity.

3. In respect unto our selves, the people of England; it is Lawful for these
Reasons.

1. Every thing is bound by nature to seek and labor after the preservation
of it self, and to prevent its Ruin and destruction, which of this Kingdom
is threatened, by severing and seperating of the King, the Law and the Kingdom,
as has been sometimes maintained by the opposite party, see that ever to be
renowned Judge Jenkins, p. 175 therefore to prevent Ruin, and destruction,
enjoynes endeavors for the restoration of his Majesty.

2. Considering we have by the two Houses lost our Birthrights, happiness, and
prosperity, with effusion of much innocent blood, and the expense of vast
treasure, which the Kingdom can never recover without his Majesty's freedom,
honor, and safety; without which we shall never enjoy moment of quiet, nor
safety to our persons, wives, children, nor estates: and that the King being
Medicus Regni, the Physician of the Kingdom, without him the Nation is
irrecoverably sick; and he being Pater Patriae, the Father of our Country,
without him all English men are miserable Orphans and he being sponsus Regni,
the Husband of the Realm, without him all England is a widow; each whereof,
much more all, if not remedied will prove fatal, unto so notable a freeborn
people: unto but common reason therefore the least of these are stronger, and
of greater authority then any paper Commission signed and sealed by the
pretended two Houses, and may move every serious and sober minded man to join,
and endeavor for the restitution of our gracious King: and whosoever shall
upon sound and honest principles, without sinister ends use his best abilities
to effect the same, shall be sure to beget present happiness to himself and
his fellow Subjects; and shall deservedly be honored, and renowned unto
eternity, and enjoy present favor with God and man.

2. As the Law and light of nature maintains this verity, so likewise the Law
of the Land, both reast and pretended, first the pretended Law, the
protestation, Vow, and Covenant, Solemn League and Covenant, with many of
their Ordinances, Declarations and Remonstrances speak for his honor, with
heed unto his Prerogative, and has often promised to make him glorious, with
safety, not security of his Majesty's sacred Person and estate; but to suffer
him to lie in prison, is to maintain a power above and against his Honor,
estate, and Prerogative, and if not timely prevented, will prove destructive to
his Person, and the rest which is an open breach of all the foresaid pretended
Law. Secondly the real and true Law of this Land upholds this Truth, Stat. 6.
Ed. 1. Liege Homage, every Subject owes unto the King, (viz) faith de membro,
de vita, and Terreno honor, which is confirmed not only by the former
pretended Law, but also by the Oa^h of supremacy: which Oath was taken by every
man now in both Houses, though broken by them all; the words whereof to this
purpose are these: I promise that hereafter that I will perform all faith, or
Alegeance and true obedience to the Kings Majesty, and his Heirs and lawful
Successors, and according to my power, to help and defend all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preeminencies, and Authorities granted or due, to the Kings
Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors, or united and annexed unto the Imperall
Crown of this Realm, so help me God, and the contents of this book.

Whoever has taken this Oath, and does not to the utmost of his power, labor
to help his Majesty out of prison; must needs be as guilty of perjury, as
they which keep him prisoner: this therefore is a sufficient Commission, and
is firmly made good by the Statute Law of the Land, as it is peremptorily
enjoined 26. Hen. 8.2. Ye shall swear to bear faith, truth and obedience.
all, only unto the Kings Majesty: to bear faith, truth and obedience; there
is Commission to do him all necessary service. All, there the Commission is
derected unto every Englishman, only to the Kings Majesty, there all faith,
truth, and obedience unto the two Houses, and every other power whatsoever
against or besides his Majesty in England is exploded and it is neither faith,
truth, nor obedience to suffer the Kings Majesty to be a Prisoner; and it was
enacted, 14 Edw. 3.5. that all Officers take an Oath, well and lawfully to
serve the King, and his people: Whereas permitting and suffering his sacred
Person to remain in prison in Carisborough Castle, is wicked and unlawful
service unto both King and people; again this Commission is made good St. 7
Edw. 1. The words are these. To us (the King not any other) it belongs, and
our part is, through our Royal Seigniory straightly to defend force of armor,
and all other force against our peace at all times, when it shall please us,
and to punish them who shall do contrary, according to the Laws and usages of
this Realm, and heereunto they are bound to aid us as their Sovereign Lord
at all seasons, when need shall be. When need shall be there is their
Commission, for can there be more need then when a good* learned, wise, holy,
religious merciful, and conscientious King, is traitorously and rebelliously
imprisoned, and his Kingdom lies bleeding and gasping at the brinck of ruin
through Rebellion and Divisions? See Stat. 25. Edw. 3.2. By the Law of the Land
when Treason and Felony is committed, it is lawful for every Subject, Vid.
Judge Jenkins page 185.
who suspects the Offender to apprehend him and secure him, so that justice may
be done upon him according to the Law. Idem p. 176.
To deliver his sacred Majesty out of traitorous hands, is every man of the
Lands bounden duty; Read Judge Jenkins page 18.
whosoever they be that shall undertake for the restitution of his Majesty,
though without Commission, have the Law of the Land for their Protection. 11.
H. 7. chap. 1. which you may read in That Patriot of England.
Judge Jenkins page 89. but to encounter such in fight as come to aid the King
in his war is guilty of high Treason: Thus you see every English Subject has
sufficient authority, and it is his bounden duty though without Commission, to
join and endeavor for the restitution of his Majesty. 3. This is warranted
unto us by the Law of God: it is a maxim amongst the Divines, contra Rebels
omnis homo miles, every man is to be a Soldier against a Rebel; but lest we
fail, let us ascend higher, St. Paul injoynes us to render unto all their
dues, tribute unto whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, Romans 13.7.
fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor, all which are in the highest due
unto our gracious Sovereign in his several Dominions. Tribute because he is
Gods Minister, custom because he is head over his people, fear because he
bears not the sword in vain, honor because he is our greatest, that is
Political Father, and therefore is he styled Pater Patriae, the Father of the
Country: all these dues therefore are due unto him in the first place, not
unto any of his Subjects, but as their right and claim thereunto, is derived
from him by the conveyance of the Law of God and the Land and all these being
primary and principal dues due from us and all his subjects; how much more a
rescue of his sacred Person out of the Traitors hands, which you see is so
strongly enjoined us all by the Law of the Land? Whereunto St. Peter injoynes
obedience. Submit your selves unto every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be unto the King as supreme, or unto Governors as those that are
sent of him, 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit unto every Ordinance of man, there must be no
slighting nor neglecting the Law of the Land, but submission and obedience
thereunto, for this is most certain that not the Letter or Declaration of the
Law of the Land, but the execution thereof. makes it good and profitable; for
now by too doleful and present experience, we may see that when the Law is
misused, dissembled with, or laid aside, or condemned, or is done pro forma
tantum, and as they term it in France, Par maniere d'acquit only. it will be
the certain ruin (though not at first perceived) of the Commonwealth;
therefore this must be done for the Lords sake, because the good of all, is the
will of the Lord Paramount, the God of Heaven and earth, and our submission and
obedience must be in this order, unto the King as supreme: imprisoning
therefore and securing his gracious Person, is not submission and obedience
thereunto, because it is an extirpating and expelling his supremacy: For
whosoever is imprisoned, therein argues inferiority unto that power by which he
is imprisoned.
On the contrary therefore a recovering and restoring his Majesty unto his
supremacy, being so strictly enjoined by the Law of the Land, is a submission
and obedience to that ordinance of man: But I will come yet closer who they be
that have exploded the ten Commandments (judge dear Reader) which are
nevertheless the rule of every conscientious Christians life, the list whereof
is, honor thy Father and Mother, etc. which is the first with promise: and
that we may the better understand the honor due, let us first consider in the
contrary dishonor, and this shall be in Canaan son of Noah, who dealing
undutifully and irreverently toward his Father, procured a curse; A servant of
servants shall thou be, Genesis 9.25. though his Father in some things was
unexcusable, but a wiser then Noah has denounced a curse upon all undutifull
children; the eye that mocketh at his Father, and dispiseth to obey his Mother,
the Ravens of the valleys shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it,
Prove. 30.17. and if it be so odious to God and man for a child to be
undutifull unto his natural Father, how much more for Natural Subjects, when
they imprison their great Political Father, and natural Sovereign? whom in
the receipt of that Homage of fear from his Subjects, God has joined with
himself, fear thou the Lord and the King, Prove. 24.21. but as God has linckt
himself with his Vicegerent in that command of fear from their Subjects,
doubtlessely were they able, would have linckt them together in prison;
questionless therefore a restitution of our gracious Sovereign Lord the King,
would be as acceptable in the eyes of the Almighty, as if it were a restitution
of himself; and if Gods justice will be so severe upon cursed cursing thoughts
against a King, that a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which
has wings shall tell the matter, Eccles. 10.20. What will be his punishment of
those that imprison their Liege Lord? How gracious and merciful on the
contrary, will he be unto them that shall restore his gracious Majesty? This is
an honor both of debt and duty, then which for the present Subjects can do no
greater, and is commanded you see both by the Law of God and the Land, this was
the judgment of the children of Israel in such a case, they were at a strife
for restitution of their King. And all the people were at strife throughout all
the Tribes of Israel, saying, the King saved us out of the hands of our
enemies, and he delivered us out of the hand of the Philistines, and now he is
fled out of the Land for Absalom, and Absalom whom we anointed over us is
dead in battle; now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the King
back? 2 Samuel 19.9.10. It was likewise David's judgment, And King David sent to
Zadock, and to Abiathar the Priests, saying, speak unto the Elders of Judah,
saying, why are ye the last to bring the King back to his house? (seeing the
speech of all Israel is come to the King, even to his house) ye are my
brethren, ye are my bones, and my flesh; wherefore then are ye the last to
bring back the King? ver. 11.12. who ever thou art then, that art a Christian,
and an Englishman, thou see not only thy Commission and Authority, but thy
duty from the Law of God, and the Land, to join and endeavor for the
restitution of his Majesty unto his Throne and Dignity; go on therefore stoutly
and courageously, God who has given this Commission, will in this cause keep
thee for himself; look up unto God as thy preserver and keeper, and unto his
Majesty as the center of all thy earthly hopes in this Kingdom, and then do
thou rightly fear God and honor the King, and shall prevail at the last.

God save the King.
FINIS.

