Come, come all you that are with ROME offended,
Come now and hear from whence the Pope descended*

THE LINEAGE OF LOCUSTS OR THE POPES PEDEGRE Beginning with his prime ancestor
the Devil, plainly set forth to be noted of all good Christians and true
Catholics, for the avoiding of those subtle snares continually laid for them
by his insinuating Agents.
THE PEDIGREE.
1. THe Devil begat darkness. 2. And darkness begat ignorance. 3. And
ignorance begat error and his brethren. 4. And error and his brethren begat
free will and self love. 5. And self-love begat merits. 6. And merits begat
forgetfulness of Gods grace. 7. And forgetfulness of Gods grace begat mistrust.
8. And mistrust begat satisfaction. 9. And satisfaction begat facrifice of the
Mass. 10. And sacrifice of the Mass begat Popish priesthood. 11. And Popish
priesthood begat prayer for the dead. 12. And prayer for the dead begat
sacrilege of souls. 13. And sacrilege of souls begat superstition. 14. And
superstition begat hypocrisy the king.
And these are fourteen Generations.

1. ANd hypocrisy the king begat lucre. 2. And lucre begat purgatory. 3. And
purgatory begat foundation of irreligious houses. 4. And foundation of
irreligious houses begat patrimony of the Church. 5. And patrimony of the
Church begat ma^mon of Iniquity. 6. And mammon of iniquity begat abundance. 7.
And abundance begat cruelty. 8. And cruelty begat domination. 9. And
domination begat pomp. 10. And pomp begat ambition. 11. And ambition begat
intrusion into the Church right. 12. And intrusion into the Church right begat
symonie. 13. And simonie begat universal superintendencie. 14. And universal
superintendencie begat the Pope, the Cardinals and all his brethren.
And these are fourteen Generations, in the transmigration of abomination.

1. ANd the Pope begat the mystery of iniquity. 2. And the mystery of iniquity
begat divine sophistry. 3. And divine sophistry begat rejection of the
Scripture. 4. And rejection of the Scripture begat tyranny. 5. And tyranny
begat murder of the Saints. 6. And murder of the Saints begat the despising of
God. 7. And the despising of God begat dispensation. 8. And dispensation begat
license to sin. 9. And license to sin begat abomination. 10. And
abomination begat confusion. 11. And confusion begat travel in the spirit. 12.
And travel in the spirit begat disputation. 13. And disputation begat matter
to write of:
By which writing the son of perdition Antichrist specified in so many places
of Scripture was revealed.

The Protestants Conclusion.
THe Pope, himself (the simple to beguile)
Servum servorum Dei does instile,
The servant of Gods servants, who (we find)
To seem his masters better is inclined,
Christ humble was, humility requiring,
The Pope is proud to honor still aspiring,
Christ was content to wear a crown of Thorns,
But the Popes head a crown of gold adornes,
A triple crown which hardly him suffices
But of his foul ambition what arises?
Hunc capit infernus, quem deserit ordo supernus.
Forsaken by the Quire supernall,
He Is taken by the fiends infernal,
For let false Catholics say what they can
He Is neither God nor angel, nor a man,
But a prodigious beast or monster fell
With all his brood hatched or begot in hell,
And so I leave him.

