COMA BERENICES; Or, The HAIRY COMET; Being A Prognostic OF Malignant
Influences from the many blazing Stars wandering in our Horizon.

1 Timothy 2. 9. -- Not with broidered hair. 1 Pet 3. 3 -- Not of Plaiting the
hair. In the Homily of the Church of England against Excess of Apparel. The
proud and haughty stomachs of the daughters of England are so maintained with
diverse disguised sorts of costly apparel; That, as Tertullian an ancient Father
says, there is left no difference between an honest Matron and a common
Strumpet. Jerome to Laeta. Ne caput gemmis oneres, nec capillum irruffes and
aliquid de gehennae ignibus admisceas. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1674.

Against Women's Gorgeous attire about the head, etc.

For coma Berenices, see His dictionaries of proper names.

SATYRA in SATYROS.
Who Will say shag'd Absalom no sons begat,
When every man almost looks like his brat,
Or Jezabel, no painted Daughters nursed,
(For Jehu's dogs or sword) by Heaven cursed.
When such a breed of Bashans bulls do roar,
That push at Virtue and Religion goar.
Of old in Temples, veild were modest faces,
But now for Mates they gaze with open traces:
The Goats of Kensington yield silver hair,
And in rank curles their wanton eyes do glare.
No shame, since on them their wild Satyrs glance,
And cloven feet do round about them dance.
Hired Galen says, it is for their health to lop,
And sends them to the Barber Surgeons shop,
Its true, their soft and watrish brains they plead,
New scurveys then, and saltish humors dread:
Thus they traduce poor Galen, who to cure
Their French Consumptions bids their heads immure
With spiced caps, and dangling borders charm
Foul stenches, and to keep their doublets warm:
What, go like no body? we are quite undon,
For then brave Hectors our cropped Amors shun.
O handsome fashion taught in Phoebus school, a intonsus Apollo.

Where Frantic Priests bestride the Delphian stooll.
Hence the Fanatic Omens of grim times,
When hairy Comets blazon out our crimes:
Their bushy rays with powdered guilt do shine,
But shall ere long hiss in the Stygian brine.
Their serpent-towers stolen from Avern lakes,
Tyrinthius stern shall lash with fiery snakes,
Of all the forest, Hells black Nazarites,
Doctors of Chaucers song, woodcocks and snites.
How just they look when their hair Hoods are laid,
And they to some unlawful bed are strayd.
Such Shepherds shear themselves, and vow to hang
Their Fleece in Venus Temple whence they sprang.
Such Florence Priests along our streets do wave,
In Per'wigs marching to confess some Knave,
Or Parthian Dames sore pricked in conscience now,
By horned bulls that grazed their brazen brow:
Are these fit Jacobines for him to bless,
Who sue to Heaven in rough Esau's dress.
I fear their Clergy they will scarce obtain,
And miserere mei chaunt in vain.
I leave these Balaams and their Vestal Nuns,
To this good Pontif, who in Vizor runs,
To scourge their whorish Garbs within the Court
Of this short Treatise, and to spoil their sport,
That they may cook no more hair baked or sod,
Lest he afresh should wind his smarting rod,
But learn to tend chaste fires within their breast,
Till holy flames convey them to their rest.
-- Difficile est Satyram non scribere. Wigs equal in expense to a Tax or
Subsidy -- P. 1. fruits of the Tree of Pride -- P. 4
Priest's Wigs buzled and artificial -- P. 8 Wigs. -- worn 1 as a defense in
time of danger -- P. 10 2 as a covering for national defects P. 11 (not worn by
Elijah) -- do.
3 as ornaments -- do
Invented by Satan -- P. 12 the wearing of them a Sin -- P. 17 a reproach to
Providence -- P. 19 Proscribed by the Heathens by the light of Nature -- P. 23
by the ancient lights of the Church -- P. 24 by TERTULLIAN. CLEMINS. IEROM --
P. 25


Flags of Vanity -- P. 25 Works of darkness -- P. 26 worse than baldness and
sackcloth -- P. 28



A Prognostic of malignant Influences, etc.
THere are great complaints of want and grievances, both in the City and
Kingdom; That Trading is dead, that Taxes are heavy, and that the Dutch War
has half undon us. But who will believe our complaints, or at least who will
pity us, whilst we have money good store to bestow upon superfluous and
questionable; if not unlawful vanities? The price of one of those Periwigs
which some men wear, would pay more than what they are rated at for a years tax
or subsidy. It Is true indeed, that Atheism, whoredom, and desperate swearing,
with such like, are the great capital sins under which the Kingdom groans, and
for which all who have not baffled their consciences, or are bereaved of their
understandings, expect an heavy reckoning ere it be long. But we may also put
into the black Inventory and Catalogue our abounding pride and luxury (which
were accounted sins by our forefathers, but are almost become our virtues) our
vein of fantastical fashions and strange apparel, for which the children of
Nobles were severely Zeph. ^ 8.
threatened.

I know people generally say, they may conform to the garb of the times they
live in, without deserving the imputation of pride or vanity. And it were
strange, if they should speak otherwise. Pride is a sin which most practice,
but no body will own, till it be shaven, and its nails pared, as the Jews were
directed Deuteronomy 21. 12.
to deal with the captive woman before they took her to wife; but when it is
swadled up in soft expressions, when it is fitted with the plausible name of
handsomness or decency, then the sweet Babe is smiled upon, and dandled upon
the knees of the greatest Professors, without fear or remorse. The best way for
us to judge of persons and things is by their fruits. If the effeminacy of the
men of this generation in their hair and habits; if women's naked breasts,
spots, towers, curls, etc. be not fruits growing upon the tree of pride, I
wonder what pride is; Let us take heed, while we thus plead for our own, lest
we legitimate the vices of all former Ages, wherein some invented diverse and
strange fashions of curling their hair; others colored it with unguents and
powders; some put upon it the filings of gold to make it shine, as Verus the
Emperor, some others Iul. Capit. in Vero.
tied up the Tresses of it with golden ribbands. And in the days of
Heliogabulus, Athen. Deip. Lamprid. in Heliogab.
there were certain men who bound up their hair in a caul, after the manner of
women, that they might curry favor with him by the imitation of his manners.

Pretenses are never wanting, especially to those who live in eminent Cities,
when their dealings and converse are with Persons of Quality, whom they think
themselves obliged to comply with in these matters for their own profit. But
that is a cursed gain which is gotten by stretching the conscience to a sinful
compliance, with the corrupt humors and inclinations of the men of this world.
Yet if these men would speak impartially, the pleasing of others is not the
only or chief cause (if any cause at all) of the unjustifiable excess and vanity
of their habit, but rather an affectation and desire of being like the great
ones of the earth, herein resembling Aesops frog, who fain would have swelled
her self to the dimensions of an Ox, but the poor Animal failed in the
enterprise.

The truth is, Cities of great resort and commerce, and where Princes keep
their royal Residence, as they grow wealthy, so they grow proud and wanton, not
knowing what they may eat, or what they may drink, or wherewithal they may be
clothed: when they are waxed fat like Jesurun, they fall a kicking, and nothing
will tame them, till they are brought low by some terrible judgments. Pride
like the Gout harbors chiefly amongst rich people, and in great opulent Cities,
as appears from Jer. 13 9. Thus says the Lord, after this manner will I mar
the Pride of Judah, and the GREAT PRIDE of Jerusalem. It is too visible, that a
great number of Citizens take not their measures from their Estates or Quality,
when those of mean Occupations vye it with great Personages in fashionableness
and Gallantry, as if all Londons Tradesmen were Merchants, and their Merchants
were Princes. By the Ordination of God, as Isa. 23. 8.
there are distinctions of callings and degrees amongst men, so there ought to
be distinctions of habits. A grave and learned Preacher of that City Dr. Sibbs
Lydia's convers. p. 17.
gave them a seasonable Item many years ago, That overmuch delicacy in attire
was a fatal thing, that there were many in the City and in the Country given
to overmuch nicety and sumptuousness in this kind, and that it was a forerunner
of ruin. But we have out passed the luxury of those times. The Tree of Pride
has blossomed and born other manner of fruit, when those whose education has
been in shops, can give as many pounds for a Periwig, as would almost make up a
stock to set up a poor Apprentice, or relieve many a poor Member of Christ,
which languisheth under great pressures and wants: I hope they are well
provided with an Answer against the day of Judgment, Luke 16. 2. When they
shall give an account of their Stewardship, to him that judges righteously,
and accepts not the Persons of men.

I know it is pleaded that these things are indifferent, and men think that
their estates are their own. But the pretense of harmlesness and indifferency
has almost undon us all, and opened a gap to all manner of licentiousness. If
we list to follow odd scandalous fashions, and are taken with the capritious
inventions of unsober fantastical persons; we hush our consciences, and silence
our reprovers, with the powerful name of indifferency. But admit they were so,
is there no circumspection to be used in the Practice of indifferent things? It
is an observation grounded upon long experience, That Religion is always going
down the wind, when its Professors and Votaries allow to themselves a
boundless and unwarrantable liberty in things which are commonly called
indifferent. A Malady which has its beginning in the extreme or outward parts
of the body, oftentimes at last invades the vitals, and proves mortal. And
though men's Propriety in their estates ought not to be denied, yet it should be
remembered, that they must and shall be accountable, God always reserving the
supreme Propriety and Dominion to himself, and therefore he calls it, My Flax
and my Wool, Hos 2. 9.

Not a few bolster up themselves in their conformity to the vain fashions and
disguises of the times, because they do no more then what is common. But
thinking thus to alleviate the business, they make it well the worse. For
corruptions, the more common they are, the more they provoke God, and the more
fatal they are to men. When all flesh had corrupted their way, we know what
became of the old world, Genesis 6. 12. They sinned together, and they went down
quick together into that universal grave of waters.

But that which gives a greater countenance and reputation unto the excess
which we are speaking of in habits and hair, is, That eminent Professors have
taken them up, and licensed them as it were, at least given them protection
under the venerable names of Profession and godliness. But the more is their
shame in the judgment of the most discerning unbiassed persons, who cannot but
wonder at the unbridled practices of diverse of our modern Professors, and
lament to see how much Religion is abused in the house of her friends. I will
not deny, but that diverse of them are conscientious godly persons; but I take
this for none of their godliness, or the proper fruits of it.

There is a strange incongruity and unevenness in the ways of some people,
which I could never yet reconcile, or well understand. They will not come at
Common Prayer, because they say some of it was taken out of the Mass Book: they
detest a Surplice, because it was worn by the Romish Priests in their
idolatrous worship: but as for vain, ridiculous, immodest fashions and attires,
they never boggle at them. A tender conscience indeed will make men afraid of
one sin as well as another, or else it is not tenderness of conscience but
hypocrisy, as the Apostle shows, Romans 2. 22. and an evidence of partiality
in Gods Law. That man's or woman's conscience is of a strange temperament, that
will not give them leave to conform to the Church, but never troubles them for
conforming to the World. It is aliene from my present undertaking to declare
for or against Conformity: (I would offend none,) but I do not like it, when
there are hills and dales in men's consciences, when at some things they strain
and other things as bad they swallow down without the least appearance of
reluctance. They which upon pretense of scrupulosity refrain from the public
established Worship, had need be very careful how to indulge themselves in any
ways of sensuality, lest that passage of the Apostle be laid in their dish; but
those which are otherwise minded, These be they who separate themselves,
sensual, having not the Spirit, Jude 19.

There is one thing more which gives no small encouragement to the vain
fantastical garbs of these times, (which are one of the dotages of the world
now waxing old) that the hand of the Priests, and spiritual Guides are chief in
this Trespass. I speak not this of all, for there are many of them whom the
contagion of the times has not touched, who still retain that old Apostolical
gravity, which best becomes their place. In the mean time others of their
brethren take to themselves a greater freedom; and others no doubt take example
by them, (which for the reverence I have to them I should never publish, were
it not exposed daily to the view of all men) what may not others do, when
persons venerable for their Office, eminent for their Gifts, and otherwise of
pious exemplary lives, standing in the room of God, and acting as Messengers of
the Lord of Hosts, shall pray and preach in public Assemblies, and perform all
other duties of their sacred Function, with long buzled Periwigs, or Borders of
Artificial hair, hanging over their bands and shoulders? From the beginning it
was not so. I dare undertake for them, Paul or Timothy, Ignatius or Polycarpus,
Bradford or Hooper, would have thought themselves as ill harnessed for their
work in this Attire, as David did when he put on Saul's Armor. There is a
greater degree of gravity, composedness, mortification and sobriety (...). 1 Timothy 3. 4.
required of them than of others. It is a great disorder when the Shepherds
infect the flock. The Lord was highly displeased, Jer. 23 15. when from the
Prophets of Jerusalem, the contagion of evil example sent forth into all the
Land.

Neither may others justify their undue Practices in these things, from the
example of their Guides; for they are men subject to like passions with others,
too often surprised with the same temptations of pride, affectation and vanity;
and when they give way, they expose their Persons and Office to contempt, to
the great detriment and hindrance of their labors.

There is a general Complaint that little good is done by preaching in these
days: and I fear that Ministers in part may thank themselves for it, whilst
they immerse themselves in the manners and fashions of this world; whilst
people in their habits and converse can see so little difference between their
Guides, and one of the vain fellows, 2 Samuel 6. 20 They despise them in their
hearts. Those teachers which will keep up the reputation of their holy calling,
and be successful in winning souls, must keep at a remote distance from the
extravagancies and levity of the Times, as appears from the example of John
the Baptist, the austerity of whose life, and the very plainness of whose habit
procured veneration to his Person, and prepared the why before him, as he did
before his Lord and Master. One part of the Ministers work is with zeal and
authority, to rebuke the most prevailing corruptions; out their mouths are
stopped, and the edge of their reproofs is blunted, when they are involved
under the same guilt which they arraign in others. Reprovers had need be
innocent (lest their weapons be beaten back upon their own heads.) The Snuffers
of the Tabernacle were to be of pure beaten gold. When the Ecclesiastics of
France inveighed against the Pomp and Luxury of the French Courtiers, the then
King replied upon them with great disdain and indignation, Let the Clergymen
first of all reform themselves, there are none so fantastical and vain in their
Habits as they. The Chancellor of Paris, who was an ear-witness, is the Author
of this Relation. Gerson.
.

But least I may seem hitherto to have produced words rather then Arguments, I
shall lay down my Reasons against the custom of wearing Artificial counterfeit
hair by either sex; hoping that persons of modesty, candor and conscience, (if
at least they shall prove cogent and weighty) will render up themselves Truths
prisoners, or rather its willing and thankful Proselites. And herein I shall
give the precedence to men, who otherwise may justly challenge it. Upon a
little search into this matter I find that men have had recourse to this
Practice, chiefly in three cases.

1. Some have used it, the better to conceal themselves in time of danger. Thus
Hannibal fearing to be killed in his Winter Quarters by certain Gauls, caused
Polyb. Hist. l. 3.
hair of different Ages artificially composed to be prepared for him.

2. Others have used Periwigs, or Borders of counterfeit hair, to supply the
defect of their natural covering, fallen from them by reason of Age or
sickness; using them for warmth, and to hide the shame and uncomcliness Causab.
in Sueton.
of baldness, which was ever accounted a deformity, as appears from the
childrens mocking the Prophet upon the sight of his bald head, 2 Kings 2. 23.
His Master Elijah had no Periwig belike to leave him, when he bequeathed to him
his Mantle.

3. A third sort there is whom God and Nature has supplied with hair
sufficient for Defense and Ornament; but they forsooth out of a humor must cut
it off, and adorn themselves with borrowed Plumes, that they may be in the Mode
of the Times, or please heir own diseased fancies, or gratify the eyes of
wanton and witless beholders. And yet when they have done their utmost, a Lion
or a Horse have a more stately Main. These I take to be the greatest Seneca.
number: And the Reasons why I judge the Practice of such, (especially if they
be noted for a Profession of Godliness) scandalous and unlawful, I shall range
in this following Order.

1. Because the custom of men's wearing Periwigs or counterfeit hair, was
brought up by the worst of men, and used by them for the vilest purposes that
can be well imagined Men did I say? nay, an holy Bishop and Martyr of the
Primitive Church Cypr. de Hab. Virg.
faith, That such like Practices were the inventions of the Apostate-Angels.
Certain it is, God was not the Author of this fashion; in which Persuasion I am
confirmed from the Scriptures, 1 John 2. 16. For all that is in the world, the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the Pride of life, is not of the
Father, but of the world. And if this be not a branch of the Pride of life, I
wonder what is.

As far as I can learn, the world is obliged to the Medes for this invention of
wearing supposititious, counterfeit Xenophon de Cyri vita. l 1.
hair; a people given up to the lusts of uncleanness and luxury. And at the
same time they used painting of their faces, and coloring of their eyebrows,
all chips of the same block, unmanly pride and vanity. I would there were a Law
enacted to make them a Pass, and send them back again to the place of their
Birth, as we deal with Vagrants and Beggars; such Modes and Fashions would
better suit with Pagans than with Christians. The Prophet tells us, Zech. 5.
11. That wickedness is upon its own proper base, when removed out of Judah, and
has a house built for it in the Land of Shinar.

The next time I read of this fashion is amongst the Romans and that not
until their manners were degenerated, and they grown to a prodigious excess of
Vice and Luxury. Paul speaking of their debauched manners at that very time
when this uncouth habit began to be in request among them, says, That they
were Inventors of evil things, To. 1 30. and I have sometimes thought, that this
was one of the evil things intended by the Apostle. I do not find that it was
ever of vulgar use amongst the Romans; and of their Emperors, I can find in
their Records mention of but four, which thus disguised their Heads, viz.
Caligula a bloody Sueton. in Calig. Ner. and Othone.
Monster, Nero the worst man that ever was born of a woman, Otho a lover of
strange flesh, and Antoninus Bassianus, an Herodiani l. 4.
incestuous person and murderer.

If any be inquisitive, to what purpose they assumed such a Garb, contrary to
the gravity of the Roman people? I answer, they did it to disguise themselves
when they went about their works of darkness: When Caligula went abroad by
night to the Taverns Suet. in Calig.
and Stews, he absconded himself in a long garment and a Periwig, Dion Cassius
and Tacitus relate the same thing of Nero.

Now this alone, as one would think, were enough to make sober persons
disgusted against this habit, That it was initiated in Stews, and fullied upon
the Heads of such Monsters. We are at a sad pass, when the vanity and vicious
Practices of the worst of Heathens, are naturalized and in daily use amongst
Christians; Nay, when their botches are become no small part of our Ornament
and Bravery. It was laid to the charge of others upon the like occasion, That
they were mingled amongst the Heathen, and learned their works.

2. Another reason why I cannot approve our modern custom of men's wearing of
Artificial hair, extended to such a length, prepared with so much Art and
curiosity, is because it is repugnant to that sober, humble, mortified temper,
which is required of Christians: Methinks men of sobriety, wisdom, conscience
and gravity should disdain to wear those fooleries, wherewith Pagans were wont
to deck the Statues of their Idols, as Dempster, Baxhornius, and others relate;
and should Baxhorn. in Sueton. (...) etc. Plato
be ashamed to behold themselves in the same dress with Mercury and Priapus.
The Head is the noblest and most honorable part of Man's body, having a
Despotical power over the Members; there is the Tower and Arsenal of Reason,
the most noble Faculty of Invention, the wonderful Repository of Memory, the
two Luminaries of the eyes, ordained to look heavenward, and from which there
is the effulgency of Majesty and comeliness, which things should be a strong
inducement to men, not to dishonor their Heads by ridiculous unseemly
coverings. Besides the remembrance of thorns worn by our Redeemer for our sake,
should keep us for ever from crowning our heads with vanity and luxury.

Christians are the disciples and followers of a crucified Lord, who affected
none of the worlds pomp and gaieties; they are or should be crucified to the
world, which though it be an invisible work, and transacted in the inner
chambers of the soul, yet there must be outward expressions of it in our
conversations, and our very habits. In all things they should be singular
Patterns of Moderation. But now it is hard to distinguish some of our greatest
Professors from the most temporizing Gallants, who make their backs their God,
as Gluttons do their bellies, unless they should wear a Ticket pinned upon
their back, or we had some Nomen-clator pointed out to us.

If any object, what you condemn, others both learned and pious account very
sober; I should demand of them, What others do you mean?

They must be such as have forsaken the Duct Sentiments and Teachings of
Nature. For Paul says, 1 Cor. 11. 14. Does not even Nature it self teach you,
that if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him. And what longer hair can
he mean, than that the divisions of which cover the breast and shoulders, like
unto the wings of spread-Eagles? The manners and discipline of our Nation in
the days of our forefathers would not have born this; When one of the Lords of
the Council, meeting a Fox vol. 2 p. 512.
serving-man in the streets of London, with his hair hanging down upon his
shoulders, notwithstanding the pretense of his Vow, committed him prisoner to
the Marshalsea, for no other reason but because he thus disguised himself, and
went not after the English fashion.

But if we take (...) for comis superbire, as it is used in Aristophanes, for
men's priding themselves in hair; what more pregnant evidence was ever given,
then in wearing these costly elaborate trifles, the matter of which must be
fetched far, (it may happen from Norway, Germany, or the wild Irish) and then
it must be prepared by the Barber or tire-woman, with great expense of Art and
precious time: it must be boiled, baked stitched and powdered, before it be
ready for use: Tantae molis erat. etc. Salmasius himself (of a laxer judgment
in these Dial. de Coma.
things then most) says, that crisping of the hair and the use of exotic
powders, is an indecency against the Law of God and Nature: and that if men
content not themselves with that plain simple hair which Nature has given
them, but must have it of another color, and artificially formed or set, (eam
rem vitio, and peccato non carere prorsus statuendum est) it is doubtless a sin.

I know not whom such affection does please, unless it be the Devil; and upon
this occasion I shall recite a story. A certain Coel. Rho^ l. 8. c. 10.
Italian Maid was possessed by the Devil, and being asked his name, he
answered, Cincinnatulus, i. e. one delicately curled. Haec ille appellatione
gestiens inclamanti subinde res: pondebat, says my Author. If I may be allowed
to make a gloss upon this Relation, (it should be this) That the Devil is
wonderfully pleased with that Vanity which the Curioso's of our Times are so
studious of, seeing he adopted their name, and showed himself, willing to be
free of their company.

The Primitive Christians had a great abhorrence of our modern luxury. When one
Torquatus frequented their religious meetings at Rome, that he might inform
against them, he was presently suspected to be a false brother, because he
spruced up himself so industriously, and used borders of Artificial hair;
insomuch that one of them spoke thus of him before Fabianus the Praetor,
Think thou this man to be one of us? Jesus Christ never Baron. Annal. Tom.
2. p 276.
thought such Pests worthy to be any of his servants.

But why do I speak of Christians, when these things are decried and had in
derision by the Philosophers, Historians and Poets of the Heathens! whoever
reads them, shall find Babylons children reading Lectures of sobriety to the
sons and daughters of Zion.

One thing is worthy of our remark, that in old time they which were curious
about their hair, were suspected to be of vicious inclinations, as appears
from that passage of the Comedian.

Quis tibi isthuc credat Cynaede Cincinnatule -- I forbear to Plaut. Asin. Act.
3. Scen. 3
English it.

I have often wondered, that so many ancient men comply with this aerie fashion.
Methinks multitude of years should teach them more wisdom and gravity. For
hereby in a great degree they forfeit that honor which is due to the hoary
head, Lev. 19. 32. and seem to be ashamed of that which is their glory, if they
be found in the way of righteousness, Prove. 16. 31. A flaunting youthful bush
of hair does ill become them (as if it were yet but early spring with them,)
when their faces are wrinkled, their joints tremble, and they have December in
their bones. It was a witty passage of Hadrian the Emperor, when he had denied
Spartian. in Hadr.
a certain request to an old grey-headed person; The same man addressing
himself to him again in hair of another color, says he, I have already denied
this thing to your Father.

It would also well become those which are in Places of Government, if they
would preserve the honor due to their places, by carefully absteining from all
things which have a show of levity. They are terrestrial Gods, and nothing but
what is Majestical becomes them. If they would adorn their Heads, they need not
consult the Barber or Tire-woman, the Scriptures having directed them to a more
suitable and noble Ornament: I put on Righteousness and it clothed me: my
Judgment was as a Robe, and a Diadem, Job. 29. 14.

3. This novel fashion of wearing strange Heads (as it is now used) seems
unjustifiable, because it carries in it a dislike of Gods Workmanship, and a
kind of Practical reproach to the universal Maker. As if their inward thoughts
were, that if they had been advised with about the Creation, some things at
least might have been better ordered.

God in whose Book all our members were written, and Ps. 139. 16. by whom the
very hairs of our heads are numbered, (besides other innumerable instances of
his Providence and bounty to mankind) has furnished us with hair growing from
our selves, both as a natural Ornament, and to be a defense against overmuch
heat, of hurtful impressions, from both which, the brain, being a moist
substance, is very capable. As man has a more capacious brain then the rest of
the creatures, so he is observed to be Animal maxim pilosum. Unto this noble
Coel. Rbodig.
and useful excrement there is a daily supply of nourishment conveyed through
the porous parts of it, according to the different temperament of men's bodies:
it is of different colors and forms. Black hair is said to be the result of a
hot constitution, by reason of a blackish vapor arising from adust humors,
which impresseth the same quality upon the hair. When it is of a pale whitish
color, it is an indication that the temper is inclined to cold. When it is
yellowish or red, we are taught out of Avicenna, that it shows a more exact
constitution, equally balanced and adjusted between both extremes. They which
have dry brains, or live in very hot countries, have usually curled hair, as it
is with the inhabitants of Ethiopia, where also the Trees grow knotty and full
of curls. All this is spoken to show, Salmas. de Dial. de Coma.
that the very color and form of men's hair is the Work of God, whose wisdom
is not to be despised in the least of his works. But many amongst us make
them^^lves wiser then God. That hair which God and Nature has provided for
them does not ^lease, and therefore they will undertake to a^end Gods
workmanship, and transform themselves into another shape; somewhat like those
which hanker after stolen waters, when they might drink freely out of their
own Cisterns, Prove. 9. 17. But shall the thing formed say to him that formed
it, why have thou made me thus? Romans 9. 20. They imagine hereby that they
consult for their beauty, but things that are most natural are most comely; and
therefore the native colors of the Lilly or Tulip, Matthew 6. 29. are preferred
before all the acquired Artificial ^ravery of Solomon. God is an enemy to
innovations in Nature, as well as in Religion and Worship. He said of his own
work, that they were all very good, Genesis 1. 31. but he never set his seal of
Approbation upon men's petulant and foolish inventions. That which is as God
made as it is Gods; but that which is new modelled and changed, it is Cypr. de
Hab. Virg.
the devils work We may fear, that God will send strange punishments for our
strange Attires: Not many years ago, there was in Poland, and some parts of
Germany, a Boltons four last things.
Disease called the Plica, which which caused men's hair upon a sudden to curl
twist into the form of snakes or serpents; imm^diately after it bred vermin,
sending forth ^ noisome savor, and being pricked with a Needl^ it yielded
bloody drops. No Age had ev^^ greater reason to exp^ct some sharp and sham^ful
rebuke, than this Age of unexampled luxur^ and vanity.

4 This Epidemical fashion or disease of wearing Artificial hair, involves men
in the guilt of others sins, and that diverse ways, if I be not greatly mistaken.

Women-Factors are sent abroad through a^ the Kingdom, to bring up Heads of
Hair, an^ that at lusty rates, as it is reported, ('it is well some of their Head
be worth so much as is give^ for their hairy excrement) A more shameful
employment then that of the children of Israel Exodus 5. 12. when they were
scattered throughou^ all the Land of Egypt to gather stubble; for tha^ was only
their affliction, but I cannot excuse thi^ from sin.

Diverse of the Female sex, (especially the poorer sort of Countrey-Maidens and
children, barte^ away that which the Apostle calls their glory, contrary to the
light 1 Cor 11 15. Calv. in loc.
of Nature, and the Custom of Nations. But if a woman have lon^ hair, it is a
glory to her, for her hair is given her for a covering. These poor sheep in the
Country are miserably shorn and polled, to maintain the ignoble Traffic and
Pride of the City. Nay, Mothers unnaturally denude their own children of
Natures covering for filthy lucres sake.

In every street and corner almost of the City, are exposed to sail new Heads,
Artificially composed and dressed up, so that it may be said of London as of
Rome in times past, that there are to be seen there (amongst other strange
sights,) Rhod. out of Columella.


Capitum, and Capillorum Concinnatores. Obj. Now if it be objected that it is
the livelihood of hundreds of Families. I answer, this will not serve the turn.
Those women which weaved hangings for the idolatrous Groves, 2 Kings 23. 7.
might have made this Plea; and they which made silver shrines for Diana, Acts
19. 25. actually did so. Sirs, says Demetrius, ye know that by this craft we
have our wealth.

It is not enough that we are busy in some calling, but our calling must be
good and lawful. Let him labor, says Paul, working with his hands the thing
which is good, Ephesians. 4. 28. The very Heathens, by the light of Nature, have
condemned, as fit to be exterminated out of the Commonwealth, Arts which tend
only to the Tull. Of fic. l. 1. p. 61.
upholding of pleasure and luxury, and amongst them they reckon selling of
Perfumes, Dancing, etc. And doubtless selling of Periwigs had bin in the List,
if it had not bin born out of due time.

Now if they which are employed in buying up hair go upon a sleevless errand,
if those Emissaries can give no good account of their Time and Travels: They
which are a means of setting them on work must expect to pay part of the
reckoning with them, having made themselves Partakers of others sins. 1 Timothy 5.
22.

If it be a shameful thing for a woman to be shorn, as the Apostle teaches, 1
Cor. 11. 6. If God will one day reckon with them for their unnatural and cursed
cutting off their hair, how can they go unpunished who tempt them to this
indecency, and afterward adorn themselves with the ill-gotten spoils?

If Tire-womens shops (which are of late so greatly multiplied) should prove
shops of vanity, and Nurses to the pride and luxury of the Kingdom; how can
they wash their hands in innocence, who have been the occasion of setting up,
and upholding that unnecessary and ignoble Trade.

It ought to be of great weight with persons fearing God, that the most ancient
lights of the Church both ancient and modern, have condemned this custom of
wearing Artificial hair both in men and women, and have expressed great
indignation against it, dipping their Pens in Gall and Vinegar, while they are
writing against it. He that shall compare their judgment and doctrine with our
Practice, will evidently find, that we are either wiser then our forefathers,
or worse. And here I might mention the Reverend Names of Tertullian, Clem.
Alexandrinus, Cyprian, Basil the great, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Jerome, Chrysostom
and Epiphanius, who thunder terribly in their Writings against this and the
like effeminate usages. Epiphanius reckons the Massaliani amongst heretics,
because they did efferre Lib. 3. Tom. Haer. 80.
meretricio more comam. Of our own I might produce as Witnesses against our
modern vanity, three Reverend and pious Bishops, Bp. Babington, Bp. Hall, Bp.
Reynolds; Of our learned and godly Divines, Downam, Deuteronomy, Mr. Rob. Bolton, etc.
I hope I shall not offend, if I recite three passages out of them in stead of
an hundred. Tertullian calls Periwigs, Nescio quas enormitates satilium,
atque textilium Tert ull. de cultu Foem.
capillame itorum, says he, If thou regardest not the sin, yet let the shame
and defilement of them deter thee. Do not put upon a holy and Christian head
the exuviae or castings off, it may chance of some vile ungodly person, it may
be of a Malefactor that ended his days at a Gibbet, it may be of one that is
damned in hell.

Famous Bp. Hall tells us his mind in these words, We see in this Castle
Sermon. at Greys-Inn
of the body, the Flag of Vanity hang out most conspicuously, in Feathers,
Perukes, Frizzles, Powders, and such other trash.

Mr. Rob. Bolton is very zealous according Genesis Direct. p. 200
to his manner; reckoning false hair amongst the works of darkness; calling it
one of the hateful baits and enticements to lust, which (without other
monstrous; Ibid. p. 195, 196.
fashions,) are not taken to heart in any proportion to their execrableness,
against which Pulpits are too silent, and the times digest without any remorse
or reclamation.

Now when those whom God has made his Ambassadors and our Teachers, are
unanimous in decrying a corruption of the times, it should be an effectual
means of our conviction, as it was to the unbeliever mentioned by Paul, 1 Cor.
14. 24. He is convineed of all, he is judged of all. When God speaks to us by
the mouth of his holy Prophets, as if they had all but one Luke 1. 70. (...)
mouth, it behooves as many as fear God to take more diligent heed thereunto;
especially since it is made a character of one that fears the Lord, that he
obeys the voice of his servant.

But if we will not be instructed by them which seek our good, it is advisable
at least to learn of our enemies. What Fas est and abhoste doceri. Virg.
bitter invectives are the speeches and Pamphlets of Quakers stuffed with
against the pride and luxury of this generation: and how do they glory in their
own affected and voluntary humility and abstinence? Methinks this black soap of
railing invectives, should help to fetch out London-dirt. We live in such a
juncture, that we ought rather to retrench our selves in lawful things, then by
any undue exorbitant practice to harden those miserably deluded creatures to
their destruction, justify their often repeated Accusations, or in the least
degree give them occasion to think well of themselves in forsaking our
Communion.

6. Let it be duly and sadly considered in what time we live; Times in which
the judgments of God have been, and are yet abroad; times of jealousies and
fears, lest some worse thing may happen unto us then we have yet felt: such
should be times of putting off our Ornaments, Exodus 33. 5. The Lord said unto
Moses, say unto the children of Israel, ye are a stiff-nacked people: I will
come up into the midst of thee and consume thee, therefore now put off thy
ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee. Those vanities which
at other times are but unjustifiable, at such times are unpardonable, Isa. 22.
12, 13, 14. And in that day did the Lord of Hosts call to weeping, and to
mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth. And behold joy and
gladness, slaying of oxen, and killing of sheep, and (...)ing of wiggs. And it
was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts; S^rely, this iniquity shall
not be purged from you till ye die, says the Lord God of Hosts. Baldness and
sackcloth you see would better become us, than such bushes of hair as are
usually worn. Jer. 7. 29. Cut off thine hair, O Jerusalem, and cast it away,
and take up a lamentation on high peaces, for the Lord has rejected and
forsaken the generation of his wrath When P. Scipio had taken Carchedona a City
in Spain, he absteined Polyb. Hist. l. 10
from his usual delights, because it was a time of war, and so it has been
with us. Ahab, and the King and people of Nineveh were but under a threatening,
yet they showed the sense they had of their danger in laying aside their costly
and curious attire. And shall we which understand more practice less? Shall
insensibility be added to our iniquities? War and the Pestilence, and the like
fore judgments, are called Tonsura humani generis. It Tertul.
is unseasonable for men and women wantonly to shave themselves, to make room
for idle and unnecessary Trappings when God has been shaving our Nation with
the sharp Razor of his judgments, Isa. 7. 20. Are we like to deprecate the
wrath of God hanging over our Kingdom, when in our Religious Assemblies, and at
our Fasts, we appear before him rather like so many Princes, then humble
Penitents, wearing silk in stead of sackcloth, and having Perfumed Powders on
our heads in-stead of Ashes?

T. Ann. Milo being questioned for his life for killing Clodius, fared the
worse at the hands of the Judges, because he came trimmed up, and splendidly
apparelled, and not in the habit of a Mourner, as the manner of those times
was. It is written of the Eagle, that she pruneth up her feathers against a
storm; and Agag came delicately, when he was immediately to be hewed in pieces,
1 Samuel 15 32. There is a general fear that a storm is coming, but it seems we
intend to encounter it bravely and not to veil our Bonnets. It is no good sign,
but so it is, we were never more delicate, fantastical and vain in our habits
and attires than now, when God is hewing us in pieces with his judgments. When
God was about to visit Babylon, she was commanded to lay aside her stately
Head-tire, and so should we if we did wisely discern the signs of the times
Isa. 47. 1, 2. Come down and sit in the dust, O Virgin-Daughter of
Babylon.-Take the Milstones and grind meal, uncover thy locks, etc. The time
may come, even that year of our Visitation, when (according to the old Proverb)
Heads may go to the Pot for the vanity of hair.

And here I should make an end, but that I think my self obliged to speak a few
words of Advice to the other sex, the Women of this Age, for whom I have so
much charity as to believe, that all of them have not lost their ears, as some
of them have their heads.

I think it must be granted, that it is more natural and tolerable for women to
adorn their bodies, and cultivate their beauty, than for men. Their freedom
from great and public Valor. Max. l. 9. c. 1.
Affairs, gives them more leisure, and I think that God himself has so far
indulged the weakness of their sex. I would not be thought to speak against
their lawful Ornaments, Ezekiel. 16. 11. 12, 13. The Graces of the Church are set
forth by them; Ezekiel. 16. 11, 12, 13. and Rebecca decked her self with jewels of
silver, and jewels of gold, in times of the greatest plainness and simplicity,
Genesis 24. 53. The reason of this allowance I think to be, that they may be more
desirable in their eyes, whose help and individual companions they are ordained
to be. But nevertheless, they must not divide their precious hours between the
Comb and the Glass; nor give way to foolish, immodest, unlicenced fashions.
They Seneca.
must so trim up their scabbards, their bodies, I mean, as not to neglect the
hidden man of the heart. The Virgin or the Wife must not make them forget the
Christian. Nothing must com upon their backs or heads, but what becomes
godliness, 1 Timothy 2. 10.

How far the Females of our times have departed from this Rule, may appear from
some instances, Citizens and others, as if their daughters were the daughters
of Herodias, send them to learn immodest outlandish Dances and Friskings,
wherein the whole body is abused to wantonness, to the manifest breach of the
seventh Commandment, which lays a restraint upon our very Gestures. They
esteem it an Accomplishment, and a piece of good breeding, not considering that
some women may dance more elegantly then becomes Saltan elegantius quam
necesse erat probae Salust.
modest persons, as was noted of Sempronia a Roman Lady. This very thing was
observed to have corrupted the young women of Rome, and to have disposed them
to lewd practices.

Motus doceri gaudet Ionicos
Matura virgo, and fingitur Artibus Horat. Carm. l. 3 Ode 6.

Jam nunc, and incestos amores
De tenero meditatur ungue.
Others plaster their faces Oh Dinah! Dinah! by one days frolic amongst the
daughters of the Land thou were utterly undon.
, and graft on new eyebrows, audaciously chopping and changing the workmanship
of their Maker, Ps. 137. 14. that they are fearfully and wonderfully made,
their Bodies being a piece of divine Embroidery.

There are that expose their naked breasts, as if the Time of Innocence were
again returned, when our first Parents were naked, and were not ashamed, Genesis
2. 25 Such are commanded to put their adulteries from between their breasts,
Hos 2. 2. and indeed I read that Helenas Naked breasts gave the first occasion
to her Adulteries. As for those women which Prodita sunt memini, etc. Ovid: ep:
have the confidence thus to expose themselves in times and places of public
worship, I shall leave them to be schooled by the Prophet, Jer. 7. 11. Is this
House which is called by my Name, become a den of -- in your eyes.

Neither may it be omitted that diverse of that sex, who have spots enough in
their consciences, and too many in their lives, wear more in their faces. I
shall inform them the best I can how they were brought up A certain slave at
Rome received from his Master several brands on his face, (you may imagine it
was for his goodness if you Mart. l. 2. ep. 25. Numerosa linunt stellantem, etc.
please) Afterward being advanced to the degree of a Senator, he used black
spots to conceal his scars. The Roman Ladies were lovers of Ingenuity, and
taken with new Fancies. This as far as I can learn was the Original of the
Noble Order of black Patches.

But the vanity of women does in nothing display it self in so great a
multiplicity of forms as in the wearing of hair. Many in despite of God and
Nature, and the express words of Scripture, will shave themselves, 1 Cor. 11.
15. Of old a solemn curse was denounced against such, though they did it under
a pretense of Religion, because their hair was given them both as Coel. Rhod.
an Ornament, and as a token of their subjection.

They whose business is in the Kitchen, and amongst the Pots, must wear
artificial curls, trundled up like so many snakes, which would put one in mind
of the description which the Poets give of the Furies of Hell.

It is also reported, that Goats hair which was once used about the Tabernacle,
is made use of to adorn the Temples of some of the female sex, were I one of
their number I should be afraid of this new invention, lest it should prove an
inauspicious Presage to what squadron I should belong, when the Judge of all
the earth shall divide the sheep from the Goats, Matthew. 25. 33.

Besides all this, Women have their Shades, their Towers, their Bulls and Bulls
foreheads, strange names and stranger things, fit only for the Kine of Bashan,
Amos 4. 1. persons overgrown with an excess of pride, pleasure, ease and
petulancy.

But because I would charitably believe, that not a few are drawn into these
Practices, rather out of ignorance then insolency; and because their ignorance
may be thought the more pardonable, in that it is hard for women to search into
these matters, most of the passages relating to them being in an unknown
tongue; I shall lend them some help, with expectation of a Christian, and
favorable acceptance, whilst I shall faithfully relate what is written by
others. And that I may not be farther troublesome, I shall only propound to
those which are in this trespass a few short and inossensive Queries

Qu. 1 Would you willingly attire your Head after the same manner that Witches
were wont to do when they went about their enchantments? I know you abhor the
motion, why then lay aside your Wigs and Bulls, for thus they harnessed
themselves to serve the Devil. And one of them, Sagana by name, betaking her
self to her heels upon a sudden fright, lost the Jewel off her head.

Altum Saganae Caliendrum
Ex cidere -- Hor. Sermon. l 1. Sat. 8.

In English thus,

Encountering with a saucy puff of wind,
The Hag left her towering Perewig behind.
Nay, Clem. Alexandrinus, and after him Polyd. Virgil and Raderus inform us,
that these new and strange inventions about women's hair were first found out by
Medea, a notorious and wicked Sorceress.

Qu. 2. Would you, if you knew it beforehand, wear that which of old time to be
the dress of harlots? Prove. 7. 10. No, you would reject it with indignation:
why then it will cost you the parting with somewhat, but you may well spare it.
For they were wont to trade much in Artificial counterfeit locks, and they were
Ov. de art Amand l. 3
wont to send as far as from Italy to Germany to furnish themselves. A grave
Author says, that such wares were most in request with the Curtizans at Rome,
Crines ascititii and adulterini, qui Dempst. Ant. Romans
Meretricibus in pretio -- Messalina that shameless woman, when she went to the
Stews to prostitute Juven. Sat. 6.
her self, dressed up her self in a Bull, and laid forth her naked breasts;

Et nigrum flavo crinem abscondente galero, etc. Qu. 3. Would you bring your
selves in the same Praemunire with the haughty Daughters of Zion, which are so
sharply rebuked, and threatened with burning in stead of beauty, Isa. 3. 17, 24.
And to have the Crowns of their Heads smitten with lothsom ulcers? I know your
answer. Why then be not too fond of your well-set hair, or affected curls, (as
some render it) which was their sin. Nay, it is said, that after our manner
they decked themselves with the hair Sanct. in Isa. 3.
of others, and that this custom amongst them was as old as Absalom. For we
read, that when he polled his head, 2 Samuel 14. 26. he weighed the hair of his
head at two hundred shekels. Now, say they, it is prodigious and ridiculous to
think, that the pollings of one man's head, at every years end should Sanct. in
2 Sa. 14.
weigh as much as the fleeces of two sheep. Wherefore they conclude that these
words must signify the weight or price, at which the Reversion of Absaloms
head was sold Puellis solymitanis, to the women of Jerusalem, to make them
Artificial Tresses, or Towers of hair.

Qu. 4. Would you have a hand in pulling down the Judgments of God upon the
Kingdom? I know your tender hearts cannot endure to think of it. Beware then
for which they are inflicted; when the Lord went about to visit Jerusalem with
sore judgments, the women are called upon as more immediately concerned in the
sin which brought them, and the bitterness of them, Is. 32. 9. Rise up ye women
that are at ease, hear my voice, ye careless daughters, give ear unto my
speech. Again v. 10. Many days and years shall ye be troubled, ye careless
women, for the Vintages shall fail, the gathering shall not com once more, v.
11. Tremble ye women that are at ease: be troubled, ye careless ones, strip ye,
and make ye bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins. Though women are the
weaker vessels, yet they are strong enough to pull down the judgments of God
upon a Nation. The pride and wantonness of the daughters of Jerusalem, was a
principal cause of Judahs ruin, and in special their affected fashions in
their hair, Isa. 3. 24. Isa. 4 4 When the Lord shall have washed away the filth
from the Daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from
the midst thereof, by the spirit of judgment and by the spirit of burning.
From which words we may animadvert, That what some women account their Finery,
God calls their Filth. That the Pride of women is ranked with murder, one of
the most unnatural and crying sins; it stands in the same Catalogue with the
blood of Jerusalem. That it is a filth to be purged away by judgments and fire.
It deserves to be considered, whether the flames which laid London in ashes
were not kindled from these sparks.

Shall England, our native Country, be choked with hair (as one of the Popes
is said to be) the ignominy of the destruction being added to the sadness and
misery of it.

Qu. 5. Have you a mind to draw forth the impure lustful inclinations of
others, and so bear a share with them in their sin and punishments? Shall Adam
in his Posterity complain the second time, Genesis 3. 12. The woman which thou
gave me, etc? If you say, No. Then forbear to spread Nets and snares for
their eyes, as if you would invite them to lust after you. It is certain, that
Hair artificially and vainly set out, is unto vain minds a very tempting
object.

Spectat inornatos collo pendere capillos Ov. Met. l. 1.
Ecquid si comante ait? -- Qu. 6. Would you be found in such a fantastical
Attire at the time of your Death, or at the second Appearance of Jesus Christ:
No, then you will all be more humble and serious. And why not sooner? for what
you have done shall be then remembered and accounted for. Tertullian wished that
at the General Resurrection he Tertul. de cultu Foem.
might but stand behind those Women and Virgins, that went in strange heads and
strange faces, to see if the Angels would take them up, and carry them to meet
the Lord in the Air.

Qu. 7. Would you follow the Trade of them that are most addicted to th^se
disguising fashions? Are you willing to cast in your lot amongst them? I dare
become surety for many of you that you would not. Why then eat not of their
broth, lest in time to come you eat of their Beef.

To conclude, let men abstein from unmanly disguises and fashions. Let them
show themselves such by somewhat else, besides the wearing of the breeches,
that is may not be said of Men of this Age, That they are but women in men's
Apparel. (...). Hom, Odys.

It should be remembered, that we read but of one man in Scripture, that made
an idol of his hair, and it proved the instrument of his death. Oh Absalom!
Absalom! what has thy pride profited thee, and thy goodly locks, whereby thy
life was ensnared, like the hunted Stag, which has sometimes bin entangled by
reason of his stately-branched stems? It was said of old, That the Woman was
first in the transgression; let us not now change places with them If you would
have your heads comely and full of grace, in stead of the Barbers or
Tire-womans shop, go to Wisdoms Warehouse, and there you shall be better
furnished, and better cheap, Prove. 4. 9. She shall gave to thine head an
ornament of grace, a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee.

And you, O Women and Virgins, remember that you have lamps to trim as well as
carcasses, if you be wise indeed. You are of near alliance to corruption and
the worms; and when once you come amongst your poor Kindred, there will be
none of these things. Follow the living Patterns of diverse of your own sex, and
those persons of plentiful estates, and good quality, who have not touched
these (very doubtful and suspicious, if not unclean) things; which thing with
the rest of their virtuous works, shall praise them in the gates, Prove. 31. 31.
Be not too curious in adorning those heads of yours, which must shortly be laid
in the dust, nor those faces which ere long will be bound about with a Napkin.
John 11. 44. Jezabel almost in the same hour tired her head in the greatest
bravery, and was eaten of dogs, 2 Kings 9. 30. She came from looking in the
Class, to the looking out of that window from which she was cast headlong. If
you will play the wise women, divert your care to more necessary and better
things. In stead of your broidered curled hair put on shamefastness and
sobriety, 1 Timothy 2. 9. This is an Apostolical Dress, Head-tire for women that
is Jure Divino, Espouse your selves as chaste Virgins to Jesus Christ, devote
your selves entirely to your Princely husband, Psalm. 45. 11. So shall the King
greatly desire your beauty, and you shall have God himself to be your lover.

At the Close (...) OR; A Song of Conversion by Persons having seriously
Perused this Treatise.
FAlse Hair, the Flag of Pride, take down,
That Witches, Whores and Drunkards crown:
We who the sheep of Christ profess,
Shall Goatish looks defile our dress?
Shall we tempt others unto lust,
That shortly must lie down in dust?
What thus our time and coin expend;
Whose precious souls shall have no end?
Lets trim our Lamps by Scripture-Glass,
That to Eternity must pass:
What we proud Ruffian-duels arm,
By wanton looks, and lustful charm?
Shall we to envy stir those breasts,
That scarce a groat have in their chests?
Shall we offend those pious hearts,
And wound them with our poisoned darts?
That spend their time in sighs and groans,
To weep on us with holy moans?
What we enchanted by their spell,
And merrily dance into hell
With such as glory in excess,
And hate the ways to blessedness.
Shall we for odious trifles fight?
For excrements lose Heavens light?
Lets with good Magdalen amend,
And on his feet our tears spend;
And wipe them clean with our chaste hair,
His precious blood who did not spare.
LUKE 16. 15.That which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the
sight of God. (...). Gr. Naz FINIS.

