THE MYSTERY OF CONTENTATION In and Through CHRIST.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Joseph Cranford at the Sign of the Phoenix in St
Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

TO THE Right Honorable and truly Religious Lady, JANE Countess Dowager of
Mar, Increase of Grace and Peace.
Madam,
THE certain knowledge I have had for a long time of your devout affection
toward the saving Truths of Jesus Christ, the recent sense of manifold favors
received at your hands, both since and in the time I had the honor of
employment for many years in that Noble Family, and the experience of your
gracious acceptance of my hearty endeavors unto your service, makes me bold to
offer to your Ladyship this part of my weak Labor, as a small Testimony of my
humble acknowledgement of much duty.

I do here present you with some refreshing drops from that Mystery of
Contentment found in the Fullness of Jesus Christ: In him is enough to supply
all defects in the inward man, and more then enough to supply all wants in the
outward man which can befall us, from the disappointing and discontenting
changes in persons or things of this world: yea, it is of the Lords wisdom
and mercy that our ways are hedged up with thorns, that we may return to our
first love, Hos. 2.6, 7. That we may delight our selves in him, and enjoy that
solid, satisfactory, and unchangeable Contentment, which in experience we
perceive cannot be found in the empty, insufficient, uncertain and perishing
comforts of the poor creatures. Many times the Children of God enjoy most of
himself when they enjoy least of the Creature. As the Sufferings of Christ
abounded in Paul, so Consolation also abounded by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5. He had
most of Gods presence when he had least of man's countenance, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17,
Stephens face shined like an Angels when men looked on him like Devils, Act.
6.15. Such enjoyments at such a time are no other (as Jacob said from his
experience of light arising out of darkness) then the gate of heaven, a
prelude on earth of that immediate Contentment we shall have in heaven in God
alone, without either opposition or interposition of the Creature. Hence it is
that the Children of God from the comfortable sense of this love have most
vigor of grace sometimes under greatest outward pressures, they can glory in
tribulations, Romans 5.3. And sing praises to God in a prison, Act. 16.26. Then
have they enlarged spirits when their bodies are under restraint: As the Sun
re-enforceth his light in the time of an Eclipse, so the graces of the Spirit
in the inward man are the more united and strengthened in an hour of darkness
from outward troubles: The heat of our love as the Sunne-beam from the hard
rock, is the more reflexed toward the Sun of righteousness from the cold and
hard re-encounters of the Creatures.

In a day of prosperity our affections lagge and straggle here and there,
seeking Contentment in things far below our happiness, and no ways
proportionable to the vast desires of the spirit of man; Therefore our God in
great wisdom and mercy so orders the removal of worldly objects, that our
affections may be retired, amazed, and with greater vigor set upon himself,
that according to our measure of enlargement of heart, our measure of delight
and contentment in Christ may be the greater, he dries up the brinks to the
end we may seek and be filled with purer and sweeter contentment in the
Fountain: This earnest and first fruits of absolute and full satisfaction
abiding them in heaven, makes the Children of God humble in their greatest
prosperity, and patient with much contentment in their greatest adversity:
Faith looks to things not seen; It reckons all worldly advantages but loss and
dung in comparison of the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord,
and also reckons that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with that glory which shall be revealed in us. A look to things not
seen preserves the soul from fainting at what we see or feel: And though the
Children of God be subject to some qualms of fear in time of storms and trials,
yet all these will be gone as a sea-sicknesse when our Lord shall bring us
within the port of eternal salvation.

Madam, You know both whom and what ye have believed: As it is his will ye
should look to the glory set before you, and endure the Cross; So that ye
should also rejoice in the hope of that Kingdom which cannot be shaken, that
eternal mansion above all possibility of decay, and that Inheritance
incorruptible which cannot be defiled, and fades not away, reserved in Heaven
for you, by his Intercession who purchased it by his merit. That your Ladyship
may be comforted, guided, and guarded by his Spirit in this life; and brought
into the possession of that full happiness in the other life, is and shall be
the humble prayer of him who in all duty is obliged to show himself, Madam,

Your Ladyships most faithful and devoted Servant, WILLIAM COLVILL.

THE MYSTERY OF CONTENTATION In and Through CHRIST.
PHIL. 4.11, 12, 13. For I have learned in whatsoever estate I am therewith to
be content.

I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound; every where, and in
all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and
suffer need.

I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me,


AMongst the many sweet and excellent fruits of the Cross of Christ,
Contentation most necessary for a believer.
Contentation of mind to a Believer in all conditions of life is one exceeding
necessary; Hereby a believer becomes Master both of the little and great world;
Of unruly desires within himself, and of temptations in the world without; It
makes him acceptable to all with whom he converseth, and to be admired and
envied by his enemies; It is a treasure hid in his soul that he carries with
him to the third heaven; where an exceeding weight of glory, and contentation
with full satisfaction to our desires will be added to the little stock of our
contentment here, which (as Jacob said of that gracious manifestation, Genesis
28.) is no other but the house of God, and the gate of heaven; For God
all-sufficient dwells in the heart of a believer; and gives contentation to the
soul where he dwells; though the outlet of his allowance here to a believer be
not comparably such as it will be in heaven, where we shall see him face to
face, and be filled with God, yet it is the gate of heaven, it is the porch
wherein we wait for an entrance to the Temple not made with hands, wherein the
measure of our contentation according to the full measure of our knowledge and
enjoyment of God will be full and complete.

In these words we have first the vicissitude of Paul's outward condition; Four
Points observable in the words.
at one time he abounds, at another he is abased; At one time he is full, at
another he suffers need.

2. The sweet and gracious composure of his spirit, expressed in two singular
acts; The first is his contentation of mind in all conditions, In whatsoever
estate I am (says he) I am therewith content; The latter is his prudent and
pertinent comportment with his present condition, I know both how to be abased,
and how to abound.

3. The way how he attained this Contentation of mind; I have learned (says
he) I am instructed; This he learned not at the feet of Gamaliel, but in the
School of Jesus Christ; who at the first initiation of his Disciples teaches
them by word, example, and by the powerful operation of his spirit inclining
them to the lesson, to deny themselves to take up their cross, and follow him.

4. The sole Author of all the strength and ability he had either for doing or
suffering the good will of God; I can do all things (says he) through Christ
that strengthens me.

From the first particular, the variety and vicissitude of his outward
condition, at one time he abounds, at another time he is a based and suffers
need, we observe this Doctrine.

The dear children of God in their outward condition are subject to many
changes; At one time they are in prosperity, Job a man fearing God and
eschewing evil was the richest man in the East to day, but on the morrow the
poorest and most distressed of all men in the whole earth in his time, in great
honor and reputation at one time, Job 29.8. The young men saw me and hid
themselves, like Schoolboys out of an awful respect to their Schoolmaster;
And the aged arose and stood up, when they heard him they blessed him, and gave
an honorable testimony to him by approving and commending what he had spoken;
but at another time not only is he misprised and neglected, but derided by the
younger and baser sort of the people, Job 30.1. Joseph at one time in great
esteem and credit with Potiphar; None greater in the house then he; at another
time disgraced and without any just cause cast into prison, Genesis 39.8, 9, 20.
Moses for the space of forty years was in great honor at Pharachs Court, but
afterward was forced to fly with his life in his hand to Midian, and keep sheep
there other forty years; David a man according to Gods heart, at one time in
great prosperity and credit at Saul's Court, and greatly beloved, 1 Samuel 16.21.
at another time in great adversity and perplexity; he who before in a sudden
fit of Court-favour was sought out and brought from his Father to the King, in
a more violent fit of spite and malice was chased from Court, and hunted as a
Partridge in the wilderness, 1 Samuel 26.26. Jehoshaphat a man of an upright
heart, at one time in great prosperity, and had rest from all his enemies, 2
Chro. 17.10. at another time a great change; whereas in former times other
Kingdoms round about feared him, now the fear of them falls upon him, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Paul at one time abounded, and by a divine dispensation is loaded
with such things as were necessary for him, Act. 28.10. at another time he is
in great adversity; Thrice he suffered shipwreck, in perils of robbers, and in
many other troubles, 2 Cor. 11. he was in esteem at Lystra far contrary to his
desire, and in the same place was he disgraced contrary to his deservings, Act.
14. such was his zeal to the honor of God; he was more grieved with their
blasphemous honoring then with their malicious disgracing of him.

The Reasons wherefore the Lord our God without any change in the purpose of
his love,

1. 1. Changes make men fear God.
For their Instruction; By such changes the Lord instructs his children to fear
him; It is said of the wicked, Psa. 55.19. They have not changes, and therefore
they fear not God; because Sentence against their evil works is not executed
speedily, therefore their heart is fully set in them to do evil; But by great
changes from prosperity into adversity, the children of God learn to fear God
and eschew evil, Ezr. 9.13. After all that is come upon us for our evil deeds,
and for our great trespass, seeing our God has punished us less then our
iniquities deserve; Should we again break thy Commandments? Hos. 3.4, 5. The
children of Israel shall abide many days without a King, and without a Prince,
and without a Sacrifice; Afterward shall the children of Israel return, and
seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his
goodness in the latter days; Here was a great change, the people of Israel
was sometime the praise of the earth for good policy both civil and
ecclesiastical, but here a great change and desolation; they have neither a
King nor face of a Church; God in his gracious and wise dispensation sends
these changes in their outward condition, that he may thereby work a change in
their hearts and practice in after times, that they may repent of their former
evil doings, and fear the Lord their God from generation to generation, who
shall hear of such fearful changes, and shall serve the Lord with fear; the
Lord sends changes to teach them where they should seek solid content and
happiness, even in God himself who is alsufficient, and without any shadow of
change; If our estate were always prosperous in this world, we would rest on
it, and say as Peter lifted up in the mountain, Mat. 17. It is good to be here,
yea, like beasts in fat pastures we would eat and lie down upon them; Therefore
the Lord sends a change, and teaches us to seek hearts rest in God alone, Hos.
2.6. I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a wall that she shall not
find her paths; She shall follow after her Lovers, but shall not overtake
them; Then shall she say, I will go and return to my first husband, for then
was it better with me then now.

2. 2. By changes men are chastised for sins against mercies.
God does it for their correction to chastise them for sinning against their
father in a time of prosperity; Solomon was in great peace and prosperity, but
when he sinned, and to please his strange wives, displeased the Lord his God by
authorizing and countenancing a false and idolatrous worship, God sent a
change, and stirred up against him one adversary after another, 1 King. 11.14,
23. Ezechias was in health and prosperity after the time he had been
dangerously sick, yet for his ingratitude the Lord sent a change, and there was
wrath upon him and upon Judah and Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 32.35. The Prodigal Son
Luk 15. abused his Fathers indulgence and his own plenty; The Lord corrected
him with a rod of his own planting, he sent a famine procured by his own waste
and mis-government.

3. 3. By changes sin is prevented.
The Lord sends such changes to prevent sin in his own Children; Paul was
ravished to the third heaven, but soon after there is a great change; the
messenger of Satan was permitted of God to buffet him lest he should be exalted
above measure; The Lord in his wisdom sees, that continued prosperity would
be a stumbling block to his own children, Therefore in great mercy to prevent
their stumbling and fall, he removes it out of their way; Whereas on the
contrary he suffers wicked and worldly-minded men to enjoy prosperity outward,
and to fall and be broken in pieces upon their own Idols of prosperity; Riches
was a snare to the young man in the Gospel, those golden fetters entangled and
restrained him from following Christ, Luke 18.23. Worldly honor was a snare
and a tonguetye to the Rulers of the Synagogue, they confessed not Christ
because they loved the praise of men Joh. 12.42, 43. Therefore Agur prays God
to remove such stumbling blocks out of the way, Prove. 30.9. Give me not riches,
lest I be full and deny thee.

4. 4. Changes discover the insufficiency of the creature.
The Lord does it to discover to his own children the insufficiency of
creature-help and comfort, and to give them a proof of the al-sufficiency of
God; In our adversity we perceive that ofttimes the creatures either cannot or
will not help us, they prove a broken tooth or a disjointed leg, they will
feed, but not grind with us, sit at ease, but not walk and toil with us; they
will have a large share in our prosperity but none at all in our adversity; The
dear children of God, as David, have their own Achitophels, very familiar and
insinuating men into their secret counsels in the day of prosperity, but the
wind of adversity drives them away like smoke, Pro. 19.6, 7. Every man is a
friend to him that gives gifts, but all the brethren of the poor do hate him;
How much more do his friends go far from him? he pursues them with words, yet
they are wanting to him: yea, many times we perceive not only insufficiency in
them to do us good, but base and malicious ingratitude in rendering evil for
good; This David found in the day of his distress, Psalm. 35.13, 15. When they
were sick I humbled my soul with fasting, but in my adversity they rejoiced. On
the contrary in the dark day of adversity we see the alsufficiency of our God,
we see him in the mount, when and where inferior helps and comforts cannot be
seen; when worldly comforts like winter-brooks in Summer, disappoint us of
refreshment in a time of drought and necessity, then find we in our God a
fountain of living water to revive us, Psa. 27.10. When my Father and my mother
forsake me, then the Lord will take me up; when Moses his Parents out of fear
and desire of self-preservation cast him into the river, then his all-sufficient
God sent Pharaohs daughter in a special providence to take him out of the
waters; when men fail and forsake, then it is that God helps. Jacob saw most
of the light of Gods countenance, even then when he saw nothing but clouds of
wrath in the countenances of his fierce brother Esau, and of his ingrate Uncle
Laban, Genesis 20.12, 13. Genesis 31.5. when false witnesses did calumniate Steven
before the Council, then found he most of Gods special presence, and a
testimony from heaven; His face did shine as the face of an Angel, Act. 6.15.
When the Council gnashed upon him with their teeth in that hour of darkness,
he saw most of the glory of his God; he saw the glory of God, and Jesus
standing on the right hand of God. Act. 7.54, 55. According to that in the Psa.
112.4. Unto the upright there arises light in darkness; In their saddest
hours they see the light of their Fathers countenance.

5. 5. Changes try and manifest grace.
The Lord sends such changes for the trial and manifestation of his own
graces in them, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Of their faith in a time of adversity: hereby
Jobs faith was tried and manifested, Job 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I
trust in him; His patience and submission to the good will of God, Job 1.21,
22. The Lord gave and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the
Lord; Hereby Aarons submission to Gods Judgment on his Sons was manifested,
Lev. 10.3. when Moses said to him, This is it that the Lord spoke, saying, I
will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the people will I
be glorified: And Aaron held his peace; Hereby David's patience and submission
was manifested, Psa. 39.9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou
did it; hereby their love to God is manifested: Many hypocrites in a day of
prosperity with their mouth will show much love, Ezekiel. 33.31. and seem to
rejoice in the word of God with the temporary believer, but when a change comes
by persecution, then they question, hate, and in end persecute the same truth
sometime they professed; but the children of God at such a time do make the
sincerity of their love toward God and his truth more manifest; Demas out of
love to this present world forsook the truth, but Luke abode in it, 2 Timothy
4.10. Hereby the meekness of the children of God is made manifest in a day of
their reproach; Proud and malicious hypocrites will seem very quiet and
Saint-like men, so long as men esteem highly of them, but if any thing be
spoken or done to their reproach, then become they like the foaming waves of
the Sea casting up mire and dirt, they answer calumny with calumny, and render
wrong for wrong; The supercilious Pharisees, when they imagined they were
wronged in their reputation by that young man, Joh. 9.34. they answered with
much sauciness and bitterness, Thou wast altogether born in sin, and do
thou teach us? And they cast him out; By their power they break all that will
not bow to them: It was not so with David, when malicious men changed his Name,
and belched out reproaches against him, 2 Samuel 16.11. Let him alone (said he to
Abishai of railing Shimei) in the day of Moses his reproach when the people
murmured and spoke against him; yet the meek servant of God spoke for them to
God; hereby the meekness of Stephen was made manifest; when his Persecutors
cast stones at him, he sent up prayers to God for them; when they cried with a
loud voice against him, he cried with a loud voice to heaven for them, Lord,
lay not this sin to their charge, Act. 7.60. hereby Paul's meekness was made
manifest, 1 Cor. 4.12, 13.

Lastly, 6. By Changes God acquaints with his special love.
The Lord sends changes in their outward condition for their spiritual
advantage, to assure them of the love of God toward them; as the tender mother
crosses the breast with wormwood out of love to her child, to wean it from
the breast, and acquaint it with a more solid and enduring food; So our
heavenly Father when he perceives his children nusling on the breast of worldly
contentments, out of love he lays on the wormwood of affliction to wean them
from the love of that perishing meat, and to acquaint them with that hidden
Manna, even the sense of his love in Jesus Christ, and by the bitter taste of
afflictions outward, he makes his love and the Cross of Christ relish the
more sweetly to our souls, Hos. 2.14. I will bring her into the wilderness and
speak comfortably unto her, and as it is in the Original, I will speak to her
heart; when the children of God are brought to such an outward condition, that
as in a wilderness there is nothing from without to comfort them, then the
Lord speaks comfort to their heart; when there is none to visit and comfort
Paul and Silas in the dungeon, Act. 16. God visits them with the comforts of
his Spirit, and makes them sing for joy. 2. By outward changes the inward joy
of their heart is increased, in their prosperous condition their joy was but
uncertain from an opinion they had of their faith, mixed with doubting of the
truth and of the soundness of their faith; The Lord in time of the change of
their condition strengthens their faith; and the experience of a tried faith
solveth their former scruples, and makes them to rejoice with joy unspeakable
and glorious; As a man finding a piece of gold has some joy from his opinion
that it is gold, but after he has tried by the touchstone, and perceives it is
upright gold, his joy is greater: so the joy of Gods children is much increased
from the trial of their faith in time of adversity, 1 Pet. 1.7, 8. That the
trial of your faith might be found unto praise, honor, and glory, at the
appearing of Jesus Christ, whom having not seen, ye love; in whom though now
you see him not, but believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious.
3. Our love to God and his holy Commandments is increased; as the coldness of
the air in winter makes a repercussion of the heat into the bowels of the
earth, so storms of afflictions in our outward estate serve through a gracious
providence to keep in and concentrate our love upon God and his will, Psa.
119.71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
Statutes.

For Admonition to the children of God in the day of their prosperity not to
rest on worldly comforts; they are uncertain, Outward comforts are not to be
rested on.
and thou can not tell how soon a change may come, 1 Timothy 6.17. Put not your
trust in the uncertainty of riches, in the Original it is in the inevidence of
riches, that may be seen to day, and to morrow take the wings of the morning
and be gone; When riches increase set not thy heart upon them, Psa. 82.10. but
improve thy present and perishing commodities to a spiritual use for raising
up thy thoughts and desires from present enjoyments to a high esteem and strong
desire of that enduring substance in heaven; This use our Lord will have us to
make of our desires to have, and of our cares to keep the good things of this
world, Joh 6.27. Mat. 6.19, 20. From thy worldly riches, inheritance, honors
and pleasures, step up to behold and to long after those durable riches, that
inheritance incorruptible, that Crown of immortal glory, and those rivers of
pleasures reserved in heaven for us.

This Doctrine serves for a ground of reprehension to those who mis-judge the
Children of God from their outward afflicted condition, Outward afflictions
argue not a man to be forsaken of God.
as if they were forsaken of God; It was the sin of David's enemies. Psa.
71.11. saying, God has forsaken him: This was the fault of Jobs Friends, from
the great and sudden change of his prosperous condition, charging him with
hypocrisy, Job 8.6, 13. This rash mis-construction of the providence of God in
afflicting his own dear children, provokes him highly against these bitter
Critics, Job 42.7. The Lord said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled
against thee, and thy two friends, for ye have not spoken of me the thing that
is right: It is well known that wicked men may prosper in their outward
condition. Job observed it in his time, Job 12.6. The Tabernacles of robbers
prosper; and they that provoke God are secure, into whose hand God brings
abundantly; So did Solomon in his experience, Eccl. 8.14. there be just men to
whom it happens according to the work of the wicked men, to whom it happens
according to the work of the righteous; which is all to be understood in
respect of their outward condition; The rich glutton fared sumptuously every
day, but Lazarus would have been content with the crumbs that fell from his
Table, Luke 18. Eccl. 7.15. There is a just man that perishes in his
righteousness, and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his
wickedness. The uncircumcised Philistims and the vile Benjamites prospered for
a time, 1 Samuel 4. Judge. 20. Antiochus Epiphanes who did pollute the Sanctuary,
and bring into it the abomination of desolation, Dan. 11.31. yet he destroyed
wonderfully and prospered, Dan. 8.24. how did the Goths and Vandals, for the
most part all Arians, overrun and oppress the world many years. It is known
from time to time that the dearest children of God have been plunged in the
deeps of adversity, Heb. 11.36, 37, 38. We must neither justify the wicked and
their courses from their outward prosperity, nor condemn the children of God
and their courses from their adversity; the Christian Church for the space
almost of 300 years was under the hammer of Pagan persecuting Emperors, and
after some breathing how did it groan under the Arian Persecution! Therefore be
not rash to pronounce in the favor of evil men and their courses because they
prosper; Consider the Lord turns them up and down as a wheel at his pleasure,
Psa. 83.13. he cuts them down like grass when they are at the highest, Psa.
92.7. As Haman Esth. 7. Babylon Isa. 47.10. and Herod Act. 12.21. By their
prosperity the Lord fats and fits them for a day of slaughter, Romans 9.22. What
if God willing to show his wrath and to make his power known, endured with much
long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction? The Lord like a
strong man seems to retire for a time from the course of his justice, that he
may with greater strength fetch a sore blow upon them; But the changes that
befall the godly are to purify them from the dross of corruption, Dan. 12.10.
and fit them to be vessels of honor, to the praise, honor, and glory of God
at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.7.

It serves for a ground of comfort to the children of God, not to be
discouraged with changes in their outward condition, Outward changes ought not
to discourage.
as if it were a thing strange; In thy adverse condition examine how thou
usedst thy prosperity, if thou wast ingrate to God, proud toward thy
neighbors, or vainly confident in thy worldly enjoyments, humble thy self in
the sight of God; and if thou be humbled for the sins of thy prosperity,

1. It is thy comfort, God in love has made a change in thy outward condition,
to change thee in thy inward man, and fit thee for a condition of happiness
that will have no change; But if after due examination thy conscience bears
thee witness, that in the day of prosperity thou drawest out thy soul to the
indigent, thou madst not the wedge of gold thy confidence, yet comfort thy self
in this, that thereby thy heavenly Father weaneth thee from the world, and this
weaning is an act of love in the Parent, though the child for the time has no
wit to discern the same.

2. What know thou but there is much preventing mercy in thy change? These
worldly advantages have been snares to many; It is far better thy outward
prosperity be changed into adversity, then thy inward peace into fear and and
trouble of spirit, which would have been if thy prosperity had been to thee a
stumbling block of iniquity.

3. Under such a change wherein thou perceivest the insufficiency of Creatures,
thou will see most of the alsufficiency and unchangeablenesse of the love of
God; At such a time the Lord will visit thy soul more frequently then in former
times when thou wast courted and taken up with the complements of the world;
and one of such visitations will give thee more solid comfort then all the
salutations and acclamations of men in the time of thy most flourishing estate.

Lastly, Now thou gettest a proof of thy faith and patience, and as at such a
time thou praisest God who preserves the work of his own hands in thee, so
thou should rejoice in a tried faith, as a Soldier in a day of battle
rejoices in his armor of proof; And if there had not been a change and trial,
thou would not have had the joy of a tried, sound, and steadfast faith;
Therefore says James Iam. 1.2. My Brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into
diverse temptations.

The second particular to be considered in the words, His Contentation.
expressed in his inward contentation of mind; In whatsoever estate I am, I am
therewith content; The word in the Original signifies, I am sufficient;
Because sufficiency and abundance in a man himself makes him quiet and content;
and on the contrary, sense of, and grief for the want of sufficiency makes him
discontent and sollicitous for the supply of his wants; to this sense the
primitive word is used, Luke 3.14. Be content with your wages, said the Baptist
to the Soldiers; Be ye sufficed with them, and Heb. 13.5. Be content with such
things as ye have, in the original it is, Be ye sufficed with such things as ye
have for the present; In this place the word signifies a self-sufficiency, as
it is also used, 2 Cor. 9.8. that ye having alsufficiency; This (...) and
self-sufficiency is in the believer himself, but not from himself, such a
self-sufficiency is only in God from himself, Genesis 17.1. I am the alsufficient
God; Some render El shaddai by the same word that is used here, Junius and
Tremel. in Marg. and Mercer. on Genesis 17.1. The believer his sufficiency is in
himself not from himself but from God; as in the clear day a house has
sufficiency of light within it self, yet not from it self but from the Sun;
So the sufficiency and comfort of the child of God is within him, but from God
the Fountain of all the comfort and contentment in his soul; The believer gets
of Gods rich and free grace an interest in Christ, and in him a title to God
who is all in all, 1 Cor. 3.23. Ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods; with Christ
he gets assurance of all things needful to make him happy; This inward
provision of Gods favor and of faith in Christ is bestowed and laid up in the
believing heart by Jesus Christ the great Steward of the childrens bread,
whereof in his wisdom he gives a sufficient portion in a right proportion for
their contentment and present satisfaction, so much as may hold up their hearts
till they come to their Fathers house where is bread enough; Faith in God and
his promises for the present, and hope of absolute contentment in heaven, makes
a sound believer content with his present condition; as a Traveller
sufficiently fed and refreshed in the morning, is resolute and content to pass
through a barren wilderness until the evening, at which time he looks for
convenient lodging and plentiful refreshment; so a soul refreshed here with
some sense of the comfortable love of God in Jesus Christ, which is as the
morning of the eternal day of our happiness, is resolved and well content to
pass through any hardness in this time of our sojourning until the evening of
his life, at which time he will get a day without an evening, and a full
portion that shall never be taken from him.

A renewed man is a man contented in any condition of life; A renewed man is a
contented man.


Obj.

Answ. Wicked men are not contented in prosperity.


1. Because he receives nothing but the bare creature, and this without Gods
favor and blessing in Christ is as light bread that satisfies not, nor
contenteth the appetite.

2. Ecol. 5.10 He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he
that loves abundance with increase, Ecc. 4.8. There is one alone, and there is
not a second, yea, he has neither child nor brother, yet there is no end of
all his labor, neither is his eye satisfied with riches; but there can be no
true content amidst these flames of self-tormenting desires.

3. The wicked and worldly-minded man though his outward estate be prosperous,
yet he envieth all that have more then he himself, his eye is evil because he
thinks God is good, or better to others: he would have a Monopoly of
prosperity, and if he had it he cares not though all men beside him were
miserable; But where envying is there can be no contentment or rest to that
soul; for Envy is the fretting of the heart and rottenness of the bones, Pro.
14.30.

But the renewed man is content in his prosperity less or more, The godly
content in 1. Prosperity.
he looks on his worldly advantages in one relation to God, both as they are
tokens of his fatherly love, and as they are pledges of a better and more
enduring substance; It is not those common gifts but their relation to God that
gives him contentment; It is like the great contentment a faithful wife has
in a gift but of common and ordinary substance sent from her loving Husband.

2. The renewed man his prosperity does not increase his desires after more of
the creature, but after more of God himself, in whom alone is eminently to be
found all the comfort that is scattered and sprinkled like salt here and there
on diverse creatures; He is content with his present condition, prays God to
continue it, if it so seem good in his eyes; But above all he desires the
increase of favor with God.

3. The renewed man in his prosperity communicates to the necessities of
others, and this breeds him much contentment; He is more content with that
which is useful to others then of what himself possesses; their good contents
him more then his own goods.

4. He is free from envy that is a worm in the gourd; the more plentiful
condition of others does augment, but no ways diminish his contentment, for he
rejoices and delights in the riches of Gods bounty to others. 2. Adversity.


The sound believer is content in his estate of adversity and low condition;
Old Eli when he heard the threatening of a fearful change in his outward
estate, 1 Samuel 3.18. said, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good; he
looked to the Sovereign Lord, who renders not an account of any of his
matters, Job 33.13. Not only is he content and submits to what is revealed, but
is prepared to submit to more when God reveals more of his will to afflict him;
Let him do this (said Eli) and whatsoever seems him good; So did Ezechias
rest content with a sad dispensation, 2 King. 20.19. Good is the Word of the
Lord (said he to the Prophet) which thou have spoken; So did David, 2 Samuel
15.26. Behold here am I, let him do unto me as seems good unto him.

The reasons and ground of his contentment in his greatest adversity are,
Reasons of contentment in adversity.


1. Because the child of God makes Gods favor his portion, Psa. 16.5. Psa.
73.26. Psa. 119.57. Thou art my portion O Lord, The loving-kindenesse of the
Lord is better then life; And life is better then means of life; The child of
God can and will rejoice in this everlasting portion; Though all things worldly
should fail him, he wants not matter of contentment that has the
all-sufficient God for his everlasting portion, Hab. 3.16, 17, 18. in a time of
great trouble; Although (says he), the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither
shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields
shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall
no herd be in the stalls, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my salvation; As a Merchant adventuring a little portion at Sea, though it
miscarry, yet he rejoices in the stock he has at home; So the child of God,
though his outward commodities perish, yet he rejoices in his God, who is the
strength of his heart, and portion for ever, Psa. 73.26.

2. Faith in a renewed man looks up to God as his Father in Christ, Joh. 16.27.
The Father himself loves you, Joh. 20.27. I ascend to my Father and your
Father; The believer rests on his Fathers wisdom who knows what is best, and
on his love who will give to his children what is best for them, Mat. 7.11. If
ye then being evil know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much
more shall your heavenly Father which is in heaven give good things to them
that ask him?

3. Faith in a renewed man is copulative; It believes all the promises of
greater and lesser, of spiritual and bodily, of eternal and temporal benefits,
because God is faithful in all; and he that doubts of one calls in question the
authority of all, being one and the same, to wit, the Word of God; Now God has
promised, Psa. 34.9. There is no want to them that fear him, Psa. 37.3. Trust
in the Lord and do good, so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall
be fed; Faith from an interest in Christ that great Original gift convinces
the judgment, and persuades the heart quietly to depend on God for lesser
benefits; by a demonstrative argument from Gods love, Romans 8 32. He that spared
not his own Son but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him
freely give us all things? Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the
evidence of things not seen; Faith makes the happiness of heaven to be present
in the heart of the believer; He sees heaven in a map, he gets a view of the
promised eternal rest, in an elevation of faith, as Moses did of the Promised
Land from the top of Pisgah, Deuteronomy. 34.1. This sight does so affect the heart
with quietness and contentment, that it neither faints nor frets under present
troubles, 2 Cor. 4.16, 18. For which cause we faint not, while we look not at
the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen.

Let us learn in every estate to be content, Learn contentment in every estate.
Shall we receive good at the hands of the Lord, and shall we not receive evil?
Job 2.10. Neither must we limit the holy One of Israel in his dispensation, by
saying, We could be content to suffer so much but no more; It is both folly and
presumption for the Patient to prescribe to his Physician; Let us rather
resolve with the Apostle Paul Act. 21.13. I am ready not to be bound only, but
also to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus; And with the Martyr
Ignatius be content to suffer one extremity after another, so that we may gain
Jesus Christ; Remember what would have become of us if our Lord and Surety
Jesus Christ has said so, that he was content to pay a part only of our debt,
and to drink a part of that bitter cup of Gods wrath; One of ten thousand was
enough to keep us for ever in that bottomless prison; One drop of wrath would
be enough to make us for ever miserable.

Obj.

Answ. 1.

2. He may both desire and also use the lawful means to be freed; Ezechias both
prayed and also applied the Fig to the boil, 2 King. 20. But our desires must
be ever with a submission to Gods will; As our Lord contented with his Fathers
will prayed, If it be possible let this cup pass from me, nevertheless not as
I will but as thou will; Impatient and masterful desires of deliverance in a
time of trouble cannot consist with true contentment, but humble and submitting
desires consist very well with it; To God the sole Author of true contentment,
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, be all praise, Amen.

The second act of the composure of his Spirit in all conditions of life is
manifested in his solid and equal carriage, I know both how to be abased and
how to abound.

The sound believer is not carried here and there like a willow with the
contrary winds of prosperity and adversity, The sound believer in all estates
is unmovable.
but he remains unmoved as an Oak; he is not up and down; He is not like
churlish Nabal in his prosperity and jollity despising his betters, and in his
adversity dejected with pusillanimity, and dead like a stone, 1 Samuel 25. But he
is of a prudent, solid, and equal temper of spirit, 1 Cor. 7.30. They that weep
as though they weep not, and they that rejoice as though they rejoice not: The
Children of God will not in a dissembling way counterfeit with their tongues
and eyes with sorrow for public calamities, as cruel Ishmael the Son of
Nethaniah did, and yet have malice and revenge boiling in their hearts, Jer.
41.6. Neither will they as the Pharisees disfigure their faces when there is no
sorrow in their hearts, Matthew. 6. But they carry the variety of their condition
in such a mystery of moderation, that beholders cannot read their condition in
their countenance or outward behavior; This is that Christian moderation which
the Apostle requires Phil. 4.5. Let your moderation be known to all men; when
we so moderate our affections in all occurrences, that they exceed not; Our joy
in prosperity we moderate by the grace of humility, Our sorrow in adversity by
Christian Fortitude and Faith in God, Psa. 27.19. I had fainted, unless I had
believed, to see the goodness of God in the Land of the living; In the midst
of all their worldly troubles their heart rejoices in God, and in the midst of
outward wants, they enjoy the allsufficient God; This inward joy moderates
their outward griefs, 2 Cor. 6.10. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as
having nothing, and yet possessing all things; for a believer enjoys God who is
all in all to him.

The Reasons of this Doctrine, Reasons of a Christians equal carriage in all
conditions.
That a sound believer is of a solid and equal carriage in all conditions, are;

1. Because God puts his fear in the hearts of his own children. Jer. 32.40.
and fear to offend God by abuse of prosperity keeps the heart humble and
stable; Heb. 10.38. If any man draw back (to wit, by unbelief,) my soul shall
have no pleasure in him.

2. Faith keeps the heart in a solid and equal temper: in a time of worldly
prosperity faith looks to things eternal reserved in heaven for us; this makes
us have humble thought; of those flying shadows of worldly pleasures, in
comparison of that substance of glory that endures for ever: faith also in
adversity quiets and settles our spirits, when we believe that our light
afflictions which are but for a moment, work for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. fear and faith are to the soul, as
ballast and sails to the ship; the one keeps it from being overcarried in the
top of the wave, and the other from being swallowed up in the gulf between the
waves: so the fear of God keeps the heart of a believer from being overturned
by strong temptations in the top of his prosperity; and assurance of faith,
like a main sail carries the heart through the deeps of afflictions, and keeps
it from being overwhelmed.

This Doctrine serves for reprehension of two sorts of people, Reproof to such
as know not how 1. To abound.


1. Of such as know not how to abound; How many are there that cannot carry the
cup of prosperity even? their pride is intolerable; they trust in their
wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches, Psalm. 49.6. Some
abuse their prosperity to riot and excess, feeding themselves without fear of
God that covers their table, Jude v. 12. Jam. 5.5. weep ye rich men, ye have
lived in pleasure on the earth and been wanton; this is the worst sort of
ingratitude, to render to our God evil for his goodness, like Jeshurun that
waxed fat and kicked against his feeder, Deuteronomy. 32.15. Some make not a right use
of their plenty for a supply to the indigent; Jam. 5.2, 3. How lie rich men,
your gold and silver is kankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness
against you. Some saucily despise those that are in adversity, like Nabal in a
festival day, 1 Samuel 25.10. Who is David? there be many servants that now
adays break away from their masters, etc. they will give evil words, but do no
good works. And others are insolent oppressors of the poor: Prove. 22.7. The
rich rules over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the lender; he
abuses that to make it a burden, which should be an ease and relief: The
mercies of the wicked are cruel, Prove. 12.10.

2. Of such as know not how to be abased, 2. To be abased.
but miscarry in a day of adversity: some are stupid and senseless of the
Lords visitation. Isa. 42.25. He has poured upon Israel the fury of his anger,
and the strength of battle, and it has set him on fire round about, and it
burned him, yet he laid it not to heart. Some are in the other extreme, they
faint in the day of adversity; if riches decrease they droop, like thin
feathered fowls in a rainy day; if at any time they be blasted in their
reputation, they become pale and heartlesse, as if they could not live but in
the popular air: Some turn impatient, murmur and blaspheme God in the course of
his providence; so did the people of Israel in the wilderness, Exodus 16.2, 3.
They murmured and said, Would to God we had died by the hand of the Lord in the
land of Egypt, when we sat by the fleshpots, and when we did eat bread to the
full, for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole
assembly with hunger. Others become desperate, and blaspheme God in his truth
and mercy, as wicked Jehoram, 2 King. 6.33. Behold this evil is of the Lord
(said he) what should I wait for the Lord any longer? And such as are desperate
of Gods help use unlawful means for relief, as Ahaziah, 2 King. 1.

Therefore I would offer some considerations as so many bases to balance
unstable souls, Considerations to ballast unstable souls.
that they be not too much lifted up with prosperity, nor too far dejected
with adversity.

First, this provokes jod to send a change in thy estate. Hos. 2.8, 9. She did
not know what I gave her corn, wine and oil, and multiplied her silve^ and
gold, and therefore will I return and take away my corn^^ the time thereof, and
my wine in the season thereof.

Secondly, that pride and vain boasting is the moth of prosperity; it is a
swelling in the high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly at an instant. Isa.
30.13. Pride in prosperity is an evident prognostic of a fall and change. Dan.
4.31. While the word of pride and boasting in his prosperity was in the mouth
of Nebuchadnezzar, there fell a voice from Heaven, saying, O King
Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken, the Kingdom is departed from thee; here
was a sudden and great change: he that was lifted up above the ordinary
condition of men in plenty and honor is brought down so low that he runs mad
and wild amongst the beasts of the Field, and eats grass as oxen.

3. Thou who abusest thy plenty to riot and excess, thy surfeit and repletion
will turn to a consumption, and bring a change, Prove. 23.20. Be not amongst
wine-bibbers, among riotous eaters of flesh, for the drunkard and the glutton
will will come to poverty, and drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags.

4. this provokes God to bring a change on thy estate, Prove. 11.24. There is
that scatters and yet increases, and there is that withholdeth more then is
meet, but it tends to poverty; The rich Glutton gave not a crum, and in hell
he got not a drop of water to cool his tongue.

5. Thou that in thy prosperity mis-knowest thy self, thou sinnest against God,
who only of rich and free bounty has made the difference between thy condition
and his, Prove. 14.31. He that despises his neighbor sins, but he that has
mercy on the poor, happy is he.

6. thou reproachedst God his maker, who entitles himself the defender and
judge of the poor and indigent, Psa. 72.4. Thou provokest God to deliver up thy
estate into the hands of the spoiler, Isa. 33.1. Woe to thee that spoilest, and
thou wast not spoiled; and dealest treacherously, and they dealt not
treacherously with thee; when thou shall cease to spoil thou shall be spoiled.

Next I would offer these considerations both to direct and uphold a weak
spirit in the day of adversity.

1. Thou that art senseless of Gods visitation, Prove. 3.11. Heb. 12.5. Job
5.17. Despise not the chastening of the Lord, slight it not, but take notice
of it; This froward senselessness provokes God to increase thy troubles, Lev.
26.18. As the Physician does cure a Lethargy by casting the Patient into a
Fever, and by this means does quicken his senses, so the Lord does cure this
spiritual Lethargy many times by some sharper and more corrosive affliction
that touches them to the quick.

2. Pro. 24.10. If thou faint in the day of adversity thy strength is small:
This fainting is an evidence of a pusillanimous and weak spirit; Against this
soul-fainting the only cordial is faith in God and his gracious promises. Psa.
27.14. I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of God in the
Land of the Living. Psa. 43.5. O my Soul, why art thou disquieted within me?
hope in God, for I shall yet praise him; By faith as the saving Organ the sweet
smell of Gods mercies is carried into the heart, and revives it, Psa. 138.7.
Though I walk in the midst of trouble thou will revive me.

3. Thou that art impatient and secretly in thy heart murmurest against the
good Providence of God, consider in time thy fretting impatience does more
disquiet thy soul then the cross it self can: by patience thou possessest thy
soul, Luke 21.19. but by impatience thou dispossessest thy self of that
dominion thou should have over thy thoughts, speeches and actions; it so
distracts thee that thou know not what thou think, speak, or do; By
thy impatience thou provokest God to increase and continue thy cross; Thou art
as the Fowl in the Net, the more thy impatient spirit does flutter, thou art
the more entangled. Number. 11. when the people complained, It displeased the
Lord, and his anger was kindled, and the fire of the Lord burnt among them,
Number. 14.34. Because the people murmured at the difficulties in their journey to
the promised rest, the Lord lengthened their troubles forty years; whereas if
they had been patient and obedient, they had got an expected end in forty
days; Impatience puts men to much pains which might be saved if in patience
they would submit to Gods providence in a time of great difficulties; Consider
it is a fearful thing in the time of thy impatience to get thy desire of ease
and delivery satisfied, at such a time it is far better to want it then to have
it; It is a feeding for the slaughter, Number. 11.33. The people were impatient
for want of flesh, God gave it to them, But while the flesh was in their mouth,
the wrath of the Lord was kindled; It is far better to live in want then to be
consumed in thy abundance.

4. desperate unbelief casts away all hope of deliverance in a time of great
trouble, Consider thou blasphemest God in his power, as if our God were not
able to deliver thee; Thou say as Israel did in their unbeleef, Can the Lord
prepare a Table in the Wilderness? Psa. 78.19. Such Unbelief in a time of a
great and common calamity may provoke God to seclude thee from the comfort of
the common deliverance; That unbeleeving Lord who blasphemed God in his power,
was trod down in the gate, and was not partaker of the common benefit, 2 King.
7.19, 20.

5. that usest unlawful means to be freed of thy trouble, consider in time
such means provoke to more wrath; Ahaziah his consulting with wizards in the
time of his sickness brought him to his death, 2 King. 1. The Jews did
persecute the Prince of life, thinking thereby to preserve their place and
nation, Joh. 11.48. but such a means brought upon them desolation and
destruction, Mat. 23.37, 38.

This Doctrine serves for a seasonable warning to the children of God who are
subject to the like passions within, Directions how to behave our selves in all
estates. 1. In prosperity
and to the like temptations from without, how they should carry themselves in
an equable tenor both in prosperity and adversity.

In thy day of prosperity,

1. Be thankful to thy God, Deuteronomy. 8.10. When thou have eaten and art full,
then thou shall bless the Lord thy God for the good Land which he has given
thee; So did good Jacob, Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy of the least of all the
mercies which thou have showed unto thy Servant, For with my staff I passed
over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands; Remember that wrath was upon
good Ezechias for his ingratitude, 2 Chronicles. 32.25.

2. Walk humbly with thy God, Pro. 22.2. they are alike in their birth, both
come naked out of the womb, and alike at their death, they return naked to the
womb of the earth, the difference only is for a moment of time; Remember
Ezechias his pride in his treasures provoked God to give them to the spoiler, 2
King. 20.17.

3. Walk in charity toward them that want the good things of the world;
Remember as this is the day of thy receiving, so there will be a day of
reckoning when thy Lord will say, Give me an account of thy Stewardship;
Profession of love to God without this is but hypocrisy, 1 John 3.17. Whosoever
has this worlds good, and sees his brother has need, and shuts up his
bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? yea, thy
outward performances of public worship and solemn humiliation by fasting is
abomination before the Lord without this labor of love, Isa. 58.6, 7. The Lord
requires that thou deal thy bread to the hungry, etc. If God send a change, the
remembrance of thy merciful dealing with the poor will comfort thy heart in
adversity; Augustine.
It was Jobs comfort in his saddest hour, Job 31.16, 17. etc. Augustine says
well, God made the rich man that he might help the poor, and he made the poor
man that he might try the rich.

4. moderate thy affections; Let not thy desire, joy and delight dwell on
things worldly, Phil. 3.20. Let your conversation be in heaven; The Merchant
though he trade in a foreign Country for a time, and be never so well
entertained there, yet his more frequent thoughts and stronger affections are
on his own Country and the comforts there: here thou art a sojourner: Amidst
all thy transient pleasures here let thy mind and heart be set upon the things
that are above, Col. 3.2.

5. Of thy worldly commodities make a spiritual use; as the skilful Chemist
extracts subtle spirits out of the grossest Minerals, so the spiritual man
draws a spiritual use out of things earthly; Out of any sweetness he tastes
in the creatures his appetite is enlarged toward that full joy and pleasures
for ever at the right hand of God; as a profane worldling in a Church-meeting
many times has earthly thoughts, so the spiritual man even in his civil
meetings, in the midst of his earthly pleasures is a heavenly-minded man, He
looks through the creatures to heaven, He can at once look both to the earth
and to the third heaven; From earthly objects his heart is raised to things
heavenly, and after such thoughts he returns to the use of the creature with
great moderation; as a man refreshed already with more excellent delicates then
the creatures can afford.

In the day of adversity carry thy self also in an equal way, 2. In adversity.
I know also (says our Apostle) how to be abased.

1. Be not regardlesse of thy Cross, Heb. 12.5. Ephraim bemoan thy self, Jer.
31.18. accept the punishment of thy sin, and justify the Lord in all his
dispensations, Lev. 26.41. and seek to God by prayer for comfort. Isa. 26.16.
They poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them.

2. Be not faint-hearted; Baruch fainted in his sighing in a time of adversity
and dis-appointment of his hopes, Jer. 45.3. Jonah fainted in a time of great
perplexity, Jonah 2.7. Prepare cordials against this fainting; As men subject
to fainting in the body carry always about with them some preservatives, lay
up store of the precious promises with faith to them in thy understanding, and
with love to them in thy heart; The taste of this bread of life will keep thee
from fainting; Carry Christ and his Cross in thine heart, and the smell of his
Cross, and the sweet fruits of it will keep thine heart from fainting; If at
any time thou faint, then with Jonah Jon. 2.7. Remember the Lord and his former
kindenesses; He is unchangeable in his love, He loves to the end, Joh. 13.1.
The meditation on former experience, and on the unchangeablenesse of his love
is a Restorative to a fainting soul.

3. In thy adversity be patient. Jam. 1.4. Let Patience have her perfect work,
that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing; It is not perfect in any
man in a perfection of degrees, but in the purpose of their will and affection
of their hearts; The godly should be willing in all things present or to come
to submit to the good will of God; Patience is joined to hope as the Cable to
the Anchor, 1 These. 1.3. Patience of hope. As in a stresse of weather, the more
the Cable is lengthened there is the less agitation of the Ship, so in a time
of trouble, the more our patience is increased the commotion of our spirit is
the less: It is true, the dear children of God may have their own fits of
impatiency, as Moses at Meribah: Job had his, Job 3. Jeremiah, Jer. 15.10. and
Jonah had a sore fit, Jon. 4.8. It is better for me to die then to live, His
fit grows worse verse. 9. I do well to be angry even unto death; Yet his
merciful Father takes not Jonah away in this fit, but spared him, and gave him
grace to outlive this fit by repentance; The children of God recover
themselves by repentance, and in an holy indignation revenge themselves upon
themselves for their former distemper; So David recovered from his fit of
impatiency rebukes himself, Psa. 73.22. I was as a beast before thee.

4. Cast not away thy confidence but walk by faith; In a time of trouble the
Just shall live by faith, Hab. 2.4. The children of God in times of great and
long troubles are subject to fits of unbelief, Judge. 6.13. Gideon said, O my
Lord, if the Lord be with us why then is all this befallen us? Did not the Lord
bring us up from Egypt, but now the Lord has forsaken us; And David Psa.
116.11. I said in my haste All men are liars, Psa. 31.22. I said in my haste I
am cut off from before thine eyes. Notwithstanding special promises of God to
the contrary, yet he had his own fit of distrustful fear to be cut off by the
hand of Saul; Against such fits guard thy heart with submission to his divine
wisdom in the training up of his own children, He scourges every Son whom he
receives, Heb. 12.6. Consider his gracious wisdom ordering thy afflictions
for thy souls good, Heb. 12.13. He chastises us for our profit, that we may be
partakers of his holiness: But when thou have such a fit of unbelief, and
can not believe that the Lord in love chastises thee, but punishes thee in
anger; Remember the days of old when the Lord heard thy prayers, and thou
had a sweet return of peace to thy soul; In the experience of this say thou
to thy heart as Sampsons Mother said to her Husband Manoah, Judge. 13.23. If the
Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt-offering and a
meat offering at our hands. Look into thy own heart, and if thou in a time of
great trouble fear to offend him, and desire to obey, thou may and should
rest on him as thy God. Isa. 5.10. Who is amongst you that fears the Lord,
and obeys the voice of his servant, that walks in darkness and has no
light? let him rest in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Though thou
see not any appearance of deliverance, yet rest on the power of God, submit to
his will and use no unlawful means for thy own delivery; So did the three
children Dan. 3.17. Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the
burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand: but if not, Be
it known unto thee, O King, we will not serve thy Gods.

The third particular to be considered, is the way how the Apostle attained
this contentation of mind in all estates of life; I have learned (says he)
and I am instructed, in the original it is, I am instructed in a mystery or
secret.

The mystery and secret of contentment in whatsoever estate, The mystery of
contentment is taught only in the School of Christ. It is not taught from
principles of nature.
is taught only in the School of Jesus Christ; The truth of this Doctrine will
appear if we consider 1. how it is not taught, 2. how it is taught.

It is not taught from any principles of corrupt nature, because this being
alike in all the children of Adam must be uniform in its operations, and so all
men should be taught this contentment, but the contrary is seen in many
malcontents and murmurers under their present condition in the world: Corrupt
nature frets at every thing displeasing to flesh and blood, until it be healed
by the grace of regeneration; But where this secret fretting is, there can be
no true contentment.

Neither can it be taught by the moral precept of Natural men: It is true,
heathen men, Nor by moral precepts of natural men.
specially the Stoic Philosophers have spoken somewhat to this purpose, yet
they did not teach men to be content in whatsoever estate; They did commend
that horrid sin of self-murder in the case of dis-contentment; They compared
man's life to a banquet, that he might willingly leave when once he were full,
and to a stage play that he might leave when once he were wearied; And Seneca
calls such a death a gate to liberty; This is not to teach contentment in every
estate; As they failed foully in their precepts, so in their practice of
contentment; It is true, some heathens appeared content in their sober and
course diet of living: Fabricius that Noble Roman Senator was content to feed
upon his dish of Roots, and he answered to these Legates, who would have
corrupted him with vast Sums of gold to betray his own Country, that a man who
was content to feed on Roots needed not their gold: yet they were not content
in every estate; they could not endure disgrace in the world, for their honor
was their Idol; Lucretia and Cato of Vtica could not bear their disgrace with
any contentment, but made away themselves in their violent fits of
coffeehouse: Augustine.
And August. lib. 1. de Civit. Dei cap. 20. says well, That it is but a weak
spirit that cannot comport with the want of health in the body, or with the
want of the applause of the people.

Next the truth of this Doctrine appears, It is taught 1. By the Word
if we consider positively how this mystery of contentment is taught; It is
taught in the School of Christ. 1. By the Word of God. 2. By the example of
Christ. 3. By the Spirit of Christ.

1. Is is taught by the Word of God; It is called the word of Patience, because
it commands us to be patient, Rev. 3.10. Because thou have kept the word of my
patience (says the Angel of the Covenant to the Church of Philadelphia) I will
also keep thee from the hour of Temptation, etc. It is taught by the word of
precept which commands us to be godly, and where godliness is, it has with
it contentment, 1 Timothy 6.6. Godliness with contentment is great gain; That is,
godliness which has always with it contentment is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.8.
Having food and raiment let us be therewith content, Heb. 13.5. Be content with
such things as ye have; It is taught by the word of threatening, 1 Cor. 10.
Neither murmr ye as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of the
destroyer; he threatens them from the fearful destruction that fell upon
murmurers against the Lords dispensation, Jude ep. 15, 16, 17. Behold, the Lord
comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to
convince all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds, and of all
their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him; These are
murmurers, complainers; It is taught fully by the word of Promise, Heb. 13.5.
Be content with such things as ye have, for he has said, I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee; Our Lord in his gracious promises holds forth to us
the grounds of contentment in our lowest estate.

1. He promises provision in time of want, Psa. 34.10. 1. Promise of Provision
a ground of contentment in time of want.
The young Lions shall lack and suffer hunger, but they that seek the Lord
shall not want any good thing: Has it not been seen in a time of great
scarcity, that many old oppressors who sometimes have been like fierce Lions
roaring after their prey on the poor, and like the evening wolves, in the end
have been brought into great misery, when they that fear the Lord have been
furnished daily with a comfortable supply out of the storehouse of divine
Providence; Eliah in time of that great famine in Samaria was better furnished
then the Princes of Samaria.

2. The Lord promises both protection and provision, 2. Promise of Protection
a ground of contentment in a time of danger.
so that a man well guarded by the Almighty God needs not eat his bread with
quaking but with cheerfulness, Isa. 33.15, 16. He that walks righteously and
speaks uprightly, he shall dwell on high, his place of defense shall be the
mountains of rocks, bread shall be given him and his waters shall be sure. And
may not a man be well content that has Gods Word to assure him of a daily
maintenance and protection.

3. The Lord promises comfort in troubles, 2 Cor. 7.6. 3. Promise of Comfort,
a ground of contentment in a time of mourning.
He is a God that comfort those that are cast down, 2 Cor. 1.3. The God of
all comfort; Is not this a solid ground of contentment to have such a comforter
in our troubles? He is near to us in all our troubles, a present help in
trouble, Psa. 46.1.2. He is an alsufficient comforter us in all our troubles;
The God of all comfort who comfort us in all our tribulations, 2 Cor. 1.3,
4. His comfortable presence goes along with them in all their tribulations, he
was with Joseph in the pit and in the prison; with Jacob in his pursuit by
Esau, and in his pursuit by Laban; with Moses in the River, in Midian, and in
his great troubles and dangers from the peoples murmuring in the wilderness;
This word of promise was the ground of David's comfort and contentment in a
world of troubles, Psa. 119.50. This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy
Word has quickened me.

4. 4. Promise of Counsel in time of perplexity.
His word of promise to give us counsel in difficulties is a ground of
contentment and rest to our hearts in all our perplexities, Jam. 1.5. If any
man lack wisdom, let him ask of God that gives to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given him; The Apostle speaks of wisdom and
prudence in a time of trial, which requires we should be wise as Serpents and
also simple as Doves; Ye see Paul's prudence in dividing his Persecutors, Act.
23.6. in his discreet Preface to Felix, Act. 24.10, 11. and Agrippa, Act. 26.2,
3. to conciliate attention and favor to his just cause in a time of trial,
and also in his discreet compellation to the governor, Act. 26.25 I am not
mad, Most Noble Festus; to convince his Judge of the soberness of his spirit in
the maintenance of persecuted truth.

5. 5. Promise of Strength a ground of contentment under difficulties and
pressures.
The Lord in his Word promises strength to uphold believers under heavy
pressures and burdens. Isaiah 42.10. I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help
thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness; and 1
Cor. 10.13. He will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may
be able to bear it; Our high Priest is full of compassion, he does not as the
Pharisees who laid on heavy burdens, and would not touch them with one, of
their fingers; but as God laid a heavy burden on Moses to go and speak to
Pharaoh in a matter so displeasing unto him, he did sustain him under the
burden, Exodus 4.12. Go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou
shall say. The Lord laid a heavy burden upon Jeremiah to go and speak against
a rebellious people, but withal he furnished him with strength to bear the
burden, Jer. 1.8. Be not afraid of their faces, for I am with thee to deliver
thee; So the Lord laid a heavy burden on Paul to preach the Word in the City
of Corinth wherein abounded all sort of iniquity, 1 Cor. 6.10. yet the Lord
promises him strength to bear the burden, Act. 18.9, 10. Be not afraid, but
speak and hold not thy peace, for I am with thee, and no man shall set on thee
to hurt thee; Is not this promise of strength a solid ground of contentation to
rest on under our burdens?

6. 6 The promise of a wise providence ordering all for good is a ground of
contentment.
The promise of a wise and gracious providence ordering all things for good to
them that love God is a sure ground of contentment to the children of God in
their lowest condition; Though they know not the good of the bitter cup of
affliction, yet they shall know it, Romans 8.28. We know that all things work
together for good to them that love God, to them who are called according to
his purpose: Joseph's prison by Gods good providence was a step to his liberty;
There God made his acquaintance with the Butler, who made him known to Pharaoh,
that sent for him and preferred him in Egypt; Moses in his Infancy was cast
into the River, God orders it for good; He is drawn out of the waters by
Pharaohs daughter, nourished by her for her own Son, and well bred in all the
wisdom of the Egyptians: and always it is for their spiritual good; The Lord
brings sweet to their souls out of that which is bitter to the body; The rod of
Ashur is ordered by God for humbling his people of Israel, Isa. 20.12. The
furnace of Babylon is ordered of God to be a means for purging his people and
making them as choice gold for his Treasure, Isa. 27.9. By this therefore shall
the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his
sin; This should teach the children of God contentment in their greatest
afflictions; They know not whether they shall turn to their temporal good, but
they may know certainly they shall be ordered and carried on for their
spiritual good.

7. Lastly, 7. Promise of a comfortable issue a ground of contentment.
The gracious promise of a comfortable issue to all our troubles is a ground of
contentment; Assurance of a safe harbor to the Seafaring men, of a fruitful
harvest to the Husbandman, and of a triumphal Crown to the Soldier, are
grounds of contentment to them in all their labors and difficulties; So the
full assurance of hope we have of that port of eternal salvation, of that
harvest of full joy, and of that Crown of immortal glory, is, and shall be a
ground of contentment in tempestuous times, in our seed time of tears, in our
warfare against terrors within and fightings without; Faithful is he who has
promised, Psalm. 34.19. Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord
delivers him out of them all. Joh. 16.20. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
that ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice; and ye shall be
sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy; As in the time of
affliction thou find this true in thy experience which thy Lord foretold; so
it is ground contentment in such a time that thy Lord has foretold also of a
comfortable issue; The sick Patient in the time of his pain while the medicine
is a working, being forewarned of it by the Physician, has some contentment
and comfort in the hope of the good of it in his after health foretold him also
by his Physician; So thou may be assured as thou find the experience of
sorrow by thy Lord, so thou shall also find the experience of joy; for the
same faithful Lord has foretold both.

2. 2. By the example of Christ.
We learn contentment and submission of spirit from our Lord Jesus Christ who
in his lowest condition rested content with his Fathers will, Samaria refused
to entertain him; James and John was highly discontent, and breathed nothing
but fire against Samaria, yet our meek Lord rebuked them and said. Ye know not
what manner of spirit ye are of, Luke 9.53, 54, 55. In thy bodily wants learn
contentment from him; when he was hungry and none ministered unto him; The devil
tempted him to discontent and murmuring, Mat. 4.3. If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread; Our Lord answered, It is written, man
should not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of God; He that at first by his powerful word gave life to the creature,
can, if it so please him, by that word preserve life; When such means fail, yet
learn from thy Lord to submit to the will of God, and to trust in his power
that is not limited to ordinary means; In his thirst they gave him gall;
whereas others at their death got wine to make them forget their pain, yet he
was content, he did not complain of them to God, but in great calmnesse of
spirit and eminency of love prayed to the Father for them, Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they are doing; He renders wine for their gall:
yea, though all thy life time thou should live in poverty, yet look to Christ
and be content, for he was poor in his birth, poor in his life, and at his
death he was stripped of his garments.

2. When thou suffer in thy Name, Pet. 2.21. Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an example that we should follow his steps, who when he was reviled,
reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself to
him that judges righteously; When in speaking the truth thou art contradicted
by proud and contentious men, who call thee ignorant, or a liar, be patient,
and look to thy Lord who was the way, the verity, and the life; yet was a sign
of contradiction, Luke 2.34. And when thy heart begins through discontent at
the hard speeches of the world against thee to faint within thee, then consider
thy Lord that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest ye be
wearied and faint in your minds, Heb. 12.3. When thou art traduced by
malicious detracters, be patient and content; look to thy Lord who was without
all spot and blame, and yet was traduced, as a man gluttonous and a
wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners, Mat. 11.19. a deceiver of the
people, Joh. 7.12. Mat. 27.63 and a complier with that arch malignant spirit,
Mat. 12.24. The Servant should be content when he is no worse, yea, not so evil
entreated as his Lord and Master; when thou art affronted and mocked to thy
face by insolent enemies insulting on thy misery, be content and look to thy
Lord who was as a sheep dumb before her shearer, he was affronted with a
Scepter of reed put into his hand, with a tormenting crown of thorns on his
head; they mocked him by bowing the knee, wagging the head; and upbraided him
with cruel mockings, Luke 23.5. when thou suffer injury in thy person at
the hands of cruel and insolent men, yet be content and submit to the will of
God, who takes off the collar of restraint from their tongues and hands; Look
to thy Lord blinde-folded, spitted on, buffeted, scourged, and crucified
between two thieves; If they do these things in a green tree, what shall be
done in the dry? Luke 23.31. 3. By the Spirit of Christ; by 1. Inlightning.


3. We learn this lesson of contentment by the Spirit of Christ, who teaches
us by enlightening the understanding with faith to perceive and discern the
unsearchable riches of Christ; Then as this sight makes the believer have low
thoughts of the best things in this present world, and to count them but loss
and dung in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.8.
So it makes him rest content in all his sufferings, and to think them light in
comparison of that glory hid with Christ in God, which will be revealed to us
at the second coming of Jesus Christ, Romans 8.18. I reckon (says the Apostle)
that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory which shall be revealed in us.

2. 2. By sealing.
The Spirit of Christ works this contentment in us by Obsignation and Sealing
us after we have believed; Ephesians. 1.13, 24. In whom also after ye have believed,
ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
Inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise
of his glory; The Spirit seals to the believer two great privileges.

1. Adoption, Romans 8.16. The Spirit bears witness to our spirits that we are
the children of God.

2. right in Christ to the heavenly inheritance and our future possession; the
assurance of our adoption makes us content to drink of the cup of affliction
given to us by our heavenly Father, and in a like, though no ways equal frame
of a submisse spirit, we say as our Lord the beloved Son of the Father said
both for satisfaction in our behalf, and for an example of submission to us,
Job. 18.11. Shall I not drink of the cup which my Father has given me to
drink? The assurance of our Inheritance makes us content in this time of our
minority to be under the rod: some earnest penny in hand of a great bargain
covenanted by a faithful party, makes men content with a small portion for a
time in the sure expectation of perfecting the full bargain; So the assurance
the children of God have by the Spirit of Christ of their full redemption and
deliverance from all their troubles, makes them in all their troubles, to
rejoice in hope of the glory of God, Romans 5.3.

3. 3. By comforting.
The Spirit works this contentment in the children of God by comforting them
and giving them some first fruits of eternal life, Romans 8.23. Such are, the
sense of Gods love shed abroad in our hearts by the Spirit, Romans 5.5. Peace in
the conscience and the joy of the holy Ghost: 1 These. 1.6. Having received the
Word in much affliction with joy in the holy Ghost: These are like the sweet
refreshing Grapes in the Land of Canaan, whereof Joshua and Caleb brought some
clusters to make the people content with present troubles in the wilderness,
and to encourage them to go to the place of their rest where every thing grew
in great plenty for their full refreshment and satisfaction; The sense of Gods
love makes the child of God content in his lowest estate; Mephibosheth the Son
of Jonathan was unjustly slandered by Zibah, and rashly divested of all his
goods by David, yet was he so affected with joy for the Kings safe return to
dwell in his own house, that he could in calmnesse of spirit dispense with his
own private losses, 2 Samuel 19.30. Mephibosheth said unto the King, Yea, let
Zibah take all, forasmuch as my Lord the King is come again in peace into his
own house; So a Believer is content to suffer contumelies and injuries at all
hands, when the Lord dwells in his soul and gives him peace; the sweetness of
his love expels the bitterness and gall of our afflictions; It is as wine to
the heavy heart, Pro. 31.7. He forgets his poverty, and remembers his misery no
more; David was so affected with the sense of Gods goodness in giving him
peace and rest from his enemies, that he was content to forgive private
injuries, 2 Samuel 19.22. Shall there any man be put to death this day in Israel,
for do not I know that I am King this day of Israel? So the sense of peace with
God in Jesus Christ the peacemaker, makes the children of God content and
obedient to the will of God, Ephesians. 4, 32. Forgiving one another, even as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven you.

4. 4. By strengthening.
The Spirit works our hearts to contentment by strengthening us to bear the
burden of affliction; It is the Apostles prayer to God for the Ephesians, Ephesians.
3.16. That God would grant you according to the riches of his glory, to be
strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner man; and here it is said, I
am able through Christ strengthening me to do all things; whereof in the
strength of his grace we shall speak hereafter.

This Doctrine serves for Admonition, In the day of thy prosperity, Seek not
contentment in earthly things.
neither seek nor place thy contentment in things worldly: Contentment is not
learned in the school of the creature; the most pleasant roses have their own
pricks: Riches are accompanied with thorny cares: Royal Crowns are tinned with
fears and jealousies: Pleasures are deceitful, and have an hook under the
bait; when thy conscience awakes with terror for unjust purchase of them; or
though the purchases be lawful, yet if thine heart smite thee for ingratitude
to God in the possession of them, for abusing of them to pride, riot and
excess, and for not using of them to the relief of the poor; thou shall have
no contentment in them, but the possession of them in unrighteousness or
ingratitude, and the misimploying or not employing of them to a good use, will
augment thy coffeehouse, and in a sad experience thou will be forced to say,
they are comforters of no value: When Belshazzars conscience was awaked with
the sight of the hand writing on the wall; all his plenty of wine, and other
cordials of that kind, all his magnificence, and the smooth speeches of his
Queen and Princes could neither quiet his spirit, nor fasten his joints: In thy
adversity and troubled estate, seek not contentment or ease to thy spirit from
worldly divertisements; these are but as David's playing on the Harp to Saul at
the time of his great distemper, 1 Samuel 16.33. But the evil spirit returned
again: Such poor means may for a time divert thy thoughts, but cure not the
disease and distemper of thy unquiet spirit; they are as a cup of cold water to
an hydropick man, which refreshes him for a moment, but increases his thirst
and pain.

2. to go to the school of Jesus Chaist, Go to the School of Christ to learn
contentment.
that in all our troubles we may learn this necessary and profitable lesson of
solid contentment: Some enclining to a Consumption are easily induced to the
study of Medicine to prevent the symptoms of that distemper: coffeehouse is
a frettig consumption of the spirit, and it is hereditary to us from our first
parents, in whose aggregate sin (to speak so) coffeehouse with their
present condition was an ingredient.

1. makes us pleasing to God who is highly displeased with malcontents at his
Providence; Nehemiah was sore afraid when the King perceived him sad, Because
he knew Kings are jealous of discontented persons, Neh. 2.2. much more is the
King of Kings displeased with them who fret at his dispensations, who in the
right of his supreme dominion may do what he pleases, and as a righteous Judge
is ever holy and righteous in all his procedings toward the children of men.

2. social and pleasing to all men with whom thou have thy conversation in the
world, thou can condole with them in their adversity and rejoice with them in
their prosperity, but the discontented spirit is sullen and surly either when
evil befalls himself or good to his neighbor.

3. is to thee an earnest of that absolute contentment in heaven, and on the
contrary fretting coffeehouse, unless it be broken off by repentance, is no
other but the beginning of the worm that dies not.

As ye have shown us how that profitable lesson of contentment is taught, Helps
to the practice of Contentment.
show us also some helps for furthering us in the practice of it.

1. Break off thy sins by repentance, and be reconciled to God; contentment is
increased, as that of a Pilgrim at the border of his own Country, and
Seafaring man at the entrance of the harbor.

2. Christ to dwell in thy heart by faith, and then nothing can come amiss
that comes with Christ; we make strangers welcome to our house, who come along
with a dear Friend; No affliction is so strange but it will be made welcome
with Christ; Not only are believers content with it, but glory in it; As
courageous Soldiers to be employed in hard service; So did the Apostles when
they were ignominiously beaten, Act. 6.41. Paul and Silas did sing in the
dungeon, Act. 16.14. it was Paul's gloriation, Gal. 6.17. that he bare in his
body the marks of the Lord Jesus; he esteemed them marks of favor and honor
put upon him by his Lord; he gloried in them as a valiant Soldier in the
cicatrice of his wounds; Our Lord brings with him peace to the soul where he
dwells; Peace with God, Romans 5.1. and peace to the conscience which is the Echo
and resound of our peace made in heaven with God; This peace is the health of
the soul, and as a man in bodily health can well comport with course diet for a
time, whereas a sickly man frets and cankers at better entertainment; So a man
that has peace with God and with his own conscience, can comport with the
bread of adversity and water of affliction; But the man that has not this
peace has a fretting of spirit in the midst of his plenty; while there is
laughter in his mouth there is much sorrow in his heart.

3. Labor to be holy in all manner of conversation, for holiness has the
promises of this life and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. The precious
promises of God are the common places out of which faith draws several
arguments of contentment for all our several wants bodily or spiritual; Out of
the bounty of providence the godly man gets supply for his outward condition,
and out of the Fullness of Christ he receives for his inward man grace for
grace.

Lastly, Moderate thy desires after things worldly; Impatient desires to have,
breed much coffeehouse for disappointment, and immoderate desires still to
enjoy what we once have, breeds us much coffeehouse at our losses; Rachels
impotent desires of posterity, bred her so much discontent with the want of
children: Therefore the Apostle exhorts, Heb. 13.5. Let your conversation be
without covetousness, and be content with such things as ye have;
Covetousness is like Hagar, there is no peace in the house to Sarah till she
be cast out, so there is no quietness nor contentment to our spirits until
covetousness be mortified; Moderate therefore your desires after the things of
this world, and the greater shall be your contentment both in your abundance
and in your wants; Covet the best things even the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness, and things worldly shall be added to you; Ye cannot exceed here
in your desires after things heavenly, but your enjoyment in heaven will exceed
all your desires, for it cannot enter into the heart to conceive what God has
prepared for them that love him; To this God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, be
all praise, honor and glory now and for ever, Amen.

Now follows the fourth and last particular to be considered in the words, to
wit, The fourth particular.
the sole and only author of all his ability and strength for doing and
suffering the good will of God: I can do all things (says he) through Christ
which strengthens me. Before I raise the Doctrine, the words would be cleared:

1. What is meant by this strength.

2. Next, Wherefore it is called the strength of Christ. And

3. How it is said he can do all things through Christ which strengthens him.

First, By strength is not meant that infinite power, 1. What is meant by
strength.
wherein Christ is equal with the Father; that mighty power by which in a
sovereign and authoritative way he wrought miracles. Luke 9.73. They were all
amazed at the mighty power of God; by which he subdued all things, and will
raise the dead. Phi. 3.21, Who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is
able to subdue all things. This strength is essential to the Son of God, and
incommunicable to the creatures; the mighty one of Israel puts forth this
strength toward the defense and protection of his own children in time of
danger, but puts it not in them; as a strong man will use his strength for the
defense of them that are weak, but puts not his strength within them: But by
strength is here meant an ability created and infused into the heart of a
believer, whereby he is enabled in such perfection, as is accepted of God in
Christ, for doing and suffering the will of God: It is a strength from Christ
in them, as the Original imports, (...) it is a strength in the innerman, but
from his Spirit. Ephesians. 3.16. strengthened with might by his Spirit.

Secondly, 2. Why it is called the strength of Christ.
It is called the strength of Christ: 1. Because Christ has procured this
strength to us by his merit and intercession. Joh. 14.16. I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever: Our Lords departing out of the world by the death of the Cross, was the
cause procuring to us the comfort and strength of of the Spirit. Joh. 16.17. If
I go not away the comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart I will send
him unto you. 2. Because Christ is the efficient cause, and worker of this
strength in us. 1 Timothy 1.12. I thank Christ Jesus our Lord who has enabled me;
it is the same word which is used here; 2 Timothy 2.1. Be strong in the grace that
is in Christ Jesus, or by Christ Jesus, as the Preposition is frequently used;
as Mat. 5.34. it is rendered by the Heaven. Matthew. 23.20, 21, 22. where it is
five times so used. Romans 12.21. Overcome evil by good: so (...) is the same
with (...), by Christ, who by the efficiency of his Spirit applies to us the
strength of grace procured by the merit of his death.

Thirdly, 3. How a man by the strength of Christ is able to do all things.
As to the third thing to be cleared, How a man is able through the strength of
Christ to do all things, those of the Roman Church understand it thus; That a
renewed man by the grace and strength he receives from Christ, is able to keep
the whole Law perfectly and absolutely in all points and degrees of legal
perfection: to this purpose is that peremptory assertion of the Council of
Trent. Sess. 6. Began. 18. But the Scripture tells us, it was Gods purpose to
save man, not by his own inherent righteousness though wrought in him by
Christ, but by the righteousness of a Mediator. 2 Cor. 5.31. He has made him
to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him: If it were possible for a renewed man to keep the Law, then
might he be justified and saved by the Law; but no man is justified by the Law.
Acts 13.38. Be it known unto you, that through this man is preached unto you
forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are justified from all
things from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Gal. 2.21. If
righteousness be by the Law, then Christ has died in vain. But in a sound
sense the words may be taken three ways.

1. By way of restriction to the particulars spoken of ver. 11, etc. and yet be
content. Thus the general (all things) is restrained. 1 Cor. 9.22. I am made
all things to all men, which must be restrained to the particulars spoken of,
to wit, his provident condescension to all things indifferent to men of diverse
conditions.

2. They may be understood By way of reduplication; Joh. 1.9. Christ
enlightneth every man that comes into the world; that is, every one that is
enlightened, is enlightened by him; for there be many that never were enlightened
with that special illumination of faith: So it is said, 1 Timothy 4.10. God is
the Savior of all men, specially of those that believe, that is, all men who
are saved and preserved, either by a general providence from temporal misery,
or believers that are saved in a special manner by a Mediator from eternal
misery, they are all saved by God; and in another sense it cannot be
understood: for many are not preserved from bodily and temporal evils, and
far more are not saved and preserved from eternal misery; for the special
salvation is only of believers, and all men have not faith, 2 These. 3.2.

3. in a righteousness and perfection Evangelical, so far forth as God pardons
his sins, accepts in Christ his weak endeavors, and covers the imperfections
of his best performances with the perfect righteousness of Christ, and so he
walks answerable to the Gospel that requires truth and sincerity in our
obedience, he is able through grace to walk without offense in his outward
conversation; in his purpose of heart he is willing to live honestly, Heb.
13.18. and endeavors to keep a conscience void of offense toward God and man,
Acts 24.16. But to do all things in a legal perfection he cannot, because such
a perfection is only to be sought in Christ the mediator, who was made of God
unto us righteousness in the Covenant of Grace.

The strength of a believer, A believers strength is from the Lord Jesus.
is from the Lord Jesus. Phil. 1.29. Unto you it is given in the behalf of
Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for his sake. Our
strength also for doing is from the Lord Jesus, Joh. 15.4. As the branch cannot
bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine, no more can ye, except ye
abide in me: Without sap from the root the branch cannot bring forth fruit, so
without influence of strength from Christ we cannot bring forth the fruits of
holiness and righteousness. Joh. 15.5. He that abides in me and I in him,
the same brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do nothing: Our Lord
speaks to men renewed, his holy Apostles, that without him they have no ability
or strength to do any thing: Phil. 1.11. Being filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God. Our
fruits and works of righteousness are wrought by us through the Spirit and
strength of Christ, and are accepted of God through the merit of Christ, in
whom alone, both our persons, Ephesians. 1.6. and services are accepted, 1 Pet. 2.5.

As the strength of a believer for doing is from Christ, so also for suffering
and for bearing every burden God in his good providence lays on him; Our
strength to stand out against the violence of temptations from within us, is
all from Christ. 2 Cor. 12.9. The Lord said unto me (says Paul in the day of
temptation) My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in
weakness; as the strength of the foundation is made manifest by supporting all
the stones built upon it; so the strength of Christ is declared to be a perfect
strength in upholding all the living stones built upon him; though the
tempestuous winds of temptation may shake them, yet are they supported by the
strength of that precious corner stone laid in Zion, the Lord Jesus Christ: So
our strength to stand out against the assaults of temptations from without, is
all from Jesus Christ. 2 Timothy 4.16.17. At my first answer no man stood with me,
but all men forsook me: notwithstanding the Lord stood with me and strengthened
me: Here was a sore trial; Paul is brought before Nero or his Officers, fierce
and cruel persecutors of the Christian faith, like Lions roaring after their
prey, yet that which grieved him most was this, all men forsook him: this
opened the mouths of persecutors, to reproach him with a singularity of pride
and wilfulness, that would stand to his own opinion when all men were ashamed
of that way; It wounded his zealous spirit, to see the Son of God and the
Gospel disgraced by their fearful defection at the time they should chiefly
have given a countenance and testimony to the truth: he was not a little
grieved to see the levity of fair professors: at first when he came to Rome,
they flockt out to him as far as Appii forum, Acts 27.15. but in a day of
trial they all forsook him; notwithstanding the Lord who will not fail nor
forsake, stood with him and strengthened him to stand out against this sore
trial; when no man did own him nor his cause, yet God did own both; Not only
are the children of God strengthened through Christ to bear afflictions, but to
overcome in all their sufferings, Romans 8.35, 36, 37. We are accounted as sheep
for the slaughter; Nay, In all these we are more then conquerors through him
that loved us; Faith in Christ made them strong and courageous, and not to
succumb to the temptation for fear of death; by constant suffering to the death
they were more then conquerors; Sometimes by their sufferings they have even
conquered the hearts of Persecutors to the love of the truth; Paul's sufferings
were active on the hearts of some of Caesar's household, Phil. 1.13. Tertullian.
Tertullian In his Apologetick for the Christians says, that the more
exquisite and cruel the torments were against Christians, in regard of their
courage and constancy, it proves the greater allurement to beholders for
embracing the Christian faith; yea, though they have not conquered the hearts
of their enemies, yet they overcame their consciences by the force of truth and
strength in suffering, and rendered them self-condemned.

The truth of this Doctrine does also appear from these Reasons.

1. From the mystical Union between Christ and Believers; As the members of
his body have influence of life from him their head in the beginning of
Sanctification; So in the course of it they have influence of strength and
vigor for doing duties; as the ointment was first poured on Aarons head, and
from thence ran down to the skirts of his garments; So together with the other
graces of the Spirit the gift of strength was in a large measure given to
Christ the head of his Church, and Of his Fullness we receive grace for grace;
Of him we get not only the life of grace, together with a renewed power and
strength for doing, but also we receive strength in doing; Not only he gives
an ability for walking in his ways, but strengthens us in the act it self of
obeying his will. Ezekiel. 11.19, 20. I will put a new spirit within you, and I
will give them an heart of flesh, that they may walk in my statutes: Not only
in the Covenant of grace is promised ability and power to do, but also actual
strength in doing and exercising that power. Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes: for doing acts of moral
fortitude and valor, there is not only required courage of spirit and
resolution to stand against difficulties and peril, but also actual courage and
strength in the encountering with the same; without this men of courageous
spirits succumb in conflicts. Psalm 76.5. The stout-hearted are spoiled, they
have slept their sleep, and none of the men of might have found their hands:
much more in our wrastlings not only against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickedness in high places, Ephesians. 6.12. is required
both Christian ability and courage of spirit, and also actual strength from
Christ our head, that we may in the evil day stand firm in the faith: This
strength is derived to all the members of his mystical body from Christ their
head by his Spirit; the union is by the spirit which is the bond proceeding
from Christ toward us, and works faith, whereby his members are united to
him. 1 Cor. 6.19. He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit: In like manner
our Communion with Christ and his strength is by the Spirit, who communicates
strength to us. Ephesians. 3.16. Strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner
man.

2. Christ's inhabitation in believers by his spirit. Joh. 6.56. He that eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him: The Spirit of
Christ dwells in the believers heart, as his sanctuary wherein he is
worshipped and found; and the believer dwells in him as his souls delight and
rest: now it is certain that the Spirit of Christ will defend and protect the
soul where he dwells, that though the believer be often times molested with
temptations, yet is he many times preserved from the bondage and power of the
temptation. The Angels that lodged with Lot, Genesis 19. defended him against the
violence of those vile men of Sodom; so it is the Angel of the Covenant, Jesus
Christ, who defends by his strength the believer, against the sore and violent
temptations from his own corruption and the world; It is the Spirit of Christ
that strengthens believers to stand firm in the love and profession of the
truth against crafty or violent seducers. 1 John 4.4. Ye are of God little
children, and have overcome them, because greater (that is mightier) is he that
is in you, then he that is in the world.

3. interest and propriety Christ has to believers, as his redeemed ones,
purchased by the price of his blood; he will by his strength desend his own
subjects: It is the honor of a mighty King and Lord, to help and defend his
subjects from their enemies; thus God is glorified in his power and strength,
when he upholds his weak and afflicted servants in a day of trial. Isa. 25.3,
4. Therefore shall the strong people glorify thee, the City of the terrible
nations shall fear thee, for thou have been a strength to the poor, a strength
to the needy in his distress, when the blast of the terrible ones is as astorm
against the wall: the skilfullnesse of the builder, and the strength of the
wall is best seen, when the house stands firm against a great storm; so the
glory of the Lord in strengthening his weak children, is most conspicuous in a
tempestuous time: From this ground of right and property, the Lord encourages
his people against fears and troubles. Isa. 41.14. Fear not thou worm Jacob,
and ye men of Israel, I will help thee says the Lord and thy redeemer the holy
one of Israel. Isa. 43.1. Fear not O Israel, for I have redeemed thee, I have
called thee by thy name, thou art mine: upon this ground it is that believers
run to God in time of trouble for comfort and strength. Psalm. 119.94. I am
thine, save me: Dan. 9.18. Behold our desolations, and the City that is called
by thy name.

Lastly, from our interest also in Christ; the believer is espoused to him as
an husband, 2 Cor. 11.2. As the wife has interest and communion in her
husbands goods, so have we in the gifts of our Lord and husband Jesus Christ;
he is made of God unto us, wisdom and righteousness, and sanctification and
redemption: Elkanah a kind husband, comforted and encouraged Hannah in the day
of her great trouble and reproach, 1 Samuel 1.8. so the Lord Jesus comfort and
encourages believers in a time of trouble. David by power and strength rescued
his wives that were carried away by his enemies, 1 Samuel 30.18. So our Lord and
husband recovereth believers out of the snare of temptation, by renewing in
them the acts of repentance, and strengthening them to break asunder the cords
of iniquity; thus he recovered Peter with a look of power piercing into his
heart; he rescueth also his oppressed servants out of the hands of oppressors:
Isa. 54.4, 5. Fear not for thou shall not be ashamed, for thy maker is thine
husband; the Lord of hosts is his Name.

Qu. Means by which the Spirit strengthens.
It is true, the Spirit of Christ is the worker of our strength, both for doing
and also in doing; but by what means does the Spirit strengthen us to withstand
outward and inward temptations?

Ans. 1. By strengthening our faith in the Promises; the stronger our faith is,
we have the more strength and courage to stand against temptations: It was a
great trial for Abraham to forsake his own Country and kinsfolks, and to go he
knew not whither; yet being strong in the faith, he overcame the temptations of
many difficulties and discouragements: faith to the promise of a better
inheritance strengthened his heart against all difficulties. Heb. 11.8. The
offering up of his son Isaac was a great trial; many temptations had he from
flesh and blood to the contrary, yet his faith to the promise strengthened him
against them; for he believed that God was able to raise up his son Isaac
from the dead, Heb. 11.17.19. As in the natural body strength is conveyed from
the head to the several members by the nerves, so strength is derived from
Christ our head to all his members by faith.

2. The Lord strengthens us against temptations, by putting his fear in our
hearts: It is said 2 Chronicles 23.19. Jehojadah set porters at the gates of the
house of the Lord, that none who was unclean should enter; so the fear of God
is a strong porter to hold out temptations from forcing our will: It restrains
from secret sins; How can I do this (said Joseph) and sin against God? from
wronging our neigbour though no creature should know it. Lev. 19.14. Thou shall
not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the blind, but shall fear
thy God: It strengthens to resist temptations, though no creature would or
durst control us; Nohemiah was a governor of great power and authority, and
might without controlment have been chargeable to the people, as the former
governors had been, but so did not he, because of the fear of God, Neh. 5.15.
Ob. But fear weakens the heart, and how can the heart be strengthened by it?
Ans. It is true, a faithless fear weakens the heart in an hour of temptation,
so that it yields; Pilat's fear to displease Caesar, made him a weak Judge in
yielding to the importunate cries of a misled multitude, and for fear of man to
condemn the innocent Son of God; but the godly and awful fear of God,
strengthens the spirit of a man that he stands out against the temptation of
humane and worldly fear. Exodus 1.17. The midwives feared God, and did not as
the King of Egypt commanded them.

3. by the sense of his love in our hearts, and by our love to himself. 2 Timothy
1.7. God has not given us the spirit of fear, but the spirit of power, of love
and of a sound mind. The spirit of power and of love stablisheth the heart
against temptations: The sense of the love of Christ in carrying our sorrows
on the Cross, is a cordial to strengthen our hearts against the bitterness of
the cup of affliction; Shall not we taste of the cup whereof our Lord drank the
drugg to the bottom? the sense of his love in suffering for us, strengthens our
hearts cheerfully to suffer what is his good will; the Lord strengthens us
against temptations and difficulties, by kindling in our hearts love to
himself; Jacob's love to Rachel strengthened and encouraged him against the
heat of the day and cold of the night; so our love to Christ will strengthen us
against all temptations and discouragements; his love covers the multitude of
our infirmities, and therefore many waters should not quench our love to him.

4. by a lively hope and assurance of victory in and over all temptations and
enemies. Genesis 3.15. The seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the Serpent;
as our Lord did this in his own person, so by his Spirit he does it in his
members. Romans 16.20. The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet
shortly: Assured hope of victory is a powerful mean to strengthen the heart in
the day of conflict; hope is the Anchor that stablisheth our hearts amidst all
the waves of afflictions, against outward temptations in the world from cruel
oppressors. Jer. 31.16, 17. Thus says the Lord, refrain thy voice from
weeping, and thine eyes from tears, for thy work shall be rewarded says the
Lord, and they shall come again from the land of the enemies, and there is hope
in thine end says the Lord, that thy children shall come again to their own
border: hope strengthens the heart in time of fainting under present great
troubles. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. and it strengthens the heart against the inward
disquietnesse of spirit. Psalm. 43.5. Why art thou disquieted within me, O my
soul; hope in God, for I shall yet praise him.

This Doctrine serves for Admonition to the children of God, Depend not on
thine own strengtht in the prrformance of any duty.
Seeing all our strength for doing and suffering comes from Jesus Christ our
head; Go never to any commanded duty or against any temptation in the
confidence of thy own strength; It is not enough thou have an ability given
thee of God for acting, but thou must also have actual strength in the acting:
Though the seeds of grace be sown in the heart at our regeneration, yet the
fruits are not brought forth for Gods glory and our comfort, until the Lord
blow upon the seed-bed planted by his own hand, Can. 4.16. Blow upon my Garden
(says the Spouse) that the Spices thereof may flow out; Let my Beloved come
into his garden and eat of his pleasant fruits; as fire under the ashes gives
out no light until it be blown upon; so grace received does not exert it self
in any gracious act except the Lord blow on it; In all thy encounters with
temptations do as David did in his going out against Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.45. I
come against thee in the Name of the Lord; It was Peter's fault that he was
confident in his own strength, that though all men shall be offended because of
thee, yet will I never be offended, said he, Mat. 26.33. but in the hour of
temptation his own strength failed him, Mat. 26.74.

Obj. Three causes why the children of God succumb in one temptation and stand
in another.
What makes the strength of Gods children to abate in the hour of temptation,
that at one time they resist great temptations, and at another time they
succumb to lesser temptations; Peter at the voice of a silly Damsel denies
his Lord, but at another time before the Council of Priests and Rulers
confesses him, notwithstanding all their threatenings. Act. 4.

Answ. There be three Causes specially of this abatement.

1. A too deep sense of the evil feared in the creature, or a vehement desire
of the apparent good in the creature; Excess of fear benums and oppresses the
spirits of men that it is not active to withstand the temptation, but becomes
dull and passive to close with the temptation; Abraham's fear weakened his
strength of spirit, and made him dissemble twice in the court of Egypt and
Gerar; David's fear weakened his courage, and made him dissemble and counterfeit
himself mad before Achish King of Gath, 1 Samuel 23.13. And the vehement desire
of good in the creature does so exhaust the spirit that it becomes weak to
resist the temptations, Rachels vehement desire after posterity exposed her to
the temptations of coffeehouse with her own husband, and of envy at her
sisters condition.

2. Vain confidence of our own wit, and dexterity to use and manage grace
received, provokes God to suspend his assisting grace, and the supply of his
Spirit for strengthening us in the act, as is evident in Peter's weakness and
yielding to the temptation in the denial of his Lord.

3. Neglect of the means makes our strength to abate; Prayer is a special
means whereby we implore strength from God in an hour of temptation, Mat.
26.41. Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation; When Moses held up his
hands, Israel prevailed, and when he let down his hands Amalek prevailed, Exo.
17.11. So when we become negligent of prayer, our corruption prevails, and we
succumb to the temptation; Neglect of prayer is the obstructing of our
intelligence and correspondence with heaven from whence only comes our help in
the hour of temptation; For our adversary the devil takes the opportunity to
assail us when he perceives there is no intercourse between us and the Captain
of our salvation, by prayer from us, and by supply of the spirit from him;
Neglect of hearing and reading the Word makes our strength to abate; The Word
is the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. and the man who has no care to hide Gods
Word in his heart is like a naked Soldier without his weapons exposed to the
fury and violence of every temptation; The Word of God is both the seed of the
new life, and the milk, whereby it is entertained, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. when the
children of God become negligent of hearing and reading the Word of God, they
fall into a consumption of their spiritual vigor and strength, like young
children growing weak, and pining away by their abstinence from the breast.

It serves for a ground of Exhortation; Go to Christ for strength in new
duties an new temptations.
Let us he stirred up to go to him for renewed strength in new duties and in
new temptations, and that upon these motives.

1. Because it is not in man's power to direct his steps in his bodily motion,
Jer. 10.23. far less in his spiritual course toward heaven, which requires a
more special help, and therefore with the Apostle 2 These. 2.17. we should pray
that the Lord would stablish us in every good word and work.

2. There is a necessity of a new supply of strength for every new act, because
our understandings wax dim, and therefore have need of a new touch of that
eye salve spoken of, Rev. 3.17. as prospective glasses are wiped, whenever of
new we make use of them; So when ever we go to hear or read the Word we have
great need that the dimnesse cast up by our foul affections may be wiped away;
and to pray with David, Psa. 119.27. Make me to understand the way of thy
precepts: Our will and affections though sometime in former duties they be
bended and fixed, yet like the paces of a clock in a short time they run out,
and therefore in new duties we have need of renewed strength to get our
straggling affections retired, bended upward and set on God and our duty.

Obj. Means to be used to obtain new strength.
What means shall we use for attaining strength in an hour of temptation.

Ans. 1. Be humble under the sense of thy own weakness,

2. Be not so much affected with the sense either of temptation or of thy own
weakness, as with faith into the strength of Christ; By faith we draw strength
from Christ; Faith in the Invisible God did strengthen Moses to overcome his
temptation from present and visible fears, Hebr. 11.27. Faith in Christ and
hope of the rich recompense of reward strengthened. Moses to bear the reproach
of Christ, Heb. 11.26.

3. Prayer is a special means to obtain strength from God, Psa. 138.3. In the
day when I cried thou answeredst me, and strengthnedst me with strength in my
soul; the Lord gave unto him a return of his prayer by putting strength and
courage in his soul to stand in the hour of temptation, 2 Cor. 12.9. Paul
prayed again and again, God heard him and perfected his strength in his
weakness; Go to God for strength in the beginning of a Temptation. When Peter
began to sink then he began to cry unto the Lord; The Disciples in the lake did
not awake our Lord before the Ship was full of waves; Delay to run to God for
strength in the beginning of a temptation makes it stronger and us weaker.

Here is ground of comfort and encouragement to a believer trembling under the
sense of his own weakness, Comforts against our wickedness and the strength
of temptations.
and under the fear of strong and violent temptations; Comfort thy self with
these following considerations.

1. Consider, thy Lord and head Jesus Christ has an infinite strength; Jesus
Christ our Lord is called the Almighty, Rev. 1.8. and 15.3. Out of this
infinite strength thy Lord is able to furnish thee in a time of trial with
proportionable strength against all the assaults of the devil on all hands; As
thy adversary renews his force, so thy Lord can and will renew strength, 2 Corinthians. 1.5. As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also
abounds by Christ, 2 Cor. 4.16. For which cause we faint not, but though cur
outward man perish yet the inward man is renewed day by day: Though affections
may weaken the outward man, yet the inner man grows in strength from day to
day by a continued influence from Christ his head; As our Lord is of an
infinite so of an everlasting strength; He is Jehovah our righteousness, Jer.
23.6. and In the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, Isa. 26.4. his strength
is not as Sampsons which departed for a time, but as he lives for ever, so his
strength endures for ever. Isa. 40.28. Have thou not known, have thou not heard
that the everlasting God the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth
faints not, neither is weary? Though thou faint and weary oftentimes under
thy burden, yet comfort thy self in this, thy Lord faints not, he wearieth not
to bear thee up with arms of everlasting strength, he can strengthen thee by
his spirit in the inward man, not only to patience for a time, but also to all
long-suffering with joyfulnesse, Col. 1.11.

2. Consider the styles he takes to himself, rock whereupon believers are built
and established, Mat. 16.18. A strong rock to defend; a high rock to which
neither the power nor subtlety of hell can reach; a living rock furnished with
all things necessary and comfortable to believers that in a day of trouble run
to him, and abide in him; He is called the Captain of the Hosts of the Lord,
Josh. 5.14. He has a directing power over the good Angels to minister for thy
good, and he has a restraining power over devils and wicked men; He
restrains Satan from doing any thing against the life of his Servant, Job
2.6. He puts a hook in the nostriss of Senacherib, and forces him to leave the
pursuit of his people, Isa. 37.29. He restrained Laban from speaking an evil
word to Jacob at the time he intended much mischief, Genesis 31.24. He restrained
Abimelech from wronging Sarah, Genesis 20.3. The Lord Jesus Christ is called the
Captain of our salvation, Heb. 2.10. As Soldiers take courage and strength
from looking to their Captains leading them on against the Enemy, so a believer
in a day of temptation looks to Christ and gets strength. Psa. 34.5. They
looked unto him, and were lightened, and their faces were not ashamed, Heb.
12.3. Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself,
lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds: The look of faith to Christ does
strengthen a Believer with comfort from the merit of his sufferings, that has
taken away the course and wrath which is the soul of suffering, and also does
strengthen a believer from his example with patience and submission to the will
of God; for when he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself to him
that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2.23. It is a great comfort in all our
fightings to consider we have such a Captain, excellent in conduct; He will not
put his new and untrained Soldiers to hard duties at the first; when he
delivered his people out of Egypt, Exodus 13.17. He led them not through the way
of the Land of the Philistines, lest the people should repent when they see the
war, and this leader was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.9. our skillful and compassionate
Captain puts not new converts lately come out of Egypt to hard trials at first,
but after he has trained them up in some bickerings against less temptations,
he sets them out against the fierce assaults of Satan, the world, and the
flesh; and when the sore trials come; Praise him in his wisdom that sent not
the greater until he had trained thee up in lesser trials; And when thou come
to the Shock thy Captain will send a new supply, 2 Samuel 10.11. Joab could say
to his Brother Abishai: If the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then
will I come and help thee; Much more may thou be confident that thy elder
brother the Captain of thy salvation will help thee against thy spiritual
enemies that are too strong for thee.

3. Consider, Thy Lord as he is able, so is he willing to strengthen and help
thee; For his promise is the revelation of his will, Isaiah 40.31. They that
wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, in the Original it is, They
shall change their strength; Like Soldiers put on hard service and relieved by
others, having order from their Commander in chief; So the Captain of our
salvation Jesus Christ in time of a sore conflict sends forth his Spirit with a
fresh supply of strength and comfort to the inner man, Isaiah 41.10. Fear thou
not, for I am with thee, I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, I will
uphold thee with the right hand of my Righteousness, Psalm. 37.24. Though a
good man fall, yet shall he not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth
him with his hand: The Prophet speaks of falling into temptations, and tells
us that it is the Lord that by his strength upholds up that we fall not under
the power of temptation; though the temptation make an assault upon them, yet
they fall not under it.

4. Consider his practice in helping and strengthening his Servants in time of
need, 1 Samuel 30.6. David was greatly distressed, for the people spoke of
stoning him, but David encouraged himself in the Lord his God; By faith he
received courage from God who has promised never to fail nor to forsake; He
strengthened his faithful witness Stephen against the malice and persecution
of all his Antagonists; They were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit
by which he spoke; he strengthened Paul in a time when many enemies appeared,
but few or no Friends, 2 Timothy 4.17. No man stood with me, notwithstanding the
Lord stood mith me and strengthened me; To this purpose much is spoken in the
Martyrologies, and records of the strength and courage of blessed Martyrs
wonderfully supported amidst cruel torments to the astonishment of tormentors,
and the admiration of all beholders; In the third persecution under the
Emperor Hadrian, Faustinus and Jobita Citizens of the City of Biria suffered
with so great patience and strength of spirit, that one Celicerius at the sight
thereof cried out with these words, Vere magnus Deus Christian^rum, Verily
great is the God of the Christians: In the eighth Persecution under Valerianus
the blessed Martyr Lawrence being laid on a hot grate of Iron, after he had
lain for some space boiling in the fire, supported by an extraordinary strength
of spirit, he cried out, O Tyrant, this side is roasted enough, turn over the
other: At the sight of his patience and courage a Roman Soldier then present
was converted to the Christian Faith, and desired to be baptized of Lawrence;
for which he was called before the Judge, was scourged and afterward beheaded;
Tertullian in his Apology for Christians says, Tertullian.
that their patience and courage in suffering, which Heathens and Persecutors
called obstinacy, was a real and magisterial instruction of many in the
Christian faith.

It serves for Instruction; Seek his face and his strength. Psalm. 105.4. Seek
ye the Lord and his strength, seek his face evermore; seek first the favor of
God, and reconciliation in the blood of the Mediator, then may thou be
confident of strength and supply in an hour of temptation.

Ob. But does not the Lord protect even wicked men many times, though they be
not reconciled to him?

Answ. The Lord grants unto them a general protection in a time of outward
troubles; as a Judge guarding and protecting a condemned malefactor from the
violence of private avengers of blood, until the day he be brought forth to
public execution; but he protects those, with whom he is reconciled, by a
special protection of grace, as a father does his weak and sick children, until
they be confirmed in health and strength: The Lord protects them sometimes from
falling under the power of a temptation, and at other times if they fall, he
restores them by repentance, that they lie not and live not under the bondage
of temptation.

2. Go about it with all diligence, decline it not out of fear of personal
weakness; if thou meet thy God in the way of obedience to his call, thy God
shall meet thee with strength at the time of thy greatest need; Moses out of
fear of weakness at first declined that charge to speak unto Pharaoh, yet he
no sooner went about it actively, but God furnished him with strength in the
discharge of it: Stephen did not decline a dispute with men of contentious and
violent spirits when God called him to it, and the Lord filled him with such a
strong measure of wisdom that they were not able to answer him, Acts 6.
according to that promise of our Lord, Luke 12.11, 12. When they bring you into
Synagogues, unto Magistrates and Princes, take ye no thought, how or what ye
shall answer, or what ye shall say: Our Lord does not prohibit all
premeditation of what we should speak, but only an anxious solicitude that
perturbs the judgment, and disables men in a day of trial, when men will trust
nothing to a divine assistance, unless they be very strong in their studied
preparations and defenses: It is our best course to wait on the Lord, who in
his own due time will give strength and comfort when our extremity is greatest;
some Martyrs have complained heavily to God against themselves, for want of
courage in the time of their imprisonment; yet in the day they were taken out
to the place of execution, they no sooner saw the fire, but incontinent they
cried out with joy, venit, venit, the spirit is come, he is come.

Lastly, Directions to conquerors in any temptations.
or after thou have done any service acceptable to the Lord,

First, Give all praise to the Lord, and say with the Church, Psalm. 44.3. They
got not their land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm
save them, but thy right hand and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance,
because thou had a favor unto them: Have thou at any time resisted a strong
and violent temptation? bless God who girdeth thee with strength; it may be in
these sad times thou may say of thy self as Jacob said of his son Joseph,
Genesis 48.23. The archers have sorely grieved thee, and shot at thee, and hated
thee, yet praise thy Lord who gave strength and courage to thy spirit, that
thou may say also from the experience of Gods assisting and strengthening
presence; Thy bow abode in strength, and the arms of thine hand were made
strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; It may be thou have stood, when
others by all appearance stronger then thou have fallen; bless thy God who by
his strength only made thee to differ from others in an hour of temptation: The
weakness of God is stronger then men, 1 Cor. 1.25. Gods strength in his
weakness is far above the strength of moral abilities in men that are
counted the able men in this world: It may be at one time thou have resisted a
mighty temptation, when at another time thou have fallen foully under the power
of a lesser; bless God in his strength, who makes thee to differ from thy
self, who art by nature weak and ready at all times to be carried about with
every wind of temptation.

2. be not secure, but watch and pray that thou be not led into a new
temptation: Satan watches for a new opportunity from thy security or pride of
thy former victory; he departed from the Captain of our salvation but for a
season, Luke 4. though he had no hope to prevail by his temptations; thou may
be sure though he be repulsed by thee at one time, and put from possession, yet
thou can never put him from obsession and molesting thee with assaults; for
he thinks so long as his correspondent thy corruption is within thee, possibly
he may get entrance and prevail: It was a good and seasonable counsel of the
Prophet to the King of Israel after his late victory over the Assyrians, 1
Kings 20.21, 22. The Prophet came to the King of Israel and said unto him, Go,
strengthen thy self, and mark, and see what thou do, for at the return of the
year the King of Syria will come up against thee: So say I; Still strengthen
thy self in the Lord, mark and observe the approaches of temptation, thy enemy
will rally his forces again, and come not only at the return of a new year, but
at the return of a day, or a night, yea of an hour. Now unto him that is able
to keep you from falling, and to present you faultlesse before the presence of
his glory with exceeding joy; To the only wise God our Savior, be glory and
majesty, dominion and power now and for ever. Amen.

Perseverance in GRACE through CHRIST.
PHIL. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good
work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.


AS regeneration, and the beginning of sanctifying grace, so perseverance in
grace received, Perseverance a peculiar privilege procured by the death of
Christ to the Elect.
and the continuance of a renewed and gracious disposition in believers, is a
special privilege of the Covenant of grace procured to the Elect by the death
of the mediator Jesus Christ. Luke 1.73 74. In which words the grace of
Justification in our delivery from all our spiritual enemies; The grace of new
obedience (to serve the Lord) and the grace of perseverance (to serve him all
the days of our life) are reckoned up together, as privileges and benefits
promised in the Covenant of grace, and confirmed by an oath of God to Abraham,
and to all believers, his children according to the promise.

In the words we have two main points considerable: 1. The Author of
Perseverance, In the words two points.
he which has begun the good work in you, will perform it. 2. The certainty
of Perseverance in the grace received; in these words, being confident of this
very thing.

The Author of their Perseverance and performing the good work of grace, is
God, to whom the Apostle gives thanks, verse. 3. for calling the Philippians to
the fellowship of the Gospel, by preaching whereof, the Lord had begun in them
a good work of grace, and of inward communion with Jesus Christ.

Perseverance is the free gift of God alone, Perseverance the free gift of God.
Hos. 2.19. I will betroth thee unto me for ever in loving kindness and in
mercies. 1 Cor. 1.8. The Lord Jesus shall also confirm you unto the end, that
ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. Heb. 2.10. It became
him in bringing many sons into glory, to make the Captain of their salvation
perfect through sufferings; Our election to glory is of Gods free love the
decree, and actual sending of Christ to suffer for us, and in the end to bring
us to that glory, is also of free love, Joh. 3.16. but we get a right and title
to that glory only by the merit of his sufferings; by his Spirit he leads us in
the way of Sanctification and brings us in the end to that promised
inheritance; by his merit in our Justification we get jus ad rem, a title and
claim to the heavenly inheritance; in our Sanctification and Perseverance we
get the first fruits and the earnest; and when our Sanctification is perfected
at the end of our life, we get jus in re, actual possession, and all this is
through the merit of Christ, and the efficacy of his Spirit, for he is both the
author and finisher of our faith. Heb. 12.2.

Reasons for confirming this doctrine are, for of him are all things, and we (to
wit believers and renewed persons) are his workmanship created unto good works.
Ephesians. 2.10. The new heart and the new spirit are his free gift, Ezekiel. 36.26. As
the new Creature depends on God in the production and being of it, so also in
the conservation and continuance of it; for as he upholdeth all things by the
word of his power, Heb. 1.3. so by the power of his grace he keeps the new
creature, 1 Pet. 1.5. Ye are kept by the power of God through faith unto
salvation. Our Lord and great High Priest in our behalf prays to the father
for our perseverance, Joh 17.15. Father keep them in thy name and power; It
were needless to pray unto God for perseverance, if it were not of Gods free
gift, but of man's power to persevere; The Apostle also prays to God for it, 1
These. 5.23. I pray God your whole spirit, soul and body, be preserved
blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. 3. Thanks are given to God
for the grace of perseverance. Iud. 24. God alone who establishes, and
preserves us in an hour of temptation, and so makes us to persevere. 2 These.
3.3. The Lord is faithful, who will stablish you, and keep you from evil.

This doctrine serves for admonition, Let no man depend on his grace received.
seeing God is the Author of perseverance, let no man rest on the beginnings of
Sanctification as if grace once received or begun, Sanctification could
preserve and continue it self; No, the creature cannot create it self, no more
can it by its own power keep and conserve it self in a being; it is not the
first gale and blowing of the wind that will continue a ship in her course, if
the wind do not continue, there is no progress; There must not only be a begun,
but a continued influx of water for continuing the motion of the Mil-wheel, so
the breathings of the Spirit of God must be continued upon our souls; Otherwise
we advance not in the course of Sanctification, notwithstanding our fair and
specious beginnings; if the Spirit of God withdraw his breathing and influence,
we are as a ship under sail, presently in a dead calm: As a musical instrument,
though well tuned, sounds not when the skilful player withdraws his hand: so
a heart, though well set in the work of regeneration by the finger of the
spirit, yet in its actings cannot sound forth to the praises of his grace, if
God withold his assisting grace: Yea the Angels, who stood not in the truth,
and also our first Parent Adam received grace of God in a large measure, yet
when it was left to their own keeping, they both lost it and themselves.

For Exhortation: Go to God for a new supply of grace.
go to God for assistance, and a new supply of grace, 1. Because we are not
able to guide our selves, and continue in a course of well-doing without his
assisting grace, Joh. 15.5. without me ye can do nothing: Jer. 10.23. It is not
in man that walks to direct his steps; Man cannot without a guiding and
overruling providence set down one foot after another in his bodily motion,
far less in his spiritual course toward heaven and happiness. Psalm. 73.23. The
steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord. because he has promised to renew
strength to them that faint. Prove. 8.20. I lead (says the wisdom of the
father) in paths of righteousness. Jer. 31.9. I will cause them to walk by the
rivers of waters, in a straight war, wherein they shall not stumble; It is
said, I will lead them with supplications; that is, in all the acts of piety,
taking one special part of piety for all the duties thereof; This leading of
us, and our perseverance, either in a gracious disposition or in actings, is
all of his free and fatherly love, Israel says the Lord. 3. The dear children
of God pray for this assisting and leading grace of God. Psalm. 5 8. Psalm 27.11.
Teach me thy way O Lord, and lead me in a plain path. not only are we ignorant
of the way of righteousness, and have need of the grace of faith and
illumination, but our will is froward, and our affections impotent, therefore
there is a necessity they be set on God and his will, and then led by his
assisting grace in the course of obedience. Psalm. 119.5. O that my ways were
directed to keep thy statutes. Because the children of God (from faith into the
promise, and their own experience of begun graces) have been confident of a
leading and guiding grace in the course of Sanctification, Psalm. 73.24. Thou
shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory: Psalm.
23.3. He leads me in the paths of righteousness for his names sake. Psalm. He
will be our guide even unto death. 5. There is a necessity for thee to go to
God for a renewed assistance, so often as thou renewest thy duty, because our
heart is very unstable, soon and easily drawn away from thoughts of God, and
our duty. Therefore we have great need to pray that our hearts may be
established by grace, for continuing in gracious actings according to the good
and acceptable will of God; And that we be not like unto some foolish strangers
in their through-fare, taken up with the sight and esteem of some pleasant toys
by the way, whereby they both spend their time and moneys that should have
carried them forward to their own country, upon things unnecessary in the way;
Therefore go to God for grace to settle thine heart upon himself and his
goodness, and to keep it fixed and unmoved in the time of thy pilgrimage and
through fare amidst the inveigling and intangling pleasures of this world, and
pray with David that the Lord would uphold and establish thee by his free
Spirit. Psalm. 51.12.

Quest.

Answ. 1. Consider the necessity of perseverance, Mat. 24.12, The means of
perseverance
13. Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold; but he
that shall endure to the end, the same shall be saved; he that endures in love
to God and to his truth, in a time wherein God is dishonored, and his truth
oppressed by iniquity and violence, the same shall be saved in the day of the
Lord; as there is a necessity of perseverance in our active, so in our passive
obedience and patient suffering the good will of God. Heb. 10.36. Jam. 1.12.
Blessed is the man that endures temptation. Heb. 12 7. If ye endure
chastening, God dwells with you as with sons. 2. Set God and his word always
before thine eyes. Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me, because he
is at my right hand, I shall not be moved: when we set him before us in his
rich and free mercy, in his almighty power and unchangeable truth, we are not
moved in a time of temptation, to unbelief, despair or impatience. Psalm. 18.21,
22. I have not wickedly departed from my God for all his Judgments were before
me: he set Gods Judgments and Testimonies before him, as his rule, and this
kept him from departing wickedly from his God, though the dearest of Gods
children depart out of the way in much weakness, like as weak children going
toward their father, may through a violent wind against them be driven from the
straight path, yet they do it not out of wicked wilfulness; so in Gods children
there may be a departure out of weakness from the course of godliness for a
time, but never out of wickedness from the purpose of Godliness. 3. Entertain
the fear of God in thy heart, bridle whereby God moderates and overrules all
affections. Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me. Work out your salvation in fear and trembling. 4. Look before
you to that rich recompense of reward: Our Lord for the joy that was set before
him endured the cross, Heb. 12.2. So did Moses, for he had respect unto the
recompense of reward, so did those worthies take joyfully the spoiling of their
goods, knowing in themselves that they had in heaven a better and an enduring
substance; upon this ground the Apostle in that place. Heb. 10.34, 35. exhorts
them to perseverance in the faith, Cast not away therefore your confidence,
which has great recompense of reward.

When ever thou perseverest and stand in an hour of temptation, Give God the
glory of our perscverance.
give all praise to God, for perseverance is his free gift; we cannot advance
one step in the way of righteousness without his special conduct; Consider, Thy
strength to stand in the hour of temptation is from God alone: It was his
special help preserved Joseph under a great temptation: whereas David not
having so great a temptation, fell under the power of it in the matter of
Bathshebah; It may be thou have at one time withstood a greater, when at
another time thou have fallen under a lesser temptation; Praise God who made
the difference. It may be thou continuest in doing duties acceptable to God at
such a time, when some of the children of God of greater knowledge and
abilities then thou art, do fail in the performance thereof, acknowledge to the
praise of the excellency of his grace, that this difference proceeds only
from his special help and assistance: So did Paul, 1 Cor. 15.10. I labored
more then they all: Not I, but the grace of God with me. It may be in bearing
the burden of crosses thou have greater patience at one time under a greater,
then thou had at another time under a lesser burden: It may be thou endurest
the spoiling of thy greatest worldly comforts with more patience then Jonah did
the want of his gourd, bless God who gives unto thee strength to stand under
thy burden. Remember thou bear not the root, but the root thee: If thou
become forgetful and ungrateful, thou will thereby provoke Gods displeasure,
though thou were as godly as Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. Therefore after that
thou in the strength of the Lord have done any acceptable duty, or stood out in
a time of trial, retire thy self, and in secret upon thy knees give all praise
to God: this is the way to be helped in a new exigent: Ingratitude will weaken
thy confidence at another time of thy great necessity of Gods help: Thou will
not have a heart or face to go to God for help, conscience of former
ingratitude does fill the heart with diffidence: A sick patient, who proves
ungrateful to his Physician for his pains and help toward his former recovery,
in a new fit of sickness has not a face to go to him: As of ingratitude, so
beware also of self-reflecting, and sacrificing to thine own abilities, as if
by thy own strength thou had overcome a temptation, done a duty, or born a
cross: This pride and self gloriation provokes God to desert thee at another
time that thou may be humbled, and learn to glory only in the Lord, and in
the power of his might: Therefore let all flesh be silent before him, and let
him that glories, glory in the Lord, who is only to be praised, for of him,
through him, and for him are all things, to whom be glory for ever, Romans 11.36.

The other main point to be considered, Being confident that he will perform
the good work in you until the day of Jesus Christ; Before we raise the
doctrine, some things would be cleared in the text. 1. What is meant by the
good work. 2. What is meant by performing the good work until the day of Jesus
Christ, which is his second coming, Luke 17.24. 1 These. 5.2. Is not the work of
our Sanctification perfected at our death? What is meant by good work.
how then is it said, God will perform it until the day of Christ? Answ. I
answer to the first; by good work is meant a communion with Christ in the
graces of his spirit, wrought in us by the Spirit and word of promise; Of this
good work the Apostle speaks in this Chapter, verse. 5. their fellowship in
the Gospel. To the second I answer, What is meant by performing it.
the word rendered [perform] signifies the bringing to an end a work already
begun, as a house already founded, is perfected when the topstone is put on.
Heb. 8.5. So the performing of the good work, is the bringing of the work of
Sanctification unto the term of perfect sanctity, and purity in a gradual and
absolute conformity to the will of God in the estate of glory; To the
endeavors whereof we are exhorted: 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore such promises,
let us cleanse our selves from all filthyness of the flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God; It is true, the work of Sanctification
in respect of our soul, is perfected at the hour of death, because no unclean
thing can enter into Heaven; No infirmity, no spot comes there, we must be
perfectly cured of that hereditary leprosy of sin, before we can come within
the camp of that triumphant Israel, corruption cannot inherit the incorruption
of glory: But the whole suppositum and person consisting of soul and body is
not perfected until that glorious day of Jesus Christ; Though the souls of the
godly immediately after their parting out of the body be perfectly sanctified,
and admitted to behold the fathers face in glory, yet the body being laid in
the dust, is not restored from that state of corruption, nor perfected until
the day of Christ's second coming, which is called the day of restoring all
things, Acts 3.21. at which time the good work of Sanctification begun here in
soul and body, will be absolutely perfected in both.

A renewed man, in whom God has begun the good work of Sanctification, Renewed
persons cannot fall totally from grace.
cannot fall totally from the state of grace, but persevere therein to the end
of his life; for the Apostle is confident that God who has once begun the good
work in them will perform it until the day of Christ; before I confirm this
doctrine, two questions would be answered. 1. What is understood by persevering
in grace. What is understood by persevering in grace.
2. How perseverance, being a thing to come, is said to be certain. Answ. I
answer to the first; the word grace is taken ordinarily for Gods free favor,
for that giving grace, from which, as the fountain, does flow, through the
merit of our mediator, all spiritual blessings: It is so taken Ephesians. 2.8. by
grace are ye saved, Romans 3.24. being justified freely by his grace. It is also
taken for the grace that is given, which does flow from the fountain of free
grace and love. Ioh. 1.16. Of his fullness have all we received, and grace for
grace: Such graces are faith, hope, Love, and other saving Graces of the
Spirit; There is a perseverance actual in the exercise and actings of holy
duties: Act. 2.42. They continued steadfastly in the Doctrine of the Apostles.
And there is (to speak so) an effectual perseverance in respect of a settled
inclination and disposition to holy duties, though there may be some remitting
in, or intermitting of the acts and exercise thereof; such is our perseverance
in prayer. Ephesians. 6.18. Col. 4.2. Praying always, as a Musical instrument well
tuned by the hand of the skilful Musician, though it be not always played on,
and giving out a sound, yet it is s^ill well tuned. So this inward disposition
and frame of Spirit unto holy duties, remains fixed in the children of God,
even in their failings, in their coming short, and imperfections about holy
duties. Romans 7.19. The good I would do, I do not; though he did not act and
exercise the commanded duty, yet at the same time he persevered in an holy
disposition and inclination of will to the duty.

To the other question I answer; How perseverance in grace is said to be
certain.
A thing to come is said to be certain two ways. 1. In respect of Gods Decree,
and this is the certainty of Immutability, because Gods Decree, counsel and
purpose is unchangeable. Heb. 6.17. Thus it was certain that our Lord should be
delivered unto death, because it was so determined in the eternal counsel of
God, Act. 2.23. Him being delivered by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God. 2. A thing to come is said to be certain in respect of
Gods fore-knowing and revealing that such a thing shall be; This is the
certainty of infallability, because Gods knowledge is infallible. Thus it was
certain that Judas should betray our Lord, because our God in his permissive
Decree foreseeing it would be, revealed the same in his Word; the perseverance
of renewed men is certain in both respects; first in respect of Gods Decree.
Romans 8.30. Joh. 6.39. Next in respect also of Gods revealed Will, concerning
their perseverance. Ioh. 10.28. I give unto my sheep eternal life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. John 6.39.
This is the Fathers will, that of all which he has given me I should loose
nothing.

The Doctrine of a renewed man his perseverance in Grace, and the certainty
thereof is proved from Scripture; Proofs of the perseverance of the Saints.
first he is continued in the loving kindness of the Lord, and so perseveres in
an estate of free Grace and favor with God; for whom he loves once with that
love of complacency, Ioh. 13.1. It is true, he is displeased with them when
they offend, as a loving Father with his children, and chastisech them, yet
will he not consume and destroy as a Judge in his wrath. Psalm. 89.31, 32. Psalm.
99.8. Ierem. 46.28. Next the renewed man perseveres also in the Grace given and
received; the stock of Grace infused is never totally lost, Faith, Hope, and
Love remain in the habit and root, though in an hour of temptation the act and
fruit thereof may intermit and fail. John 3.36. He that believes in me has
everlasting life; It is not said, he shall have, but in respect of the
infallible consequence of eternal life to Faith in Christ, Eternal life certain.
It is said in the present tense, he has eternal life; Eternal life is certain
in the Promise, because God is Faithful, who has promised eternal life to
every one that believes in Jesus Christ; earnest, because Faith is an earnest
of the Spirit: and the Faithful Lord who gives the earnest of Grace in this
life, will certainly give the sum of Glory in the other, for Grace is the
earnest, and first fruit of Glory; John 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the water
that I shall give him shall never thirst, but the water that I shall give him
shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life; if Grace
received could be lost, and dried up wholly, like the winter brook in drought
of Summer, then should it not spring up unto everlasting life. But as it is
observed in aquaeducts, the water will ascend so high as the place is from
whence at first it did descend; even so this water of life, saving Grace, as it
descends from heaven, it carries the soul a long to heaven, for it springs up
(says our Lord) unto everlasting life; This truth is also evident from Ioh.
Him that comes unto me, I will in no ways cast out; by coming to Christ is
meaned our believing in him, as is evident by comparing verses 64, 65.
Therefore a true Believer in Christ is never cast out from him, but does
persevere unto the end.

Obj. he may steal away his own heart by Apostacy from Christ, and so cast out
himself; To this I answer, first, Israel, and great Bishop of our souls did
sleep or slumber, his sheep might steal away, wander and perish in their
errors, but he is vigilant over all his flock, he is not like that Keeper, 1
King. 20.39. While he was busy here and there, he lost tho man committed unto
his keeping; The Shepherd of Israel slumbers not, his eyes are always upon
every one of his flock, The crector of the ends of the earth faints not,
neither is weary. Isa. 40.28. he leads them in great compassion and wisdom.
Isa. 40.11. He shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his
bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young: he pittyeth us in our
infirmities, and will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able. 1
Cor. 10.13. Though the great Shepherd of our souls in his wisdom suffer his
little flock to wander in an hour of darkness, to humble them with a sight of
their own sillyness and weakness, who has neither wit nor strength to keep
themselves, yet he has a watchful eye over them in their wanderings: he looked
upon Peter with an eye of Pity and Power, to bring him again by repentance,
after he had departed by a foul denial; he suffers not his own sheep to wander
out of the sight of his mercy, he sends out after them the Spirit of
conviction and contrition; he makes their barking conscience like the
Shepherds Dog, to pursue and turn them from their wanderings. 2.

Reasons from Scriptural Truths, certainty and stability of election; 1. The
stability of Election.
Math. 24.24. There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders, insomuch, (that if it were possible) they shall
deceive the very Elect. 2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of the Lord stands sure.
It is not possible for those he has elected in his unchangeable purpose, to
fall away totally and finally; but so it is that a sound Believer is elected of
God, John 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; all whom the
Father elected to Glory, and gives to the Mediator, that by the Merit of his
death they may be brought unto the possession of that decreed glory, all such
sometime are made believers in Christ; so likewise all who come to Christ and
believe in him, are given of the Father, and elected: There is a reciprocation
betwixt election and believing, as betwixt the cause and necessary effect. Act.
13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal life believed. To expound this place
of a natural disposition and inclination for eternal life is Pelagianism, and a
violating of the text; of such misinterpreters I say as Augustine contra
Adimant; S. Augustine.
if they do it out of ignorance, there is nothing more blind: and if they do it
out of knowledge, there is nothing more wicked.

2. 2. Gods Power.
Reason is taken from the power of God: Those who are kept by the power of God
cannot be lost, for there cannot be a greater power to pull them out of the
hand of infinite and Almighty power: but so it is that Believers are kept by
the power of God, 1 Pet. 1.5. They are kept by the Father. Ioh. 10.29. By the
Son. Ioh. 10.28. And by the holy Ghost dwelling in them, and keeping the house
where he is lodged. Romans 8.11. all the three blessed persons have one common
care to preserve Believers.

3. 3. The Mystical Union with Christ.
Reason is taken from the mystical Union of a Believer with Christ; Those who
are once in Christ cannot perish, but do persevere in Grace to the end. Romans
8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; but believers
are in Christ, and Christ is in them; he dwells in their hearts by Faith,
Ephesians. 3.17. he is the Savior of his Mystical body. Ephesians. 5.24. A strong man will
not suffer any of his members to be taken from him, and our Lord is the
stronger one, Luc. 11.22.

Obj. Mystical body, may through his own prevalent corruption be cut off from
Christ, and perish for ever.

Answ. There is no question, our head, the Lord Jesus Christ is able not only
with mercy and strength of Grace to prevent the decayings of his Mystical
members, but also by the Grace of Repentance to restore them, when their falls
do disjoynt and dislocate them, not from the body, but from a lively and
vigorous motion in the way of common duties, with other believers that stand
firm; thus he restored David and Peter after their failings; the corruption of
such Members is not desperare and incurable; The Union of a Believer with
Christ, is compared to that betwixt the husband and the wife, Ephesians. 5.23. the
Believer is espoused to Jesus Christ; by Faith we give our consent to him, when
we say with heart and mouth as the Spouse, Cant. 2.16. My beloved is mine, and
I am his; It is the duty of the husband to use his utmost endeavors for
protecting his wife from perishing; David took no rest, until he had rescued
his wives out of the hands of his and their enemies, 1 Samuel 30. But our Lord
and husband Jesus Christ surpasses all men, both in affection and power for
the protecting of his Spouse; Therefore one espoused into him, cannot fall away
finally; for the relation is perpetual; he is a Lord and husband for ever of
his Spouse: To wit, the Church of Believers.

Obj. Although this or that person once espoused to Christ, may fall away
finally, yet Christ has a Spouse still; to wit other Believers who persevere.

Answ. without Subjects, a Shepherd without a flock, a Head without a body,
and a Husband without a Spouse.

Obj.

Answ. A soul once espoused to him, is never divorced from him; It is true, in
that great day there will be a separation of hypocrites, who gave their names
but not their hearts to him; Then will the Lord say to them, depart from me; It
will not be a divorce, but a nulling of their counterfeit communion with
Christ: Then will he declare there was never a consummate marriage betwixt him
and them; No union nor communion in the Spirit: Then will our Lord disclaim
them before man and Angel, saying, I never knew you, Math. 7.23. he never knew
them so, that he approved them for his own people; But a soul receiving Christ
by Faith, and once united to him, will never be separate from him. Romans 8.35.
Whosh all separate us from the love of Christ? Our Lord and Husband keeps the
heart of his Spouse in a dutiful affection to himself; If a husband were able
to restrain the affection of his wife from strange lovers, he doubtless would,
and should do it, that in so doing he might prevent all cause of divorce; but
our Lord has promised in the Covenant of Grace, to over-aw our hearts by his
fear, that we turn not away in our hearts from him after strange lovers, Jer.
32.40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.
3. It is true, the sins and gross failings of regenerate men do for a time
interrupt a communion in the sense and comfort of our Lords love, and of their
own peace and joy; Then their Lord and husband frowns upon them, withdraws the
light and comfort of his countenance; as an husband greatly displeased with his
wife does estrange himself for a time from her; So the Lord hides his face for
a time from them, yet their sins do not turn off his heart from them. Psalm.
89.32, 33. I will visit their transgression with the rod, nevertheless my
loving kindness will I not take utterly from him; yea he invites them to
repent, and notwithstanding their soul miscariages, he promises to receive
them. Ier. 3.1. Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return to me
again says the Lord.

The fourth Reason is taken from the efficacy of Christ's Prayer, and the
gracious acceptance it had always with God, The efficacy of Christ's Prayer.
in the behalf of Believers: Those for whom our Lord did pray that they might
persevere to the end, such do certainly persevere, because the Father hears
him always, John 11.42. But our Lord prayed for perseverance to Believers.
John 17.15. I pray that thou should keep them from the evil of the world;
For this he prayed not only in the behalf of the Apostles, but also for all who
should believe in his Name. Ioh. 17.20.

The fifth Reason is taken from that inviolable conjunction of the links in
that golden chain of salvation. The links of the chain of salvation inviolable.
Romans 8.30. Whom he called, he justified, and whom he justified, them he also
glorified; from hence we have this reason; Those whom God will glorify in
heaven, do certainly persevere to the end: such as are once justified will be
glorified; for the Apostle to declare the certainty hereof, expresses it in
the time past, saying, he has glori^ed, as the like expression of a thing
certain is found. 1 Ioh. 3.14. We have passed from death to life, because we
love the brethren.

The sixth Reason is grounded on the Believers victory over the world, he that
overcomes the world, Romans 8.37. 1 Ioh. 5.4. It is a ridiculous exception to
say the regenerate man is not overcome of the world so long as he is a
Believer, for that were as much as to say, whosoever is born of God is not
overcome of the world, so long as he is not overcome, which were a Tautologie;
If a Believer could become an Unbeliever by the prevalent temptations of Satan
from the world, then should he be overcome of the world, contrary to that
assertion of the Apostle 1 Ioh. 5.4. This is the victory that overcomes the
world, even our Faith. It is true, Tertullian.
(as Tertullian says) the renewed man is subject to many infalls of
temptations from the world, and to daily out-fall from indwelling corruption,
yet in the end the Believer in the strength of our Lords Grace does prevail.
Romans 8.37. In all these things we are more then Conquerours through him that
loved us.

The seventh and last Reason is taken from that inseparable connection betwixt
adoption, Adoption and the inheritance inseparable.
and the heavenly inheritance: Those who are designed heirs of eternal life, do
persevere in Grace to the end; But so it is that regenerate men being adopted
Sons to God, are designed heirs of eternal life. Romans 8.17. Gal. 4.17. If a
Son, then an heir of God through Christ.

Obj.

Answ. 1. That one who is once a Son, may afterward fall from the estate of
Adoption, is expressly contrary to that of our Lord; Ioh. 8.35. The Son abides
in the house for ever: But if he could fall from the estate of Adoption, he
could not abide in the household of Faith, which is Gods special dewlling place
on earth. Col. 1.12. Giving thanks unto the Father, who has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, and 1 Pet. 1.5. The
inheritance is kept in heaven for us, by the eternal counsel of God, and we are
kept on earth for it, by the power of his invincible Grace, leading us through
a world of temptations, in the Degrees of it by worldly objects; as variety of
objects weaken the beams of our sight by dividing them, so our affection to God
is diverted and much weakened by things sensible and worldly: Though there may
be, and oft-times falls out an intermission of filial conversation, and a
remitting of filial affection, yet the filial relation abides for ever:
Relatives admit not a more and a less; a Father is not more a Father at one
time to his Son, and less at another; he is a Father to him alike in respect of
relation when he is in health, and when he is in sickness; when he does well,
and when he does evil: Though the communication of his favor may admit a more
and a less; The Prodigal Luke 15. behaved himself lewdly and basely, yet the
relation remained still; I will go (said he) to my Father; and the Father
acknowledged him for his Son, ran to him, fell on his neck and kissed him; it
was no wonder to see Jacob fall upon the neck of a Joseph, and kiss him: but to
kiss a Prodigal, is a mystery of rich mercy and free love: Our heavenly
Father loves repentance, the work of his own hands, wherever he sees it; It is
true, renewed men deserve by their sins to be disinherited, as the Prodigal
humbly and truly acknowledged, I am not worthy (said he) to be called thy Son;
but their sins do not effectually disinherit them, which effective
disinheriting is hindered by Gods rich mercy in his unchangeable love, in the
intercession of Christ, and in the operation of the holy Spirit renewing
repentance in them, whereby their course of sinning is broken off, and their
wonted peace and comfort in God restored to them: Augustine.
To this purpose speaks Augustine well, lib. de corrept. and great. ca. 12.
Therefore help was provided for the infirmity of man's will, that it should be
acted by Divine Grace in an indeclynable and unseparable manner. And so
although it be infirm, yet it should not fall away, nor be overcome with any
adversity.

As for the use of this Doctrine, Papists and others, Refutes the Doctrine of
the Apostasy of Believers.
who affirm that a man renewed and in the state of Grace, may fall totally and
finally from the Grace of Justification; It is true, some appearing members of
Christ in respect of an outward communion in a visible Church, may fall totally
from the outward communion, and will be declared in that day of the manifest
revelation of Gods wrath, never to have been in an inward communion with
Christ, and in acceptance with God, Math. 7.22. he will say to them, I never
knew you, nor approved you for mine; Then will they be cast as brambles into
that unquenchable fire. Ioh. 15.2. Every branch in me that bears not fruit. I
take away; They were in him only by appearance, like those branches painted by
Zeuxis, that had neither sap, smell, nor fruit; so worldly hypocrites smell not
of Christ and his ointments, but of the earth, and of self-seeking; They are
enemies to the Cross of Christ, refusing to bear it in a time of persecution,
resisting the preaching of it, and not laboring for any inward mortification of
the flesh and lusts thereof. Philip. 3.18, 19. They are without that sap of the
oil of charity toward God and their neighbor, they serve not one another in
love, but seek their own things, and serve their own belly. Romans 16.18. They
are also without the fruits of true holiness and righteousness, having a form
of Godliness, but denying the power thereof. 2 Timothy 3.5. using their Christian
liberty for a Cloak of maliciousness; and doing all their works that they may
be seen of men; It may be said of them, as of Israel, Hos. 10.1. Israel is an
empty vine, he brings forth fruit unto himself; and as it was said of
Ephraim, Hos. 12.1. Ephraim feeds on wind; the hypocrite and the counterfeit
Professor feeds and delights himself on the wind of humane applause, but
not on the testimony of a good conscience, which studyeth in all things to
approve it self to God, and commend it self to the consciences more then to the
humors, and inordinate affections of men; after the example of Paul, 2 Cor.
4.2. Commending our selves to every man's conscience in the fight of God.

Obj. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. That men sometime enlightened, and who had tasted of the
powers of the life to come, may possibly fall away? but such men were renewed
by illumination in their understanding, and heavenly tastes in their affections,
therefore it appears that renewed men may fall away totally and finally from
the state of grace.

Answ. For clearing that place of Scripture, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. opened and cleared.
The Apostle speaks of men baptized and initiated into the mysteries of
Christian religion. because in these times men were both before and after
baptism catechized in the grounds of Christian faith; It is impossible that
those who were once enlightened, etc. The Syriack translation has it, it is
impossible for them, qui descenderunt ad baptismum, who did go down into the
water of baptism: and it is well known that the ancient Doctors of the
primitive Church call baptism (...) illumination, because by the doctrine of
baptism men were instructed and illuminated with the knowledge of the mysteries
of the Christian, says Justin. Apol. 2. pro Christ. Justin.
(...). This laver is called illumination, so that by illumination it may be
said the Apostle understands baptism and the doctrine thereof; and by their
tasting, that their hearts and affections were for the time affected with the
newness and pleasantness of the Christian doctrine: No doubt, but men having no
more then the common gifts of a general illumination, and a transient motion in
the heart, may fall away from their outward profession, and from that inward
general disposition toward Christ and the Christian faith. 2. Differences
betwixt the unrenewed, and renewed man, in 1. Know ledge.
Consider there is a wide difference betwixt the illumination and tastes of a
renewed man, and the illumination and tastes of the man unrenewed. 1. The
unrenewed man his illumination is a common gift of the spirit and may be lost:
It is only a bare assent to the truth revealed: but in the man renewed, his
knowledge and assent to the truth is joined with an high estimation of the
truth. Psalm. 119.72. The law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of
gold and silver. Phil. 3.8. I count all things loss, yea but dung in comparison
of the excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord: in the man unrenewed, his
knowledge of Christ, and divine mysteries is all speculative and discoursive,
like the knowledge a man has of a remote country, only by the Map; but the
renewed man's knowledge is experimental and practical, like the knowledge a man
has of a country wherein he has painfully traveled; The ways of God are in
his heart, Psalm. 84.5. The Law of God is in his heart, the unrenewed man his
knowledge is without love and obedience in his will to God and his word: Ezekiel.
33.31. They sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they
will not do them: It is not so with the knowledge of a renewed man: it is
joined with love, obedience, and practice: Psalm. 119.11. I have hid thy word in
my heart, that I should not sin against thee. Psalm. 119.104. Through thy
precepts I get understanding: Therefore I hate every false way. As there is a
great difference betwixt the illumination of the renewed man, and that of the
man unrenewed, 2. Taste.
so it is in their tastes: In the unrenewed man the taste of things spiritual is
superficial, like a Gargarism in the mouth: but in the renewed man his heart is
deeply affected with the precious promises, like a strong cordial, the virtue
and strength whereof abides in the heart. Psalm. 119.16.2. I rejoice at thy word
as one that finds great spoil: The taste in the man unrenewed is dull and
ineffectual: but in the man renewed it is quick and operative: it provokes and
increases his spiritual appetite for more of God: and makes him more diligent
in the use of the means of salvation, 1 Pet. 2.3. Desire the sincere milk of
the word, if so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious: their taste of the
Lords favor increases their desire after the word, like babes that have
tasted of the milk in the breast, become more eager in their desires after it:
in the renewed man, his taste of spiritual blessings, and of the fatness in the
Lords house does blunt his taste and affection to sin and worldly pleasures, as
the taste of that excellent and rarest wine, made by our Lord in Cana, Joh. 2.
did so affect the taste of the guests, that in comparison of it they esteemed
little of the former wine they had tasted: A lively taste of the sweetness of
Christ does make the pleasures of sin bitter, and does make our most lawful
pleasures in the world but unsavory and gustless in comparison of it; Paul
reckons his prerogatives worldly, but loss and dung in comparison of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ his Lord. Philip. 3.8. but the man unrenewed still
retains the old sent of his sins, like Moab, whose sent was not changed, Ier.
48.11. Like those of whom Ezekiel speaks in his time, Ezekiel. 33.32. With their
mouth they show much love; and they are affected with the Preaching, as one
with hearing a pleasant voice, yet their heart goes after their covetousness:
The renewed man is so affected with the sense of God and his goodness, that he
breaths out the praises of God, whereby others may be also moved to seek after
God, and to taste of his loving kindness. Psalm. 34.8. O taste and see that the
Lord is good. Psalm. 66.16. Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will
declare what he has done for my soul; But the unrenewed man is not so deeply
affected with it, that either he seeks more of it himself, or inviteth others
to taste of it. 3. The place alleged, Ioh. 5.18. We know that whosoever is born
of God, sins not. To wit, that special sin spoken of verse. 16. for the which
a man should not pray in the behalf of any guilty thereof.

Obj.

Answ. Man's corruption, like the Spider, The Doctrine of perseverance, opens no
gap to licentiousness.
sucketh poison out of this pleasant and sweet flour of Christian Doctrine.
Man's corruption may take the occasion, but this truth gives it not: Thus the
comfortable Doctrine of Free Grace was abused by carnal men, for a Cloak to
continue in sin. Romans 6. and the Grace of God was turned into wantonness. Jude
Ep. v. 4. Thus the spotless Law of God forbidding all sin, is through man's
corruption made an incentive to sin. Romans 7.8. But the mercy and wisdom of God
in this Doctrine is justified of her children; the renewed man, as he believes
the certainty of perseverance in the state of Grace, so does he believe the
means for persevering must and should be followed, and therefore his Faith of
the certainty of perseverance will not make him secure, but active in following
the means; Elijah knew certainly it would be rain, for God had revealed it, and
yet he used prayer as a means appointed of God for obtaining every good thing.
1 King. 18.1.42. the sound Believer will make conscience of the means, he will
obey that, Philip. 2.12. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling: which
is not a fear or doubting of Gods performance of the begun work of Grace, but a
fear of his own weakness, with a solicitous care in using the means: The sound
Believer does believe that gracious promise of our perseverance. Ioh. 10.28.
None shall pluck my sheep out of my hand; and yet he will make conscience of
that warning. Math. 26.41. Watch and pray, that ye be not led into temptation;
he believes that of Peter, 1. Ep. 1.5. Ye are kept by the Power of God: and he
makes conscience also to obey that 1 Pet. 4.7. Be sober and watch unto prayer;
The renewed man believes, that according to our Mediators Prayer, the Father
will keep him in his name and power, and will preserve him from the evil of the
world. Ioh. 17.11, 15. Yet he makes conscience also to obey that of Jude,
verse. 21. Keep your self in the love of God; of that 1 Ioh. 5.18. He that is
begotten of God, keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not; and
while he stands in a time of inward and outward peace, he makes conscience of
that warning 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least
he fall.

This Doctrine serves for admonition both to men unrenewed, Admonition to
persons unrenewed.
and to those that are renewed. 1. For men unrenewed, let not such flatter
themselves, as if they were in an estate of Grace, and sure to persevere
therein, because they have a common Grace restraining them for a time from the
outward act of sin before the world; wicked and reprobate men have had the
like, and have also lost it; wicked Ioash out of respect to good Iehosadah; and
cruel Herod, out of awful fear of John the Baptist, refrained themselves from
some sins. 2 Chronicles. 24.2. Mar. 6.20. let not such men rest on a fair outward
profession, and an outward communion with holy and sound Believers, that may be
lost; Demas for a time shined in the Apostolic Church, being a fellow Labourer
in the Gospel with Paul, and numbered amongst the faithful servants of Jesus
Christ. Philem. Ep. 24. but in a time of persecution, like a fiery exhalation
and shot-star, he disappeared and fell away to embrace the present world, and
conformed himself to the fashion thereof; hypocrites and temporary Believers,
like Stage Players, to please them that look on, can soon put on and put off a
form of Godliness. 2 Timothy 4.10. neither let them rest on some eminent gift
enabling them for a particular calling or employment: Judas had that, and many
other reprobates. Math 7.22. such a common gift and ministerial Grace may be
lost: Saul had the Spirit and gift of Government, and he lost it: 1 Samuel 16.14.
Moral and Civil men, though unrenewed, may have a continuance of Civil and
Moral Gifts, a large measure of literal knowledge, and an honest worldly
conversation for a time. 2 Pet. 2.20. They have escaped the pollutions of the
world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: they may have
some transient tastes of the good Word of God, as men affected more with the
newness, then with the truth and goodness of the Divine Doctrine, Ezekiel. 33.33,
34. they may have some tastes of God and his word, but they feed not on them: It
is not their meat and drink to do the will of God; In this they are like unto
Cooks, who taste the meats that come through their hands, but live not on them;
yea unregenerate men may have a taste of the powers of the world to come. They
may by forbearing some great sin at a time, have some quietness of conscience
afterward, and this quietness of conscience in them at that time is like
something of heaven in respect of the peace there; whereas at other times,
after the committing of great sins, the horror of their conscience has been a
hell to them; Therefore be earnest with God for special Grace to renew thy
heart; and to restrain the inward act of sin in the consent of the will: with
any knowledge thou have of the truth of God, join an high estimation and
appretiation of it, when thou gettest a taste of the good Word of God, and of
the powers of the world to come, labor to keep it in a good and clean
conscience: for when thou defilest thy conscience by sinning against thy light
and knowledge, then thou loosest the sent of the sweetness of the Word, and the
comforting relish of thy former peace; even as foul and stinking waters take
away the former good sent of a vessel.

Next it serves for admonition to men renewed, Admonition to persons renewed.
and in the state of Grace, not to rest secure on the beginnings of a work of
Grace; though the saving Graces of the Spirit cannot be lost, yet if thou that
art renewed become careless and negligent to entertain the life of Grace, the
waters of life that sometime abounded in thine heart, may be brought to a very
low ebb, the strength of Grace not exercised will decay, thy peace if it be not
kept in a good conscience will be taken from thee for a time: thy joy if it be
not entertained in a pure heart will be suspended. Three considerations.
Therefore consider these three things. 1. That even the renewed children of
God are subject to their own weakenings, and decayings in the state of Grace.
2. Thou would consider what makes this change. 3. Then thereafter, as men
subject to fainting of Spirit have in readiness some cordials for removing the
beginning, and preventing the progress of their fainting, so thou should lay
up in thy heart store of spiritual provision, for an hour of soul-fainting.

As for the first, Grace in the children of God, subject to abatements.
that living Grace in the renewed children of God, is subject to abatements in
the Degrees and strength thereof, is evident in diverse respects. 1. In respect
of promptness, and forwardness for doing duties, at one time they will have a
great elevation of heart, Psalm. 108.1. O God my heart is fixed, I will sing and
give praise; at another time they will have a great suppression of Spirit,
Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities have
taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up; he was as a man stooping
under an heavy burden, and not able to lift up his head; The Spouse at one
time runs here and there to seek her beloved; at another time ye see in her
great laziness, Cant. 5.3. I have put off my coat, how can I put it on again?
Peter at one time is forward at a word of our Lord to cast himself into the
deep Sea, at another time he will not hazard so much as a word for avowing his
Lord and Master: of cheerfulness in time of doing duties; at one time it will
be their meat and drink to do the will of their heavenly Father, they will have
also much contentment in serving their Lord, as hungry and thirsty men have
in eating and drinking at another time holy duties will be a burden to them:
David with a cheerful heart danced before the Ark, but great fear surprised him
when he saw Vzza smitten, this made him change his note: we can look cheerful
in a day of prosperity, rejoicing in our Lords presence, but in our adversity
we question the Lords presence, and say with Gideon, Judge. 6.13. If the Lord be
with us, why then is all this befallen us: we can at a time when God reveals
himself to us in some special testimony of his love, with Peter in the Mount,
exult at a glance of his glory; but at the time of our Lords suffering in his
Mystical body, our hearts become drousie and careless, as Peter's was in the
Garden. 3. In respect of the degree and measure of Faith; David, Psalm. 27.10.
When my Father and my Mother did forsake me, then the Lord did take me up: and
Psalm. 46.2. We will not fear though the earth be removed: there was great
Faith, but ye see a slacking of his Faith. Psalm. 31.22. I said in my have, I am
cut off from before thine eyes. and 1 Samuel 27.1. David said in his heart, I
shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul, notwithstanding he had from God a
special Promise to be King of Israel. 4. of their continuance in duties; at one
time the children of God will continue in some bensal of Spirit with delight in
their secret devotion; at another time they have not well begun, but they
become weary, their untimous and impertinent thoughts pulls them away to some
other business; It is thus also in their hearing, reading, and meditation on
the good word of God; at one time they will continue in hearing with much
reverence and attention, though the Minister be a man of weak gifts; at another
time, though the Minister were like Paul, they fall drousie like Eutychus, and
if God did not prevent with mercy, they would fall from this drousiness into a
deadness of Spirit; but our God, rich in mercy and long suffering, waits upon
his children, and recovers them from these fits and faintings, unto their
former soul health.

As to the second, What (...) is that causes the abatements in Grace.
consider what makes this change in the children of God, and procures the
abatement and decay of the degrees and strength of Grace in them. 1. A careless
neglect of the means of salvation, or an overly and superficial performance of
holy duties; Apostle will have us as new born babes desire the sincere milk of
the Word, that we may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. in which words he insinuates
this also, that want of desire to the Word, is a main impediment to our growth
in Sanctification, and a cause of the decay and consumption of the inner man.
Spiritual pride and vain confidence in our own strength for the employing and
improving of any Grace or Gift received of God, brings with it a decay of the
vigor of Grace; as the swelling bigness of the Spleen makes the other noble
parts of the body to decay, so the swelling pride of our Spirit makes the
Graces of the innerman to abate of their strength; Pride goes before a fall:
It is ever followed in the children of God with a fall, either into some cross,
or into some sin to humble them: Ezekias was lifted up in the pride of his
heart, and therefore was wrath threatened against him and all Judah. 2 Chronicles
32.25. Peter in the pride and presumption of his own strength boasted, though
all the world should be offended, yet should not he be offended in Christ;
whereupon followed a great abatement of the strength of Grace, when he denied
the Lord of Life. 3. Sloathfulness in not improving the stock of Grace, or
Gifts God has bestowed upon thee, brings on a decay. Strong bodies through
laziness and want of exercise, become weak and feeble; It is no wonder the
Merchant becomes poor, who improves not his little stock to some advantage; and
it is no wonder a Christian decay in the measure of grace, if he improve not
his talent to the glory of his Lord, to the good example of his neighbor, and
to his own comfort in laying up a sure foundation against the time to come,
When our eye and heart is too much fixed on visible and sensible objects of
sorrow or fear, then our graces begin to abate somewhat of their former vigor;
great and long troubles oft-times weaken our Faith: when Peter looked too much
to the wind that was against him, and not to the Lord who called him to come on
the waters, his Faith began to fail, and his body that before was elevated by a
believing soul, did now begin to sink, weak Faith made a heavy body.

As to the third, how to prevent this decay of Grace, it is evident by knowing
and shunning the evils that procure it; Means to prevent decay in grace.
Therefore 1. make conscience to use the means whereby grace is begun,
preserved, and increased in the soul: as faith comes by hearing the word of
God, we are transformed into his image. 2 Cor. 3.18. by frequent hearing,
reading, meditation, and prayer, we become heavenly and spiritual, as Moses
coming down from the Mount did shine in his countenance, so this communion with
God in his Ordinances will make our hearts to burn with love to God, and our
faces to shine in all manner of holy conversation before the world: The
conscionable and careful using the means of our spiritual food and life will
prevent the decay of the inner man. 2. Walk humbly in the remembrance of thy
former sins, in the sense of thy present infirmities, in a jealousy of thy
best endeavors, and in a solicitous fear of manifold temptations: men
recovered out of a dangerous disease, shun every morsel that may distemper
them, or may procure a recidivation: so the humble man shuns every thing that
may bring a change on his inward condition: Remembrance of former sins, and of
mercy in pardoning of them, does much strengthen his graces: It increases his
zeal against sin, and augments his love to God and his holy commandments. 3.
Improve thy grace and gift to thy Lords advantage: To him that has shall be
given; he that improved his five talents, and the other that improved his two,
received much more from their Lord then they got at first. Math. 25. God
increased knowledge in his servant David, who made conscience to walk according
to his knowledge. Psalm. 119.100. I understand more then the Ancients, because I
keep thy precepts. In an hour of trial and temptation look to the promises of
God, who is both able and willing to sustain thee under thy greatest burdens,
and will not suffer thee to be tempted above that thou art able. 1 Cor 10.13.
we may look unto the strength of a temptation, and then be humbled with a sense
of our own weakness; but withal let us look to God by Faith, and rest upon his
Almighty, infinite, and everlasting strength, who has promised to renew
strength to all that wait upon him. Isa. 40.31.

This Doctrine serves for a ground of comfort to the children of God, Comfort
to the children of God.
discouraged with the sense of their daily out-breaking infirmities, and with
that want of the sensible comfort of the love of God in an hour of darkness and
dissertion: Here is ground of solid comfort, seeing a person once accepted into
favor through Christ, is never therefore cast out of Gods favor; daily
infirmities, daily bemoaned in secret before God, and wrestled against, may and
do consist with a state of grace: the Apostle speaking in the name of persons
renewed, says, In many things we fail all. Jam. 3.2. It is true, if we say we
have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness we l ye: The renewed man walks
not in sin as his way intended and delighted in, but it is no less true, If we
lay we have no sin, we deceive our selves. 1 Ioh. 1.6, 8. be thou humbled for
thy daily infirmities, wrestle against them, shun all occasions of evil, and
the Lord will not cast thee off for disliked infirmities, Mal. 3.17. I will
spare them, as a man that spares his own Son that serves him: a loving Father
accepts in good part the endeavors of his willing child to serve him, though
there be weakness and much imperfection in the performance Our heavenly Father
is full of pity: he did not reject Abraham for his distrustful fears, nor
Moses for his unadvised speech at Meribah, nor Jonah for his bitter fit of
impatience, nor the Apostles for their ignorance, and ambition: yea consider,
that regenerate persons may fall into gross and scandalous sins, as David and
Peter; therefore thou that art regenerate, while thou stand, look to the
falls of others, and work out thy salvation in fear and trembling: thou who
have fallen, look to their repentance, and rise with them, and therefore walk
more circumspectly, redeeming the time.

Obj. But how shall a soul in a time of dissertion,

Answ. As for dissertions, we would consider, 1.

First God disserts wicked men out of wrath, as a Judge, Dissertions are
either, 1. Penal.
to punish them for their antecedent and wilful disserting of him and his holy
commandments; for this end God never does dissert a justified and regenerate
person: because wrath was taken away in his Justification, at which time God
accepted him in the beloved: God never hates those he once Accepts in Jesus
Christ: as he ever loves his Son, so he ever loves all the Mystical Members
of his Son: as he loves the head so the Members also: But God as a Judge, in
wrath does dissert wicked and unrenewed men to correct them and to manifest his
Justice against, and hatred of them: This he does, not by withdrawing saving or
renewing grace from them, for such they never had: but by withdrawing a common
restraining grace, which formerly was as a strong rampant to keep their
wickedness from overflowing: Such was that Penal and Judicial dissertion of the
Jews. Act. 7.42. God turned, and gave them up to worship the Host of heaven:
such was that dissertion of the Romans. Romans 1.24. God also gave them up to
uncleanness: the Lord also disserts wicked men, by withdrawing a common though
an eminent gift of their particular calling: so Saul was disserted, when the
Spirit of government departed from him. 1 Samuel 16.14. This is a Penal and
Judicial dissertion, (...).

Secondly, 2. Medicinal.
God disserts sometimes his own children in an hour of temptation, as a Father
displeased with them, by withdrawing strength, and his upholding Grace, to the
end he may chastise and humble them for some corruption not perceived, or not
mourned for by themselves: to this end the Lord disserted Peter, and did not
strengthen him by a special help of grace in that hour of temptation in the
High Priests hall, that he might chastise and humble him for self-confidence,
whereof Peter took no notice before his fall. This may be called (...), a
Fatherly or Medicinal dissertion, to purge out some latent corrupt humor, and
to prevent other dangerous symptoms of the body of death that dwells in us.

Thirdly, 3. Probatory.
Sometimes the Lord disserts his own children in respect of sense of any
present comforts, to this end, that he may try the Faith and patience of his
own children, who in the cloudy and dark day must walk by Faith and not by
sense: This may be called a dissertion Probatory: 1 Pet. 1.7. Now for a season
ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations, that the trial of your Faith
being much more precious then of Gold, may be found unto praise, etc. As the
Goldsmiths puts the Gold into the fire, not to consume, but to purge and try
the same: To this end was David disserted, and for a time had no sense of
comfort. Psalm. 30.7. Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled: and Psalm.
10.1. to this end was Job disserted in respect of comfort, that his Faith and
patience might be seen to the praise of Gods grace, and to the good example of
others; Job 7.3. and 13, 14, 15. and James will have us look to him as a
pattern of patience, Iam. 5.11. Ye have heard of the patience of Job.

Consider the manner of Gods disserting his own children; The manner of Gods
disserting.
It is not in respect of his love toward them: This is founded on his eternal
purpose of electing them in Christ, Heb. 12.6.10. for our profit, that we may
be partakers of his holiness; Neither is it a dissertion in respect of the life
of grace, for even when the children of God fail, and do not act grace, yet the
seed remains in them, 1 Ioh. 3.9. Peter fell foully, yet at that time the Lord
preserved the life of Faith in his soul. Luc 22.32. Satan has desired to have
you, that he may sift you as Wheat, but I have prayed for thee that thy Faith
fail not; as God preserved life in Eutychus, notwithstanding his sore fall.
Act. 20.10. So the Lord preserves the life of Faith in the hearts of his
renewed children in the time of their great and foul falls; No thanks to them,
but all praise to God, who forsakes not the work of his own hands in them: But
God disserts his own children sometime in respect of strength, when he
upholdeth them not in the hour of temptation, David in the matter of Bathsheboh
and Vriah; as also Peter when he denied the Lord: Sometime he disserts his own
children in respect of comfort, when he hides the light of his countenance,
when he withholds or with-draweth the joy of his Spirit: Thus was Job,
David, and our Lord himself disserted, when he cried out on the Cross, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? This dissertion of our Lord was no ways in
respect of the love of the Father for he was ever his well beloved: Neither was
it in respect of strength to sustain him under the burden, for he was sustained
by the Divine nature dwelling in him bodily: It is true, dissertion in respect
of strength has ever with it a dissertion also in respect of comfort: for then
the children of God, being without strength, do succumb to the temptation, and
therefore become heartless and comfortless, like weak men robbed of their
treasure of peace and joy: yet there may be a dissertion in respect of comfort,
when in the mean time they are not disserted, but upholden by a secret
strength: as a person fainting and sinking down, may be upholden by one at his
right hand, though in the time he have no sense of it: so many times the dear
children of God are upholden by the strength of God, that they despair not in
their greatest troubles, when in the mean time they have no comfort, The
measure of Gods disserting a renewed person.
nor clearness to discern the Lords strengthening presence.

Consider the measure of dissertion: the children of God are not in a like
measure disserted at all times: sometimes more, sometimes less, at one time
they are shaken with the wind of temptation, as a tender plant, but not cast
down, at another time they are laid on the ground, brought under the
temptation, like a young tree born down with a great storm, yet are never
plucked up by the root, because they are ingrafted in Christ, and that root of
Jesse bears them: at a time they will be disserted in respect of strength,
for doing and exercising some one gracious act, and yet at the same time they
will be eminently assisted of God in the exercise of another grace. Peter's zeal
to be at Christ was very great, when he desired to come through the deep Sea to
him. Math. 14. But his faith was weak, when he saw the wind boisterous: The
children of God will have strong desires after God, and yet at the same time
much weakness of Spirit, and remissness in their spiritual courage: such was
David's disposition. Psalm. 41.1. As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so
pants my soul after thee, O God: yet at the same time his heart was much
discouraged and disquieted with the reproaches of enemies: They will also be
fervent in Prayer and yet at the same time not so patient, as at other times:
Thus was it with David, Psalm. 31.22. I said in my have, I am cut off from
before thine eyes: there is a fit of weakness and impatience, and yet at the
same time he is fervent in prayer: Thou heardest my supplications, when I cried
unto thee: as of some seeds sown in one seed-plat, some herbs may appear
sooner, and be higher then others: and the same which were at one time high,
may take a setting, and be overtopped by others: so in a renewed man when he is
regenerate, the seeds of all the saving graces of the Spirit are planted within
his heart, but sometime the fruit of one grace, and sometime of another will be
more eminent, according to the wise and gracious dispensation of God,
out-letting on, or restraining the influence of his Spirit from the seeds and
habits of grace received.

Lastly consider thy duty in a time of dissertion, The duty of a renewed person
in the time of dissertion.
when the Lord hides his face from thee: 1. Search thy ways, for as under a
dissertion thou do observe a change in Gods countenance, and dispensation
toward thy self, so if thou search diligently and impartially, change in thy
ways to the worse, since that time thou found the comfort of the light of his
countenance; when great persons at sometimes favorable and familiar do change
their countenance, we do soon observe it, and forthwith examine our selves, if
we have done or spoken any thing to procure such a change. It is also our
Christian wisdom carefully to observe the time when God hides his countenance,
and it is our duty to search our ways: if we light the candle of our
conscience from the light of Gods Word, as the damsel in the Gospel did, to
search after, and to find the lost penny, we shall undoubtedly find, that since
the time we had the comfort of Gods presence, we have departed from his ways
and turned from him, it may be by our ingratitude, and not rendering to him
according to the favors received, or by our spiritual pride and vain
gloriation, as if we had not received it of free love, by our bitterness of
Spirit, and repining at afflictions, by our indignation at others, because more
esteemed in the world then our selves: by neglects or omissions of duties, by a
negligent and overly performance of them; or by some lurking corruption not
perceived and mourned for by us. 2. When thou have searched, Achan, Humble thy
self before God, and confess that and all thy former transgressions. Hos. 5.15.
I will go and retire to my place, till they acknowledge their offense: when God
retireth and withdraws the presence of comfort, there is no regaining of that
presence, but by acknowledgment of thy sins: I would counsel thee at such times
to set some day apart for afflicting thy Spirit with fasting and mourning: I
dare say, such days have fair evenings and comfortable nights. 3. Meditate
seriously upon the unchangeableness of God, and thy own former experiences of
his love; There is no change with him, Lament. 3.22. Mal. 3.6. Iam. 1.17. It is
with men departing from God, as with those that sail away from the firm Land,
they think as they remove from the Land, so it removes from them; but when they
turn sail, they find the Harbor in the same place they left it: so when we
turn from God, we do think in the sense of our bad deservings, that the Lord is
turned from us, but when we change our course, and turn again by repentance, we
find our God where he was slow to anger, but ready to forgive.

The remembrance of Gods former kindness, upheld David in his comfortless
condition. Psalm. 77.5, 11. I have considered the days of old: This comforted
Jonah, 2.4. I said I am cast out of thy sight, yet I will look again toward thy
holy temple: He remembered the comfortable testimonies of the Lords love and
presence in his holy temple. 4. Wait thou upon God by an humble confidence and
dependence. Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, and obeys the
voice of his servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light, let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God: This is the counsel of
the Prophet, when the Caldeans oppressed the people of God and prospered; at
such a time God hid himself, did neither deliver his people, nor reveal the
time of their delivery, and of their enemies destruction, yet he will have them
to wait on, and depend on God by Faith, when there was no sense of comfort.
Habak. 2.3, 4. The vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall
speak, and not ly^; though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come,
it will not tarry; his soul which is lifted up in him, is not upright, but the
just shall live by Faith: the soul that is lifted up in a time of great
trouble, the Apostle, Heb. 10.30. Expounds it, the soul that draws back, to
wit by unbelief. Heb. 3.12. When men say as wicked Jehoram, in a time wherein
they see no appearance of deliverance, 2 King. 6.33. Behold this evil is of the
Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? Therefore in hope and
patience wait thou upon the Lord: so the Church of God resolved to do. Isa.
8.17. I will wait upon the Lord, that hides his face from the house of Jacob,
and I will look for him: So did David, Psalm. 42.11.43.5. Why art thou cast down
within me, O my soul; hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him: It is an
evidence of a true and loving servant to wait and attend on his Master, though
for a time he get neither a kind word, nor a benign countenance: his patient
attendance, and constancy in doing duty, is the way to obtain it: A soul
believing and waiting patiently on God shall not be disappointed of the desired
and expected end. Psalm. 9.18. The needy shall not always be forgotten, the
expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever: One time or other thy God
will put a new song of praise in thy heart and mouth, as he did to David, who
waited patiently, and in the end was delivered out of the horrible pit. Psalm
40.1, 2. It is good even under great calamities quietly to hope. Lament. 3.26.
Hope is our Anchor, that establishes our hearts in the stormy day, from being
carried about with every strong wind of the present time. Let us therefore do
as those men. Act. 27. When they saw neither Sun nor Stars for many days, they
cast out their Anchors, and waited, and wished for the day: So in our cloudy
times of desertion, wherein we have no light or comfort, more or less; let us
cast our Anchor of hope within the vail, and wait for that glorious day,
wherein our Lord will wipe away all tears from our eyes, and give us glorions
rest for ever.

Before I close this purpose of our perseverance in the estate of grace through
the strength of Christ, Two questions resolved.
I would answer two questions. 1. If a renewed man may have any certain
knowledge of his perseverance? 2. What kind of knowledge it is, whether at the
best only Moral (as some Popish Divines grant) or fiducial, by a certitude of
Faith?

Answ. To the 1. I answer affirmatively, A believer may have certain knowledge
of his perseverance. 1. Examples.
as is evident from examples in holy Scriptures of the dear children of God,
who were assured of their perseverance. Job 19.26. In my flesh shall I see God:
he was assured to see God in his Country above, and therefore was assured to
persevere in his journey toward it, even in an estate of Grace Psalm. 23.6.
Kindness shall follow me all the days of my life. Psalm. 48.14. He will be our
guide even unto death: Where he speaks not of himself only, as by a special
revelation, but he speaks in the plural number. in the name of all Believers;
Asaph also was confident of his perseverance in grace unto glory. Psalm. 73.24.
Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. Romans
8.39. Nothing shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus, and 1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from death unto
life, because we love the brethren: in which places the Apostles speak of the
certain knowledge of perseverance and of salvation in the name of all believing
and Justified persons.

It is also evident from reason, 2. Reasons.
and necessary consequence from Scriptural Truths. a renewed man may know that
thing certainly, wherein he rejoices, for joy is not in things uncertain; but
we rejoice in the hope of glory. Romans 5. A renewed man may know that in
certainty, for which he blesses God, seeing we bless not for things uncertain.
But renewed men bless God for the grace of perseverance. 1 Pet. 1.5. blessed be
God, we are kept, by his power through Faith unto the inheritance, etc. 3. If a
man renewed may know that he has justifying Faith, then may be know certainly
that he shall be saved, and persevere in grace unto eternal life, because there
is an inseparable conjunction betwixt this Faith and eternal life. Ioh. 3.16.
Ioh. 5.24. Ioh. 6.47. but a renewed man may know that he has Justifying Faith,
because it were in vain to require a man to examine himself, if he be in the
Faith; if so be he could not know it after examination, for a man cannot
examine himself in that which is impossible to be known; but we are commanded
to examine our selves if we be in the Faith 2 Cor. 13.5. which cannot be
understood only of that Catholic and Dogmatick Faith (as Adversaries allege)
because Paul speaks to them who had received the Christian Doctrine already,
and there was no doubt concerning the soundness of it; as also he speaks there
of Christ his dwelling in us by Faith, when we are assured Christ is ours, as a
man is assured of the society and company of one who dwells in the same house
with him; and the Faith whereby Christ dwells in a man, is that special Faith
which purifieth the heart where he dwells. A renewed man may know his
perseverance by a certainty of Faith.


To the second I answer: there is a knowledge of a thing to come from
probabilities or conjectures, and this is opinion only, which is liable to
error, and therefore in it there is no certain knowledge. from the natural and
immediate cause of it; Moral certitude, when a man knows the certainty of his
estate for the present, but is uncertain whether it will continue, as a man
from sense may know a present heat in his body, but is uncertain whether the
same will endure; some learned Divines in the Roman Church, grant this moral
certitude of salvation. 4. of Divine Faith, whereby we assent to supernatural
truths, not from any evidence intrinsecal in the thing known, but from evidence
of Divine authority revealing the same in the Word. The certitude of knowledge
in a man renewed concerning his perseverance, is not opinion, for that is
uncertain, and liable to error; It is not Science, because this is from natural
reason. But the knowledge of perseverance is taught by Scripture and divine
revelation. Neither is it moral certitude only for the present; but it is a
certitude of divine Faith, grounded on divine Authority in holy Scriptures.

Obj.

Answ. I answer 1. A conclusion may be de fide, Mary is the Messiah) is to be
assented to with divine Faith; and yet our Lord infers the same from one
proposition known by the light of Scripture, To wit, Isaiah 35. he that does
the works of the Messiah is he true Messiah; But I do these works (says our
Lord) Math. 11.3. Now this assumption was known by sense, and by seeing him do
those works: So I say this conclusion (I shall persevere in grace unto eternal
life) is assented unto by divine Faith, and is deduced from one proposition
known by the light of Scripture; To wit, He that believes shall not perish,
but persevere unto eternal life. Ioh. 3.16. And from another known by the light
of spiritual sense in the renewed man: But I believe. 2. This spiritual sease
of a Believer is not a fantasy or imagination, but is soundly founded on the
qualifications and marks of true saving Faith, as they are holden forth in holy
Scripture; Zach. 12.10. They shall look upon him whom they pierced, and they
shall mourn. This look is by believing, and it brings home with it a sense of
love, which wounds the heart with sorrow for sin. Act. 15.9. Christ received
by Faith to dwell in our hearts, does by the sweet smell of his ointments and
graces purge out of our hearts the sent and delight of sinful and vile lusts.
It works by love, Gal. 5.6. as the fire works by heat on the objects see
before it, so Faith by love to God brings forth works of holiness toward God,
and of righteousness toward our neighbor. Joh. 5.4. This is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our Faith: and Faith resisting and overcoming
temptations is a sound Faith; Though a renewed man and sound Believer may be
overcome by temptation at a time in his affections: Yet his will is not wholly
subdued and overcome: for the ill he does, he wills it not. Romans 7.19. To
Jesus Christ the Author and Finisher of our Faith, with the Father, and holy
Ghost be all praise; Amen.

Victory over DEATH, through CHRIST.
1 COR. 15.56, 57. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the
Law.

But thanks be to God, who gives us the Victory through Jesus Christ.


AS our perseverance in the state of grace, A peaceable death flows from the
fullness of Christ.
is a fruit of the Merit of Christ, so a peaceable death in the savor of God,
and in the hope of glory, is a refreshing stream flowing from the fullness of
Jesus Christ. The comfortable taste of the fruits of the Cross of Christ does
sweeten the bitterness of death, as that tree did sweeten the waters of Marah.
Exodus 15.25.

In the words two points offer themselves to our consideration. 1. A twofold
misery, from which we are delivered: In the words two points.
to wit the sting of death, and the strength of sin. 2. procurer of our
deliverance:

As for the one part of our misery, In what sense the Law is the strength of
sin.
the curse and rigor of the Law, and how we are delivered from it, we spoke
already in a Sermon on Act. 13.39. Only I would speak one word or to clear how
the Law, which forbids sin, and threatens punishment to the sinner, is said
to be the strength of sin: It is not to be understood so; as if the Law did
strengthen a man to, or in sinning, for it prohibites sin, and reveals wrath
from heaven against all unrighteousness and disobedience; but the Law is called
the strength of sin, because a man unrenewed, before the time the Lord by grace
rectifies his will and affections, does from his own inbred corruption take
occasion at hearing of the Law, to enlarge his vast desires toward all the sins
forbidden therein: It is not so much the forbidding of sin, as sin forbidden
and heard of, that provokes the sinful appecite, Romans 7.7, 8. Is the Law sin,
God forbid? Nay, I had not known sin, but by the Law; but sin taking occasion
by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of concup scence, for without the
Law sin was dead: Our inordinate concupiscence, when it is once awaked by
hearing of sins forbidden, like a sleeping Dog awaked, becomes more fierce to
commit sin; like those whose appetite is depraved by that disease called
Malacia or Pica, they long most after meats forbidden; for this reason Aquinas
renders the word (...) Augmentum; Aquinas.
as if the Law were the increase and augmentation of sin; because by hearing
the Law, the desire of a man unrenewed is the more increased after sin: Luther.
Luthers similitude is very apposite to this purpose; as fire (says he) in
burnt limestone appears not, until ye cast water on it, and then immediately
it smoaketh; so the fire of concupiscence which should be quenched by the Law,
is from man's own latent corruption provoked by the Law; There is no fault in
the Law, but in man's distempered will, and appetite; As when a sick patient
longs after meat forbidden by the Physician, there is no fault in the
Physician, but in the distempered appetite of the patient.

The other part of man's misery through sin, How sin is a sting.
is the misery of death; the sting of death is sin; As by the sting of a
venomous Serpent comes an inflammation of the blood, together with a great
torment and pain in the body, so by sin, which is the sting of that old
Serpent, comes pain and horror in the conscience, and consumption in the body,
with dissolution and death at last: as the sting is the only weapon of a
Serpent, without which he can do no harm, so sin only, specially impenitency
and unbelief, are the strength and weapon of death, which make it both fearful
and hurtful to the children of men.

Sin which is the sting of the old Serpent, Sin brings death.
when it came into the world, and was tastened in our nature by a virtual
consent in our first parents, it brought death along with it. Romans 5.12. By one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin. 1 Cor. 15.21. By man came
death: By death, the wages of sin, we understand both all the alterations in
the body preceding our death, and also all the pains and evils that accompany
death; Thus then by death we understand those particular evils of misery. 1. A
subjection to the necessity of dying. 2. Alterations and sickness in the body
disposing it for death. 3. Fear of death, 4. Pain in death. 5. The separation
of soul and body. 6. The curse of death.

First man by sinning became subject to a necessity of dying: By death is
understood, 1. The necessity of dying.
As Soon as he sinned, he became mortal; No sooner sin entered into his soul, but
mortality and corruption immediately entered into his body; then the parcels of
dust that were bound together by the bond of innocence, were shaken loose, and
as a glass of sand turned up, the body became mortal, and the life of man
subject to a continual flux and decay; for after he had sinned, and not till
then, it was said by the Lord of life unto him, Dust thou art, and to dust
shall thou return, Genesis 3.19. It may be truly said of Adams body, that in the
state of innocence it was both Mortal and Immortal, in respect of a capacity
indifferent to dye or live: and also it may be said to have been neither mortal
nor immortal in respect it was created free from a necessary subjection to
dying, or an absolute appointment of God to live for ever: It was the gross
error of Pelagius a patron of corrupt nature, and an enemy to free grace,
Pelagius confuted.
To affirm that Infants were not born in sin, but that they had it only by
imitation; when he was pressed by force of argument taken from the death of
Infants as a bitter fruit of original corruption in them, his answer was, that
man would have dyed, though he had never sinned, because (said he) man had a
mortal body composed of contrary elementary qualities, which warring one
against another, would have made alteration in the body, and in the end brought
it to corruption and dissolution; But for confutation of this error, we should
consider, First as God created Adam with power of free will to stand or fall,
Adam with an inclination (though he was of a mutable condition) to sin; for as
an inclination to sin, being the first step of turning from God, is sinful, and
the most holy God is not the Author of sin; so a subjection to the necessity of
dying was not, before man subjected himself willingly to sin; for our most just
God, though by an act of sovereign power and dominion over his own creature, as
the Potter over his vessel, he might annihilate the same, yet would he not
punish his innocent creature before it had sinned, and was found guilty, and
liable to punishment. This was Abraham's argument for sparing the innocent in
Sodom, if there were any; Shall not (said he) the Judge of all the earth do
right? Genesis 18.25.) As for the contrary Elementary qualities of heat, and cold,
moystness and dryness created in the body; I answer, if man had persisted in
his integrity, keeping an harmony with God and his will, then God would have
kept these qualities in a right temper, and just symmetry amongst themselves,
without destroying one another: As by an overruling providence he preserved
the Lion and the Lamb, the Woolf and the Kid together in one Ark of Noah,
without the destruction of the Lamb and Kid; as he restrained the Lion from
destroying the living Ass, or the dead body of the Prophet, 1 King. 13. As he
restrained the fire Dan. 3. in the exercise of it, that it did not so much as
singe a hair of their heads, though at the same time he did not destroy the
fire in the heat and nature of it; So the Lord would have preserved those
elementary qualities in their nature and first act, though in their second act
and exercise he would have restrained them from destroying one another, if man
had stood in integrity: And will not the Lord preserve our glorified bodies in
heaven in a condition of an immutable immortality and incorruption, though they
will be raised (as is very probable) with the same Elementary qualities
wherewith they were created in the state of integrity? 2. Weakness and sickness.


Secondly as sin brought on man a necessary subjection to death and
dissolution, so it brought alterations upon the body by weakness and sickness:
Thus David acknowledged in the time he was under some distemper in body. Psalm.
38.3. there is no rest in my bones because of my sin; weakness and sickness of
the body is a consequent of sin; if man had continued in the state of
innocence, his labor and exercise in the body should have been to him as a
recreation with delight, and continued strength in his Spirit, whereas it is
since the fall with toil in the body and faintness in the Spirit. Genesis 3.19. In
the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread. Man's fainting and weariness of
Spirit in the labor of his calling do convince him guilty of original
corruption, and preach unto him humiliation and repentance; as weariness, so
sickness in the body, is a fruit of sin; It is a commotion and collision of
those humors in the body, which God restrained from breaking out one upon
another, so long as man by sin transgressed not the bounds set to him by God;
but when man passed his bounds, then the humors of the body passed their
bounds, and like an impetuous flood after the bulwark is removed, over-runs the
whole body: Sin made way to this inundation, which in the estate of integrity
was barred up in the body by the overruling providence of God, who shuts up
and opens the bars even of the great ocean at his own pleasure.

Thirdly from sin is that tormenting fear of death, 3 Tormenting fear of death.
which keeps the heart of miserable man in straitness and bondage. Heb. 2.15.
Through the fear of death all their life time are subject to bondage: In which
words a sinner is compared to a Malefactor condemned, shut up in prison, and
under a continual fear of the execution of the sentence: It is the Apostles
allusion also, Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has shut up all under sin; that is, it
has convinced all men of guiltiness and of obligation to eternal death. Job
18.14. Death is called the King of terrors; Heathens called it the most fearful
of all fearful things: Caligula the fourth Roman Emperor, hid himself under a
bed when he heard the noise of thunder; guiltiness in the conscience, is the
worm that breeds this gnawing and tormenting fear of death. Cains guiltiness
made him fear every one that met him, would kill him: This fear of death until
it be qualified and tempered by Faith in the Merit of the death of our Lord,
does exceedingly torment and disquiet the heart of man; in the midst of all his
pleasures even a glancing thought of death makes his heart sorrowful; Amidst
all his plenty he is like unto Damocles, who had not a heart to taste the
dainties on Dionysius his table, for fear of the drawn sword hanging over his
head by an hair; in like manner the fear of death in his adversity does
wonderfully disquiet him; he takes a very small cross, though it were but a
sore head, to be a beginning of his endless woes, to be a drop of that cloud of
fierce wrath that is to be poured out upon him in vials at his death and
judgment, and to be a Messenger sent of God to arrest him.

Fourthly, 4. Pain in dying.
Pain in dying is also a bitter fruit of sin; This bitterness and Antipathy
betwixt the living man and death is a part of the wages of original sin; It is
true some wicked men may have little or no pain at their death. Psalm. 73.4.
There are no bands in their death. But all that calmeness is but a shore
Sunshine before a storm: the fearful tempest of Gods wrath abides them; their
day comes on apace, wherein their worm dies not, and their fire will not be
quenched: The rich Glutton (no doubt) at his death had store of all Lenitives
that could give him any ease, whereas Lazarus had none. But that rich man
afterward felt the pain to the uttermost; he got not a drop of cold water to
refresh him: The death of some wicked men is like those Fishes going down with
much facility through Jordan, till they once fall into the dead Sea, and there
they die; so the wicked man is driven away in his wickedness, but the righteous
has hope in his death. Prove. 14.32.

Fifthly, 5. Separation of the soul and body.
In the first death is employed the dissolution it self, when the soul and body
by their union making up one person, are separated the one from the other; This
actual separation is also a punishment of sin. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is
death. It is true Enoch and Elias were born in sin, but had not this separation
of soul and body; yet it is certain, when they were translated in the body to
heaven, they were separate from the society of men living on the earth: they
were changed from a state of corruption, which was a separation, not of the
soul from the body, but of all corruption from the body, and of the remainders
of sin dwelling in both: Moreover God who is above all his penal Laws and
Statutes, might according to his good pleasure give an Indulgence and Immunity
to his servants from that penal Ordinance of death, as he did grant unto David
an Indulgence to eat of the Shewbread, notwithstanding there was a positive
Statute to the contrary.

The sixth and last evil of misery employed in death threatened against man before
his fall, and deserved by his fall, 6. The cu^^^ of death.
is the curse of death, when it serve has a dark and dreadful passage into the
second d^a^h and outer darkness: This by the fall was deserved by all; and
herein stands the curse of death, that not only it separateth the soul and the
body, but as Gods officer it opens the prison door, to the end the soul the
prime malefactor may be first drawn forth, and put under the execution of
wrath; and therefore the body which did second the soul in obeying the lusts of
the flesh, is put to the suffering of eternal wrath at the day of resurrection;
Death to the rich Glutton was a dark trance carrying him into hell: As hell it
self and the bottomless pit are the wages of sin deserved by all, so is also
the curse of death in being a passage unto hell due unto all sinners; for as
the Malefactor deserves the execution of the sentence of death; so in like
manner to be carried in such a way that leads to the place of execution.

This Doctrine serves for our humiliation; Sin is matter of humiliation in all
bodily distempers.
the pain accompanying, and the destructions following it, It is our duty when
ever any change seiseth on the body, to humble our spirits before God, and to
acknowledge the sins of our souls; Remember the distemper of the soul brought
on all the distempers and indispositions upon the body; There may be many new
and strange diseases in this sinful age, whereof it is hard for the most
skilful Physician to find out and show the true natural cause, but it is most
easy to find out the true spiritual cause both of our new and old diseases,
which is the corruption of our inward man; as in the last and worst of times,
new and strange sins do abound, foretold 2 Timothy 3. which our Ancestors and many
honest Pagans having nothing but natures light, would have abhorred, and said
as Hazael, Am I a dead Dog to do such things? so no wonder there be new
diseases inflicted justly by God as new punishments of new and uncouth
transgressions. Therefore at what time soever thou find any alteration in
thy constitution bodily, humble thy self in the sight of God, acknowledge thy
indwelling corruption, thy original and actual sins: for our sinful corruption
is the peccant and malignant humor, from which proceed all the distempers and
out-breakings in the body; It was David's practice in the time of bodily
sickness, to be humbled for his sins; and his greatest desire was to be healed
of them; Psalm. 39.8. Deliver me from all my transgressions; and if all men
should make this humbling use of bodily indisposition, how much more such men
in whom sins have not only been a meritorious cause of their sickness and
weakness, but some particular sins have been an active and efficient cause of
their great distemper of body? as some persons weakened through incontinency or
intemperance do pine away in the punishment of their own iniquities; how should
such be humbed before God, when they may read in great letters imprinted on
their bodies their particular sins? If any such belong to God, they will pine
away with grief of heart for their sins; they never turn their bodies in the
bed of sickness, but their sins return to their memory, and they cry with
Ezechias, I am oppressed, 2. Seek earnestly the health of thy soul.
Lord undertake for me. 2. After thou have in time of sickness humbled thy self
before God in acknowledging thy sins, seek first and most earnestly thy souls
health; So did David in a time of sickness, Psalm. 41.4. Heal my soul, for I
have sinned against thee: Our first and chief care should be to have that which
is most precious healed first; Men are more careful to heal Apostems in the
noble parts, then scratches in the skin: to heal a wound in the face, then one
in the back: No man is so senseless and soul-less as to deny that the soul is
more noble and precious then the body; and therefore soul-health is most to be
sought after, and to be preserved.

3. 3. Use lawful means to recover the body.
Having acknowledged thy sins, and sought first soul-health and Remission of
sins, thereafter in the name of God, use all lawful means for recovery of thy
bodily health: To this effect thou may and should use the help of the
Physician: his calling is the good Ordinance of God, but beware thou put thy
trust in the lawful means; for as small means through Gods blessing giving
virtue to them will do much good: so without it all consultations, operations,
and applications of the most probable means cannot profit thee in thy sickness;
Therefore in using lawful means though never so weak, be earnest with God by
prayer for a blessing: Beware on any terms to use unlawful means, as Ahaziah
did, 2 King. 1. He consulted with the Devil for recovering his health (...)
such means will not cure thee; or if they do, they may possibly cure thy body,
but withal they give a deadly wound to thy soul; for it is certain the Devil
does more evil this way by healing then by inflicting diseases: Those who are
called by the ignorant multitude good witches, do far more evil then those who
are called evil, because the first do wound the souls of those whose bodies
they cure, by their consulting and wicked compliance with such unlawful means;
and as the soul is far better then the body, so the destruction of the soul is
wor^e then that of the body.

It serves for instruction to teach us patience under sickness and bodily
indispositions: be patient O man, Learn and exercise patience in sickness.
the Lord does thee no wrong; thy way and thy doings have procured those things
unto thee. Ier. 4.18. Wherefore does a living man complain? a man for the
punishment of his sins. Lament. 3.39. It is a mercy thou art yet a living man,
and have any time allowed to thee for thy repentance: at such a time say thou
with the Church. Micah 7.9. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I
have sinned against him. It is true, the dear children of God in time of sore
and long continuing sickness will have some paroxysms and fits of impatience:
Patient Job cursed the day of his birth. Job 3.1. Jonah was very impatient at
the time he had pain in his head and faintness in his heart, Jonah 4 8, 9. good
Ezechias had his own fit also, Isa. 38.13. as a Lion he will break all my
bones. But such fits abide not with them: They recollect themselves, they mourn
and chatter for their impatience, they pray for patience, and resolve in the
strength of the Lord to submit to his holy will for the measure of their
sickness both in the degree and endurance of it: Job says after the fit is
gone, though he should kill me, yet will I trust in him. Job 13.15. and
Ezechias prays to God, and resolves on patience and submission for time
coming. Isa. 38.14.15. What shall I say? he has both spoken unto me, and
himself has done it. Our heavenly Father spares us in our fits of impatience,
and bears with us, as a tenderhearted Father bears with his cankered
child in time of sickness: he considers wisely, his sick child speaks
frowardly from a distemper in his body, and not from any disaffection in his
heart: Our wise Lord cares not for the flashes and flatterings of hypocrites
and wicked men, when his heavy hand is upon them Psalm 78.38. They did flatter
him with their mouth: then it may be God will get many fair words and large
promises: Neither is he provoked to wrath by the sudden fits and unadvised
out-breaking infirmities of his own dear children in time of heavy diseases.
Psalm. 103.13. Like as a Father pittieth his children, so the Lord pittieth them
that fear him; The Spirit of God sets before us the patience of Job, Iam. 5.11.
Ye have heard of the patience of Job: but there is not one word of his
impatience; Our gracious God remembers and rewards for his Sons sake the
purpose of their will and the affection of their heart but he forgiveth and
forgets their infirmities and imperfections: The child of God recovered out
of his sickness, calls to mind his own impatience, and the riches of Gods
bounty in bearing with him, and pardoning him: this makes him to walk the more
humbly with his God all his life time; this wonderfully engages his heart
toward God; As Patients recovered of a dangerous disease, should be very
thankful to the Physician, who did diligently and kindly attend them,
notwithstanding their untowardness in the time: so the children of God that
have been waited on in time of sickness with much patience and loving kindness
of their heavenly Father, when they look back to their recovery, both from
bodily sickness and soul distempers, David, Be moderate in the use of worldly
things
Psalm. 116.12.13. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits
toward me? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the
Lord.

It serves for admonition to put us in mind to be moderate and sober in spirit
in the use of things worldly; Man is subject to a necessity of dying, therefore
set not your hearts too much upon those things ye must sometimes leave; 1 Cor.
7.31. Use the world as not abusing it; we abuse it, and it abuses and abaseth
us, when we make it Master of our affections; then make we the earth our heaven
and happiness; and by so doing the world draws away the heart from true
happiness; The Apostle tells us, the fashion of this world passes away like
a Stage Play (as the word imports) within the space of an 100. years (if the
world endure so long) new Actors and Players will come upon the Stage; One
generation goes and another comes; like some going to the common market, and
others who have made either a good or evil bargain coming from it; you would
think that Son foolish and evil-advised, who being sent by his Father to travel
for a short time in a strange country, should marry there without his Fathers
consent, in a place which he must leave, and he knows not how soon his father
may send for him, and reckon with him for misdemeanors abroad; and shall we be
so foolish and unadvised as to espouse our hearts to the world? For who can
tell how soon the Lord may send his messenger death for us, and sentence us
with an eternal divorce, because our hearts went a whoring from him after
strange lovers. 2. Be not proud of any thing enjoyed.
Let us not be proud of any thing we enjoy in this present world; Thou can
not tell how short a time thou may enjoy it; It is both vanity and folly to
be proud of a borrowed cloak* thou can not tell, how soon it may be sent for,
and thou divested of it; The Romans of old did put a Sergeant in the triumphal
Chariot to keep the triumphing Conqueror amidst all his triumph within the
bounds of moderation and sobriety of spirit, by crying to him, Memento te esse
mortalem, Remember thou art a mortal man: Philip of Macedon directed his Page
every morning to call at his chamber door with this morning salutation, Memento
mori. Remember death: Thoughts of mortality in the morning keeps our spirits
sober all day long: Tamberlane that great captain and conqueror caused a
winding sheet to be carried in his march before him: the displaying of deaths
banner made him sober minded amidst all his warlike and victorious banners: it
is well known some Jews of the greater and better sort had their sepulchers in
their gardens, that in the midst of their pleasures they might be mindful of
death: The thoughts of it were as water to their wine, for preserving them from
surfeit and drunkenness with worldly cares and pleasures.

This doctrine serves for exhortation: Be preparing for our change.
it is the wisdom and duty of every person to be preparing for their change,
this is a duty required both of young and old; The Preacher gives the same
counsel to young men, Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
youth; and his reason is taken from deaths insensible, and yet most certain
approach; because the time is coming when the marrow of the backbone which
joins all the members to the head, and one to another as a silver cord, will be
loosed. The heart that is like a golden bowl, from which all the parts of the
body drink in the vital spirits, will be broken: And the head that is like a
wheel, eminent and conspicuous above other members, as the wheel is above the
cistern, it will be broken and laid in the dust; Although thou be young, yet
remember the day of death comes on apace; No sooner begin we to live, but so
soon begin we to die; Our life is in a continual flux and sometime it will run
out; The serious forethought of this change will be a mean to mortify
youthful lusts; This will make sin die in thee, before thy self die; and thy
life will be most comfortable after thy dying to sin; from thenceforth Christ
lives in thee. Gal. 2.20. and he comfort and reviveth the heart where he
dwells and lives. Isa. 57.15. If the young should prepare for their change;
what should those do who are of riper years, and by course of nature nearer to
the end of their journey? should not such prepare for their removal, as Job
did, Job. 14.14. All the days of my appointed time will I wait, Motives.
till my change come: Consider 1. The necessity of death is inevitable; Heb.
9.27. Nothing earthy can exempt thee, not thy riches: the rich Glutton died:
Not thy honor: Kings are laid in the dust: Not thy wisdom; Solomon died;
against it nor might nor strength will guard thee. Great Commanders have been
arrested and hurried to deaths prison in the head of their armies: yea grace
will not exempt thee; Abraham and the believing Patriarchs died. 2. Consider
the circumstances of time, place, and manner are all most uncertain. One said
truly, we all come into the world one way, but we go out of it a thousand
diverse ways: Therefore thou should be preparing at all times: for thou
know not at what hour of the day or watch of the night, death may come upon
thee as a thief: Did not death and destruction come upon the old world when
they were most secure? Mat. 24.38. And upon the rich man at the time he had
most rest and plenty of provision for many days, Luke 12.18. Therefore number
to thy self not years, but days, and count every day as thy last day. Psalm.
90.12. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom: and is not this a special point of wisdom to foresee, the plague, and
hide our selves under the shadow of Christ and the merit of his death from the
curse of death? Prove. 22.3. A prudent man, foreseeth the evil and hides
himself, but the simple pass on and are punished: yea the Heathen Poet could
say, Think every day thy last day: in all places guard thy heart and be
preparing for death, at home and abroad: thou may go out of thy house in good
health in the morning but return home sick, and die before the evening. 2 King.
4.18. Old Eli went out in good health in the morning, but dyed before the
evening, 1 Samuel 4.18. How to prepare for death.


Object. But how shall I be prepared for death. Answ. 1. Labor for repentance
and reconciliation with God: Mat. 5. which place Augustine applies to this same
purpose: Augustine
for if thou dyest in thy impenitency, having God thy adversary, consider in
time what will be thy fear and confusion in the day of thy appearing before his
tribunal: Sin unrepented of is the sting, whereby the first death wounds a
dying man with an incurable wound unto eternal death: As the sting of of the
Scorpion inflameth and tormenteth the whole man that is stung, so known sins
unrepented of, put soul and body in a flame of unquenchable fire: thus it was
with that miserable rich man, Luke 16.24. Delay not thy repentance and the
seeking of thy remission till thou art on thy death bed: would ye not think
that malefactor a careless fool, and unnatural to himself, who should delay to
seek his remission unto the very day he were taken out of prison to the place
of execution? though God has promised mercy to him that repents, yet has he
not promised repentance to him that delayeth: The sluggard foldeth his hands,
and says yet a little sleep, a little slumber, and his poverty comes as an
armed man: he cannot resist it. Prove. 24.34. so it is with a careless
Professor, who sleeps over his days, and has not a thought of death, till it
be at door: then does it surprise him as an enemy armed with the dart and sting
of sin unrepented of, and such a man not guarded by the shield of faith into
the righteousness of Jesus Christ, is confounded and overcome as a naked
soldier with fear at the very sight of death: Such debtors who delay to think
on their debts, and in time to speak for favor with their creditors, when the
term of reckoning and payment comes, they are confounded with shame and fear:
therefore delay not, but in time confess thy debts unto God, seek thy discharge
and acquittance in the blood of Christ, who is the surety of the new Covenant.
Labor by faith in the charter and Covenant of grace for a sight of that great
salvation purchased by the death of Jesus, that at thy death with old Simeon
thou may say and sing that Swan-like song, Mine eyes have seen thy salvation:
now let thou thy servant depart in peace. Luke 2.29. 2. As thou would be
well prepared for death, Labor to keep a good conscience in thy lifetime:
This is the chest wherein thy remission and peace is kept: a man of good
conscience, in all things willing to live honestly, as the Apostle describes,
Heb. 13.18. he lives aad dies in peace: It was Hezekiah his great comfort in
his sickness and apprehension of death 2 Kings 20 3. I have walked before thee
in truth, and with a perfect heart; It was Paul's comfort, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have
fought a good fight, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. A
good conscience is a continual feast, it has the sweetest relish at death:
when a man at that time is become like old Barzillai through age and debility.
2 Samuel 19.35. his senses of seeing, tasting and hearing fail him, yet even at
that time the relish of a good conscience will most refresh him. 3. as the wise
virgins were to meet the bridegroom, not only with light in their lamps (as the
foolish virgins were also) but with oil in their vessels; Not only must thou
have the light of a fair profession before the world, but also thou must have
in thy heart the oil of charity toward God and man; If thou have love toward
God and his holy commandments and love unfeigned toward thy neighbor, but
specially toward those in whom thou see most of the image of God, then art
thou prepared for death, and life eternal is prepared for thee. 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye
has not seen, ear has not heard, neither can it enter into the heart of man
to conceive, what God has prepared for them that love him. And 1 John 3.14. By
this we know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the
Brethren: but thou who hate thy neighbor, art filled with bitterness and
desire of revenge, and wilt not commit thy cause to him who judges
righteously: thou art not yet prepared for death, so long as thou art in the
gall of bitterness; for he that loves not his brother, abides in death, 1 John 3.15. That rigid and merciless servant who had no pity on his fellow
servant, was cast into prison: So (says our Lord) our heavenly father will do
unto us, if we from our hearts forgive not every one his brother their
trespasses. Mat. 18.33.4. as good and faithful servants, waiting for the return
of their absent Lord. Luke 12.36. Having their loins girded, and watching. In
those Eastern countries, the servants for their better expediting business at
home, or their Journeys abroad did gird up their long clothes, that they should
not entangle their feet and retard them in their course. The Apostle Ephesians. 6.
speaks of the girdle of truth and sincerity when our affections are taken off
from things earthly, trussed up, united together, and set on God; when our
heart is in heaven where our treasure is: Then and not till then is a man
prepared for death. When his mind is heavenly, and his affections are not
trailing on the things of the earth, like long garments licking up the dust:
for a worldly minded man is not yet prepared for death: A man that spends all
his time and care upon repairing the house where he dwells for the present,
but speaks not for another house, nor sends away any of his furniture to
it: will ye say such a man has any mind to remove? so a worldly-minded man
that spends his time and strength of spirit upon this present world, who
speaks not to God in time by prayer for that eternal house in heaven, that
sends not his heart before him as a part of his heavenly furniture, such a
man is not prepared for removal out of this world; Therefore let us obey our
Lords warning, Luke 21.34. Let not your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting or
drunkenness, and with the cares of this life, and so that day come upon you
unawares; A heart fixed on the world is taken away unwillingly: at death the
worldly man who had his full heaven in a full barn, his soul was taken from
him, Luke 12.20. The worldly-minded man, unless he repent and become
heavenly-minded, does in some respect die a violent death: he does not as our
Lord did, commit his spirit into the hands of his Father, but his soul is taken
from him against his will; he is drawn forth as a Malefactor from the prison of
his earthly house to the place of execution; But the spiritual man, that has
his heart drawn off the world, and set on God, he has his soul ready in his
hand to put it over into Gods hand; he knows whom he has believed, and that
his faithful creator will keep the good thing committed to him against that
day; As thou must gird up thy loins, so thou must watch, for thou know not
how soon thy Lord may send his messenger for thee; Watch over thy heart that it
depart not from the living God by unbelief, nor be drawn away by thy inordinate
concupiscence and unruly affections; watch over thy ways that thou may be
found in thy Lords ways, walking in his holy commandments; blessed is the man,
whom his Master when he comes, sindeth so doing; as thou watchest over thy own
heart and ways, so watch and long after the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ and
this longing for death out of a love to be with him, is a sure evidence of a
soul well prepared for death. 2 Timothy 4.8. The Lord will give a Crown of
righteousness, not to me only, but to them also who love his appearing. To him
with the Father and holy Ghost be all praise. Amen:

Having spoken of the sting of death, we proceed to speak the cure, and of our
deliverance from it, Of the cure of death.
The Author of our deliverance and victory is the Lord Jesus Christ, the
Captain of our salvation. The Apostle compares death to a conquering and
prevailing enemy, which by its sting and weapon wounds many with a mortal and
incurable wound, because such men as live to sin, and die in their guiltiness,
go down by the first death to the second, into that bottomless pit, out of
which there is no redemption.

Jesus Christ our Lord by the merit of his death alone has overcome death,
Christ only has overcome death for all that believe in him.
and of a bitter enemy has made death a comfortable friend to all who believe
in him; for by him alone we get victory over death. That we may understand this
point the better, we should consider, in what respect Christ has delivered us
from death; he has not delivered us from our obligation and subjection to the
necessity of dying, for we see believers dye as well as unbelievers; Neither
has he delivered us from being subject to sicknesses and alterations going
before death; David complains, the pains of hell got hold upon him, Psalm.
116.3. that is, extreme pains in his body, and anxiety in his spirit; Neither
has our Lord delivered from pain at the hour of death, nor from the separation
of soul and body by death; But our Lord has overcome death in these respects.
1. In respect of 1. The sting of death.
In respect of the sting of death; he has taken away our sins; and as an enemy
is overcome when his deadly weapon is taken out of his hand, so our Lord
overcame death by taking away sin on his cross; for sin is the sting of death.
Hos. 13.14. O Death, I will be thy plagues. This the Apostle cites, 1 Cor.
15.54. The Captain of our salvation upon the cross, as in an open and pitched
battle did spoil principalities and powers, Col. 2.15. One of these powers
armed against us was death; he took away our sins on the cross, and so spoiled
death of his weapon, as a valiant Conqueror takes away the weapons from a
subdued enemy. 2. 2. The fear of death.
Jesus Christ our Lord has freed us from the fear of death. Heb. 2.15. he was
partaker of flesh and blood (he took upon him our nature) that he might deliver
them who through the fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage;
Our Lord by taking away our sins, the sting and weapon of death, does deliver
us from the fear of death; for that which makes an enemy fearful, is his
deadly weapon; It is true, sometimes men may fear even a naked enemy, but they
have no cause, seeing he cannot harm them so some of Gods dear children at a
time may exceed in the fear of death, but they have no such cause of fear:
neither would they be so afraid, 3. The curse of death.
if they were strong in the faith of Jesus Christ, who has disarmed death. 3.
Our Lord has delivered us from the curse of death, that to us the first death
is not a dreadful passage to the second; Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have eternal life. Rev. 14.13. Blessed are they that die in the
Lord, that henceforth they may rest from their labors. As for weakness,
sickness, pain, and alterations in the body, though our Lord has not delivered
us from them, yet by the merit of his death, and the grace of his Spirit, he
sanctifies them to us, and in a gracious providence turns them to a good and
spiritual use: Our Lords death is like to that salt that purged and sweetened
the naughty waters of Jericho 2 Kings 2.21. and like the meal cast into the
pot, wherein was the bitter herb: 2 Kings 4.41. The death of our Lord has
taken wrath and the curse from out of all our afflictions, and makes them
useful and profitable unto us. Our Lord in a gracious dispensation turns the
bodily sickness of his own children into a spiritual medicine for purging an
humorous and distempered soul: for bringing down the tympany and swelling pride
of the heart: such as glory and boast in the beauty or strength of the body, do
see in time of sickness the weakness and vileness of the body, and so being
humbled, learn to glory only in the Lord, and in the beauty of his grace in
the inward man. A sanctified sickness purges out of the heart covetousness
(the hearts Dropsy) thirsting for more of this present world, when the sick
man sees the emptiness of things worldly which cannot give him any ease in the
time of his greatest need; A sanctified sickness purges out unruly lusts,
which are as a burning fever to the soul; sickness takes down the body, and
grace sanctifying it, turns it into a temple to the holy Ghost. The wise
Master Builder uses sickness as a sharp edged tool for polishing the body for
the inhabitation of the Spirit, that it may be a temple prepared: In like
manner our wise and merciful Lord, though he deliver not his own children from
death, yet he makes their death to be of singular good use to them: It is a
putting off of corruption, that they may be clothed upon with incorruption: The
death of wicked men, dying in their guiltiness, is like unto a thiefs putting
off his clothes, to the end he may be scourged: but the death of the godly is
like unto a child's putting off the old garment, that he may put on the new,
that is incorruptible, and will not fade, but ever have a beautiful luster: It
is for this their soul does groan and long 2 Cor. 5.2. In this we groan,
earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our house, which is from heaven. 4.
The dominon of death.
As for deaths dominion and power over our bodies in the grave, our Lord did
take it also away by the merit of his death, and declared his victory over, and
our deliverance from it, by raising his own body, and by loosing the bonds of
death: when our Lord awoke from death, and stretched out the strength of his
Godhead like Sampson, he broke asunder those bonds as cords of flax. Our
deliverance from the grave will be fully manifested in the day of the glorious
resurrection of our bodies

Object.

Answ. I answer, Death is not inflicted on Believers in wrath.
that death temporal is formally and properly a punishment. when it is
inflicted by God as a Judge in his wrath* and when it is a door and passage to
the second death, and to a perpetual separation from the face of God: But the
death of the godly is not inflicted by God in wrath, for these reasons.

1. Because in the remission of their sins and reconciliation with God in their
justification, all wrath is taken away: God forgiveth and forgets their
sins. Isa. 43.25. I blot out thy transgressions for my own names sake, and will
not remember thy sins; But where wrath remains, sin is not forgotten.

2. Rev. 14.13. it is a passage unto their eternal rest in their country that
is above: It is as a speedy passage by sea to a traveller returning home to his
Fathers house.

3. Psalm. 116.15. Next I answer, death to the godly is not a door of fear and
condemnation, but of hope and salvation, Rom 8.1. There is no condemnation to
them who are in Christ Jesus; There may be in a great Princes house a common
door and gate, at which Malefactors do enter, and go down into the dark
dungeon, at which also the children may enter and go up to the rooms above that
are full of light; The door is one and the same, but the use of it is far
diverse in the respect to the one and the other; So dissolution at death is
common both to the godly and wicked: but the relation that death has to them
is diverse: to the one it is a passage for glory and to the other for eternal
pain; from whence it appears; that the punishment stands not so much in the
dissolution of the person, which is common both to the godly and wicked; As in
that ordination of the first death to be a passage unto eternal death, which in
Gods purpose is ordained and in justice executed on the wicked It is true death
will be bitter in the pains of it even to the godly, but this bitterness of
death is not properly a punishment to the godly: as a bitter potion given out
of the hand of a loving father to his weak child is not given as a punishment,
but as a medicine, that though it be painful for a time, yet he may have
stronger health in time to come So after the bitterness of death is passed, the
children of God get confirmed health and salvation in the kingdom of heaven.

Object. for us? how is it then, that Believers are not freed from that debt of
death, for the which their surety has given satisfaction?

Answ. I answer, true it is, Our Lord died, Believers die not to satisfy divine
justice.
that by his death he might satisfy divine justice fully; but to this end we
die not, that we may satisfy divine justice: for a finite creature cannot
satisfy infinite justice: yea the wicked in hell do not by their sufferings
fully satisfy; they will be ever in satisfying, but never able to make out the
satisfaction: The end of the death of the Godly is not (as was the end of
Christ's death) to satisfy the justice of God as a Judge, but to subject
themselves to his fatherly pleasure and wisdom, that by death they may be
purged from the dross of inbred corruption, and thus enter into the glory and
Joy of their father, for corruption cannot inherit incorruption; did not our
Lord fulfill all righteousness for us in his active obedience? and yet we stand
obliged to the mandatory power of the Law: as we have endeavored to prove
elsewhere, in Sermon. 4. on Ezekiel. 36 6.27. though we be not bound to obey the Law
for the same end our Lord obeyed it, to wit, for our justification, yet we are
bound thereto for this end that by our obedience we may testify our
thankfulness to the Lord our creator and redeemer: likewise in our Lords
passive obedience, his end was to satisfy for our guiltiness and obligation to
punishment but a special end in all our sufferings, is that we may be
conformable to the Lord our head. Rom 8.29. not by satisfying with him, but by
our patient submission to the will of our heavenly father, like as our Lord in
all things submitted to the will of his father.

Object. David and Ezechias had their own fears in a large measure. Psalm. 116.
Isa. 38. How then say ye that Christ has delivered us from the fear of death?

Answ. Believers have a natural fear of death.
I answer, it is no wonder the godly have a natural fear, because they have, as
all creatures, a natural desire of self-preservation; and this natural fear
being concreated with man in the state of integrity, was not sinful.

But sometime this natural fear exceeds in the godly, when faith and hope is
weak: This excess of natural fear is in them a sinful infirmity, not to be
defended by any, but to be pitied by others, and mourned for by themselves, and
prayed against by all: weakness of faith at such times makes their fears great
and strong; when the children of God have deep apprehensions of death, and but
weak apprehensions of Jesus Christ, and of eternal life by him then is their
eye fixed on the bitter potion, which breeds astonishment, until the time they
gather their thoughts, and by faith and hope look to that eternal health which
will follow upon this bitter potion. Our Lord said to Peter, Mat. 14 Why art
thou so fearful, O thou of little faith? little faith makes much fear: but a
vigorous faith into Gods special presence, though it do not altogether expel,
yet will it moderate and regulate our natural fear of death. Psalm. 23.4. Though
I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou
art with me, thy rod and thy staff comfort me: They are as children in their
loving Fathers hand, and fear not to pass through that dark trance to their
eternal Mansions of light and glory.

This doctrine serves to rouse and raise our hearts unto the duty of
Thankfulness: Be thankful for victory over death.
Thanks be to God who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. How
should we bless our God for sending his wel-beloved son into the world, to
deliver us from all our enemies, and from this awful enemy death, that
assaileth us in our lowest condition! The damsels of Jerusalem praised David,
who had slain his ten thousands: how then is David's Lord and ours to be
praised, who has overcome innumerable thousands at death in the behalf of his
elect and redeemed ones? As Sampson killed many at his death, so the Captain of
our salvation in his lowest condition subdued our enemies in their greatest
strength: for the weakness of God is stronger then men. 1 Cor. 1.25 Then was
our Lord strongest in the might of his power, when he appeared weakest in his
outward condition: by his cross he triumphed, by the shame he endured, he
overcame that perpetual shame and confusion we had deserved: by his pains he
saved us from eternal pains: and by his death he was the death and plague of
our death: how then should we love this Lord who has delivered our souls from
the sting and curse of death, our eyes from perpetual tears, and our feet from
falling into that bottomless gulf, out of which there is no returning? Amongst
the Heathen, in whose hearts were engraven by the finger of nature some dim
lines of the law of gratitude, If any man in time of battle had rescued and
saved a Roman Citizen, he was adorned with a new oaken crown or garland, and
highly praised: how then should we, for whom, and before whom Christ was, and
is crucified, praise him, who rescueth us from the power of death and prevents
us with mercy that we are not sent from death into hell? The people of Israel
did sing the high praises of the Lord for dividing the red sea, for bringing
them through it, and for his mighty power and mercy in bringing them through
Jordan to their promised rest: how then should we praise our Lord, who in his
infinite power, unsearchable wisdom, and rich mercy, has made a way for us
through the deep of his sufferings into that heavenly rest? as at the Priests
entering the river Jordan, Josh. 4. it divided and gave way to the people of
God to pass over: so our great high Priest by going down to death, has made a
way for us through it unto eternal life: therefore from a deep sense of that
which our Lord has done already for us, and in hope of that happiness before
us, hid with Christ in God, Let us bear a part in that new song, Rev. 5.13.
Blessing, glory, honor, and power be unto him that sits upon the throne, and
unto the Lamb for ever, and ever.

It serves for admonition: Submit to the disposals of God in sickness, death.
seeing our Lord Jesus Christ by his death sanctifies our death, and all our
bodily indispositions, by making them work for our good, and this also is a
part of his victory; it is our duty in weakness and sickness to submit unto the
wise and gracious dispensation of God, for doing whereof I propose these
ensuing motives. 1. Motives. 1.
Because in the sickness of the children of God his wisdom is made manifest,
ordering the sickness of their bodies for the healing of their souls. Rom 8.28.
All things work together for good to them that love him; their sickness is Gods
medicine, and has an operation on their souls for their good, what ever be the
end of it; if the child of God recover, his sickness brings forth the
peaceable fruit of righteousness: Heb. 12.11. that is to say, a near and closer
conformity to the will of God, the supreme Law of all righteousness, which
righteousness and endeavor of conformity to the will of God brings forth
peace of conscience as a sweet and pleasant fruit; But if the sickness be unto
death, it brings forth the incorruptible fruits of eternal life. Therefore in
time of sickness submit wholly to his most wise and holy will: Our Lord said to
Peter, Joh. 13. What I do, thou know not now, but thou shall know: so in the
time of thy sickness, wherein the Lord purges thy soul, thou know not what
thy Lord is doing, but afterward thou shall know: Though the manner of his
operation be a great mystery and secret, yet the work brought forth in thy
soul and conversation shall be manifest: Though sickness be like a medicine,
sharp and bitter in the operation, yet it proves very profitable in the souls
health that follows upon it: shall we take bitter potions upon the word of a
man, a skilful Physician, for the healing of our bodies, and shall we not
accept sickness as a Medicine out of the hands of our wise God and loving
Father for healing our souls? he is faithful, and has promised that our
afflictions, though grievous for the present, shall bring forth the peaceable
fruit of righteousness, Heb. 12.11. If we endure trials, we shall receive the
Crown of life, Iam. 1.12. Some in Gods preventing mercy have been drawn to God
by their sickness: as that Palsie-man, Mar. 2. and that haemorish woman: The
great Physician at one time healed both their souls and their bodies: according
to that of Isa. 48.10. I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction, he
refines his own children as Gold, makes them vessels of honor, and sets
his Image and superscription upon them in the legible characters of true
holiness and righteousness. 2. Because he makes his loving kindness and
indulgency manifest to his own children in time of their sickness: do they not
under long and lingering diseases now and then feel some sparks of his love
warming and cherishing their hearts, and his sensible strength in the inward
man upholding them under the burden of a sick body? These glances of his
countenance and favor, are as cordials to keep their hearts from fainting:
Thus did the Lord visit his servant David. Psa. 31.7. Thou have considered my
trouble, thou have visited my soul in adversities, and Paul 2 Cor. 1.4. He
comfort us in all our tribulation.

3. Submit to his will in sickness; the Lords preventing mercy in preserving
thee at such a time from many sins, whereinto thou might have fallen if thou
had enjoyed health and liberty to go up and down a world full of snares;
Therefore if thou be young, and under weakness, and a daily decay of bodily
strength, adore the deep wisdom, and rich love of thy Lord, who keeps thee in
durance as a prisoner of hope; A father that keeps within doors his
distempered and distracted child without liberty to go abroad, does it not as
an act of rigor and unkindness, but out of much wisdom and love, fearing he
should abuse his liberty, and throw himself away into dangers; so thy heavenly
father by sickness puts a restraint upon thee, not out of hatred, but out of
much love; It is far better to suffer affliction in a weak and sickly body,
then to act sin in a strong and healthful body; It is much better to have the
strength of grace made manifest in thy weak body, then to have a weak and
unruly spirit in a strong body; It is much better to be under a sickly and
suffering condition, then to be like those young widows rambling up and down in
their licentious health: such are not only soul-sick, but dead while they live
in that base element of noisome lusts. 1 Timothy 5.6. but the children of God
living to him in their sickness, have healthful souls in sick bodies: they have
freedom of spirit under bodily restraint.

It serves for a ground of comfort and encouragement to the children of God
against the fear of death; Comforts against the fear of death.
and for the better establishing of our hearts, I propound these consideraons

1 Consider, Death is a naked and spoiled enemy, Our Lord has taken the sting
from it, so that it cannot harm thee: It is true the dear children of God have
their own fits of natural fear, when they look to deaths pale and ghastly face,
but when in their second and better thoughts, they consider death has no power
nor weapon wherewith to hurt them, this does raise and comfort their drooping
spirits; and upon this account I may say to the child of God, as the two
faithful spies said to the Children of Israel, affrighted with apprehensions of
strong and mighty enemies in the way unto their promised rest, Number. 14.9 Their
defense is departed from them, and the Lord is with us, fear them not.

2. Thy Lord and Captain of salvation is with thee at thy death; and will lead
thee through that dark trance: This was David's comfort, Psalm. 23 4. I will not
fear, although I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, because the
Lord is with me: This valley is like that of Achor to the child of God, a door
of hope. Hos. 2.15. As the children of Israel were much encouraged and
comforted by the first tastes of plenty in Achor at their entrance into the
promised land: so the children of God at their entering into the valley of
death, and border of eternity, receive of the first fruits of eternal life,
peace in their consciences, and joy of the holy Ghost in their hearts; by faith
and hope they see some light before them at the further end of this dark
valley, like a light on the shore, toward which their will does steer the
course of their affections; Psalm. 48.14. He will be our guide even unto death;
Think not thy God who has been thy guide through the wilderness, will leave
thee when thou come to Jordan, and to the border; Thou art both unthankful
and unbelieving to entertain such unkind thoughts of thy kind God, upon whom
thou have been cast from the womb: make better use of tried love, then to
distrust him in the end of the day, who has been with thee since the morning
of thy life: but rather learn, as David, to make good use of former kindness:
first to praise him, Psalm 71.6. By thee have I been holden up from the womb, my
praise shall be continually of thee: Next to hope and confide in him. verse.
14.16. I will hope continually, I will go in the strength of the Lord God: And
last, to pray to him for continuing his loving kindness, ver. 17, 18. O God
thou have taught me from my youth; Now also when I am old and grayheaded, O
God, forsake me not.

3. Consider thy union with Christ. he is the savior of his body, all his
members will be brought where himself their head is, he will be complete in his
body: he will not want the weakest or poorest believer, that did on earth
cleave to him with purpose of heart.

4. Consider he prayed for thee, that thou might be where he is: Joh. 17.24.
Father I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me; and he prayed
also that the father would keep them in his name and power by the way, until
they came unto the end of their faith, the salvation of their souls: Thou who
in thy sick bed prayest for the same thing our Lord sought in prayer for thee,
and before thee, thou may be assured to be heard, when thy prayer is founded
on his merit, and on the efficacy and example of his prayer.

5. Consider the godly man is a great gainer by death; It is best to be with
Christ, Phil. 3.23. The man who lives to Christ, and dies in Christ, does not
loose the good things of this world, but exchangeth them for far better: A man
returning from a strange and poor country to his own home, and in place of
base metal which he leaves behind him, receiving a bill of exchange to be
answered in gold, and ten thousand for one, that man loses nothing by leaving
that poor country and base coin, but gains much: so the believer at death
upon the account of Gods true and faithful promise made to him in place of
empty and perishing riches, receives in heaven solid and durable riches, in
place of honor worldly, that is like the inconstant wind, he gets his adoption
manifested to him, when he is put in possession of eternal glory: when he is
made a sure pillar in that new Jerusalem, whereupon holiness and glory is
engraven with indeleble characters. The new Jerusalem is wholly founded upon
Jasper stones. Rev. 21.19. All such precious things so much esteemed in this
world, are far below our contentment and happiness in heaven, as the foundation
of a house is far below the plenishing and precious furniture of it: God
himself, infinite in greatness, goodness, beauty, and all perfection, will
replenish our house there with his own presence, wherein is fullness of joy and
pleasures for ever. Psalm. 16.11. Compare I pray you our happy being with Christ
after death, and our being in the miseries of this life: Then can thou not
but assent to that of Paul. It is best to be dissolved and to be with Christ;
at the best here we are but Pilgrims: and is it not best for a Pilgrim to be at
home in his fathers house? we may and should as Pilgrims resolve for hard and
unkindly entertainment in this strange world: yea, entertain a pilgrim never so
well, yet his heart is homeward; so though the child of God were every way in a
prosperous condition here on earth, yet his heavenly mind is far above those
empty husks, and his heart is in heaven: here not only are we in a course of
pilgrimage, being absent in the body from the Lord, but also in a daily
warfare, not only against flesh and blood, but against principalities and
powers, against Satan, the world, and our own rebellious corruption, by which,
as a domestic traitor Satan and the world do deceive, assail, and overcome us
now and then in the hour of temptation; we get rest in time of our life from
diverse temptations, which Satan as a crafty fowler uses thereby, as so many
calls and whistlings to allure into his Net diverse kinds of silly fools; in our
younger years we are tempted to untowardness and frowardness: in riper years to
riot and sensuality; after that to pride and ambition, and in our declining age
to covetousness and worldly mindedness. To have our hearts even then fixed in
the world, when one of our feet is already in the grave: a most untimely
temptation, and yet prevails with too many; Is it not therefore best to be
dissolved and to be with Christ? There and then will be perfect peace, and
freedom from this body of sin, and inordinate concupiscence, which like a
troubled sea raised up with the winds of temptations, does cast up mire and
dirt: but in heaven with Christ our Lord there is a perpetual calm; all the
stormy winds are in the inferior region of the air: so all the winds of
temptations, are here below; but none there where our Sun of righteousness
shines for ever. Man here is subject to one cross after another, like Paul, no
sooner out of the danger of the raging sea, but a Viper leapeth upon his hand,
Act. 28. No sooner do our eyes dry, but we are put to weeping again. The
breathing times and respite God in his goodness gives to us at one time, are
to prepare us for a new onset at another time: is it not therefore best to be
there, where all tears will be wiped from our eyes? Rev. 21.4.

2. It is best to be in heaven with Christ, if we compare the small beginnings
of glory here with that cempleat glory and hapiness there: here the children of
God receive the earnest of the spirit, and the first fruits of eternal life:
but what is the earnest penny in comparison of that full sum of glory which
cannot be conceived or numbered by the heart of man here? And what is the
handful of the first fruits in comparison of the full harvest of Joy in heaven?
I grant the earnest should comfort and encourage us in the assured expectation
of the full bargain of happiness, for faithful is he who has promised: And the
first fruits, some grains of peace and joy bestowed on us here, should comfort
us in the hope of that full joy there, that shall never be taken from us: The
same was a ground of the Apostle his willingness to be dissolved, and of his
confidence to be eternally happy after his dissolution. 2 Cor. 5.6, 8. He has
given unto us the earnest of the spirit: we are confident and willing rather to
be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord,

6. Consider to what society and company we go at our death, Peter upon the
Mount in the society of our Lord at his transfiguration, and of those two
witnesses Moses and Elias; It is good to be here said he; what then will thou
think and say when thou shall have an immediate communion with thy Lord, and a
comfortable, but unspeakable communion with all the Angels and Saints in
heaven: Old Jacob was much encouraged to go down unto Egypt, when he considered
Joseph was there before him to receive and welcome him, when he looked beside
to the wagons and provision sent to him for his journey, and when he looked
behind him to a land of famine, from which he was to depart. So at the hour of
death we have matter of encouragement, when by faith we look before us: Our
Joseph, the Lord Jesus Christ, the great Steward and dispenser of grace and
glory is before us to welcome us, when we look with the eye of sense and
experience beside us, Our Joseph sends some provision of faith and hope to
hold in the life of grace by the way; And when we look behind us, we leave a
world abounding in sin and misery; That divine Philosopher Socrates said, death
would be a hard matter to me, if I thought not I were going to men departed
this life, and those far better then many who stay behind them: Therefore in
this respect also it is best to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

7. our happy condition is a thing certain and sure, already prepared for us by
the merit of Christ, and reserved for us in heaven. 1 Pet. 1.4. It is not with
us (blessed be God) as with the Emperor Hadrian; he knew not whether his soul
went at death, when he said, O my silly wandering soul, into what places will thou now go! But a Believer says with Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have
believed: Our Lord has told us, Joh. 14.12. I go to prepare a place for you.
As a man espousing a wife in a strange country, returns to his own country,
makes all ready for her coming home, and in his convenient time sends his
special friends for her to convoy her home; so our Lord by his word has suited
us, and by faith wrought in us by his Spirit, has espoused us unto himself; he
has gone before us, prepared all happiness for us, and in his own good time
does send his holy Angels to convoy our souls at death unto that eternal house
in heaven, not made with hands: The sight and knowledge of this made the
Apostle to groan in his spirit, and long for it. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. As one dwelling
for a time in a strait, dark, and rainy house, compassed about with naughty and
wicked neighbors; such a man after he has gotten a promise of a large
lightsome and close house, that has the society of good and comfortable
neighbors, how much will he long for the term of removal? Such is our
condition in the body; Much straitness and suppression of spirit through many
grievous troubles; much ignorance and darkness in our understanding. Many
temptations, like rain dropping in through the open and ill-guarded organs of
our senses; And also many wicked men do compass us like Bees, to sting us; but
in that house and happy condition above there is largeness of spirit, and
freedom from all molestation, full light and knowledge stability, perpetual in
grace and glory, above the rain and wind of temptations; And there is the
blessed society of God, Angels and perfect souls: Therefore from all these
considerations we must and should conclude, it is best to be dissolved and to
be with Christ, with whom our life is hid in God.

Object.

Answ. I answer, no doubt he may, so did David, Psalm. 39.13. A believer may in
time of sickness pray to live.
and Ezekias, Is. 38. but desire of life should be well qualified.

1. It must be ever with submission to the good will of thy heavenly father:
thou must say as our Lord did, Father, if it be thy will, let this cup pass
away from me, yet not my will, but thine be done.

2. It must be out of a serious intention and resolution to honor the God of
thy life, by bringing forth the fruits of righteousness after thy sickness,
that all who know thee, may praise thy God, not only in his power manifested in
thy bodily recovery, but in his mercy for healing thy soul, and making thee to
grow in grace after thy sickness.

3. It must be with an earnest desire to glorify God in thy calling: As Paul,
Phil. 1.24. It is best for you that I abide in the flesh: As Parents being sick
may lawfully desire to live, that they may bring up their children in the
knowledge and nurture of the Lord; but all this must be done with a submission
to the will of God.

Object.

Answ. That was Jonahs sinful fit of impatience, It is not lawful our of
discontent to desire death.
we should be much displeased and discontent with our sins, but in no wise with
the good and blameless providence of God in afflicting us for our sins; It were
evil for us if death should take us away in such a fit: It were with the silly
fish, but a leaping out of the lukewarm water into the hot fire: It is a
weakness of spirit to fret and faint under crosses, but the strong spirit
bears them with resolution: To this purpose Augustine does argue well,
Augustine.
that Cato and Lucretia were both of weak spirits, in so far as they could not
bear those disgraces, wherein they were innocent sufferers, but out of their
weakness of spirit, and a desperate coffeehouse, they became Agents in their
own perpetual shame and confusion, by self-murder, and leaving their station
without any order from God who had placed them therein; It is most certain that
crosses, through Gods grace sanctifying them, are means to wean the heart of
the child of God from the world, as babes are weaned from the breast after it is
crossed with wormwood; But the main ground wherein rises and stands the
desire of Gods children to be dissolved is this, that they may be delivered
from the burden and bondage of indwelling corruption, and be with Christ,
which is best of all; Therefore whatsoever thy present condition be, labor
thou to be content therewith; This is a sure ground of comfort after thou art
once in a state of grace and favor with God through Christ. Thy present
estate, be it what it will, prosperity, or adversity, it is ever the best;
Reverence his wise and holy providence; God has placed thee in this world;
Submit thou to his will for the time of thy abode or removal; As God put Noah
in the Ark, so the holy man stayed there till God commanded him to come forth;
Joseph and Mary stayed in Egypt, till God sent them word to depart out of it;
So must we with patience abide in a miserable world until the time God sends
for us; and when death comes as a messenger from God, then should we answer as
Rebekkah did to her nearest friends, when they said, Genesis 24. Will thou go with
this man? She answered readily and resolutely, I will go; She leaves parents,
friends and all. So at death should we be willing to leave all in this present
world, for it is best to be with Christ the prince of life, and Lord of Glory,
To whom with the Father and Holy Ghost, be all Praise, Honor and Glory, for
now and ever. Amen.

The glorious resurrection of the body by CHRIST.
JOH. 5.28, 29. Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming in the which all
that are in the graves, shall hear his voice,

And shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life,
and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation.


THe great privilege of the glorious resurrection of our bodies, The
resurrection of the body, a fruit of Christ's Merit.
is also a sweet refreshing stream flowing out from the fullness of Christ his
love, merit, and power, 1 Cor. 15.22. Since by man came death, by man came also
the resurrection of the dead; we get a right and claim to this privilege by
Faith in Jesus Christ, the purchaser of it; Ioh. 5.24. Verily, verily I say
unto you, he that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into damnation, but is passed from death
into life. It is spoken of the whole person, and supposes man made up of soul
and body, and also in the praeterit time, he is passed from death unto life:
because his interest and claim to Christ does ensure unto him all the benefits
purchased by the death of Christ; As the purchase is by the merit and
satisfaction of Christ: The application and appropriation of the right and
claim by Faith in Jesus Christ; so we are put in the possession of it by our
Lord at his second coming, Philip. 3.21. he shall change our vile body, that it
may be fashioned according to his glorious body.

In the words we have these four points considerable.

1. In the words 4. points. 1.
The certainty of the resurrection of the body, The hour is coming: Our Lords
Disciples and hearers marvelled when they heard of the Mystery of the first
resurrection whereof our Lord was speaking, that those who were yet dead in
their sins and trespasses should be quickened by the word and Spirit; in these
words he says, marvel not at that, for not only is there a first resurrection
in this world to a new life, but also a second resurrection in the other world
into eternal life.

2. All in the graves.

3. They shall hear his voice, and shall come forth.

4. They that have done good, unto life, and they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of damnation.

From the first point we observe this Doctrine and Conclusion; There shall be a
resurrection of the body.
It is most certain there will be a resurrection of the body; The hour and time
appointed for it in Gods purpose is coming, says our Lord, in whose lips was
never found guil; There is a certainty of infallibility in respect of divine
prediction; for heaven and earth will pass away, before one of his words fall
to the ground; and there is also a certainty of immutability in respect of Gods
Decree and eternal purpose; for the counsel of the Lord shall stand, and he
shall do all his pleasure; Isa. 46.10. The resurrection of the body is most
certain in both respects.

1. 1. It is foretold.
It is foretold and revealed by the holy Spirit in the Scriptures both of the
Old and New Testament, in that (...), first Gospel, preached by God himself in
Paradise, Genesis 3.15. the seed of the woman shall bruise the head of the
Serpent, that is destroy all his works: when the head is bruised and crushed,
forthwith all the operations and actings proceeding from it, are crushed and
destroyed. So the power and dominion of death over the body in the grave, one
of his works brought upon us by his tempting, and our own virtual consent in
our first Parents is destroyed in the seed of the woman, as was foretold in
that first and fundamental Gospel-Promise. Exodus 3.6. I am the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob; which place our Lord cites against the Sadduces, to prove the
certainty of the resurrection, Math. 22.32. Because God is the God of the whole
man, and man is not whole without the body; Job 19.25. I know my Redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though
after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God; whom I
shall see my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; Job is
confident of his resurrection in the same individual body, Psalm. 17.15. I shall
be satisfied* when I awake with thy likeness; which place sound Interpreters,
both ancient and modern, do expound of the awakening of the body from the sleep
of death in the day of resurrection; To this purpose speak also the holy
Prophets, Isa. 25.8. He will swallow death into victory: And this is by
delivering our bodies from the captivity of the grave, wherein death and
corruption for a time had power over them. Isa. 66.14. Your bones shall
flourish like an herb; at the day of resurrection, the bodies that were hid in
the graves, and secret receptacles of the earth, like a herb hid under the
ground in time of Winter; The Son of righteousness at his return will revive
them, and make them spring forth in fresh and lively colors by the effectual
influence of his mighty power, Dan. 12.2. Many of them that sleep in the dust
shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt; It is certain also from the divine Oracles of the New Testament,
Math. 12.41. The Ninevites shall rise in Judgment, Ioh. 11.24. I am the
resurrection and the life, says our Lord, Act. 24.25. Paul preaches before
Foelix of the Judgment to come, and if there will be a Judgment, certainly
the resurrection of the body must precede, that the persons to be judged may
give appearance before the Judgment Seat; And Paul preaching to the same
purpose, Act. 26.9. says, Why should it be thought a thing incredible with
you, that God shall raise the dead?

As the resurrection of the body is infallibly certain, 2. It is appointed by
God.
in respect it is revealed and foretold in holy Scriptures, so it is immutably
certain, in respect it is so appointed by God in his eternal counsel and
decree, which cannot be altered, Act. 10 42. God has commanded us to preach
that Jesus Christ is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and
dead; If God ordained him to be Judge, then certainly he ordained that there
should be a resurrection, that men might be brought before this Judge; for
without a resurrection there could be no persons to be Judged, Romans 14 10. We
shall stand before the Judgment seat of Christ: There cannot be a standing
till first there be a raising from the dead, Act. 17.31. He has appointed a
day wherein he will Judge the world in righteousness. The Apostle proves the
certainty of the resurrection, from the certainty of a day of Judgment set and
appointed of God, Job 6.40. This is the will of him that sent me, that every
one that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life, and I
will raise him up at the last day: In which words our Lord shows us, that
eternal life is appointed and ordained of God for all that believe on him, and
that the resurrection of the body is a means also appointed of God for
executing the Decree of their complete glory.

That the resurrection of the body is possible and probable, 3. It is possible
and probable.
the Apostle Paul proves at large, 1 Cor. 15. from Gods power seen in things
natural and obvious to sense, as in raising out of the grain of corn sown and
dying under the clod, a fair stalk of corn with many grains; The day (says
Tertullian) is buried in the night, and yet rises in the morning: we see also
in vegetables, the herb that is withered in the Winter, does in the Spring time
revert and flourish again; the Lilly puts on again those pleasant colors in
the Spring time, that were laid aside in the Winter: Do we not see that
Alchymists out of diverse herbs cast into one common Limbick, do extract those
simple principles of which at first they were composed: And what is our
sleeping in the night time, but a shadow, and resemblance of death? then are
our senses bound up from exercise, and our awaking in the morning is a rising
to the use and exercise of our senses: such like arguments prove only the
possibility of a resurrection; for with God nothing is impossible; and all
things are alike possible to him, who is of infinite power: but the certainty
of it is proved only from holy Scriptures, for God is able to do many things
which he will not, as to raise up children to Abraham of stones; This
possibility of the resurrection is well inferred from his infinite power, but
the certainty of it is concluded from his will and purpose revealed in holy
Scriptures, which are infallibly true.

This Doctrine serves for admonition to all, Be thankful for the revelation of
this Mystery.
who live within the verge of the Church of Christ, to be thankful to God, who
of his good pleasure has revealed to us this great mystery hid from the wise
men and great Philosophers in former ages; who in their conjectures about the
estate of the dead, became vain in their own imaginations: It is true, they had
some glimpses of the immortality of the soul; Plato in his Dialogue entitled
Phaedo, says, by deaths coming to a man, that which is in him immortal
departs freed from corruption, and gives way to death. Cicero in his
Tusculan questions, lib. 1. says it was a maxim inbred in the Ancients, that
man at death is not so taken away, that by it he is altogether destroyed and
annihilated; The Poet Lucan, lib. 1. renders the reason why the old Gauls were
so hardy in all their encounters at ^^ght; because their Pagan Priests, called
Druides, did teach them, that their souls immediately after death would be in a
happy condition; but concerning the resurrection of the body ye cannot read one
syllable in all the heathen writers; Such Doctrine was mocked at by the
Philosophers of heathens, Act. 17. they could not give an assent to it: And
therefore Paul says, Act. 26.8. Why should it be thought a thing incredible
with you, that God should raise the dead? They measured Divine Mysteries by the
short plummet of humane reason: Likewise from this ground, that of nothing,
there can be nothing produced, they could not believe that Mystery of the
infinite power of God in the work of Creation; in like manner, having their
understandings prejudiced with this received maxim, that from a privation there
cannot be any regress unto the habit, they could not assent to the Doctrine of
the resurrection of the body; Humane reason cannot reach Divine Mysteries, they
are above its capacity, 1 Cor. 2.14. the only ground whereon rests our assent
to such a Divine Mystery, Augustine.
is the infallible testimony of God in holy Scripture; Augustine (says well)
that a natural man requires a reason of evidence in the matter it self, before
he believe it, intelligam (says such a man) ut credam, let me understand it
that I may believe; but the Disciple of Jesus Christ, who has captivated his
thoughts unto the word of God, says, credam ut intelligam, let me once believe
that God has spoken it, then shall I understand it to be true and evident from
the testimony of God; when we consider the goodness of our God in revealing to
us this great Mystery hid from many of the wise in the world, let every one of
us say with our blessed Lord, Math. 11.25, 26. I thank thee O Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them unto babes; even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy
sight.

It serves also for comfort to three sorts of persons, as are under any
trouble and pain in the body; Comfort to Saints under bodily pain.
though it were a painful languishing disease, yet here is a sure ground of
hope and comfort; It is most certain thy body will be raised, and in the body
thou shall have a comfortable rest from all labor and pain: This was Jobs
comfort in the day of his sore trouble, that in the same body he should rise
and see God, Job. 19.25, 26. It was the Apostles comfort, 1 Cor. 15.19. If in
this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable;
because they suffered more in the body then other men did; yet the hope and
comfort of the resurrection upheld them; It is some ease and comfort to one
that is Sea-sick, to look a far to the Land, but their comfort and joy of heart
is much greater when they come safely to it; so in all our troubles in the
body, which are as a Sea-sickness in our passage toward our Country above, let
us look by Faith to the certainty of the resurrection of the body; and if there
be some comfort and joy (as undoubtedly there is) from Faith into the Promise,
and from hope of the promised resurrection; What then will be the measure of
thy comfort and joy, when in a glorified body thou shall see the Son of God
manifesting his glory and transcendent beauty in his body.

It serves for a ground of comfort to them that are on their deathbed,
Comfort to Saints against the apprehensions of death.
and have received in themselves the sentence of death; be of good comfort, the
day is coming, when thy body shall be raised out of the dust; Consider for thy
comfort;

1. The mystical union of the bodies of Believers with Jesus Christ their head,
and thou may be confident our Lord and glorious head will not want any part
of his Mystical body; 1 Cor. 15.20. Christ is the first fruits of them that
sleep; as the first fruits were a sure evidence that the harvest was coming on
a pace, so the resurrection of Christ is a sure ground of hope and comfort for
assuring us of the resurrection of our bodies; 1 Cor. 15.16. If the dead be not
raised, then is not Christ raised.

2. Consider the end of Christ's death, These. 1.7. It is a righteous thing with
God to render to you who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall
be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels; It is true, in the grave thy
body will have a kind of a negative rest; then no pain in the body; but in the
day of resurrection thou shall have a positive and refreshing rest in God
himself, like a man awakened and resting on a bed of Roses.

3. Consider the endurance of the Kingdom of the Mediator, Cor. 15.25. He must
reign until he have put all his enemies under his feet; One of those enemies is
the grave, which our Lord before subdued, and will also put under our feet,
when our bodies shall be raised out of the grave, and we shall be above the
power of corruption; Therefore thou that believe in Christ may dye with
great comfort, and exult with Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have believed,
and I am persuaded he is able to keep that which I have committed to him
against that day; Commend thy Spirit into his hands, and thy dying body to his
Fatherly care to be kept in the grave by him; he is a Faithful Creator, and
Conservator of both; at the day of resurrection he will render both; Thou may
be assured, the Lord who requires men to be faithful in rendering again the
pledge entrusted to them; Deuteronomy. 24.13. he will in the day of restoring all
things, render again to thee thy soul and body, with increase of glory, beauty,
and strength.

Thirdly; Comfort to Saints mourning for the death of their friends.
It serves for comfort to those who mourn for the death of their dear friends;
I grant it is not only lawful to mourn, but it were unnatural not to do so; Our
Lord wept over Lazarus; Joseph mourned many days for his old Father; The death
of dear friends is one of Gods visitations, and it becomes us well to take
notice of Gods visiting us; Heb. 12.5. The first is a brutish stupidity and
Heathenish Apathie; the other is a sillyness and pusillanimity, proceeding from
unbelief, and repining of Spirit; but let thy mourning be qualified and
moderated with the comfort and hope of the resurrection, 1 These. 4.13. Sorrow
not even as others which have no hope: That Heathen Moralist could say, We have
not lost our friends, but sent them before us; what then should Christians say,
who believe not only the immortality of the soul, but also the resurrection of
the body? As in thy mourning thou make conscience of natural affection to thy
dear friend, so at the same time make conscience also of thy supernatural
affection and submission to the will of thy heavenly Father; this consideration
will regulate thy sorrow.

2. It is best for thy dear Christian friend to be with Christ, and thou have
great cause to bless God that thou know where he is; he is now at his rest
from all his labors, Rev. 14.13. A loving wife parting from her husband on the
shore, when he is going to another Country, though her heart be sad at parting,
yet does she rejoice to hear of his safe and happy arrival at his wished Port;
bless God, and rejoice in this, thou know from the good Word of God thy
friend is come safe to his Port, where the salvation of God will be a perpetual
Bulwark against all troubles and storms.

3. Consider, The Lord our God keeps the very dust, and rude materials of
their bodies; Rizpah watched over the bodies of the Sons of Saul, and guarded
them against the ravenous fouls of the air, 2 Samuel 21. And shall not the Lord,
who is love it self, preserve the bodies of his own dear children against that
day? the Lord had a care of the Prophets dead body, 1 King. 13.24. when a
ruinous house is taken down by the owner, he carefully lays aside the stones
and timber, and keeps them, till afterward out of them he raises it up in a
new frame: So the Lord does keep the materials of the body, until he raise it
up in a new frame of beauty.

4. Consider, so will it be powerfully raised, and we shall all meet together
in that assembly of the first born: Peter, James and John, met with Moses and
Elias at the transfiguration of our Lord: which was a prelude of his second
coming in visible glory; so in that day thou shall see and know thy dear
friends, but all in Christ: That superlative relation of being glorified fellow
Members of his Mystical body, will swallow up all relations according to the
flesh; As a woman marrying one that is her near kinsman, though she know such a
relation, yet her love to him as her husband surpasses far her former respects
she carried to him only as her kinsman.

The second point considerable, 2 Point. The universality.
is the universality of the resurrection, All that are in the Graves: The word
rendered, graves, signifies monuments or remembrances, because graves are
memorials of the dead, and should be of good use for the living, to be Monitors
and remembrancers of their mortality: by Graves we understand not only the
lower places of the earth, wherein the bodies have been interred, for the
bodies of many will be raised that were never buried: but by graves we
understand the receptacles of the dead, such as the Air, Water, and Earth, they
must and will render up their dead, Revel. 20.13. As for the bodies of those
who will be living upon the earth at our Lords second coming, though their
bodies will not be in graves, and therefore cannot be said properly to be
raised out of their graves, yet they will be changed from an estate of
corruption, unto incorruption; There will be a raising and elevating of the
condition of their body from mortality unto immortality; This change will be in
the twinkling of an eye, 1 Cor. 15.51. as some falling asleep, do sleep for a
long time; whereas others no sooner have their eyes shut, but incontinent they
awake; so the change of such as are living at our Lords coming, will be in a
very short and insensible time; As Adam in an instant, after he had sinned,
became mortal; so all who are sound living at Christ's second coming, in an
instant will become immortal, and incorruptible in the body.

There will be an universal resurrection of all the dead, Cor. 5.10. There
shall be an universal resurrection of the dead.
We must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ; Therefore all must be
raised, that all may appear, Rev. 20.12. And I saw the dead small and great
stand before God; as in a seed-plot, though the seeds be mixed there together
in one place, yet the Sun in Spring time makes several herbs to rise from
thence, distinct one from another in stalk, flower, and fruits: So though many
dead bodies be sown in one common burial place, as a seminary of the
resurrection, yet the Lord will raise from thence the several bodies, every one
distinct from another in number and individual qualities; No new Creation.
The same individual bodies that died will be raised, for it is said, All in
the graves; at that time there will not be any Creation of a new body.

1. called a resurrection; and a resurrection is the rising of the same thing
that had fallen.

2. sleep, and burial places are (...), sleeping places; Such are raised which
sometime slept; but bodies created anew on that day, cannot be said to have
slept.

3. render up the dead: Revel. 20.13. but if the bodies were anew created,
there would be no rendering of the old.

4. Emphatick and Demonstrative manner; 1 Cor. 15.53. This corruptible, this
mortal; and therefore it must be the same body that sometime was subject to
death and corruption.

Obj.

Answ. No, Ephesians 2.6. and they are called the Children of the resurrection, Luc.
20.36. but he will raise the wicked by force as their Judge, by virtue of that
^en^ence. Genesis 2.17. what day thou eatest of the forbidden fruit thou sh lt
certainly dye, and that the sentence of the second death may be executed on
them, they must be raised,; So that their resurrection is a curse, and not a
blessing to them But the Godly will be raised by Christ as their head, drawing
all his Members unto himself by a full redemption from all their enemies, that
he may be complete in his body, and they may be complete in their head, in whom
and with whom both the soul and the body is fully glorified.

This Doctrine serves for a seasonable wakening and warning unto secure
sinners, An awakening to secure sinners.
who dishonor God here in the condition of their mortality by many vile sins
committed in and by the body; Remember thou will be raised in the self same
body, and brought before him who is Judge of quick and dead; It will be with
thee that live and dyest in thy impenitency, as it was with the Baker in the
prison, Genesis 40. he was much disquieted in the morning with the remembrance of
his sad dream in the night time; his trouble was great in the night time
greater in the morning, when by Joseph it was expounded of his shameful death,
but greatest when his dream was fulfilled and himself led from the prison to
the place of a painful and shameful death: so wicked and profane men are
greatly disquieted when thoughts of a resurrection and Judgment are sometime
born in upon them against their will, then are they as with a violent gripe and
stitch suddenly surprised and suppressed: but all this disquietness and anguish
of Spirit is like a dream in comparison of that horror will overtake them in
that day of resurrection; Then will their own consciences suggest unto them,
what shall be their doom; They will be self-condemned before ever the Judge
pronounce his Sentence: I require the senseless sinner to consider in time, if
after thy yester-nights drunkenness or other wickedness, thy conscience has
smitten thee soundly, sometime after thy first sleep, in such a manner, that
thou could get no rest for the lashings of it, which were as pricks in thy
eyes, and thorns in thy sides; how think thou thy conscience will torment
thee in that day, wherein there will be no rest, no, not for a moment from
extreme and endless pains? then shall all thy sins be set before thee in the
light of thy countenance: If Judas was so tormented with the sense of one
horrid sin, to wit his treachery in betraying the Innocent, what will thy
torment and desperate horror be, when all thy sins will be set before thee as
a shameful fang in the eye of a condemned thief; The black sight of thy sins,
and of Judgment, will be the first thing thou shall see after thou art raised
in the body: Therefore while it is called to day, harden not your hearts; but
obey that Act. 3.19. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may
be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of
the Lord; for though sins be forgiven only in this life, wherein there is place
for repentance, and for reconciliation with God; And though sentence of
absolution is now quietl, pronounced in the conscience of the true penitent and
believer, yet at the day of resurrection, the sentence of Absolution and
Justification will be solemnly pronounced in that great Court of Jesus Christ,
wherein it will be made known to Angels and men: when he will say to them on
the right hand, come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you, Math. 25.24. And contrarily men self-condemned in this world, and dying in
their impenitency, shall then be condemned before Angels and men.

It serves for a ground of sol d comfort to the Godly, Solid comfort to the
Godly.
fall thy body where it will* at home or abroad, by a natural or violent death
yet it shall be raised again: Some of the dear children of God have been
devoured by wild beasts, others in the fire consumed into ashes, and their
ashes scattered into the Air; yet these bodies will be raised (as many report
of the Phoenix) out of their ashes; some have been drowned in the waters, and
others smothered under the earth; yet the Lord in that day will gather all his
Jewels, as men do their Gold out of the ruins of a burnt house, Revel. 20.13.
the Sea gave up the dead that were in it, and hell and death gave up their
dead; by hell is meant the receptacles within the lower parts of the earth; as
Jaylours are countable to the Judge for the prisoners delivered into their
keeping, and must present them to the Judge at his command: So all the prison
houses of the bodies of the Saints will be opened, and all the Jaylours must
make open doors in that great day of our Lords glorious procession, that the
prisoners of hope may come forth and be made partakers of that full redemption
from the grave and corruption.

Ob. But what say ye of those Anthropophagi^men eaters,

Answ. 1. Jonah.

2. All the parts of the body were not devoured,

3. who can do above all that we can think, Ephesians. 3.20. and in the hope of our
glorious resurrection, we give to God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all praise,
honor and glory for now and ever, Amen.

The third point considerable, 3. Point. The powerful means of our resurrection.
is the powerful means of our resurrection; they shall hear his voice and shall
come forth; of this speaks the Apostle, 1 These. 4.16. The Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the
Trumpet of God; By that voice and trump we understand some sensible
manifestation of his power and glory at his second coming; as the Audible voice
does express the conception of our mind, and as the sound of a Trump is an
ordinary sign of state and power; so this visible appearing in glory, and the
great work of raising the dead, will be a manifest expression of the glorious
power of the Son of God: in this sense the Word of God is taken, Heb. 1.3. He
upholdeth all things by the word of his power: that is, by his powerful
providence conserving the being of his creatures; This active providence is as
it were the word, and expression of his infinite power, whereby he does in
heaven and earth what he will: Thus it is said Jonah 2.10. The Lord spoke unto
the Fish, and it vomited out Jonah; This speaking was Gods doing and working by
his mighty power: in such a language will the Almighty Lord speak to all the
graves of the dead, and in an instant, at the word of his power, they will cast
out their dead; Thus he is said by his word to have created the world; the work
of Creation was the expression of his eternal purpose so to do, and of his
omnipotent facility in doing; as a word is easily spoken, and does express the
thought of our mind. It is called his mighty power, or efficacy of power. (as
it is in the original) according to which he will raise the dead; Philip. 3.21.
he rent the vale of the Temple, he shattered the Rocks, and opened the graves
at his death in his lowest condition: what then can resist his power in the day
he comes forth to Judge the world; since he was so powerful in the day of man
when he was Judged? in this manner I take it with some sound Interpreters, not
so much literally of an audible voice and material Trump, as to be spoken in an
allusion to Kings, who in solemn processions to their great and high Courts of
Justice, have their Heralds and Trumpeters going before them, at whose
proclamation and sounding (as was the custom of Egypt, Genesis 41.43.) immediately
all come out of their houses to behold the King in his state and glory, and to
do him the homage of the highest civil reverence; so when our Lord and King of
Saints shall come attended with Millions of Angels then shall he by his mighty
power rai^e the dead, and they shall come forth immediately out of their
earthen houses, and do homage to him: The Godly will acknowledge him for their
Lord and Redeemer; and delight themselves in the sight of his glorious pomp and
power, they shall meet him with acclamations of joy, Revel. 5.9. Thou have
redeemed us unto God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people,
and Nation; But the wicked will be forced to acknowledge him for their Judge,
and shall be confounded at that sight; And because the number of the wicked
will exceed the number of the Godly, therefore it is said, Revel. 1.7. All
kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him; Some think there will be an
audible voice at our Lords coming, for he can make his thundering voice to be
heard over all the earth; yet this is most certain, and without all
controversy, that an act of infinite power will go along with that voice; As
in raising Lazarus from the dead, our Lord cried with a loud voice, Ioh. 11.43.
Lazarus come forth; what he signified by this audible voice, he did work and
execute by his invisible and mighty power; so together with that voice at his
second coming, arise ye dead, and come to Judgment, he will express his mighty
and irresistible power in raising the dead; he will raise the Godly as their
head, but he will raise the wicked as their Judge.

The second coming of our Lord to raise the dead, The second coming of Christ
shall be with great Majesty.
will be with great glory, Majesty and power, Luc. 21.27. Then shall they see
the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory; It was the ancient
custom, that the Conquerors were carried in triumphal Charriots drawn with
white horses; so shall our victorious King and Conqueror come riding on a white
cloud; What is meant by the sign of the Son of man. Mat. 24.30.
and this manner of his coming I conceive in the most simple sense to be the
same which is called the sign of the Son of man, Math. 24.30 And then shall
appear the sign of the Son of man in heaven: which is expressed more fully Luc.
21.27. By his coming in glory and power: The Divines of the Roman Church in
their superstitious conjecture, think it will be the sign of the cross; Others
think it will be some sign immediately preceding the coming of our Lord to
raise the dead; which sign (say they) will be so manifest and extraordinary,
that all men seeing it will be convinced that the Lord is at hand, and coming
immediately to Judge the world: Others take it to be that purging fire spoken
of 2 Pet. 3.10. when the heaven like a garment infected from the contagion of
the body of this inferior world about which it was wrapped, is purged from
that vanity whereunto it is made subject through man's sin, Romans 8.22. But with
sound Interpreters I take it to be the same with that glory and power wherewith
Luke says he will come, which power and glory will be an evident and peculiar
sign of his coming for Millions of Angels will attend him: Many Angels were
guarding Elijah, 2 King. 6. how many then will attend his Lord and ours? and as
by all the beholders, a King is known to be there, where his special servants
are attending him with all reverence; so in that day our Lords presence will be
made manifest by the glorious attendance of Angels, to whom for fitting them
for the Ministry of that day, he will give some outward, visible and glorious
representation: for it is said, Luc. 21.27. They shall see him coming with
power and great glory: and Math. 25.31. The Son of man shall come in his glory,
and all his holy Angels with him.

2. 2. The second coming of Christ shall be with great power.
As his coming will be with great Glory and Majesty; so will it be with great
power: at his first coming he subjected himself to the infirmities of our
nature, and unto the punishment due to our persons, and upon this account he
came to be Judged, Isa. 53.5. He was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him: That was the day of his weakness, but
this will be a day of power, wherein he will come to Judge the quick and the
dead; To this effect he has received a Commission from the Father, Ioh. 5.22.
The Father has committed all Judgment to the Son; he will Judge in the humane
nature and pronounce the Sentence, but by the power of his Divine nature
execute the same, because God alone, in whom is infinite mercy and goodness,
can make some eternally happy, and others in his infinite Justice and wrath
eternally miserable; and to this sense said our Lord, Math. 20.23. To sit at my
right hand is not mine to give, but the Fathers: he gives it not as man, but
as the Son of God equal in power with the Father.

This Doctrine serves for matter of terror, and wakening unto all profane and
careless sinners, Terror to profane persons.
that are not moved with the word of threatening; thou who hear all the
threatenings with a deaf ear, and take no notice of them for cleansing thy
heart and thy ways from wickedness, remember at this day of appearing before
thy Judge, thou shall be forced to hear his voice on the deafest side of thy
head; Thou that would not rise out of the grave of thy sins, wherein thou
wast rotting for many years: thou that would not Judge thy self, that
would not obey him in this life as thy Lord and head: Thou shall by the
force of his power and Iron Scepter be subjected to him as thy Judge in that
day, wherein all knees shall bow before him: thou that would not bow to thy
Lord at the throne of Grace, shall be bruised and broken before thy Judge at
the throne of Justice: Oh how fearful will that voice be, when he calls for
thee to come out of thy grave to Judgment! It will be as the imperious call of
a severe Lord at the Gate, returning home to reckon with his servants: when the
idle and lewd servant (that was unfaithful in the time of his absence) hears
it, he trembles for fear: And as Nabal at the report of David's wrath, his
heart dies within him: Then will thou be like unto Pashur, Jer. 20.3, 4.
Terror round about thee: thou will be a terror to thy self: Thy own
conscience as a familiar evil Spirit will haunt thee with horrid
representations, and torment thee: That glorious guard of Angels attending that
great Judge will be a matter of terror to thee, thou will fear as Sh^mei did
Benejah; that strong guard shall fall upon thee: Adam did fly at the calm
voice: but what will thy fear be at that dreadful sound? whether will thou fly
in that day of astonishment? the heavens will not admit thee: the earth will no
longer bear thee: hell only will be enlarged to receive and contain thee:
Foelix trembled when he heard of Judgment to come; consider in time what will
thy trembling be, when thou shall be raised up and hurried before thy Judge:
The people of Israel, Exodus 19. did tremble at the giving of the Law with
thundering in the Mount; what then will be thy trembling when thou art Judged
according to that Law? therefore while it is called to day, harden not thy
heart, but hearken unto the voice of the Lord in this life, break off thy sins
by repentance, so shall the day of resurrection be unto thee a day of peace,
and not of terror, a day of joy,

It serves for admonition to the children of God, Awakening to slumbering
Saints.
who are subject to their own slumberings, and cold fits of a beginning
sluggishness; as thou would prevent this, meditate often upon the day of thy
resurrection, and coming unto Judgment; great sounds and noises do keep men
from sleep; Jerome said, he thought he heard ever that voice sounding into his
ear; arise dead, and come to judgment; Oh that this sound were often in our
ears! I dare say, the greatness and dreadfulness of it would drown the sound
and noise of many temptations, that we should not hearken unto them; This would
make us more watchful and faithful, both in our Christian and particular
callings; and then as servants who have been diligent and faithful, we shall
rejoice at the report of the coming of our Lord.

It serves for a ground of comfort unto the children of God, Who bearken unto
his voice in his word, Comfort to the children of God.
who have a desire to fear his name, and have a respect to all his
commandments; If thou be one of those, be of good comfort, his coming shall not
be terrible, but comfortable unto thee; his call in the day of resurrection, at
thy grave, will be as the known and familiar call of a loving husband returning
to take his Spouse out of a strange Country; How a man may know his
resurrection shall be with joy to glory.


Obj. But how shall I know that my rising in that day shall be with joy and not
with terror?

Answ. Thou may know it,

1. By thy part in the first resurrection, Revel. 20.6. Blessed is he that has
his part in the first resurrection, the second death shall have no power on
him; If thou art risen by Repentance to a new and holy life, this first
resurrection to an estate of Grace, is a sure evidence of thy second
resurrection to an estate of Glory, because Grace is the earnest and first
fruits of Glory.

2. Thou may know it by the inhabitation of the Spirit, If the spirit of him
that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from
the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit that dwells in
you; If the spirit of God dwell in thy body as his Temple, thou may be
assured, in the day of resurrection he will enter into his Temple, and fill it
with his joyful presence; therefore as thou would be sure of a joyful
resurrection, use thy body as a Temple to the holy Ghost in these respects. 1.
In separating and sanctifying thy body for the service of thy Lord; though the
ground of the Temple of Jerusalem was sometime a common or profane place, a
threshing floor, yet afterward it was set apart from that common use: So must
thy body and all the members thereof be separate from all profane and sinful
employments. 2 Cor. 6.17. Be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the
unclean thing, and I will receive you; There must be a separation from thy
sinful delights before God receive thee into a communion of grace in this life,
or into a communion of glory in the other life; thy tongue must be separate
from swearing, lying, backbiting, railing, and all filthy communication, thy
ears must be circumcised, thy eyes turned away from beholding vanity, and the
other members must be purified, and preserved from all pollution, as vessels
belonging to the Temple of the holy Ghost.

2. So not only thy soul, which is the inward and most holy place of the
Temple, but also thy body must be dedicated to the service of God; Let thy
tongue be tuned to his praise, thine eyes lifted up to behold his wondrous
works, thine ears ready to hear his word, thy hands to work the works of
righteousness, thy knees to bow to him in prayer, and thy feet swift to run in
the ways of righteousness and peace.

3. Act. 21.28. that Paul had brought in Graecians to defile the Temple; In
like manner do thou use thy body as a Temple to the holy Ghost; admit not
within the Porch of that Temple, to wit thy ears or eyes, any straggling or
strange motion, which may defile thy conscience, which is thy little sanctuary
within that Temple.

4. so must thou labor to preserve thy body pure and clean from the pollutions
of the world from without, and from inordinate affections from within; It thus
thou use thy body, fear not, for in the day of resurrection the holy Ghost that
dwelt in thy body here, will fill it with joy and gladness in that day: after
the Temple of Jerusalem was built and consecrate to God; The Lord filled it
with a special presence of his glory in the Cloud: so if thy body be consecrate
to God, it shall be filled with beauty and glory: if thou tremble at his word
in this life, and work out thy salvation with fear and trembling, be of good
comfort, the day of thy resuirection will be a day of good tidings, from heaven
and of joy to thee; then all thy evil days will be over, wherein thou had
thy trembling fits and fevers of conscience; but that will be thy good day,
without succession of an evil day; then shall thou have perpetual peace in thy
soul, and confirmed health in thy body; for if thou be espoused here to Jesus
Christ in holiness and righteousness, thou shall not be afraid at his glorious
coming; the glory of thy Lord and Husband will reflect upon thee, and his
spouse shall rejoice at his coming; The wise Virgins rejoiced at the voice and
coming of the bridegroom, in that day thou shall rejoice, as Jacob did in
hearing and seeing his Joseph in the day of his great honor and power in Egypt.
Our Lord with his white cloud at his coming will scatter and abolish all thy
clouds of afflictions; Though now, (it may be) thou have much weakness in the
body, yet in that day thy Lord will come with power to give unto thee a strong
body: It may be for a season thou suffer much disgrace and trouble in the
body for keeping a good conscience in an evil time, yet be of good comfort, thy
righteous Lord will come in great glory, and shall give unto thee a new name,
even glory and honor, that none can take from thee; Therefore in the sense of
thy true conjugal affection unto him wrought in thy heart by his spirit, and in
the lively hope of the full manifestation of his love in that joyful day when
there will be a perpetual cohabitation in glory; let thy soul be looking and
longing for his second appearing, and as thou hear him saying, Rev. 22.12.
Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, So let thy soul as an echo,
answer with the spouse, Even so Lord Jesus come.

4. Point. The fourth point considerable in the words, different ends of this
universal resurrection; They that have done good unto the resurrection of life,
and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation; both the
godly and the wicked will come forth from their graves; but as they differed in
their life and death, so shall they differ in the end of their resurrection;
The godly will come forth as the Butler out of Prison, Genesis 40. to stand and
live for ever in the favor of God; but the ungodly as the Baker, to be made
spectacles of the Justice and wrath of God for ever. It is true, the bodies of
the wicked will be raised immortal and incorruptible, to the end they may be
everlasting subjects of everlasting pain, as the body of a Malefactor is held
up at a Pillory, when he is scourged, that by the extention of his body, he may
be rendered the more capable of the scourge and pains.

The resurrection of the bodies of Believers, who live to the Lord, and die in
the Lord, will be unto an happy condition, Believers shall arise to happiness.
and freedom from all trouble, pain, and all the consequents of sin; for the
Resurrection of Life is opposed unto the Resurrection of Damnation; as the
ungodly in their bodies, will be fastened like condemned slaves to eternal
torments, they will be ever dying and pining a way in torments, but never dead;
so the godly will live in the body a life of happiness, being absolved and
freed from all pain, and enjoying all satisfaction in the presence of an
all-sufficient God, Phil. 3.21. he will change our vile bodies, and he will make
them like unto his own glorious body; Our bodies in this life are but weak and
frail, a little thing will distemper them, even one nights unrest; Our bodies
in this vale of misery, are but vilis saccus servorum: The greatest amongst the
children of men carry about with them such excrements, as should be Monitors of
frailty, and documents of humility, and that which makes our bodies most vile,
is this, that they are cages of unclean birds, of many unruly lusts; though
they reign not in the godly, yet they dwell in them, as Hagar with Sarah, and
do molest them: But at the resurrection there will be a change of our Bodies:
Our Lord will make them like unto his glorious body; and it is said Mat. 17. at
his transfiguration (which was a prelude of the glorifying of his body) his
face did shine as the Sun: As the Tabernacle under the Law was made according
to the pattern shown in the Mount, so our earthly Tabernacles will be renewed
according to that pattern shown in the Mount, where our Lord was transsigured,
great will be the brightness of their bodies; in that day of resurrection there
will be a most glorious sight, when the bodies of the Saints will rise up
together as so many Suns above the horizon of the grave and time; that will be
a lightsome and a glorious day: This surpassing glory of their bodies is
described more particularly, 1 Cor. 15.42. in diverse respects.

1. Wherein the glory of the body consists.
In respect of endurance, it is sown in corruption, but raised in incorruption.
Our life here is in a continual flux, as one part of running water thrusts
forward the other parts, so some parts of our body decay daily, times in the
furnace, all dross and corruption will be fully purged out, and the body will
be made an everlasting vessel of honor; There will be no alteration in the
body, nor declining to old age; but the glorified Saints shall be like the
Cedars in Lebanon, Psalm. 9.14. they shall still bring forth fruit in old age,
they shall be fat and flourishing.

2. In respect of the stature and beauty of the body, it is sown in dishonor,
it is raised in glory: there will be great glory in the bodies of the godly,
excellent comeliness in stature, and a beautiful, and equal proportion of all
the members; The Saints who had any deformity, or defect of members in this
life, shall have none then, Act. 3.19. It is called the day of restoring all
things; what ever their body wants now for comeliness, shall then be restored
and supplied: Our Lord restored Malchus his ear, and by the same power he will
restore the defect of any member, as there will be comeliness in a just
symmetry and proportion of the members, so a surpassing comeliness in the
color and brightness of the body; do we not see in our daily experience, the
body is sown in dishonor? a little before death the face becomes pale,
earthlike, and the body of one dying does smell of the earth, like wine near
run out, smelling of the dreg; after the soul and breath is gone, the body
corrupts and begins to stink like an empty earthen house without fire in
it; at such a time the body is loathsome even to the nearest friends; Sarah had
a fair and comely body, yet after her death Abraham desired a place to bury her
out of his sight: But in the day of resurrection the bodies of the godly will
be raised in honor, in great comeliness and splendour; though they be sown in
dishonor, and thrust into the dust, yet like the root of a Lilly shut up under
the ground in time of Winter, they shall spring up again, and be clothed with
beauty by the power of God, who clothes the Lilly.

3. In respect of constitution, and healthful disposition; the body is now
sown in weakness (says the Apostle) but will be raised in power.

Our constitution of body in this life at the best is weak, though all bodies
be not alike weak; a fit of the burning Ague or of the Stone, will lay the
strongest man on his back, and though the bodies of son be strong for bodily
employments, yet through frequent labor and exercise they languish, and become
weary; Sampson, though of matchless strength, yet did waste his spirits in the
labor of the fight, and became weary and thirsty; the strongest bow will slug
through too much bending and shooting, and the strongest body will become weary
with too much exercise; on a death bed the strongest man is not able to hold
the drink to his own head, or to turn himself in his bed: But in the day of
resurrection the body will be raised in a strong constitution; then will there
be no weariness in the body, nor faintness in the spirits. This weakness of
body now is one of the Symptoms of original corruption, but death as a
Catholicon will purge out that bitter peccant humor which makes our bodies
weak; and after that purgation, our bodies will be preserved and raised to a
strong and confirmed health for ever in the heavens, where the body will be
kept from all corruption from within, or alteration from without.

4. of exercise and operation, it is sown a natural body (says the Apostle)
but it is raised a spiritual body; not of a spiritual substance, but with
spiritual qualities; for if it were raised an Aerial body (as some erroneously
have asserted) then should not the same body which died, be raised, for it is
sown an earthly body, but it is called a spiritual body in respect of the
exercise and use of the body after the resurrection; it is here on earth a
natural body, having necessity of natural means and helps for preserving the
species by procreation, and for conserving the person by nutrition, but after
the resurrection the body will be abstract, and retired from all such natural
operations and employments; the glorified Saints will be like angels, neither
giving nor taking in marriage, Mat. 22.30. The number of the elect and
triumphant Church will be then complete, and their whole delights will be in an
immediate communion with God, which will drown both the remembrance, and the
desire of all creature-delights, neither will the body then have need or use of
meat and drink, because the body will be of a fixed and durable constitution,
without any possibility of alteration or decay; They will be filled with God,
and this will fully satisfy and delight both the soul and the body: they will
not hunger nor thirst, because they will be ever full of the bread of life, and
of the water of life; It will be a spiritual body, in respect of Agility, for
Spirits are Agile; The Angel Gabriel in a very short time came from the heaven
to the earth, Dan. 9. And the Angel Act. 8. carried Philips body in a very
short time from one place to another, so shall our spirits carry our bodies in
a very short time through a large space and intervall. Augustine, Augustine.
in his book of the City of God, lib. 22. chapter 30. says, That certainly
wherever the Spirit and soul would be, straight ways the body will follow the
desire of the heart, and be in that place: Neither will the soul desire any
thing which is unbeseeming for it self or the body; as the helm turns the
Ship in a very short time, wheresoever the Steersman will, so our bodies will
turn instantly at every motion of our Spirits; our body will be caught up by
our Spirits into the third heaven in a short time, as Philips body was caught
up, and carried from one place to another, Act. 8.39. where the same word is
used which ye have, 1 These. 4.17. As for those members of our bodies which
served to natural uses and employments in the time of our sojourning here, they
will remain in the body for ornament and integrity; as the breasts in women come
to old age, though they do not serve them for giving suck as sometime they did,
yet are they for the ornament of their bodies: Augustine, in the place above
cited says well; Augustine.
all those members and bowels of the incorruptible body, which in the time of
mortality served for diverse uses, now they will serve for matter of praise to
God.

This Doctrine serves for admonition; Be careful in this life to do well
some will be raised to life and glory; others to damnation. Let it be thy
desire and endeavor to be of their number in this life, who do well, because
glory is appointed for such; how earnest should we be to know that our
resurrection will be unto life; If many prisoners were shut up in one common
prison, and it were told to them all, that some of them should be taken forth
unto liberty and honor, and others unto shame and pain, in such a case how
earnest would each of those prisoners be to enquire if himself were one of
those appointed for liberty and honor: It is certain, death as a Jailer will
shut up all mankind in the common prison of the grave and corruption; how
solicitous then should we be to know if we be appointed of God unto life and
glory; in this text our Lord gives unto us a sure evidence of a glorious
resurrection unto life; to wit, if thou have done good in the body: They that
have done good shall come forth unto the resurrection of life: It is true good
works have no place, or interest in the work of our salvation by way of merit;
Christ our Mediator only has Merited it by the work of his righteousness; by
him alone we have boldness to enter into the holiest, Heb. 10.19. Neither have
good Works any efficacy on our salvation, It is the free gift of God, Romans
6.23. Yet it is most true that good Works are necessary by way of concomitancy
in him who is to be saved; for without holiness none shall see the face of God,
Heb. 12.14. Although thou can not be justified in this life by thy good
Works, yet in the day of resurrection thou shall be judged according to thy
Works, Math. 25. 2 Cor. 5.10. Therefore as in the day of resurrection thou
would differ from evil doers, who will be raised unto damnation, see thou
differ from them in thy living and dying. Godly differ from the wicken in
living:


1. The wicked man in his lifetime employeth his desires, endeavors, and time
to serve his own lusts; but the care of a Godly man and sound believer, serve
his Lord, Romans 13.14. Put on the Lord Jesus, and make no provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.

2. wicked man walks in the broad way that leads to destruction; he takes
unto himself ease and pleasure in sin, as one having room in a broad way; he
does not afflict or grieve his own heart at any time by refusing the unlawful
desires of it; But thou who would rise to life, must walk in the strait way
that leads unto life; thou must straiten and hem up thy desires, and afflict
thy unrenewed part and flesh by refusing and rejecting unruly desires; and if
at any time thy heart look back unto sin, thou must afflict thy Spirit with
Godly sorrow for any step thou have made toward the broad way.

The Godly man and sound believer differs also from the wicked in his dying,
Godly differ from the wicked in dying.
The wicked man at his death lays not hold on Christ, and dies unwillingly:
but thou that would rise unto life, thou must with old Simeon, an old
expectant of glory, embrace Christ,

It serves for a ground of terror and awakening to the ungodly, Terror to
ungodly men.
who rush into sin, as the horse into the Battle, go on in their sins like the
Ox unto the slaughter, and will not know the evil of their ways till the
deadly dart of Gods wrath strike through their souls: Remember O foolish man,
if thou live and dye in thy sins, and as Zophar speaks, Job 20.11. If thy
bones be full of the sins of thy youth, and they lie down with thee in the
dust, thou shall rise unto damnation; what thou would not believe in this
thy day, thou shall be forced from sense of pain to believe in that day of the
Lord; and then shall the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ say as Paul did to
his fellow-Passengers in the Ship, Act. 27.21. If ye had hearkened unto me, ye
should not have gained this harm and loss: The remembrance of neglected
opportunities will increase the fretting torment of their souls. It may be thou
have pain and sickness in thy body, with great agony at thy death: but consider
all that is but as a flea-bite in comparison of that worm that dies not, and
the fire which cannot be quenched: Thou may be assured, unless thou repent
while thou art in the body, thy pained and deformed body shall be raised up in
greater pain and deformity: An ugly and hideous spectacle will thy face and
body be, so that (if it were possible) in that day thou would fly from thy
self. Then soul and body at their reunion and uniting, will in a manner curse
one another, and live, or rather languish together as it were in mutual
imprecations for ever. This will be a part of their hell, like two Mastiffs
chained together and tearing one another, the soul will curse the body, and all
the Members of it for ministering temptations by the eyes and ears, and for
being too ready to bring forth and act sin conceived in the heart; then soul
and body that sinned together, shall be tormented together; as they were bound
together in sin, so also in punishment; therefore let the sad forethought of
pain in the body in that day, calm thy impetuous affections; Remember, as thou
sowest in the body, so shall thou reap in the body, Gal. 6.8. thou shall
receive according to that thou have done in the body, 2 Cor. 5.10. The serious
forethought of this will be an awful means to suppress thy tumultuary
affections; The Town Clerk, Act. 19.40. composed the tumult with one word; we
are in danger (said he) to be called in question for this days uproar: so
consider, thou art in danger to be called in question in that day of
resurrection, for the insurrection and rebellion of thy heart against thy Lord
in this thy day. The Royal preacher sounds forth this sad, but profitable
Note into the ears of young men, who are dit-times violent, like Jehu, in their
sinful courses; Eccles. 11.9 Rejoice O young man in thy youth, etc. but know
thou that for all those things God will bring thee unto Judgment.

This Doctrine serves for a solid ground of comfort to the Godly, who
endeavor to glorify God in the body; Sound comfort to the Godly.
let the meditation on these glorious qualities of the body in the day of
resurrection comfort thy heart under all the pains and troubles in the body;
Thy vile body will be changed; now thy body is decaying and dying daily; thou
art troubled in underpropping thy ruinous house of clay, and do what thou
can, one time it will fall down; but there is thy comfort, it will be raised
in incorruption: This was the ground of the Apostles comfort against the decay
and dissolution of the body; 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that if our earthly house of
this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens; there we will get a Mansion, John 14.2. In
my Fathers house are many Mansions; then our condition will not be subject to
alterations, like men dwelling in a Tabernacle and removing from place to
place, but it will be fixed and permanent without any change; it will be (...)
-- an abiding of glory, and joy.

2. Though now (possibly) there be some deformity in thy body, yet in that day
thy body shall be complete and comely; though at thy death thy body were full
of fores and ulcers, yet if thou dye in the Lord, thy body shall be raised in
honor and comely beauty; in that day Lazarus will have no sores; as the body
will be fully purged in that day from all contagion of sin, so will it be freed
from all deformity, which was only a Symptom of indwelling corruption.

3. Whereas thy body is now weak and frail, a little thing does soon distemper
thy Spirit, and little labor makes thy body weary; This is thy comfort, that
in the day of resurrection thy body will be raised in strength: though now thou
can not go up a little hill without some weariness in the body yet in that
day thou shall go up in the body to the third heaven, and shall not be weary.

4. Now thou art much troubled about the natural operations and employments of
the body, for food and raiment and other things pertaining to this decaying
life: but in that day thou will have appetite after nothing but God himself,
and all thy appetite will be fully satisfied by a perpetual delight in thy God,
infinite, all-sufficient, unchangeable and eternal in glory, goodness, and
bounty toward thee; Thou who art vexed and disquieted in this life with the
relics of inordinate concupiscence remaining in the body; thou have cause to
be humbled in the sight of God for that body of death; yet there is thy
comfort, thou shall be freed in that day from all such molestation in the body,
and thou shall be like unto the spotless Angels, without all inclination to
delight in any thing but in the knowledge and love of God^: In that day great
will be thy joy at the meeting of the soul and the body; Though at parting here
by death there was much pain, and trouble, like the parting of Jacob and
Benjamin; yet their meeting will be with great joy like the meeting of Jacob
and Joseph; the soul will bring down good news from heaven to the body, like
the report of the faithful spies, Numb 14. to encourage the body to go with it
unto the heavens, where they shall rejoice together for ever in the presence of
God; then shall their joy be increased at their meeting with Christ, and
perpetuated in their abode with Christ in the third heaven, and following with
praise and triumph the Lamb, wherever he goes. To him, with the Father, and
holy Spirit be all praise, honor, and glory, now and ever, Amen.

Of Eternal Life by and with CHRIST.
PSALM. 17.15. As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be
satisfied, when I awake with thy likeness.


AS the glorious resurrection of the body is a refreshing stream from the
fullness of Christ, so is also eternal life, Eternal life is in and from Christ.
which is the full and complete happiness of soul and body in one person: This
is purchased by the Merit of the righteousness and obedience of Jesus Christ.
Romans 5.20, 21. Where sin abounded, Grace did much more abound, that as sin has
reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto
eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord; by Faith in Jesus Christ we get a right
and claim unto eternal life. Ioh. 6.47. he that believes on me, has
everlasting life; by him we shall be put in possession of eternal life, Math.
2^.34. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, come ye blessed of
my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you: After that the bodies of them
that have done good are raised up, and inlivened with the souls, then shall the
Saints go with the Lord unto the third heaven, and there in soul and body enjoy
eternal life.

The great blessing of eternal life is laid before us by the Psalmist, The
sense of the words.
in these words. I know some Interpreters understand the words to be meant of
the lively sense of Gods favor bestowed upon his children, after they have
been for a time under a night of trouble, It is most true, light is sown even
in darkness, for the upright in heart; though the Lord hide his face in a
little wrath for a moment, yet with everlasting kindness will he have mercy;
Isa. 54.8. But I conceive (as many sound Interpreters do) the Prophet speaks
of that confidence and hope the children of God have of rest, happiness, and
satisfaction after this life, when their bodies that sleep in the grave shall
be awaked to the resurrection of life; Because he opposes the hope of after
happiness, as a strong prop to sustain the children of God in all their
troubles and wants in this life, against the temptations from the prosperity of
wicked men in this present world, to whom God gives a large portion of things
worldly; The Prophet comfort himself and all the Godly with the hope of that
full and enduring portion in the other life; some read the latter part of the
verse thus, I shall be satisfied when thy Image or likeness is awaked; and the
original will bear it; as if the meaning were thus; when I who was once created
to thy Image, shall rise again, I shall be satisfied but I incline rather to
the ordinary reading; I shall be satisfied with thy Image, when I awake: by
Image is understood the face of God, which in the former part of this verse is
called a beholding of Gods face, in the immediate seeing whereof will stand our
eternal happiness, when we shall see him as he is, 1 Ioh. 3.2.

In the words we have, The parts of the Text.


1. when I awake.

2. Gods face or likeness; the manner of enjoying, I will behold thy face.

3. I shall behold in righteousness, having my heart perfectly conformed to the
will of God, the perfect and adequate rule of righteousness.

4. The measure of his happiness, I shall be satisfied;

The time when his complete happiness will begin is, The time of full happiness.
at the day of resurrection, when I awake: This is no ways to to be understood
of the awaking of the soul; as if the soul during the sequestration of it from
the body, were as in a sleep, without all sense, either of pain or joy, until
the day of resurrection; This is contrary to the holy Scriptures, that tell us
the spirit returns to him that gave it, Eccles. 12.7. The soul of the rich man
was tormented, and the soul of Lazarus comforted, Luke 16. Our Lord said to the
convert Thief, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise: and therefore his
soul went straight to heaven: Rev. 14 13. Blessed are the dead who dye in the
Lord, from hence forth, that they may rest from their labors, and their works
follow them; This place, as it overturns that invention of purgatory, for it is
said from henceforth, that is after their death they rest from their labors,
and so go not to that labor in the fire of purgatory: So it discovers and
confuteth that dotage of some in the former and present times, concerning the
sleeping of the soul; Neither can the place be understood only of a mere
privation of trouble or pain, such as dead bodies may have, but it is a rest
from labor, with comfort reflecting to the soul from point of pain.

1. It is an (...), comforting, rest, as the same word is used by our Lord,
Math. 11.28.

2.

3. And withal it is said, their Works follow them; is used to express the
death and rising of the body: for in the Scripture phrase the death of the body
is compared unto a sleep, Ioh 11.11. Our friend Lazarus is asleep, (says our
Lord) but I go to awake him; of Iairus daughter our Lord said, the maid
sleeps, Math. 9.24. 1 These. 4.15. We which are alive shall not prevent them
that are asleep; The death of the body is fitly compared to a sleep, Death
fitly compared to a sleep.
for those reasons following.

1.

2.

3. Patriarchs are a longer time in their graves, then the bodies of those who
dye in the later times.

4.

5. Job said once in a fit, wishing for his dissolution they shall say in an
eternal impatience, longing for an Annihilation, but shall not obtain it, Job
3.20. Wherefore is light given unto him that is in misery, and life unto the
bitter in soul, which long for death, but it comes not, and dig for it more
then for hid treasures.

Our complete happiness is delayed until the time our bodies be awaked and
raised out of the grave; Complete happiness shall be after our resurrection.
for it is said here, I shall be satisfied when I awake; Our satisfaction will
not be till then: The children are first awaked and raised up in the morning,
before they be set down at Table: so our bodies must be first raised before we
can be set down at their common Table and Communion of glory with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob; for our happiness cannot be consummate until the person be
glorified both in soul and body; that our complete happiness is delayed till
that time, is evident from Scripture, Dan. 12.2. Many of them that sleep in the
dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, 1. Cor. 15.54. When
this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, then death is swallowed up in
victory; so that the complete happiness both in soul and body will not be until
we get victory over death and the grave by the resurrection of the body: Thus
the Lord delayeth it in his wisdom, for these reasons.

1. To show his truth and faithfulness, by inflicting death according to the
Word of threatening, Genesis 3.19. Dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return;
And therefore to fulfill the Word of truth, there must be a dissolution, and
returning of the body unto dust, before there can be a resurrection.

2. To confirm our faith of the resurrection, Patriarchs do rest yet in their
graves, and are not raised up; we are assured God will raise them, and our
selves with them: If God had raised their bodies already; Many would have
doubted of any other resurrection; yea when we see at any time the graves
opened of those who dyed in the Lord; their very bones and dust preach unto us
(and this a pious Necromancie) the Doctrine of the resurrection, that the
bodies shall awake and rise unto life.

3. The Lord delayeth it, to show his great power in quickening and raising the
bodies that have been dead long ago; for all things are alike possible to our
God of infinite power; he can raise them who are dead thousands of years since,
with no less facility, then those who are lately dead; with the same omnipotent
facility he raised Lazarus stinking in the Grave, and Jairus daughter but a few
hours after her death, his infinite power admits not a more and a less; Gates
of Brass and Iron yield to him as soon as Doors of wood.

This Doctrine serves for admonition: look well in this thy working day, what
is thy disposition when thou go to thy bed of rest, and layest down thy
Tabernacle of clay; for as a man lies down to rest; so ordinarily does he
rise: If he go sober to bed, he rises fresh and cheerful; so,

1. a sober mind, emptied of the immoderate love of this present world,
because a man dying with his heart fixed on this world, cannot awake with joy
in the day of resurrection; as a man going to bed in his surfeit, is
distempered in his body when he awaketh in the morning; so will it be with such
as dye in their surfeit with the love and care of this world.

2 thou should dye in a good conscience, hating every known sin; It is true,
many of the dear children of God may dye without repenting particularly of some
sins, which they know not to be sins, as it was with the believing Patriarchs
in the case of their Polygamie; But if thou dye without repenting of thy known
sins objected against thee by thy own conscience, this will make a fearful
wakening in that day of thy resurrection; as a man eating at evening that which
does not agree with his stomach, it troubles him in the morning when he
awakes; so those who have swallowed down all sin with a wide conscience
enlarged like hell, and did not cast it up again by true repentance, in that
gloomie morning of that eternal dark day, their awaking will be heavy and
fearful; Then shall they have a desperate repentance, like unto that of Judas,
and shall find that true to the utmost which is spoken, Job 20.12. Though
wickedness be sweet in his mouth, yet shall it be the gall of Aspes within him.

3. thou should dye, laying thy self on Christ, and fastening thy soul by
Faith into him; because the man who dies in Christ, is found in Christ in that
day; as a man carried down with a torrent of water, is found after his death
with such a thing in his hand as he griped in the way while he was alive; so a
man dying, and in his way toward the grave, embracing and clasping Christ, in
that day will be found in the arms of Christ; for he is a faithful Redeemer,
keeping that which is committed to him, and will present thee in that day to
the father faultless with exceeding joy.

It serves for comfort to the godly man; his happy and best condition, though
it be delayed for a time, yet is abiding him; Happiness, though delayed, waits
for a Godly man.
The wicked, with that rich wretch, Luc. 16. receive their good things here;
but the Godly, with Lazarus, receive their evil things: It is far better for a
poor afflicted Christian, at death to go to his bed of rest without their
surfeit, then together with it to have their fearful wakening: The Pharisees
and all such vainglorious hypocrites have all their reward in this life; they
get applause here from men, but they shall be disallowed of God in that day;
whereas the Godly man looks before him to this complete happiness, when the
Lord will come with a rich recompense of reward in his hand, Rev. 22.12. I come
quickly, and my reward is with me; To this Moses looked, Heb. 11.26. and Paul 2
Cor. 4.16. the Godly man measures not his happiness by any present difference
in respect of his outward condition betwixt him and sensual worldlings, but by
that which is to come; he knows well this is the time of his nonage, and the
heir while he is young differs not from a servant, Gal. 4.1. it may be, he is
beaten oftener with the rod of his Father then a servant, because the Father
loves him better, and will not suffer him to perish for want of correction;
but when the day for dividing the inheritance is come at the resurrection, then
shall it be known who are sons; Therefore thou who art the child of God, endure
hardship for a time, yea but a moment of time in comparison of that eternity
before thee: And I think from undeniable grounds of natural reason, there is
less proportion betwixt an hundred thousand of years and eternity, then betwixt
a moment and an hundred thousand years; It is no small comfort to have our best
before us: from this our Lord comforted his Apostles, and us in them, Ioh.
16.20. Ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy; Now
thou sowest in tears, but thou shall reap in joy; the hope of a plentiful
harvest is matter of comfort in a painful and laborious seed-time; Now thou art
betwixt wind and wave, in this raging sea of an evil world, but there is thy
comfort, thy body tossed here like a brittle bark, shall in that day be brought
to a condition of eternal rest: Abraham's bosom is a bay without winds of
temptations or afflictions; there is perpetual tranquillity: Now is the time of
thy fighting against the Devil, who is the Tempter; against the world, which is
the Magazine of his temptations and fiery darts; and against the flesh and
treacherous enticer and wilful consenter to temptations, but be thou still
wrestling in the strength of thy Lord, and in the end thou shall be more then a
Conqueror through him, and get a crown of immortal glory; look to thy enemies
and be watchful, but look also to the promised victory and Crown, and be of
good courage, for if God be with us in his strength, who can be against us?

The second point considerable, Second Point The matter and manner of our
happiness.
is the matter of our eternal happiness, the face and likeness of God. And the
manner of our enjoying it, I will behold thy face: Divines call the former our
objective, and the latter our formal happiness: for understanding whereof, it
is necessary that we clear,

1. What is meant by the face of God.
What is meant by the face or likeness of God.

2. How we are said to behold the face of God; As to the first, by the face of
God in holy Scripture is signified;

1. His gracious presence and good Will, Psalm. 51.11. Cast me not away from thy
presence, or from thy face, as it is in the first language, Psalm. 105.4. Seek
his face evermore; that is, his gracious presence and favor. Thus Genesis 4.15.
It is said Cain went out from the face or presence of the Lord, as men withdraw
their countenance from those who have grievously offended them.

2. An extraordinary manifestation and representation of the Majesty of God,
Deuteronomy. 5.4. the Lord talked with you face to face in the Mount out of the midst
of the fire.

3. an extraordinary, yet familiar and gracious revelation of his presence, and
of his holy will by some glorious, visible, and created representation, which
in comparison of Gods not revealing himself so fully unto others, is called
face to face, Exodus 33.11. Number. 12.7, 8. The Lord spoke unto Moses face to
face: as a man speaks to his friend.

4. The irresistible power of God throwing down every impediment in the way of
his eternal purpose and counsel, Isa. 64.3. The mountains flowed down at thy
presence or face.

5. The sense of Gods favor, Psalm. 13.1. How long will thou hide thy face from
me, Isa. 54.8. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee; God is said to hide
his face, when he restrains the sense and comfort of his love in time of great
trouble, and shows not in the face of providence any sign of his love:
Because pity in the heart is oft-times seen in the face and countenance.

6. The face of God signifies that essential, infinite increated, and
invisible glory of God, Exodus 33.20. Thou can not see my face, for there
shall no man see me and live: 1 Cor. 13.12. Then shall we see face to face; and
in this sense it is taken in this place.

As to the second, what is understood by beholding his face, What it is to
behold the face of God.
I answer, there is a beholding of God in his works, when in the creatures we
behold footsteps of the power and wisdom of God, Romans 1.20. The invisible
things of God from the Creation of the world are clearly seen.

2. There is a beholding of God in a created and visible representation; Thus
Moses is said to have seen God, Exodus 33. and Isai. 6. it was not properly a
beholding of God, but something created by God, from the which visible
representation the beholders did perceive with their understanding something of
the greatness and Majesty of God.

3. There is a beholding of God by the eye of faith: Jesus Christ, in whom as
the only Mediator we behold Gods face, and good will toward lost man; 2 Cor.
4.6. God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ.

4. There is an immediate beholding and knowing the essential glory of God,
Mat. 18.10. Their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in
Heaven: So in this place to behold the face of God, is to know immediately, and
to enjoy him fully; as a man beholding a face immediately and perfectly when it
is set before his eyes at noonday.

The complete and full happiness of the Saints in heaven, stands in the
seeing and fruition of God, Complete happiness stands in the seeing of God.
Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the poor in heart, for they shall see God, 1 Ioh. 3.2.
We shall see him as he is; Our natural life consists in a union of soul and
body, our spiritual life in a union of our souls with Christ by faith, and
eternal life in an immediate union with God, and communion of glory. Our growth
in the spiritual life of Grace here, must go before our coming to the stature
of the fullness of Christ in that eternal life of glory, Ephesians. 4.12, 13.

For clearing the doctrine, we would know wherein stands the matter, and object
of our happiness. 2. What is the manner of our participation and fruition of
that object.

As to the object and matter of our eternal happiness, What is the matter, or
object of our happiness.
the spirit of God in holy Scriptures expresses it in terms borrowed from
things of highest esteem in this world, that by such expressions he may
condescend to our capacity, that we may learn things invisible by things
visible, and that our desires may be stirred up by things earthly, toward
things heavenly.

1. It is called, ^. Light.
It is called Light, Psalm. 36.9. With thee is the fountain of life, and in thy
light shall we see light; It will not be a dazelling and confounding light, as
was the brightness of Moses his face at his coming down from the Mount; the
people could not behold him; it will not be an astonishing light, as that in
the Mount at our Lords transfiguration, the Disciples fell to the ground, their
weak eyes could not behold those glimpses of glory that shined through the vail
of flesh; but the light in our heaven of happiness will be a strengthening and
comforting light, it will strengthen and confirm the eyes of our understanding
to behold it: Then shall we be enabled as the young Eagles, to behold the Sun
of Righteousness in his brightness and glory; it was said by the Lord to Moses,
none can see my face and live, Exodus 33.20. that glorious sight which Daniel
saw, took strength from him, Dan. 10.8. The object being without him, drew out
all his spirits to behold and admire it, and so weakened him; but in heaven our
God whom we shall see and know, will be within us to strengthen us; then shall
we live, because we see his face: It will be also a comforting light, like the
light of the morning to the wearied watchman, who longed after it in the night
time.

2, It is called a Kingdom, Luc. 12.32. 2. A Kingdom.
Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers will to give unto you a Kingdom.
It is a Kingdom that cannot be shaken or moved, Heb. 12.28. there will be no
commotions or divisions, as in these inferior sublunary Kingdoms; in that
Kingdom will be everlasting peace, Rev. 22.11. without are dogs, to wit,
contentious and seditious men, who like dogs barking at the superior lights,
do despise dignities and dominions, which God has appointed to be as the
greater lights for ruling this inferior world; such men living and dying in
their seditious disposition and courses, will not come within the border of
that Kingdom; It is a Kingdom of incorruptible glory; Suppose a man were
Monarch of all the world, in great splendour and prosperity, yet all his glory
and contentment is but a flying shadow in comparison of that solid,
substantial, and eternal glory of the least of Saints in the Kingdom of heaven;
as the creature is infinitely inferior to the Creator, so is created glory to
the increated, which the child of God beholds in that Kingdom of glory, Isa.
40 15. Behold the Nations are as the drop of a bucket, and are counted as the
small dust in the balance; how does the glory of earthly Kings, and their
Kingdoms pass away like the glory of a King in a stage play? but the glory of
the Kingdom of heaven is fixed and permanent, as the Kingdom is immortal, so
the glory of it is incorruptible.

3. Our happiness is called a Crown, Jam. 1.12. A Crown.
He that endures trials, shall receive the Crown of life: The four and twenty
Elders had on their heads Crowns of Gold, Rev. 4.4. The Roman Senate of old,
after some great victory, did send to their Generals and great Captains a
triumphal Crown; and they did also send to the Soldiers chains, bracelets, and
garlands: Our Lord and great Captain of our salvat^on Jesus Christ, after he
had overcome all our enemies, was Crowned with glory, Heb. 2.9. He became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross, wherefore God also has
highly exalted him, and given him a name, which is above every name, that at
the name of Jesus every knee should bow, Phil. 2.8, 9, 10. This glory of the
subjection of all things, is peculiar to the Son of God, exalted to the right
hand of the Father in our Nature, in which he was promoted to glory and
Crowned; as the Kings Purple Robe is advanced with him when he ascends into the
Throne; so the humane nature, wherewith our Lord was invested, was glorified
with him in his Ascension, and exalted to the right hand of God in glory; like
as the Captain of our salvation after his victory, obtained his Crown
super-eminent, a name above every name; so every one that fights the good
fight under his command, and in his strength shall receive their Crown of glory
also, which he by the merit of his valor in spoiling principalities and powers
on the Cross has purchased for them and to them, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I fought a
good fight, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness. Then our
righteousness begun here will be crowned with perfection and glory; God will
crown, not our merits, but his own gifts, it is a crown that fades not away,
1. Pet. 5.4. a crown incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9.25. then both head and Crown will
be immortal, the person and the glory will endure for ever.

4. An inheritance.
It is called an inheritance incorruptible, that cannot be defiled, that fades
not away, 1 Pet. 1.5. It is an inheritance infinitely large, which will
satisfy all the children and heirs without any occasion of envy or contention,
it is not like that land that could not contain both Abraham and Lot, with
their substance; which was the occasion of quarrelling to the heards-men.

5. It is called an house not made with hands, An house not made with hands,
etc.
eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. here we are as men remaining for a time in
Tabernacles; our life is subject to changes and decays, our bodies must be
daily repaired, our spark of life would soon languish and dye without
entertainment; our bodies like a house of clay, do daily fall down in one place
or other with every new shower of a defluxion or distillation from our heads,
that are the roof of this house; but in heaven our condition will be fixed and
permanent; as in a large house there is much ease and room for the Inhabitants,
so Ioh. 14. In my fathers house (says our Lord) are many Mansions; there is
abundance of happiness and glory for every child of God, it is a house full of
light, Rev. 21.23. there is no need of Sun nor Moon, the Lamb will be the light
thereof; it is a house full of all provision for eternity, in our fathers house
(says the Prodigal) is bread enough, bread of life, and water of life; yea,
God himself will be all in all to us; we shall live in him, and with him, and
shall be continually refreshed and entertained by the seeing and enjoying of
God.

6. A plentiful common Table.
Our happiness in heaven is set forth by a plentiful common Table, where all
the glorified Saints will be entertained with a communion of one essential
glory, in the perpetual beholding of the face of God, Luke 22.29, 30. I appoint
unto you a Kingdom (says our Lord) that ye may eat and drink at my Table, Our
Lord in such expressions condescends to our weak and childish capacity, thereby
to signify that satiety of pleasure and joy that shall redound unto the
affections and sensitive part of our souls, from the blessed Vision of God; and
also to set forth that Communion of glory with Angels and glorified Saints, all
the heavenly guests will be refreshed with the clear vision of an infinite
glorious God; the entertainment will be great: eye has not seen, ear has not
heard, neither can it enter into the heart of man to conceive what God has
prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. there will be good and solacious
company, Angels and just men: there will be sweet and pleasant melody, no
jarrings there, but perfect harmony, singing that Trisagium, Rev. 4.8. holy,
holy, holy, Lord God, almighty, which was, and is, and is to come: This
heavenly feast will not have an end, as Ahasuerosh his feast had, though it
lasted many days; But Psalm. 16. At thy right hand are pleasures for ever.

As to the manner how we participate this happiness and vision of God: The
manner how we participate of the vision of God.
there is something of it in the general revealed in holy Scripture, but the
particular and distinct knowledge of it is reserved to our experience and
feeling in heaven; that which is revealed to us is,

1. 1. Intellectual.
That this vision of God in heaven is intellectual and mental; for whereas it
is said, 1 Ioh. 3.2. We shall see him as he is, and 1 Cor. 13.12. We shall see
him face to face, it is expounded by the Apostle in the same place, of
knowledge, then shall I know, even as also I am known; It is true, we shall see
our Lord Jesus Christ in his glorified humane nature; but God being a Spirit,
cannot be seen with the eye of the body; for nothing can be seen but that which
has color; And God is of a most simple essence, without all composition
whatsoever.

2. 2. Immediate.
This vision and fountain of God will be immediate, 1 Cor. 13.12. H re we see
as through a Glass; we receive some representations of God in the two glasses
of his word and works; as in a glass we see here only the representation, and
some reflex of the face of God; but in heaven we shall see him face to face,
without the interposition of any midds; here we see him through the Lattess,
Cant. 2.9. But in heaven we shall see him within that eternal house of glory;
here we know God by his word, but in heaven Prophesying and Teaching shall
cease, 1 Cor. 13. As when the building is perfected, the scaffolding and other
means necessary in the time of building, are removed; Though in heaven there
will be no midds intervening betwixt the soul and God in that blessed vision,
yet man's finite understanding will be corroborated and supported by the mean
and midds of a glorious created strength, that it may be enlarged, and in some
measure made capable of the fruition of an infinite God: As the eye of the
body, until it be somewaies strengthened, cannot look steadfastly on a bright and
beautiful color at a near distance, so the finite understanding of man cannot
behold that infinite beauty and Majesty of God, unless it be supported by the
hand of God: Zacheus being of a low stature, went up to the Sycomore-tree, and
from it got a sight of Christ; though at that time there was no midds of a
glass betwixt his eyes and Christ, yet he had a midds and mean under his feet,
the Sycomore-tree elevating and supporting him for the beholding of Christ: So
in that blessed vision in heaven, there will be no midds intervening betwixt
our understandings, and God, for representing God to us; yet there will be a
mean and midds for corroborating the understanding to perceive, and the heart
to enjoy, and delight in that vision.

3. That vision will be perfect. 1 Cor. 13.12. 3. Perfect.
then shall we know as we are known: But our God knows us perfectly, to him
all his works are known, All our members are written in his book, Psalm. 139.16.
he knows all his works more perfectly and distinctly, then any man knows
what he himself writes down daily in his Diary: here we know (says the
Apostle) as in a riddle; Our knowledge of many mysteries is but general and
confused: as men hearing a riddle, do understand the Gramatical sense of the
words, but little or nothing of the Mystical or moral sense: So there be many
Divine Mysteries, whereof we have but a general and confused knowledge in
comparison of that we shall have in heaven: As of the blessed Trinity distinct
in persons, and yet one in Essence: the unspeakable manner of the generation of
the Son: the unspeakable manner of the procession of the holy Ghost, from the
Father and the Son: the unspeakable manner of the Union of the Divine and
humane nature, and their subsisting in one person: as also other mysteries, we
know but in part: we believe the matter, because it is revealed: But of the
manner and great depths of those mysteries, we are ignorant with a pious
ignorance; when God sets bounds, we must not touch the Mount: These depths of
knowledge are reserved for us until the day we shall be promoted to that
highest Class with Angels and glorified Saints: and shall be made capable of
God himself, who will be all in all to us and in us: there will he teach us
immediately by himself, as we see in vulgar Schools, the Master himself, and
not the under Doctors, do teach these of the highest Class: here we know by the
ministry of our senses: Our common sense is the ordinary passage through which
light and the species or samples of things are carried into the understanding,
from the outward senses. But this light is very like light transmitted into a
dark Dungeon through narrow bores; but in heaven the soul and understanding
will be filled with light from within, because filled with God who is light, As
if a man were within the body of the Sun, he would be full of light: Then the
soul will be united immediately to God; It will be said unto the faithful
servant, enter into thy Masters joy; light and joy will not so much enter into
us, as we shall enter into it, by being unseparable and immediately joined with
God; Then shall we know him, as we are known of him: Now we have but weak and
shallow apprehensions of him by our trembling hand of an infirm Faith, but then
shall we get our arms full of God; the understanding and will shall be filled
with the knowledge and love of God; and in comparison of the weak and little
gripe we have here in our wayfaring, we shall be comprehendors in our Country
above; Though to speak simply and absolutely, none can comprehend God, who is
infinite, and incomprehensible to any creature.

4. 4. Eternal.
This vision is permanent and eternal; that glimpse of represented Majesty and
Glory which Moses saw, Exodus 33. was but transient, and that which Peter saw in
the Mount, did soon disappear, and a cloud followed after; though the children
of God get some comfortable sense of Gods favor at any time in this life, yet
it abides not: Our Condition here is subject to a vicissitude and change: At
one time we have some sense of his favor, and great joy, Psalm. 4.7. Thou have
put gladness in my heart, more then in the time that their corn and wine
increased: at another time God hides his face, and then there is great sorrow
of heart, Psalm. 28.1. If thou be silent unto me, I become like them that go
down to the Pit; But in heaven our sight of God will be permanent; God wholly,
God alone, and God for ever will be in our eye and heart; Revel. 22.5. There
shall be no night there, and they need no candle, neither light of the Sun, for
the Lord gives them light, and they shall reign for ever and ever.

Not only will our happiness stand in the vision and knowledge of God in our
understandings, Our wills shall be filled with love and delight in God.
but also our wills shall be filled with love and delight in God; Then will our
love toward God be pure without mixture, perfect without defect, and permanent
without change or fear of change.

1. Our love will be pure, without mixture; 1. Pure.
here our affections are drained forth like rivulets and run toward our lustful
delights and comforts in the creatures; but in heaven our affections will be
all gathered together, as waters in the fountain, and be poured forth on God.

2. Our love of God in heaven will be perfect; 2. Perfect.
Our love here for the most part does rise from some sign or effect of Gods
love toward us; in it there is much reflecting on our selves: But in heaven we
will love God for himself wholly; here our love is weak in the degree and
measure, but in heaven we will love God perfectly, with all our soul, heart,
and strength; as forces scattered here and there are strong when they are
united into one body: so our affections struggling here on diverse objects, will
be then united together, and in their full strength set on God.

3. Our love will be permanent, even in the full strength of it: 3. Permanent.
here our love, though sometimes it be bended and set on God, yet in an instant
it sluggs and remits of the bent: but in heaven our love to God will be ever
intended and kept in the full height: here fear like an heavy weight draws
down our hearts, and weakens our love, but in heaven perfect love will cast out
fear, 1 Cor. 13 then will we be delivered from all fear, either of the change
of our sense of the love of God to us, or of our love toward God; we will be
confirmed in the assurance of his love toward us for ever, and our hearts will
be established in our love toward God for ever.

This Doctrine serves for a timely admonition; Our chief care should be to
enter into this happiness.
seeing there is an eternal happiness attainable in the vision and fruition of
God: It should be our chief care in time to enter into that way that leads
into such an happy end; in heaven is laid up a Crown of glory; but it is given
to such only as endure to the end: The rich prize is there, but given to such
only as run their race with patience, and finish their course; thou must have
some mediate sight of God in the word here in the way, before thou attain that
immediate sight in thy Country: The knowledge of God in Christ here by Faith is
the rudiment and pedagogy of our immediate and perfect knowledge of God in
heaven, Joh. 17.3. This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: the Disciples of Christ must be
grounded in their Rudiments here, before they be commenced there Masters of all
perfect and happy knowledge.

Obj. How shall I know that I am in the way to eternal happiness, for there is
a way that seems right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of
death? Prove. 14.12. Many men are of Tamberlans opinion, that every man living
civilly and honestly, may be saved in his own Religion.

Answ. Infallible signs of entering into life; 1. Faith.
There be three infallible Antecedents of Eternal life.

1. Faith in Jesus Christ: as there is no coming to the end of the Journey,
unless a man set his feet in the way toward it, so there is no coming to
salvation without Faith in Christ, 1 Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of your faith,
the salvation of your souls; Faith at the end of our life is turned into vision
in that life eternal.

2. 2. Conformity to Christ.
A conformity unto Christ, Romans 8.29. Whom he did foreknow, he also did
Praedestinate to be conformed to his Son; thou must in some measure be
conformed to Christ in holiness in this life, otherwise thou can not be
conform to him in the other life in happiness; because as God Predestinates a
man to glory, so he does also Predestinate him to grace and holiness, Ephesians.
1.4. He has chosen us before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy. This conformity unto Christ stands not only in an outward profession
and approaching to the Ordinances, which hypocrites may do with a great show of
piety in bodily exercise, Isa. 58.2, 3. but specially in the ordering of our
life and conversation, according to the precept and example of Jesus Christ our
Lord, Phil. 2.5. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: we
must be conformable to him in our sufferings, by patience and submission to the
good will of God: Not my will (said our Lord in his Agony) but thine be done:
and we must be conformable to him in meekness toward violent men, who are
instrumental in our sufferings, 1 Pet. 2.23. Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an ensample, who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not; but committed himself to him that Judges
righteously.

3. 3. The first fruits of the Spirit.
The third evidence of our walking in the way to true happiness, is the first
fruits of the Spirit; To wit, such saving graces as are the beginnings and
first fruits of eternal life, as knowledge of God in Christ, sense of his love,
peace of conscience, and joy of salvation in our heart: The first fruits were
consecrate to God in testimony of thankfulness; they were grounds of hope of a
plentiful harvest, and motives to stir up a longing desire after the harvest;
in like manner the child of God should be thankful for those beginnings and
first fruits of happiness; he may be confident also that God who has given
unto him the first fruits in the state of Grace, will give unto him a joyful
harvest of glory; This was the ground both of Paul's confidence, and willingness
to be dissolved and to be with Christ, 2 Cor. 5.5.8. He has also given unto us
the earnest of the Spirit; we are confident and willing rather to be absent
from the body.

It serves also for matter of comfort unto the children of God, Comfort to
mourners under imperfections, fears, etc.
who mourn here under the sense of many imperfections, under the fear of many
and daily temptations, who groan under the burden of indwelling corruption
that hangs so fast on, and under the heavy pressures of many troubles and
calamities; look by faith unto that rich recompense of reward, and rejoice in
the hope of that everlasting happiness, when ye shall behold the face of God in
glory.

1. the imperfections of our knowledge, in our wayfaring; we are ignorant of
far more then we know: but then shall we know God himself, and all things in
him, as a resplendent Mirror, so far forth as he sees may conduce for our
happiness: here our knowledge is confused, and dark in the valley of Baca, but
there it will be distinct and clear in Mount Sion, that is above, where no
mists are: Now we know in part, but then shall we know fully and perfectly;
Then shall we say as the Queen of Sheba did, 1 King. 10.6, 7, 8. It was a true
report which I heard in mine own Land, and behold, the half was not told me:
Thy wisdom and prosperity exceeds the fame which I heard: here our love is
imperfect, God is not our all in all: Our love is carried on other things
beside God; but then God will be all in all in us; and to us, whatever we loved
here in the creature, will be exceeded and swallowed up in that vast ocean of
love and delight we shall have in God himself: here are great changes in our
love; sometime we are hot in our zeal, like David, dancing before the Ark; at
another time we are cold and stupefied when any thing crosses us in our
performance of holy duties, as David was when Vzzah was smitten, 1 Chronicles.
13.12. but in heaven our love and zeal to Gods glory will be perfect in
degrees, unchangeable in condition, and perpetual in duration.

2. under manifold temptations; It is true, we are subject here to one
temptation after another; and when in the strength of our Lord we have resisted
one, yet are we disquieted with the fear of another; for Satan, who departed
but for a season from our Lord, who was temptation-proof, Luc. 4.13. he leaves
us but for a short time, waiting an advantage of our security, which is his
opportunity; he will appear sometime to depart from tempting, but if we become
proud, as having resisted his temptations by our own strength, or if we become
secure and negligent in prayer and watchfulness, then will he return, and
double his temptations, as he did to that man, Math. 12. he returned with seven
worse; but watch thou and pray, that thou be not led into temptation; though
now thou be molested with one temptation after another, yet resist them, being
stefast in the Faith; and be comforted in the hope of thy eternal rest and
immunity from all temptations in thy Country that is above, in it there will be
no tempter: Then shall Satan be fastened to damnation, by the indissoluble
chains of darkness; in heaven there will not be remaining in us any inordinate
concupiscence to be tempted; Then our will and affections will adhere so close
unto to God the supreme Good, that it will be impossible to draw the heart from
God; No air of temptation can intervene; The Angels who stood not in the truth,
though they had neither a tempter from without, nor inordinate concupiscence
from within, they being created pure and holy; yet were they created of a
condition mutable, but the Saints in heaven will be confirmed and established
as pillars, in a condition immutable, Revel. 3.12. Him that overcomes will I
make a Pillar in the Temple of my God; Adam in the estate of innocence had
posse non peccare, a power not to sin, but in heaven there will be a non posse
peccare, an impossibility to sin.

3. who groan under the burden of indwelling corruption; rejoice in this, the
day of refreshment is coming; Let thy indwelling corruption be the matter of
thy daily grief, and humiliation before God: Let it be to thee as Hagar and her
brood was to Sarah, and as the daughters of Heth to Rebekah: Let it be the
occasion of thy daily wrestling, and subjecting the flesh by works of
mortification; Let it be as pricks and goads in thy sides to push thee toward
the throne of Grace with Paul, 2 Cor. 12. that the strength of Gods Grace may
be perfected in thy weakness: In such a wrestling condition, rejoice in hope,
and be of good comfort; though now the flesh lusts against the Spirit, yet at
death thy warfare will be accomplished: And after thy resurrection there will
be nothing in the whole person but Spirit and grace; here in an hour of
temptation thou prayest for strength; in heaven thou shall praise God for thy
victory over sin, Satan, and the world.

4. Here is matter of comfort against all thy calamities, public or private;
in the midst of all thy troubles rejoice in the hope of that glory, Romans 5.3.
We glory in tribulation, 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light affliction which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, Romans
8.18. I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us; That Kingdom in heaven
cannot be shaken; that treasure of unsearchable, and durable riches cannot be
robbed, nor wasted; There all tears will be wiped from thine eyes, all enemies
will be subjected to Christ, and also unto all the members of his Mystical
body, they will be made his footstool, and the footstool in below all the parts
of the body; in that day of perpetual separation of the wicked from the godly
it will be seen, as it is said of Pharaoh and his host that persecuted the
Israelites, Exodus 14.13. The Egyptians which ye have seen to day ye shall see
the^ again no more for ever; To God who gives us victory over all our enemies,
and crowns us with everlasting mercy, the father, son, and holy Ghost, be all
praise, honor, and glory, for now and ever, etc. Amen.

I having spoken of the time when our complete happiness will begin, 3. Point,
the perfect disposition of glorified Saints.
and of the matter and manner of our happiness; at our awaking in the day of
resurrection from the sleep of the death, we shall behold the face of God: Now
we proceed to speak of the the perfect disposition of the glorified Saints, and
of the measure of their happiness. The third point considerable in the words,
is the perfect disposition of Saints glorified in soul and body; I shall behold
(says he) in righteousness, at my awaking and rising out of the grave, I shall
be perfectly righteous in my soul and body, and being wholly pure, shall behold
thy face, and so be satisfied; in this life the personal righteousness of the
Saints is not perfect; in many things we fail all; Righteousness is a
conformity to the will of God the only and supreme rule of right and wrong; in
the estate of innocence man had a righteousness pure, without mixture of
imperfection, but not exempted from mutability; in the estate of renovation the
renewed man has personal inherent righteousness, firm and sure, with an
immunity from a total and final decay, 1 Ioh. 3.9. but it is not perfect and
pure, though our renovation be perfect in parts both in soul and body, yet not
in degrees; In heaven our personal righteousness will be pure, perfect in
degrees, and unchangable; then will the Saints follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes, there will be no declining from him and his commandments.

The Saints in heaven will be perfectly and wholly righteous in their souls and
bodies; then will there be a perfect conformity in all things, The Saints in
heaven will be perfectly righteous in souls and bodies.
and for ever to the acceptable will of God, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Christ loved
the Church and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with
the washing of water by the word, and that he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle; in the course of our regeneration
he clean (...), but the perfection of holiness and beauty will be in that day
when the marriage between the Lamb and his Spouse shall be consummate; here the
Church of Christ is like an house in building, but there the topstone and crown
of Glory will be put on: here it is as a young child growing in his dimensions,
but in heaven we will be at our term of consistence, even our perfect measure
of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. here there is much
imperfection in the righteousness of the children of God; there be many
infirmities and faults that others may, and themselves should censure and
condemn, but in heaven we shall be (...) faultless, Jude Ep. 24. To him that is
able to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding
joy, to the only wise God our Savior be glory and Majesty; The Church
triumphant will be then as a beautiful bride adorned and prepared for her
Husband, Rev. 21.2. here on earth is the time of her purification, but at the
day of resurrection she will be presented perfectly pure in that Temple not
made with hands, and praise him for ever for his mercy and grace bestowed on
her here: The song begun here shall be continued there, Rev. 1.5, 6. Unto him
that loved us, and washed us in his own blood from our sins, and has made us
Kings and Priests unto God and his father, to him be glory and dominion for
ever and ever, Amen.

This doctrine serves for a ground of terror and weakening to wicked men, who
live and dye in their unrighteousness; It is not possible for any in his
unrighteousness to behold the face of God.
It is not possible for them in their unrighteousness to behold the face of
God; It is true, they shall be forced to look on him as a dreadful Judge, and
avenger of all unrighteousness; They shall behold him as a Malefactor does the
Judge, with great terror and anguish of spirit, Rev. 1.7. They shall look upon
him, and wail before him: Thou that mournedst not on earth for thy sins, shall
mourn for ever under that insupportable burden of wrath and Judgment:
therefore remember in time, that this righteousness wherein the Saints will
behold the face of God, must have a beginning in this life; Our sanctification
is compared to a race, Heb. 12.1. and no man comes to the end of the course,
but he that sometime began to run, it is compared to a building, 1 Pet. 2.5.
there must be a foundation laid, a believing and resting on Christ the corner
stone, and therefore a superstructure of holiness and righteousness before the
topstone and crown of perfect righteousness be put on: It is compared to a
growing in stature, 2 Pet. 3.18. and without growing up in sanctification it is
impossible to come into the measure of stature of the fullness of Christ; we
must be infants of glory in the state of grace, before we can be men of glory
in heaven, Ephesians. 2.21. in Christ all the building fitly framed together, grows
into an holy Temple in the Lord: there must be first a growing and building up
in sanctification, before we can be Temples filled with glory in heaven.

It serves for a ground of comfort unto all those who have set themselves in
the way of righteousness, Righteousness begun in this life, will be perfect in
heaven.
and do endeavor a conformity of their wills and ways to the holy will and
righteous ways of God; here is their comfort, that their righteousness begun in
this life will be perfected, and in a perfect personal righteousness in heaven
they shall behold the face of God in glory; begun holiness here is the infancy
of perfect holiness, and is no other thing then the gate of heaven and
happiness, Mat. 5.8 Blessed are the poor in heart; for they shall see God,
Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in
heart: The seed of that full joy in heaven is sown in the renewed heart, and
the full fruits will be seen and enjoyed in the day of restoring all things,
when the godly by virtue of the second Adam will be restored to the possession
of all the happiness they lost in the first Adam; in that day thou shall eat of
the fruit of thy labors: Thy labor of love here will not be forgot there, a
cup of cold water given to a disciple in the name of a disciple, shall be
richly rewarded; the Lord thy God has a book of remembrance, Mal. 3.17. he
has a particular and distinct knowledge of every good work thou do, as men
have particulars written up in their Diaries, for their better remembrance; In
the day of resurrection, whatsoever good work thou have done in secret, though
there was little notice or noise of it in the world, yet shall it be published
in the audience of angels and men; then thy bread cast on the waters upon the
poor distressed and despised members of Jesus Christ, which the rich Nabals in
this present world thought to be as water spilt on the ground, as lost and cast
into the bottom of the Sea: Then (I say) after many days thou shall find it,
Luke 14.14. Thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the Just. It is
true, (I confess) it is not for our righteousness we are brought to behold*
Gods face in glory, yet it must be in righteousness, though not for our
righteousness; Christ's righteousness only makes way for us to the beholding of
Gods face; but personal inherent righteousness is a concomitant, necessary for
every person that would behold his glory, Heb. 12.14. This thy perfect
righteousness in heaven will make thy heart exceeding glad; consider what joy
of heart the godly have even from this testimony of their conscience only,
that they are willing to live honestly; though in many performances they come
far short of their duty, and desire: Then what joy of heart will they have when
they find in themselves the graces of holiness and righteousness perfected in
an exact conformity unto the will of God; if there be such joy in the seed
time, that Peter calls it unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. what then
will be the joy and exaltation in that day of the full harvest and in
gathering? if there be such joy at the laying of the foundation, and in the
time of building, what will be our Joy in that day when all will be covered and
crowned with glory, when the Comforter will dwell in us for ever? Then will
there be in our hearts an ever and overflowing fountain of Joy, we shall be
perfectly righteous, and never grieve the Spirit; and the Comforter will never
desert us, nor suspend the influence of his comfort; Therefore be glad in the
Lord, and rejoice ye righteous, and shout for Joy all ye that are upright in
heart, Psalm. 32.11.

The fourth point considerable is the measure of our happiness, 4. Point. The
measure of our eternal happiness.
set down in these words, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness.

Our happiness in heaven will be full and satisfactory, to the desires of our
souls; Our happiness; heaven will be full and satisfactory.
This satisfaction stands in these two. 1. In a full peace and rest for ever
from all troubles. 2. In a full Joy and delight for ever: these two blessings
of Peace and Joy for ever, will flow from that Ocean of blessedness, the facial
vision of God, and run as a refreshing river, through the soul, beholding the
face of God: the eternal misery of the damned will be perpetuated both in a
punishment of loss, which is called outer darkness, the want of Gods gracious
and comfortable presence for ever; and also in a pain of sense, which is called
Isa. 66. a worm that dies not, and a fire that cannot be quenched; but the
happiness of the godly will be continued for ever in a Rest from all pain, and
in a fruition of all good in God, all-sufficient in himself, and all in all to
them.

The godly will have a full Rest.

1. The Saints in heaven have a full rest from 1. All troubles.
From all troubles and molestations outward, Rev. 14.13. they rest from all
their labors, 2 These. 17. it is a righteous thing to recompense to you who are
troubled, rest with us, when the (...) Jesus Christ, shall be revealed from
heaven with his mighty angels: Then shall we have full rest from all our
spiritual enemies, 1 Cor. 15.26. the last enemy death shall be destroyed; when
our bodies shall be raised and clothed with immortality, then shall we rest
from all our afflictions: These are Gods medicines to purge our humorous souls,
and to prevent the out-breaking of corruption, but in heaven our souls and
bodies will be confirmed in an heavenly temper of health and happiness, and
there will not be need of such a medicine: afflictions are the bitter fruits
growing from inbred and rooted corruption; then will corruption be pulled up by
the root, and our nature will be perfectly healed.

2. 2. Inward temptations.
We shall have rest from inward temptations, and suggestions, then the sparkles
of inordinate concupiscence, smoking even in the regenerated, will be fully
quenched with that pure river of the water of life, clear as cristal,
proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb, Rev. 22.1. then shall we
get rest from indwelling corruption, that like the troubled Sea casts up the
dirt and mire of impure suggestions; Then all our raging and unruly affections
will be fixed on God, and quieted with admiring, adorning, and delighting in
God.

3. 3. The molestations of wicked men.
Then shall we get rest from the daily molestations of wicked men, who vex the
godly, as the soul of righteous Lot was vexed with the iniquities of Sodom; as
David was vexed with the malicious calumnies of his evil neighbors, Psa.
118.12. they compassed me about like Bees; but this was his, and will be our
comfort in that day, they will be all quenched as the fire of thorns: The fire
they raised against the godly will be quenched, but the fire of Gods wrath
kindled here against themselves, and poured forth in that day upon the
seditious and contentious, will never be quenched; here the wicked are like the
Sons of Zerviah, a daily vexation, and are too strong for us: like the
Iebusites, pricks in our eyes, and thorns in our sides. Here the strong do push
at the weak, and foul the waters with their feet; they spoil us of our worldly
comforts, Eze. 34.21. here we are in greatest danger from feigned friends, that
betray with a kiss; as there is more danger to ships from rocks unseen, then
from those that are seen; But in that day of resurrection, which is the
inaugurall of our consummate glory, there will be a separation of the goats
from the sheep for ever, Esaias 11.9. in the mount Zion that is above, there will
be none to hurt, Rev. 21.15. without shall be dogs, and whosoever loves or
makes lies; here in this world, simple and well meaning people are deceived
and destroyed by state liars, who under a pretext of grievance for
misgovernment and zeal for reformation, draw away the people from duty to
lawful Superiors, as Absalom by false aspersions, stole away the hearts of the
people, 2 Samuel 15.3, 6. here also flatterers by their lies spread a net before
the seet of the Rulers, and under pretext of zeal for the sacred Authority, do
alienate the hearts, and provoke the hands of Rulers to be stretched out
against the faithful, such a liar was Amaziach against Amos, Amos 7. and Doeg
against the Priests, but in heaven there will be no such scandals to grieve the
godly, Math. 13.41. The Son of man shall send his Angels, and they shall gather
out of his Kingdom all things that offend.

4. 4. From the differences that here fall out amongst themselves.
Not only will there be peace and rest from the iniquities and malice of the
wicked, but also from all differences that through ignorance in Judgment, or
weakness in affection do fall out here amongst the Godly, and interrupt the
comfort of mutual communion; Paul and Barnabas had their own Paroxism. Act.
15.39. Chrysostom and Epiphanius in a fit of bitter passion at their parting
one from another, had their mutual imprecations, but in heaven there will be no
debates, no contention, no difference in judgment, then will we know, mind,
love, and speak all one thing; all doubts will be resolved by seeing the face
of God, then will our harmony with God be perfect, and one with another, both
in Judgment and affection.

Our rest in heaven, as it will be full and absolute from every thing that can
disquiet us, In heaven there will be perpetual rest.
so it will be perpetual, and rest for ever; The soul in this present world,
though it may at a time be free from trouble, yet if it be under fear of new
troubles, this very fear does interrupt the rest and quiet of the mind; in the
time of our calm, the fear of a new storm does much disquiet us; the man sick
of a feavour tertian, is troubled even in his good day, with the sad
apprehension of his evil day ensuing. But here is our comfort, that
establishes our hearts amidst all the winds and waves of temptations here, we
shall have a calm in heaven, and good days for ever; Our peace and rest there
will be without all fear of a change, Revel. 21.4. There shall be no more
death, nor sorrow, nor pain. Not only will the Saints in heaven have that
privative blessing of peace and rest from all trouble for ever, In heaven there
will be joy and delight for ever.
but also they will have the positive blessing of joy and delight for ever;
though eternal peace and rest be a great blessing passing all understanding,
yet it is the far least part of our happiness: But our greatest satisfsction is
in that joy and delight which will proceed from the beholding of Gods face; not
only shall we have a privative rest from trouble, but a positive rest and
delight in God, which will satisfy and quiet all our affections.

This joy will be full in the measure, Psalm. 16.17. This joy wi^^ be 1. Full.
In thy presence is fullness of joy; in this life our joy is mixed with sorrow,
like the prick under the rose; Jacob had joy when his sons returned home from
Egypt with the sacks full of corn, but much sorrow when he perceived the silver
in the sacks mouth. David had much joy in bringing up the Ark of God, but at
the same time great sorrow for the breach made upon Vzzah: This is the Lords
great wisdom to temper and moderate our joy; As men of a weak constitution must
have their wine qualified with water for fear of distemper, so must we in this
life (such is our weakness) have our joy mixed with sorrow, least we turn giddy
and insolent; here our joy is mixed with fear, Psalm. 2. Rejoice in trembling;
the woman departed from the Sepulcher of our Lord with fear and great joy,
Math. 28.8. in our regenerate estate though we have joy from Christ that is
formed in us, yet the impression of the terrors of God before the time of our
new birth remain in us; as in a commotion of the Sea by a great tempest after
the stormy wind has ceased, yet the impression of the storm remains and makes
an Agitation The tender mother recovering her young child from danger of a fall
has joy from the recovery, but with much fear with the impression of the
danger; so after we are recovered here from our dangerous falls by the rich and
tender mercies of our God, sometime prevening us, sometime restoring us; though
we rejoice in his mercy, and in our own recovery out of the snares of Satan,
yet in the midst of our joy the remembrance of former guiltiness; and danger do
humble our our hearts with much sorrow, and some trepidation of heart; As our
joy here is mixed with fear, so with sorrow also; The sound believer does look
up to Christ crucified, and does rejoice in his incomparable love, that such a
person should have dyed such a death for such as were enemies to God by sinful
inclinations and wicked works; They look down also upon their own sins that
have wonnded and crucified the Lord of Glory, and this breaks the heart; as a
widow should mourn, who by her froward and lewd behavior has burst the heart
of a kind and loving husband.

The sound Believers look to their small beginnings of Grace, and they rejoice
in the Work of Gods hands; but when they compare it with that original and
primitive righteousness, they mourn bitterly, as the Elders of Israel did at
the rebuilding of the Temple, Ezra, 3.12. Those who had seen the first house
weeped; But in heaven our joy will be full without mixture of sorrow. Ioh.
16.20. Your sorrow (says our Lord) shall be turned into joy; Then will there
be no sorrow for a present trouble nor present fear of future troubles; Then
their eye will deeply affect their heart; The sight and knowledge of God the
supreme and infinite good will ravish and take up all their heart with joy and
delight; Peter in the Mount, Math. 17. was so affected with that glorious
sight, that he forgot both the delights and troubles that were below; It is
good to be here, (said he.) How much more will all worldly troubles and
delights be forgot at that soul-satisfying sight in heaven, which is as far
above that of Peter in the Mount, as the third heaven is above that Mount, and
as the increated is above the created glory!

Obj. But will not the Saints in heaven remember the evils on earth from which
they were delivered? and if so be they remember them, will it be with any
sorrow or fear?

Answ. The knowledge and remembrance of miseries which the Saints in Heaven
have, is with our anguish.
No doubt, they will remember great deliverances, Revel. 5.9. Thou wast slain,
and thou have redeemed us, say the four and twenty Elders; yea the Saints in
heaven have some knowledge of the great misery of the damned; Not only from the
remembrance of the Word of God foretelling it, but also from their own great
happiness, as knowing one contrary by another; they know well the misery of
such men is extreme, who are deprived of the great happiness themselves do
enjoy; But all their knowledge of the misery of the damned, and the remembrance
of troubles in this life will be without all anguish or sense of pain.
Augustine of the City of God, lib. 22. chapter 30. compares the knowledge that the
Saints in heaven have of the misery of the damned, unto that knowledge
Physicians have of painful diseases from their reading, but not from sense and
experience of the pain in their own person; The Saints in heaven will remember
the troubles of this life, as Soldiers after the victory remember the fight,
and as passengers safely arrived remember a dangerous voyage, This remembrance
will increase their joy and praise to God. The knowledge of the misery of the
damned, though of their dearest friends and acquaintance on earth, will be
matter of praising Gods Justice declared on them, and of his eternal mercy
manifested on themselves; the glory of Gods Justice will so affect them, that
they neither can nor will be sorry for the misery of any person.

This joy of the Saints in heaven will be full in the measure of it; for if the
measure of our joy here from faith into the gracious promises, and from some
sense of love, be above expression, what will be the joy in that facial vision?
If such be the joy of faith in hearing of our Lord and husband by his sacred
letter, and secret tokens of love: what will be our joy in seeing him and
dwelling with him for ever? if the passengers at Sea have such joy in seeing
the desired Land a far of, through the prospect of faith, what will be the
measure of their joy, when they come within that part of eternal salvation
where they shall have perpetual tranquillity and perfect delight in the fruition
of God, in whom as the center do meet all the lines of created comforts and
delights that have been drawn forth at any time to any part of the
circumference of this world; yea much more then eye has seen, ear heard, or
heart can conceive?

As our joy in heaven will be intensively full, in the degrees and measure so
will it be extensively full to the whole person, both to the soul and to the
body. Joseph at his enlargement out of prison, got a new garment, a ring, and
honorable preferment; so in the day of the enlargement of our bodies out of
the grave there will be given to the Saints a long and large white robe of
innocence both to soul and body. Then heavenly comeliness and brightness shall
as a ring adorn the body, and the whole person in soul and body will be
preferred to sit at the right hand of God in glory; the soul being but a part
of the person and whole suppos it, has a natural desire, and longs for the
reunion of the body; therefore in the day of resurrection, when the body will
be reunited, the desire of the soul will be fully satisfied; That joy of soul
and body at meeting will be mutual, like the joy of two dear friends meeting
together after some separation for a time; then will the soul be affected with
joy from the body, when it looks out by the eye and beholds the glorious
body of Christ, the glorified bodies of the Saints, and the brightness of that
body wherein it self lodged; the soul will have great joy in perceiving this
glorious change in the body; like a noble guest sometime straightened and molested
in a nastie house, does afterward much rejoice in a clean, large and quiet
habitation: As the soul will have accession of joy from the reinvestiture of
the body: So the body over and besides its own proper outward glory will have
an accessory joy reflecting from the soul; as light within a glass is
transparent, so the inward glory of the soul will be legible in the large
Characters of an ever cheerful countenance in the body.

As the joy of the glorified Saints will be in full measure and extent, 2.
Permanent.
so it will be permanent and perpetual, Ps. 16.11. At thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore. Joh. 16.22. Your joy (said our Lord to his Disciples)
no man takes from you; Though a sound believer has matter of joy in his God,
even amidst his greatest troubles, yet many times there are here sad
interruptions of his joy in respect of the exercise of it; in this vail of
tears our condition is mixed; at one time a shour of tears and prayers, at
another time a Sunshine of joy and praises; at one time we are ravished as it
were to the third heavens with the sense of Gods love; at another time we are
cast down into the depth of sorrows, when the Messenger of Satan, even some
violent tentation does buffet us; at one time we are full both of matter and
affection to praise our God, that we may say with Elihu, Job. 32.18. The Spirit
within constrains me, I am full of matter, at another time our heart and
spirit is like a bottle in the smoke; all our former joy is spent and dried up,
Psa. 102. Our joy here is like the husband-mans joy in harvest; he must be put
again to the troubles and the pains of seed time: so after our joy here, we are
put again to sow in tears; Jacob had much joy at the return of his sons with
corn from Egypt; but it endured not; for soon after he had great sorrow; the
corn was spent, and he must part with his beloved Benjamin; but in heaven our
joy will be everlasting; a full joy without mixture of sorrow, a continual
harvest, a joy ever in perfection, as the fruits are in time of harvest; we
shall never sow again in tears; a perpetual joy, but without wearying or
loathing, because there will be infinite and recent variety of sweetness in God
to delight and rejoice our hearts for ever.

Object. But will there not be degrees of glory in heaven? It is probable there
will be degrees of glory in heaven. 1.
and if there be degrees, how will all be satisfied? can he that has less be
as well satisfied as he that gets a greater measure of glory?

Answ. 1. It is most probable, there will be degrees of glory in heaven, Dan.
12.3. some shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and others as the
stars for ever and ever. 1 Cor. 15.41. there is one glory of the Sun, another
of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars; so also is the resurrection of the
dead: There are also diverse degrees of torments in hell according to the diverse
degrees of sin and guiltiness in this life; so according to the diverse degrees
of grace in this life, it is probable there will be diverse degrees of glory in
heaven: The servant who knows his Masters will and does it not, will be
beaten with more stripes then he that is ignorant of it, though he do it not,
Luke 12.47. It will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of
Judgment, then for those Cities which did contemn and reject the offer of the
Gospel, Mat. 10.15.

2. Though there will be degrees of glory in heaven, Yet all the Saints will be
fully satisfied.
yet all the Saints will be fully satisfied with that one essential and
substantial glory communicate to all in the vision and fruition of the one
infinite and all-sufficient God; As vessels of diverse measures are all filled in
the same Ocean, though all of them be not of equal capacity: The greater degree
of glory communicate to some, will not be for the excellency and differences of
their graces here, but according to the diverse degrees of grace freely bestowed
on them in this life, by the spirit of Jesus. As they were merited only by
him, who is the sole procurer of our grace and glory; so in heaven the degrees
of glory are a crowning not of our merits, but of his own gifts: for the giving
of a former gift does oblige the receiver to thankfulness, but not the giver to
bestow another gift: so grace given freely of God obliges us to thankfulness,
but does not oblige God to give unto us glory more or less: Because grace and
glory in all their degrees are of his free love, Romans 5.17. for if by one man's
offense death reigned by one, much more they which receive abundance of grace,
and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ.

This doctrine affords a ground of sharp reproof against all profane and
earthly-minded men, They are fools who for perishing pleasures part with
everlasting joys.
who with profane Esau do sell their part of this full refreshment and
satisfaction for the deceitful and perishing pleasures of sin; To such in our
time, I say as Isaiah did to those in his time, Isa. 55.2. wherefore do ye
spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which
satisfies not? Therefore to the end thy heart may be rectified, I offer these
considerations.

1. Consider that worldly pleasures are 1. unsatisfactory.
Consider in time, the pleasures of this present world cannot satisfy thy vast
appetite; Riches do not satisfy the covetous man: he desires more what he yet
wants, then he delights in what he has already: The Heathen Moralist spoke
truth to this purpose, when he said the covetous man wants as much what he
has, as what he has not; as he possesses not what he wants, so he has no
heart to make use of what he possesses; honor does not satisfy the ambitious
man: what he has of it already, is but a step to raise up his vain spirit to
the desire of more: and where are vehement desires of more preferment, there
cannot be satisfaction: Neither do sensual pleasures satisfy the incontinent
or intemperate man: his sinful desires are not satiated thereby: the more he
sins, his corruption is the more set on fire of Hell; more sin is but more
fuel to the fire of concupiscence; Therefore as Isaiah exhorts in the same
place, hearken diligently unto the word of the Lord, and eat that which is
good, and let your soul delight it self in fatness; obey that exhortation of
the Apostle, Col. 3.2. set your affections on things above, and not on things
on earth; covet the best things; be thou truly generous, and heavenly-minded;
set thy heart on these durable riches, on that immortal crown of glory, and on
these pleasures that fade not away; those pleasures in the vision and fruition
of God, will satisfy thy soul for ever; they will fill up the measure of all
thy desires; thou will have more set before thee in an infinite God, then thy
finite soul can comprehend; and yet thou shall be made capable to receive and
enjoy so much as shall satisfy thee to the full, and all thy spiritual desires
shall be turned into delights there.

2. Consider the pleasures of sin are deceitful, Heb. 3.13. 2. Deceitful.
they perform the very contrary of that they promise in the temptation; they
promise pleasure, but bring endless and unspeakable pain, if not repented; they
promise much gain and profit to the covetous man, but bring with them in the
end an irreparable loss; for what avails it a man to gain all the world, and
lose his own soul? They promise honor and worldly applause to the ambitious
man, but bring along with them in the end shame and everlasting confusion;
Therefore in time change thy sinful ways, and set thine afrections on the
pleasures above, that are real and everlasting; greater and sweeter will they
be in our experience, then now we can apprehend them by the report, like
exquisite delicacies, and fragran: odors, which are best known by the tasting
and smelling.

3. 3. Vanishing.
Consider all thy worldly pleasures will vanish and perish; they must end with
this life; riches will take the wings of the morning; honor worldly is but a
vapor: and even thy lawful worldly pleasures are but a gliding stream that
passes away, but the pleasures in heaven are for ever; They shall never be
exhausted, neither shall thou loath them: therefore make no provision for the
flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, but let it be thy daily study so to live
here, and so to dye, that when thou art awaked in the day of resurrection thou
may be satisfied with the sight of Gods face immediately after thy awaking,
and may be refreshed for ever with peace and joy flowing from that sight.

Object. How to be assured of satisfactory pleasure in heaven.
But how shall I be assured of that full satisfaction in heaven?

Answ. 1. Thou must be a mourner here for thy sins, Luke 6.21. Blessed are ye
that weep now, for ye shall laugh. Psa. They that sow in tears, shall reap in
joy; as the harvest in order of time does follow the seed time: so shall thy
joy in heaven succeed to thy sowing in tears: ye have our Lords words for it,
John 16.20. in the world ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned
into joy; as the water in Cana was turned into wine: so thy tears shall be
turned into eternal comfort and refreshment.

2. thou must hunger and thirst for righteousness here: thou must have an
earnest desire to do the will of God: Luke 6.21. Blessed are ye that hunger
now, for ye shall be filled; A soul living and dying in a hatred of sin, and a
hunger and thirst after Christ the bread and water of life, cannot perish. God
who works nothing in vain, will satisfy thy supernatural appetite, which is
the work of his own hands; if thou dye with a longing desire after Christ, thou
shall rise with a full delight in Christ, who in that day will satisfy thy
longing soul.

3. Thou must use frequent and fervent prayer unto God: Ioh. 16.24. ask that
your joy may be full. Prayer in the name of the Mediator is the blessed
Ordinance of God, whereby he bestows on us here in some beginnings: he earnest,
and the full satisfaction there; the soul is lifted up to God by prayer, and
therefore filled with some drops of joy in this life, as a vessel is holden up
to the fountain and then filled, Psa. 86.4. rejoice the soul of thy servant:
unto thee O Lord do I lift up my soul; and those drops of Joy are to us an
earnest of that full Joy we shall have in the immediate and full fruition of
God himself the fountain of life.

This doctrine serves for a ground of comfort and encouragement unto the
children of God.

1. Against all thy discouragements from many sad dispensations: It may be thou
minglest thy drink with tears, as the people of God did, Psalm. 80. yet faint
not at that which thou see, hear, or feel, rejoice in the hope of
things not seen, but believed; be of good courage, the day is coming when thy
diet shall be changed, when the Cup of salvation shall be put into thine hand,
and thou shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of Gods house, and thou
shall drink of the Rivers of his pleasures, Psalm. 36.8. those heavenly
pleasures are deep like Rivers, they are a part of the unsearchable riches of
Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. They are long like Rivers, they are continued for ever; It
may be thou art disquieted with the unjust reproaches of men, and may in thy
sad experience complain, as Psalm. 69.20. Reproach has broken my heart, and I
am full of heaviness; yet lift up thine heart, behold the day of thy redemption
draws near, the Lord shall bring forth the righteousness of his servants as
the light at noon-tyde of the day. Rejoice thou in the hope of that solemn
Justification before man and Angel, by which the foul mouths of thy violent
and malicious reproachers shall be stopped for ever: Then shall they be
speechless, and confounded with shame when they shall hear the righteous Judge
absolve many persons, whom they in their supercilious and Pharisaical pride,
pre-condemned as profane and unrighteous; Remember thou who studyest in this
day of men's Judging, to approve thy self to God, that in Gods day the Counsels
of hearts will be made manifest: And thou shall have praise of God, 1 Cor. 4.5.

2. 2. Want of assurance of Gods love.
It may be now thou art discouraged from the little assurance thou have of the
love of God; and accordingly thy Peace and Joy is but little; Yet be of good
comfort; Remember we must walk here by Faith, and not by sense; such a full
measure of the sense of Gods love, and of peace and joy as thou would have,
is reserved for thee in the other life; rejoice in this, that God has enlarged
thine heart with strong desires after that promsed satisfaction; he that has
opened thy heart, will fill it, Psalm. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide, and I will
fill it: The little of peace and joy thou receivest here, is given to increase,
but not to satisfy thy desires; at thy dying, thy desire of refreshment and
satisfaction will be greatest, after death thy soul will behold thy Fathers
face, and at thy resurrection thy soul and body will be satisfied with his
likeness.

3. 3. Vicissitude of peace and trouble.
It may be thou art discouraged from the vicissitude of peace, and trouble, of
joy and sorrow; a long night of trouble succeeds to thy short day of peace
and joy. Sometime the Lord will speak peace, and at another time he writes
bitter things against us; we may read his displeasure in sore and great trials;
sometimes he shows his face reconciled in Christ, as our Father; at another
time in the course of his providence he looks upon us as a stranger and
wayfaring man, like Joseph, with a strange countenance toward his brethren,
for their trial: But in such a dark hour wait thou upon him, he will not absent
himself for ever; Though the full and permanent manifestation of his love be
delayed until the day of resurrection, yet now and then he will give unto thee
a blink of his favor to uphold thy heart till the day of thy full refreshment,
Math. 28 7. the Angel said of Christ to the woman, He goes before you into
Galilee, there shall ye see him; and yet the woman did get a sight of him at
Jerusalem before he passed into Galilee, Ioh. 20.19. so though the full
manifestation of his glorious presence be delayed until thou pass over by death
into heaven, yet wait thou on God in the conscientious use of the means, and
thou shall get some sight here, and a full sight of glory there; Our faithful
and bountiful Lord gives never less, but many times more then he promises.

4. 4. Company of evil neighbors.
It may be thou art much discouraged and vexed with the company of evil
neighbors: they are thorns in thy sides, and make thee many times in the
bitterness of Spirit to cry out, Woe is me that I dwell in the Tents of Meseck;
but be of good comfort, if God in his wise providence has placed thee amongst
such men; he is able to preserve thee from the contagion of their society, as
he did Joseph and Daniel from the Idolatry of Egypt and Babylon, and Obadiah
from the abominations of Achab, and his Court; in the mean time let thy light
shine in their darkness: be thou the more circumspect in thy walking: though
thou may have an evil communion with them as Citizens of the same present
world yet must thou not have a communion or fellowship with their unfruitful
Works of darkness, for thou art a Citizen of heaven, and called out of darkness
unto light, be earnest in daily prayer with God to be saved from that froward
generation, rejoice in the hope of that comfortable communion with the Saints
in heaven: while thou art here on earth; distance of place is an impediment to
that full communion: for the Saints here who are the salt of the earth for its
preservation, are also like unto salt in this respect, they are not all in one
place of the earth, but scattered here and there: whereas in heaven they will
be all together without any mixture of the wicked; here we know a very few of
the Saints, but in heaven we shall know them all, as Peter in the Mount did
know Moses and Elias; as Adam in the state of integrity, after he awoke, knew
Evah to be his wife; we will know none there after the flesh: we will love them
all as Saints, and all with the like affection, because all will be alike holy,
even in the perfection of created holiness; Therefore under sense of any wants
here, bodily or spiritual, rejoice thou in the hope of that full sight, full
peace, full joy, and full perfection in holiness: Then God will be all in all
to his Saints. To this purpose Augustine speaks well, lib. 22 chapter 30. of the
City of God: That saying (says he) is rightly to be understood; To wit, that
God will be all in all; he himself will be the end of all our desires, who
without all end will be seen, who will be loved without loathing, who will be
praised without wavering: Then (says Bernard) The rational parts of our soul
will be filled with the light of wisdom, the concupiscible part with the
fountain of righteousness, and the irascible part of our soul with perfect
tranquillity: Therefore the Believer who has received Grace for Grace out of
the fullness of Christ, both may and should in his life and death rejoice in the
hope of that full satisfaction in his Fathers house: for here is a sure ground
of comfort, when thou awakest in the day of resurrection, thou shall behold his
face in righteousness; Now to the Lord Jesus Christ, of whose fullness we
receive both Grace and Glory, with the Father and holy Ghost, be ascribed all
praise, honor and glory, for now and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Joseph Cranford, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.
THe Practice of CHRISTIAN PERFECTION, wherein several Considerations,
Cautions, and Advices are set down for the Perfecting of the Saints and
Completing them in the Knowledge of Christ Jesus, by Thomas White Minister of
Gods Word at Anne Alde sgate London. PANTHEOLOGIA, or the Sum of Practical
DIVINITY, Practiced in the Wilderness, and Delivered by our Savior in his
Sermon on the Mount, being Observations on the fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh
Chapters of S. Matthew: to which is prefixed PROLEGOMENA, or Preface, by way of
Dialogue: wherein the Perfection and Perspicuity of the Scripture is vindicated
from the Calumnies of Anabaptists and Papists: By Thomas White, Minister of
Gods word at Anne Aldersgate. London. ANIMADVERSIONS, or the Rabinical Talmud
of RABBI John Rogers: Wherrein is Examined his Doctrine, as of the Matter Form
of a Church The duty of Separation. Matter Form of a Church The subjects of
Church Power.
etc. By Zach. Crofton, Minister of Gods word at James Garlic Hythe, London. A
PRACTICAL DISCOURSE of PRAYER: Wherein is handled the Nature, the Duty, the
Qualifications of Prayer, viz. Ejaculatory, Public, Private, and Secret
Prayer; with the necessity and Engagements unto Prayer, together with sundry
Cases of Conscience about it: By Thomas Cobbet, Minister of Gods Word at Lyn.
JUS DIVINUM Ministerii Evangelici; or the Divine Right of the Gospel Ministry,
Published by the Provincial Assembly of London. A VINDICATION of the Answer to
Mr. Brabourn concerning the Civil Magistrates Power, as to changing
Church Government: Wherein the Reverend Mr. Perkins and some Truths of God are
Vindicated from the Lies and scurrilous expressions cast upon them. A PROSPECT
of Eternity: Or man's everlasting Condition opened and applied, by John Wells
Mr. of Arts, now Pastor of Olaves Jury in London.

