THE COMPLAINT OF THE BOVTEFEV, Scorched in his own Kindlings. OR THE
BACKSLIDER Filled with his own VVayes:

In two LETTERS of the Ministers of the PRESBYTERY at CARRICK-FERGUS, to the
Lord of ARDES, Now in Rebellion in ULSTER, in IRELAND, against the
Commonwealth of ENGLAND: WITH HIS ANSWER TO THE FIRST of those LETTERS.

Together with some Animadversions upon the said LETTERS.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed by Matthew Simmons, 1649.

TWO LETTERS FROM THE PRESBYTERY OF CARRICK-FERGUS, to the Lord Ards, and his
answer to the first of them.
Right Honorable,
THE present strange alteration of affairs, moves us to write our mind freely
to your Lordship; especially since (as it appears now clearly) you have been
the chief Author of all those calamities: We would first put your Lordship in
mind of the hazard you were in, before the Covenant was renewed, and how ye
complied with us then, for your own safety, with solemnity and forwardness ye
renewed the Covenant; Ye your self first moved and framed a Declaration in
opposition to Malignant courses, and all the present enemies of the cause of
God. In the Propositions to be offered to (...) King, you agreed that these
concerning Religion should be first offered, and if these were not granted, no
other should be presented: Your Declaration also bears very large profession,
both in general, that ye would do nothing in reference to Religion, without
our consent and advice, and that least God should leave you to fall in error,
and particularly that ye would acknowledge the Kings Demands, when he should
give satisfaction in securing Religion, before he were admitted to the exercise
of his Royal Power, you all along show your self ready to subscribe all
Orders against Malignants, and so by ample professions, engaged us the more
deeply to give credit to your Declarations, and trust your faithfulness: Yet
nevertheless your Lordship has had secret dealing to bring in Malignants, and
had correspondence with them, and all this time has been dealing subtly in
your heart, professing one thing, and intending another; which has been a most
notorious deceit, to ensnare the people of God to advance your most synistrous
ends; Who cou^^ have believed that your Lordship would have avo^^ed a
Commission from the King, when he yet ^^^^^ses as much as his Father, to secure
Religion, (...) follows wicked counsel, and so avowedly to violate that
Article of your Declaration; or that ye would own a wicked association of
Irish Papists, and under color of strengthening, should have betrayed that
Garrison of Belfast. We must be faithful in warning your Lordship (though the
Lord knows what heaviness it is to us) that the Lord will reward you if you
repent not for such a betraying of the faithful servants of God, who would
have plucked out their eyes for you, and the Lord will visit your Family with
sudden ruin, and irrepairable desolation for that you have been so grand an
instrument to destroy the work of God here. We exhort your Lordship in the
Name of the living God, to whom ye must give an account, in haste to forsake
that infamous and ungodly course you are in, and adhere to your former
profession, otherwise all the calamities that will ensue, will be laid on your
score. The Lord himself and all the faithful will set themselves against you,
and we will testify of your unfaithfulness to the World so long as the Lord
shall give us strength, we shall yet continue to pray for your Lordships
conversion, and shall expect your Answer, remaining.

Your Lordships servants in all duty, the Ministry of the Presbytery.
At Carrick-fergus, June 29. 1649.

HAD not the strange and treasonable Libell of the Scots Presbytery at Belfast,
by them there published, the 15. of Feb. last, prepared that simple people to
put on the yoke, who are always ready to be fired by such Boutefeux, and led
by those Demagogues from their duty, and their Interest, to their ruin, there
had not been at present, that strange alteration of affairs in the Province of
Vlster; nor the Ministers of the Presbytery at Carrick-fergus (the same men, or
some of them who were at Belfast) had been furnished with an occasion to write
so freely to his Lordship, and to tell him that he has been the chief Author
(though themselves were the pri^^ ones) of all these Calamities: That Libell of
theirs against the Parliament of England, the Supreme Authority, under whose
protection these Incendiaries lived, has been Declared against by Parliament,
and also examined by a private Pen, and the Treason of it laid out to the
World, before these effects were visible to all, though they might then have
been foreseen, and were so in the tendency of their cause. They then must needs
cry down the Sectaries, that is (as themselves interpret) the Parliament of
England) and will determine that the Fundamental Government of England and
Ireland is by King and Parliament, and stir up the people, not to depart from
it; believing (like clear sighted men) that Charles the second, the hastily
proclaimed King of Scotland would most readily embrace, and Cordially maintain
their Idol Covenant: Yet he that could see but as far as a Batt at Noone,
may very well judge (though he should only take the ground from the people
that are about him) that Cu^^. loves the Covenant, as well as a Scotch Priest
loves a Bishop: But their obedient Son Montgomery, the Lord of the Ards, is
so well Catechized with that Doctrine of the Classes, that he accepts a
Commission from the same Charles the second of Scotland, which he yet
conceales; going first, out into Rebellion with the most of his Nation there
(if not all) upon the account of the Covenant, to prevent those dangers from
the wicked Sectaries, of which he had so zealous and pious warning from his
received Ghostly Fathers: Mean while thereby (besides their own Rebellion)
giving such a Diversion to those forces of the English Nation in Vlster, as
held faithful to their duty, that they were not able to contribute any
assistance to Collonell Jones for resistance of Ormond, and Inchiquine, and the
rest of the Irish Rebels that now entered Colonel Jones quarters, took in many
out Garrisons, and among other, Drogheda, and Besieged Dublin it self, which
also had been in great danger to have been lost, had it not been with great
prudence and foresight cleared of all suspected Vermin within, and with much
Courage, and Gallantry defended against all efforts without, by that worthy
Governor Colonel Jones, now Leivtenant General of the Horse in Ireland, who
ought to be loved, and honored of all true English, that would promote the
Interest of this Nation. Thus these Sons of Bichri, have blown a Trumpet of
Rebellion to all that Kingdom, which themselves (poor men!) now see is not
like to stablish their blessed Covenant, or their Canonical Presbytery. For
whil they had thought their well taught Son of their Kirk, the Lord of Arder
had been only in Arms against the Sectaries; He, though a young man, yet was
too old for them, he conceales his Commission from C. S. till George Monro with
his Brigade of Irish from Ormond was come to Carrick-fergus, and then he
declares himself, what Authority he was clothed with; and what help the poor
Covenant and Presbytery is like to have from him, being Commissioned from him,
whose Leivtenant General professes to maintain the Christian Religion in the
large Extent, and not under a strict notion of new invented Names, themselves
begin to suspect; and George Monro was no Dissembler with them, when they
lately at Carrick-fergus asked him, whether he would take the Covenant or not.
He ^^^^^ed The Devil take the Covenant and you too. These are the sweet
effects of that Consisteriall Libell, which yet by accident, and no thanks to
them, may in time prove of advantage both to England and Ireland. But no more
of that now: It is worth the observing how these Backsliders from their duty,
are filled with their own ways. And it were good that others of that Tribe
would give over their trade of Intermedling with Civil affairs, for they
find that Young men can over reach them.

It Were perhaps good that their Brethren of Scotland would for their better
information consider what may be their case, if Montrosse should bring but a
small strength into the North of Scotland, to join with the malignants there;
or if George Mo^r^ Having seiled his business in Vlster should transport
thither his Irish Brigade, might there not be found, men enough in Scotland to
bring things there once again to the condition they were in, before the
^^^tell of Kilsyth (consider it!) And it is ten to one, Montrosse has made so
good Observtaoin of the cause of his misfortune at Phillips-bough that you
would never take him in that condition again, deceive not your selves, you
that are the conscientious Presbitery in Scotland (if any such there be) either
your Civil or Kirk ruin is inevitable in the way you now go, you may yet
establish has if you will; there is one way, and it cannot be hid from your
eyes, but who can help it if you will not see, He had need be a good swimmer
that dare embrace a sinking man.

And perhaps some would say it were no bad counsel, if I should advise some of
our hyper-poly pragmons, the St. politiques of the Pulpit, to meddle only with
their proper work, least they do like their poor silly Brethren at Belfast,
raise more such Devils then they can conjure down: If they be up, they will
break into their Circle; there is nothing so sacred, which these they plead
for will not proph^^^e, Oaths, Covenants, Priests, Pulpits, any thing, take
heed you raise not a new War, for if you do, 'twill be most miserable to
your selves.

So much of the Alteration of affairs, and the cause thereof.

[Wee would first put your Lordship in mind of the hazard, etc.] Why do you
not speak it once, it may be his Lordship knows no such hazard, and how was
it avoided; by renewing the Covenant? That same can admirable Panpharma^on, it
cares all diseases infallibly: But what (...) was he in danger to loose his
Estate in Ireland to the Sectaries, because he was a Religious Presbyterian; I
do not hear that any of them have such opinions: Certainly he is in danger to
lose it now to the Commonwealth of England for his Rebellion, to which you his
Ghostly Fathers instigated him; you tell him of his Declaration, that he would
do nothing without your advice, least God should let him fall into error*
Pray where learned he, that your advice was like to be so sure a preservative,
was it not from (...)? (his ^^^telous Uncle could have taught him better; he
has no such Hyperbolicall opinion of you) Are you not ashamed thus obliquely
and (...) to insinuate your own infallibility? Do you^ (...) think you have
led him sufficiently into error, when you led him into ^^bellion against the
Commonwealth of England, he must needs be a wise man that gives up himself to
your leading: When the blind leads the blind, you know the event; and this is
like to prove a woeful one to you both.

[Your Lordship has had secret dealing with Malignants, etc.] And you have
openly been so, unless Treason, Rebellion, and to stir up to it, be
Anomalous, and excepted from that General rule. And with what face do you
tell his Lordship of his dissembling, and subtle dealing, professing one
thing, and intending another, to ensnare the people of God to his sinistrous
ends; why may not his Lordship do it as well as you, whose whole course is
nothing else, but masking under the vizard of the Cause of God, and reformation
of Religion; to impose upon all who have the weakness to trust you, while you
carry on your own ends. But to your Express, His Lordship were best consider
whether there be not something of an Omen in it; perhaps while he pursue the
Course you put him into, his END may be SINISTROUS. It seems incredible to you,
he would take a Commission from the King, while he refuses as much as his
Father, to secure Religion, and follow wicked Counsel. Why may not the King of
Scotland follow other men's wicked Counsel, as well as your wicked Counsel;
for who shall assure us, you will give him better then you gave the Lord of
Ardes, when you put him into Rebellion against the Commonwealth of England.

But because you talk of securing of Religion, tell us what that same Religion
is, that needs to be secured by Kings? was it not that true Religion that once
grew and spread in the World, and made a Conquest of the Roman Sword, against
all the power of the Empire, set on work by the Devil to oppose and endeavor
to root it out: Religion properly so called, can maintain it self without
External power; it is their Religion that calls for defense from the secular
Arm, that is not able to defend it self from the appearance of truth, which
is great, and will prevail over all Antichristian forms and clouds. But [you
will be faithful to his Lordship now] it is well you will at last, you should
have been so, when you put him into Rebellion. For your denunciation and
Prophecy, we will not much contradict it; your Grand-sire Caiaphas hit it
once, and so did that shadow raised by the Witch of Endor, when he told Saul,
that to morrow, he and his Sons should be with him; but if this be his doom
for his Rebellion, what will become of you that put him on to it.

The Lord of Ardes Answer to the Presbytery at Carrick-fergus.
Reverend Friends,
I Cannot but with unexpressible grief resent the bitter expressions, and ill
grounded wrong aspersions you are pleased to cast upon me in your Letter, as if
I had secretly brought in Sir George Monroe his party into this Country, and
so have been the chief Author of all these present distractions; whereof God,
the searcher of hearts is my witness, I am free (notwithstanding of the
jealousies raised upon some expressions in that Letter of Sir George Monroe to
Sir Robert Stewart which was intercepted) and that among other, many prevalent
reasons and motions (too long here to express) induoing at this time, to own
his Majesty's Commission. It was not the betraying, but the securing of these
Garrisons from Sir George his party; which in our distracted and disjoynted
condition, for want of Authority, and by reason of the Soldiers affection to
their former Officers, were likely to be rendered to him. The Lord he knows,
that the preservation of the established Church Government, your peace, the
good and quiet of this poor corner, and the advancement of Religion, according
to the Covenant (all which by private underminers, to your own knowledge, were
in apparent hazard of ruin) are the chief reasons which induces me to this
course, of making use of that Authority, as the only mean to secure us,
(being so united under command) from the violence of opposers hereunto. It
request you therefore, and until my carriage (after that now I am clothed
with Authority) may witness whether my intentions and resolutions be not
according to my profession, you would be pleased to have more charitable
thoughts of me, and rest assured that I am,

Your affectionate faithful Friend and Servant, MONTGOMERY.
Belfast, June 30. 1649.

THE poor Thunder-stricken Lord answers with the humility that becomes a good
Son of the Kirk, he now ownes (...) his Commission, and thereby confesses
himself guilty of Treason to the Commonwealth of England, but dare not own
his juggling with George Monroe, and Sir Robert Stuart, because perhaps that
might be Treason against the Presbytery, and Covenant, which may not be
forgiven him, neither in this World, nor that to come; neither dares he tell
the reasons why he did not declare his Commission till then; nor is it
convenient for me to tell them, though they cannot be unknown to him that is
acquainted thoroughly with the state of those affairs: The poor Man has
learned from them to appeal to God too; take heed my Lord, you know who was
wont to do so, and the World has seen that God will not be mocked, nor is an
(...), but an Omnipotent, and Omniscient God, that judges in the Earth,
whether the New Rebels of Vlster believe it or not. But now your Lordship is
clothed with Authority, we shall see how Georg Menro will give you leave to use
it, which the Presbytery have told you in their next Letter, they do not
believe will be for the good of Religion, and the Covenant, being Associate
with the Enemies of them both, indeed your Lordship is in bad terms with
them, and with all men else, you had better been still persevering.

Right Honorable,
WE received yours, wherein you with grief resent our bitter expressions, and
ill grounded wrong aspersions, (as much as to call them false) which you say we
cast upon your Lordship. Truly our expressions flow from the bitterness of
grief and sorrow, and not disaffection toward you: You have often known our
abundant affections, and endeavor to serve your Lordship in our stations.
These which your Lordship calls wrong aspersions, are the words of truth and
soberness, Intercepted letters from that party, together with Colonel
Conawayes discovery of that which is now clear, w^^ many other circumstances of
your Lordships latter carriage, and the exact correspondence between Colonel
Monro's motions and yours, does evince the reality of our assertions, as well
as his own Letter, which we believe spoke neither affection, nor a conjecture
of your Lordships design, being written to such a close friend. It is a sad
jest to your Lordship to tell us that it was the securing of these Garrisons
from Colonel George Monroe that moved you to put on that commission; whereas by
the conjunction of your Lordships forces and command, he lies before this
Garrison to destroy it. It were a good proof of the reality of your purpose,
if ye should with your whole power urge him to remove, which if ye were
cordial in, were easy to do. Neither know we how to believe that your
Lordships present course is intended for the good of Religion and the Covenant,
when ye are not only associate with the enemies of both, but your commission,
as we are informed, subjects you to the immediate commands of the Marquess of
Ormond, whose infamous and irreligious peace made with the Rebels, may easily
tell us what establishment to the Covenant, or Presbyteriall government we may
expect from his Orders and Authority, his own printed speech to the council
of Kilkenny, explaines to us his real resolutions concerning Religion, to
maintain Christian Religion in the large extent, and not under a strict notion
of new invented names, and besides the King yet refusing to secure Religion,
how shall you establish it, except ye do very far transgress the limits of
your commission: which we believe you desire no man to think. In a word your
Lordship has but reassumed the old quarrel which the Engagers the last year,
and before them, James Grahame and the Malignants in England were of old
pursuing: Neither we are confident, will it prosper better in your hands nor it
did in theirs. The Lord in Justice has declared his displeasure against that
course, and will do so against all them who seek to advance the King against
Christ's throne, and even while he refuses to give Christ his due first. We
would therefore yet again as lovers of the standing of Christ's Kingdom and of
your Lordships salvation, as the Messengers of God beseech your Lordship before
you run a further hazard of the Lords wrath, to leave of that ungodly course,
and take better means to effectuate the good of Religion. Remember those who
honor God he will honor, and those who despise him, shall be lightly esteemed
of: Whereas your Lordship desires our charity toward you; truly as we have
ever testified a due respect to your self and family, we shall yet continue*
but you have involved your Lordship already so far in the guilt of
unfaithfulness to the cause of God and your own subscriptions, that we cannot
but testify against the course you are in, and denounce judgment upon your
person, family, and all your party, till the Lord persuade your heart to
return, which shall be our fervent desire, and shall remain,

Your Lordships servants in all dutiful observance, the Ministers of the
Presbytery.
At Carrick-fergus, the 2 of July, 1649.

TO the reply of the Presbytery, there remains little to say, they here
discovered his falsehood, and tell him by whom, and all his humble and calm
language gains him nothing of credit with them, they now see, he that could be
drawn from his fidelity to the Commonwealth of England, by the Presbytery at
(...) may also be drawn from them, by the glorious ^^^mises of a pretended
King; they will trust him no (...) they are inexorable. And so do the
Presbytery (...) deal with those that will not serve their turn (...) shadow
of it here in England, though they want a (...)-story for the forming those
dreadful Thunderbolt, (...) they make the Pulpit serve for a shift, to blow
the Tr^^pet to Rebellion, and a new War; what would our (...) do, if they had
the power of the Kirk of Scotland; T^^ poor Viscount Montgomery lies under
their Prophesies and Fulminations, which may be like (...) come upon him,
though he should repent his s^ule against the Covenant.

And for a close of all, I shall ask them only these Questions. Whether it be
not as dangerous for (...) of men, as for another, to set up themselves against
the Throne and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ? And whether it be not a great
part of his Kingly office, to rule in the understandings, and consciences of
Men? Whether the true light that lightneth every one who comes into the
World, may not give out that light in what ^^^ner and measure, and by what
means he pleases? And whether they do not usurp his Throne, that seek to
oppose those beams, or limit and present the (...)

And whether the Presbytery be not every where more employed in this work,
then is for their safety, if the wrath of the Lamb be kindled?

FINIS.

