The Complete DOCTORESS: OR, A Choice Treatise of all Diseases insident to
Women. WITH Experimental Remedies against the same.

Being Safe in the Composition. Pleasant in the Use. Effectual in the
Operation.


Faithfully translated out of Latin into English for a common good.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Farnham and are to sold at his Shop at the entrance
into Popes-head-alley out of Cornhill, 1656.

THE FIRST BOOK OF Women's Diseases.
The Proem by the Author.
IT is acknowledged by the most able Physicians, that it requires great
diligeuce, and Judgment to contrive an exact Partition, or Explanation of
Women's Diseases, and to oblige the World with a right Method, and Means to
cure them: because sometimes a part is diseased by consent, and sometimes
primarily, by it self, or without any communication of distemper either with,
or without matter, from any other part. The Ancients, whose studious endeavors
conspired the subduing of these Diseases, have left behind them most
honorable testimonies of their labors, in favor of that Sex. Modern men also
have been stirred up to their defense, as Mercurialis, and Mercatus, the former
indeed with sufficient elegance, but the latter with so much tediousness, and
confusion; that you may sooner find your Patient dead, then a remedy in his
writings for her recovery; to correct this inconvenience, Rodericus a Castro
engaged his pen in their quarrel, but with no great success, for if my
Judgment be any thing considerable, his writings are more learned, then
useful. When I had noted these deficiencies, I thought with my self, that if
I culled out the choicest Medicines (omitting the superfluous) and digested
them into a little work by themselves, it might prove an undertaking worthy of
a general acceptance; This was the birth, and growth of my design,
warrantable enough, as I conceive, if not praise worthy, and if I flatter not
my self in an opinion of my own pains, I have proceeded with so much
perspicuity, and tender circumspection, as will make the event answerable.

AN INDEX OF THE CHAPTERS.
The first Chapter. OF the consent of the Diseases of the Matrix, with the
other Parts. The second Chapter. Of the suppression, or staying of the Courses.
The third Chapter. Of the immoderate running of the Courses. The fourth
Chapter. Of the coming away of the Courses by Drops, the vehement Symptoms
thereof, and of the Whites. The fifth Chapter. Of the Complication of the
Courses, with other Diseases. The sixth Chapter. Of hard swellings in the
Breasts.
The second Book.
The first Chapter. OF the Mother. The second Chapter. Of the Epilepsy in the
Matrix, And the several kinds thereof. The third Chapter. Of Melancholy
proceeding from the Matrix. The fourth Chapter. Of a cold Distemper, and windy
humors in the Matrix. The fifth Chapter. Of a hard swelling in the Matrix. The
sixth Chapter. Of the Dropsey in the Matrix. The seventh Chapter. Of the
falling down of the Matrix. The eighth Chapter. Of an Itch, Chaps, and an
Inflammation in the Matrix. The ninth Chapter. Of a Cancer, and an Ulcer in the
Matrix. The tenth Chapter. Of Worms, and the Stone in the Matrix, and of the
Piles.
The third Book.
The first Chapter. OF Barrenness, both Absolute and Respective. The second
Chapter. Of a Mola, or shapeless lump of Flesh. The third Chapter. Of Women's
longings. The fourth Chapter. Of a bad stomach, proceeding from vomiting. The
fifth Chapter. Of a Pain in the belly, the Passion of the Heart, and of
sounding Fits. The sixth Chapter. Of a Cough in great bellied Women. The
seventh Chapter. Of the swelling of women's legs, when they are with Child. The
eighth Chapter. Of Costiveness in Women with Child. The ninth Chapter. Of the
blood which comes away from the Matrix of a woman with Child. The tenth
Chapter. Of the water which comes away from the Matrix of a woman with Child.
The eleventh Chapter. Of acute Diseases, which happen to women with Child.
The fourth Book.
The first Chapter. OF a Natural ^irth, and of Abortivenesse. The second
Chapter. Of a hard Labor. The third Chapter. Of the Afterbirth. The fourth
Chapter. Of the Dead Child. The fifth Chapter. Of the Pains, and the
suppression of the Courses, after the woman is delivered. The sixth Chapter. Of
the immoderate flowing of the Courses, after the woman is delivered. The
seventh Chapter. Of the Diseases which commonly befall a woman, after her
delivery. The eighth Chapter. Of an inflammation in the Matrix after her
delivery. The ninth Chapter. Of too little, and too much milk. The tenth
Chapter. Of sore Breasts. The eleventh Chapter. Of wrinckles remaining in the
Matrix after a woman's delivery, and of the means to contract the Matrix.
FINIS.
VVomens DISEASES.
The first Chapter. Of the consent between the Diseases of the Matrix, and
those of the other parts.
WOMEN were made to stay at home, and to look after Household employments, and
because such business is accompanied with much ease, without any vehement
stirrings of the body, therefore has provident Nature assigned them their
monthly Courses, that by the benefit of those evacuations, the feculent and
corrupt blood might be purified, which otherwise, as being the purest part of
the blood, would turn to rank poison, should it remain in the body and
putrify; like the seed ejaculated out of its proper vessels. Hippocrates had
a perfect understanding of these things, as may appear by those words, in his
book de locis in homine, where he says, that the Matrix is the cause of all
those diseases which happen to women; and it is no strange thing which he
speaks; for the Matrix has a Sympathy with all the parts of the body; as
with the Brain by the Nerves and Membranes of the parts about the spine, from
whence sometimes arises the pains, in the fore part, and the hinder part of
the head, with Heart also, both by the Spermatick, and the Epigastrick
arteries, or those that lie about the Abdomen at the bottom of the belly,
from hence comes the pain of the heart, fainting, and swounding fits, the
passion of the Heart, anxietie of mind, dissolution of the spirits, insomuch
as you cannot discern, whither a woman breaths or not, or that she has any
pulse; it has likewise a consent with the breasts; and from hence proceed
those swellings, that hardness, and those terrible Cancers that afflict those
tender parts, that a humor does flow upwards, from the Matrix to the Breasts,
and downwards again, from the Breasts to the Matrix, is the unanimous assertion
of Galen, Hippocrates, Laurentius, Duretus, and others; moreover it has a
sympathy with the Liver; and thus the sanguification is perverted, and the
body inclines to a Dropsy, and with the stomach and the Kidneys also, as those
pains which great bellied women do feel, and the torments which some Virgins
undergo, when they have their Courses, sufficiently witness. And lastly,
Hippocrates has taught us, that this consent holds with the bladder, and the
straight (...); for, says he, when that part is inflamed, then the urine
comes away by drops, and the Patient has frequent desires, and solicitations
to go to stool, but but without any performance.

Women's diseases are divided into four Classes, whereof the first contains
the diseases that are common to all women: the second comprehends such as are
peculiar to Widows, and Virgins; The third specifieth those Affects that
concern barren women, and such as are fruitful; And the fourth treats of
such diseases, as befall Women with Child, and Nurses; of all which we shall
now speak, one after another, in their order.

Those diseases that are common, both to widows and wives, both to barren
women, and women that are fruitful, as also to young Maids, and Virgins,
proceed from the retention, or stoppage of their Courses, as the most
universal, and most usual cause; when these come from them, in a duc and
regular manner, their bodies are preserved from most terrible diseases; but
otherwise, they are immediately subject to the falling Sickness, the Palfie,
the Consumption, the Whites, the Mother, Melancholy, Burning Fevers, the
Dropsey inward inflammations of all the principal parts, the suppression of
the urine, n^e eating, vomiting, loathing of meat, yexing, and a continual
pain in the Head, arising from ill vapors, communicated from the Matrix to
the Brain.

Wives are more healthful then Widows, or Virgins, because they are refreshed
with the man's seed, and ejaculate their own, which being excluded, the cause of
the evil is taken away. This is evident from the words of Hippocrates, who
advises young Maids to marry, when they are thus troubled; that women have
stones and seed, no true Anatomist will deny; the woman's seed, I confess, in
regard of the small quantity of heat, is more imperfect then the seed of the
man's, yet is it most absolute in it self, and sit for Generation. Another
cause also may be added, besides that which is alleged from Hippocrates,
namely, that married women by lying with their husbands, doc loosen the
passages of the seed, and so the Courses come down more easily through them; Now
in Virgins it falls out otherwise, because the blood is stopped by the
constipation and obstruction of the veins, and being stopped putrifies, from
which putrefaction gross vapors do arise, and from thence he^vinesse of
mind, and dullness of spirit, a benummednesse of the parts, tim orousnesse,
and an aptness to be frighted, with a sudden propensitie to fall into fits of
the Mother, by reason of much blood, oppressing and burthening the heart, also
continual anxiety, sadness, and want of sleep, with idle talking, and an
alienation of the mind, but that which most commonly afflicts them, is a
difficulty, and pain to fetch their breath, for the chest by a continual
dialatation and compression, draws the blood from the Matrix to it self, in
a large proportion, and sometimes produces asthmaticall effects. But what
shall we say concerning Widows, who lie fallow, and live sequestered from these
Venereous Conjunctions? we must conclude, that if they be young, of a black
complexion, and hairie, and are likewise somewhat discolored in their cheeks,
that they have a spirit of salacity, and feel within themselves a frequent
titillation, their seed being hot and prurient, does irritate and inflame them
to Venery, neither is this concupiscence allaid and qualified, but by provoking
the ejaculation of the seed, as Galen propounds the advice in the example of a
widow, who was afflicted with intolerable symptoms, till the abundance of the
spermatick humor was ^iminished by the hand of a skillful Midwife, and a
convenient ointment, which passage will also furnish us with this argument that
the use of Venery is exceeding whole some, if the woman will confine her self to
the Laws of moderation, so that she feel no wearisomnesse, nor weakness i^
her body, after those pleasing conflicts.

Most certain it is, that barren women are more tormented with sickness, the^
those that are fruitful, because, they wh^ have children, live in a more
healthful^ condition, by reason of the opening of the veins, and the coming
away of the superfluous blood; which being of an earthy, and feculent
substance, must needs introduce prodigious symptom^s in the bodies of other
women, who have no seasonable means to vent and purge it out, and daily
experience does witness it to the private consideration of such women, that
very many obstructions breed in their Liver, Mesenteries, and Matrices. That
women in Childbed also, and such as nurse their own children, are subject to
most bitter, and vehement affects, Galen does daily teach us by an undeniable
reason; for whereas the child in the womb is nourished by the sweetest,
fattest, and most elaborate part of the menstruous Blood, in its own nature
filthy, and dreggish, when the woman is delivered, that blood is forcibly
evacuated by a critical kind of motion, and violent ebullition, whereupon the
spirits are exhausted, and the feeble creature is precipitated into mortal
infirmities, as fainting fits, incredible torments, and frequent soundings.

Many times also, besides that particular fullness of the womb through the
swelling, and strutting of the veins; such women all the time that they be
great with child, are oppressed with an abundance of ill humors, contracted,
and heaped up together by a bad diet, after which the upper parts of their
bodies are many times most woefully inflamed.

After the same manner also Nurses are tormented with sore breasts, painful
swellings, Ulcers, and Cancers, and the like crueii diseases, by reason that
the Menstruum flows in an unmeasurable quantity to the breasts, and there
settles. But now, by the permission of Heaven, we shall set down a particular
Explanation of these Diseases.

CHAP. II. The suppression of the Courses.
THe suppression of the Courses, is an interception, or stoppage of that usual
evacuation of blood, which is wont to flow from the Matrix every month.

There is a twofold cause hereof; one inward, the other outward^; the inward
cause is also manifold; for sometimes it is one kind of distemper, sometimes
another; and sometimes again, a humor is the cause thereof, the distemper is
either hot, or cold, and concerning the former, this is controverted among the
Doctors, how a hot distemper can stay the Courses: for if we will credit the
b^st Authors, or submit our judgments to the general Vote of Philosophy; it
is the property of heat to open, to rarifie, to make thin, and to dilate: as on
the contrary, it is the property of cold to obstruct, to thicken, to bind, and
to condensate, the answer is easy and obvious; wherefore we say that heat
properly does not stay the Courses, but only by accident, as namely by
attenuation, dissipating, and consuming the thinner parts of the Menstruum, for
any humor is reasonably conceived to become more dry and thick, when the
thinner part thereof is wasted away; and again, the thicker and dryer it is,
it must needs be so much the more unapt to be expelled: and this is the reason
that sturdie women in the Country, who are accustomed to labor, and take much
pains, and such Virgins, as are of a hot constitution, have ver^ little, or no
evacuation this way, because the M^nstruum is wasted, and vanishes by their
continual exercise, and pains taking. Secondly, when the moisture is consumed
away the vessels are so much the more narrow and bound up, so that there is
almost no passage left for the exclusion of the Courses.

A cold Distemper stays the Courses, because it weakneth and colleth the
parts, breeds bad humors and obstructions, straightens the passages, obstructs
the conduits, infirmes, and overcooleth the Matrix, and so retains,
suppresseth, and stops the Courses.

Swellings, Imposthnmes, scars, and the like, are all reducible to the inward
causes; but the most u^uall inward cause is a slow, tough and slimy humor,
which glewing up, as it were, the vessels of the Matrix, and thickning the
blood, retains the Menstruum, according to the opinion of Galen, delivered in
several places of his works.

The outward Causes are all those things, which any way increase a cold juice
in the body, as a cold and moist Air, gluttony, crudities, cold ^aths, and an
unseasonable use of them, meats that yield a gross nourishment, and are hard
to digest, and such as constipate the humors, and thicken the blood; in which
number are thick and sweet wines, pulse of all sorts, white meats made with
milk, hard fish, and salt flesh, pothearbs, Vinegar, Olives, Rice, and the
like; also an unseasonable use of Venery, a disorderly motion of the body,
presently after meats, cold drink, ale, and other Pourtents, or liquors which
breed slow, and thick juices.

You may know when the Menstruum is, or will soon be suppressed by the relation
of the sick woman, who commonly will make these discoveries; that she has no
stomach to her meat, that for a long time together she has felt a heaviness
over all her body, with a pain in her back, her privities, and her Matrix:
besides, you your self may discern agreenish paleness in her face; Sometimes
she is troubled with loud belchings, and cruel pains in her belly; but
frequently with the headache, especially in the forepart of her head, and when
the blood is stopped, and putrifies in her body, presently there arises a
Fever, by reason of that Sympathy, Communion, or consent between the Matrix and
the other parts.

Many, and irreparable are the inconveniences, and evils, which happen by this
stoppage of the Courses, if we may believe the great Hippocrates, who in one of
his Aphorisms says, if the Menstruum comes away without moderation, diseases
follow; but if it comes not away at all, yet then diseases happen also from the
Matrix: but if it comes away in a due, and natural manner, it preserves the
woman from all gowtie torments, from pains in her joints, from the Pleurisy,
and all other inflammations in her sides, from the Apoplexy, from the
difficulty to fetch her breath, and from loosing her voice; Women that have not
their Courses, must seek for remedies with spend and prudence; let them betake
themselves to a temperate and movst Air, for if the Air be too hot, it
waste^h the blood, and draws it upwards from the Matrix; it likewise exhausts
the Spirits, and is thought to be a weakner of the body: on the contrary, when
the Air is too cold, it compels the blood to retire, it weakens the Matrix,
breeds gross and thick humors, and locks up the passages, so that the
Menstruum cannot descend, the most convenient drink in this case is small
Rhenish wine, if there be a Fever, or, which will be less dangerous, small
beer boiled with a little Cinnamon, Anise, Maydenhaire, or Birthwort.

Her diet should be such as will be soon concocted, and easily distributed to
all the parts; boiled meats are more wholesome for her then ros^ed, because
these dry up the blood, but they soften the body, and keep it moist: let her
also choose to feed upon tame creatures rather then wild, because these are
more hot and dry, but those are more moist and temperate; boil them with red
fitches, for the broth that is thus made does most powerfully bring down the
Courses. What meats must be avoided has been said above; but above all things,
let her refrain the use of sour things, because, as Hippocrates has warned
us, they bring pain to the Matrix; it will be good to rub the lower parts of
her legs very often, and to tie straight ligatures about them, till they make
her complain of much pain.

Having thus prescribed her Diet, the next design must be to evacuate the
Cause; this may be done several ways, but especially by letting blood, and
sometimes by purging her body; the Physicians have long contended, but very
foolishly, which vein should be cut: but we omitting the frivoulous alterations
on both sides, conclude with Galen, that when the Courses are stopped, if the
strength of the woman will bear it, and the nature of the Disease require it,
the vein in the Ankle must always be opened; not in the Arm as Aetius
commands; who also is backed in that opinion by Gradus, Mercurialis, and Amatus
Lusitanus, who was taught by Ruffus to open a vein in a woman's arm, to advance
the cure; but I cannot approve of that course, because rectitude must ever be
observed. Galen in his book de Curandi ratione per sang. miss. chapt. 11.
instead of opening a vein, uses Scarification to the domestical part, as
having the greatest resemblance with Phlebotomy, and if these things do not
overcome the Disease, apply Leeches to the Hemorrhoids, to take away the
accumulation of melancholy blood; for they suck out the feculent, and dreggish
humors, impacted in the Matrix, by reason that those parts are so near the
one to the other.

Zacutus Lusitanus applies them to the inner part of the Matrix, and boasts
himself the Author of this kind of remedy; but whether it be consonant to
reason, I leave to considering persons to judge.

There is no doubt but the application of Leeches may be useful, because the
humor is slow, thick and earthy: but in regard that no part is evacuated, till
the whole body be first purged, therefore I shall advise you to give her this
Purge following, which will work very gently.

Take three drams of Sena.

Three scruples of Agarick.

A dram of Annise-seeds.

Macerate them together, in a sufficient quantity of Penniroyall water, for the
space of a night, to three ounces, in the morning allow them one or two
bublings, and to the liquor which you press out, add

Four drams of Diaphenicon.

Mingle them, and give it her to drink.

Or of the Electuary make a Bolus.

When the body is purged, and a vein has been opened, let your Judgment keep
company with Galens directions, and prepare the thick humor with this
Decoction following.

Take Smallage, Fennel, and Sparagus roots, of each half an ounce, the leaves
of Hysope, Pennyroyall, and Birthwort, of each a handful.

Two drams of Carrotts seeds.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of Barley water, to a quart; to the
strained liquor add Sir. de 5. radicibus, and Sir. lupulorum, of each an ounce,
mingle them, and make an Apozem. Or

Take the roots of Acorns, and Elecampane, of each two drams.

The leaves of Pennyroyall, Motherwort, Balm, Betony, of each a handful.


Two ounces of white Agarick.

An ounce and a half of Anise seeds.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of Fumitary water to a pint: to the liquor
which you press out, add Syrup of Motherwort, Syrup of Maydenhaire, of each
an ounce. Mingle them, and make an Apozem.


Note that Agarick has respect unto the nervous parts, and that the Syrup of
the five roots with vinegar does hurt the Nerves, because all sharp things are
hurtful to the Matrix, according to Hippocrates, whose Judgment wins
reverence with the best Physicians.

Fomentations must be applied to the small guts, to the privy parts, and you
must make them of opening simples, and such as will cut into, and make thin the
gross and thick humors.

Baths and halfetubs prepared of the like simples will be very useful; and the
best liniments you can choose are made of oil of Lillies, castor, dill, and
capers, and the most profitable ointments are unguent. Agrippe, and de Althea,
with gums.

After you have gone thus far, you must evacuate the blood, and provoke urine:
to which purposes prescribe this Decoction following.

Take the roots of Butchers broom*

Sparagus, Smallage, Fennill, of each an ounce.
The roots of Aristolochy the round.

Birthwort of each two drams.

The leaves of Penniroyall,

Snakeweed, Motherwort, of each a handful.
Four drams of Sena.

Two ounces of white agarick.

Four ounces of Hermodactyls.

An ounce and a half of Epithymum.

Anise and fennill seeds, of each an ounce.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, to a pint and a half, to the
strained liquor being hard pressed, add two ounces of the best honey, mingle
them, and make an Apozem.

Every other morning let her drink four ounces of this fasting, and in the
mean time strengthen her belly, and her Matrix, with fomentations that are
good to expel wind: you may make them of the Simples aforesaid, with the
powders Dianis, Diacumin, Diagalang. and the like.

You must provoke the Menstruum with Pessaries, made of the juice of Mercury,
Cucumbers, Restharrow, unsalted butter, Hogsgrease, the gall of an Ox,
Sagapenum, Ammoniacum, Castor, Assa-fetida, and the like. Perfumes made with
spices bring down the Courses, if the steame or vapor of them be conveyed
into the Matrix; or you may appoin^ little Trochishs to be made with rue,
aristolochy, Castor, assa fetida, Sagapenum, and turpentine, which being cast
upon hot burning coals they will smoke, and that smoke will speedily bring down
her Courses, if it be received up through a tunnell.

You must make an issue in her leg, that the Matrix may exhale, and the thick
humors may be purged out.

Such Compositions as have steel in them will be most effectual, for it is
manifest by experience, that steel is good to cut into, and make thin the
thick and slow humors, to open obstructions, to bring down the Courses, to
provoke urine, and to free the vessels from all matter that stop them: and all
these things it performs by manfest qualities inherent in it, and not by the
ponderosity, or heaviness thereof* as some have conjectured.

Several Authors have devised several preparations of it; but we always used
to prepare it after this manner following.

Take a pound of Steel filed into a mos^ fine dust, wash it in Pennyroyall
water distilled, till the water look pure and clear, then put it into a glass
Viol, pouring upon it a sufficient quantity of Vinegar, made with Penniroyall:
set it in the Sun thirty days, stirring it about every seventh day, afterward
dry it, wear it to a most subtle powder in a Marble mortar, sift it, and keep
it for your use; the Dose, or quantity hereof to be taken, is a dram with
wormwood wine, or Rhenish wine, or with Hydromel.

Note, that we advisedly make use of the vinegar aforenamed, because the use
and virtue of Steel is to unlock obstructions; and Vinegar has a faculty to
penetrate, make thin, and cut asunder the thickest humors, and therefore by
the help thereof the Steel is with the more expedition transmitted to the
remotest parts of the body.

Yet if the patient be troubled with a hot distemper in her Liver, stomach, or
spleen, or if you discern any weakness in her inward parts, then prepare the
steel with Rosewater, or whey of Goats milk.

When she has taken the steel, let her walk an hour after it; for exercise
opens the pores, and thereby the Medicine is the more easily distributed: when
she has observed this injunction, let her lie down till she begin to sweat, or
if she find in her self a disposednesse, let her sleep: afterward give her
to eat, but her meat should rather be roasted, then boiled, and for her drink,
allow her small wine, or wine prepared with steel.

I do not judge it meet to determine any time for the continuance of these
Rules, and precepts, only in general, I hold it convenient to use them, till
the Patient be more apt, and disposed for exercise, till she can walk without
any lazy complaint of weariness, till her lips begin to look of a more lively
color, till no obstruction be perceiveable by the touch, and in a word, till
the urine, which was thin, pale, and discolored, appear reddishlike unto the
urine of a healthful woman.

The Spring time is the most convenient to undertake this Cure; for then the
humors are most apt to flow, which in the Winter are congealed, and impacted
in the several parts; and in the Summer time it will not be altogether so
proper to begin the Cure, for then thorough the immoderate heat o^ the season,
the humors do daily threaten to precipitate the sick woman into a fever.

If the woman be weak in her body, let her refrain from exercise, and rest
her self upon her bed, and after the space of a full hour, let her body be
diligently rubbed, till it look red, that the faculties of the steel may be
actuated, and assisted in their operation; for Galen in his book de Puero
Epileptico and the fourth Chapter says, that the rubbing of the body supplies
the want of exercise, because it attenuateth and cuteth the humors, unlocks
the obstructions, quickens, and kindles the natural heat, and dissolves the
peccant matter.

Many mingle steel prepared with Conserves, and Syrups; Some make Lozenges
thereof, and so do we also; especially when the Patient refuses Wine, or
Conserves, and the like: for in some cases we must allow pardon to the
queazinesse of the sick, and humor the Palate with a safe indulgence.

The powders Diarhod. Abbat, Dialacca, and Diacucurma, are very good to open
the passages which are stopped, and therefore you may prudently mingle them
among the ingredients for the Lozenges aforesaid.

Here perhaps you will start this question; if heat provokes to stool, and
brings down the urine, if it attenuates, cuts into the humors, and open the
obstructions; why do Physicians unanimously command the staying of a
looseness, or an Issue of blood, in what part of the body soever it happen,
and to that intent prescribe water, or wine, or beer, wherein steel has been
quenched, thereby to make it more binding, and more apt to stay any flux? I
answer, that steel is endued with those qualities I readily grant; but the
Method which is observed in the use of steel does clearly demonstrate a
diversity of faculties to be in it: wherefore if your aim and intention be to
open the obstructions, drink the wine when the steel has been once, twice,
or thrice quenched in it; but if you desire it should bind, then prescribe it
to be taken after the sixth, or seventh quenching; for the first water or wine
opens, because in that lies the fiery quality; but the other binds,
because in that consists the earthy part: neither shall you need to wonder,
that several and contrary qualities should lie concealed in one, and the same
mineral, metal, or simple, seeing that by daily experience we have a
demonstrative certainty of the truth thereof; for thus Aloe^ has an Emplastick
and an opening quality: thus Rubarb both binds and purges.

Now you must note that these Simples are called hot and cold, as they have hot
or cold parts predominant in them: thus we conclude endive to be cold, because
the parts thereof are more moist then bitter, and we say Rubarb is hot, because
it has a nitrous, fiery, purging quality predominant in it, above the earthy,
binding, and cold parts.

Christopherus a Vega, a man otherwise very learned, seems to my understanding
to forsake the offers of reason, in saying that steel is unprofitable, because
he never saw any woman, who had not her Courses, or who was troubled with
obstructions, cured by the means of this Remedy; but truly, if it does not
sometimes totally' subdue the evil, yet the fault must not therefore
consequently be charged upon the Medicine, because the Matrix is sometimes
vitiated by an habitual distemper, or else the obstructions thereof are so
many, or so stubborn, that sometimes they d^stroy the sick woman; and if it
do not fall out so, yet is it an undeniable truth which the Poet tells us,

Non est in Medico semper relevetur ut Aeger, Interdum docta plus valet art
malum.

That is,

The Doctor cannot still successful be, Sometimes the evil gets the victory.

CHAP. III. The immoderate flowing of the Courses.
THis disease is contrary to the former; for as in that the Menstruum is too
long retained, so in this they run too long.

There is also this difference between them: the one proceeds from a hot
distemper, the other from a cold one.

This we now treat on, is produced by twofold cause, the one inward, and the
other outward.

The inward Cause is a hot distemper o^ the Liver, whereby the blood grows hot
thin, boiling in the vessels, and opening them, so that the Menstruum is
purged out, before the usual and due time.

The outward Cause is that which heateth and inflames the blood, and withal
makes it thin, as vehement and sturdy exercises, pensiveness, and immoderate
care of the mind, excessive anger, and thought busied upon revenge: a custom
of eatin^ meats that are hot in their quality, namely, such as are full of
pepper, and salt, bibing of wine, and strong drinks, too much bathing of the
body, long watchings, fiting in the Sun overmuch, or by the fire side, etc.

You may easily make your self acquainted with the signs by conversing with,
and questioning the sick woman, besides, you may of your self observe, that
the Patient is much weakened, in regard that the parts are deprived of the
purest portion, and the most laudable substance of the blood, by which the life
of a Creature is prolonged; women thus affected are very sad, and melancholy,
by reason that the blood fails, which otherwise contains a spirit in it,
that makes them cheerful and lively, they grow lean and feeble, scarceable
to stand upon their legs, they are apt to Nauseate, and forsake their meat,
they are bound in their bodies, and grow puffed, and swelled up; they are troubled
with weakness in their stomachs, they cannot digest their meat, their eyelids
sink inwards, the calfes of their legs swell, and their outward parts look
pale, and discolored: yea, by degrees the whole radical moisture, and inborne
preservative decays and the Patient perishes.

Wherefore make no delay, but immediately oppose all your helps of Art to the
subduing of the Disease; let her be lodged in an air that is cold and dry, and
let her not be exposed to any air by night: strew cool herbs about her
chamber, and let her avoid the air which is hot, because it rarifies the
blood, makes it thin and waterish, and also inflames, and overheats it.

She must forbear the use of hot meats, as Leeks, Onyons, Watercresses,
Origanum, and the like; let her likewise refrain from feeding upon spiced
meats, and such as breed a thin juice; Rice boiled with sheepsfeet is good for
her: and so are roasted Quinces, Medlars, and Services.

Three hours after Supper, let her take fine flower, or pure Biscuit dissolved
in Plantane, or Rosewater, and sweetened with Sugar.

Give her no wine, unless it be sour, and binding red wine; but it will be
more profitable to give her water, wherein gun tragacanth has been boiled, and
perfume^ with Mastick, beer in which steel has been infused will be
profitable for her about the third, or fourth day, for this drin^ has a
binding faculty without heating.

But the opening of a vein twice, or thrice in a day, obtaines the pre-eminence
from all other remedies, according to the judgment of Galen, because it draws
back the humor more forcibly to the upper parts when it is often repeated,
then when it is done all at once; hear him in his own words. Quanto majorem in
numerum particulares auxeris detractiones, tanto efficaciorem revulsionem
efficies, that is, the oftener you open a vein, taking away a small quantity of
blood at a time, so much more effectual will the Revulsion be; for when the
blood is allured to the contrary part by these frequent iterations; Nature is
accustomed to summon the blood to the upper parts: and thus that ordinary
saying among the Doctors may properly be understood, that one flux cures
another.

Hippocrates commends a large Cuppinglass applied to the breasts; and very
deservedly, because there is a great consent and Simpathy between the veins of
the Matrix, and those of the Breasts.

Moreover, you must prescribe such things as are of tried, and known virtue, to
thicken the blood, syrup of Poppy, Quinces, dried Roses, Myrtles, and the like.

We usually prescribe this Draught following for the sick, and we must add this
to its commendation, that it seldom fails in its operation.

Two scruples of boiled Rubarb.

A scruple of Citron myrobalans.

Half an ounce of syrup of Quinces.

Two ounces, and a half of Plant ane water.

Mingle them, and let her drink it.

Diverse Authors, as Rondeletius, Hollerius, Amatus Lusitanus, and others
condemn the boiling of Rubarb; and the reason is this* as things say they,
become more mild* and weak in their operations, when they have past the fire;
so those things which ar^ gentle, become more vehement, having acquired a new
kind of faculty by the forc^ of the fire: this I grant most willingly, bu^ in
the mean time they purge less, an^ bind more, which we desire, and as for
any corrupt quality, which the power o^ the fire may have contributed to it,
that i^ easily washed away by the help of Plantan^ water, or the juice of
Quinces, if you demand whither this humor should be prepared? I answer,
evacuate it without any delay, for you must not expect, or wai^ the concoction
thereof.

Binding Glysters will be very useful; you may make them after this manner.

Take four drams of the roots of Consolida major.

The leaves of plantane and horsetayle, of each a handful.

Half a handful of red Roses.

Two drams of shaled Pease.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of plantane water, to nine ounces; to the
strained liquor add a dram of the Trochischs de Carabe, two ounces of syrup of
Roses made with dried Roses.

The whites of two Eggs.

Mingle them, and make a glyster. Or

Take four drams of the greater Comphrey roots.

The leaves of knotgrasss, and plantane, of each a handful.

As many red Roses as your thumb, and two fingers can take up.

Sumach and Quince seeds, of each two drams.

Three drams of barley parched, and beaten to a gross powder.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of plantane water to nine ounces.

To the strained liquor add two ounces of syrup of Myrtles.

A dram of terra sigillata.

Mingle them, and make a glyster.

After these glysters are injected, anoint the Matrix with astringent
ointments; Take as many plantane leaves as you can grasp between your thumb and
two fingers at twice.

Red Roses.

Mulberry leaves.

Oak leaves, of each half the quantity aforesaid.

A dram of Sumach seeds.

Boil them gently in four pints of oil of Quinces.

Strain and press the liquor hard, and then put in

True Bolearmanick,

Trochischs de Carabe, of each a dram.

With a sufficient quantity of white wax, make a soft ointment, according to
art, or

Take two ounces of unguentum Comitisse.

Oil of myrtles, and oil of quinces, of each two drams.

Mingle them, and make a liniment.

You must likewise bath the Matrix with fomentations made after this manner.

Take the leaves of plantane,

Knotgrasse,

Oak leaves.

Red Roses, of each a handful.

The seeds of plantane, Sumach.

Quinces, of each three drams.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of red wine, or water wherein steel has
been quenched to three pints: use the strained liquor as was said above.

That which remains after the straining may be kept for a Poultis, unto which
you may add oil of quinces, and unguentum Comitisse, of each two ounces, and
mingling them together, you have an excellent Poultis.

But if the disease yield not to these Remedies, you may exhibit half a dram of
new Treacle, or Philonium Persicum, or a scruple of the mass of Pills de
Cynoglossa; if the Patient incline to a Consumption, give her Cowes milk
prepared rightly with steel, to drink in a morning fasting; if the evil still
persevere, and you suspect the heat of the Liver to be the Cause of the
disease, make an issue in her leg, that the Liver may exhale at that vent, and
the other bowels may evaporate, or else let her go into a Bath, the waters
whereof run from an iron Mine; for these naturally bind and thicken.

CHAP. IV. Of the coming away of the Courses by Drops, of the vehement
Symptoms thereof, and of the Whites.
AS the urine irritates the expulsive faculty, so many times does the
Menstruum, for as that, when it is too hot, does prick, burn, and is frequently
pist out, so the Menstruum being vehemently hot, does cause an itch, and an
irritation, and produces a Disease, which the Doctors call Stillicidium
Vterinum, which we may english, to be a coming away of the Courses by drops.

The Disease proceeds from the same Causes, as does the immoderate* flowing of
the Courses: therefore the same Remedies will be also proper to overcome them;
yet in this present cure you need not prescribe so many Remedies, nor so often.

When any notable Symptoms accompany this Disease, as a vehement burning,
torments in the Matrix, a pain about the secret parts, it is called the
Stillicide, or Dropping of the Matrix, from a sharp humor, arising through the
hot distemper of the Liver, and the Kidneys; and whereas it takes beginning
from a hot distemper, from whence sharp, hot, and fiery humors are generated,
your Method must be first to root out the Cause, and then to cure the
distemper; wherefore her body must be cooled, her blood must be thickened, and
the Flux must be drawn back to the upper parts; this is done by a cool Air,
by giving her whey to drink, wherein steel has been often quenched; and
lastly, you may prescribe for her the cold thickning Diet, which we have set
down above.

You may let her blood in both arms, and appoint the opening of the vein
called Salvatella; Leeches must be applied to the Hemorrhoids, that the adust
and melancholy blood may be drawn out. Purge her often with Rubarb and Cassia,
Syrup of Violets, Citron Myrobalaus, Manna, Tamarinds, Diaprun sumpl. and the
like Simples which gently bring away choler. Cooling and thickning Juleps will
be very necessary, which you may make after this manner.

Take twelve ounces of plantane water.

Four ounces of Rose water.

Two ounces of Syrup of the juice of Quinces.

Mingle them, and make a Julep, or

Take the waters of Plantane,

Purselane, of each eight ounces,

Syrup of Poppy,

Syrup of restharrow, of each an ounce and a half.

Mingle them, and make a Julep.

If the chiefest fault lie in the Kidneys,

Take ten ounces of Bean water distilled.

The waters of Plantane.

Mallows, of each two ounces.

Syrup of Myrtles.

Syrup of Poppy, of each an ounce.

A scruple and a half of Lapis Prunelle.

Mingle them, and make a Julep.

But note, if the Patient have a hot Liver, and a cold stomach, it will be
convenient to lessen the quantity of the distilled mallow water, or to
prescribe an equal part of Rose water, the virtue whereof strengthens the
inward parts.

Baths made with binding Simples, are highly profitable in this Disease; for
they do not only attemper the sharpness of the humors, but they drive the
humors to the outward parts, and so defend and fortify the Matrix from that
annoyance, which they threatened unto it, and in a while the Flux is stayed.

Whey, although it be Diureticall, and provoke urine, yet when steel is
quenched in it, it is wonderful wholesome for her: as Hippocrates affi^meth
concerning the Son of Erotelaus, lying sick of a bloody Flux, for when he had
drunk whey, in which red hot flints were quenched, his evacuations were more
moderate, although they were bloody, and in a short time they ended; here is to
be noted, that whey although upon a slight consideration, it may seem to be
Diureticall, and ^o to provoke rather then to stay the flux, yet if steel be
frequently quenched in it, till the thin and fiery parts thereof be wasted
away, it stays the Flux.

If these Remedies prevail not to perfect the Cure, I shall counsel you to
make an Issue upon the knee, for this being kept open, the corrupt humors are
evacuated, without any decay of the spirits, which otherwise do many times
produce grievous and vehement Symptoms; we have spoken of the coming away of
the Menstruum by Drops, with the terrible Symptom which accompanies it,
namely, a vehement and insupportable pain, but because this pain proceeds
from diverse causes, the Cure must be also diversified.

Women therefore which are of a cold Constitution, especially if they be young,
prone to Venery, Black, and Hairy, must be purged, that the Cause may be taken
away, and therefore their bodies must be first prepared before you can hope to
appease the pain.

You may evacuate the humor with Diaphenicon, Benedicta laxativa, or with
Pills of Hiera: and you may prepare the humor with smallage, and fennill
roots, with agrimony and Motherwort leaves, boiled in water wherein steel has
been quenched with Rhodomel.

The pain must be appeased with unguent. Populeum, unto which you may add a
few grains of opium; or else you may apply fomentations to the head.

A vein also must be opened, as we have showed you above.

If a woman or Virgin have the whites, which come away of a thick and fattish
substance, you must proceed as in the former Cure; but you must be exceeding
cautious how you let blood, for such bodies are full of raw humors, by reason
whereof the spirits are much exhausted, and her body is weak and infirm,
according to the Judgment of Galen, in his book de Sanguin. missione. chap.
11. wherefore in such cases, I counsel the Patient to go to the Spaw waters,
or some other of the like Nature; for they purge away the thick humor both by
siege and by urine, but especially the melancholy juice, which is the cause of
this disease.

A Decoction of China and Sa^zapavilla cannot be improper, nor Leeches applied
to the Hemorrhoids. Note that the Caul of a Ram or Weather newly killed, must
be laid to the affected part, being first anointed with oil of Castor; for as
the skull of a man is good against the Falling Sickness, and the Lungs of a
Fox against the stoppage of the pipes, by a specificall virtue, or hidden
similitude, so is this good for the stomach, and the Loins.

The Whites are defined to be a lasting distillation from the Matrix, however
it be affected; for Nature indevoureth to expel that superfluous, moist, and
excrementi^ious blood thorough the Matrix, and even at the same time
disburtheneth the body from this unprofitable and offensive humor.

This evil is reckoned among the Symptoms of those things, which are
immoderately expelled out of the body, the Causes whereof are diverse; for
sometimes a predominancy of choler, sometimes a phlegmatic juice; many times
melancholy, and very often blood is evacuated; this is easily known, because a
snottie kind of humor drops, and distills continually from the Matrix, which
if it be red, it proceeds from blood; if white, from phlegm, if yellow, it
takes beginning from choler.

The sick woman complains of a general weakness over all the parts of the
body, her legs and eyelids are swelled, she cannot digest her meat, her stomach
fails her, she is lazy, and loves no exercise, and cares not to stir up and
down; so that at length her strength decays, and her spirits fail, through
the abundance of blood which has come from her: wherefore this disease calls
for early help, least it degenerate, as not seldom it does, into a Dropsey, or
a Consumption, or the like terrible Diseases.

If the body therefore abound with much blood, let a vein be opened in the
arm, to draw back the course of the humor, which is hastening from all parts
of the body to the Matrix. Thus we read that Galen cured the wife of Boethius,
unto whom^ other Physicians had preposterously prescribed Medicines without
opening a^ vein.

Afterward you must prepare the phlegmatic humor with a decoction of
wormwood, unto which add Sir. of Roses, or Sir. de artemisia, the choleric
humor must be prepared with a decoction of endive, sorrel, unto which may be
added Oxysaccarum, or Syrup. de succo Cichorii; if it be a Melancholy humor,
prepare it with a decoction of Fumitary, Buglos, unto which add Sir. of
Fumitary, and Sir. Lupuli.

Then expel the humor with some gentle purge; if it be phlegmatic,

Take three scruples of white agarick Trochischt.

Two scruples of the root of Mechoacha.

A dram of Annise seeds.

Macerate them the space of a night, in a sufficient quantity of fennill
water; in the morning to two ounces and a half of the liquor which you press
out, add

Three drams of Diacarthamum.

Half an ounce of Diacnicum.

Mingle them together for a Potion.

If Choleric humors abound in the body, Take two drams and a half of the
best Rubarb.

Citron myrobalans.

Cinnamon, of each a scruple.

Macerate them a whole night in a sufficient quantity of endive water, press
them with all your might, and add

An ounce and a half of Syrup of roses laxative.

Mingle them, and give it her to drink in the morning.

If Melancholy humors be predominant.

Take two drams and a half of Sena.

A dram of Annise seeds.

Macerate them over night, in a sufficient quantity of fumitary water, in the
morning press out the liquor, and add

To two ounces and a half of the liquor strained and pressed,

Two drams of Confectio Hamech.

Halse an ounce of Syrup of fumitary.

Mingle them for a Potion.

If the Disease yield not to these Medicines, expel the humor by an
Epicrasis, that is, by some Decoction, that by degrees will digest, open, and
eva^uate the humor, and also mightily provoke urine; this Apozem following
has all these virtues.

Take the roots of Parsley, Fennel, Buglos, Polypody of the Oak, of each half
an ounce. The leaves of Maidenhaire. Agrimony, Motherwort, of each a handful.
Six drams of Sena. Two drams of rubarb. One dram of agarick.
As much Epithymum as you can graspe between your thumb and two fingers.

Two drams of Annise seed.

Macerate them together a whole night, in two pints of barley water, upon hot
embers, in the morning allow them one or two gentle bublings, and when you have
strained them, add

Syrup of fumitary.

Syrup of roses laxative, of each an ounce.

Mingle them for an Apozem.

Every other morning let her have four ounces of it fasting.

If all these things prove ineffectuall, infuse a whole night six grains of
Antimony in wine, and let her drink it, if her body be strong enough to abide
the conflict of the medicine: for besides that, it draws back the humors from
the Matrix, by provoking to Vomit, it likewise purges away by stool that
tenacious, phlegmatic, and thick humor which is the cause of the Disease.

Wormwood beer is not unwholesome for her, or instead thereof, prescribe to
her, beer wherein China roots have been infused, for this disperseth the humor
to the skin, and dries up the superfluous moisture; for the same purpose, we
advise, with Galen, that a Bath of hot sand be prepared; that after the use
thereof the body be well rubbed, and anointed with honey heated by the fire;
then, as we prescribed above, make an Issue in her knee.

CHAP. V. Of the Complication of the Menstrunm, with other Diseases.
THe Complication of the Menstruum with other Diseases is hard to be known, and
not easy to be cured; for if any woman be sick of any Disease, and if her
Courses be suppressed, or appear not, the Physicians are at a stand, what is
most fit, during this Judication, to be done, for if we follow the motions of
Nature, who works rightly, and open a vein in the ankle, this will not cure
the Disease, which is rooted in the upper parts.

And if you draw blood from the arm, you pervert the course and order of
Nature, to the great disadvantage of the sick woman. But you will say, in such
a case as this, what is to be done? I shall tell you in few words.

The Disease is either vehement, or moderate, and of long continuance; if the
Courses appear, or come down, in a disease of long continuance, you may defer
the opening of a vein till a more convenient season, be it either a vein in the
arm, or in the ankle, which you intended to cut, for you can do no hurt by
omitting, or at least suspending this remedy.

But if the Disease be acute, and require a speedy evacuation; you must observe
whither the Menstruum be answerable to the plenty of blood which abounds in
the body; if her Courses come down, according to the prescription of
Hippocrates, you must not be busy, but leave the whole matter to Nature; of
the same opinion is Galen also, for, says he, if at that time when you are
letting blood, it should so fall out, that her Courses come down, or that she
should on a sudden have the Piles, you must desist from phlebotomy, and commit
the whole business to Nature, if you are satisfied that the Menstruum comes
away in a sufficient quantity; but otherwise take from her so much blood, as
may make good the deficiency of her Courses.

But if a burning Fever be upon her, if she have not her Courses according to
custom, and to the satisfaction of her own desires, then this defect must be
supplied with medicines, by opening a vein in her ankle, applying
Cuppinglasses with scarification to the calfes of her legs, or Leeches to the
Hemorrhoids, to take away the superfluity of the blood.

One thing must be considered, namely, if a woman after her delivery have a
burning Fever upon her, her Courses actually flowing, whither it be lawful, in
regard of the vehemence of the Fever, to open the upper veins? Fernelius,
Valeriola, Amatus Lusitanus, and diverse others of good account, assent the
lawfulness and expediency thereof; for although some have imagined, that if
the upper veins be opened, the blood will ascend to the upper parts; yet if it
be true which they imagine, more profit and advantage will accrue thereby to
the sick woman, then hurt or danger; for when a vein in the ankle is cut,
although it bring down the Courses, and supply the defective motion of Nature,
in respect of the part particularly affected; yet is it not equally prevalent
against a most vehement infl^mmation, nor altogether so profitable in a most
acute disease; because the blood must be drawn out from some vessel, that is
nearer to the part affected, that the conjunctive cause may be taken away, and
although by cutting a vein in the ankle, we can draw the whole mass of blood
out of the body, yet the blood is not so fitly taken from one part, as from
another; for in a Quinsey, or a Pleurisey, it is more commodious to open the
Basilick vein to temper the heat, then any other vein in the whole body.

CHAP. VI. Of hard swellings in the Breasts.
THe Breasts are naturally thin, spongy, or fungous, and loose; for this reason
they are apt to entertain any crude, and melancholy humors, flowing to them
either from the Matrix, or from any other parts; these, if they are not
rightly, and duly expelled, they breed painful, yea malignant and cankerd
Ulcers: wherefore you must address your self to the Cure, without any truce
or delay; and this consists in three things; in prescribing a Diet, in the
manual operations of Surgery, and in outward and inward Medicines.

Let her therefore make choice of a pure air, let her drink be small beer
boiled with annise and snakeweed; let her meat be of good concoction, and easy
distribution, as Mutton broth, Cock broth, and roasted Chickens; let her avoid
meats that thicken the blood, as milk, cheese, bacon, fish, and the like; open
a vein, if she have not her Courses, in her ankle, or cut the Basilic^ vein
twice or thrice, to ease the Liver, the Spleen, and the Kidneys, as the
multitude o^ blood shall require it.

Note that the humor must be prepared and attempted with this Apozem.

Take the roots of Succhory,

Polipody, of each an ounce.

The bark of the root of the Caper, an^

Tamarisk tree, of each half an ounce.

The leaves of Buglos,

Fumitary, Balm, of each a handful.
Two drams of Fennill seeds.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity o^ barley water to two pints, and to the
strained liquor add

Syrup of Borage,

Syrup of ^umitary, of each an ounce and a half.

Ten grains of Spirit of Vitriol.

Mingle them, and make an Apozem.

Because the humor is thick and dreggish, you must purge her body several
times, till it be perfectly cleansed, this may be done with this decoction
following.

Take an ounce of Polypody of the oak.

The leaves Fumitary,

Hops, Borage, Endive, of each a handful. Epithymum, Century the less, of each
half a handful.
Boil them in a sufficient quantity of Barley water, to two pints, and in the
strained liquor infuse a whole night,

An ounce of Sena.

Four drams of Rubarb.

Agarick Troch.

Cream of Tartar, of each two drams.

Epithymum, and

The flowers of borage, buglos, and rosemary, of each as many as you can grasp
between your thumb and two fingers at twice*

Two drams of annise seeds.

In the morning give it one or two bublings, strain and press it, and to the
liquor, add

Syrup of violets. Syrup of fumitary, of each an ounce. Make an Apozem, or
Take the leaves of buglos,
Fumitary, of each a handful. Balm,
Germander, of each half a handful.

As much Epithymum, as you can contain^ between your thumb and two fingers.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity o^ whey, to a pint, and a half, infuse
for ^ night in the strained liquor

Six drams of Sena.

Two drams of white Agarick.

A dram and a half of annise seeds.

In the morning press out the liquo^ hard, and add

Syrup of Violets, Syrup of fumitary, of each an ounce an^ a half. Mingle
them for an Apozem.
Confectio Hamech and Diacricu will b^ highly profitable; so also are Pills de
Lapi^ Lazuli.

Sometimes you may prescribe glysters, t^ temper the melancholy humor; as for
example.

Take the leaves of Mallows, Marishmallowes, Violets, of each a handful.
Half a handful of bran. Two drams of fennill seeds.
Boil them in a sufficient quantity of barley water to nine ounces: in the
strained liquor put in

Confectio Hamech, Diacatholicon, of each an ounce. An ounce and a half of
oil of violets. Mingle them, and make a glyster, or Take half an ounce of
Polypody roots. The leaves of buglos, Fumitary, Violets, of each a handful.
Four ounces of sena.
As much Epithymum as you can take up, between your thumb and two fingers.

Two drams of fennill seeds.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of Cock broth to nine ounces, to the
strained ^^quor add

Diaprun. Laxativum, Confectio Hamech, of each an ounce. Half an ounce of Syrup
of Violets. A dram of Sal gemme. Mingle them, and make a glyster.
Leeches applied to the Fundament may much promote the Cure.

The event may likewise gratify your ^riall, if you prescribe Cordials,
Treacle, Mi^hridate, Lozenges of Pearl, Alkermes, and the like: which with
their coldness, dryness, and cordial virtue, retain the spirits, correct
the blood, even when it is putrefying, and preserve the bowels in their due
Symmetry, and natural constitution; Note, that you may not forget to wash her
legs, with a decoction of Hops, Violets, Fumitary, Roses, Mallows, and Vine
leaves.

If by the advantage of time it prove a^ cankerd, and a creeping Ulcer, you
must not vex, and discompose the Patient with many, or strong Medicines, but
you mus^ institute a palliative Cure; for Gale^ boasts that he thus cured a
woman who had a Cancer in her breast, for when the thinner part was brought
away, i^ became thicker, more full of putrefaction, and subject to exulcerate;
for it i^ undeniable, as the same Author affirmeth^ that the vehemence of the
remedies inflam^ the humor, and set it on fire, by that acrimo^nius quality,
which is naturally in them.

Almost all Authors agree that Issues an^ convenient, for they supply the stead
o^ Purges, and Phlebotomy, as Guido a good written witnesses in his book de
Cauteriis.

The end of the first Book of Women's Diseases.
THE SECOND BOOK, Written by NICHOLAS FONTANUS: OF Women's Diseases.
The first Chapter. OF the Mother.
THat Disease which we commonly call the Mother, the Physicians term the
Strangulation, or Suffocation of the Matrix, and sometimes the Ascent of the
Matrix. Ga^^ took it to be a drawing back of the Ma^ix, to the upper parts.
Hereupon some of the Ancients conceived the Matrix, to b^ some straggling
Creature, wandering too and fro thorough several parts, to which fantastical
conceit, Fernelius, Eugenius, and Laurentius, contributed a credulou^ Assent;
for though a woman be dead, yet can you not with an ordinary strength remove
the Matrix from the natural place; neither is that reason, which Fernelius
alleges, of any moment, who says, that in these diseases he has touched it
upwards, seeing that this is not the true Matrix, but a gross, windy
swelling, of a roundish figure, and somewhat resembling the Matrix; you will
say the Matrix does remove, and slip from its proper place; I grant it, for by
reason of the moisture, wherewith those parts abound, the Matrix is loosened,
and exceedingly stretched: and this is the truth of the whole matter.

The Cause of this Disease is twofold: the Retention of the Seed, and the
Menstruum, which are the material cause: and a cold and moist distemper of the
Matrix, breeding phlegmatic and thick juices, which is the efficient cause:
for when the Seed is retained, and the Menstruum has not the customary, and
usual vent, they burden the Matrix, and choke, and extinguish the heat
thereof: then upon the diminishing of the natural heat, windy humors are
bred, especially in the Matrix, which by nature is a cold, nervous, and
bloudlesse part; after the same manner, if the seed be kept too long, it
disturbeth the Function of the spiritous parts, and the Midriffe, it oppresses
the heart, causes fainting and sounding fits, binds as it were, and girteth
about the parts, and seems in such a manner to stop the breath, that the sick
woman is in danger to be strangled: her pulls is sometimes weak, various, and
obscure: she has inward discontents and anxieties, and is most commonly
invaded by, at least very subject unto Convulsion fits: she lies, as if she
were astonished and void of sense: and from her belly you may hear rumbling,
and murmuring noises; she breaths so weakly, that it is scarce discernable,
and indeed she is so sad an object, that the bystanders may ea^ily mistake her
to be dead. The drowsy and sleepy disease called Carus differs from this,
because they who are affected with it, have the use of their breath free,
without any molestation: and it differs from a Cata^psy (another drowsy
disease, casting the ^^ck into a profound and dead sleep) because they who are
taken with that, li^ without any motion, but they who have the mother, are
tormented with Convulsio^ fits, their legs and their hands are stretche^ and
wrythed into unusual figures, an^ strange postures; and by this it is
distinguished from an Apoplexy, unto which it is exceeding like.

Galen wondreth how these women ca^ live, who are ^roubled with these crue^
fits of the Mother, without any pulls, o^ breathing, in as much as it is
impossible for one that lives not to breath, or for on^ that breaths not, to
live; for so long ^ we live, so long we breath. To this I answe^ that although
these women live without respiration, yet do they not live without
transpiration; for this being performed thorough the pores of the skin, by the
motion of the arteries, conserves the sym^ metry of the vital heat; for then
tha^ small heat retiring to the heart, as to Castle, may bepreserved by this
benefit o^ transpiration alone.

Now to procure an assurance, whith^ the woman be living or dead, hold a
feather, or a lo^king-glasse to her mouth, the former stir, or the latter be
spotted it is an undoubted sign that she lives.

This is a most acute Disease, and soon dispatcheth the sick woman, especially
if it took beginning from somevery contagious, and poisonous vapors; lecherous
women, and lusty widows that are prone, and apt to Venery, are most subject to
it: but married women that enjoy the company of their husbands, and such as are
with child, are seldom invaded by it.

You must apply your Remedies in the ^^t, and after the fit: in the fit, the
humor ^ust be drawn back with rubbing the parts, ^ying painful Ligatures
about them, and ^pplying Cuppinglasses, with scariffication to ^he calfes of
her legs: have such Glysters in ^eadinesse, as will take away the pain,
dis^olve, draw back, and purge out the thick ^umours: you may compound them by
^hese forms following.

Take half an ounce of Elecampane roots.

The leaves of rue, penniroyall, Motherwort, and pellitory of the wall, of each
a hand^ull.

Three drams of sena.

Bran, Camomile flowers, and the tops of Dill, of each half a handful.

Bastard Saffron, and Annise seeds, of each ^wo drams.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of birthwort water to nine ounces, to the
strained liquor being squeezed, and pres^ very hard, add

Diaphenicon, and benedicta laxativa, of each an ounce.

Oil of dill, and oil of rue, of each s^ drams.

Half an ounce of butter.

A dram and a half of salt.

Mingle them, and make a Glyster.

Carminative medicines must be laid upon the whole inward region, as
fomentatio^ made of the leaves of Rue, Motherwort, Penniroyall, the flowers of
Melilot, and Cam^mile, or unguent. de Althea, with the oyl^ of Camomile, Dill,
and Rue; for this looseneth the passages by opening the pores, an expelling the
wind; pessaries may be p^^ up, made with Civet, Musk, and Amber but you must
affront her nose with stinking odours, as the steame of brimstone, the smoke
ascending from old shoes burn^ Partridge feathers, sagapenum galbanum,
as^fetida, and the like, cast into the fire; because the Matrix does, as it
were abhor, r^treat, and fly from these things, wherea^ sweet things do
allure to them.

But some curious brain may here d^mand, why sweet things held to the nos^ do
breed the fits of the Mother, and on the contrary, stinking things appease
those fits? I answer; sweet things applied to the Matrix, in regard that they
are hot, do expel the wind, cut into the slow and tenacious phlegm, and
afterward purge it out: but stinking things applied to the Nose, consume the
ascending vapors with their heat; but you may still demand, if hot stinking
things be good to break the wind, why may they not be laid to the Matrix, as
well as sweet things? I answer? the Matrix embraces, and meets sweet odours
and perfumes, but unsavory and stinking sents it abhors, and flies from; for
it is a most certain truth, that every creature, even by natural instinct,
shunneth inconveniences, and affects things convenient.

If the evil still increase, and if the Virgin be of a good habit, fleshie,
and for a long time has not had her Courses, or for too long a time has had
them: the safest course, although upon the approach of the Fit, will be to open
a vein in the ankle, without delay, especially, if any excretion of blood
appear, either at the nose, or at the mouth; for as Hippocrates has
excellently taught us; as the coming down of the Courses, is a present Remedy
for those who vomit blood; so in a body that is plethorick, by reason that the
Menstruum has been long suppressed; you may help a woman who vomits blood, if
you cut one of her lower veins; the same opinion i^ favored by Galen in his
Commentry, saying in this case we ought to endeavor ar^ evacuation, namely,
such an one as is correspondent to nature, when she is obedient to her own
laws.

After the Phlebotomy, if her body b^strong, and the Disease continue, apply
Cuppinglasses, with scarification to her thighs Leeches to the Hemorrboids,
and with iterated Glysters, and medicines given again and again into the body,
purge out the Melancholy juices.

Many, who are more rash then learned more bold, then skillful, because of the
cold and the wind, which are the cause^ of this Disease, at the beginning will
unadvisedly be offering wine to the sick, which being odoriferous, is apt to
allure the Matri^ to the upper parts; therefore I counsel all those that value
the health of their friends, to forbear this temerity: yet if she faint, and
her spirits be so far spent, tha^ she swounds, or is ready to swound, in such
an exigence you may allow her wine, yet in a small quantity.

When the Fit is over, let her live soberly, and feed upon hot meats. that
yield a thin, and subtle nourishment, and be very careful to preserve her
self, least she fall into a Relaps; herbs, and roots, and such thing as
thicken the blood, or are hard to digest, must be no part of her diet,
Wormwood beer may be allowed her, or in her beer mingle Cinnamon water, or
boil Annise seeds, or China roots in it.

The humor must be prepared with cutting Sy^ups, as Rhodomell, Syrup of
Wormwood, Syrup of Mint, or Syrup of the five roots.

You may prescribe the Purge of Mechoaca, Hiera Picra, pills of agarick, of
Hiera, with Confectio Hamech, or Sena.

You must open a vein in the ankle again, and because this thick and stubborn
humor will not obey a single evacution, you must also purge her body again
with agarick, hellebore, Pills of Mastick, or of Rubarb.

Steel taken in powder, or mingled among the other medicines, will much
advance the Cure; so will an Issue, and an artificial Bath made with Sulphur,
or a decoction of Salsa parilla, Guaiacum, and China.

Lastly, if the Disease take beginning from the seed, because in Physic, no
peculiar, or elective purging medicine is consecrated to it, you must lessen
her diet, enjoyne her an abstinence from hot wine, and let her continually
wear plates of lead upon he^ back; for it is most certain, that these do^
diminish the seed; if the Patient for twelv^ mornings together upon an empty
stomach drink three ounces of a decoction of agnus castus seeds, boiled with
six grains o^ Camphire.

CHAP. II. Of the Epilepsy in the Matrix, And the several kinds thereof.
Physicians reckon up a twofold Epileps in the Matrix; one by Consent, the
other by Propriety; the Cause of this is thick, viscous, and slow humor,
obstructing the hollow parts of the Nerves: the cause of that is a cold
distemper of the Matrix, and a contagious vapor assaulting and shaking the
Brain, and the nervou^ parts: for when the animal faculty strives to expel
that humor, or vapor from it self, the hollow parts of the Nerves are crushed
together, and the passages are stopped, and thus there happens a constipation, or
an obstruction, the insides of the Nerves being, as it were straightned, bound,
and closed up together.

That there is such a Disease, as an Epilpsy by Consent, we are warranted by
Galen to believe, who in his book de Locis, propounds the example of a boy, who
being lame in his legs, fell afterward into an Epilepsy, and after the same
manner Virgins, who are troubled with obstructions, wind, or a malignant
vapor in their Matrices, do frequently fall into the Falling Sickness.

This is easily known; for imminent windy humors, and rumblings in her belly
do presage it, her stomach swells, her mind is confused, her eyes are dim, and
when she is ready to fall into a fit of the Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness,
she may perceive a tingling noise in her ears, a giddiness, circumagitation,
or turning round in her head: she is sad in her mind, disquieted in her body,
troubled with the passion of the heart, and not seldom with sounding fits;
it is a sad spectacle to behold her in this condition, from which if she be not
seasonably delivered, she is very likely to fall into an Apoplexy; this we have
learned from Galen, who in his third book de Locis, and 5. chapt. says,
Epilepticks do often degenerate into a melancholy madness, and so on the
contrary; for this melancholy mood turns to the Falling Sickness, when the
humor invades either the body, or the mind; or if that dark vapor becloud
the mind, inducing a dimnesse, or gloominesse in the thoughts, with sadness,
despair, and deep melancholy; if the spirits, which are bright and clear in
their own nature, be obscured with the foggy commerce of black vapors, the
very presence of them dismayeth, terrifies, and discomposeth the mind: or if a
confluence of those vapors assault the body, that is, the brain and the
nerves, they produce the Falling Sickness.

This requires a twofold cure: one in the Fit, the other after the Fit. In the
Fit you must quicken and excite the animal faculty, and force back those
poisonous vapors, that are stealing from the Matrix to invade the upper parts:
then the wind must be expelled, the ways kept open, and the thick humor must
be got out of the body, by rubbing the parts, by tying straight ligatures about
her legs, by fomentations, and baths, made with the leaves of penniroyall,
motherwort, thyme, nip, camomile, salt, vinegar, and water; softning Glysters
are so useful, that you must not forget to inject them; you may make them thus.

Take the leaves of motherwort, Penniroyall, Birthwort, of each a handful.
Rosemary, Mint, of each a handful. Two drams of fennill seeds.
Boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, to nine ounces, strain and
press out the liquor, and then add

Hiera picra Galeni, Diaphenicon, of each an ounce. A dram of sal gemme. Mingle
them, and make a glyster, or Take the roots of Elecampane, Restharrow, of each
four drams. The leaves of Marjoram, Motherwort, Birthwort, of each a handful.
The tops of Dill,
Camomile Flowers, of each half a handful.

Two drams of Annise seeds.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity o^ Barley water, to nine ounces, to the
liquo^ which you press out, add

An ounce and a half of Diaphenicon.

Mass. pill. fetidar.

De hiera cum Agarico, of each two scruples.

Oil of Dill, Camamile, Butter, of each half an ounce. Mingle them, and make
a glyster.
If necessity urge you, and the strength o^ the Patient will bear it, you may
prescrib^ a sharper glyster, to draw the humors from the farthest distant
parts, and to imitate the nature and effects of a Purge; be this for a^ example
to you.

Take half an ounce of Polypody roots. Two drams of Mechoaca. The leaves of
Sage, Rosemary, Betony, of each a handful. Half an ounce of bastard Saffron
seeds. Two drams of Agarick.
As much Epithymum as you can take up between your thumb, and two fingers.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of honied water to ten ounces, strain,
and press out the liquor, and add

An ounce of Hiera Logodii. A dram of the Mass of Pills of Cochia. Ten grains
of Troch. Alhandal. Half a dram of sal gemme. Mingle them, and make a glyster.
For this being a most acute Disease, requires the utmost trials of art, that
it may not degenerate (as it is very prone to do) into a true Apoplexy.

To the Matrix (to make a sudden dispatch of the Cure) apply Carminitive
fomentations, and ^ath the privy parts, to break, and expel the wind.

After the use of the Fomentation, apply oil of Castor, oil of wormwood, and
inject odoriferous Pessaries of musk, amber, Civet, made up with gallia
Moschat, and a piece of Cotton, according to the secret rules of Art; to the
nose you must hold stinking things, as sagapenum, galbanum, assa fetida,
Castor, rue, and the like.

When the Fit is approaching, Hippocrates advises to open a vein in the
Ankle, and this advice is magnified, and applauded by Galen in his book de
Rigore Chapt. 8. neither may you forget to apply Leeches to the Hemorrhoids, or
the calfes of her legs; for they will suck out the feculent and dreggish
humor, that is impacted in the Matrix.

Cordialls must be administered, as Treacle, Mithridate, Alkermes, Confection de
Hyacyntha, and the like: or if you please compound them after this manner.

Take the hoof of an Elk.

The wood of Misletoe of the Oak, of each two drams.

The skull of a man newly dead of some violent death.

Hartshorne, of each two drams. Pearl prepared, Burnt Ivory, Mastick, of each
a dram and a half. The powder of Rosemary, Stechas, Sage, of each a scruple.
The species Diacastor. Diaccumin. of each a scruple.
With a sufficient quantity of honey, of roses, and Syrup of Stechas, make a
mixture.

If the Disease become again indigested and crude, prescribe another Purge, of
Aloes, Hiera Picra, Benedicta Laxativa, or Turbith; but that the ignorant may
not be rashly precipitated into some erroneous composition, we shall limit him
to this prescription.

Take two scruples of the mass of Pills de Hiera cum agarico.

Ten grains of pill. faetidae.

Troch. Alhandal,

Diagrydium, of each five grains.

With a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Stechas make nine Pills.

Sometimes the retention of the Seed is the Cause of these Symptoms, which if
they be so vehement, that the former remedies cannot tame them, proceed as
follows.

Take Storax in powder, Aloes in powder, White agarick, of each two drams. The
juice of the herb Mercury, The juice of the wild Cucumber, of each three
drams. A sufficient quantity of Turpentine.
With a piece of Cotton make a pessary, according to art, put it up, and move
it up and down, till the superfluous seed be ejaculated.

If the sick woman have many Fits in a day, certain it is, that the disease is
fixed, and rooted in the Head: wherefore in such cases I have known no better
remedy, then an actual cauterizing in the hinder part of the head, from whence
as from an Issue, that virulent and luxuriant humor which is the cause of this
most dangerou^ disease, may at last have a vent.

In the intermission of the Fits, you mu^^ open a vein in her Ankle; this is
not my counsel only, but Galen enjoynes the sam^ remedy; for in his book de
Cur. ration. pe^ sang. missionem, he says; if you will prevent the Falling
Sickness, ^ut the Scyrhena^ that is the vein in the Ankle; afterward^ he
commands the preparation of that cold^ and thick humor, which may be effected
by this Apozem following.

Take the roots of fennill, Small Aristolochy, Elecampane, of each four drams.
The roots of Dittany, Piony, of each two drams. The leaves of Nip, Penniroyall,
Calamint, Sage, of each a handful, The flowers of Stechas,
Rosemary, of each as much as you can graspe between your thumb, and two
fingers at twice.

A dram of annise seeds.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, wherein steel has been
infused, to two pints.

To the strained liquor add

An ounce and a half of Syrup of St^^has. An ounce of oxymell Scilliticum.
Mingle them, and make an Apozem.
After you have prepared the humor, purge the body with this composition
following.

Take two drams and a half of Sena.

Three scrup^e^ of white agarick.

A dram of annise seeds.

A scruple of Ginger,

Macerate them for a ^ight in a sufficient quantity of parsley water; in the
morning give them one or two bublings; and to the ^iquor which you press ou^
(I mean ^hree ounces of it)

Add two scruples of Mas^* ^il^. (...).

Mingle them for a Potion* or

You may prescribe some other mi^ture ^o^ purge phl^g^^* and more (...) to
^reak and expel wind, or make ready ^his plaster following, to be applied to
^e^ ^^vell, and her secret par^^^

Take three ounces of ^^stort (...) Lign. Aloes. Sautali moschatel^^* Nutmegs.
Barbaries. Dill, of each two dram^* Cinnamon, Cloves, Scevanth, Camamile
flowers, of each a dram. Male frankincense, or Olibanum, Mastick, Trochischs de
Gallia Moschata, Storax calimata, Red storax, of each a scruple. Seven grains
and a half of musk. Three ounces and a half of yellow wa^ An ounce and an
half of turpentine. A pound of pure ladanum. Nine ounces of ship Pitch.
Mingle them, and according to Art mak^ a Plaster.

If the contumacity of the evil be such, ^ not to yield to all these remedies,
make I^sues in the legs, and if those also prove in effectual, my last
recourse is to a decoction of Guaiacum wood, wherewith the learned Jachinus, as
he averreth in his Commentaries upon Almansor, has cured many o^ this Disease.

CHAP. III. ^f M^lancholy proceeding from the Matrix.
THis has one and the same Cause with the Epilepsy, namely the retention of ^e
Seed, and the suppression of the Men^^m, which being earthy, and not ob^ning a
vent, they putrify, beget vapors, which do not only assault the brain, but
^ey oppress the heart also, and the Mid^e; for when a gloomy and black vapor
^ends to the brain, the principal parts, ^d their instruments are depraved,
and ^e animal spirit, which is the chiefest in^ment of the soul, and in its
own nature ^are and perspicuous, is rendered dark, ^d obscure.

The true signs of this disease are sad^se, fearfulness, anxiety of mind,
and seve^l figures or postures of unquietness ap^ring in the body.

They despair, they doat, they talk ^ly, especially at that time when they
^pect their Courses; in these you may ob^ve a depraved motion of the principal
Members, because the temperament of t^ brain is perverted by that cold and d^
humor; moreover they are unwilling dye, they cannot sleep, they have no
st^mack to their meat, and being taken wi^ a strange loathing of aliment, their
bod^ waste and consume; sometimes they im^gine that they undergo the torments
damned souls in Hell; they weep wit^ out any cause, they groan, they lame^
anon again they laugh, desire to go to some by corners, and according the
inward discomposure of their mind they turn, vary, and alter their gestu^ and
countenances into several figur^ sometimes they have a conceit that they
talking with Angels, sometimes they m^^mur, sometimes they sing; certainly the
is not a more strange and wonderful d^ ease, for in several persons it
bewray^ a thousand, several, ridiculous, and ant^ behaviors.

He sees the difficulty of this Cure, b^ in regard of the Symptoms, and the
stu^ bornesse of the disease, who understands to be a cold and dry affect (for
there is ^ doubt, but the brain labors under cold, and dry distemper) and how
mu^ drienesse resists the best medicines, is n^ unknown to Philosophers; for
as it is of a dull, and sluggish action, so are there many resistances: and
from thence comes the danger, because it easily degenerates into rave^ng, and
raging madness, or into the Falling Sickness, or into an Apoplexy, and it is
held incurable, if the brain be primarily affected, because in continuance of
time, ^t takes so deep a root, that no Magazine of Remedies, no stratagems of
Art can remove it.

Wherefore you must be very careful, when you undertake the Cure; as for her
Diet, let it incline to hot and moist, assign ^er a gently breathing air;
boil her drink with the roots of buglos, angelica, and snake^eed; with the
leaves of hops, buglos, balm, and fumitary; allow her white Wine that is
^mall, and well sented, let her be indulgent to her sleeps, avoiding cares,
pensiveness, and troublesome thoughts; if her body be costive, make it, and
keep it soluble. Venery is wholesome for melancholy persons, provided that it be
acted seasonably, and with moderation. Hippocrates placed the whole hope of the
Cure in the evacuation of that excrement, commanding, as we have said above,
such Virgins to marry.

To facilitate the Revulsion, and the evacuation of the humor, loosen the
belly with moistning Suppositories, and Glyster^ observe their composition.

Take two scruples of the species Hiera picr^

Ten grains of Troch. Alhandal.

Half a dram of common Salt.

With a sufficient quantity of honey boi^ed to a due thickness, make a
Suppository, ^

Take a scruple and a half of Hiera Pi^ in the species.

Trochishs of agarick.

Troch. Alhandall, of each a scruple.

Half a dram of Sal gemme.

With a sufficient quantity of honey, according to art make a Suppository.

Take the roots of Elecampane, Polypody, of each four drams. The leaves of
mallows, Violets, Balm, Pellitory on the wall. Mercury, of each a handful.
Ten good prunes. Five drams of Sena.
As much Epithymum as your thumb, an^ two fingers can grasp.

Two drams of annise seeds.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity ^ fumitary water to nine ounces, when you
have strained and pressed out the liquor, add,

Diaprun. Laxat. Diaphenicon, of each an ounce. An ounce and a half of oil of
Violets. A dram of Sal gemme. Mingle them, and make a glyster. Or, Take the
leaves of Buglos. Borage, Balm, of each a handful. Half a handful of
Violets. Four drams of Sena.
Half an ounce of the roots of black Hellebore.

As much Epithymum as you can take up between your thumb and two fingers.

A dram of fennill seeds.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of ^roth, made of a sheepshead and guts,
sound^y washed before you put them into the pot, and to ten ounces of the
liquor which you press out, add

An ounce of Diaprun. Laxat.

Half an ounce of Confectio Hamech.

An ounce and a half of oil of Violets.

Two drams of common salt.

Mingle them, and make a glyster.

But if the Disease arise from a suppression of the Courses, think upon that
Oracle of Hippocrates, and obey his words as a sacred Law, when he says, the
true way to provoke them, is by drawing blood from the ankle; provided that
there be no reason to oppose this injunction; having so done and laying Leeches
to the Hemorrhoids, the use whereof is exceeding profitable in thi^ disease; if
the body be full, and the diseas^ be found to be common to the whole body, open
the Basilick vein on the righ^ side: from whence, if an earthy and blac^ blood
flow away, Galen advises you t^ take out a large quantity.

If the Patient be young, lean, black an^ hairy, adventure upon deep
scarification made in her back, and fasten great Cuppi^ glasses to her arteries.

These universal administrations being premised, and the humor being rightl^
prepared, it will be convenient to prescribe a Purge to cleanse her body from
melancholy: to this purpose

Take three drams of Sena.

A dram of the roots of black Hellebore.

Two scruples of agarick Trochisht.

Half a dram of fennill seeds.

Macerate them in a sufficient quantit^ of fumitary water for a night, and when
i^ the morning you have pressed out the liquor take three ounces of it, and add

Three drams of Diacatholicon.

Two drams of Confectio Hame^h.

Half an ounce of Syrup of Violets,

Mingle them, and make a Potion.

She must not take any Pills, for they are too great driers, both in respect of
their form, and also in regard of the ingredients whereof they are compounded.

But by all means, let her have somewhat to dispose her to sleep; as this, or
the like emulsion.

Take the seeds of Gourds, Melons, Citruls, Cucumbers of each an ounce. Six
sweet Almonds blanched. Two drams of white Poppy seeds.
With ten ounces of a decoction of Lettuce, and Poppy heads, and an ounce of
Syrup of Poppy, make an Emulsion, to be taken about nine a clock at night, and
at two a clock in the morning.

Embrochations also may be prepared for the head; you may make them of a
decoction of poppy heads, barley, roses, violets, waterlilles, nightshade,
lettuce, coriander, and mandrake roots.

Anoint her nose and her Temples with this ointment following.

Take half an ounce of unguent. Populeum.

Two drams of unguent. rosarum.

Half a dram of Opium, dissolved in vinegar of roses.

Mingle them for the use aforesaid.

Let her have cooling Lotions, to bath the palms of her hands, and the soles
of her feet; if the cruelty of the disease be such, as to deprive her of all
sleep, prescribe this draught following; yet suspend the use thereof till you
have tried other means, to procure rest for the sick Creature.

Take a scruple of Philonium Romanum.

Three ounces of Lettuce water.

Mingle them, and let her drink it when she goes to bed, or

Take Philonium Persicum, Requies Nicholai, of each a scruple. Two ounces of a
decoction of poppy. Mingle them for a Draught.
Sometimes we use to exhibit two or three grains of laudanum opiatum: yet
forbear this remedy, unless an urgent occasion prompt you to it.

Baths are most wholesome, if they be made of the decoction before prescribed;
or else you may follow this example.

Take two ounces of Barley, The leaves of Violets, Vine leaves, Lettuce, Willow
leaves. Mallows, of each two handfulls.
The leaves of red rose, water lillies, of each a handful.

Boil them altogether, in a sufficient quantity of broth made with a
sheeps-head, and let her bath her self in the strained liquor.

A Bath prepared of oils, and sweet waters is very effectual; so also is a
Bath of Asses milk; for these things temper the earthy humor, mitigate the
acrimony thereof, correct the dryness, and parchednesse of the skin, render
the blood more apt to descend, provoke sleep, qualify the furious motions of
the spirits, and nourish and fatten such bodies as are dried up, and consumed.
You must also comfort the heart with Cordialls, and to the same purose

Take the waters of Borage, Balm, of each six ounces. Syrup of the juice of
Borage. Syrup Regis saboris, of each an ounce. Two drams of Cinnamon water.
Mingle them, and make a Julep, or Take Conserve of the flowers of Violets,
Borage, Oringes, of each an ounce. Confectio Alkermes, Confectio de Hyacy^tha,
of each a dram and a half. Species Diamargarit. frigid. Species Diambrae, of
each a dram.
With a sufficient quantity of Syrup de pomis Regis saboris, adding two
leaves of gold, make a mixture, or

Take the species Letificant. Galeni,

The species Diambra, of each half a dram.

Pearl prepared.

Bezoar stone, of each a scruple.

Two ounces of Sugar dissolved in Rosewater.

Make them into Lozenges according to Art.

If these remedies get not the victory, we counsel you to make deep issues
upon the knee; and if the disease be inveterate, prescribe an extract of black
Hellebore, and apply Causticks to the region of the spleen, by the force and
strength whereof, the black and cloudy humor, which sticks so close to the
bowell, may by degrees be brought away.

CHAP. IV. Of a cold Distemper, or a swelling in the Matrix.
THe Matrix is sometimes swelled, either because the Courses are stopped, or
else in regard of a continual suppeditation of cold aliment, which generates a
cold distemper in those parts: which because it cannot be simple, or solitary,
therefore it presently consociates it self with moisture, and from thence
arise thick, slow, and cloudy winds, in the very cavernes, or hollow parts of
the Matrix, tormenting the woman with unspeakable pains.

The signs are a swelling below the Navell, near the privy parts, slow
winds, with rumbling, and murmuring of the guts, forsaking of meat, sadness,
slothfulness, heaviness in the head, and about her secret parts.

This is a grievous disease, because many times it turns to a Dropsey in the
Matrix: for, in regard that those windy humors are bread, and increased by
the diminution of the natural heat, as Galen has observed in his book de
Sump^om. Causis, it comes to pass, that the feeble heat, now generating wind,
proceeding from a cold distemper in the Matrix, does so weaken it, that instead
of wind, water, or a waterish humor is produced.

This disease is cured by an extreme thin, and drying diet: wherefore let the
air incline to hot and dry: but if the place be such as does not naturally
afford such an air, prepare it by art, sprinkling aromaticall things about her
chamber, as sage, nip, betony, rosemary, ^^echas, thyme, origanum, and lavender.

Let her choice be of those dishes, which will be of good nourishment to the
body, ^asie to digest, and soon distributed to all the parts, as thrushes,
young sparrowes, partridges, pheasants, and pigeons: she may not eat the flesh,
of goats, Kids, hares, cowes, sheep, nor Deer: meats made with milk are
unwholesome for her: so are roots, sallads, and pothearbs: new laid eggs,
raisins, and figs may be allowed her: but command a forbearace of chestnuts and
almonds; for they are thick and windy; let her eat the whitest bread baked with
annise, or fennill seeds, or a little honey; course barley bread, and the like,
is not good for her, but nothing is more unwholesome for her then fruit; you may
grant her the use of some few herbs, as sparagus, parsley, alexanders, water
pepper, ^orage, and buglos.

For her drink, give her Fountain water, wherein annise seeds, or cinanon, or
china ^oots, or the like have been boiled; but ^he most wholesome drink for her
is worme^ood ^eer.

If she drink wine, let it be sparkling and ^leasant, claret wine mingled with
water, ^ther artificial drinks, as ^ider, perry, me^eglin, steepona,
Nectarella, Medea, and the ^ike are hur^^full for her.

The humor must be prepared with Rho^omel, Syrup of wormwood, Syrup of
mint, and the like.

Her body must be purged by fits, for the ^rude, thick, and windy humor, will
not ^e got out with one medicine; this is ^aught us by our great Master
Hippocrates, who in his fourth book de Acutis, says, whosoever endeavors at
the beginning of a disease to dissolve, or take away an inflammation by a
purging medicine, he will find himself much mistaken; for whilst ^he part is
intensively inflamed, and the affect yet crude, and unconcocted, the phy^ick
gets no victory, has no laudable operation at all: but rather it brings away
such things, as would have made resistan^^ against the disease, and so by this
rashness, the body is weakened, and the disease g^t^ strength: which when it
has once overcome the body, becomes uncurable: therefore whenever you
undertake to purge^ body, you must not only make the humors fluid, but you
must also stay till they are co^cocted, especially in chronicall, and long
lasting diseases; this may be done b^ the help of this Ap^ze^ following.

Take the roots* of fennill, Elecampane, of each half an ounce. The leaves of
pe^^iroyall, Worm^wood, Hops, Motherwort, of each a handful.
As many Camamile flowers, as you ca^ take up, between your thumb and two
fingers at twice.

Two drams of agarick Trochischated. Half an ounce of Mechoca roots. The seeds
of fennill, Annise, of each two drams.
Boil them according to art, in a sufficient quantity of barley water, to tw^
pints; when you have pressed out the liquor with all your strength, add

Two ounces of Diacnycum.

Mingle them, and make an Apozem, or

Take the roots of Polipody.

Angelica. Hermodactyls. Of each half an ounce. The leaves of Hops,
Motherwort, Fumitary, Balm, Betony, of each a handful. Six drams of sena.
Agarick Trochischated.
The roots of Mechoaca, of each two ^rams.

Half an ounce of Bastard Saffron, seeds.

Epithymum,

Camomile, of each as much as you can ^^ke up between your thumb and two
fin^ers.

Two drams of fennill seeds.

Boil them according to art, in a suffici^nt quantity of Cock broth, to two
pints, ^resse out the liquor with your utmost ^rength, and add

Two ounces of Syrup of the juice of fu^itary.

An ounce of Diacnycum.

Mingle them, and make an Apozem.

Let her every day drink three ounces of i^

For nothing cleanses the Matrix from tenacious, and slimy humors, so
effectually as Agarick; or which is a surer, an^ more infallible remedy against
the Mother^ if we may credit Galen, and Mesur. Mona^dus, Costa, Clusius, Lobel,
and Weckerus, ascrib^ the same virtues to Mechoaca, which is ho^ and dry.

Turpentine, although Galen in his boo^ de sanitate tuenda, says, that it
serves on^ to loosen the belly, yet it purges, a^ cleanses all the bowels,
as the Liver, t^^ Spleen, the Kidneys, the Lungs, and the M^trix, from those
tough and slimy humor which are strongly impacted in them.

There are several ways to prepare i^ sometimes it is most easily taken with
t^ yelk of an Egg, sometimes in powder, a^ sometimes being reduced into an
oil, t^ admirable efficacy hereof frequent exper^ence does more and more
discover to m^ so that I have often adventured to give (and with blessed
success) in many di^eases, both of the Chest, the Kidneys, an^ the bladder; for
this cleanses the stomac^ from thick, and tough humors, from which part
flows the whole stream ^^ phlegmatic humors, it wonderfully warmeth the
Matrix, wipeth away the clammy filth which sticks about the walls of it,
expels wind, provokes the Courses, and brings down urine.

You may make an excellent Fomentation after this manner.

Take the leaves of Motherwort, Penniroyall, Birthwort, Rue, of each a handful
and a half. Rosemary, Sage, Betony, of each a handful. The flowers, of
Camomile, Stechas, of each half a handful. The tops of Dill, Wormwood,
Of each as much as you can take up between your thumb and two fingers.

Boil them in white wine to four pints; use the strained liquor for a
Fomentation, and with sponges dipped in it, bath all about the bottom of her
belly, her groiny and her privy parts.

After the Fomentation, apply this admirable ointment.

Take oil of laurel, Wormwood, of each an ounce, and a half. Oil of Castor,
Earthwormes, of each an ounce. In these oils boil gently The powder of
aromaticum rosatum, Wormwood, Sage, Lignum aloes, of each a dram and a half.
A dram of red Coral.
Strain, and press out the unctious substance, and add

Three drams of yellow wax.

Mingle them, and make an ointment.

If you augment the several doses of the aforesaid herbs prescribed, for the
Fomentation, you may make a half Tub: or you may lay on the plaster pro
Matrice ('it is sold in the shops) aromatized with Diarrhodon Abbat. and
Diamoschus dulcis, or instead thereof apply the plaster Tachamacha, or
Catanua. Antidotes may not be omitted, as Treacle, and Mithridate. Excellent
Lozenges may be made for her of sugar, with the species Diamoschus, Diagalanga,
Diaeinnamomum, or Diacumium, or if you please, prescribe this mixtue following.

Take the roots of Elecampane candied, Ginger candied, of each an ounce.
Conserve of the Flowers, of Sage, Rosemary, Orenges, of each six drams. Half
an ounce of conserve of horage. The species aromaticum rosatum, Diamoschus, of
each a dram, and a half.
With a ^ufficient quantity of Syrup of Wormwood (...) them for your use.

If these medicines do not overcome the disease, let her u^e mineral,
sulphurous baths, or the like.

Zacutus Lusitanus says, if you take the dirt in the bot^ome of one of these
baths, and lay it upon the Matrix, it is as divine a medicine against the cold
affects of the Matrix; but in these words of his, I conceave there is more of
ostentation, then of truth.

If the evil yet persevere, we used in the next place to prescribe sweating
remedies, of guaiacum, china and sassaphraz roots to be administered, as we have
already showed in the for^going cures; and afterward we make issues that the
Matrix may exhale.

Now let us consider what must be determined in this case concerning
Phlebotomy; some will say that in a bad habit of the body, in a Dropsey, in the
trembling palsy, and the like, where there is a deficiencie of natural heat,
no man will adventure to let blood: seeing that when the blood is diminished,
the heat is also lessened, and the crude humors become so much the more crude:
this was Avicens fear, as is manifest by these words of his: beware least you
precipitate your Patient into one of these extremes, either into an ebullition
of chollerick, or an indigested abundance of cold humors; this we confess to
be true; yet not so, but that sometimes (all other administrations being
rightly and duly premised) with Galen we may take away blood by fits, then
exhibit Mellicratum. Then again open a vein, either the same day, or the day
following, as the disposition of the matter shall dictate to your reason; we
leave much also to nature her self who many times concocts the thick humors;
the vein in the ankle must be opened, if women are thus affected; but when men
are troubled with these windy humors, the Basilick vein is the most prope^ to
be opened.

CHAP. V. A Schirrhus in the Matrix.
A Schirrhus in the Matrix is a hard, and stony swelling, bread of earthie
humors, and of a thick and melancholy blood retained in the body.

This is either produced by a cold distemper in the Matrix, or else it proceeds
from a weakness in the upper parts from whence thick humors do arise.

This disease is very easy to be known, because in those who languish under
it, the Matrix appears hard in the circumference, like unto some great bowl,
or a round Sphere*

It differs from a swelling which is caused by wind; because in this wind is
heard within, which yields to the touch, and is moved from place to place:
but a Schirrus is a hard unmovable swelling, of a black color, and sometimes
of a palish, wan color, if any phlegmatic humor be mixed with it.

It differs from an inflammation in the Matrix, because in this there is a
burning Fever conjoined, and other signs which manifest an inward fiery
Disposition.

This is a Chronicall Disease, continuing many times beyond the space of a
year; for the Matrix, not being numbered among the more noble parts, does
better endure these molestations; it is also a contumacious affect, despising
ordinary remedies, and if you oppose such as are vehement, it degenerates into
a Cancer.

After this sometimes follows a Dropsey in the Matrix, which when it is much
hardened, becomes void of sense, incurable, drawing the neighboring parts into
consent with it, and so weakening them, that many times the Creature perishes
for lack of wamrth and cherishing heat.

She must forbear all those things, that yield a thick juice, and what these
things be we have already in good part told you; for her drink, allow her a
mixture of wine and water, in which tamarisk roots, or the bark of the Caper
tree have been boiled.

The first regions of the body must be gently cleansed, and then that humor
which nourishes the swelling, must be rooted out with some peculiar and
elective medicine; if it proceed from a suppression of the Courses, or
Hemorrhoids, open a vein in her ankle, or open the hemorrhoidall veins with
leeches: but if it arise from some fault in the Liver, or the Spleen, cut the
basalick vein.

Having thus showed your self careful of the whole body, you must in the next
place be solicitous of the affected part; first by applying such things as will
gently mollify it, as the fat of a hen, the marrow of a dear, or of a calfe,
with ammoniack, Storax, or bdellium: or with discutient fomentations after this
manner.

Take an ounce of the roots of Polypody of the Oak.

The bark of the root of the Caper tree.

The bark of the tamarisk tree, of each half an ounce.

The leaves of wormwood, Sage, Savine, Penniroyall, of each two handfulls.
Balm, Motherwort, Hops, of each a handful. The seeds of broom, Fennill, of
each half an ounce.
Boil them in a sufficient quantity of water wherein steel has been
quenched, to six pints and bath the affected part with the strained liquor;
This ointment following has a like efficacy.

Take unguent. Agrippe. Unguent. Martiatum, of each an ounce. Half an ounce of
unguent. de althea. Oil of wormwood, Capers, Dill, of each three drams.
Mingle them, and make an Ointment. Plasters also are very profitable. Take
Diachylon cum gummis, Emplastrum de meliloto, of each an ounce. Mingle them for
the use aforesaid, or You may make ready this plaster following. Take
ammoniack, Sagapenum, of each an ounce. Opoponex, Bdellium, of each half an
ounce.
Dissolve them in strong wine vinegar, thicken them to the form of a hard
ointment, and then add

The powder of ireos. Ceterach, Auripiguentum, of each a dram.
With oil of Capers make a mass of plaistering stuff, and spread it upon a
piece of leather, cut into a convenient form.

If these medicines avail not, prescribe sweating drinks for her, made with
Guaiacum, China, and Salsa parilla; for as Fallopius, an Author of good
account, says, Salsa parilla has a sovereign faculty to dissolve a skirrhus,
or any hard knotty swelling.

Sulphurous Baths are also most excellent in their operations.

Some commend a poultis made of Goats du^^: for this draws away the wind,
strengthens, and mollifies the part afflicted, and consumes the thick matter,
whereof the schirrus is bred. I usully made it after this manner.

Take three ounces of Goats dung. Meal of Lupines, Fitches, or Vetches, of
each two ounces. An ounce of Bran. Half an ounce of Sulphur in powder.
With the sharpest and strongest vinegar, wherein steel has been ten times
infused, make a Poultis.

Steel is commended by all Authors, it mollifies and opens the Matrix;
quickens the natural heat of the upper parts, and brings down the Courses, the
stoppage whereof is the undoubted cause of this disease; this, as has already
been declared at large, is taken many ways, either in water, or in the form
of a Bolus, or in Lozenges, or in powder, or in some conserve, as it shall
seem good to the Physician, and most acceptable to the sick woman's palate.

Issues will be profitable; for whatsoever slimy, or clammy humor does daily
fall down, more and more from the upper parts into the Matrix, finds a
passage out of the body again, so long as these are kept open.

CHAP. VI. Of the Dropsey in the Matrix.
WE affirm with Galen, that an universal Drosey can by no means be
generated without the fault of the Liver, seeing that the first instrument of
sanguification is the author of the blood, which if it fail in its action,
it is no wonder if water and wind be generated in the body, instead of laudable
and pure blood.

But we confess with Hippocrates, that a particular Dropsey may be produced
without any fault in the Liv^r; thus there is a Dropsey of the Chest, in the
Foot, the Finger, the Arm, the Matrix, which we our selves have often seen;
the Cause thereof is a waterish swelling, rising in the hollow parts of the
Matrix, partly by reason of the suppressed Menstruum, and partly by some
violent labor, or some vehement Abortivenesse, or by some cold distemper, and
wind ^n the Matrix.

The swelling is discernable by the touch: and if you lay your fingers upon her
Matrix, the print of them remains: if the Patient turn her self from one
side to another, the waterish humor immediately falls down on that side;
within you may perceive a rumbling noise of waters, her Courses are stopped;
she falsely surmiseth that she is with Child: the breasts grow lank, and there
is no appearance of milk.

She feels some difficulty to fetch her breath; she is troubled with passions
of the mind, she is tormented with thirst, complains of heat in all the parts
of the body, is apt to nauseate, subject to a pain in her heart, and all other
things molest her, that usually accompany a true Dropsey, and that in regard of
a salt and waterish phlegm, retained in the hollow parts of the Matrix, and
communicated thorough the common ways to the upper provinces of the body.

It differs from an inflammation in the Matrix; because this is consociated
with a Fever, continually burning all the parts of the body: but in a Dropsey
of the Matrix, the heat is more gentle and temperate; all things are locked up
in the Matrix, that is, nothing worth the mentioning comes from thence in an
inflammation: but in a Dropsey a waterish, slimy and stinking excrement flows
away.

This is a Chronicall Disease, and does not quickly either destroy, or take
leave of the Patient.

It differs also from the windiness which swells the Matrix, for in that the
swelling is not so great, the flesh is not so pale and shining, neither is
there so much wind, and it is easily differenced from a Schirrus, for in this
you may feel a great hardness, but in the Dropsey, the slesh is soft and
lanke.

The Dropsey in the Matrix is a direful disease, whereby the upper parts being
vitiated, sometimes the whole body is drawn into consent, and then the natural
heat of the Matrix is diminished, and indeed the economy of this part only is
not disturbed, but the universal strength of the influent heat is by degrees
extinguished.

Wherefore you must begin the Cure without any procrastination, or careless
delays, by a heating and drying diet; the form, quantity, quality, and manner
whereof, we have set down already at large, in the Chapter of a swelling in the
Matrix.

Allow her pure wine for her drink; that is sincere wine; or else wormwood
wine; or if it seem pleasant to her, boil china roots, with Annise seeds,
Cinnamon, and Agrimony in water, for her to drink; or alter her beer with China,
or wormwood, or Century.

All moist things must be avoided: and the air must be artificially heated,
unless you can settle her in an air, which is naturally hot.

Among the universal remedies you must Ornit Phlebotomy, for this exhausts the
hot substance, and weakens the natural heat, cools the body, extinguisheth
the inborne preservative; yet this rule is not so strict, or so general, but
that sometimes it may be lawful, yea necessary to cut a vein, when her
Courses are suppressed, or when the Piles are stopped: yea, if she be young, and in
the flower of her youth, it may be requisite to let her blood in the spring of
the year, especially if the constitution of the weather be agreeable, and the
constitution of her body temperate, and sanguine, but otherwise never, or at
least very sparingly, and that in the Ankle.

Purge the first regions of her body with Diasenua, Mechoaca, or Diaphenicon,
the thick, viscous, and waterish humors, nevertheless being first prepared,
specially with such remedies as we have commended unto you above, and although
the waterish humors may be purged out, without staying for their concoction,
because water neither concocts, nor waxes thick, according to Galen, in his
book de purgand. Med. Facult. yet to expel the wind, and to open the
obstructions, wherewith the upper parts are infested, I praise those things
which are good to break wind, to unlock the passages, and to purge out the
humors; this is commodiously performed with wormwood, agrimony, fennill,
Maidenhaire, the juice of the Florentine Flowerdeluce, Sena, the roots of
Parsley, Fennill, Sparagus, Butchersbroom, and Alexander, boiled after this
manner.

Take the last named five roots, of each half anounce.

Three drams of danewort roots. The leaves of wormwood, Water agrimony,
Maidenhaire, of each a handful. Six drams of Sena. An onnce of the juice of
Ireos roots.
Boil them in a sufficient quantity of Barley water, to two pints, unto the
strained liquor clarified with the white of an Egg, add

Two ounces, of Syrup Byzant. simpl.

An ounce of Syrup of wormwood.

Mingle them, and make an Apozem.

When the humor is prepared, exhibit pills de Hiera cum agarico to the quantity
of a dram. Antimony warily administered, is a divine medicine, and so are the
Trochischs Alhandal; for these irresistably bring away those thick and clammy
humors, which stick so fast to the Matrix; afterward the Matrix must be
strengthened, and the windy humors must be expelled, with Lozenges made
according to this manner.

Take the Electuary Diacinnamomum, Diagalanga, Dialacca, of each half a dram.
Two ounces of sugar dissolved in Cina^on-water.

According to Art, make them into Lozenges, or

Take an ounce of old Treacle. Two drams of aromaticum rosatum.
With a sufficient quantity of Syrup of wormwood make a mixture.

The Ointments, Plasters, and Poultisses, which are mentioned above, must be
applied to the secret parts: issues also and sca^ifications will be convenient,
as we have already taught; Pessaries likewise may be made after this form
following.

Take Troch. Alhandal, Troch. de agarico, The best Aloes of each two drams.
A dram of Elaterium, which is the juice of the wild Cucumber inspissated.

The yelke of an Egg,

Unsalted Butter,

The juice of Mercury, of each three drams.

With a sufficient quantity of wax, a piece of Cotton, and a piece of taffata
make a pessary.

This being administered, apply the Fomentation following to her privy parts.

Take danewort roots newly gathered.

The roots of the Florentine Flowerdeluce,

The roots Cucumer. asi^rin. of each six drams.

The flowers of Camomile,

Melilot, of each two handfulls.

A handful of the tops of Dill,

Juniper berries,

Laurel berries, of each half an ounce.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of wormwood water distilled, to four
pints, to the strained liquor add

Oil of Lillies,

Laurel berries, of each three ounces.

Use it as was said above.

CHAP. VII. Of the falling down of the Matrix.
THe Matrix sometimes falls down upon the lower parts, and this disease the
Physicians call the Descent of the Matrix; this is resembled to a pare, or a
gooseegg, as it is small or great; as there are many Causes of this disease,
namely a hard labor, and a frequent bringing forth of children, miscarrying, a
bringing away of the dead child, some fall from on high, hard riding, or
immoderate dancing, yet there is one, in my judgment, more common then any of
the rest, namely too much moisture in that part, whereby the Matrix becomes
soft, and loose; it is needless to set down any signs whereby to know this
disease: for of it self it is conspicuous.

Yet in the mean time you must not let pass any opportunity of help, because
it is accompanied with a diuturnall Fever, many times with Convulsion Fits, and
a trembling of the parts.

Wherefore if the disease proceed from an excess of moisture, prescribe a
drying diet^ and open the basalick vein for Revulsion sake.

A purge must by no means be granted her, for it is exceeding hurtful, because
it precipitates the humors to the part affected, and there breeds an
inflammation; but a Vomit is very proper in this case; because by drawing the
humors to some other part, it does derive them from the Matrix.

When you have done these things, labor to settle the Matrix in its former
place, and to this purpose the woman must be laid upon her bed, with her legs
stretched out, then the Matrix must be gently bathed with mollifying
fomentations, afterward to the end it may not fall down again, rub the parts
well, tie ligatures upon her arms: yea, apply stinking things to her Matrix,
as assa faetida, galbanum, Castor, and stinking piss: but to the nose hold
sweet things, as musk, civet, and amber.

When you have thus done, dry up the moisture, digest the slimy humor, and
expel the wind with this Fomentation.

Take half an ounce of tormentill.

The leaves of wormwood,

Mint,

Sage,

Penniroyall, of each two handfulls.

The flowers of Camomile,

Red roses, of each a handful.

Burnt alum,

Live Sulphur, of each three drams.

Boil them in sour red wine to three pints, and with the strained liquor bath
her secret parts.

After the fomentation, lay on this plaster.

Take two ounces of Emplastrum pro matrice.

Pitch,

Gummi laranne, of each a dram.

Two drams of the Trochischs de Gallia Moschata.

The powder of red roses,

Red Coral,

Acornes, of each a dram and a half.

With a sufficient quantity of wax make a Mass and spread it upon a piece of
leather cut into a convenient form.

If it cannot be reduced to its natural site and position, by the dexterity of
the hand, but begins to mortify by the inclemency of the air, cut it off, and
afterward fasten it by actual Cauterizing, only be careful of some
ligaments, and fear not the incision, because it is none of those principal
parts, without which we can live no longer, but it is a part intended by Nature
for Conception only and generation. Avicen reports of some women, who lived
eighteen years without a Matrix; and the possibility hereof we affirm to be
true upon our own experience.

CHAP. VIII. Of an Itch, Clefts, Chaps, and an Inflammation in the Matrix.
AN Inflammation in the Matrix is a preternaturall swelling, arising from a hot
blood, or from the suppression of the Menstruum, in the hollow parts thereof.

The Causes of this swelling are either inward or outward; the inward Causes
are a great plenitude or fullness of the whole body, begot by a hot distemper
of the Liver and the veins.

By the vehemence of this distemper, the blood it self is compelled in a large
proportion to the Matrix: and thus the retained blood, being no ways able to
get out, either putrifies, or else without putrefying, produces an
inflammation: sometimes also an Ulcer in the Matrix, or clefts, or chaps, or
the Piles, do most speedily draw the blood unto them by reason of the pain
and heat.

The outward Causes are a fall, a blow, a stroke, a hard labor, immoderate
coition, and the like, which weakening the Matrix, the blood flows unto it, and
settles there without resistance; after this inflammation in the Matrix, there
follows an acute Fever, bred of the putrefaction of the blood, which Fever,
Galen says, must be numbered among the continual Fevers.

She complains of a great pain in her head, by reason of vapors ascending
from her Matrix: also her eyes ache, and her neck is drawn to one side, her
stomach is affected by consent with nauseating, vomiting, and a griping pain;
and from hence many times proceeds a pain in her back, and idle talking; the
excrements are suppressed by the compression of the straight gut, and from
hence comes a difficulty to make water, or a pissing by drops.

Every one knows how dangerous, and mortal this disease is, by reason of the
consent, which it has with the parts aforesaid: wherefore you must presently
address your self to the Cure; first prescribing a thin and cold Diet, which
Hippocrates enjoynes to be observed in all Fevers, and inflammations, and
afterward opening a vein.

Many Physicians have been puzzled to find out Galens meaning, who first
commands the Basilick vein to be cut; Secondly, the Saphena, or vein in the
ankle, but the reason is obvious; for whereas in the beginning of the disease
the body is full, he prescribed the opening of the basilick vein to expedite
the Revulsion: otherwise he had drawn the humors by a precipitate motion, to
the part affected, and so superinduced an inflammation.

When this is done, he proceeds to lessen the predominancy of the blood, by
cutting a vein in the ankle, and not without sound reason: for by the
proximity, or nearness of that part, the laboring parts are soonest
disburthened.

A Purge is in this case inconvenient, by reason of the inflammation of the
part, and the drawing faculty of the purging simples. Glysters may be
profitable, both to bring away the antecedent cause, and also to free the
afflicted part from the peccant matter; Make them by this example.

Take the leaves of Violets,

Mallows,

Beet, of each a handful.

The flowers of dwarfelder,

Violets, of each a handful.

Roses,

Prunes, ten in number.

The seeds of Melons,

Cucumbers,

Citrons,

Gourds, of each two drams.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of whole barley water, to nine ounces, to
the strained liquor, add

Two ounces of Electuarium lenitivum.

Oil of Roses,

Oil of Violets, of each an ounce.

Mingle them, and make a glyster.

To appease the pain, you may mingle Topicall remedies with the Anodynall, and
apply them.

Take the leaves of Mallows,

Violets, of each a handful.

Boil them to softness, then set them into an oven, and dry them, beat them
to powder, sift them, and to the sifted matter add

The whites of two eggs beaten together.

The meal of marish mallows,

Unsalted butter,

Oil of Violets, of each an ounce.

Two drams of Opium dissolved in wine vinegar.

Mingle them, and make a Poultis, or Take four ounces of the crumbs of whit^
bread.

The whites of two eggs.

Ointment of Roses,

Ointment of Poplars, of each an ounce.

Two scruples of Saffron.

Mingle them, and make a Poultis.

This Inflammation will either be dissolved, or hasten to suppuration; you may
guess by the vehemence of the fever, when it will dissolve; for seeing that
the greatness of the fever does accompany the greatness of the inflammation;
if the fever remit, which depends upon the inflammation, it is a certain sign,
that the inflammation shortly will be dissolved; but if after the universal
administrations, the fever still continue vehement, it is a true sign of
suppuration, and the rather if the pain be increased, according to that Oracle
of Hippocrates, whilst Matter or Corruption is ripening, the pains and the
Fevers are more importunate then when it is full ripe.

The proper sign of suppuration is a most vehement pain upon the privy
parts; and therefore to humor the evil, and to hasten the suppuration,
prescribe this Poultis following.

Take the heads of white Lillies.

The roots of marish mallows, of each two ^unces.

The leaves of mallows,

Marish mallows, of each a handful.

Bran,

Camomile flowers, of each half a handful.

Twelve fat figs.

Boil them all to softness, pulp them thorough a hair sieve, and add to the
pulp

Two ounces of the meal of line seed.

Unsalted butter,

The oil of sweet almonds, of each half an ounce.

Hogsgrease,

The fat of a hen, of each half an ounce.

A dram of Saffron.

Mingle them, and make a Cataplasme.

A Fomentation made of these things, and with sponges applied to the secret
parts, are of known virtue; but then note, that when you use it, it must be
hot or lukewarm; for the Matrix being a part full of Nerves is easily offended
with cold things.

When there is an itching in the Matrix, by reason of an influx of some
choleric, and biting humor, usually there follow chinks, chaps, and clefts,
all which require one and the same manner of cure, with an inflammation.

If the Itching continue long, give whey, or an infusion of Ruharb to dri^ lay
cooling Epithems upon her Liver, ^ then wash her Matrix with this Injectio^

Take a dram of Trochisch. All. Rhasis.

Mallow water.

Breast milk of each three ounces.

Mingle them together for an injection.

From hence, if there be occasion proce^ to issues.

CHAP. IX. Of a Cancer, and an Ulcer in the Matrix
A Cancer is an uneven, bluish swellin^ with pain, and filthy to behold, the
is twofold, either with, or without an V^cer; the one has ^ordid lips, from
whence issues a black corruption, unsavory an^ stinking; but the other,
namely, that without an Ulcer, is called almost by all Antiquity a hidden Ulcer.

The cause of this is the menstruous blood detained in great abundance, and
afterward dried, and burnt up to adustion: sometimes it is produced by a dry
humor falling down from the upper parts upon the Matrix, from whence that
accumulation of ^did, and blackish blood flows away. You may discern the
signs by a pain ^ut the groine, the abdomen, the bottom the belly, and in
the loins of her back: is a stubborn disease: both in respect of ^e
incommodiousnesse of the place, which the sink of all the humors, and also in
^gard of her frequent desire, and indea^ur to make water, which render the
me^cines so moist, that they cannot stick to ^e part; moreover light remedies
it con^mnes, and vehement medicines make it ^orse: wherefore Hippocrates in one
of his ^horismes most wisely advises us, not to ^re a hidden Cancer; because
they who ^e cured quickly perish, they who are not red live so much the longer;
and we say ^e same of a Cancer, which is exulcerated, ^e pains whereof are
greater, and do ^ore torment the woman, when the Cure ^f the Ulcer is
attempted.

We must therefore content our selves with palliative Cure, that the Patient
may live ^e longer (for in the midst of misery life sweet) this may be done by
appointing good Diet, and forbidding the use of Me^ncholy meats.

Upon the approach of the Spring, and about the end of Autumn, let her bl^
from the basilick vein; but if she have n^ her Courses open a vein in the
ankle.

Prescribe such simples as are good ^ purge Melancholy, as Sena, Hellebore, my^
balans, epithymum, and annise seeds; So^ of these must be infused a whole night
^ whey, and so strained and drank, but ^ hibit not stronger Physic, because
the h^mour is so apt to be outrageous.

Local remedies which are moderately cold and binding, may be applied to ^
privy parts, as roses, myrrh, the juice of u^ ripe grapes mingled with
rosewater, bred milk, and the white of an egg, or

Take Cerus washed,

Tutia, of each an ounce and a half.

Burnt Lead,

Frankincense, of each two drams.

With four ounces of oleum Omphaci^^^ stirred much, and long in a marble
mortar* and

Three drams of white wax, make an ointment, or

Take four ounces of Litarge of silver washed in the juice of Pomegranets, and
for two whole days worn to dust in a marble mortar.

Frankincense,

Burnt Lead,

Auripigment, of each two drams.

Hogsgrease,

The grease that is gathered from sheeps wool,

New butter, of each half an ounce.

Four ounces of oil of roses.

Four drams of wax.

According to the rules of Art make an ointment.

If any filthy matter, or bloody corruption run from the Ulcer, beat the shells
of Crab fishes to ashes (having first dried them in an oven) and strew the
ashes upon the Ulcer, and anoint it twice a day with oil.

If the pain increase, and grow insufferable, inject this decoction into her
Matrix with a Syringe.

Take an ounce of the sperme of Frogs.

The leaves of mallows.

Marish mallows,

Violets,

Mercury, of each a handful.

Coriander seeds,

Poppy seeds, of each two drams.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of whole barley water, to eighteen ounces;
to three ounces of the strained liquor add

Syrup of the juice of Pomegranets,

Honey of roses strained, of each an ounce and a half.

Mingle them together, and make an injection for six times, to be injected
twice every day.

Purge her body once a month with this Medicine following.

Take three drams of Sena.

A dram of Agarick Trochischated.

Half a dram of black hellebore.

A dram of annise seeds.

Macerate them a whole night in a sufficient quantity of fumitary water, to
three ounces; in the morning set them upon the fire, and after one or two
bublings, add to the liquor which you press out, half an ounce of Syrup of
the juice of fumitary.

Two drams of Confectio Hamech.

Mingle them for a draught.

If her body be sufficiently strong, open a vein, yet be sparing of her blood;
the Surgeons work, which may be profitable, when the breasts, or the other
parts are infested with a Cancer, must in this case be omitted: first, because
he cannot have a full view of it, and secondly, being irritated by his
administrations, it would cast the Patient into Convulsion Fits, in regard of
the consent which it has with the brain, which by this means would presently
perish.

Ulcers happen in the Matrix several ways, either upon the coming down of the
whites, proceeding from an acrimonious and sharp humor, or else from clefts
and chaps, which are not easily curable, because of the humor which
insinuating it self, corrodes, and exulcerates the part.

The signs of an Ulcer in the Matrix are, a pricking pain about the privy
parts, fluxes of a virulent and corrupt humor, a gentle Fever, idle talking,
and sometimes sounding Fits.

These Ulcers are very hard to cure, partly because of the distance of the
place, the virulency and malignity of them, and partly also, because it is so
full of Nerves, that they hinder the coalescence, and healing of it.

The most proper and convenient diet which in this case you can prescribe, is
that which is moderate and temperate: let her surrender her whole desires to
sleep, not fearing any excess; hot meats must be avoided, and exercise must
be forborne; but above all things, let her refuse her husband in his loving
offers of Benevolence; for by heat and motion the humors melt, and falling
down upon the Matrix, they exasperate the Ulcers.

When you let blood open the black vein; a Vomit may be given with security,
and safety, but the event of a Purge is doubtful: yet if you prescribe one,
let it be very gentle for the reasons aforesaid.

Local remedies are very proper and profitable: so are Baths, and the
Injections which we have already commended to you; provided, that you add a
dram and a hall of the Trochisch. alb. Rhasis, with two ounces of Hydromel, and
the whey of Goa^^ milk.

If you can gather from the confession of the sick woman, that these Ulcers owe
their beginning to the French Pox, having first made trial of all these
remedies aforesaid, as well universal, as particular, prescribe compositions
which receive Mercury, the several forms whereof, if God permit, when we
describe the Cure of the French Pox, we shall set down at large.

CHAP. X. Of Worms, the Stone in the Matrix, and the Hemorrhoids.
THat worms breed in all the parts of our bodies is a truth not to be denied.
The Cause of these worms is a viscous, phlegmatic, raw, and cold humor,
sticking by its clamminesse to the very Matrix, or to the neck thereof, and by
degrees putrefying.

The signs of them are a dew, or moisture upon the lips of the Matrix,
slenderness, troublesome sleeps, an itching in the belly, and a slow Fever.

This is a disease full of molestation, in regard of the Fever, and the want of
sleep, which waste and consume the sick Creature.

To facilitate the Cure, a dry regiment is necessary; meats that yield a thick,
cold, and moist juice must be avoided; her beer should be boiled with rubarbe,
purselane, or sorrel, and you may purge her body with pills of mastick, or de
Hiera, cum agaries, or

Take an ounce of grass roots.

The leaves of plan^ane.

Tansie, of each a handful.

Two drams of ci^^n seeds.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of balm water to a pint, in the strained
liquor infuse for the space of a night

Three drams of the choicest Rubarb,

A dram and a half of agarick Troch.

Coralline,

Hartshorne prepared, of each a dram.

In the moring set them upon a gentle fire, allow them one or two bublings,
strain them, and press out the liquor, and then add

Four ounces of Diacni^u.

Mingle them for an Apozem.

Every other day let her drink three ounces of it.

You may make your injections after this manner.

Take half an ounce of Dittany roots.

The leaves of Tansie,

Calamint, of each a handful.

Half a handful of Century the less.

Two drams of citron seeds.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of honied water to nine ounces, add

An ounce and a half of Syrup of Wormwood.

Two drams of aloes in powder.

Meal of Lupines.

Rubarb in powder, of each a dram.

Mingle them, and make an Injection to serve three times, or

Take the roots of Costmary,

Aristolochy, the long, of each two drams,

Coloquintida,

Aloes,

The gall of an Ox, of each three drams.

Two drams of hartshorne prepared.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of wormwood water to nine ounces, every
morning inject three ounces of the strained liquor.

Or make a plaster of the things aforesaid, according to art, and lay it to
the privy parts.

The same administrations will serve against the stone in the Matrix; provided
that you are sure, that that is the Material and efficient Cause; that is a
thick, slow and visco^^ humor, the other, namely the efficient, is an
immoderate heat.

Stones many times also are generated of a corruption, or matter congealed in
the Matrix, and grown dry; the Cause is twofold; one inward, the other outward;
the inward has already been declared; the outward is a thick, cold, and
waterish meat, suppeditating matter to the Concretion of the stone: as milk,
fish, pulse, and other gross aliments, as cheese and muddy ale.

The Stone in the Matrix is known by the pain in the part, and if you press
down the Matrix the pain is exasperated.

The woman conceives not, her Courses come down immoderately, and if she put
her finger up her fundament, she may feel the Stone. Use your utmost speed and
diligence to cure it; for whereas the Matrix is as the sink, or common shore,
into which Nature empties out all the gross and superfluous blood, it may be
feared that that corrupt matter will turn to a Stone, which in continuance of
time grows sometimes to such a bigness (as we of our own knowledge can
testify) that it fills the whole capacity of the Matrix, and totally
suppresseth the Courses, breeding Ulcers full of corruption and purulency.

The Cure consists in a good regiment, in the preparation of the humors, and
in the evacuation and expurgation of them, to prepare the humors, give her
this Apozem following.

Take the roots of parsley.

Eryngos,

Fennill,

Alexander, of each half an ounce.

The leaves of Germander,

Violets, of each a handful.

White Maidenhaire,

Century the less, of each half a handful.

The seeds of grummell,

Nettles, of each two drams.

Six drams of raisins picked and stoned.

Four drams of licoras,

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of barley water, to two pints, to the
strained liquor add

Syrup of the five roots.

Syrup of Lemons, of each an ounce and a half.

Mingle them, and make an Apozem.

When she has drunk the Apozem, make ready this Potion.

Take the roots of Polypody,

Marish mallows,

The leaves of Violets,

Mallows, of each a handful.

The leaves of Sena,

Bastard saffron seeds, of each half an ounce.

Agarick Trochischated,

Mechoacha, of each two drams.

Macerate them a whole night in a sufficient quantity of Rhenish wine to eight
ounces, and boil them gently in the morning, strain and press out the liquor
with a strong hand, and add to it

Half an ounce of Electuary Diacarthamum.

Mingle them together, and make a Potion for two doses to be taken every other
day.

We have already furnished you with Fomentations, Poultisses, Ointments,
Plasters, and half tubs to bath in, which are very serviceable in this cure;
but above all things inject these glysters following very often, throughout the
whole progress of the Cure.

Take nine ounces of some emollient decoction.

Diacatholicon,

Benedicta Laxativa, of each an ounce.

Oil of Dill.

Oil of bitter Almonds, of each six drams.

A dram of Sal gemme.

Mingle them, and make your glyster, or

Take the roots of restharrow,

Marish mallows, of each half an ounce.

The leaves of mallows.

Violets,

Pellitory of the wall,

Mercury, of each a handful.

The tops of Dill,

Camomile flowers, of each half a handful.

Line seed.

Fenugreek, of each three drams.

Two drams of nettle seeds.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of water to nine ounces, to the strained
liquor add

Diaphenicon.

Benedicta laxativa, of each an ounce.

Oil of Lillies,

Unsalted butter, of each an ounce and a half.

Mingle them and make a glyster.

When these things are done, let the Midwife put her finger up into the
Patients Fundament, and artificially press down the belly upon the bones,
that join near the privy parts, that the place where the stone lies, may be
raised up: this being dried, put in a hooked instrument, and draw it out, as we
have sometimes seen it done, but afterward let issues made in her body be kept
open.

THE THIRD BOOK, OF Barrenness, and such Diseases, as befall Women with Child.
The first Chapter. OF Barrenness, both Absolute and Respective.
PRovident Nature that she might contrive the continuation of Mankind for a
long time, if not in the Individual, yet at least in the Species, has
imprinted in those parts dedicated to generation, a vehement, continual, and
inexpressible appetite to propagation: and thus by a due commixture of the
woman's blood with the seed of the man, she forms and fashioneth a Creature in
the Matrix, which at a certain, and appointed time, she sends forth into the
world complete, and perfect in its Conformation.

Wherefore in my Judgment, Conception is nothing else then a receiving of the
man's seed in the Matrix, being exquisitely and proportionably intermingled,
aptly retained, and fully perfected, and therefore by the rule of Contraries,
we may affirm Barrenness to be a Depravation, or defect of these operations.

Barrenness is either natural, and acquired from the first Elements of the
Conformation, or introduced by sickness; or lastly Respective, namely in
reference to the Man, or the Woman, the first is incurable; for no Physician
can correct those errors, which Nature commits in the mysterious purpose of
our generation; one of these errors is the straightness of those passages
which lead to the Matrix, being sometimes so narrow that they hinder the right
transmission of the seed into the vessels of Generation, or if it be injected,
yet is it received with so much pain and labor, that the Matrix does neither
concoct nor perfect it, another error is the wideness of those parts, into
which although the seed be duly ejaculated, yet it presently slips out again,
because the capacity of the Matrix is too wide; the crookedness of the
vessels also may be another impediment; for we may many times meet with
jesting errors, as I may call them, in the workmanships of Nature; thus in one
body a double Matrix has been seen, in another two hearts, in a third, the
Spleen placed where the Liver should stand, and many other such like
recreations of Nature, as Realdus Columbus has discoursed of the^ at large in
his Anatomy.

The second kind of barrenness is that which is contracted by some disease;
for whereas the seed is a certain spiritual substance, generated of the
purest part of the blood, it is necessary that it should be concocted in a
temperate womb; but if the Matrix be too hot, it consumes the seed, as a
little water thrown into a fire, is presently dried up, and on the contrary, if
it be too moist and cold, the actions that are ordained for conception are
weakened, and disabled, because cold is unprofitable, and useless for any
function: it shuts up the mouths of the veins in the Matrix: it renders a
woman averse from, and indisposed to the pleasure of the Lawful sheets; for a
waterish seed cooles the Testicles, and makes them unapt to elaborate the seed,
and make it fit to unite and mix with the man's seed; unto these impediments
Hippocrates has also added another which in his Aphorisms he calls a thick
Matrix.

From all which it is manifest, that the temperate Matrix is most fruitful,
namely that which obtaines a mediocrity, approaching to no excess, either of
an active or passive quality; by the universal Constitution of the whole body,
you may best discern the temperature of the womb, which is most fit for
conception; for such women are fresh colored, and of a rosy complexion,
gentle of behavior, affable in their carriage, merry and pleasant in their
conversation, not dull and drowsy, and full of pensiveness.

The third cause of barrenness proceeds neither from the Nativity of the
Patient, nor from any sickness, but relates to the man, as for example; one and
the same woman may have had Children by a former husband, and yet no children
by a second husband, not because she is now barren, or unfruitful, but she is
so called because of her husband, by whom she has now no children, the case is
likewise the same on the man's part, respectively to the woman; but perhaps you
will demand a reason hereof, I answer; because the proportion and temperature
of both the seeds, which ought to concur to generation, are contrary the one to
the other; for the seed both of the man and the woman, if it be prolificall and
fruitful, will be of a white, and shineing color, not thin and waterish, but
of a thick, and compacted substance, in sent, like unto the flowers of the
Dwarfelder tree, and being put into water, it will sink to the bottom; but
that which is unfit for generation will swim upon the top of the water, and is
in all respects contrary to the former; the man ought to be of a strong
constitution, well set, full of museles, and neither too slender, nor too
thick; for those that are slender, are usually too weak to get children, at
least such is are healthful, strong, and lively, and those who are to gross,
are commonly of a cold temper, have a thin and slippery seed, and are more
desirous of Venery, then able to perform it.

Barren men are commonly beardless, slow in imagination, and dull in practice,
because their seed is cold, and contains not any spirit to tickle, and warm
their Fantasies, but they sit like images, and are sad, and insociable; on the
contrary, hairy men, that have Testicles of an indifferent size, and a well
concocted seed, are cheerful, affable, ever frequenting the young company of
Maids, and Virgin^, being excited by the flagrancy of their eyes to Venereous
dalliances, and lustful speculations.

After the same manner we must give judgment concerning women, which besides
the signs aforesaid, if they be bald* and harelesse in the privy parts, they
are suspected to be barren; but if they be rough, and full of hair, it is a
sign that they are fruitful; the wiser sort of Physicians know, that much
hair is an undeniable argument of much heat, and of the strength of that heat,
which drives out those fuliginous humors, whereof those hairs are generated.

Those women that have black hair, are more apt for Venery, then any other
complexion, because they are hotter, and have their Courses in a more
plentiful manner: which Courses, how conducible they are to make her
fruitful, is manifest to any ordinary capacity, because the menstruous blood
is one of the Principles of our generation.

Other sorts of barren women must be referred to this Catalogue, as those that
are luxuriant, and the whorish crew; the former, because by frequent coition
their bodies become empty of seed, and if any at that time be ejaculated, it is
not fit for generation, because Nature is not allowed time enough to elaborate
and concoct it: and the latter sort conceive not, partly by reason that many,
and various seeds are mingled together, and partly also by reason of their
frequent cohabitation with men, whereby the neck of the Matrix is made so
slippery, that it cannot retain the man's seed.

It will not be impertinent to enquire at what time women begin to have their
Courses? I answer, that for the most part, they begin when the Virgin is twelve
years of age, and end when she has attained to ^orty five: and in all that
intercourse of ^ime women are held capable of children; ^ut if any Auhors will
affirm that women ^ay conceive, before and after those fore^med periods of
time; we also affirm, ^at this is not ordinary, but very rare; let the learned
Reader consult Marcell^s Donatus, and S^kenchius de menstruo sangui^^, in the
chapter de cita and sera Conceptione admiranda, and he will straight demand,
whither a woman can conceive without the Menstruum? I answer negatively; for
when either Principle of Generation i^ defective, there can be no conception;
if you still obtrude upon me, that many women have conceived without the
Menstruum, I grant it to be true; if you spea^ of the outward Menstruum, namely
that, which we call their monthly Courses: but if you mean it of the inward,
that is of that, which runnet^ out of the vessels into the Matrix for
conception sake, you are deceived; for no woman can conceive without this
inward menstruum; you will ask again peradventure, can a woman conceive
without pleasure? and whither i^ ^e absolutely necessary that the seeds should
be intermingled, and that the man and the woman should both spend at one, and
the same point of time? to the first I answer, that they enjoy an unspeakable
pleasure, although tha^ conduces little or nothing to conception; and to the
second I affirm, that it is not necessar^ that they both spend at one time,
althoug^ I confess that may facilitate, and much help conception, but that it
is sufficient, if the seed be received into the Matrix, and rightly concocted;
for there is in the woman's seed, such an earnest, covetous, and greedy desire,
to embrace, and be united with the seed of the man, that although the man spend
after the woman, yet she sucks it in, and the conception is nevertheless
perfect.

Thus we have declared unto you (with all possible observation of modest
expressions) the Causes of barrenness in general; and the signs of such men
and women that are unfruitful, by which notes you may discern the particular
constitution of either Sex.

It would be needless to set down any prognostic signs, because from a true
consideration of the precedent notes, you may raise an unerring determination,
whither the fault be in the man, or the woman.

Let us now advance to the cure; we have said that there is a threefold kind
of barrenness, Natural, Respective, and that which is contracted by some
disease; that which comes from the Nativity of the Patient is incurable; but
that which is comparative in relation to the woman, or the man, may have help
from artificial administrations; for if the man or the woman be unfruitful
through an excess of the first qualities, that intemperance must be corrected;
how to bring this to pass, now hear and understand; if any man thoroughly
knows how to cure that barrenness, which comes by sickness, the same man
will be able to particularize every cause that introduces unfruitfulnesse.

Now this barrenness that happens by reason of some disease, must be cured by
a distinct observation of the cause, whereupon it has dependence; if it
proceed from an Ulcer, that Ulcer must be cured; if it arise from frequent
coition, the incontinent person must curb her, or his appetite; if the Air be
a suspected cause, remove to another place; if any poison has got into the
body, by the power and malignity whereof, the spirit which is in the seed is
weakened, and dulled, you must prescribe remedies of Bezar stone, and apply such
medicines to the privities, as have a faculty to resist poison.

If the party be bewitched, as it often comes to pass, even by the malicious
art of the Devil, or his instruments, besides the ordinary helps, you must
endeavor to subdue the evil with other means, as the learned Fernelius has
taught us in his book de abdit is rerum causis; for some diseases and remedies
exceed the limits and boundaries of Nature.

If slenderness be the cause of unfruitfullnesse; you must nourish and fatten
the body with meats that yield good juice, and with moistning baths: and you
must be careful to avoid evacuations, and all other things, which weaken the
strength, and exhaust the spirits.

If fatness hinder fruitfulness; the body must be extenuated, made lean,
dried, and rubbed, and all other means must be used to dissolve and evacuate
the thick juyces; the Patient must accustom her self to much exercise,
refrain from anger, and all passions of the mind, and content her self with
little spleen; for these things introduce leanness, bring down the body, and
take away all grossness, and corpulency; for the same purpose also you may
frequent the Bath, and hot houses, for sweating does much extenuate a fat body.
If the Affect be produced by an excess of the first four qualities, as we
have already intima^^d, that hot distemper must be corrected by a various
administration of remedies, in contrariety to that excess; first with a cold,
and moist air, for in such cases, a hot air weakens our strength, and draws
out the natural heat to the circumference, inflames, dissolves, and enervates
the faculties of the Matrix, and because a hot distemper cannot long continue
simple, and uncompounded, but in a short space associates to it self a dry
distemper, therefore the aliments must be moist to resist the increase of that
drought, which is not cured without much trouble and difficulty, if it be once
introduced into the Matrix, which by Nature is a dry and nervous part;
wherefore let her drink be potentially moist, as small beer, or a decoction of
barley, but enjoin her an abstinence from wine, and all such meats as are
spiced with cinnamon, and Ginger.

Let her meat be of easy concoction and distribution, potentially cold, and
moist, that is, cold and moist in their qualities, and operation, though they
be actually hot when she eats them, it would be superfluous to name them,
having already sufficiently spoken of them in the precedent chapters of a hot
dihemper in the Matrix, and an inflammation in the Matrix.

It will be convenient to draw blood from the basilick vein, in the right arm,
and if the hot dishemper be the cause, that the Patient has not her Courses,
cut a vein in her ankle.

Moreover you may prepare cooling, and moistning Juleps after this manner.

Take Syrup of Violets and water lillies, of each two ounces.

Twelve ounces of Endine water.

Six drops of Spirit of (...), mingle them, or

Take Syrup of horage, and Syrup of purselane, of each an ounce and a hals^^

A decoction of let^uce, wash ^^cumber citrull, gourd, and melon feeds, of
(...) a diam and a half, take a pint and alhalfe of the decoction mingled with
the Syrups, and (...) her drink it at three doses.

Prescribe a Purge also to evacuate ^holer.

Take three drams of the best rubarb.

A scuple and a half of citron seeds.

Macerate them a night in a sufficient quantity of a decoction of tama^inds, to
two ounces and a half, in the morning strain and press them, and to the
liquor add three drams of the Electuary Diaprun. laxative. Half an ounce of
Syrup of Violets by infusion, mingle them, and give it in the morning.

Whey of it self is exceeding wholesome, or else you may thus compound it for
your Patient.

Take an ounce of borage roots.

Two handfulls of sorrel leaves with the roots.

Endive and borage leaves, of each a handful.

Six drams of tamarinds.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of whey to a quart, and in the strained
liquor infuse for a whole night

Half an ounce of choice rubarb.

Two scruples of Cinnamon.

In the morning let them bubble a little over a gentle fire, and when you have
pressed them hard, add

Three ounces of Syrup of roses laxative.

Mingle them together for an Apozem.

Which is of most excellent virtue to correct the heat, and distemper of all
the veins, and principal parts; this Bath also will be very effectual to
cool the body.

Take four handfulls of vine leaves.

The leaves of mallows, violets, and endive, of each two handfulls.

A handful and a half of bran.

A handful of salt.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of water to eight quarts, let her hold her
feet in the strained water, two or three hours together.

You may likewise prepare fomentations of the herb aforesaid, and bath the
privities, the Liver and the Reins of the back; and afterward you may make
use of this ointment.

Take two ounces of unguent. infrigidantis Galeni.

An ounce of Cerat. Sautalin.

Oil of roses, and oil of violets, of each half an ounce.

Two drams of the powder of red coral.

Half an ounce of vinegar of roses.

With a sufficient quantity of white wax, make an ointment according to Art.

Take the liquor which is distilled out of Cockles, Snailes, or Frogs, mingle
it with Saccharum perlatum, and give it her to drink, as a most effectual
remedy against this Disease.

A decoction of young Chickens boiled with prunes, and borage leaves, and taken
every morning upon an empty stomach, does refresh the body, strengthen the
spirits, moisten the Matrix, cleanses away the foulness that grows in those
parts, and very powerfully resists the causes of barrenness.

When unfruitfulnesse proceedoth from a cold distemper, you must observe a
contrary method of cure; as for example.

The air must incline to hot and dry, the meat must be also potentially hot
and dry: and because this cold distemper in perpetually consociated with
moistu^^, whereby cloudy and gross v^pours get into the Matrix, which is cold
and ne^vous, therefore it will be requisite to correct this coldness, to take
away the moisture, and to consume, and dissipate those windy vapors; from
hence you may gather, that this is a very frequent cause of barrenness, and
abortivenesse; and so likewise are flatulent and windy humors; for they
extremely swell the Matrix, so that the seed cannot be perfectly retained,
neither can the child be held fast by the Cotyledous.

When you attempt the Cure, abstain from Phlebotomy, unless it be preparative
only, to disburthen the oppressed vessels; when the Patient is in the spring
of her years, and at the Spring of the year, least by taking away the blood,
the spirits should be wasted, the humors should become more cold, and
indigested, which otherwise, were not the blood prodigally let out, might be
seasonably concocted, and this you may observe with the learned Fernelius, to
prescribe a Purge, before you open a vein in crude bodies, that the first
region may be cleansed; if any man shall rashly proceed to a contrary course,
doubtless with great disadvantange to the Patient, he shall pervert the right
order of Nature: for when as he has emptied the veins by Phlebotomy, he will
fill them again with that filthy accumulation of corrupt humors, which they
suck in with greediness from the first places, and so he shall not lessen, but
double the disease; the Purge may be made as follows.

Take a dram and a half of the whitest agarick.

Two drams of bastard Saffron seeds.

A scruple of Ginger.

Half a dram of Anniseeds.

Macerate them a whole night in a sufficient quantity of marjoram water, to
three ounces; in the morning press them hard, and add

Diaphenicon and Diacuicum, of each half an ounce.

Mingle them, and let her drink it in the morning.

If her body be not sufficiently open, give the same potion every third day, or
else prescribe this Glyster following.

Take nine ounces of a mollifying decoction made with marjoram and groundpine,
or germander, of each a handful.

Diacarthamum and Diaphenicon, of each an ounce.

An ounce and a half of honey of roses strained.

Mingle them, and make a Glyster.

When you have thoroughly purged the body, and taken away the cause, the parts
must be strengthened, and the distemper must be corrected with these pills.

Take a dram of right lign. aloes beaten to powder.

Two scruples of aloes to sat.

Musk and amber, of each a scruple.

With a sufficient quantity of alkermes, make thirty five pills.

Let her swallow five of them, or fewer, every morning; they are exceedingly
provocative, and withal they strengthen the brain, the heart, the liver, and
the Matrix; when the man and the woman intend conjunction, let him anoint his
yard with oil of mastick, and wormwood mingled with a few grains of musk and
civet; and let the woman also anoint her privy parts therewith, as well within
as without; for by this means there is raised a mutual inclination to Venery,
and the seed is received with a greater pleasure, and is more duly retained
and elaborated; reason it self will convince us, that sweating remedies made
of ebony, and Salsapa^illa will mightily help, and prepare the Matrix; for they
expel the windy humors, strengthen the Matrix, and dissipate the fuliginous
and gross vapors; natural Baths are excellent for the same purposes, and so
are Treacle, Mithridate, Alkermes, Aromaticum rosatum, Diarrhodon Abbatis,
Diamargarit. calidum, and Diacinnamomum; and lastly if you desire any
satisfaction from our opinion concerning Issues, we answer, that they evacuate
those cold and thick juyces which daily flow unto, and settle in the Matrix,
and therefore, as we said almost every where, we affirm the use of them to be
very expedient, and conducible.

CHAP. II. Of the shapeless lump of Flesh called Mola.
A Mola is an unprofitable and shape^^^^ lump of flesh, bred in the Matrix of
the menstruous blood, as the Material cause thereof, according to the opinion
of Galen, in sundry places of his works.

He says of the menstruous blood, that it, such as is very thick and much
hardened in the Matrix; but note, that he does not here exclude the seed of the
man, for every Physician knows that a Mola proceeds from a mixture of the
menstruum, and ^ corrupted seed, which indeed does somewhat endeavor
Conception, but cannot perfect it: neither is there any cause of wonder that
such a lump of deformity should be fashioned in the womb, seeing that several
kinds of monsters are bred there, according to the variety of the humor,
which flows into the Matrix; h^ that would acquaint himself with the
knowledge of these things, may rea^ Skenkius his Observations, and the
wonderful stories related by Marcellus Donatus; if also he would search into,
and examine the true cause of these things, let him read Laurentius his book of
Anatomy.

But why does this breed in the Matrix only of a woman, and not in some other
part? I answer, because, although the blood may congeale, and become clotted in
the other parts of the body, yet it happens so more frequently in the Matrix of
a woman, then in any other part of her body, because the Matrix is as the
common shoore of the body, where most of the excrements are exonerated.

But why does a Mola breed in women only? I answer, because women only have
an abundance of this menstruum, more then other Creatures, and that their
bodies are full of gross, thick, and tenacious humors, by reason that for the
most part they use a moist diet, and abandon themselves to a reproveable, and
disorderly course of life. This Mola is of several kinds; for sometimes it is
waterish, sometimes windy and humorall, and sometimes again it is skinnie and
bloody; this last is the most ordinary, and all Physicians have granted it,
this is that which is most usually presented to our observation; and lastly,
this is that which so often has deceived women, who boasted themselves to be
with child, and were not, and their Physicians also who told them they were
with child, when they were not.

Wherefore to avoid these common couzenages, let us be circumspect in the
knowledge, and right understanding of the signs, which are a swelling, with a
drawing back of the Hypochondriacall parts, the women grow lean, are full of
pain, and very apt to long; the belly is burdened, her back aketh, her
breasts swell, and her Courses are stopped, and that at the beginning of her
conception: but afterward in process of time, she seems to have the Dropsey,
her belly is so immoderately swelled; but you may know this from a Dropsey; for
in that the belly sounds like a Drum: the woman feels within a kind of
fluctuation, or waving motion, and if a finger be laid hard upon her belly, the
print of it remains.

A Mola is distinguished from a perfect conception, by three most certain
signs, that is, by the motion, by the milk, and by the time that a woman
bears her child; in the motion, because there is a great difference between
the motion of a child, and the motion or stirring of a Mola, because the
child kicks, and turns about to all the parts of the bottom of the belly,
but a Mola moves like a Globe, now on the right side, and anon on the left;
this also, if you press down the woman's belly with a gentle hand, removes
from the place, and returns not suddenly into it again; and from the milk
you may gather a never-failing sign, because the breasts swell all the time a
woman is with child; but in the other it happens otherwise; the time
likewise affords a never-failing sign; for if the swelling of the belly
continue beyond the eleventh month (which is the most constant and certain
period of a woman's Reckoning) and no signs of a Dropsy at that time appear,
you may warrant your own confidence that she has a Mola, but no child in her
belly.

This is a most dangerous disease; for many times a woman carries it in her
womb, the space of two or three years, and sometimes longer, insomuch that
the natural heat is suffocated therewith, moreover, in the expulsion of it,
there is no small danger, for many times it grows to such a bigness, that it
comes not away without extreme hazard of the woman's life: for a great Issue of
blood ensues, whereby the spirits being spent and exhausted, she waxes
feeble, wan and pale, and many times perishes in the very act of expelling it.

This evil has a twofold manner of Cure; one Preservative, to prevent the
Generation or breeding of the Mola, and the other curative, to destroy and
bring it away, when it is bred; and this last is also twofold; for the first
design must be to exclude it; and the second to save the woman in the very act
of excluding it.

The Preservation consists in a due observation of these things following; the
air she lives in must be hot and dry, and the place healthful, being situate
toward the East: let her keep a good diet, feeding upon meats that yield a
wholesome nourishment to the body, and such as are soon concocted, and
distributed to all the parts: let her choice also be rather of hot, then cold
meats, avoiding such as are fat, salt, and hardened with smoke, fish which breed
thick, windy, and viscous juyces, are unwholesome for her; she cannot desire a
more wholesome drink then Wormwood wine, or excellent generous French wine:
her belly must be kept open and soluble; exercise must be used, and sleep
refrained: angry chidings and cares of the mind must be moderated, and all
such things for borne, as dry the blood, and diminish the natural heat.

In the next place prepare the thick, and gross humors with Rhodomel, Syrup
of wormwood, Syrup of mint, and the like, mingled with some convenient water,
afterward prescribe this Purge.

Take three drams of Sena,

A scruple of Agarick Trochischt.

A dram of the root Mechoaca.

A dram and a half of anniseeds.

Boil them a short space in a sufficient quantity of pure water to three
ounces: then strain and press them, and to the remaining liquor add three
drams of Diaphenicon. Mingle them, and let her drink it in the morning early.

If her Courses be stopped, cut a vein in her ankle; Leeches also may be
applied to the Hemorrhoids, but with caution and wariness, least thereby you
more and more weaken such women, whose bodies are full of raw and indigested
humors, afterward you must purge her body again, with a scruple of extract.
Catholic. and as much of mass. pillul. faetidar. and lastly, prescribe an
Apozem, or Decoction to cut asunder, and evacuate the gross and tough humors*
to provoke urine, to open the obstructions of the Matrix, and to bring down the
Courses: all which virtues meet together in this Composition following.

Take the roots of smallage,

Eryngos,

And Fennill, of each half an ounce.

The bark of the root of the Caper,

And Tamarisk tree, of each two drams.

The leaves of penniroyall, and birthwort, of each a handful.

Germander, Maidenhaire, Balm, of each half a handful.

Ten drams of Sena.

Three drams of agarick trochischt.

A dram and a half, or two drams of Epythymum.

Boil them all according to art, in a sufficient quantity of water, wherein
steel has been infused to a quart: when you have strained, and with a strong
hand pres^ out the liquor, add

Three ounees of Syrup of roses.

Mingle them, and make an Apozem, or

Take the roots of Butchers broom,

Asparagus,

Polypody of the oak,

And fennill, of each half an ounce.

The leaves of Penniroyall,

And motherwort, of each a handful.

A dram and a half of annise seeds.

The flowers of Violets, Rosemary, and Borage, of each as many as you can take
up between your thumb and two fingers.

An ounce of raisins of the Sun.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of barley water to a quart. In the
strained liquor infuse for a night

Ten ounces of Sena.

Three drams of the whitest agarick.

Two drams of the best rubarb.

A dram of Epithymum.

In the morning let them buble once, or twice, and then to the liquor which you
press out, add

Sir. Byzantin.

And Sir. de eupatorio, of each an ounce.

Mingle them and make an Apozem.

Of this, or of the former let her take twice in a day the quantity of three
ounces for a week together, once in the morning, and the second time at four a
clock ^n the afternoon.

Excellent Lozenges may be made of the species Diamosch. and Diacinnamomum, or
you may compound them with Treacle, Mithridate, and Bezoar stone.

When the Mola has obtained some growth, if it be waterish, it must be brought
away with such simples, as have a faculty to purge out waterish humors; or i^
it be windy, you must prescribe such medicines, as are of a known, and approved
virtue to strengthen the Matrix, and to expel wind; and Carminative glysters
in such cases will be very convenient; so also will plasters and fomentations
applied to her privy parts: but that which is humorall, skinny and bloody may
be overcome with the same remedies as are set down at the beginning, against
the stoppage of the Courses.

When Nature endeavors to expel this unprofitable burden, and an issue of
blood ensues thereupon, with fainting and swounding fits, then you must be
diligent to strengthen the Patient with broths made of the flesh of Capons, and
Partridges, and with such things as will stay the blood, and refresh the
exhausted spirits; such as are Chalybeated wine, Sugar of Pearl, Coral, etc.

You will object that wine cannot be seasonable, because by the heat thereof it
makes the blood thin, and makes it more apt to flow away in greater measure by
opening the passages, rather then it can any way help to stay it. I answer, it
is not guilty of this mischief, if it has a reddish Tincture; for if good
Claret wine be chalybeated, as has bin said, besides that it nourishes the
b^dy, it is also a binder; for it comfort the spirits, and refreshes the
whole body, which vermes must needs be profitable for, and welcome unto a
Creature, who is hourly subject to faint and swound, and although it might
provoke the blood to flow, yet a greater good must be preferred before a small
inconvenience, and therefore give her wine to refresh her spirits, which will
be more to her advantage, then the issue of blood can be to her prejudice, for
she may perish suddenly in one of those fits, but the flux of blood may be
restrained by degrees.

Note that four things require an abstinence from wine. First, an inflammation
of the bowels. Secondly, a vehement pain in the head. Thirdly, a Frenzy.
And fourthly, a burning Fever in a crude disease; and of this opinion was
Galen, as appears in his first book ad Glauconem, and the 14. chapter.
Moreover the Patient should be refreshed with the choicest meats, and then the
Mola should be disposed to come forth by softning and loosening fomentations,
made of a decoction of marishmallowes, mallows, motherwort, Mercury,
Birthwort, Sage, Hyssope, Calamint, the seeds of line, marishmallowes,
fenugreek, camomile, melilot, and rosemary; in this you may dip a clout, and
bath her privy parts.

But if the blood come not away, rub her legs, and apply dry Cuppinglasses to
the calfes of her legs, and bind most painful ligatures about them; and in a
word make trial of all such remedies, as will draw down Nature, the humors,
and the Mola to the lower parts.

CHAP. III. Of Women's Longings.
WOmen are sometimes so extravagant and preposterous in their appetite, that
they refuse wholesome meat, and long after colaes, chalk, a piece of an old
wall, starch, earth, and the like trash, which they devour as ravenously, as a
hungry Plowman will wind down a good bag-pudding.

Now perhaps you may also long to know the cause hereof, which is no other then
the menstruous blood, especially if it be retained about the middle of their
time, and grow corrupt; for the child in the womb is nourished with the
sweetest part of the blood, and the other part remaining which is vicious,
filthy, and dreggish, noisome exhalations, especially in the middle months
arise from it, and in such a manner contaminate all the upper partts, that the
worst things are vehemently desired, and the most wholesome refused; the signs
are apparent from the depravation and irregular temper of their stomach.

This Disease is hard to cure; yet not so much in respect of the disease it
self, as of the subject wherein it is generated, which is a woman with child;
now we know that such women must be warily, and religiously dealt withal, and
unless it be in extreme necessity, their bodies ought not to be purged. By
this unavoidable abstinence the disease is increased, and the bad humor, being
long retained in the body, becomes daily more and more corrupt, by the tetrous
exhalations which ascend up from the pollutions of the Matrix: therefore having
first appointed a strengthening, and drying diet, you must endeavor to rid away
that humor, with Syrup of roses solutive, and afterward when the body is
cleansed, and free from the humor you may prescribe a gentle Purge of Rubarb,
which has both a purging and a strengthening faculty; for if we may adventure
our belief to the assertions of the best Physicians, Rubarb may be safely
given to old men, infants, and women with child; and Fallopius in his book of
purging Simples, and in the chapter where he speaks of Rubarb, says, it
dries up all superfluous moisture contained in the vessels of the Matrix, it
is a gentle cleanser, it strengthens the Heart, and the stomach by its
astringent faculty, neither need you to entertain the vain fears of some,
who suspect that the bitterness thereof may destroy the child, for the taste
of it is not horrible to nature, and besides the bitterness quickly vanishes.

There remains another doubt to be answered; namely, whether it be more proper
and advantageous to prescribe an infusion of Rubarb, or to give it in the
substance? I answer, that it purges most in the substance, or body of it,
expelling the humors by siege, which it does not in an infusion, at least not
so powerfully, because then it evacuates only by the purgative virtue which is
in it, and of the same opinion is the Author before named.

CHAP. IV. Of a bad stomach, proceeding from Vomiting.
IT is a known truth, that most dangerous, direful, and pernicious Symptoms
invade women with child, from which also forsaking of meat, and Vomiting do
afterward follow, all which things proceed from those noisome and soggy
exhalations, which are distributed into the several parts, from the corruption
of the blood; for whereas there is a sympathy, and consent between the stomach
and the Matrix, when any poisonous, or malignant vapor ascends from the
latter, it immediately invades, and overcomes the stomach, which being weakened
in the conflict, or endeavor to resist, and keep out those vapors, the
functions of it are depraved, it refuses all comfort or nourishment, or if at
any time it admit any, it is no sooner swallowed, but vomited up again; these
are the signs of this disease, and to cure it, proceed according to the Method
following. In the first place prescribe a cleansing potion.

Take three drams of Elecampane roots

The leaves of wormwood, and

Century the less, of each half a handful.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of whole barley water to a pint, and a
half, to the strained liquor add three ounces of honey of roses strained,
mingle them for a Potion; against the next morning prepare this purge following.

Take three drams of rubarb.

Two scruples of agarick Trochischt.

A dram of annise seeds.

Macerate them a whole night in a sufficient' quantity of mint water, to two
ounces and a half; in the morning press them hard with all your strength, and
add three drams of the Electuary Diaphenicon; if she cannot take down a Purge,
let her swallow these Pills following.

Take a dram of the mass. of Pills de Hiera cum agarico.

Make nine pill^, and guild them.

The next day following, give her this strengthening mixture, which does not
purge at all, and every morning let her eat the quantity of a Nutmeg.

Take Elecampane roots candied,

Marmalade of Quinces, of each an ounce.

Half an ounce of Conserve of red Roses.

Four scruples of aromat. rosat. in powder.

Two scruples of mastick in powder.

With a sufficient quantity of Syrup of ^int make a Confection.

After the use of these things, make this plaster following, and lay it to her
stomach.

Take lignum aloes,

Yellow Sanders,

And the round Cyperus, of each two drams.

Galangale, mace, cloves,

And calam. aromat. of each a dram.

Common wormwood, roman wormwood,

Spikenard, dried mint,

Of each as much as you can take up between your thumb and two fingers.

Mastick,

Storax calamitu.

Red Coral, of each two scruples.

Amber,

Musk, of each a scruple.

Pure ladanum,

Turpentine, of each an ounce.

Four ounces of white wax.

Make a Mass; whereof let him take a sufficient quantity, and spread it upon
leather, and lay it to her stomach.

Biscuit steeped in muskadine is excellent good for her: because it refreshes
the spirits, and mightily strengthens the stomach.

CHAP. V. Of a Pain in the Belly, the Passion of the Heart, and of sounding
Fits.
Women with Child do often feel a pain in their bellies, and this also
proceeds from wind, and the malignant vapors aforesaid: neither are the
swounding Fits, or the Passion of the heart produced by any other causes,
because the heart when it is shaken with this fuliginous, and gross spirit,
does frequently stretch, and contract it self, and endeavoring to expel the
evil which annoyes it, it falls into an inordinate and strange motion, like
unto trembling.

Under these diseases the woman languisheth, is full of fears and frights,
prone to despair, subject to faint, can obtain no sleep, but wastes away
daily, and waxes lean and meager.

To take away her pain, you may administer such remedies, as will expel the
wind, and strengthen the bowell; of which sort you may furnish your self with
plenty above, in the chapter of a cold distemper, and windy humors in the
Matrix*

You may likewise anoint the stomach with this ointment following.

Take an ounce of unguent. Altheae.

Oil of wormwood,

Oil of Camomile,

And oil of rue, of each three drams.

The power of lignum aloes,

Mastick,

Wormwood,

And both sorts of Coral, of each a dram.

Half a dram of aromat. rosat. in powder.

Six drops of oil of annise seeds.

With a sufficient quantity of yellow wax, according to art make an ointment.

This, or the like fomentation may likewise be very useful.

Take half a dram of elecampane roots.

Two drams of lignum aloes.

The leaves of Rue,

Motherwort,

Sage,

Wormwood,

Mint, of each a handful.

Mastick,

Cloves, of each two drams.

Boil these Simples in a sufficient quantity of water to three pints, and
prescribe the strained liquor for a fomentation.

After the use of the fomentation, clap to the stomach the caul of a sheep
newly killed. In Spain the greatest persons, and those the wisest also, take
hot bread from the oven, afterward they soake it in Muskadine, and having
sprinkled upon it the powders of red and white coral, and aromat. rosatum,
they lay it to the heart: others instead thereof use Treacle, Alkermes, and
Confect. Hiachytorum, to all which may be added, if the evil yield not to the
remedies aforesaid, a little bag to be worn upon the left pap, and made after
this manner following.

Take two drams of lignum aloes.

Bezoar stone,

Musk,

Red coral, of each a dram.

Red and yellow Sanders, of each two scuples.

The Specie Diamosch.

And Diambr. of each a scruple and a half.

With a piece of red taffata and cotton make ^ quilted bombast for the use
aforesaid.

Mingle cordialls with her drink; and cordial conserves, as for example.

Take two ounces of conserve of red roses.

Two drams of alkermes.

Macerate them a night in two pints of ^^antane water, and red wine, in the
morning strain it thorough Hippocrates his sleeve, that is a woolen bag, and
give her now and then the quantity of a small wine ^lasse.

If these remedies overcome not the dis^^se, apply an exceeding great
Cuppinglasse ^o the heart; by the force whereof the win^y vapor will
evaporate; for although ^lysters do draw back the humor from ^^ affected
part, yet in reference to great bellied woman you ought to suspect the event of
them, because they raise too great a disturbance by provoking nature down*
wards, and many times cause abortivenesse; yet if the pain be insupportable,
then inject carminative glysters, and omit all bitter ingredients, as Hie^a,
benedicta Laxativa, or Scammoniata; but to prevent all error, prescribe this
following.

Take a handful of mallow leaves.

The flowers of melilot,

The tops of Dill, of each half a handful.

Two drams of fennill seeds.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of barley water to nine pints, to the
strained liquor add two ounces of Syrup of ^^se^ Laxative.

An ounce of red Sugar.

Mingle them, and make a glyster. Or

Take the flowers of melilot.

And mallows, of each a handful.

Annise and Fennill seeds,

Of each two drams.

Boil ^them in a sufficient quantity ^^ broth, made with an old Cock to ni^^
ounces, to the inward liquor add

Calabrian Manna:

And red Roses, of each an cunce and half.

An ounce of oil of rue.

Mingle them, and make a glyster.

It might do much good, if you gave her a draught of balm water in the
morning, in which water you may s^eep lignum aloes the space of a night, and
afterward put to the strained liquor a sufficient quantity of Syrup of mint;
for this expells the wind* cleanses away the phlegm, and powerfully
strenghthens the stomach.

You must frequently and laboriously rub her lower par^s, tie ligatures about
them, and apply Cuppinglasses to them, if there be no imaginable cause to fear
abortivenesse, but if there be the least suspicion of that, omit all such
applications as may procure a revulsion of the blood, nay, let me give you this
caution absolutely to forbear them, unless she be taken with desperate
trembling and fainting fits, or swounding, in the spring time too, when her
spirits require them.

You must cause her Basilick vein to be opened, if she be young, fleshy, and
strong, for this Remedy, besides that it lets out the thick, dreggish, and
black blood, it refreshes the child also, and the heart is sweetly, easily,
and safely delivered from that burdensome humor, which (...) press and
almost overwhelme it.

CHAP. VI. Of a Cough in Women with Child.
MOst certain it is, that great-bellied Women, by reason of their being with
child, have not sometimes a free vent for their crude and indigested aliments,
either by Stool, or by Urine, or by any other E^unctories of the body; these
being unduly kept in the body putrify, wax hot, and communicate noisome fumes,
and vapors to the spiritous parts, which by their clamminesse, thickness and
sharpness, together with the bad quality that is in them, gripe, and twitch
the Woman, and force her to cough.

Some perhaps may demand, why does this Coughing happen in the last months? the
answer is obvious; namely, because in those months a greater plenty of
excrements are lodged in the body, then were accumulated at the first.

The cause of the Cough, according to Hippocrates, i^ a viscous, thick, and
tough humor, imp^cted in the Pipes of the Lungs; which humor sometimes also,
thorough that consent which is between the Matrix, and the Chest, invadeth that
part, and raises a Coughing: and these are these are set down as the true
signs of this evil.

As for the Prognostick's, you must know that a Cough befalling a woman with
child is a bad Symptom: seeing that by the least stretching, and shrinking
the Cotyledons or vessels of the womb, are many times loosned, yea sometimes
burst asunder, and from thence comes abortivenesse.

The Cure is perfected with sweet wine, mild beer, and the frequent use of a
Ptisa^* sharp, sour, and cold things must be avoided; meats also must be
forborne which breed a thick nourishment, and are hard to digest; vehement
evacuations likewise are not good; wherefore having given order for the
observation of a good Diet, prescribe some gentle, lenifying medicines to
provoke her to spit, as manna, Syrup of roses laxative, Diacnicu, and the like.

These things being administered, proceed to Electuaries, and expectorating
medicines, and especially to this Apozem following.

Take an ounce of cleansed Barley.

The roots of Aristolochy,

Licoras scraped, of each two drams.

The leaves of Asarabacca.

Nettles,

White Maidenhaire, of each a handful.

Two drams of raisins picked.

The flesh of Dates.

Fat Figs, of each three drams.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, to two pints, and to the
strained ^^quor, add

Two ounces of Diacodium.

Mingle them, and make an Apozem, or

You may prescribe Lozenges after this manner.

Take a dram of the species Diatragac^n^^. frigid.

Diaire^^,

Poppy seeds, of each a scruple.

Two ounces and a half of Sugar dissolved in rose water, according to ar^ make
them into Lozenges.

Then prescribe this Conserve.

Take Conserve of red Roses,

Elecampane candied, of each an ounce.

Conserve of Violet flowers,

Rosemary flowers, of each half an oun^^.

Two drams of meal of beans.

A dram of Diaireos.

Ten grains of S^lphur.

With Syrup of Colt's foot make a Conserve.

Meal of ^eanes, according to Galen, does cleanse and mundifie the Chest,
digests the crude spittle contained in the pipes, and makes it easy to be
excerned; beanflower water is exceeding good for the Lung^, especially if she
drink it with Syrup of Maydenhaire, or Oxymel S^i^^iticum; the same faculties
has the distilled waters of red Poppies.

The yolke of an egg taken in the morning with Sugar, and the oil of sweet
Almonds is a most incomparable remedy, and has done good to thousands.

Anoint her Breast with this Ointment, which is good to prepare the crude, and
thick matter which stops her pipes.

Taken an ounce of the ointment of marish mallows.

The axungia of a hen

Of a Duck, of each half an ounce.

Oil of sweet Almonds,

Oil of Violets, of each* two drams.

Ten grains of Saffron.

Mingle them, and according to art make an ointment; heat it when you use it,
and anoint the whole region of her Chest therewith.

CHAP. VII. Of the swelling of the Legs in Women with Child.
FRom the same cause, namely from abundance of phlegm, and crude humo^rs,
especially in the last months, proceed the swelling of the legs, face, and
eyebrows* and when I have told you that the flesh of the whole body grows
soft, and that she looks white and wan in the face, I have discovered unto
your consideration the fignes of this disease.

Women in this condition cannot be restored to perfect health till she be
delivered: yet may we not delay our helps, least a worse evil happen unto her;
for whereas the legs and feet are outward parts, and at a great distance from
the fountain of heat, they are quickly affected with cold, and mortified
through the abundance of crude humors, which many times settle in them.

You may securely, speedily, and gently accomplish the cure by strengthening and
dissolving remedies.

In the first place therefore provide a bath with chalybeated water, Saltpeter,
Sulphur, Wormwood, Stechaz, Rosemary, and Camomile: in this liquor let her
wash her lips, her thighs, her legs, and her feet, and when she washes them,
let her also rub them soundly.

If her flesh grow very soft and lank, so that you fear a mortification, apply
this Poultis following, which will exceedingly comfort her.

Take two handfulls of Wormwood,

Meal of Vetches,

Meal of beans,

Meal of barley of each an ounce and a half.

An ounce of Bran.

With a sufficient quantity of oxymel, and a brine made with lemon pills,
according to art make your Poultis.

If the coldness of the part be such, that you fear a gangreen, there is
nothing will more certainly prevent it then Scarification: for by this means
the part is ventilated, and preserved from putrefaction.

Strengthening remedies must sometimes be exhibited to expel the wind, yet you
must administer them with a good diet, consisting of drying, and corroborating
things, as Treacle, Mithridate, and other drying confections and powders,
Diacinna^om^m, arom^tic^m ros^tum, Diarrhodon Abba, it is, unto which we may well
adjoyne a decoction of China and Salsaparilla with a little stick of cinnamon,
and a few annise seeds.

Note that these remedies may properly be accommodated to the cure of the
disease, called the Vterine Flux, which happens sometimes to women when they
are ready to lie down, by reason that there is an excessive abundance of humor
in their bodies, or else because the child in their bellies is very large and
great.

CHAP. VIII. Of Costiveness in Women with Child.
THe inner part of the humor being spent upon the nourishment of the child in
the woman's belly, the dregs grow hard, and when Nature striveth to cast them
out by a strong and vehement endeavor, the* Matrix suffers a compression, by
which* compression the child is offended, the C^tyledons are loosened, and
many times the woman miscarrieth, and the child proves abortive.

The belly must be solicited, but not with glysters, because they hurt the
child, especially if it be grown to some bigness, but with Suppositaries made
with hogsgrease, and five or sixgraines of Diagrydium; for these will irritate.

Her meat should be of a moistening and mollifying quality, as mallow, and
borage ^eaves eaten with butter and Sugar; fat pott^ge also is good for her, in
which, if she complain of no torments, you may boil polypoda, sena and pr^nes.

Manna above all other things is in present case to be preferred: and next to
it we commend Syrup of roses laxative, and Syrup of Violets made with a
frequently iterated infusion.

Sometimes you may prescribe this Julep.

Take the waters of borage,

Fumitary, of each eight ounces.

Three ounces of Syrup of Violets.

Mingle them, and make a Julep.

Forberare the use of sharp medicines, for they work with an unnecessary
vehemence, and not seldom cause Abortivenesse.

Unto this disease we adjoyne a loosenes, which happens, when women are of a
cold constitution, and full of crudities, or when they have a weak belly:
Sometimes also it happens by their inordinate Longings, when they wish for a
greater variety of dishes then they are able to concoct; for then many times
what they have so greedily devoured passes down into the guts without
digestion, and causes a loosnesse through the weakness of the retentive
faculty.

We have learnt from Hippocrates to account this among the dangerous diseases;
for in the fifth brok of his Aphorisms he has these words: If a woman with
child be troubled with a great loosnesse, it is to be feared that she will
miscarry, and note well the reason hereof: for when she is thus afflicted, the
good and the bad go away together, the child is defrauded of its due
nourishment, and so perishes.

You must presently strive to stay the loosnesse with binding and thickning
meats, as quinces, rubarb, beer wherein steel has been often infused; or else
you may prescribe this Potion following.

Take a handful of plantane leaves.

The seeds of flux wort.

The seeds of Sumach, of each a dram.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of red wine, to a pint and a half, to the
strained liquor add

Srrupe of Comphrey.

Syrup of Quinces, of each an ounce.

Make a Potion.

Boil, or steep annise seeds in her drinke^ and apply the same fomentations,
ointments, and plasters, as we have already commended unto against Vomiting.

But if the excrements be slimy, putrified, and stink, you must not neglect
the use of Rubarb gently roasted, and of myrobalans slightly roasted; for these
do not only purge, but they bind withal, and strengthen the parts.
Sometimes you may exhibit Philonium Persicum, Requiem Nicholai, or Pill. de
Cynoglossa, but with a sober caution; the quantity is a scruple, or at the most
but two scruples, and that when the other things have proved unsuccessefull,
and also when the strength of the Patient will a^low the taking of them.

CHAP. IX. Of the flowing away of Blood from the Matrices of women with Child.
ALthough we made mention of this disease in the first book, where we treated
of the immoderate flowing of the Courses; yet we conceive it may be worth our
labor, and the Readers thanks to add a few things, which in the Chapter
aforesaid, were purposely omitted by us.

Blood then flows immoderately from the Matrix, either when the lips thereof
an unlockt, or when the vessels are open, or lastly, by transcolation.

The inward cause of these symptoms is an extreme heat, or thinness in the
blood; which either eats asunder the vessels, or rarefies the tunicles
thereof; the outward causes are all those things which have a power to make
thin, to heat, to open, to rarefie, and to subtilize the blood; as immoderate
cares of the mind, long watchings, a continual use of hot meats, as dishes
pepperd and spiced: also drinking too much wine; yet you may exhibit a glass
of Claret wine in a moderate quantity, to refresh her spirits, provided that no
Fever be suspected, and that her Matrix be not inflamed.

The signs of this evil are manifest; for the spirits are deficient, the heat
is diminished, the face grows pale, the feet swell, the strength decays, the
meat is forsaken and no sleep can be obtained.

The danger of this Flux is unknown, I suppose, to few women; for seeing that
our natural heat has its chief, and sole perseverance in the blood, the
loss of that blood in an immoderate quantity, must needs exhaust the spirits,
weaken the body, and at length when the natural heat is almost extinguished,
and the sanguification is depraved, there will undoubtedly supervene either a
Dropsey, or a Consumption.

When you begin the Cure, keep the Patient in a dark room, and let the air
be cold and dry; or if naturally it be not so, make it so by art; her meat
should be potentially cold, thick, and binding: as the flesh of Partridges, and
sheeps* feet, or sheeps-heads, or broths made of them; pease beans, quinces,
Services, and the like, are not unwholesome for her, and for her drink, let it
be beer, or water wherein steel has often been quenched.

Let her blood immediately to divert the humor, but in what part, there is
indeed a great controversy among the Physicians about it; but to promote the
Revulsion of the humor, if the Patient be strong enough, we tie ligatures
about her legs, and boldly open a vein in her arm; or if she be very strong,
we apply Cuppinglasse^ with scarification to her shoulders.

When the vein is opened, give her thickning Syrups, as Syrup of poppies,
Myrtles, quinces, or Syrup of restharrow; Juleps also made with the distilled
waters of plantane and roses, and mixed with the Syrups aforesaid, will be
convenient for her, or you may mingle Conserve of roses, or Conserve of acacia
with Bolearmenick, and the Trochisch. de Carabe, which will be an excellent
mixture to thicken, and stay the blood; but however forget not to prescribe
this Purge.

Take two scruples of Rubarb gently boiled.

Ten grains of the myrabolans called chebule. Syrup of dried roses, or

Syrup of sour Pomegranets, half an ounce.

Three ounces of plantane water, or a decoction of tormentill roots.

Mingle them, and make a Potion.

Procure some sleep for her with Opiates, as Athenasia, Requies, Nichola^,
Philonium Persi^um, new Treacle, or Philonium Romanum; yea with pills de
Cynoglossa, or four or five grains of Opium: all these things do wonderfully
thicken the blood, straighten the passages, fatten the body, concoct the blood,
provoke sleep, and therefore are very proper for women thus affected. Note that
the Opium restraines, and stops all superfluous evacuations, sweat excepted,
which it provokes; besides, by inviting sleep it refreshes the body; for by
sleep the aliment is soonest concocted, the natural heat retiring to the
inward parts, whereas when the Patient waketh, the heat is distributed and
diffused all over the outward parts.

Lay this plaster which follows the ointment to the reins of her back, and
with the ointment anoint her privy parts, and the region of her Kidneys.

Take the powder of Gyprus Nuts.

The roots of Comphrey,

Bistort, of each two drams.

Red Sanders,

Red Coral,

Bolearmenick,

Mastick, of each a dram.

With four ounces of Vnguentum Comitiss^ make an ointment.

After the ointment apply this Plaster, as was said above.

Take a pound of loom, and beat it to powder, with ten drams of gum-arabick
tosted by the fire, and the whites of four Eggs, incorporate them, and make a
plaster.

CHAP. X. Of water flowing away from the Matrices of women with Child.
MOst certain it is, that Women with Child by reason of their depraved
appetites, and continual intemperance in their diet, abound with crude and
unconcocted juices, which nature not knowing how to digest, nor being able to
expel them by her monthly Courses, are accumulated in a large measure,
pollute the body, and introduce a cold distemper, from whence that water comes,
which is the intended subject of our present discourse; they who live a
sedentary and an idle life, are very obnoxious to this disease; in such women
this waterish humor comes away at the Matrix, cold to the touch, slow in
motion, slimy in substance, and white to the eye, and void of all manner of
sharpness; these women look pale, their skin is lanke or loose, they are lazy,
and loath to use any exercise, they are troubled with wind, and loud rumblings
in their bellies.

Account this a difficult Cure: especially when it happens in the last months,
when we dare not administer convenient remedies, fearing to destroy, or hurt
the child; because such kind of remedies dissolv^, and exhaust the spirits,
and when the body is extremely weakened, they precipitate the Patient into a
Dropsey, which is scarce curable; or else she miscarries by reason that the
retentive faculty is too much weakened by excess of moisture.

You must therefore endeavor the cure by a drying Diet, as Biscuit made with
annise seeds, and with flesh meat rather roasted then boiled; forbid windy
meats, salt meats, such as breed a thick juice, and yield too much moisture;
almonds, chestnuts, pine kernells, and boiled rise are very wholesome, all herbs
and fruit, beside quinces and medlars, are unwholesome.

For her drink, give her binding red wine, or wine wherein steel has been
quenched: for this comforts the spirits; a decoction of china and Salsaparilla
may be profitable, because it dries up the descending moisture, and cleanses
the body from it, this potion following will do her much good.

Take two drams of Cyprus nut^.

The leaves of wormwood,

Mint,

Red roses, of each half a handful.

The seeds of quinces,

Services, of each two drams.

Parcht rise,

Mastick, of each a dram.

Half a dram of gum dragon.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, wherein steel has been
quenched, to two pints; to the strained liquor add

Syrup of dried roses,

Syrup of the juice of quinces, of each an ounce.

Half an ounce of honey of roses.

Mingle them, and make a Potion.

Let her take three ounces of it early in the morning; it evacuates the
waterish humor, and not only strengthens, but also binds the parts, dries
the Cotyledons, and retains the child in the Matrix, that it come not into
the world before its due time; after the Potion, the next day lay this Plaster
to her privy parts.

Take two drams of Loadstone beaten to powder.

Spikenard,

Mastick,

Red coral, of each a dram.

Two ounces of oil of quinces.

Six drams of white wax.

Mingle them and make a Pla^ster.

A gentle laxative Decoction cannot be inconvenient, and therefore we shall
here set down that which has often purchased sweet ease to the Patient, and
credit to our selves.

Take a handful of plantane leaves.

A pugill of red roses.

Four drams of rubarb.

Two drams of agarick trochischated.

Mastick,

Spikenard, of each a scruple.

Macerate them together in two pints of water, wherein steel has been infused
upon hot coals, the space of six hours; afterward set them upon the fire,
and when they begin to bubble, press out the liquor with a strong hand, and
add to it

Two ounces of Syrup of Fumitary.

Mingle them according to Art.

Give her every other morning fasting three ounces of this decoction; for it
gently strengthens the parts, diverts the waterish humor from the Matrix, and
with much benignity evacuates it.

When the woman is almost ready to be in labor, a wheyish or waterish humor
flows leasurely, and by degrees from the Matrix, either because of some
dilatation of the Membranes, in which the child is enwrapped, or else because
those membranes are burst asunder; and although it descend leasurely, yet a
large quantity comes from her; if this happen when she is in labor, suspend
all helps of art, for it is a good omen that she will be safely delivered; but
if it should fall out in the fifth, sixth, seventh, or eigth month, in which
there is, or may be a fear of miscarrying, then may you properly and securely
adadminister those things, which we even now prescribed.

If you demand from whence that abundance of waterish humors does come, which
flows before she is in Labor? I answer from the Membrane, or skin called
Ammion, which is fastened to the Child, and from the other called Chorion, in
which two skins, the urine of the Child is so long reserved, till the fullness
of time be accomplished, in which it should be borne; at which time seeking by
instinct of nature, for a greater proportion of nourishment, it kicks, and
tears these membranes, out of which when a large plenty of waters have run, it
comes forth into the world.

CHAP. XI. Of Acute Diseases, befalling Women with Child.
WOmen are preserved both from the threatenings, and also from the Invasions of
those Diseases whereunto they are subject by a threefold kind of Remedies: by
Diet, by Phlebotomy, and by Purging, or to speak more properly, by being
purged.

But the two latter are the more difficult, according to the opinion of Galen,
who in this has the concurrence of Avicens judgment also; you must know,
says he, that ^very disease of repletion, or the malice of a complexion is not
cured by his contra^y, but sometimes by a good regiment of ^ealth; wherefore if
it be a slight disease, ^t will be cured of its own accord; for ^he^e is no
kind of disease so fierce, says Galen in his book of Diet, which is not ta^ed
by it; but yet a moderation must be observed; for they who are near their
^ime, and look every day to be in labor, ^ant a larger proportion of
nourishment, because the child is big, and should they be defrauded of this
mediocrity, they would perish by the cruelty of an acute disease; wherefore
here lies all the difficulty to prescribe a convenient and fit Diet for such
women; for should you allow them meat and drink suitable to the condition of
women who are not with child, you should destroy the child: and should you,
out of a regard to the preservation of the child, be more liberal and
indulgent to their appetites, this condescension would espouse you to another
error, for hereby you might cherish the cause of the disease; let her
therefore be fed with meats that are of easy concoction and distribution, and
prohibit her the use of thick, sharp, sour, bitter, and windy meats, that are
hard to digest.

Having prescribed a good Diet, you must consider whether it be expedient she
should be let blood. Valesius sets down the reasons on both sides, and for the
Negative he alleges an Aphorism in Hippocrates, running to this sense; if a
woman with child be let blood, she miscarries, and the rather, if the child
in her womb be big; because the child is thereby defrauded of its aliment.
Secondly Galen says, Physicians ought not to be busy in offering helps, or
strong remedies to women with child, nor any exquisite manner of Diet; here
you must understand Phlebotomy say they; therefore it must from Galens words be
concluded inexpedient. Thirdly, if any evacuation be a cause of abortivenesse,
as a flux of the belly, or a looseness, as Hippocrates in another Aphorism
affirms, how much more will the opening of a vein be a cause, by means
whereof the aliment is taken away from the child. Fourthly, a Fever kills the
child, by wasting the spirits, and drying up the blood with the vehement heat
thereof; therefore so also will phlebotomy kill the child by exhausting the
spirits, and consuming the blood.

But all these reasons to my understanding are of no weight* no moment, no
validity, seeing that it is most certain, that the very impregnation, or being
with child does forbid phlebotomy, in respect of it self, yet not as one of
those principal scopes which withstand it, but of those which indicate and
advise to a sober and due celebration of it; wherefore when a woman sick of an
acute disease must be let blood, yet must she bleed less then the affect and
the plenitude require, because of that indication, which is taken from the
child in her womb; for her gravidation, or being with child ought to be
reputed as a Symptom which wastes the spirits, because her bringing forth the
child is a kind of evacuation.

To the second I answer, that Galen in that place means nothing else, but that
Physicians should counsel their Patients to avoid intemperance, because women
with child admit not of the least degree beyond a medioicity.

To the third I answer, that it is not always true that abortivenesse
follows upon any large evacuation; and therefore it should not only have
been said, but proved by the Interpreters of Hippocrates; for we see that it
follows not upon hunger, or emptiness, unless it be diuturnall, nor from a
looseness, unless it be immoderate, nor lastly, from phlebotomy, if a vein
be opened in the arm, wherefore, that I may conclude, I conceive Hippocrates
did intend only to prohibit the cutting of a vein in the ankle, but not in the
arm: for I confess, if a vein in the ankle be cut, the blood is drawn in
abundance to the Matrix, and so may strangle, or choke the child, and cause
abortivenesse: the like also does any vehement and exorbitant Purge.

Wherefore if an inflammation be present, we affirm that a woman with child
may be let blood without* any danger of abortion: yet with this condition, that
she be first well nourished with meats of good concoction and quick
distribution, and that a small quantity only be taken away, least the spirits
should be empaired either for the present, or the future. Moreover I like not
the cutting of the Basilick vein, because it much exhausts the blood, and may
cheat the child of his nourishment. Lastly, I counsel you to apply
strengthening, and nourishing things to the navell before you cut the vein, as
unguentum Comitissae, or Emplastrum stomachichum, or fomentations made of
wormwood, roses, mastick, lignum aloes, quince seeds, and Claret wine: and
whilst she is bleeding, let her hold cold water in her mouth, or cold beer,
that if perhaps she begin to faint, she may swallow it, and preserve her self
from swounding.

But what shall be said concerning Purges, which consist of hot ingredients,
and as Galen and Averroes contend, disturb and hurt the child. I answer, all
purging medicines are not of that quality; wherefore we may safely prescribe
manna, sena, tamarinds, rubarb, and cassia, omitting such simples as have any
participation of vehemence; and we confidently aver, that Hippocrates must be
understood in this sense, where he says, women with child must be physickt or
purged, if the matter be turgid, in the fourth month unto the seventh; because
the child in the womb is likened to the fruit upon a tree, which as at first
they fall down by any slight motion, and afterward stick faster to the tree,
but when they are full ripe fall of their own accord; so the child; wherefore
if you will prescribe any physic, follow the directions of Hippocrates, and
exhibit it between the fourth and the seventh month, because then there is a
firm connection between the Membranes, and the Cotyledons.

If you desire exactly to know these middle months? I answer, they are the
fifth, the sixth, and part of the seventh.

If you object the words of Galen, who says that a child three months old is
strong, and able to resist the injuries of physic. I answer, that he reckons
the end of the third to be complete, not till the fourth month be begun,
concerning which argument the learned may consult the Epistles of Mainendus.

THE FOURTH BOOK, OF VVomens Diseases.
The first Chapter. OF a Natural Birth, and of Abortion.
PRovident Nature at all times has not a greater care of any thing, then of
the propagation of mankind, and this although it appear not so much in the
species, yet it is clear and manifest in the individual, and thus she has
framed women to a delight in Venereous conjunctions, that they might with
greediness suck in the man's seed, and dispose and cherish it to Generation. So
soon as the woman has conceived, Nature has an especial care to fashion,
augment, nourish, adorn, and perfect the child, and at determined time to
send it out into the world, in all respects complete and absolute.

This sending forth of the child is twofold; either natural, or
preternaturall; the first is when Nature at a time prefixed, sends out into the
Province of the world a perfect Citizen, with an exact dearticulation of all
the parts, with a little pain, without any fever, or passions of the mind:
this sometimes comes forth before its time, with great pain to the woman in
her back and belly, as in the fifth, seventh, or eighth month: or else it
stays beyond the ordinary date of time.

There are several opinions among the Physicians, why a child that is borne
in the eighth month should be weak, and not healthful, whereas a child
borne in the seventh month is held to be both strong, and healthful.
Laurentius in his book de re Anatom. handles these things with much elegance,
and thither we refer the Reader, and for our own opinion, we shall most readily
declare it to be this; that I hold it impossible, that the child should be
able to undergo two afflictions, the one immediately following the other;
namely, one in the seventh, and the other in the eighth month, in which it is
very obnoxious to sufferance and danger, and therefore most commonly perishes
in the eighth month, for it comes to pass that the child is doubly, or
consequently afflicted; first with that affliction which befalls it in the
womb, and afterward with that which happens in the birth; but this
b^^alleth not the child, which comes forth in the seventh month, because it
comes into the world perfect, strong, and without the labor of the seventh and
eighth month.

Galen describes* Abortion to be an imperfect Emission of the Child, or a
violent Excretion of the Child.

The Causes hereof are many and various; some inward, some outward; the outward
cause, which for the most part is subjected to the arbitrament of sense, is a
vehement fever, which kills the child, especially if it continue long; for it
is destructive, both to the Mother and the Child; the fiery heat thereof
devoures the whole substance of the moisture, wastes the spirits, consumes the
flesh, and so weakens the body, and destroys the child by exhausting the
spirits, and dissipating the aliment; to this we have already adjoined an
excessive, or lasting looseness, because as we have said, it looseneth the
Cotyledons, and by the sharpness of the humors irritates the Matrix, shaking,
agitating, and assaulting it, till provoked Nature excern the Child: dancing,
leaping, loud crying, long fasting, do all presage that the woman will
miscarry; so also are the relations of some unexpected events, anger, chiding,
thunder, the sudden noise of some pistol or musket, a fall, the denial of
some ardent request, and an innumerable company of other such things.

The inward are reduced to three Causes namely, to the weight or heaviness of
the humor, whereby the suffocated child is overwhelmed and perishes; the
second is the great bulk of the Matrix, by reason whereof the child is scarce
held fast, but slides away, and slips out; or the small and narrow capacity of
the Matrix, wherein it neither grows to any bigness, or perfection, but
perishes for want of room; the third is a skirrosity or hard swelling, which
is an impediment to the child, that it cannot lie stretched out to its full
dimensions, but endures a compression, and dies.

Galen reckons up those signs which go before abortion; the first whereof is
an extenuation of the nipples, the second a diminution of the milk; the third
when the child is not perceived to stir in the belly; the fourth the
slenderness of the woman; the fifth, the looseness or lanknesse of the whole
belly; the sixth, the depravation of the appetite: the seventh, which is a true
sign that she is now ready to miscarry, is a pain in her back, in her privy
parts, and torments all over her belly, with a thin humor distilling from her
Matrix.

This is far more dangerous, then a lawful and natural birth, in regard of
the perturbations and violence which is offered to nature.

As for the Cure, the woman having already miscarried, that consists in the
point of preservation, namely, to prevent the supervening of a Fever, or the
Whites; this may be done by the help of those things which we have noted above;
sleep must be ^rocured; then the belly and the Matrix must be strengthened with
fomentations, lit^^e bags, such like administrations as are ^ood to expel
wind.

To prevent obortion, and to preserve the woman from miscarrying, we approve
(if the danger be threatened from an extreme fullness of humors, the cutting
of the Basilick or the middle vein; for this counsel we have the Authority of
Fernelius, who in his second book de Meth. Med. says, unless many veins be
unlockt about the mouth, in which the woman looks, she will miscarry; for the
child is overwhelmed, and choked with too much blood; but if it proceed from
the amplitude and large capacity of the Matrix, apply astringent decoctions; if
from the narrowness of the part, mollifying medicines will be most proper,
yea, and such as resolve and consume away hard swellings, may be convenient for
this cure.

CHAP. II. Of a hard Labor.
WE call a woman's Labor hard, and difficult for five conditions, or five
reasons: the first whereof is an Anticipation of, or as we use to say, when she
comes before her due time, in the fourth, fifth, or sixth month, which because
it is excerned by nature before the natural time, it is imperfect,
precipitating the woman into many straights and bitter pangs: the second is a
transversall, or preposterous Egresse, as when one foot only, or an arm
appears, or when the breech comes before the head, or when both the feet
joined together come out first, and afterward the head; the third is, when the
child which comes forth of the womb is misshapen, nature having erred in the
conformation; the fourth is intolerable pain, fainting, swounding fits, and
bitter torments about the bottom of her belly, and the secret parts; the fifth
is, an effusion or running out of water many days before the birth: which
being run out, the passages which before were slippery to assist the emission
of the child, now remain hard and dry, and become an impediment to the birth;
this humor is of no small advantage, nay, it is of admiral concernment to
facifitate the birth, if we may without procuring envy to the man; believe
Galen, who says in his book de usu partium that that humor serves not only
to moisten the child, and to make the ways slippery, but it likewise (...)
the callosity and hardness of the matrix, almost to an incredible dilatation;
to these we may adjoyne the weakness of the mother, and the imbecility of the
expulsive faculty, as also the strength of the Retentive.

The signs of an illegitimate birth succeeding, are vehement, but vain
endeavors and strivings, seeing that the child for the reasons aforesaid is
hindered from coming forth.

No man of understanding can deny, but this must be terrible to behold, and
painful to endure; for if the child chance to dye, and lie dead in the
Matrix some days, it is most certain, that it will putrify, infest the
principal parts with noisome vapors, and poisonous exhalations, weaken their
strength, and bring an unavoided death upon the woman.

We have often, and with the saddest apprehensions, beheld, how much diligence
was necessary both to the relief of the Mother, and the preservation of the
child: wherefore having provided a skillful Midwife, you must lay the woman in
a dark place, least her mind should be distracted with too much light; all
passions of the mind must be diverted by a pleasant, and cheerful
conversation, and provide such meat for her as is easy of concoction. Let her
drink be small beer, or barley water boiled with Mdidenhaire, and cinnamon,
unto which add a small quantity of Rhe^ish wine; for this brings down the
urine, moves the Courses, and facilitates the birth; boiled meats are most
wholesome for her, as mutton boiled with Rosemary; chicken broth also is good
for her, and so are the chickens. Binding, and sharp things must be avoided;
gentle, and moderate exercise is commendable; and afterward the Midwife may
rub her legs and her feet.

We have acquai^t^d you with the Conditions of an ill birth; and now we shall
furnish you with remedies to prevent, or oppose those conditions.

When the child goes out in a depraved figure, the Midwife must gently dilate
the parts with her hand, or with some convenient instrument; certain it is
that this happens very often, if a monster be borne, in regard of the ^ad
conformation of the body; if a foot, or an arm, or the shoulders, or the
bu^tocks come out first, then the Midwife by the activity of her hand, anointed
with oil of sweet ^imonds, must thrust back the child, and dispose it to a
more regular egresse: but if this cannot be done, the child's life is in danger;
and if the child perish, it must either be expelled with medicines, or drawn
out with an ^ooked instrument, as we shall show you in the chapter next
following.

If vehement Symptoms arise from hence, all which are wont to proceed from the
weakness of the Mother, or else from clotted blood destilling from the Matrix
before the birth, and that you fear a greater i^quination in regard of that
putrified blood, then comfort the f^eble and deca^ed spirits of the woman with
the Rhenish wine and broths aforesaid; when this is done, provoke the clotted
blood* and f^culent humor by strong ligatures, by rubbing her body with a
course cloth, and applying Cuppinglasses to her leg^; and if the woman be
fallen into an agony^* if (...) be young* of a good ^abit, full of blood, or of
a sanguine complexion, and if it be also the Spring time (if those about her
have strong fea^es that she will dye^) open a vein in her ankle; for thus
Nature is disburthe^ed, and the womb which was oppressed with the weight of the
blood feel^^ ease, and many times the woman recovers who was at deaths door.

To witness the truth hereof, we have an authentic warrant from the writings
of Hippocrates, who in his book de morbis mulier. has these words; if a woman
with child be a long time restrained, and cannot bring forth; if she be
likewise in the vigor of her age, and full of blood, you must open a vein in
her ankles, and draw away the blood, respect being had to the strength of her
body. Note that he says out of her ankles, that is, at one time from both
ankles, as Cordaeus his Commentatour has observed unto us; but yet in our
Climates, we conceive it sufficient to cut a vein in the left ankle only;
because our opinion is, that somewhat must be left to Nature, who is somewhat
wearied, but yet able to make a further resistance.

After the phlebotomy, curb the malice of the humors with Bezoar stone,
Tre^cle, Mithridate, Alkermes, Hy^^ynth^, with Lozenges made of Manus Christi,
Diamargariton frigidum, Aromaticum rosatum, and the like.

If great plenty of waters come away before the birth, if the Matrix and the
Scabard thereof remain dry, if the Cotyledo^s be contracted and straightned,
so that no room is left for the egresse of the child; then must it be your
endeavor to soften, to moisten, and make wide the passages, with oil of sweet
almonds, or with a warm cloth dipped in the oil, or else fill a bladder full
of this oil, and lay it upon her privities; or lastly, you may mingle it with
a decoction of onyons, garlic, rue, and birthwort.

Half Tubs are in this case very profitable, being made after this manner
following.

Take the leaves of mallows,

Marish mallows, of each four handfulls.

Motherwort,

Rue,

Birthwort,

Penniroyall, of each three handfulls.

Camomile,

Melilot flowers,

The tops of Dill, of each two handfulls and a half.

The seeds of Fenugreek,

Marish mallows,

Line, of each an ounce and a half.

An ounce and a half of Laurel berries.

Boil them all in thirty pints of water, put them into a tub, and let the
woman fit covered in it, till all things correspond with her expectations.

You cannot scandalize your judgment by an error, if you present her with an
opening, dilating, and provoking draught, as she is seated in the Tub; the
form whereof may be this.

Take two scruples of the Trochischs of Myrrh.

Ten grains of Borace.

Eight grains of Saffron.

Half an ounce of Syrup of Motherwort.

Three ounces of a decoction of madde^ roots and rosemary.

Mingle them for a draught.

Many commend this ointment following, which they apply to the privy parts.

Take unguentum de Althaea,

Vnguentum Resumptivum, of each an ounce.

Oil of white lillies,

Oil of Dill,

Hensgrease, of each half an ounce.

Saffron,

Dittany beaten to powder, of each two drams.

With a sufficient quanty of wax make an ointment.

But if nature be culpable in both, namely in the weakness of the Mother, and
the expulsive faculty, and also in the strength of the retentive; then against
one you must administer corroborating medicines, as has already been said, and
to rectify the other fault, you must adhibit loosening remedies, such namely
as are recited above.

CHAP. III. Of the Retained Secundine.
GAlen in his book de usu partium has rekoned up three membranes, which enwrap
the child in the womb; the first whereof is called Ammios, this on every side
is spread over the whole child, and receives the child's sweat, that it may
swim in it; The second is named Allantoeides, or Intestinalis, or as others
name it better, Vrinaculum, whose use is, to receive the urine; the third is
called Chorion, our Midwives call it the Secundine, which is nothing else but a
multitude and connection of vessels and membranes, thorough which as by little
springs or rivolets, the child draws blood and air; these membranes are
burst when the child begins to ^^ick his way out into the world, from whence
that liquor distilleth, as we have noted above, which makes the passages
slippery; after the nativity of the child these membranes are excerned, but if
they chance to be retained, they introduce most outrageous Symptoms, and a
disease of number, in the excess.

The Causes of the retention are diverse, for many times the Matrix is
confirmed after the child is borne; many times the immoderate passions of the
mind make nature forget her self in his duty; sometimes odoriferous things
draw the Matrix upwards, and so nature is disturbed in her purposes of
exclusion; an unseasonable drinking of cold water is a very frequent cause of
it; and so are gross meats that stuff the body and thicken the blood.

You may know by the Midwives relation, that the Secundine is retained, unto
whom (if she be skillfull) you ought at the command of Hippocrates yield up
your belief, or you may conjecture it; if the woman be sad in mind, subject
to faint and swound, full of tossing, and unquietness, if she feel a
heaviness in her womb, or a round substance, like unto a fixed and immovable
ball.

This is a most lamentable disease; for if he Secundine be retained for any
considera^le time it putrifies, and communicates poi^sonous exhalations to the
principal parts, as the heart, the brain, the liver; from whence arise
swounding fits, anxiety of mind, giddiness in the head, and direful torments.

Wherefore let it be the Midwives care with all speed to attempt the cure,
bringing down the Secundine with her fingers besmeared with oil, and let her
hold fast the umbilicall vessels, till the Secundine follow; but what if it
remain behind? then according to the Oracle of Hippocrates delivered in the
fortieth Aphorism of his fifth book; you may exhibit sneezing medicines to the
nostrills; for these by that motion compresse the upper parts, and the
expulsive faculty being irritated, out comes the Secundine.

Take black pepper,

Mustard seed,

Sagapenum of each a dram and a half.

Tobacco,

Castor,

White hellebore, of each a dram.

A scruple of Euphorbium.

Make a fine powder of them, and upon the point of a knife, or through a quill
let her sniffe up a little of it at a time; or you may prescribe this Potion
for two Doses; it has often done the Cure.

Take eight ounces of penniroyall water.

An ounce and a half of aqua Hysterica.

Two scruples of Castor in powder.

Mingle them for a Potion, to be taken at twice, or

Take two scruples of the Trochischs de Carabre.

A scruple of Borace.

Half an ounce of the Syrup of juice of betony.

Three ounces of a decoction of Savine.

Mingle them for a Draught.

Suffumigations are also very profitable to bring away the Secundine.

Take Storax,

Benjamin,

Lign. aloes, of each two ounces.

Musk,

Civet, of each a scruple.

Make a pessarie of them, adding Vnguentum Agrippe and the juice of Mercuty.
Liniments must not be omitted, made with unguentum de Althaea, de Agrippa, oil
of Almonds, and oil of Dill; fomentations and half tubs are equally
necessary, made of a decoction of camomile, pellitory of the wall, Motherwort,
Birthwort, Origanum, Sage Savine, annise, fennill, and Line seeds, unto all
which may be added oil of Almonds, and oil of Dill; Glysters must also be
injected, and with good success you may continually rub her hips and her
thighs, tie ligatures about her legs, apply Cuppinglasses, and cut a vein in
her ankle.

When the Secundine is ejected or drawn out, give the woman Cordialls, as
Bezoar stone, Treacle, Confect. de hyacintha, or Alkermes: all which things are
of undoubted virtue to restrain the malignity of the vapors; sometimes a Mole
remains in the Matrix after the birth, which by reason of the congealed
blood, and the fleshie substance, whereof it is compounded, is as difficult to
cure, as the recention of the Secundine: wherefore you must endeavor to expel
that by the help of those remedies, which we have prescribed above in the
chapter of a Mola, and here also a little above.

Note the difference between the Secundine and a Mole: this is fixed and
unmovable, but that is moveable from one place to another in a Mole, or when a
woman is troubled with that half conception, so called, a black and clotted
blood drops from the Matrix, which upon the retention of the Secundine appears
not.

CHAP. IV. Of the Dead Child.
Certain it is, that the Child dies in the Mothers womb for many causes; the
first of these is an inward cause, as a defect of aliment, or the corruption of
it; the second is a most vehement burning Fever, which by the excessive heat
thereof wastes the spirits, and destroys the natural heat; The third cause is
an unseasonable evacuation of blood at the nose, the mouth, the Matrix, or by
phlebotomy; The fourth is an exuperance, or an immoderate predominancy of
humors in the body; The fifth is a great quantity of moisture loosening the
vessels; The sixth is some vehement medicine. The first outward cause is some
blow; the second a Cough: the third vociferations, or loud and clamorous
yawlings: the fourth sneezing; the fifth, sad tidings; the sixth, some horrible
and dreadful sights.

The Child may be known to be dead by a coldness about the Mothers navell,
and by a kind of sixth and immovable weight in her belly: by a bad taste in
her mouth, and by her stinking breath.

Use your utmost activity and cunning, to bring away the dead child, both by
inward administrations, and by outward applications, inwardly let her take this
Potion.

Take a a dram of the Trochishs of myrrh.

Castor,

Storax,

Borace, of each ten grains.

Four ounces of a decoction of Savine.

Mingle them for a draught, or

Take the powder of assa faetida.

Trochishs of myrrh, of each a scruple.

Troch. Alhandal.

Borace of each ten grains.

Nutmog,

Saffron, of each five grains.

Two ounces of a decoction of Savine,

Two ounces of muscadine,

Mingle them for a Draught, or

Take the powder of Euphorbium,

Dittany of Creet, of each a scruple.

Ten grains of borace.

Five grains of Cantharides prepared.

Three ounces of a decoction of Savine.

Mingle them for a Draught.

Glystars and Suppositaries are of great concernment, and thus make you them.

Take a dram of rest-harrow roots.

The leaves of Savine,

Pennyroyall,

Birthwort,

Motherwort, of each a handful.

Origanum,

Sage,

Dittany of Creet, of each half a handful.

Fennill seeds,

Nettle seeds,

The pulp of Coloquintida, of each two drams.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of water to nine ounces, to the strained
liquor add

Two ounces of benedict a laxativa.

Half an ounce of hiera picra.

Mingle them, and make a Glyster, or

Take Troch. Allhandall.

Scammony, of each a scruple.

A dram of common salt.

With a sufficient quantity of white honey boiled according to Art, make your
Suppository.

Outwardly you may apply ointments made of oil of Castor, oil of Foxes, oil
of Euphorbium, with unguentum Agrippe, un^o which may be added a little
coloquintida, powder of dittany, scammony, the gall of an One.

Take two ounces of Vnguentum Agripp^.

Oil of Castor,

Foxes,

Euphorbium, of each half an ounce.

The pulp of coloquintida,

Dittany of Creet,

Scammony, of each two drams.

The gall of an Ox,

Euphorbium, of each a dram.

Mingle them, and make an ointment.

Suffumigations may be prepared by this form following.

Take half an ounce of live Sulphur.

Opoponax,

Galbanum,

Assa faetida, of each two drams.

The powder of rue,

Savine, of each a dram and a half.

The gall of an Ox,

The juice of an onyon, of each a sufficient quantity.

Make them into Trochischs for your use.

Pessaries must not be forgotten; therefore

Take three drams of Hiera piera in the species.

A dram and a half of myrrh,

A sufficient quantity of unguentum Agripp^.

With a piece of cotton according to Art, make a Pessary. Or

Take Ammoniack,

Assa faetida,

Black hellebore, of each two drams.

Troch. Alhandall,

Scammony, of each a dram.

The juice of rue,

Soldanella,

The gall of an Ox, of each half a dram.

Two dram^ of Turpentine.

With wool and cotton (according to Art) make a long Pessary.

If these things will not bring away the child, and if the Mother be sadly
fallen into an agony, the safest method will be, to draw out the child with
instruments, if no contraindications appear, as a bad pulse, and a difficulty
of breathing, with anxiety and unchearfulnesse of disposition in the woman.

CHAP. V. Of the Torments, and the suppression of the Courses after the Birth.
WOmen in labor must be gently handled, and carefully looked unto, both in
respect of the room where she is laid, and also in regard of the Diet which is
most proper for her in that condition.

As for the place, it must be dark, far and free from noise, or any other
disturbance that way; least she should be offended by any accidents of fear,
or sadness, or by any sudden surprizalls of anger or grief.

The Diet consists in meats of good juice, and easy concoction, and such as
are not slow in their distribution to the several parts, because they thicken
the blood, and obstruct the passages.

Let her drink be small beer, clear, and well settled from dregs. Barley water
in which birthwort and borage leaves have been boiled, is incomparably the best
drink you can device for her: and next to it we prefer Rhenish wine,
conditionally, that the presence of a Fever does not forbid it.

The whole hope of preserving the Woman, yea, of curing the Diseases which
happen after the birth, is placed in the evacuation of the feculent menstruous
blood, and therefore it is the duty of our skill to provoke, and urge down that
blood, least that evil be fall her, which Physicians call Torment.

This is a pain in the whole lower region of the belly, felt upon the privy
parts, near the small guts; the inward cause thereof is a multitude of thick
menstruous blood retained in the body.

The outward cause, is the inclemency of the outward air, in regard of the
coldness, and the passions of the mind: thick meats, as cream, custards, and
the like, coarse bread, salt flesh, hard fish, and many other things which are
hard to digest, and not kindly distributed to all the regions of the body.

You may most easily discover this affect by the signs; for the Courses are
retained, at least they come down not so freely, nor in such plenty as at
other times they were wont; a wandering and unquiet pain is perceived beneath
the navell, with gurgulations and rumbling in the guts; the woman breaks wind,
both upwards, and downwards; and this wind is bread of a thick and feculent
blood.

This affect must not be despised by neglect; for the matter making way by
degrees to the affected part, augmenteth the pain, yea, and introduces
inflammations with a Fever; wherefore, when you have duly considered the age
of the woman, the Climate in which she lives, the time of the year, and the
menstruum, you must without delay open a vein in the ankle, and not once
only, but twice or thrice, as it shall seem expedient; for by this
administration the thick and feculent blood is drawn out; rub her legs, till by
her complaints you know she feels pain, and apply Cuppinglasses to the inward
part; neither may you forget to lay Leeches to the Fundament, by reason of its
neernesse to the Matrix and the spleen.

A Purge be it strong, or be it gentle, must be exhibited the first days,
because the belly is not sufficiently open, and inclined to evacuate the
menstruum; for should you afterward purge her body, it would take off Nature,
and interrupt her in her duty, as Avicen shows in his fourth Fen. and and
first chapter.

Therefore let the blood be made fluid, and the passages kept open: and then
mitigate the pains with mollifying fomentations mixed with Anodynalls.

Take the Caul of a weather newly killed, and clap it upon the part; for by the
actual and asswaging heat thereof, it takes away the pain: and the same
virtue has the bladder of an Ox, if it be filled half full of this decoction
following.

Take the leaves of mallows,

Vialets,

Pellitory of the wall,

Pennyroyall, of each a handful and a half.

The flowers of Camomile,

The flowers of melilot, of each a handful.

Line feeds,

Fennill seeds, of each half an ounce.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of water to three pints, unto which add

Three ounces of oil of sweet almonds.

Oil of Dill,

Oil of poppies, of each an ounce and a half; use it as was said above.

Anoint her belly with this ointment following.

Take unguentum de Alth^a,

Vnguentum Agrippe, of each an ounce.

Oil of Lillies,

Oil of camomile, of each two drams.

A dram of Opium dissolved in burnt ^ine.

Mingle them for a Liniment.

Between the suppression of the Courses, and the staying of the menstruum,
after a woman's delivery, there is little or no difference; for there is one
cause of both, and that accompanied with the same signs, and therefor we
shall not diversifie the Cure, but direct the Reader to the second chapter of
our first book, where she may furnish her self with convenient remedies.

CHAP. VI. Of the immoderate coming down of the Courses after the birth.
WE have sufficiently handled the Causes of the immoderate flowing of the
Courses in our first book; we have also related unto the signs; wherefore now
we shall tell you further from an Aphorism in Hippocrates, that if Fainting and
Convulsion fits befall a woman in Childbed, it is a bad sign, because they
argue a great weakness, after which follow inexpressible tortures, with pain
in the Hypochondriacall parts, by reason of the clotted blood, a small,
frequent, and swift pulse, yea, and death it self; sometimes the woman is
surprised with dotage, a quinsey, or a Lethargy; wherefore you must labor to
stop the Courses with all your best premeditation, and caution: and the most
expedite means you can use, are a thickning, bindiug, and cold diet, as broth
made with trotters, in which you may also boil rise, quinces, or pease: but
abstain from wine; for it opens the parts, thins the humors, and provokes the
Courses, as on the contrary cold things, bind, thicken, and stop up.

Rub her hands, and tie Ligatures about her upper parts: and according to the
injunction of Hippocrates, in his Aphorisms, lay Cuppinglasses to her Breasts.

Finally, if the woman's strength will bear it, there is not a surer remedy
then letting blood; and you must open the Basilick vein twice, or thrice.

Thickning things are very necessary, and of great moment in this cure.

Take true bolearmenick,

The species Diatragacanth. frig. 1. of each a scruple.

Half an ounce of Syrup of Quinces.

Half an ounce of plantane water.

Mingle them for a Draught, or

Take terra sigillata,

Red coral prepared,

Troch. de carabe, of each a scruple.

Half an ounce of Syrup of pomegranets.

Three ounces of a decoction of red rose leaves.

Mingle them for a Draught, or

Take the leaves of plantane,

Knotgrasse, of each a handful.

Red roses,

Pomegranet flowers, of each half a handful.

Myrtle seeds,

Sumach seeds, of each two drams.

A dram of the juice of hypocystis.

Boil them to six pints in a sufficient quantity of water, wherein steel has
been quenched, give the strained liquor for a fomentation, or

Take the powder of Cyprus nuts.

The roots of Tormentill,

Dragons blood, of each a dram and a half.

A dram of mastick,

Half a dram of right bolearmenick.

Two ounces of unguentum Comitissae,

Oil of mastick,

Oil of myrtles, of each two drams.

With a sufficient quantity of wax make an ointment.

If these get not the victory; a scruple of the mass of pills de Cynoglossa.

Make five pills, and guild them, or

Take half a dram of new Treacle.

Half a scruple of Requies Nicholai.

Two drams of Syrup of poppy.

Three ounces of plantane water.

Mingle them for a Draught.

If any fault in the Liver, as sometimes it happens, is the cause of this
evil; apply cooling Epithems unto it, or instead thereof you may adhibit
Ceratum Santalinum mixed with the powders of Coral, Roses, and Camphire.

CHAP. VII. Cures of such Diseases as usually befall a woman, after she is
delivered.
We are taught by Hippocrates, that those Diseases which happen after the
Birth, are more dangerous and venomous then the rest, because they are produced
by agrosse, impure, thick, and feculent blood; for the Child in the womb
sucketh away the sweetest part of the blood for its own nourishment, which it
purifies, and reserves, the melaneholy, and thicker portion thereof being
separated, and forsaken, which if the providence of Nature do not duly
evacuate, and purge away, the woman in Childebed will without all doubt be
invaded by strong and vehement Fevers, by reason of the boiling and putrefying
of the blood in the veins of the Matrix, which, according to Galen, are very
large; in the first place therefore, let the Patient be carefully attended, and
begin the Cure by opening a vein, by Cuppinglasses applied to the calfes of
her legs, with Scarification, and laying Leeches to the Hemorrhoids.

But the Controversy will be what vein must be cut; for if she bleed from the
arm, you draw the blood upwards; if from the ancle, you weaken the body, and
contribute no ease; but if you will follow my direction, tie strong Ligatures
about her thighs and legs, having first well rubbed them, and then open the
Cubit vein without any discouragement; for this cleanses the very Mineral,
sink, and puddle of the putrified Humors. Galen indeed affirms, that if a
vein be opened in any part of the body, it will exhaust and empty all the
Vessels; but not equally, and in all respects alike: for we deliver it for an
undoubted truth, that the whole mass of blood will soonest flow away, if the
Basilick vein be opened, which is greater then any of the rest; and of the
same Judgment is Fernelius, who says; if the menstruum flow away from women
in Childe-bed, thorough the vehemence of a Fever, you must cut the Cubit vein.

At the beginning you must refrain the use of purging medicines; for although
you should make choice of such as are most gentle in their operation, yet they
stir the humors, and do not expel them from convenient places. Again,
should you prescribe strong purges, they would draw back the menstruum from the
Matrix to the stomach, and disturb Nature, when she is laboring to expel it;
and that this were no rational, and well-grounded means of Cure, but rather a
rash and preposterous adventure, any sober judgment will acknowledge, because
the expedition, the Art, and the Mystery of the whole Cure consists in the
provocation of the Menstruum.

If it be a violent burning Fever, prescribe such things as will qualify and
temper the heat of the blood; but avoid cold Simples, because they keep in the
menstruum by binding up the parts; neither may you be too bold with hot things,
for they inflame the blood.

These Glysters following will be of excellent use for the purpose aforesaid.

Take nine ounces of some softning Decoction.

An ounce and a half of the Electuary called Diacatholicon.

An ounce of honey of roses.

Butter, and oil of sweet Almonds, of each half an ounce.

A dram of salt, mingle them, and make a Glyster, or

Take nine ounces of mutton broth well boiled.

The leaves of Motherwort, Violets, and Pellitory of the wall, of each a
handful.

Pellitory of the wall, of each a handful.

Two ounces of honey of roses.

The yolks of two eggs.

An ounce of oil of Violets, mingle them, and make a Glyster.

You may make a Ptisan of Raisins, Barley, and Licorish, which will be very
profitable for the sick; and of no less efficaci^ is this Julep following.

Take Endive and Borage water, of each six ounces.

Syrup of Betony, and Pomegranets, of each an ounce.

Mingle them together for a Jule^, or

Take twenty grains of Mithridate.

Ten grains of Alkermes without Musk, or Amber.

Three ounces of Buglos water,

Mingle them, and let her drink it at one draught.

If the Disease yield not to these remedies, we judge it expedient to let her
blood again, but in the Ankle; if you suspect that Obstructions occasion the
dis^ase, as commonly indeed they are to be suspected, you may observe the same
way of Cure, as is approved in a Fever, arising from Obstructions, and

Take half an ounce of parsley roots.

The leaves of betony, and carduus Benedictus, of each a handful.

Half a handful of white Maidenhaire.

The flowers of B^rage, Buglos, Violets, or Roses, of each as many as you can
take up between your thumb and two fingers at twice.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of Barley water, to a pint and a half; in
the strained liquor infuse four drams of the choicest Rubarb, the space of a
night setting the vessel upon hot ashes, with four scruples of agarick
Trochiscated, and a scruple of cinnamon, all put in together.

In the morning boil them a little, and when you have strongly pressed out the
liquor, add three ounces of Syrup of roses laxative, and make an Apozem, or a
Decoction.

Let her drink three ounces of this Decoction every other morning.

Hereupon ensues a Lask, or Looseness in the belly, but without any pain,
acrimony, or griping: and so long as it continues free from any of those bad
qualities, you may by no means stay it; but if it last longer with the Fever,
the most prudent course will be to open a vein in her Ankle, having always a
diligent regard to the strength of her body: for this evacuation is
Symptomaticall (as Physicians speak) and according to the Prognostications of
Galen, it is either mortal, or very difficult to be judged: his words are
these; when any disease begins, if any thing be evacuated, it is not
evacuated by any help or courtesy of Nature; but all such things happen by
chance in regard of those dispositions, which are in the body besides nature;
for it is impossible that any thing should be well purged out when Nature is
oppressed (as then she is with the crudenesse of the humors) with those causes
which did produce the disease; for that the Crisis and Judgment upon this
disease may be sound and good, it is requisite that those crudities must first
be concocted, and afterward duly purged out; wherefore if the Looseness
happen at the beginning, you must neglect that, and be intentive to cure the
Fever, yet with an eye to the looseness by letting her blood; but very
sparingly, least the spirits should be wasted; if the looseness continue so
long, as to weaken the body, and bring the sick creature very low, then stay
it, but with caution, and tender wariness; but above all things, avoid the use
of such things, as will thicken the humors, for thus indeed you might stop the
Looseness, but then withal you should stay the menstruum, which inconvenience
you ought chiefly to fear.

Your safest way therefore will be to apply strengthening Fomentations and
Plasters, that will moderately bind; and with such you may furnish your
selves above.

It would not be unprofitable to purge away the cause of the Looseness, that
so one Flux might be cured by another, therefore

Take half a dram of tosted Rubarb.

Ten grains of that sort of Myrobala^^ called Chebule.

Half an ounce of Syrup of dried roses.

Three ounces of plantane water.

Mingle them, and make a Potion.

Many times this Looseness turns to the Bloudy-Flux, with cruel pains, want
of sleep, a continual Fever, and frequent going to stool.

This must be helped with Glysters of a binding, qualifying, and cleansing
faculty, as for example.

Take the roots of Comphrey, and marshmallowes of each three drams.

A handful of plantane leaves.

Half a handful of red roses.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of barley water to nine ounces; and to the
strained liquor put in

Two ounces of honey of roses strained,

An ounce of red Sugar.

The yolke of an egg.

Mingle them, and make a Glyster. Or

Take violet leaves, plantane, and pellitory, of the wall, of each a handful.

Half a handful of red roses.

Half an ounce of whole barley.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of broth made with sheeps feet, to nine
ounces; to the strained liquor add

Two ounces of honey of roses strained.

The yolke of an egg.

Mingle them, and make a Glyster.

You must not neglect to open the Basilick vein, and the Salvatella; a vein
which brancheth out of the ^ephalick vein, on the outside of the elbow, for
these administrations will be wonderfully helpful to cure a flux of blood,
arising from a distemper in the Liver; those astringent fomentations also, with
the ointments, and Epithems, whereof we have spoken at large in the precedent
chapters, will be of singular use.

The next Disease, unto which women are subject after their delivery, is a
Lientery, so called, because the meat passes thorough the body, as it was
chewed in the mouth, without any change or alteration; this is a most dangerous
disease, and therefore all diligence imaginable must conspire to stop it: no
less terrible, and perilous is that other, named by the Doctors Iliaca
Passio, when the guts are so bound up, or inflamed, or enwrapped one about
another, that whatsoever is swallowed down, is presently cast up again by
vomit, this also requires a seasonable and prudent use of remedies, least the
Patient should pine away, and perish for want of sustenance: besides, it is so
much the more dangerous, because by those frequent Vomitings Nature is
interrupted, and distracted, and that menstruous matter is driven upwards,
which should have been purged out from beneath.

But note that these Vomitings proceed from several causes. First from a
certain contagious vapor, ascending from the Matrix, and with the noisome
odor thereof, irritating and pricking the stomach, so that it suddenly parts
with all the aliment that was contained in it.

You must be exceeding industrious with all convenient speed, to free the woman
from this infirmity; the vapors must be opposed, and forced downwards, that so
by the discreet helps of art, Nature may be assisted to expel those faulty,
and offensive humors by the Matrix.

This may be accomplished by tying Ligatures about the lower parts, and by
rubbing of them till she complains you hurt her, by putting Pessaries up into
the Matrix, and applying Cuppinglasses to her thighs, also by holding things
of a strong, and unpleas^nt odor to her nose, and by opening a vein in her
Ankle.

When her body is duly nourished, and well refresh't, give her this Glyster.

Take the leaves of violets, pellitory of the wall, and beares-breech, of each
a handful

Half a handful of red rose leaves.

Two drams of fennill seeds.

Boil them to nine ounces in a sufficient quantity of a decoction of an old
hen, and to the strained liquor add

Two ounces of honey of roses strained.

An ounce of new butter.

Make a Glyster.

This being given; you must strengthen the stomach with the stomachicall
Plaster already prescribed, and with these Lozenges.

Take a dram of aromaticum rosatum in the species.

Red coral and pearl prepared, of each half a dram.

With two ounces and a half of white Sugar dissolved in a sufficient quantity
of rose water, make little Lozenges according to Art, or

Take old Conserve of red roses.

Roman wormwood.

The Conserve of Quinces, of each an ounce.

Half an ounce of the Conserve of Acacia.

A dram and a half of aromaticum rosatum in the species.

A dram of the Trochichs de carabe.

Two scruples of red coral prepared.

With a sufficient quantity of Syrup of Pomegranets make a mixture.

Sometimes the Vomiting is accompanied with yexing, and they both proceed from
the same causes, and therefore may both be cured with the same remedies: but if
it be of long continuance, the most rational and best grounded proceeding, is
to apply a Cuppinglasse to the mouth of the stomach with a mighty flame.

After all these follow two more, namely spitting of Blood, and a Cough: the
former whereof is cured by cutting a vein in the Ankle; which kind of remedy
is approved by Hippocrates, in the thirty two Aphorism of his fifth book,
saying, a woman is freed from spitting or vomiting blood, if the menstruum
break forth, and frequent experience justifies this truth; for diverse women,
by the omission hereof, as Galen has observed in his book of Letting Blood,
fell into the Tissick, and other most lamentable diseases.

But the Cough is twofold, either dry, or moist; the cause of the former is a
certain, contagious vapor communicated to the spiritous parts, provoking the
Midriffe, the Lungs, and the other instruments of breathing, to expel
whatsoever is faulty, and offensive; the cause of the latter is a crude, and
raw humor, ascending up from the Matrix to the Chest, and sticking fast unto
it.

This is cured by rubbing the parts, and tying straight Ligatures about them,
by Pessaries, Glysters, Cuppinglasses, opening a vein in her ankle, by
Electuaries, Ptisans, expectorating Potions to cleanse away the bad humor, by
laying on Empl^strum Resumptivum Pectorale, or Vnguentum de Althaea, among
which you must mingle Cummin seeds and Saffron.

After the same manner Women in Childbed are troubled to fetch their breath,
because by a mutual, and frequent stretching, and compression of the Chest the
vapors are transmitted to the Lungs, and they who feel themselves molested
with such vapors do seldom escape that Cough we last mentioned.

Moreover to this Catalogue belongs the Pleurisy, which is a most acute, and
therefore a most dangerous disease; this you may discern by these signs
following, an acute and burning Fever, a Cough, difficulty to fetch breath, a
pricking pain, and a hard pulse.

Open a vein, and you overcome this without any further remedy; but the
question will be, in what part of the body? I answer, if it be a most violent
Pleurisy, that torments the sick, if her Courses come down after a right
manner, and yet the evil abates not, then cut a vein in her ankle; but if
this avail not, so as the Patients life is now in danger, then open a vein in
her arm, especially, if she be full of blood, that the vicious humor may be
drawn away from the inflamed place, and seasonably evacuated; this advice of
mine is justified by the approbation of Mercurialis Mercatus, Alphonsus a
Castro, Meschius, Valeriola, and the leared Zacutus Lusitanus; neither will it
be incovenient; if you interchange this administration of phlebotomy, namely,
first to draw blood from the ankle, then from the arm, then from the ankle
again, and so keeping turns, as need shall require; for thus you will give
ease, both to the part inflamed, and likewise to the Matrix, which is the part
mandant, or that from whence the evil is communicated and distributed to the
other regions.

This being carefully performed, your next design must be to mitigate, and
take away the pain with fomentations, liniments Electuaries, and Ptisans.

Take an ounce of the roots of marish mallows.

The leaves of mallows, marish mallows, and white Maidenhaire, of each a
handful.

Half a hundfull of the flowers of dwarfelder.

Annise and Line seeds, of each half an ounce.

Boil them in water to a quart, and give her the strained liquor to drink at
several times, then

Take a dram of unguentum de Althaea.

The Axungia of a hen, and new butter, of each half an ounce.

Two ounces of oil of sweet Almonds.

Mingle them, and make an ointment, then

Take Syrup of Violets compound, and Syrup of Maidenhaire, of each an ounce and
a half.

Mingle them, and make a mixture to be licked from the point of a knife.

Afterward.

Take two ounces of cleansed barley.

An ounce of raisins picked, stoned and washed.

Two drams of the best Licoras.

Boil them in rain water to a quart, and give her the strained liquor to
drink.

Note that in all diseases of the Membranes, the upper part of the throat, and
the Jaws, yea, and in the Falling Sickness, the Apoplexy, the Palsy, and the
Convulsions, you must begin the Cure by letting blood, if plenty of blood give
occasion to the Disease.

The swelling of the feet is the last of all those Symptoms, which invade a
woman after her Delivery; and this proceeds from a disorderly, and negligent
Diet, during the time of her being with Child; for by that means raw humors
are bread in her body, which after her Delivery settle in her legs; as being
cold parts, full of nerves, and far distant from the Liver, which is the
fountain of blood, in which places you shall perceive soft kind of swellings,
which being crushed down, retain the print of your fingers.

This must be cured with strengthening administrations, and such medicines as
are good to expel the raw humors, and likewise with such as will moderately
bind; for should you give her strong binders, you would thereby allure the
humors toward the upper parts; therefore to avoid that error, prepare this
Bath following.

Take two ounces of marish mallow roots.

The leaves of mallows,

Mint,

Wormwood,

Sage,

Rosemary, of each two handfulls.

The leaves of red roses and camomile,

Of each a handful.

An ounce of Laurel Berries.

Saltpeter,

Sulphur, of each half an ounce.

Boil them to eight pints in a sufficient quantity of water, wherein steel
has been often quenched, and let her put her feet into the strained liquor.

Then take the dreggish substance which remains, after the straining of the
said liquor, and add to it

The meal of Orobus,

And Lupines, of each three ounces.

Four ounces of Oxymel.

With a sufficient quantity of brine, made with the juice of Lemmons, reduce
them into the form of a Poultis, and lay it to the swelled feet.

But if the humor fall down again into the legs, by reason of an habitual
distemper in the upper parts, you must either make an issue upon the knee, or
else provoke her to sweat, with a decoction of Salsaparilla, and China roots;
for by the virtue of these Simples the humor is made thin, and more apt for
expulsion, and the lower parts wax more firm and strong.

CHAP. VIII. Of an inflammation in the Matrix after a woman's Delivery.
THe Cause of an Inflammation in the Matrix is a hot and boiling blood retained
in the vessels, and putrefying.

The signs are a pain in her secret Parts, a vehement Fever, much heat,
swelling, and a great itching about all the parts of the Matrix; hereupon the
woman becomes very prone to fainting fits, to lie as if she were stupefied, to
talk idely, and the like, by reason of the consent between the Matrix, and the
other parts, as we have already showed. Lastly, she can neither go to stool,
nor make water, without great difficulty, because the parts are so exceedingly
swelled.

This is a most terrible disease, as well in regard of the Symptoms, as of the
Imposthume, which, if it be broken, leaves behind it an incurable Ulcer, from
whence filthy and noisome exhalations are communicated to the principal parts,
which is an unerring sign of Death.

The Cure is Universal, and Particular: the universal is the opening of a
vein in the ankle, regard being had only to the part inflamed, and the motion
of nature; but afterward, we deny not, but it may be expedient, and
efficacious to draw blood from the arm, in respect of the Fever.

The Particular is accomplished by lenifying medicines, and by washing the part,
the one is done by a Cataplasm made after this manner.

Take two ounces of the crumbs of white Bread.

The Pap of roasted apples.

The Pulp of cassia newly drawn out, of each an ounce.

Half an ounce of the mucilage of Fleabaneseeds.

Ten grains of Saffron.

Make a Cataplasme according to Art.

But if the Inflammation seem to hasten to suppuration, which you may perceive
by the Fever, and the vehemence of the pain, then you must discreetly assist
Nature, by an application of suppurating medicines, but by no means adventure
to give her a purge: remedies of the former sort are as follow.

Take an ounce of marish mallow roots.

The leaves of mallows.

And marish mallows, of each a handful and a half.

Line seed,

Fenugreek, of each half an ounce.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of breast-milke unto softness; pulp them
thorough a Sieve, and add to the pulp

Two ounces of Hog's Grease.

An ounce of oil of roses.

Make your Cataplasm.

When you have overcome the Imposthume, use this Injection with a Syringe.

Take six ounces of a decoction made with wole barley, and rose leaves.

An ounce and a half of honey of roses strained.

Make an Injection, and wash the ulcerated part very often every day, till the
pain cease, and the Ulcer be healed, though she continue the use thereof for
weeks, months, and years.

CHAP. IX. Of too little, and too much Milk.
WAnt of milk arises from these three several Causes. First, from the fault
of the milk. Secondly, from some impediment which hinders the transmission of
the milk to the breasts; or if it be transmited, it is not retained. Thirdly,
a penury, or lack of blood, either for want of necessary food, or by reason of
some immoderate issue of blood from the Matrix, or from some other part.

The Signs of these things are the slenderness of the breast, a sharp taste
in the milk, and a bad smell; other signs you need none, because the disease
is manifest of it self; in the mean time you must take heed, that this
corrupt milk do not settle in the Breasts, and exulcerate them; wherefore
beginning with the first cause, you must correct and amend the faults of the
milk by purging out the bad juice: if phlegm abound, give her hot things, not
only to purge her, but also to nourish her body; if choler be predominant,
prescribe cooling and moistning things.

But when the Breasts do neither draw the blood nor retain it, you must be
solicitous to strengthen the Breasts by drawing blood unto them; to this
purpose you must rub her body, apply fomentations, and Cataplasmes, that will
moderately heat, and expel, made of marish mallow roots, the leaves of
Violets, mallows, melilot, fenugreek, the crum of white breead and the yolks
of Eggs.

Moreover, if the parts want nourishment, then let her seed upon the choicest
dishes, or at least appoint such things for her, as are good to increase blood,
and milk, as eggs, butter, milk boiled with fennill, par snips, and the like.

Rock her to sleep, by peaceable and sweet admonitions, and exercise your wits
to keep her from anger, melancholy, and all other perturbations of the mind.

It will not be hurtful, but rather expedient to allow her the use of good
wine, but then remember to put into it the powder of earth worms.

Contrary to this is the immoderate plenty, and superfluity of the milk,
which you may easily discern by that which comes away, therefore if you
suspect that the blood will congeale and grow clotted, then lessen the
abundance of the mike, with a thin and spare diet; enjoyne her to be very
abstemious and moderate in her drink, and if her Courses be stopped, open a
vein in her ankle; but otherwise in her arm, rub her legs, and use all other
means to divert the blood from the Breasts; but above all things, let her use
Exercise, which is the best remedy in this case.

Yet if the blood be congealed, and if by the exhalation of the thinner part,
the rest wax thick, then you must administer attenuating and drying medicines
to cut, make thin, and dissolve the clotted blood; of this sort are Emplastrum
de muciloginibus, and emplastrum de Meliloto, among which you may mingle the
juice of Smallage, and Frankincense.

CHAP. X. Of the Inflammations of the Breasts.
VVOmens Breasts, those delicate and tender parts, are not only frequently
afflicted with the congealing of the blood, but they are likewise very apt to
be inflamed, by reason of a mixed plenty of blood and milk, whereby they swell
exceedingly, look of a high, red color, and are full of pain and soreness;
This Inflammation is accompanied with a Fever, which the Physicians call
Lactaria, that is by Interpretation, the Fever of the milk, or the milky
Fever; and the learned Midwives call it Pila, because presently, unless the
Breasts be well chafed and rubbed, there appears to the touch an exact
resemblance of a Ball; This takes not beginning from any venomou^ humor
contained in the Breasts, but is rather to be accounted a Symptom, driver to
the Breasts by the motion of Nature, and the blood; it is likewise very hardly
distinguishable from a true Fever, in which all the signs are conspicuous and
manifest, as appear in this, the swelling in the Breasts only being excepted,
which is not some Ball accidently swallowed with the drink, as many learned
men have vainly, and irrationally surmised; for how is it possible, that a
Ball should slip from the stomach thorough those slender passages of the
Messentery, and the Liver the hollow vein, and the Axillary veins, to the
region of the Breasts; therefore in my Judgment, it is a phlegmatic matter,
ravelled as it were by the burning heat of the part into long threads, as it
happens to the slow matter contained in the Kidneys, and the Bladder.

If the Fever and the Inflammation be urgent, you must immediately command a
vein in her ankle to be opened, if it happen presently after her delivery: but
if a month be overpast, let the Basilick vein on the same side be opened.

You must prescribe medicines to repel the humor, but be careful that they
be not extreme cold, least the humor should retire back to the principal
parts; a Glyster also must be first injected; and you may afterward prescribe
this Poultis following, which will mollify and dissolve the humor, and be
very profitable.

Take an ounce of marish mallow roots.

The leaves of mallows,

Violets,

Plantane, of each a handful and a half.

Boil them altogether in milk to softness, and pulp them thorough a Sieve,
and to the pulp add

Four ounces of the crum of white Bread.

A scruple of Saffron.

Mingle them, and make a Poultis.

Many times the Breasts and the Nipples are full of chaps, which exceedingly
torment and pain a woman: these are caused by a sharp waterish humor falling
down upon them, and may be cured with mallows boiled in breast-milke, or with
the white of an egg, or with Lilly leaves moistened in oil, or with Vnguentum
Pompholygos, or which will exceed all the former with oil of Nutmegs; among
which you may mingle bolearmenick with Cerus, and some drops of oil of Lead,
or some other oil by it self.

CHAP. XI. Of wrinckles remaining in the Matrix after a Woman's Delivery, and of
the means to contract the Matrix.
When a woman is delivered, there appear Chaps, or Wrinckles, by reason of
the coming forth of the Child, and the flux of the Menstrunm: these we have
often cured with gentle, astringent medicines, having first administered this
Injection thorough a Syringe.

Take half an ounce of Comphrey roots.

Two drams of Cyprus nuts.

Pomegranet flowers,

Red roses, of each as many as you can contain between your thumb and two
fingers at twice.

Myrtle seeds,

Shumach seeds, of each a dram.

Boil them in a sufficient quantity of red wine, to sixteen ounces, and
reserve the strained liquor for an Injection; or

Take a dram of Comphrey roots.

Cyprus nuts, and the seeds of rhois,

Of each half a dram.

As many red roses as your thumb and two fingerscan grasp.

Beat them to a gross powder, and with an ounce of unguent. Pompholygos, and a
piece of Cotton, make a Pessary.

With the same medicines, intermingling some other things that are greater
binders, you may help the looseness, and wideness of the secret parts; which
if they be not seasonably and prudently contracted, may possibly be a cause
that the woman will have no more Children. Some Midwives use water wherein
she will has been infused, which we dislike not, provided that when you boil
the water, you put in a quantity of Sumach seeds, Medlar seeds, and red Roses.

FINIS.

