A COMBAT BETVVEEN SATAN tempting: And a CHRISTIAN triumphing: In the Comfort
of the Creed.
Satan. WHY do with hope (vild wretch) thy soul deceive?
Thou must be damned.

Christian. Not so, for I believe

Sa. Yea so do I: and yet I feel Hells Rod.

Chapter Thou but beleev'st God is, I trust in God

Sa. What thou a sinner trust? thou temp'st him rather.

Chapter Who should the poor Child trust, if not the Father

Sa. The soul that sins must dye, thy sins are weighty.

Chapter Yet God can pardon them, for he is Almighty,

Sa. But he is of wicked men a just forsaker.

Chapter Yet kind to what he made, and he is my maker

Sa. Why has he made thee smart thus from thy birth?

Chapter This is but love from the Lord of Heaven and Earth,

Sa. Hark, God and Angels cry thou do displease us.

Chapter And yet in God's my comfort and in Jesus

Sa. In sin thou art born and bred, and do persist.

Chapter As sin abounds in me, so grace in Christ

Sa. Why speak of grace, the Law makes thee undone?

Chapter Nay then, why did God send his only Son

Sa. Are not all sinners of his Son abhord?

Chapter No, none that strive to serve him as our Lord,

Sa. But God cannot die, of hope thou art bereaved.

Chapter But yet his manhood may which was conceived

Sa. How can man made of woman save the lost?

Chapter Yes, being made perfect by the holy Ghost,

Sa. But thou by nature art a wretch forlorn,

Chapter And yet to me in mercy a child is borne

Sa. But thou art filthy and thy heart wants purging.

Chapter His blood does cleanse me who came of the Virgin

Sa. Presumptuous men thus to tempt Christ, how dare ye?

Chapter We tempt not Christ, we joy in Christ, with Mary,

Sa. Thou hop'st in vain, from him sin pulls thee asunder.

Chapter Both sin and sinful men, he suffered under

Sa. What suffer sin, yet just? thy folly I smile at.

Chapter The sin was mine; he just, says Pontius Pilate,

Sa. But yet the punishment of thy sins abide.

Chapter No, for to quit them, he was crucifide,

Sa. Oh but the sting of Death will wound thy head.

Chapter No, Christ pulled out that sting when he was dead

Sa. Can he give life that lies himself interd?

Chapter Yes, with him my sins are hid and buried,

Sa. Thy poor and mean estate shows Christ's offended.

Chapter Shall I think much to stoop when he descended

Sa. Fear not Deaths wound, nor in the grave to dwell?

Chapter Christ went, that I might not go into Hell;

Sa. How came thou free from sting of death or pain?

Chapter By Christ who on the third day rose again
And so captivity he captive led.
Rising in glorious triumph from the dead,
Nor was my Saviors glory herein ended,
But after he was risen, he ascended
To fit a place for me, and so has given
Sure hope that I shall follow him into Heaven
Where now, in all my grief and dumpish fits
He hears my prayers, there he rests and sits
Observe his Majesty, he does not stand
Inferior like, but sits at the right hand
Not of some earthly Prince, but his abode
Is in the high and heavenly house of God
Where as his only Son he rules; the rather
Can he make my request known to the Father
That for his sake my sins which he found weighty,
May be forgiven by him which is Almighty,

Sa. If the art so sure, then sin, here is thy defense,
That Christ's in Heaven.

Chapter Oh no he sees from thence
And waits till wicked men fill up the sum,
And measure of their sins, then shall he come
Riding with thousands Saints on clouds all spread
In flames of fire to judge the quick and dead;

Sa. Then thou condemned shall be: O fear and grieve.

Chapter Satan, I still deny it, for I believe

Sa. In whom believe, that thus thou vants thy boast?

Chapter In Father, Son, and in the holy Ghost,
Who near forsake nor leave in desperate lurch
Those who are of the holy Catholic Church,
Let him but take me to himself in union,
And give me with his people the Communion
I Am safe; for he to help them never faints,
Who keep the bond of peace, and faith of Saints,

Sa. Thy ways are crooked, and in them no evenesse.

Chapter In me's the sin, in God is the forgiveness
And here my never ending joy begins
To know that he is the pardoner of sins,
Heel therefore take me to his high protection,
When the last trumpe shall sound the resurrection
Void sin and Satan both, my soul why load ye
With desperate words? this temple of the body,
Wherein corruption now and sin is rife,
Shall come to perfect glory and the life
Not such vain earthly life which now is wasting:
But that blessed life of Heaven that's everlasting:
O Lord increase my faith, and grant that then
I may behold thy glorious face Amen.
Take but this shield of faith to arm your hearts,
So shall you quench all Satan's fiery darts,
And though your nature do in name betray,
This faith shall make your honors last for ay.

Printed for the good of all true and Loyal Subjects, 1648.


