A PATTERN OF Universal Knowledge, In a plain and true Draught: OR A
DIATYPOSIS, Or Model of the Eminently Learned, and Pious Promoter of Science in
general, Mr. John Amos Comenius.

Shadowing forth the largeness, dimension, and use of the intended Work, IN
AN ICHNOGRAPHICALL AND Orthographicall Delineation.

Translated into English, by Jeremy Collier, Mr. of Arts, late Fellow of St.
John's College in Cambridge.

London, Printed by T. H. and are to be sold by THOMAS COLLINS, Bookseller in
Notthampton, 1651.

portrait of Johan-Amos Comenius IOHAN-AMOS COMENIVS, MORAUVS. A AETAT

Exsump: M: S: G. Glouer fe:

Loc, here an Exile! who to serve his God,
Has sharply tasted of proud Pashurs Rod,
Whose learning, Piety, and true worth, being known
To all the world, makes all the world his own
Are to be sold by T. H. and. I. C. F: Q:



To his much honored, and highly esteemed Friend, Mr. Sam. Hartlib, Esquire
Worthy Sir:
I Have found your large commendations divulged by a general fame of Learned
men, both foreign and domestique, abundantly and superlatively true, by my
own experience, how your whole endeavors are directed solely to the happy
furtherance and benefit of the Community; Nor can I omit Mr. Comenius his
Renowned mention of you as his Especial Friend [ Page 172. Lin. 21.] viz. that
with a certain fervent and extraordinary desire of promoting the Public good,
as far as possible may be, you brought him and his endeavors to be first
made Public. It was indeed, by your means alone, that we came to enjoy his
Prodromus, and to you we must stand engaged for the communication of any other
of his choice Works, you being the singular confident and principal Agent in
carrying on, and acquainting of the world with his Labors. I cannot therefore
but most deservedly Dedicate this Translation of Mr. Comenius his Diatyposis,
to your self, whom with the Author, I shall ever honorably respect. I
likewise conceive my self bound to notify thus much to the Public, that
waving my own high opinion of Mr. Comenius, this work of his although but an
Idea has the great commendation of diverse able Scholars, to whom it has been
imparted, and is gallantly approved by them, as containing a very rational
discourse in the series and contexture of that matter, so far as it is touched
and handled by him. And that it will be a thing much to be deplored, that such
pious and profitable designs, should not be encouraged by some eminent and
correspondent favors from the managers of public concernments in our own
Nation at this time of reformation especially; since he was invited hither by
certain Honorable and active Patrons of Learning in this present Parliament,
and disappoynted of the preferment they did sincerely intend him, in regard of
the great distractions which happened in the State at that juncture of time
when he came over. Now Reverend Sir, for your own part, let no cross
accidents disanimate you in your earnest prosecution of a general good, but
may you cheerfully encountering with, and vigorously breaking through all
intervening encumbrances, still continue and persist in this laudable way of
deserving well of the Christian and learned Commonwealth; and since I have not
lately heard of what Mr. Comenius has done in his Philologicall or
Pansophicall undertakings, be pleased to let me participate therein, and you
shall find none readier to serve you then,

SIR, Your entirely loving, and duly regarding Friend, J. C.

The Printer to the Reader.
When as the Copy of this Diatyposis growing scarce, had raised in many, a
great desire to have a view thereof, and there were some barely carried on with
Report very earnest that it might come to their hands: I determined with the
Authors permission to reprint this little Book for their sakes that favor
these Studies, to the end that the Manner and Method of the Panfophicall
purpose might be better understood, and that the grave importance of this Noble
Subject might make others to lend their care and pains heereto. Make use then
of these (good Reader) and as much as lies in thy power help on the Authors
Designs.

WE consulting about (not only in our retired thoughts, but openly) the
structure of the Temple of Wisdom, to the honor of God Almighty, the common
use of mankind, and Praeludium of the life to come, it is meet we imitate the
skill of wise Architects, who use not to attempt the rearing of any great work
without a foregoing delineation thereof. Which thing, besides the delight, (for
the mind, since it is naturally carried out to the future, is much taken with
the foresight of what is likely to ensue) is of notable use for the saving the
loss of charges, time, and credit. For having erected the proportion or Idea
of a future work, we may readily perceive whether the fullness of the whole,
the Symmetry of the parts, and the comeliness in each regard sufficiently
agree. And then if any thing shall be observed to be defective, or redundant,
otherwise then may be thought expedient, we have liberty to add, take away,
and alter, in reference to necessity or our own pleasure. An exacter account
likewise of the expenses may be collected, while out of such a platform the
length, breadth, and height, with the matter, form, worke-men, instruments, and
time thereto requisite are foreseen: which things compared with his abilities,
the Architect Judges whether or no the work may be safely undertook. Lest it
should befall him, as our Savior hints in the Parable, to be laughed at for
his labor, if happily some should say: This man began to build and was not
able to finish (Luke 14.30.)

Now Architects are wont in a threefold way to conceive and set out in a
Pattern the form of a future work, In plano, or upon a flat, or level, as
in laying the foundations; in front, or to outward view, as shall be seen in
setting up the walls; last of all most fully, as all things shall cohere among
themselves within and without, according to their several dimensions. They
call the example of the first kind. Ichnography; of the second Orthography; of
the third Scenography and Proplasma, in Latin a Model. We are minded to
follow all these in this our Diatyposis. And first to pourtray the mere naked
foundations of the Pansophicall Temple, declaring what work it is we wish for;
and why it is necessary care should be taken about the framing thereof. This
shall be our Ichnography.

We shall afterward unfold its Requisites, as well in respect of the matter as
the outward form: which all represent the raised fashion of this Temple, and
it shall be termed Orthography.

Lastly, we will endeavor to describe all the parts and their number, order
and use, which shall make up the entire plot of the Pansophicall Temple. But we
will take notice in all these of this rule amongst Master Builders, which
requires the draught be without any neater kind of workmanship: that is, not
to be polished, varnished with colors, adorned with Pictures, but bare and
plain, that a sincerer censure may be passed upon the Work itself.

Thou, O God, who alone have found out all the ways of understanding; have
known them only, and only can reveal them to any one: have mercy upon us,
and what we set upon to thy glory command to be such, that those which shall be
the builders of thy Temple of Wisdom, may suppose it spoken to them, which
formerly thou saydst unto thy servant Moses: Behold and do according to the
Pattern which was showed thee. Exodus 25.40.

These Verses should have been placed before the Effigies.
VIew him who as Great Atlas in firm sort,
The frame of General Science does support,
Whose Noble words do not unlike appear
For fulness, plainnes, Truth, and Method clear,
To silver figures, which enclosed hold
Bright tempting Apples of the fruit of gold.
And that thou may assured be of this,
Do but survey his Diatyposis.
J. C.

THE ICHNOGRAPHY OF THE TEMPLE of WISDOM, Comprised in APHORISMS.
I. WE Style the TEMPLE of WISDOM a Book in which to man, as a Creature, made
to view the works of the Creator, all things which are, shall be, or have been
any where, are offered for his Contemplation, to that end, and in that order,
by the means disposed to the end, as by the help of them all, he may be led,
and brought on to him, of whom, through whom, and to whom, are all things, God,
and to that eternal happiness which is in him.

II. For this is to be wise at length, to understand and provide for our latter
end (as God speaks, Deuteronomy. 32.29.) least a man swerve from his scope,
happiness, to the enjoyment of which with his Maker he was created: even as
that desire which is natural to him discovers, whereby every man wishes well
to himself, and that perpetually. For he abhors death and ruin, and courts to
lead a most pleasant life, and hence he declines all kind of evil and
adversity.

III. But since men have so bruitishly degenerated, by their heinous falling
into sin, continued for many ages, and always increased that they neither
apprehend, nor care to understand Gods purpose in their Creation, nor those
desires implanted in them naturally, much less the ways poynting to an happy
life; they are to be roused up out of their drowsinesse by all means and
devices possible.

IV. In as much as we all stand obliged to be dispensers of divine goodness,
and to be desirous to impart so much light to others as we have received from
God our selves. To the end that through the multiplication and different
mutual reflection, repercussion, and mixture of rays, light may come to an
increase in their minds, to see and find out the Father of lights, and to
walk in his light.

V. Now although God himself by his own virtue, upholds the World which he
has created, beautifies it with his light, and governes it by his providence:
yet because what he does ordinarily, he does by ordinary means, it comes to
pass that one creature by another is formed, reformed, cherished, and directed
to their ends through his disposal.

VI. We may bring for a witness the whole Quire of Creatures, and all the
works of Nature joind in so close an order amongst themselves, that none of
them has a being, or is made from it self, for it self, or by it self; but
every thing depends of another, serves another, and is sustained by another.
Whence indeed it is, that he has distributed several virtues to several
creatures, that each (on that part by which it is what it is, and does what it
does) imitating the course of its Creator, is subservient to its neighbor
creatures, and so tends to the preservation of the universe.

VII. Wherefore since God likewise in mankind for the graduall multiplying of
the light of his knowledge, and of his works, has hitherto improved one by the
help of another; and now the last age of the world seems to be upon us, we
must bethink our selves how we also may proceed (which verily may be hoped for
in this life) to the utmost degree of knowledge; to wit, that we render our
knowledge. 1. Universal, disgraced with no foul Casme. 2. Altogether true,
spoiled with no mixture of falsehood and vanity. 3. Most easy, perplexed with
no troublesome obscurities and thorny doubts; but flowing fairly into the
mind of its own accord.

VIII. Which three if we may come to obtain, our humane knowledge will be in
some sort perfect, viz the image of divine omniscience clearly shining in us:
so disposing us, that striving in the same ways, by the same means, to the
same ends, we may lay aside our usual discords, and the vanities of all idle
employments, all of us being only ready to relish, act, and speak the best
things.

IX. We determine therefore, that a Book should be compiled, for the
containing all things which are necessary to be known and done, believed and
hoped for by man, in respect of this and the life to come, viz. an entire
narration of those things which we know already, with an exact Index of such
things as we are ignorant of, whether they be those whose knowledge is
altogether unattainable, or those that are left for further search. And all
these things to that end, and in that order, that the minds of men by medium's
may be (as it were by a kind of an artificial Ladder) advanced from the first
to the last, the lowest to the highest, even to him from whom, by whom, and for
whom are all things.

X. But that the same Book may teach the same thing truly, and demonstrate it
solidly, that it may thoroughly appear, that they are not the trifles of
fancies, but the firm foundations of things themselves: and that we may know
that we are endued with knowledge, and not opinion. This Book then shall
contain nothing which may either be displeasing to our assent (as things
apparently false or vain, or not proved or improbable are) or may not only
tickle and invite our assent (as things which are likely and probable,) but
compel it, which force remains in the unvanquished and ever victorious truth,
so that it be but skillfully explaind, and laid forth to open view.

XI. Moreover, it is necessary this Book should be contrived in a method,
exactly fitted to dispositions, that whosoever shall read it, may likewise
understand it; carried on with a clear and full light throughout, to the end
that being translated into the common tongues of several nations, it may be
made of as common use, as God himself, the world, and our common sense is: so
as it may be nothing else but the true and genuine Copy of those things which
hither to the only God has revealed by his works, his word, and notions
imprinted in the mind of every man; and the true and common luminary and guide
of us all to the life to come; and the Rule, and true directory of all things
that are to be done in this life.

XII. The matter, Form, Efficient, and end of it may move and persuade, that
this same Book should be termed PANSOPHY.

XIII. For the matter of it shall be (...), which is to say, the Universe, and
that whereof a wise man ought not to be ignorant; namely, whatsoever good,
gallant, and profitable thing, is any where to be found in Books; or what
things likewise are not yet extant in any place, yet nevertheless are in
possibility to be had (things newly discovered, or what may be invented) we
would have to be conveyed hither, that what thing soever shall come to be
mentioned or thought upon, a sufficient information thereof may be here extant.

XIV. The form of this Book ought to be (...), that is, an Universal
harmony, or a consonance and agreement of each thing to other. For observations
delivered here and there concerning things, although they be profitable, shall
not be amassed and thrown upon an heap here; but the inmost nature of those
very things is to be detected with that artifice, that as there is no
dissonance in God the Author of things, nor in his works and words, so there
may be left no difference in our apprehensions: the medium's, viz the Centers
of this being found out, in which also the extremes and opposites may agree,
and cease their jarring, whereby there is hope it may be brought to pass, that
whatsoever diverse men (so it be with reason) diversely think or act, either not
knowing, or not understanding, or even opposing themselves, mutually may here
come into a consent and harmony: all the rivulets of thoughts and actions being
reduced to their true and pure fountains, where, will they nill they, they may
acknowledge that they do agree, the rivulets, windings, and filthiness which
runs mixed therewith being now left out. For it will fall out that the most
contradictions and controversies may be decided by neither or both. In that way
that Christ determined the variance of the Jews and Samaritans contending
about the place of prayer saying, Neither in this mountain, nor at Jerusalem,
but every where in spirit and truth. And in another place, do this, and leave
not the other undone, Mat. 23.13.

XV. The Efficient being of such fullness and harmony, can be no other than
(...), that is, an universallity of the principles of knowing, viz. that what
helps soever are divinely administered to man for to increase and rectify the
light of knowledge, all those should be here whole, and entire; namely, upon
Gods part revealing himself to us, without himself those Theaters in which he
has unfolded what he had a will to, viz. the World, with all the workmanship
of nature; and our mind, with all notions written thereupon; and the holy
Scriptures, with all those mysteries which are here displayed. And on our part,
all those instruments granted us to apprehend those things which God has
revealed, viz. The outward and inward senses, and the sound faculty of
reasoning, or discourse; and lastly, Faith, which is to be given to divine
Oracles. For all these things, if they be fully employed, will cause us know
all things which may be known: for because nothing can be known, but what is
revealed, or apprehended by Sense, or Reason, or Faith, or by all these
jointly: why may not he who knows these things, be said to know all things?

XVI. The end of the Book shall be (...), viz. the universal use of all
things unto all things, that whatsoever man must do or suffer, in time and
eternity, may be learnt here at once: and that the mind of man may be here
composed to a sufficient knowledge of all things: and the hands, and other
members for the profitable contrivance of several good works, and the tongue
for the apt utterance of each meaning of the mind; and the affections to the
embracing of things of worth, and the avoiding of such as are us^lesse: and
lastly, that the heart may be directed of God, and be taught so to fix it self
upon him alone, that at length man being removed out of the Circumference of
things, may find himself in God, their Center.

XVII. Concerning the making of such a Pansophicall Book, that our thoughts
may be seriously taken up; the very order of divine providence does now lead us
thither, the necessities of mankind compel us, and the present occasions
invite us. The explaining of which three shall serve for the laying the
foundation of our Pansophicall Temple.

XVIII. God as he is wise does all things orderly, every thing in its time, as
the wise Solomon speaks; and as he is good performs all well. Therefore this
is the process of good, rightly disposed, that it may increase by motion,
proceeding from good to better, from the less to the greater, till the
arrival be at that, then which there is nothing greater and better, that is to
say, Perfection: which progress of Gods wisdom, all the examples of his
works testify.

XIX. So although he could have framed the world in one moment, yet he was
pleased to make use of a tract of time, and a graduall succession of forms,
imprinting themselves upon their matter; beginning his works from unshap'd,
confused, and dark rudiments, yet ending in most distinct, exact, and
excellent forms: which Law likewise he has stamped upon nature her self, so
that what things soever be produced, arise out of their seeds slender, and
imperfect, and take their augmentation by little and little, even till they
arrive in their several kinds at their determinate accomplishment.

XX. He has put mankind in all things under the same condition. For when he
could have produced it in the full number (as the Angels and stars) as many as
he pleased, he created the stock, only, man and woman, and with the granting
to these the multiplying their kind, allotted for the generation of men some
thousand years, till the whole earth might be filled with Inhabitants.

XXI. And when as he could have disclosed to these men at one and the same
time, the secrets of all mysteries in things natural, artificial, morrall,
and divine; he chose rather to use an accustomed gradation, and leasureably to
increase the light of Sciences, Arts, and Faith, as all things to this very day
hold on in their progress.

XXII. For the age of all mankind, is as it were the age of one man, admitting
its increase by degrees, and promoting it self from Infancy by youth to a ripe
and well settled strength of mind. which AUGUSTINE observing writes thus:
Divine providence by a fair moderation of all things, so disposes the whole
Series of generations from ADAM to the end of the world, as it were of one man,
terminating the tract of his time in the degrees of age, even from childhood to
a decrepid estate. And hence there are also degrees of virtue in manners, till
he come to the clear and perfect virtue of man, it concerns him to
distinguish who piously devotes his mind to divine reading. (Of his 83. Quest.
the 53.)

XXIII. And that it is so, that all things increased with mankind, Sciences,
Arts, Virtues, and Vices, Faith and Treachery, that is, impiety and errors;
and by the occasion of Errors that new torches are lighted again for the
better illustration of truth: he perceives who sees any thing in Sacred or
profane History. For all things came forth as it were out of darkness into
light, one thing after another: and every thing was in his first beginnings
rude and unpolisht, receiving by little and little distincter forms, and true
perfection: And lastly, every invention passed from his inventor to other men,
and people one after another, by successive imitation.

XXIV. What therefore should keep us from hoping that it may fall out at
length, that those things which had their increase by parts, may grow up into
the whole, and that those things which we polisht by degrees, may at length be
extant in a perfect form. And what things formerly appertained to this or that
man, or Nation, tongue and Sect may become common unto mankind. Certainly
that which has a graduall ascent, must needs have a top: And if CICERO said
truly; Time extinguishes the fopperies of opinions: (And why not? whereas
truth the daughter of time, is only solid, the fumes of opinions cannot but be
subject to dispersions:) why do we not hope that the fictions and errors of so
many Ages, may even through tract of time, at length be discovered, and
expunged?

XXV. Now if we may well hope for such a thing, why may we not likewise desire
and endeavor it? For what will that be but a declaring of our selves
Administrers of divine bounty, which uses to communicate it self by degrees,
and diffuse it self more and more continually?

XXVI. Therefore, if we shall now at length assay to collect into one body,
that various and manifold light appearing at first as sparks, afterward as
torches, which the Father of lights in the succession of fore-past ages
kindled, and has daily more and more increased. And then after we have reduced
it into one universal Mass, endeavor to render it most clear and pure, and
produce it for the worlds public use and benefit, we may assure our selves we
do nothing but what divine providence has even led us by the hand to effect.

XXVII. Yea to do this same, the very necessities of mankind urge and compel
us, which I shall explain briefly, first of all in general; afterward by
certain ranks or orders of men; at length by carrying a respect to these our
own times into which we are now come.

XXVIII. Touching the perpetual confusions of humane affairs: the complaints
of wise men in every age are sufficiently known and manifest, so as none can
be ignorant thereof, unless he be either a stranger in the world, such as
Infants newly entered into it are, or a mere trunck or block, as foolish ones
are, who mind not what goes forward, nor regard or care how it is done. Now
these confusions spring and arise hence, in as much as the greater sort of men
(who even in their own and the worlds account seem to be wise) do all, or at
least their principal and chief businesses without Counsel or reason,
rashly, and ignorantly: In which sense, AUGUSTINE called the most men fools, (
lib. 1. de lib. art. cap. 9.) And agreeable to this says CICERO, there is
nothing so common and ordinary as to understand nothing also: I think the Mule
breeds oftener than a wise man is produced. Since wisdom therefore the
Governesse of things, deserts men; what wonder need it be to us to see all
things done immoderately, and by way of tumult, and our employments to miss of
their ends, by running out of their bounds and limits, and our selves thrust
headlong into sundry precipices. It must necessarily redound then to the health
and welfare of mankind, to place so clearly in the sight and view of all men,
the true discovered ends of things, and their certain medium's leading to those
ends, and all the orderly and due manners, Courses and ways of such medium's,
that all men may in seeing see, and being taken with the sweetness of that
true happiness, (which only true wisdom shows, and gives a fore-taste of) be
inflamed with the vehement and ardent love thereof. And this is that very thing
which PANSOPHY seeks after and hopes for, through its ways of full
Universality, Truth, and Facility.

XXIX. For because those things are many, and after a sort infinite, which men
in this life have for their Objects; as well without themselves, things
natural and artificial, morrall and spiritual, good and bad; as within
themselves, inclinations, desires, various affections, and lastly, near
adjoining to themselves, other men's opinions, studyes, endeavors, and very
different actions; it cannot be but they must be severally distracted and
confounded by all these, so as they cannot do that which ought chiefly and
especially to be performed; but even as any one by mere hap falls this way, or
that way, so he permits himself to be inwrapp'd, and entangled. Whence it
comes to pass, that whereas God made man right, they immix themselves both
with infinite questions and occupations, (Eccles. 7.30.) and according to that
complaint of SENECA'S, like a company of Cattle, they follow the flock before
not going where they should, but where they behold others. For which Ataxy or
irregularity, no other remedy can be found, than that all things which a man
either does or may meet with, be reduced, into a fixed and settled order, the
Weights and valuations of all things, being evidently extant, that every one
for his own benefit may clearly see, and wholely understand, what ought, and is
behoofe-full, before or after, more or less, to be attended, affected, brought
about and dispatched; which cannot be without an universal foreknowledge and
survey of things. For all things that are be so inter-woven by divine Artifice,
(which PANSOPHY will manifest and make clear) that every thing is not so much
for its own sake as for others: whence it is, that all things mutually cohere and
become serviceable, and by turns, not only things alike, but what are diverse
and even contraries, illustrate and set out themselves: as we have it apparent
in the body of any creature, how all the members, the greatest and least,
highest and lowest, first and last, serve one another mutually: so that if you
take away one, you shall spoil and maime the use of the whole. Seeing
therefore all things that are come to the composition and framing of the whole
Universe, as of one Commonwealth by a concatination, or chaining together,
which is nowhere broke or interrupted, it must needs happen that by the
ignorance of one remarkable thing, the truth of many be likewise darkened and
obscured. Certainly, as SENECA said of the Writings of great and noted men:
They are wholely to be looked into, wholely to be handled and perused; For by
the lineaments of their wit, they knit a work, from whence nothing can be
withdrawn, without a marring and ruinous defacement of the rest. That may be
far oftener spoken of the whole structure of things and learning, that nothing
can be withdrawn thence without spoil and ruin. Which also the same Author
says in another place concerning the Counsel of life, and the aberrations of
Counsels: we therefore offend, or swerve, because we all deliberate to change
the parts of life, but none of us consult about the whole. It agrees and
squares most aptly with the search and enquiry of truth: therefore we err
diversely, because we deliberate about the parts and parcels of truth, but no
man makes any matter, or troubles himself about the whole entire Universal
Catholic truth, uniting and kniting it self together on every side: which
also FRANCISCUS SANCHEZ saw, and thus expressed: Libro quod nihil scitur, page
47. There Is such a Concatination in all things, as no one may be idle but
hinder or further another; yea, every one is designed for this hurting or
helping of very many. Therefore for the perfect knowledge of every thing, it is
requisite we know all things: And a little after you shall understand this by
the familiar example of an ordinary Clock. For if you would know how it
strikes hourly, its meet you look round all the wheels from the first to the
last, and what moves the first, and how this another, and that others, even to
the last, etc. We must imagine the same in the great Orb of things, in which
you can find nothing but moves and is moved, changes and is changed, acts, and
suffers. PANSOPHY therefore by wholesome Counsel takes all things in general
into its consideration, that it may evidently and most clearly appear, how
lesser things are, and come to be subordinate to the greater, the greater to
the greatest, the former to the latter, and the latter to the last; infinite
things to finite, and the finite to one: that is, all visible things to man,
temporal things to eternity, and things created to their Creator; and that
nothing of all be omitted or left out, which may not be constrained and
compelled to serve our last or ultimate end. To wit, by this means we shall
know that the advice of ECCLESIASTICUS is sound and healthful, Eccles. 5.18.
Be not ignorant of any thing in a great matter or a small.

XXX. Now there ought to be no less, yea rather greater care and solicitude
about truth then universality: For to know truth is divine wisdom, says
LACTANTIUS: Nor is there any use at all of figments but to mock and abuse wits,
and lead men aside into waylesse places: Therefore indeed the most thoughts of
mortals are misty or smoky, slippery, crooked, vain, and unprofitable for
works or actions, because for the most part instead of things which are true
we acquiesse and rest in things which are like to, counterfeit or resemble
truth, embrace opinions for verity, and running out into opinions we have and
return little of certain knowledge. Whence it is, that we had better be
ignorant, then possessed with the knowledge of what is bad; because ignorance
is less hurtful then error; even as a neutrality or indifferency in health
is more tolerable, and rather to be endured then a sickly and distempered
condition, and as a rude behavior or rustic carriage is to be preferred
before manerlinesse and civility trimmed and polished for slinesse and malice.
In as much then as there are to be sought out by us (unless we will be
deceived and become vain) not things which are true and good to show, but
solid and substantial, which may render us truly wise, good and happy: O how
is it then to be wished that we had certain and infallible rules of truth and
goodness! For though our knowledge is like to be more contracted, and fall
within a narrower compass if we only follow and pursue things which are
certain: Yet even that very little of dyed and approved truth, and that which
affords sure and infallible use shall be of more account and esteem then all
weak opinions or guesses how diffused and large soever, or then any vain and
idle delights of fancy: Because its infinitely better to know any thing then to
conjecture at infinite. And to the sick patient one little potion which eases
him of his malady, is better then infinite most subtle discourses touching his
sickness, or what remedies soever by the greatest provision and care procured
and tendered to him, but not expelling or removeing his sickness from the
place where it chiefly lies. For AUGUSTINE says well; truth whatsoever it be
is better then all that which may be devised and feigned according to our
pleasure. ( Lib. de Ver. Relig. cap. 5.) Since therefore the wiser sort of men
acknowledge, and confess, and bewail, and deplore the mixture of errors with
truth in Philosophy and Divinity, and up and down else where: PANSOPHY which
serves and seeks to collect only things irrefragably true, and in a manner
apodictically to demonstrate how to possess them securely; endeavors without
doubt a business which is likely to be very profitable and advantageous to
mankind: For what I pray is the reason why we should be willing to be cheated
and mocked perpetually with uncertain things, however plausibly made and
contrived? Opinions ad placitum, or merely to our own likeing, are as
HELIOGABALUS his banquets, who delighted his guests with painted viands, and
afterward dismissed them hungry. That Feast is the best ordered where the
guests are entertained with wholesome and well rellished dishes, although but
few: Not where the pallat is provoked and ensnared with various and contrary
meats. For there good concoction, good sleep, good digestion, a good color
in the face, and a good habitude of body and mind follows and attends a
moderate pleasure: Here surfeits, difficult repose, doting dreams, vomits, or
wringings of the belly, diseases and deaths ensue. And as that is not a good
and commendable pourtracture of a man which is fairly drawn; but that which
extactly and exquisitely resembles his lively looks featured whatsoever it be;
so not that Geographicall table deserves praise which is garnished and set out
with colors and (such as affect and take children) but that which exhibits the
true and genuine distances of places: even so directly that book shall be held,
and judged the best, that feigning or painting nothing ad placitum, repesents
all things in that manner and form, which the things in themselves are. Which
perpetual tabulature of truth that PANSOPHY may be, is that very thing which
is sought after.

XXXI. But indeed, there will be need also of the light of method, by which
only there is hope it may be obtained; that all things truly delivered may be
both pleasantly read and easily understood, and hereby this book may become a
wholesome lure of wits, and a Ladder happily erected, to climb and mount by to
the tops of things: and lastly, an efficatious remedy to take away in the
greater part the differences of the world. Which three things we must show may
be expected from Pansophicall method, that it may be apparent, we endeavor a
matter profitable and beneficial to mankind.

XXXII. It Is in vain to hope that humane things, prolapsed and fallen to decay
by the common errors of all can be restored and made entire, without the
common help and joint assistance of all: For seeing all are members of the
worlds Commonwealth; no sooner can the state of humane society be amended and
changed for the better, then all begin to act by reason whatsoever they do, as
well those that are subject and inferiors, as those who rule and govern. Now
they cannot sooner begin and make this assay than they shall be taught and
instructed to know the reasons how and why every thing may be necessary and
requisite to be done: all which things, after they shall be delineated
according to the Rules and directions of truth it self; that also they may be
desired to be known of all, there will be need of certain baits or
allurements, viz. A delightful method, temp'ring every where pleasure with
profit, and exposing all things to the clear light, whereby this Amphitheater
of the Universe may seem to none a labyrinth or thorny bush, but a Paradise
and delicious Garden to all. Now PANSOPHY propounds this to it self, so to
expand and lay open to the eyes of all the whole University of things as both
every thing may be pleasurable to be viewed in it self, and also necessary for
the extending and enlarging of the Appetite, from one thing to another.

XXXIII. These things an artificial method promises to perform; so that
whosoever shall have a mind to read these things, shall be able also to
understand and conceive of them; a matter tru^y greatly to be wished. For
common complaints and the examples of very few, scarce at length struggling
out, and getting rid of difficulties, testify, that the vulgar, and ordinary
ways and passages of ^he sciences are beset with thorns and rubs: for so they
deliver and lay down the most things that not so much the sublimity or subtilty
of the matter, as rather the very perplexed and obscure manner of delivery
serves for the involving and entangling of wits. Pansophy therefore seeking out
Compendium's and Stratagems, and finding the^ by Gods help; by which all things
may be tempered and suited by a certain proportion, to the capacity of
ordinary and indifferent wits; why may i^ not be er^dited to propose a
business of public benefit? for it displayes all in the very order of things,
that each thing may stand in its own place, as it follows from the premises,
and begets consequents from it self, and hereby all precedents cannot but give
light and luster to their sequents, and the sequents and strength to their
precedents, which if it be woven throughout from the beginning to the end, with
like diligence and felicity: all things cannot but in like manner be penetrated
by wits. For truly there is no Tower so h^gh, nor any Rock so inaccessible, to
whose tops any one that is furnished with feet, may not attain, if you set him
sure Ladder, or hew him out due and convenient steps: whereas he who aslayes
without these, is sooner likely to find Precip^ces, than arrive at those tops
which he fondly aspires to. So he who attempts the contemplation of things in
none or in a bad order, is easily surpised with giddiness, and falls back, or
slides forward into confused, preposterous, and monstrous opinions: But he who
goes in right order and by degrees, may readily elevate, and raise himself
even to the highest pitch.

XXXIV. It Is evident, that differences, controversies, and brawles do still
reign every where, and trouble the affairs of men: Nor is it unknown to the
wiser sort that these contradictions and quarrels come from diverse and contrary
studies, because we learn not wisely to relish, act, and speak the same
things; but we whisper several things into one another, or we are carried
hither and thither, every one by his proper eagerness and passion: If
therefore it may be obtained or brought about, that all men as they are made by
one God after his image, destinated to one end of blessed eternity with him;
sent into the same school of this present life; furnished with the same
requisites of necessary helps, or are certainly apt to be furnished; so may
they but suffer themselves to be led by the hand in common from a common
principle, through common means to common ends; why may we not hope more
serious study about serious things, and less stir about trifles and by this
more concord and less difference? Now since PANSOPHY wishes, seeks, and
assaies this it verily wishes, seeks and assaies a business likely to bestead
and profit mankind in common.

XXXV. But let us come to particulars, and give a brief touch by the way what
hope PANSOPHY may afford of bettering the state as well of the Vulgar as the
Learned, and the Civil and Ecclesiastical, and to conclude all the Nations of
the whole world.

XXXVI. There Is none but sees in what things the vulgar sort of men busy
themselves; namely, in things frivolous and vain, or truly in externalls
which only extend themselves to this fugitive and transient life, they regard
not sollider good things internal and eternal, because they know them not;
now they know them not, because they are not acquainted therewith; therefore
they delight themselves with gugawes, bawbles and trifles of their own. For
what can he do who has not learned the inward culture and adorning of the
soul? Who has not tasted the sweeter fruits of virtues? Who has not looked
into the more precious treasures of Wisdom? Who is in no measure admitted to
the secrets of Heaven and Earth? How can such an one employ himself save in
sweating and toyling to plow the earth, gather fruits, scrape up money, and to
search and look into such things as are done in neighboring houses and places
adjoining? For it is not granted to humane nature to be altogether idle and
drowsy, it will be busied, or busy it self. He that does not this must
needs do something else; and he who transfers not the forcible bent and
inclination of his nature to better matters, falls certainly into such as are
worse: It will be therefore a wholesome intent and good purpose that even the
very common people be invited at length into the common amphitheater of Gods
wisdom, and that the veil being withdrawn from these things in the presence
of all, divine treasures be represented as they are in themselves, and come to
be esteemed of from the truth and reallity of the matter, to the end that the
savor of better and truer good things being perceived, they may accustom
themselves to esteem less of transitory worldly allurements, and make smaller
reckoning of shadows then substances; and finally, also that those men of the
lowest rank, condemned to labors and grievous troubles, may by the hope of
better things ease their calamitous and wretched condition.

XXXVII. Touching the state of learned men, PANSOPHY rightly constituted, may
sundry ways avail and advantage them.

XXXVIII. For first of all it is certain, that very few of those who either
please themselves with the name of learning, or are admired by others, rely
either on their own, or on the foundation of things. For they follow the
opinions of one another, which since they vanously depart from themselves and
from things, it comes to pass that there is no end of doubts, contradictions,
and disputes in Church and School; by which the wits of the learned, and the
consciences of the unlearned are troubled and tortured without end: For which
disease if a meet remedy be sought out, it cannot be any other then that all be
taught to follow, not the leaden rule of this and that Doctor, but the
adamantine rule of God and things themselves, and hereby not to come to bare
supposalls but knowledge; which Will be done not by following the external
likelihood of things, or acquiescing therein, but by searching by certain
ways the very intimate, solid, and unmoved truth of things, and by placing it
in open view after it is drawn forth and solidly demonstrated, which thing
PANSOPHY seeks after.

XXXIX. Furthermore, if we look upon those that study Arts and Sciences, some
well observe that that variety of methods (by which every Science and Art, and
Tongue, otherwise then as it differs; yea, the very same is delivered by one
Author on this manner by another on that) is not only a Remora, but even a
vexation and torment to wits: For hence it comes to pass, that all indeed make
but difficult progress; and the most taking a nauseous distaste, and deterred
with so many new lets and crosses continually happening, start back from the
course of their studies to other kinds of life, or wearied in so rugged a
path, slake in their alacrity, leaving many things either untouched, or
touching them but in an overly and superficial manner. Truly HERCULEAN wits
are rarely and seldom known into whose breasts new valor returns, and a new
vigor arises at the meeting of a new monster, and the approach of a new
encounter: And therefore solid Scholars grow so rare; who then may not think
it profitable and necessary that this bar be removed? For those of BAZIL write
well in their Diatriba, concerning the compendious manner of learning, the
Hebrew and Chalde tongue annexed to Mercurius Quadrilinguis, Printed in the
Year, 1637. It cannot be well declared what a compendium or saving of labor
and wearisomenesse it may be, every where to use the same Author, the same
Precepts, and the same Method. Now PANSOPHY shall be no other then such a
compendium of learning all things in one perpetual Method.

XL. And because such are not a wanting, who burning with the love of Sciences
and Wisdom, yet by reason of the affairs and employments of life, with which
they are distracted, cannot be at leisure for the searching through of
Libraries: Its altogether needful that these have some brief, but withal
strong Viaticum of Learning, by virtue whereof, as ELIAS refresht by the
service of an Angel with a morsel of bread, and draught of water, went on
through Deserts to the Mount of God; so they also may be able to preserve
spiritual life in any noise and hurry of businesses. Now indeed of this nature
is that which PANSOPHY endeavors; by which both men being at leisure may be
profitably employed, and being employed may be speedily promoted to their
principal ends and aims. For it shall teach us to attend, and do the first
things firstly, and the chiefer chiefly; with the certain use also of those
things to good ends, which busy others without use or benefit at all.

XLI. Again, those who sail through the vast seas of Authors, they have need
as well as those that float in the Wilderness of the Ocean of some such
magnetic directory, whereby they may the better keep and maintain themselves
from errors, quicksands, and rocks. For those who sailed by sea, before the
use of the Loadstone was invented, could not know whither they might be
carried, and what way to steer the ship, unless it were in a clear sky, or
in view of shore; in dark and cloudy weather, and when they were carried
forth into the deep they were at a loss, and at their wits end: So they who
enter into the sea of Authors furnished with no rules besides the common and
cloudable Sun of common knowledges, and the shoares of preconceived
doctrines, cannot but be in all places uncertain and doubtful of the event:
Therefore since PANSOPHY endeavors to constitute such an universal directory
(to wit an universal and perpetual harmony of truth) which who has ready at
hand, need not care for any depths, nights, and darkness, being certain of
the poles or hinges of the world, and secure of the Haven and Port to which he
tends; why may we not believe that it endeavors a business profitable and
necessary for learned men in common?

XLII. If we have regard to Philosophers apart (who being intent upon the
speculation of all things, and their causes wherein they are contained, ought
to be Masters of all things which are done rationably in any place) we shall
find that their state especially stands in need of bettering and amendment.
For what Philosophy soever the Schools have and peremptorily hold, even all
that is drawn from the Greeks and Arabians (Heathens and Mahumetans:) and
therefore however it be freed from mixed superstitions, is nevertheless very
imperfect. Of which thing there are three certain documents or sure proofs:
First, because these being not furnished with Divine Revelation, (by which they
might correct the aberrations of their senses and reason) could not but be
blinded and deceived in all chief and principal matters: For they were
ignorant of the beginning of the World, as also of its end, and knew neither
the constitution nor corruption of man's nature, nor its amendment, and manner
of its amendment: Therefore what sound thing could they deliver either of
nature or morality? Furthermore, that Greekish Philosophy was then when it was
constituted and set up (namely, in the time of SOCRATES, PLATO, ARISTOTLE) a
mere new thing in the world, destitute of sufficient experiences, catching at
and laying hold upon any thing in its way, from this person thus, from another
otherwise; and all things were transferred to matter of profession and
disputes, in which some have enwrapped others and do hitherto enwrap their
followers, with drawing wits from things to themselves, and their own
conceptions; and as it were ensnaring them in jives and fetters, so as they
cannot freely contemplate things. Lastly, even the matter it self instructs
us, that the true and living Roots have been and still are a wanting to this
Heathenish Philosophy, by which it being vegetated and quickened, might have
grown continually into a larger tree, and have produced always more copious
and abundant fruits. For that it ought to have been so, we see it in the
example of Mechanic Arts, which as it were endued with a vital spirit,
increase daily, and come to perfection: That if their first Inventers were
alive again, they should have need to turn Apprentices, and be set to learn,
so rude were their first endeavors in comparison of this perfection, to which
by the labor and diligence of their successors they are at this time advanced.
Now we see the quite contrary in Philosophical Sciences, that they throve most
of all in their first Authors, and afterward languisht; so that Modern
Persons may think it is enough for them even a far off to follow their
footsteps, which they openly confess, who with such praises extol ARISTOTLE
the Author of this Philosophy, as they assign to him the Dictatorship,
Empire, and Tribunal of Wisdom, not daring at any time to go out of his track
or footing. Hence it comes to pass that the Sciences for so many Ages stick
fast in the footsteps of the Ancients, nor receive such increase as may beseem
mankind, and grow adored after the manner of Statues, but find not any
promotion or advancement: For if in the mean while any new thing be found out
(as are the knowledge of the Lodestone, the Algebra, Logarithmes, Canons about
Creeks and Gulfes, Clocks or Watches, the Art of Printing Books, etc.) this
truly is not found out by the guidance and help of that Ancient Philosophy;
but either by chance, or for that more excellent and choice wits piercing
further made bold to assay something peculiar, I wish to God then we might
prevail with those who devote themselves to the contemplation of things, that
the principles being only rightly ordained, that they would give their minds
to trace the hidden truth of things, in things not in books or the conceits of
others: O what fair and great hopes show themselves of having continually more
plentiful treasures of the wisdom of God dug forth? which as yet are, and
will lie hid if men persevere in the resting on things found out, and adhere
only to the cogitations and devises of others. For what novelty I pray you can
he find out, who keeps himself only in the ways where an infinite go by
perpetually? What gold can he get out who ties and enslaves himself to a vein
already exhausted by others even to the least parcel or crum, or that tries
mettally earth over again, which has been a thousand times refined in hope of
drawing something out of it still? It concerns therefore Philosophers that
leaving these emptyed Mines, they open themselves new passages to find out the
treasures of nature and art; which seeing PANSOPHY both teaches, and in a good
part by Gods help performs; no good and wise man who delights in the
well-improving and promoting humane things can find in his heart to envy, much
less hinder it: The matter of it self speaks that.

43. These of the learned who are at leisure for the disquisitions of things,
and institute or order disputations for the examining of opinions, have need of
better helps. For what is there performed worthy so great designs as
polemicall books are hitherto writ for? They dispute that they may dispute,
not for determining, but fixing and increasing Controversies. For those usual
disputations are mere circulations or wheelings about, and a work without
end; which the continuance of Opinions and Sects in this our Age clashing one
against another does plainly teach. All are opposed, none overcome, one
admires at the obstinacy of another, and yet no one yields; what is the reason?
First of all Controversies are raised without necessity through the sole
itching of wits, and out of a desire of renewing things, or contradicting
others, which on each side distracts, entangles and intricates the minds of
men. Then started Controversies are exaggerated beyond measure, every light
dissent passes for Heresy; whence men's spirits are offended, estranged, and
provoked. At length the very manner and way of untying knots, which we as yet
use, proves ineffectuall. For to draw out our own and overthrow opposite
conclusions, we make use of Principles (Canons and Rules, Distinctions and
Limitations) which are caught up any where, or even lately feigned and devised
by our selves, that they may be suppositions, and serve for our cause: Or which
verily are not yet granted to by the other Party; such as the adversary seeing
himself set upon with and pusht at, he either derides, or contemnes.
Furthermore as well from these, as even from Principles which are true, and
yielded to by the adversary are picked many times conclusions not by Logical,
but Rhetorical Art; that is not by solid demonstration, by which assent is
wrested from one, will he, nil he, as it happens among Mathematitians, but by
certain persuasions soliciting indeed the assent, yet not necessarily drawing
it forth. Lastly, the end of the disputation for the most part answers the
beginning, so as it ends in prejudice and affection; whilst those that dissent
are condemned, and their Odium instilled into others, which gives the adversa^y
occasion of shrouding himself with a shield suitable to these weapons, and of
defending himself with affection against affection, and with pertinacy against
hatred. Now PANSOPHY promises a remedy for these mischiefs; while it teaches
us that only solid things be solidly handled; while it loads none with
prejudice, yea rather invites all equally, and laying down Principles really
Unive^sall, really true, really clear, which may be admitted of all of their
own accord and with pleasure, by these gradually without any hiatus or gap,
and within perpetual limits drawing men's minds, it brings them leisurably to
the v^^y tops of truth not with relu^tancy, but spontanity and willingness.
And so while it does not exasperate men's minds, but asswages and shows the
ways of reducing into consent the senses or conc^its of those who even
mutually contradict one another, if so be they have but any thing of truth and
reason in them: It makes and causes all m^n being carried on from the same
Principles, by the same mediums to the same conclusions to give their assent to
the last, as well as the first; not through any persuasion of likelihood or
probability, but by reason of the very clearenesse and perspicuity of firm and
unmoved truth.

XLIV. For Schools also, if we would have them well provided for as we ought,
PANSOPHY may afford and contribute notab^e help^. Namely because it concerns
Youth even from the very beginning of life to be seasoned with right and sound
persuasions which may thrive and grow up with them; this can scarce by any
means be better and more certainly obtained, then if the Schools have a
book at hand common to all, propounding all wholesome things in one continued
Method; by whose direction it may be plain and evident that none of those
things which appertain to the profitable culture and improvement of their
minds, are passed by, omitted or neglected in any place, but that all things
are every where performed. For though all youth be not capable of all things;
yet their Masters shall have such a rule from thence as they may neither be
ignorant, nor forget whereto all things are to be directed: But even certain
Compendiums of PANSOPHY accommodated or fitted to the capacity of first
childhood may be easily constituted and framed for the use of inferior
Schools.

XLV. Consider with me now the Political or Civil State, and you shall see
that PANSOPHY may be very serviceable also for its welfare. Known is that
speech of PLATO, and held for an Oracle long ago: That Commonwealths are even
then like to be happy when either Philosophers rule them, or those who rule
them play the Philosophers; then which saying nothing is more true; if true
Philosophy, which is the true contemplation of all things be meant and
understood thereby: For because Order is the foundation and bond of the safety
of the Commonwealth, as also of all other things, for the retaining which
among all men and all things, Governors are to be vigilantly heedfull: Its a
plain case by how much any one better understands the way of order, by so much
he may the better be president over others for the procuring and maintaining
order. Now he best understands the order of things, who understands it
universally, as it is the soul of all things, and knows to distinguish
fundamentalls from accessories, whereof these are every where necessarily the
same, these other vary. Now hither PANSOPHY does altogether tend, that it may
detect Order, the foundation and bond of all things, it may therefore make good
Governors for Commonwealths: But its also of great concernment that they who
are subject be not subject upon constraint but upon their own accord, out of
their love to justice. Now why may not this same PANSOPHY effect and perform
this, if the very Commonalty also be admitted, that it may learn and
understand that the public safety of all in general, and the private of every
one in particular does consist in it, that every one may maintain himself in
his own station, and readily and chearefully go about his own businesses,
whatsover they be that fall and happen to him?

XLVI. If you look at the Church, PANSOPHY by Gods help may yield likewise to
small advantage to the safety, but even to the increases hereof. For its
exceeding good, that even all Divines understand how exactly Gods words agree
every where with his works, that they may the better know to clear and
explain the mysteries of salvation, by the mysteries of common providence. And
its profitable that the Christian common people have not a commanded or
extorted pharisaicall or an implicit, slubberly, but a certain and explicit
faith, that they may reply to their teachers, as those Samaritanes to their
first female Preacher. Now we believe not because of thy saying, but because
we our selves have heard and know him. Now this will be brought to pass, if
they be taught to understand, that which they believe, and to know that our
faith not only contayns in it no absurdity, (as Infidels suspect, or even
blasphemously affirm) but that it is a thing of all other most rationable,
supported with the irresistible and irrefragable testimonies of the Scripture,
of the world, of all the inward senses, and moreover of Infidels themselves,
the confession of the very truth shining forth here and there from them also:
Which in the progress of time and light, may by the mercy of God be a most
strong engine, or battering Ram, to convince and convert the very Infidels,
the Jews Turks, and the remnant of the Gentiles: which could not be hitherto,
by reason of our domestic discords and the unestablished way of teaching the
truth plainly. For so much as it is a common notion, the consent of opinions
seems a note or mark of truth: such a manifold dissent of Christians, could
not but beget in Infidels, a suspicion of falsehood: nor had we any means in
readiness, whereby we might shake off that suspicion. For how can they obtain
the victory, who set upon the enemy disorderly, and besides that, oppose and
fight against themselves?

XLVII. But we ought to hope it may come to pass at length, that the Church
having a better accord within it self, may be furnished like wise with more
powerful weapons for the overcomming the unbeleefe of Infidels. For even as
the Apostle said, when he considered the gradation of divine wisdom: in the
dispensing of the revelation of himself that God spoke often sundry ways by
his Prophets, lest of all by his Son. So, why may we not imagine, that the
Son himself, (who does even whatsoever he sees his Father do, John 5 19)
after h^^ had propagated by diverse ways and degrees through Countries and
Nations, the truth of that doctrine which was brought from heaven, reserved
some utmost excellent degree for the last times? since we now see many ways
which have gone before. For first of all he would have the mysteries of
purchased salvation preached to the Genti^es by simple men and Idiots, but such
as he made men believe were sent of God by the gift of tongues and miracles,
that the hard hearts of m^n (always arm^d by their own obstinacy to resist
God) might be absolutely forced to yield. Afterward when the faith of miracles
languish'd, and the world hardened it self against the truth, and ^ag^d against
his Saints: Christ laid down another means, by which also the hardness of many
was vanquished; to wit, the constancy of the Martyrs whose blood was the seed
of the Church. For by how much more Christians were put to sl^ughter, by so
much more grew up, and came on daily to display and lay open the victory of the
Cross; that as Christ, so Christians might overcome by dying. The world
therefore yielded, and gave w^y upon Conquest. A third means of propagating the
Church forthwith approaching; namely when Christ gave it Kings as nursing
Fathers, and Queens as nursing Mothers, by whose example and faithful care
whole Countries were conv rted. But when the sly and subtle deceiver had turn
d this into the Churches bane, and had brought in security of life,
dissoluteness of manners, profaneness of doctrine, and a various mixture of
errors; God against that darkness set a new light of tongues, by the help
whereof, and the benefit of Printing, the Sacred Books were brought to public
view, and the Writings of the Ancients by whose ^ayd truth has been fayrly
purged from enterd-in errors and superstition. But because here also both
seducers who see but a little in the open light, do make a struggling, and
those who follow the light, rather light for themselves particular torches,
(and thereby hinder their own and one another light) then labor to enjoy a
full light in common. And lastly, because the Gentiles remain to be converted,
(for the Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in the whole World, before
the End come, Matthew. 24.14.) and the remnants of the children of Abraham are to
be excited to seek the Lord their God in the latter days, Ho. 3.5. why may
not the Lord of all be credited to have reserved a certain universal medium,
for so universal a business? By which both a clear light may shine upon those
who sit in darkness, and also the stiff and refractory sinews of those that
rebel against the light, be slit, and Satan be bound that he cannot seduce
the Gentiles etc. Now this kind of Medium, which Pansophy shows us, is either
that very same, or certainly some one very near to it; viz. whereby it may be
rendered most evident to every man's mind, that only mere Christian Religion
consist in eternal harmony, so as it may be discerned on every side, to be
all fair and desirable.

XLVIII. It would be of special importance likewise, that Nations and Countries
dispersed through the diverse Hemisphers and Climates of the World, and severed
as it were by railes and partitions from one another through the propriety of
Tongues, might have amongst themselves some common rule of things by which
being regulated, eve^ such as do not understand, may understand themselves
mutually: For what should that be which the Lord promises by the Prophet, if it
be not this: That he will turn to the people a pure language, that they may
all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one lip or consent, Zeph.
3.9. And this may almost be the making of the lip one, whereby all are brought
to understand themselves mutually; if not as to the sound of words, yet
according to their sense and meaning. For if this book when it is brought to
its perfection should be translated into the Domestic Tongues of Nations out
of the Latin Tongue in which it was conceived at first, in as many Paragraphs,
and as near as may be to the very words: This would be a rare help, even for
the most barbarous Nations for the easy learning of the Latin Tongue, running
parallel with their own in that common Book: By which means as it is of the
European Nations; so it might also become the common Mercury of the Nations of
the whole World: To which p^sse if the matter were once brought* we should have
an universal antidote against the confu^ion of BABEL, a true Panagea, and the
best medium for the communicating all good things.

XLIX. But we must now show that which we promised, how our Pansophical purpose
may be founded even in the very necessiti^s of this present Age of ours; to
wit, that we may resist as much as in us lies those Monsters which prevail too
much at this time, Presumption Cu iosity, Samaritanisme, Atheism, and Fury,
which arms it self daily more and more to the destruction of man kind.

L. For first of all the opinion of a learned Age is grown too much in use
among very many, as though the studies of learning and wisdom had now attained
to their (...), or full and perfect growth in this our Age. Drunk with which
opinion even the retainers to a very little, or indeed but superficial
learning do so please themselves, that they deem themselves to be almost
SOLOMON'S* and seek after no truer learning, because they dream that they
possess it already, and that there remains not so much as any thing wherein
they may make a further prog^esse: Whence it is, that in truth there is the
greatest scarcity of learned men in this learned Age; the Vulgar studies
running out almost into a certain babbling and sophistication; it would be good
and meet therefore that these supposers or over weeners might be carried on
into the Ocean of universal wisdom, and that the vast deserts of man's
ignorance should be shown to them by the discoverd and designed shores of
unknown Lands, that understanding how little we know in comparison of what we
are ignorant of, they may accustom themselves not to raise up, but pu^l down
their cr^sts.

LI. But if men freed from this p^esumption shall be reduced to due modesty,
and the ardent study of true wisdom, there will be need thereupon that the
business be ordered somewhat otherwise then hitherto it has been; namely,
that they whosoever they be, who are truly desirous of true wisdom, may come
to it by more certain and more compendious ways: For those which we have had
thus long, are ambagious or far ab^u^, and uncertain, yea dangerous. For that
in this Age, which would be termed learned, Books, Schools, Methods, and
various opinions concerning various things are multiplied even to admiration,
Learners are utterly confounded, and we may fear, lest we be all overwhelmed,
that at last we shall either read nothing, or believe nothing: If some bar or
restraint be not laid upon this Age; as luxurious in conceiving opinions, as
multiplying Books; and the Learners freed both from the wearisomenesse of
reading many things, and from the tumult of encountering opinions, and from the
two-path'd, or rather many trackt ways of Errors, which they may meet with
every where; which to be brought about by no other then a Pansophicall way, he
shall acknowledge and confess, whosoever shall truly perceive the true intent
thereof; to wit, that all things may be derived from an infallible foundation,
that is to say of things themselves, of divine testimonies of things, and of
notions or knowledges written in our mind, in which three, as in her triple
Palace eternal truth resides: And in such a Method, as by which all things may
flow into our minds easily and clearly.

LII. Which same thing also may be a remedy against human curiosity, whereby
some are excessively inflamed with an inordinate desire about less necessary,
and forbidden points of knowledge by the legitimate designed bounds of man's
industry, and the found out marks or goales of that sovereignty and power over
things, which is committed to the wit of man; and lastly, by the detected and
clearly displayed limits, and all those means and ways of possibility and
impossibility. As far forth as they may be known, to the end that those who
are busied in undecent unprofitable and impossible matters may be recalled from
their vain and irrational inclination and eagerness into the ways of
reason; and others may be taught to beware aforehand the occasions of falling
into the like exorbitancy.

LIII. Moreover Dissentions and Disputes, yea Sects have too much prevailed in
Philosophy and Divinity, in which both the learned and unlearned are wrapped
and encumbred: So as either they cannot understand themselves mutually, or
although they might understand one another, yet neglect it out of favor to
sides and parties; which thing is the original of several confusions: For
while we do not one understand the words of another, it falls out that we
neither understand things, unless it be confusedly or amiss; and while we
cast absurdities upon one another, we our selves seem or are observed to
cherrish far greater in others; nor is there any one who can efficaciously
decide Controversies, while we do not edify in common; but sliding into
Parties or Factions, every man busily goes about to fortify his own Fabrics
but to overthrow others with any kind of undermining and possible craft; By
which very thing, Sects are not lessened but fixed and settled; variances are not
taken away but multiplied; odiums are not appeased, but exasperated and
sharpened without end. O that God therefore would have pity on us, and
recollect us from this dispersion, and restore to us (as he has promised by
his Prophets, and as I have touched before) one heart, and one way, and chosen
lip, that we may understand the same things, speak the same things, do all the
same things, and serve the Lord with one arm. Now this, if as it is wished
for, ought also to be hoped, it may scarce be obtained by any other, save a
Pansophicall way: Namely, if the minds of all men be brought into the open
field of things themselves, and there prejudices being laid aside freely view
not opinions of things but things themselves: by no other guide then sense, by
no other light then of sound reason, by no other umpeer and judge then God. And
for as much as things are the same to all, and all have the same senses, and
there is the same reason judging alike, of the like things; and lastly the same
God attesting the same touching the same things, why should we be out of hope,
of having it come to pass^, that for the future, there may be also about the
same things one sense, assent, and consent among all? And so soon as we shall
agree about things, words shall not be so able to distract us: For no longer
words, nor our conceits, but things themselves (which are the same to all)
shall be the basis or ground of our thoughts and speeches. And it may be
forecasted, by Gods help, that things and the understanding of things, and
speech the interpreter of the understanding, may run parallel through the whole
Universe. And then differences will be happily taken away, and the occasions of
differences, no man being intent upon any other thing, then the very truth of
things. Then shall contradictions cease, the appearances of contrariety
ceasing, nor will there be any need of these refuges or evasions. This is true
Philosophically, not Theologically; I speak Ast^onomically, not Phisically,
etc. Nor shall any one style h^mselfe in Philosophy a Platonist or
Aristotelian, in Divinity a Lutheran or Calvinist, or Papist, but all
Philosophers and Christians: Because as there is a common Christ or Sav^our of
all; so both PAUL and CEPHAS, and APOLLO, and PLATO, and ARISTOTLE, and whoever
in any place has any thing of truth or goodness, that shall be common to us,
being taken out of the common treasu^e of truth: So who sees not but that
Sciences and Arts may be reconciled amongst themselves, and Philosophy with
Divinity, and the minds and tongues of men d ffering from one another in
opinions by the intervening of things themselves? Who therefore may not also
wish it? He Is a fierce enemy who when he may atchieve a Victory fairly, had
rather it should prove rough and bloody: We then are fierce and savage, if when
the way of Peace and Concord offers it self, we had rather be embroyld in
endless Wa^s.

LIVE. There is now another Foul and deadly monster which in this age, if ever
has strongly begun to infest mankind, and comes to be quelld with the
greatest Herculean labor, viz that most wicked profaneness, which they call
Atheism. This, whether it come from the multitude of Religions, as some
think, (because many a one seeing things various and contrary to be believed,
is confounded, and brought to that pass at length, that he believes Faith is
nothing else but a mere fable) or whether it proceed from the itch of
sinning, through hope of impunity, if so be a punisher of things done amiss
may be denied, as the Scripture intimates, Psalm. 14.1. or whether it arise from
a saucy and malapert wantonness of wits, rushing irreverently upon all things
yea, even upon God, whom at length the very brightness of his Majesty
oppresses, blinds, and drives to a reprobate sense: it is certain those
fools are not a wanting in our age; who say in their hearts there is no God,
because there want no occasions of sliding thereto, viz. the base confusion of
Religions, the horrid deluge of heinous offenses, the lavish licentiousness of
wits. It Is meet therefore that we think of remedies again and again; if we be
touched with the glory of God, if we have a care of the security of our faith
and hope; if the commiseration of our perishing neighbors affect us: and this
by so much the more, by how much we perceive this plague to be the more
creeping on, especially in the minds of Politicians, who hold it commonly
amongst their secrets of State, that they may use Religion for a pretext, to
take and awe the vulgar withal. Now what kind of remedy may we seek for
Atheism? the word of God, which is the power of God to salvation to every one
that believes, can do nothing here, because they do not believe it. As for
miracles, by which they might be wrought upon to believe, God uses not to put
forth any for the convincing of Atheism; because his ordinary works may
suffice in this case, as one of great note says: Therefore these things are
seriously to be urged, to the confusion and shaming of those fools. It Is true,
as says the renowned VERULAM, that a smattering of natural Philosophy
inclines men to Atheism: the deeper knowledge thereof brings them about to
Religion, when by the chain of things connexed or linked within themselves, it
leads them to God and providence. There will scarce then be found out any
remedy of more efficacy for the subduing and overthrow of this monster, then a
fuller, truer, and quite severer and exacter knowledge of things themselves,
that they may grope by sense, and thereby lay close and fast hold on reason it
self, which Pansophy both seeks after and hopes for. Thence there is hope it
may be effected, that Atheists being compelled to hear the testimonies of all
creatures, touching the Creator, may be constrained at length to add their
own; or being caught and held in close be forced to deny themselves rather
then God: viz. being reduced to the absurdities of the Scepticks, that there is
no sense of things, no things, no world, no men who may dispute of these
things. Brought to which issue, they shall either yield themselves conquered,
or it shall appear they are fools who saying there is no God, deny
themselves, the world, and all things.

LV. Lastly, this Age has need of some most present remedy against Frenzy,
with which a great many men being surprised, run on furiously to their mutual
destruction. For we see the devouring and deadly flames of discord and wars
pass through the whole world, destroying Kingdoms and Nations with that
pertinacy as all may seem to have conspired for their mutual bane, not likely
to give over, unless it be with their own and the worlds ruin: There is
nothing therefore, which at this time may be so necessary for the world to stay
it self that it do not utterly perish, as some universal instauration of
men's minds, and for this likewise an universal peace and concord powered forth
as it were upon all mankind. Now I understand by Peace and Concord, not so
much that external agreement of Princes and Countries amongst themselves
(which is a slippery business, and subject to be changed on small and slender
occasions) as that inward accord of men's minds in regard of tenets and
opinions which possess them: From which, if this may be obtained, mankind
has much which it may deservedly promise it self. For opinions about
following or avoiding things, as they ceaze on men's minds, so they stir up
turbulent, or beget calm affections; and if they be the same they bring forth
the same inclinations, desires and endeavors for good or evil, according as
they are themse ves: We may therefore vainly hope that the minds of men may
any other way be brought to good and quiet affections, then by the encouraged
studies of Piety, Humanity, and Wisdom, which wise Antiquity has gallantly
expressed in that feigned narration of the Theater of ORPEEUS, where all Beasts
and Birds being gathered together, forgetting their natural appetites (of
praying, sporting, fighting) stood friendly and sweetly by one another, whose
sound as often as it ceased, the Creatures forthwith returned to their
disposition. By which Apologue they taught us, that men who are by nature most
greedy of gain, pleasure, revenge, so long as they give ear to the Precepts
of Religion and Wisdom, so long they entertain peace and society among
themselves; if these be silent they fall into Seditions, Tumults, and salvage
cruelty. Yea the Holy Scripture teaches us the same, as it makes mention how
the turbulent spirit of wicked SAUL could not be composed by any other way then
by DAVID'S Harp, and how the spirit of godly ELISEUS being moved with zeal,
could not be recalled to tranquillity without the like harmonious consent: What
therefore has the tumultuous world need of save some harmonious Harp, that it
may come to it self? And because Seditions have not laid hold on some few
Countries somewhat nearer, or more adjoining to one another, but have even
surprised the whole World; so as all the Kingdoms of Christians, and what ever
remains of Infidel Nations rise up one against another, and the West is dashed
against the East, and the North against the South; and indeed by the
concurrence of sacred and profane causes, for their Country and Religion. For
so extraordinary a disease there is even need of an extraordinary universal
remedy, viz. of the reducement of men's minds into some universal concord: For
the obtaining which, PANSOPHY by its own desirable Panarmony, or general
agreement will be fit and convenient, or else there will be scarce any other
medium under Heaven.

LVI. The occasions which the most wise providence of our God, fencing in a way
to some most fair and great work, affords to make us bold in our desires to
conceive such great matters as these, to presume of them through hope, to talk
and write of them, and finally to attempt them by setting our hands thereto.

LVII. The first of these is the Commerce of Ages and Countries so rarely
discovered of late. For hitherto the affairs of men were practiced, polished,
and took increase by parts in Mechanics, and Liberals; and this indeed
sparingly through Nations and Ages, even in a way also unknown to one another.
Now we are come to that pass, that by the benefit of Printing all the
Monuments of Antiquity being drawn out of darkness, may be communicated to
the wits of our Age, and by the found out means of Navigation, Commerce, or
Traffic, may be happily entered on with all the Nations of the World. Whence by
the emulation of Wits raised by this and that means, men have begun to sweat
exceedingly in the searching out of new Inventions for some certain latter
lusters of years: But that very thing for the most part, rather by the private
industry of certain persons then in Common. What therefore may forbid us to
assay it after a sort, the things of the whole World which have been, and are
to be observed, which are and may be invented, may at length be made Common to
all? To wit that all who are and shall be admitted into the Theater of Gods
wisdom, may be taught to attend what may be done, and to stir up themselves
with mutual alacrity to observe more, and greater things constantly; for the
wisdom of God will never fail to show forth his Acts and Spectacles to the
World. We must assay this with the good leave of God the president of our
affairs; to whose glory it redounds to have very many, and very attentive
Spectators of those shows which his wisdom manifests in his Theater; that
such great works be not without full witness and full admiration.

LVIII. The happy successes of wits hitherto, about the polishing certain
particular things, and the now fit piles of materials particularly elaborated
for the co^ceiving so great a structure, give us also an occasion of atte^pting
Pansophy. For what have not Mechanics hitherto assaid? to what perfection have
they not brought their arts? what have not the Co^te^plators of things left
unsearched? of what thing have they not labored to trace out the most intimate
reasons? Now with what access of humane science this is taught by the
miraculous trimnesse of Arithmetic, Geometry, Optics, Music, Astronomy,
Chemistry: Logic also by the wits of certain late Authors is brought on to
its chief exactness, although not yet made of public use. Furthermore the
fervent study about divine Learning, and the pious and happy endeavors of
bringing forth even abstruse mysteries and hidden senses of Prophesies; whereby
through Gods bounty, that we have been and daily may be mo^e benefited than in
fore past ages: they see and joy at it, who in the light of God see light.
Therefore as SOLOMON after he had caused Cedar, and other wood of good juice
and odor, to be fel'd from the mountain Libanus, and to be transported to
Judea, and to be hew'n out for sundry uses: and after he got marble to be cut
out of Quarries, and neatly polisht, and after he had heaped up gold in
sufficient plenty, together with other more precious metals and gems, set his
mind to the very structure of the holy Temple, and happily finished it by Gods
help in seven years space. So touching our selves, after we have collected
hitherto great store of sensual observations: and after we have fairly built
the shop of humane reasoning, and after we have discovered the most rich veins
of the golden mine of divine Scriptures; what may we think remains, but that
by the pleasure and guidance of God himself our hands be set to the building
the Temple of Universal Wisdom?

LIX. The third thing which we deservingly interpret, an occasion of our now
entering on so great a work as this: xThat we see many in this our age, being
desirous of proficiency for the better labor to this end, by a certain secret,
and good instinct, that they may Epitomize Sciences, and Arts, how diffused and
large soever, and that they may free them of rubs and thorns and commend them
to a great sort by the addition of an artificial Method; and by this
Compendium to render men the more Learned. For we interpret those various
endeavors of diverse men of our age to tend hither, who have compiled and
communicated to the world Pandects, and Syntagma's, and Bodies, and sums of
Encyclopedies, and Panstraties, and of Divinity, Philosophy, Law, Physic, and
Theaters also of humane wisdom, transformations of Sciences, great
instaurations, Christian omnisciences, and such like works: whose endeavor of
reducing things manifold into one, things dispersed into order, things obscure
into light, if it do not displease good minds, why should ours displease, who
persuade to the making out of all things some one, even more general and
common than all those, and more accommodated to Universal ends? Certainly, as
in things individualls next of all make the species, the species the genus, the
genuses the most general genus; so in the conceits of our understanding, a
very gradation requires that particular things be contracted into sums, and
sums into a sum of sums.

LX. Lastly, the hidden instincts of our own heart, and motives arising
otherways, and both the desires and exhortations of so many pious men (after
the grounds of our purpose grew somewhat known) cannot but be a document that
even by this means the most wise Counsel of the Deity is a making way for some
thing, if we afford our selves obsequious instruments to him. For God and
Nature since they do nothing in vain, how can it be in vain that he puts into
us these desires of so great a matter, and that he gives us to see medium's of
its possibility, and finally discovers the manner of those medium's more
evidently day by day? that nothing may seem to remain, but that we earnestly
pursue and haste forward the work even to an happy effect. Inasmuch as God
when he offers us any thing, would have us embrace it; when he goes before, he
would have us follow; when he foreshews us a pattern, he would have us
express it by immitation, and perfect it by our very pains: Let them make me a
Sanctuary (said he to Moses) that I may dwell amongst them: according to all
that I show thee after the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all
the instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it, Exodus 25.8.9.

LXI. Yet we must answer to the objections of certain persons not rightly
attending the ends and means of our Pansophicall purpose, that they may not
render it obscure, and cast a mist thereon.

LXII. Many a one will be ready to say, these enterprises relish much of
strangeness, and rashness. I answer: To think of the amendment of humane
affairs, and to wish and endeavor it, is not so strange a business; so as
even from the beginning of our confusions, God, and by the example of God, all
good and wise men have been wont to do the very same thing, according as
necessity required, and occasions did invite, or the matter it self did
permit: How therefore can it be taxed or accused of rashness, which is done by
so great Authors? And if it be no rash thing to view and behold the works of
God; to observe the footsteps of the wisdom of God, disposing all things
sweetly to their proper ends. Lastly, to dispose all ones matters according to
the will of God: Now God commands all these things, upbraiding those that do
otherwise with stupidity and dullness. It will likewise not be a rash thing to
invite others to eye the works of God, and to teach them how they may act all
their affairs not rashly, but by reason, and to exhort and help on men, that
all persons in all things (mending the intention of the supreme Deity) may
yield themselves servants to it. By what means soever that be done, so it be
done after the imitation of our heavenly Father (who whatsoever he does, does
it for Men's sake, and wills that all men should be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth; and both teaches and leads all men in the same ways to
the same place) its a pious and holy business. Now PANSOPHY seeks for no other
thing, than the manner and way, whereby all things may be so disposed to the
benefit of mankind, and indeed to commune uses, by common medium's, that the
common welfare of all exposed to the clear light in each ones eye, may allure,
and ravish all to it and to God the Author of our welfare.

LXIII. They say: what! do you think the Church has been destitute of such
mediums? They are not by Gods grace a wanting: if so be men would not be a
wanting to themselves. I answer: But this is the very thing which is here
sought after, that men may be in some sort efficaciously taught, not to be a
wanting to themselves. And because those accustomed medium's are grown too much
out of use, we persuade that they may be renewed according to Gods command.
Break up your fallow ground (Jer. 4.3.) nor yet by feigning any new thing, but
by preparing the ancient ways of the goodness and wisdom of God, that man
shaking off drowsinesse and sleep, may be attentive to new helps. For we know,
God be thanked, the best innovation is, when the ancient ways are reduced, as
God commands, Jer. 6.16. Thus therefore persuading things to be innovated or
renewed, that men being called back to the ancient books of God and the Laws
of Nature, Scripture, Conscience, all may both be illuminated, and amended to
all things, and through all things after that most ancient manner, which was of
God: What do we but that which God commands? we teach men to stand in the ways
and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, that walking
therein they may find rest for their souls, Jer. 6.16.

LXIV. Now they go on to desire to know all things (which PANSOPHY goes about)
is a footstep of the curiosity of our first Parents, which we hitherto dearly
pay for, and to instill into men the love of a certain Omniscience, is a kind
of serpentine act. I answer. 1. Its customary and usual for God to change
evil into good, and a punishment into a benefit. The division of tongues was a
penalty inflicted on man's pride: Now the Holy Ghost when he would that the
grace of salvation should be dispersed amongst the Nations that were divided in
tongues, he took not away tongues, but distributed himself into tongues; by a
divine artifice improving and consecrating (...), or the variety of tongues,
being the bond of humane confusion, to a remedy against confusion. 2.
Furthermore, the desire of greater knowledge, was then rash, when it was
unprofitable in the state of integrity; where man being furnished with a full
degree of light, enjoyed the fellowship of his Creator, and might have enjoyed
his happiness without end, being ignorant of the contrary: Now after that he
was averse from God, he lost God his light, and through the darkness of his
mind was involved in infinite evils, and knew no way of ridding himself of
them: He has altogether need of light, in which he may both see himself, and
surrounding dangers, and his God again restoring himself unto him, that is,
that he may know the way of escaping misery, and recovering happiness: For
because a contrary is not expelled but by a contrary, against darkness there is
no remedy besides light; nor any other against so many confusions of our mind,
save a distinct knowledge of things, that Satan that old Impostor may no more
so easily deceive us. 3. Therefore God in this our state does forbid us no
longer, he enjoynes us rather to try all things, that that which is good may be
more certainly found out, and more easily retained. Hence are these speeches
of God: See I have set before thee this day life, and good, and death, and
evil: Choose life that thou may live (Deuteronomy. 30.15.16.) also know and see that
it is an evil thing, and bitter to forsake the Lord, (Jer. 2.19.) and the
like: Therefore even as man then when he was forbidden the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, because he obeyed not, sinned: So now when by the same divine
Mandates, we are commanded to try all things, if we do not obey we double the
sin, adding now contumacy to a late rashness. The counterfeit modesty of
ACHAZ did not please God, that when he was commanded to ask a sign of God,
refused, saying, he would not tempt the Lord; as though it were to tempt God
humbly and thankfully to admit of those things which his bounty offers: Seeing
then God shows us both the necessity, and possibility, and occasions of a
certain, truer, and more universal knowledge of all things, we shall be
ungrateful and blameworthy, unless we admit this with thanks.

LXV. They say. Yet nevertheless the title of PANSOPHY is presumptuous, not
agreeing with humane knowledge, so far as it may extend it self; it is to be
left to God alone. I answer, we will not wrangle about the name, when we shall
agree about the thing. Yet we suppose there can be no cause, why any one may be
deservedly offended at it: For we do not therefore attribute any thing to man,
that we may detract from God; but that the glory of God may thereby the more
shine in man his image. And if the word wisdom or wise by the good leave of
these persons be attributed to man, when yet the Scripture expressly terms God
alone wise, (1. Tim. 1.17. Eccles. 1.7.) Why may the adjection of the note of
universality so offend? Surely we have no slighter grounds to oppose this then
PITHAGORAS had, when he changed the word (...) into (...). Now they report that
he respected two things: God for whom alone he would have that glorious title
left, that he should be called (...), or wise: Besides he had regard to
Sophisters ad Triflers, who by the abuse of the word reckoned themselves among
wise men. He therefore desiring to recall men from the opinion of wisdom to
the studies of wisdom, added the mark of study (...), viz. a Philosopher: Now
we have other like causes, why we think another note of universality ( viz.
this (...)) should be proposed; the neglect of wisdom, and the word
Philosophy, Theosophy, and the abuse of others commonly received. First of all
I say, because most men are dull and sluggish, over securely leaving to God the
title of wisdom, with the thing it self, that they themselves may grow
brutish, and perform all their own matters rashly, fondly, and foolishly; and
those who would be wise, either seek to be wise by piece-meale about certain
particular objects, being ignorant and careless of the whole comprisall of
wisdom; or seek to be wise without God, indeed neither aiming at God, nor
conforming themselves and their affairs unto his rules. They are therefore to
be called back to the Laws and Rules of the all wise God, without whom as
there is no Essence; so likewise no understanding, and no wisdom, and nothing
true or coherent, that all men grown skillful in the rellishing all things;
but especially divine matters may be truly rendered like to God, and as much as
possible. The manner therefore of Science being found out whereby ((...).) all
men about all things, altogether may be taught to be wise; why may it not
deserve to be termed, A certain humane PANSOPHY? After the imitation of words
already received, by which the fuller furniture or preparation of any thing is
expressed by this adjection ((...).) as we may see on (...), etc. Heereunto is
added the abuse of the name Philosophy against Theosophy, or Theology; and on
the contrary, which they thus vulgarly distinguish, as if neither of them had
any thing to do with the other, with a manifest wrong to truth, where therefore
these are conjoined, and men are taught (as AUGUSTINE speaks) both to act the
Philosophers part in sacred things, and to be consecrated in Philosophy, by
deserved right the name is changed, so as the thing wants not its fit index or
discoverer. Yet at last if the appellation PANSOPHY shall displease the Church,
it may be changed into another, even contrary, so as we may style it instead of
Omniscience, or all-knowledge, Nulliscience, or no-knowledge. For we must even
needs come to that at length, if we shall constitute true PANSOPHY (which may
reduce contraries likewise to an identity) that by how much the more a man sees
by so much he may note more defects both of his own and others, the wisest of
men being witness. Eccl. 1.15.

LXVI. They object likewise, that we by calling PANSOPHY a certain Ladder to
God, do transform the work of converting men into an Art which appertains to
God alone? We answer, as though it were indeed absurd either to join external
helps, to the inward operation of the Holy Ghost, or to use a certain prudence
and art in dispensing these: when as he is the rather absurd who denies this:
For God acts ordinarily by mediums, in which mediums, there are borh men
themselves (whom God has as Laborers together with him, or co-workers, 1 Cor.
3.9) and also humane industry, which the art of method directs. Hence since God
promises a fair reformation of the Church, he promises Pastors which may feed
his people with knowledge and understanding, Jer. 3.15. and teachers having the
tongue of the Learned, knowing how to speak a word in season, Isay 50.4. And
the practice of the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself, shows, that they
were not wont to set upon men without certain stratagems, whom they would
excite, move, convert, or convince: that it is apparent, this work consists both
of prudence, and a certain Art. Therefore if we make all these things collected
into one, and by the benefit of method, accommodated to a ready use to be
subservient to God, what do we but that which is pious and just in it self?

LVII. They say, there are Books enough already, and what are we the better?
the world does and will remain. I answer: we may be taught never to despair,
always to hope better things, always to afford occasions and helps, by the
patience and bounty of God, always renewing it self, and in different manners
discovering it self continually with more luster: and moreover promising to
these last times; a multiplication of knowledge, and light at the very evening
of the world, Dan. 12.4. Zach. 14.7. Therefore let us endeavor that this be
promoted, even as much as it shall please God by us, by reforming not only
books, but men to the diligent use of books; which PANSOPHY will do, teaching
not only all other things, but even the universal use of it self.

LXVIII. Now how may the same book serve diverse persons, seeing diverse things
delight diverse men; and some things are agreeable to the learned, other to the
unlearned; some to believers, other to unbelievers? I answer: The Chymicks out
of this respect praise their Quintessence, because it is of so exquisite a
temperature, that being applied to all things, it bestows that on severalls
which is needful for every one: a cooling to things hot, an heat to things
cold, moisture to dry things, and a dryness to things moist; and therefore
it is a present remedy for every disease. We may pronounce some such like
commendation of this book when it is rightly trimmed and set out (as one which
will be a certain Quintessence of books) that it will profit all, its fruit
returning to every one. For by reason of the decent te perature of simplicity,
with sublimity of truth, with exactness, it will come to pass, that by the
simplicity of its method it may commend it self to those that are simple, and
by the sublimity of things it may feed the learned, and by demonstrating which
clearly by a true faith, that nothing may be more rational, it may raise
delight in the faithful, and dispose Infidels to faith or render them
unexcusable.

LXIX. Now here many a one objects, those who in matters of faith provoke or
challenge men to reason, are Heretics: Therefore PANSOPHY much alike assaying
this, is worthyly to be suspected. I answer: Therefore both JUSTIN MARTYR,
ATHENAGORAS, LACTANTIUS, LUDOVICUS VIVES, MORNEY, GROTIUS, and who ever else
have by Reasons contended for the faith against Infidells? For diverse men may
do the same, so as it may not be the same, if they do it in a different end
and manner as it is here. An Heretic in divine Testimonies uses reason as a
Judge: The Pansophist as a witness, he commands reason to go before, and
presigne the paths by which he may catch divine Revelation: This would have God
to go before, and would have reason follow: Therefore an Heretic by reason
overthrows the Tenets of faith; a Pansophist does establish them. He joins the
Creature with the Creator, this subordinates: He teaches reason to speak
against faith, this makes reason speak for faith, that they who do not admit
the testimonies of God (Atheists and Infidells) or corrupt them by their
naughty reasons (Heretics, Sophisters, Smatterers) may be constrained by the
force of their own reason, and may be brought to that pass, that they may be
compelled to stand for God and his truth against themselves; that is to say, to
acquiesse in the word of God, and not resist it. In sum our God deserves that
to his mouth the mouths and hearts of all men attest, and be enforced to
attest, which things PANSOPHY seeks after.

LXX. What do you hope then (say they) that there will be no contradictions?
But there will always be Heresies, I answer: I believe wicked men will always
be Rebels to light while the World continues (Job 24.13.) But shall we therefore
neglect to light Candles, because they are useless to such as are blind, or
to purify their flames by snuffing, because some lurking fellow delights more
in darkness? We know there must be Heresies, nor are they ever like to be
wanting, which is the restlessenesse and craft of Satan. Shall we not
therefore have a care to remove and rid them out of the way, as often as God
does give occasions? Its the part of the sons of light to oppose, what way
they can, the Kingdom of darkness, and to put lighted Candles in Candlesticks
in the house of the Church, that they may give light to all who are in the
house, the event being committed to God. It Is meet therefore to suppress what
darkness soever we are able to vanquish by the power of light; although the
Prince of darkness, is like never to be a wanting to his occasions, to cast
darkness even upon new light. For Christ the light of the world converts
again that very thing into an occasion of detecting new light: To whom indeed
it is usual to transfer all the endeavors of his enemies, even their very
ravings into an occasion of manifesting his glory (Psalm. 16.10.) The more
Satan brings in darkness, the more shall the splendour of divine light be
disclosed, and a very lie shall show the strength of truth, this we may safely
hope.

LXXI. Lastly, there are some who object to us our tenuity and disabilities:
How poor and mean a party are you that you should dare to move such great
things as these? I answer: This is not to be looked at, of what small abilities
we are who advise these things, but how great he is in whose name we advise,
and those things which we advise, and they for whose sakes we advise. He in
whose name we are bold to exhort Mortals, that they seek an universal remedy
for their confusions, is God, the Lord of all, ready to confirm his mercy upon
all, and to establish his truth for ever; in whose power it is even to open the
mouth of an Ass, or to excite stones to cry out, if others hold their peace;
and for whom it is ordinary to use contemptible mediums, that the glory may be
his own, not theirs, who forget that they are the instrument in the hand of
God, if even they may seem ought considered by themselves. The very thing
which we would have to be promoted, is the glory of God, which is to be
illustrated by all men and all things, as much as may be here under Heaven;
that from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof, from this present
even for ever the name of the Lord may be praised, and the whole earth be
filled with his majesty. They for whose sake we do these things are they
whereof we our selves are the least part, yet a part, All men, to thirst after
whose welfare as much as our own, he has commanded us, who has produced all
from one blood, redeemed all by one blood, he invites all to the same Communion
of a future life, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come
to repentance. He therefore who contemns these things contemns not us, but
God, and the Majesty of God, but all mankind, to promote whose glory and
welfare, as much as in him lies, he either dispises, or neglects, or even
hinders others who do endeavor it. As for our part, our slenderness cannot
at all incommodate or disadvantage things which are so much to be wished for by
themselves; when even a very fool may suffice to give an occasion of a good
matter: Of which rank if we be reckoned; ye wise ones put forth your
abilities, that whatsoever ye take notice of to be wanting in so great desires,
may be supplied.

LXXII. We praying with DAVID, Lord send out thy light and thy truth that they
may lead us, and bring us unto thy holy Hill, and to thy Tabernacles. (Psalm.
43.3.) From these very words we ingeminate again and again three essential
requisites of PANSOPHY, to wit that there be observed.

1. The light of Method, whereby the minds of all may be lead through all
things without any obscurities and rubbes inoffensively. 2. The truth of
Doctrine, that we take heed, lest any vain thing admixe it self, either in
the whole or in any part. 3. The subordination of all things to the last end,
which is the dwelling with God in his Holy Hill.
Psalm 90.17. Let the Beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, and let him
direct the work of our hands.


AN ORTHOGRAPHICAL DELINEATION, OR TRUE DRAUGHT OF THE Pansophicall Temple:
Laying open to the view, the outward face of its structure, with the Number,
Order, Situation, and Use of the Parts.

Ecclesiasticus 37. v. 16. Let Reason go before every Enterprise, and Counsel
before every Action.

John A. C. To the Reader, health.
Most Courteous Reader, when I read these things in sacred History; David gave
to Solomon the description or pattern of the Porch and Temple, and of the
treasures thereof, and of the upper chambers thereof, and of the inner Parlours
thereof, and of the place of the Mercy-seat, and of all the Courts that he had
by the spirit, and of all the chambers round about, of the treasuries of the
house of God, and of the treasuries of the dedicate things, and for all the
Vessels of service saying, all these things came to me written by the hand of
the Lord, that I may understand all the works of this Pattern. 1 Chronicles. 28.11,
12, 13, and 19. I observe from thence these seven things. First, that
Consultations about things ought in any wise to be sent out before the things.
Secondly, nor those extemporall only, but far going before the very things
done: as David debated in Counsels about the building of the Temple of
Jerusalem, even some twenty years before (though all the work was material;)
and Solomon his son and successor, though he was most richly supplied with all
provision, and unusual wisdom; did but set upon it at length in the fourth
year of his reign: so as near upon thirty years ran out in deliberations, and
the acquiring of necessaries. Thirdly, that consultations concerning weightier
businesses ought not to be superficial, but piercing even to the inmost and
smallest moments or concernments of the enterprises. Fourthly, that all these
things may not only be forethought, but also described and delineated: to the
end that all the works of the Pattern may be better understood, as David
speaks. Fifthly, that those are the best Idea's of things which come from God
himself: For lo Solomon, though the wisest of men, is not permitted, to devise
or contrive the form of the Temple after his own pleasure; but he is bound to
imitate a pattern showed him by God. Sixthly, those only are to be taken and
accounted for divine patterns, which are written by the hand of the Lord: to
wit, whose form he has delineated in his word, or engraven, and imprinted in
his creatures. Seventhly and lastly, that such Patterns of works are not to be
concealed or kept under in secret, but to be shown and delivered into their
hands, who are concerned to understand and imitate them.

Which things I meant to preface at this time: First, to fore-arme our present
small delineations, against their judgments, who think it better that
something be done, then that it be disputed how it ought to be done. Secondly,
to mollify their impatience, who think much, or take it ill that the work is
so long deferred, and the time put off in deliberations. Thirdly, to prevent
their rigider and rougher censure of those who think it superstitious to be in
disquisition or debate, not only so long, but so anxiously concerning the
form of any Book. Fourthly, to make it apparent, that we may not only
think, but also delineate our thoughts, till we exactly understand all the
works of our Pattern. Fifthly, because I know they are not a wanting, who are
of opinion, that books may be writ, either in any kind of method, as it offers
it self, or in none at all: I confess I seek such a method, as I may believe
comes from the hand of God. And sixthly that I account for such those methods
which resemble the works of God: either which the very hand of God made, or
which he permitted to be made by the hands of men; yet so as the very mouth of
God has prae-delineated their Order. In the first rank is the very frame of
the world: and each natural body of a Plant, living creature, etc. In the
latter the delineation of the Tabernacle, and then of the Temple of Solomon and
Ezechiel: to which that we look ever and anon in tracing the true method,
shall be manifest. Lastly, lest any sinisterly interpret even this Act of
mine, that I expose such things to the Public; the example of David may defend
me, who delivered to Solomon before all the people the future Delineation of
the Temple, which I imitate upon a two fold cause: First, because I know I
shall dye as well as David, and it may be before I be suffered to see all that
which I wish: Let others then behold, and have from me at least a fuller Idea
of my desires, then hitherto: Secondly, because I know not certainly as well
as David, that this Delineation is made exactly to Gods Pattern, and hereupon
already immutable, and not to be changed. Let them therefore see it and judge,
who can see and judge, and may they as yet advise us before we set upon the
work, (if God command us to live and proceed.) For the Spirits of the Prophets
are subject to the Prophets.

In brief, this delay of consulting can in no wise disadvantage our work, it
may conduce something for the better maturing it: According to that of Ovid.

Nam mora dat vires: teneras mora percoquit uvas,
Et validas segetes, quod fuit Herba facit.
Quae praebet latas Arbor spatiantibus umbras,
Quo posita est primum tempore Virga fuit.
Tunc poterat manibus summa tellure revelli:
Nunc stat in immensum viribus aucta suis.
Delay gives strength: by it Grapes ripe are made,
And corn grows stiff out of the tender blade.
The tree which Walkers yields a shade so big,
When it was planted first, was but a Twig:
Then up you might have plucked it with your hand,
Which now increased in strength does firmly stand.
Hence is that counsel of the same Author.

Differ; habent parvae commoda magna morae.
Defer a while; large incomes do repay
The inter-breathings of a small delay.
And hereupon is that of Herodotus in his seventh Book. Every thing by being
hastened begets errors, whence great detriments are wont to arise; but good
things come of delay: if not such things which forthwith seem to be good, yet
certainly such as in their time may appear to have been good: whence also is
that neat Emblem of Alciat: I profit by delay.

How true these things are (Reader) I hope thou will better understand, if thou
shall vouchsafe to peruse these fore-draughts of ours, which we yet stay upon.

Farewell.
THE DELINEATION OF THE PANSOPHICALL-TEMPLE.
I. WIth what words wise SOLOMON shuts up his Work which he writ of the
Vanities of the World, with the same we think good to begin the Delineation of
that work, which we wish may prove an antidote against Worldly Vanities. Of
making many Books there is no end, and much study is a weariness of the
flesh. This is the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. For God shall bring every
work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil,
Eccles. 12.12, 13, 14.

II. Where because he ranks among the vanities of mortal men, both the itch of
writing many Books (which he terms a matter of infinite labor,) as also that
of reading (which he calls a weariness of the flesh,) and counsels us so to
observe the chief scope of our whole life, that before all things, and after
all things, those things may be sought and done, by which we may be advanced
in the fear of God, and rightly prepared for the things which we expect and
look for after this life is ended: we following this advice, again and again
redouble our desires: that there might be a Book compiled by the common help
of all, which might remedy humane confusions, whose making should not be of
infinite labor, but infinite use; and whose reading should not be a weariness
to the flesh, but a recreation of the spirit, and which might not show this or
that by parcels, but the whole concernment of man, and might instruct him so to
pass this transitory life, that he might bring with him to that dreadful
judgment, the testimonies of his well performed business.

III. We desire I say, that a book be made, which one may be instead of all, a
most true Inventory of all Divine and humane Wisdom; in which all things may
be proposed facilely, that nothing may be more easy; and briefly, that
nothing be may shorter, and yet sufficiently, that nothing may be more
sufficient; to wit, by conveighing the minds of all men through all things
which are and may be known, to him of whom, by whom, and for whom are all
things, and who is both the beginning and end of our Wisdom, that there may
remain nothing else to be learn here under Heaven. For indeed PLATO himself
writ, that the life of a wise man is a return to God. How much more then does
it become us Christians to endeavor that our wisdom may be nothing else then
to be raised, drawn, and rapt through all things, and by the assistance of all
things unto God?

IV. To which end if we enter upon our sacred Philosophy, it will also happen
that none of these inferior things, by which as by a reared Ladder, we elevate
our selves to that high one inhabiting his eternity, can so much as hold us
amongst them, and yet both delight and feed, and after their sort satisfy us
more and better, then those whom they do hold and entangle: Namely, if the
largeness of our Kingdom, the Universe by an artificial brevity be presented
to our minds entire; and if by an artificial facility discovering the reasons
of all things, our minds be let in into the possession thereof; and lastly, if
by an artificial solidity of a thorough handling these things, we may obtain
that the minds of men being rid of infinite winding and wandering ambages of
opinions and employments, may be bound to the plain and perpetual grounds of
Vnum, Verum, Bonum: And if by that means, the ways to jars, erroneous tenets,
and vain studies, and occupatio^s may be stopped (as much as possible) that they
may not spread so licentiously.

V. The fundamental reasons of which matter, because ye have already seen in
the Ichnography of the Pansophicall Temple: Now the manner whereby we may hope
such a thing may be brought to pass, is to be disclosed, which we shall
dispatch in this present Orthographicall Delineation of the same Temple.

VI. The outward face of an erected building, is wont to be drawn for this
end, that men may more easily and exactly judge concerning the proportion of
the whole, and of the parts. An Idea of which manner of proportion if we borrow
from the draught of the Temple of God in EZEKIEL these things should be
observed; that the whole building be foure-square, and all the parts thereof,
and the parts of parts (the Gates, the outward and inward Courts, the Tables,
Altars, etc.) square, and all things consisting of lines mere parallel and
perpendicular, and all things open, plain, exposed to a free passage; lastly,
that whatsoever rises up to any height, may by stairs made before hand, be so
connexed and knit with the lower, that nothing may remain inaccessible, even
to the very tops of the Temple.

VII. For the imitation then hereof, we lay down before all things four
hinges of the Temple of wisdom; to which all things of it shall have respect,
Fullness, Truth, Easiness, and Method, all these exact.

VIII. Which four things, verily certain censours of Philosophies seem to
have observed to be as 'twere cardinal or principal matters in the fabric of
humane Science: For those who reckon up the Prerogatives of Peripateticall
Philosophy vaunt of these four things. 1. That none of the Philosophers has
more matters and things then ARISTOTLE in his books. 2. That he has carefully
searched out the Reasons and Causes of things. 3. That he uses a brave, round,
perspicuous, and efficacious kind of speech. 4. That lastly he has been more
observant of Method then his Predecessors. (Thus ALSTED has it in the fourth
Book of his Encycl. cap. 8.) which if they be liked off in ARISTOTLE, or any
other good Author (now they cannot but please clear minds) they are to be
observed surely so much the more, yea most of all in this Book of chiefest
care and exactness. To wit, that here (1) All the Reasons, (2) Of all things
may be explained, (3) In most perspicuous language, and (4) In a most exquisite
Method, then which there can be no better.

IX. The plenitude or fullness therefore of things and matters shall be the
first hinge of PANSOPHY, on which all the businesses of it shall mainely rest
in the whole, and in every part of it: In the whole, that the whole University
of things may be seen here; to wit, the world with all its fullness. Nor so
only as it is now, but even as it was before it was, and shall be after it
shall not be; together with God its admired and adored President: For we must
perform that for PANSOPHY, which in vain, SENECA wished for Philosophy; that
as the face of the universal world comes into view, so that might be presented
to us as a spectacle most like unto the world, (Epist. 90.) For that which he
adds, is a testimony for us, whose sight fails in what is next, that all
severalls may more easily be shown to us, not as yet capable of the Universe,
that the sage man saw the Universe was to be subdued unto Wit, but could not be
so as yet. He touches not the causes of impossibility, because perhaps he did
not understand them: Now they are manifest to us, for there was a defect of
Principles; especially of Divine Revelation, by the assistance whereof those
things which are without our senses, and have been before the memory of men,
and which shall be after us, might have been made known: And also the lack of
sensual observations from forepast Ages. But whereas to us God has both
supplied that defect of Principles by his word; and also observations continued
for so many Ages, have increased the treasures of experiments; why may there
not be hope afforded us now of the capacity of the whole Universe? Let us then
contemplate it no longer by parts only, but all things in their whole
compass, as they flow from eternity, and flow back into eternity, by the
ways and means accommodated to the Laws of eternity it self: which let us
discover to the world if we can, that men may begin to be wise, not by
peecemeale, but wholely: filling all the Court of the mind with all solidity of
learning.

X. This fullness of things in PANSOPHY will not consist with it self before
it shall be manifest, that a certain seat is assigned, or indeed meet or fit
to be left to universalls and severalls, which are in the treasures of humane
and divine wisdom, whether they be extant already, or as yet concealed. Also
whatsoever may be spoken profitably and necessarily of every thing, shall
appear it may be spoken here, or surely that the fountains are open, and the
channels rightly disposed, so as it may be drawn out from thence; to wit, that
whatsoever any man speaks, writes, thinks, endeavors, acts, he may act or do
part of those things whereof here shall be the whole.

XI To be able to obtain which by any other mean we have had no hope, but that
by fixing our last end, (for which even we and the world are, and all those
things which surround us here, and come either to be viewed, done, used, or
enjoyed by us, to wit, by our happiness in God) as the Basis and ground of the
whole work: all the rays of our knowledge from all parts may be referred, as
it were, to this Center, and to this last eternal bound all these things which
go before in the flux or passage of time, may be subordinated as mediums to
their end. Which how it may be dispatched by us, the Spectators shall see a
little below in the draught of Pansophicall method. Here they are advertised
only that the fullness of things is the first, and so the primary business
which they are to mind and judge of in this draught of the Pansophical Temple.

XII. The second hinge hereof we have made Truth, which in like manner all
things shall regard. For to this Heavenly Nymph we have dedicated a most
religious altar in the Temple of PANSOPHY; to which there shall be no open
access, for any feigned and bad opinion: lest therefore any vain, false, or
counterfeit business might press in hither, we will have Guardians of
unspotted fidelity, things themselves, and Testimonies concerning things from
the mouth of God; with the proper sense of every man, and reason well forfeited
against aberrations: that here no man may have need to fear the meeting with
colorable deceit in any thing. Here then touching all things are gathered all
truths, (hitherto commonly scattered here and there) and with such evidence and
clearness they are reduced to their Radixes, as the minds of all men may be
captivated to an eternal compliance with unmoved truth; and the confession of
what is true, may at length also be wrung from such as strive against it, or if
any continue opposite and refractory he may be convinced he denounces war to
common sense, and his conscience, and things, that is, to mankind, himself,
and God. And this shall be the second very great business, which the spectator
shall give heed to, whether truth be delivered here with that evidence and
certainty, as it cannot be contradicted (for he shall see a little beneath a
Proof or Say of its method.) If he shall take notice it is otherwise, he shall
perceive we do not yet attain our aim in that point, and leave the victory to
others.

For that even all may easily judge concerning these things, who being endowed
by God with a sound mind, shall come to contemplate the structure of the
Pansophicall Temple, we have purposed to effect by perspicuity or clearness of
speech; which we have laid down as the third universal hinge of this whole
structure. For after (the chief and never to be intermitted) respect of truth,
the principal care shall be, that all may understand whatsoever shall be
delivered. Which by what way I think it may be obtained, I must tell you
plainly.

XIV. We altogether avoid as Rocks and Shelves those obscure and perplexed
terms of second Notions, as they call them, with which even almost all books
of vulgar Philosophy and Theology do not so much abound, as they appear rough
and ragged with their stiff prickles. For what need is, there I should speak
so as none may understand, o^ scant a few, if I can speak that all may
understand? I Will give an instance. One being minded to describe exactly the
office or part of Logic, writes thus: The subject of Logic is of information,
of tractation or handling, and of use. The subject of information is the wit;
primarily indeed reason, but secundarily partly the memory, partly speech. The
Subject of tractation is the manner of discoursing well. It Is termed otherwise,
The subject of Art, as also of learning, and the internal. The subject of use
is Ens and non Ens, which is called otherwise the Subject of the Artificer, and
external, etc. Who I pray you understands these things, unless he be wonted
to these thorns by the use of some years? If I shall say, Logic informs and
directs the mind in remembering, in speaking, I have said just the very same
which he before: but I have said it so as both the Learned and unlearned may
understand me. I have said therefore more, because to more; he less, because to
fewer, although with a greater circumstance of words, and under the shrouds of
Riddles. Now why should not I rather speak so, as I may hope I do not speak to
the wind. God is wont to speak to that people which he is angry with in
another language, Esaias 28.11. And when he intends to confound the Builders of
Babel, he confounds their tongues, Genesis 11. but when to build up Sion he
restores the ready use of the tongue that they may understand themselves
mutually, who could not before, Acts 2. Therefore Paul checking the praise of
certain persons gotten from hence, because they could speak obscurely to the
unlearned, says; thou verily give thanks well, but the other is not edified.
In the Church I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my
voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue,
1 Cor. 17.19. which if it be to be imitated any where, then certainly here,
where in the face of the whole Church, yea, of mankind, for the common
edification of all men, things come to be explained by words.

XV. We have no mind to depart yet from this hinge: because there is hope of
much proficiency, if this pe^fe of obscure terms hitherto worn, and
deservedly by an unprofitable use worn out, be taken away. Indeed discreet and
understanding men thanked TICHO BRAHE, because he removed out of Astronomic
Orbs Real, Eccentrick, Epicycles, Deferents, Aequants, and the rest of that
useless stuff, teaching perfectly the Heavenly motions in plainer hypothesis.
Why therefore do we not attempt the same in all things which may be known? to
get rid of so many superfluous, obscure, rough, yea monstrous terms: through
which they must pass as through thorns, who go to the green and pleasant walks
of Sciences, and wherewith a good many being pricked, are either in great fear
to venture, and withdraw; or march through not without being hurt, and raised
with the most ragged conceits of the mind. But now if we can want such, and
explain things plain of themselves, by plain words, which may be intelligible
to all, what need have we of entanglements and trifling lets? SENECA says
well: As it is a point of Luxury to desire delicate things: so it is a part of
madness to refuse such as are ordinary, and may be had at any easy rate.
Philosophy requires frugality, not penance (Ep. 5.) Let us therefore either do
this, that all knowable things may be delivered after that manner, as they may
be apprehended by every man's understanding readily, of their own accord,
without an interpreter; or we do nothing. We because we have taken pity of
youth, which have every where so many torturing vexations, without necessity do
assay to take away those, or if need require any terms to be retained to
mollify them by a meet situation, and good definition. How well may the
learned judge if they shall but set aside prejudice? Of whom yet if we do not
obtain their approbation, we will appeal to Infants, little ones, and Idiots,
who if they shall apprehend our things better, truth it self shall acquiesse
in their judgments. For it is no new or strange thing for little ones to
applaud the teacher of eternal truth, the Seniors persevering in their
accustomed drowsinesse. And this shall be the third principal thing which the
Spectators shall observe, whether these our matters be so clear as they may be
understood easily by any one? For which business (as I have already said)
there is none but may be a competent Judge; yea perhaps, the ignoranter and
simpler any one is, the more fit he may be.

XVI. The fourth hinge of our attempt, which will contribute wonderful
strength to the whole edifice of PANSOPHY, is concinnity or neatness of
method: which we will have to be such as they who shall travel through these
things, may perceive the conceptions of their mind to be knit as close to
themselves, as they shall see the very things join themselves together in the
Universe. Which that it may be had at length by the help of method, it was long
ago to be wished, that we might not always teach on that manner, that
Scholars might remain Scholars, and Teachers Teachers, (as SCALIGER speaks,) or
that we might always prolong and never determine brawls and disagreements.
What we may endeavor here, and with how great propernesse and aptness we may
intend to couple things with things, and link them to men's minds, we must now
bewray. And this shall be the fourth thing which the spectators shall
principally mark.

XVII. We have three chief and essential properties of Pansophicall method.

1. A perpetual Coherence with all things. 2. A perpetual Gradation. 3. A
perpetual Uniformity.
By the benefit whereof we hope to obtain, that all things may be taught and
learnt here easily, and with the greatest, and as it were Mathematical
evidence and certainty of truth.

XVIII. Perpetual Coherence is in this, that all things, the greatest and the
least, from the first even to the last, shall be chained together, and one
thing shall so depend upon an other, that nothing of all those things which are
any where, may either escape or chance to be seen in any other then its own
place. Hitherto because things and words lay for the most part scatteringly,
nor rightly disposed in their Classes or ranks, nor bound up amongst themselves
with perpetual ties: it could not be otherwise, then that even scatteringly
and only occasionally for the most part, there should both be found out, and
carried together into a mixed mass, observations of things and words out of
which Rules were made and dispersed through diverse heaps of Disciplines
(whereof there was neither certain number nor order;) but the marriage of
things and words being found out and established by intervening bonds of right
conceits (if conceits accurately and punctually abstracted from things, may
again accurately and punctually imprint themselves in words,) it will be
impossible for any thing to escape, which may not come into order.

XIX This to wit is looked after, that as all things which are and may be
thought and spoken, are one world knitting it self together on every side by
its fullness: so what things are thought and spoken of that whole University of
things, may be but one System of our knowledge unseperable in it self, and so
knitting it self together on every side by its parts, that neither there may be
need for any thing to be omitted, nor twice repeated: and every thing may be
beheld standing handsomely no other where then in its own place. So it will come
to pass at length, that this work may be most like to the world, from which
nothing can be withdrawn without ruin, or certainly a foul breach; nor any
thing put to, or put otherwise without notable monstrousness. And that it may
appear what was believed formerly as impossible, that a verse could be taken
from HOMER, that may be spoken by better right of the Pansophicall work.

XX. The like concatenation of things and conceits may be had if we go in a
perpetual Analysis through the university of things; to wit, from the first
and highest conceit of Ens through all the differences of things, even to the
last, and unpartable points of differences, as far as they may be noted:
speaking of severalls by and by whatsoever we must speak in the same place.

XXI. Now in truth there is need of a quite new Analysis of things: because
those which we yet have, are not sufficient for this use. Especially those
famous ten Predicaments of ARISTOTLE, to which men vulgarly believe that all
things may be recalled as to the chief genuses of things: yet how those
genuses may be divided even into the most special specieses, neither
ARISTOTLE, nor any other shows us. Whence it came to pass that the
contemplators of things erred in the university of things and conceits, as it
were in an infinite Chaos; and they who assayd to reduce theames which were
offered them to the Predicaments, (which we were bid to do oftentimes in
Schools) that business would either not succeed, or not without doubting and
straining; which is an Argument the veins of things were not rightly
discovered: as also this, because reason is neither given there, nor appears by
it self, why there are set down so many, no more, or fewer Classes of things?
and why they follow one another in that order? whereas if we had learned to
observe aright the joints of natural co^positio^s, the University of things
would voluntarily resolve it self by its limbs, and it would be fairly
evident, that things proceed in this order and number, and not in another.

XXII. The matter therefore is to be attemped anew, notwithstanding, that
LUDOVICUS VIVES is out of hope, that any thing may be rendered perfect in
naturalls while he writes: To describe the orders of Forms, and to call them
as it were into their ranks to a muster, and to dispose them in our
speculation, as they are disposed in nature, this truly he only can do who made
them. For the proprieties of things, their virtues and excellencies are unknown
to us; unless perhaps in general. (lib. 1. de prima Philos.) now grant we do
not every where obtain the full and exact order of things: yet what forbids it
to be somewhat better settled? For we trust though our industry fail in the
displacing of substances by their forms, we shall yet show a new artifice in
accidents, and other Genuses of Enses: so as there may be had an Analysis of
things, which if it be not perfect, yet may prove the next to what is perfect.

XXIII. Now we lay down these conditions of a perfect Analysis of things:
First, that it be altogether Universal, exhausting all things; that nothing
may occu^re any where, which may not find its seat here amongst its neighbor
matters. Secondly, that it be not forced and strained, but disposing things
limb by limb as they resolve themselves of their own accord, sense and (the
understanding being never repugnant or cross.) Thirdly, that causes may either
be rendered every where or appear by themselves, why there are so many Classes
of things, and why neither more nor fewer, may be devised. This shall beget at
last both pleasantness and security in Universal knowledge.

XXIV. Furthermore, as the world, although in it self is one undivided, yet in
is parts it is clearly distinguished for order sake: so it will be necessary that
PANSOPHY, although one continued Systeme, be either divided or distinguished
into certain parts, books, and heads. Now this is not to be in any order
contrived to our own liking, but in the Series which the very intention of the
last end shall prescribe; to wit, our happ^nesse in God, through all things
which any where are either to be promoted or illustrated; whose guidance if we
follow, a threefold work will issue forth unto us, yet it is to be resolved
into seven Sections, or Books.

XXV. For before all things, it is needful that a certain preparation of minds
be premised to that which is undertaken to be done, which is vulgarly called
(...), or a fore-view: in Latin Praecognita. Then shall follow the very body
of PANSOPHY, showing the (...), or contemplation of all things which are any
where. Lastly, (...), or after-view, shall conclude, demonstrating the true use
of all things which are truly known.

XXVI. There is need of a fore-view, or of things which are to be known
aforehand; because in the producing every work, it is requisite the matter be
pre-disposed, that it may be made fit to receive the form: And why then is it
not meet that men likewise be rendered docil, or teachable before they be
taught? Truly unless we will lose our labor, and power the precious liquor of
wisdom into leaking tuns, it is necessary we begin from preparatives, and not
from the very work; to wit, that men may begin to awake out of that drowsinesse
to which mortals are so much accustomed and inured, and be touched with some
care of truer and better good things, than those which they have common with
Bruits. Which this Protheory of PANSOPHY shall seriously labor to effect.

XXVII. Now the Theory it self shall handle things themselves, in that order
wherein they were produced they shall both proceed, and at last also end; which
consideration shall yield five essential parts of PANSOPHY. To wit. First,
because God before he made the world had reposed in his divine mind the Idea's
of things; that is, the manners and forms, according to which things were to
be, and are formed. And then secondly, according to those Idea's, he contrived
the frame of the World, and put into it that power which we call Nature, to
continue even without end (if he would permit,) its motions and operations. And
because (Thirdly) he concentred the power of Nature in man especially, and by
it put forth himself variously, so that wonderful works proceeded from the
wit of man, which Nature it self could never have produced of which the world
is full* And yet because man (Fourthly) miscarried greatly in a business of
the greatest moment, the government of himself, and thereby cast himself
headlong into eternal destruction, and God by putting to his hand, restored
man again, and prescribed him being restored new Laws, which if he keep, he
avoyds ruin; if he keep them not, then he fully drowns himself in the gulf
of perdition: And it will come to pass at length, that (Fifthly) God, this
visible scene being taken away, will discover his invisible Majesty and glory to
his Elect Creatures, and make them partakers of blessed eternity, and this shall
be the last line of things, whereby God shall be, and be beheld all in all. The
contemplation of all these things shall afford in the same order five parts of
PANSOPHY. In the first whereof we collect and contemplate those general and
common ways, or manners of things, according to which all particular things
are, and be made. In the second we have to view the whole course of nature: In
the third the works of man's wit, which are, and shall be found out. There is
made a passage from thence to consider the mysteries of our perdition or fall,
and restitution or recovery; which end in the state of eternity

XXVIII. The (...) shall put an end to the Theory of things accomplished in this
sort, showing the true use of true Wisdom.

XXIX So therefore whole Pansophy shall consist of seven Books, whereof the
first shall contain Prepa^atories; the second Ideals; the third N^turals; the
fourth Artificials; the fifth spirituals; the sixth eternals; the seventh the
Praxis of all these, that we may know how to transfer what we know to noble
uses.

XXX. In which regard PANSOPHY shall resemble some fair tree rising out of its
own roots, leaning upon its own, and that a firm stock and sufficient to
sustain its bulk, displaying it self most distinctly into branches, and
producing most wholesome fruits by an enliving power or vigor diffused through
all parts thereof. That root of whole or entire PANSOPHY shall be the book of
its Praecognita; the Stock or Trunk of that Ideal Science, which they call
PANSOPHY, vulgarly METAPHYSICS, The Cardinal or chief Branches of those
things which are, and be seen in this life, are three: The contemplation of
Naturals, Artificials, and Spirituals. The power diffused through all these
things, enlivening and quickening all things, is God inhabiting eternity, yet
at once passing through, disposing, and governing all temporal matters.
Lastly, the fruits shall be the sundry uses of true knowledge for our present
and following life.

XXXI. The view of EZECHIELS'S Temple, and our looking upon the Entry, the
Gate, and the Court, the first, second, and third Sactuary, and lastly, upon
the fountain of living waters, gave us the like disposal, as we have shown in
the explaining of our Pansophicall Endeavors. But we must observe, as there
the whole Temple was consecrated to God, save that the most hidden things were
kept in the utmost inner House: So in the Temple of PANSOPHY, all things ought
to personate or sound out God; as without whom neither is there, nor comes
there to pass ought, nor any other way is there referred ought, then to
himself. To wit, because it is he alone, of whom, by whom, and in whom are
all things: it were a wicked thing silently to conceal ought of his praise.
Not is this to be done, that in the end at length all things may resolve
themselves into his glory, (which will certainly be:) but that what way soever
we shall go, even from the very entrance of this sacred Temple; religious ears
may hear and understand silent clamours of things; which will be, if to those
that view all things, that wisdom also which reaches from one end to another,
and sweetly orders all things, Wisd. 8.1. with all things, and in all things
be set abroad to their sight: that where ever we shall be, all things, even
when we are doing another thing, may erect and direct the mind unto it.

XXXII. To catch at the occasions of which business there will be no need.
They will in this real distribution of things knowable, yield themselves as
much of their own accord, as the very things are every where obvious and easy
to the senses. For in the entrance the goodness and wisdom of God will openly
offer it self to be considered, who has destinated to map an end in himself,
in the fellowship of his eternal happiness; and thereto has ordered all
mediums freely communicated, and has taught and does teach the manner and use
of those mediums. In the Entry-doore he shall come to our contemplation and
view, as the first cause of all things that are; how all things may visibly
represent him as their invisible root, and yet may show that he infinitely
surpasses, and is above them all. In the first Court together with nature, the
Author of Nature offers himself to be seen, as a hidden (...) or moving
string, and the most potent Governor, being able as often as he pleases to work
freely above and contrary to all the powers and Laws of Nature. In the second
Court, where man's Kingdom is passed through in a survay; there likewise comes
the King of Kings to our contemplation, who has granted to man only this
dominion of things, and has circumscribed it with limits, and sways,
prohibits, or inhibits his Scepters according to his pleasure. In the third
Court there shall be a description made of man's most happy estate if he be under
God; and of his dreadful confusion if he forsake his observance and slide back
into himself; and again of his new blessedness, if he insist and keep in the
way of obedience, which the Son of God sent from his Father to restore our lost
condition has taught. In the Sanctuary the glory of God is presented to our
view, as the blessed shall fully behold it with open face for ever: as much of
it as God shall think good to reveal for the present. And last of all, the way
shall offer it self to our enquiry, whereby all these things being carried on
and put to their best uses, may serve especially to illustrate and set forth
the glory of the great God.

XXXIII. These things touching the coherence of the parts of PANSOPHY where I
think good withal to mention one thing about their number, because of
censurers. The first and last part, as they are reckoned up, may seem to be no
parts of PANSOPHY: seeing the first only prepares the last seals up minds
that are to be, and are seasoned with the knowledge of things. I grant I have
sufficiently comprehended the very series of things in the middle body of the
five parts: and say furthermore that two even among these five extremes, do
after a sort the like Preparatory, and obsignatory office. For Metaphysick
delivers nothing in special, it lays down only the general grounds of a^l.
Now the contemplation of God without the creatures, is nothing but the top of
that knowledge, which being gathered from the creatures went before; and whose
perfection is yet differd for Heaven, So as it remains that the three middle
parts only (those three Courts of the Pansophicall Temple) entirely enfold and
embrace all those things which we can comprehend in this life, all that
provision of our Natural, R^tional, and Spiritual life: So it is indeed. But yet
the University of things is one business, and PANSOPHY, or the knowledge of
the University of things is another. That stands not at all in need of our
Preparations, this wholely does. For because the knowledge of things is a
certain transplantation of the same into our minds, we ought not to be ignorant
of that transplantation, neither of the manner how it is to be done, nor of the
use of it being done. Therefore SOLOMON when he began to know the ways of
acquiring wisdom, he believed even that every thing to be a point of Wisdom,
Wisd. 8 ^1 Nor is he truly wise who knows ought, and knows not the use of that
which he knows. Therefore those parts, the first and the last may by no means
be severed or cut off from the body of PANSOPHY; much less the second and the
sixth: Because as a building without a foundation, and a tree without its trunk
or main body cannot stand: so neither can the order of things, wherein all
particulars are contained, be known without the Basis of Order, which the first
wisdom discovers. Lastly he cannot be said to know all things, who would
verily contemplate God in the creatures, and the creatures in God, but would
not likewise know what the creature is without God, and what God is without
every creature: which because PANSOPHY in its last and deepest retirement,
intends (by the guidance of God and his word) to meditate on piously, it is not
to be deprived of this its last inner or withdrawing room.

XXXIV. The second virtue of Pansophical method is Gradation: whereby things
are so conjoined with things, as always and every where the latter may seem
of their own accord to arise out of the former, and the more unknown out of
the already-understood Premises, without any skip or gap at all. Even as we see
it to be in a tree, that the Stock rises from the Root, from the Stock Boughs,
from Boughs Twigs; from these Buds, Leaves, Blossoms, Fruits, in an unseperable
order, whereby always the latter are both produced, and strengthened, and
enlivened by the former. By such a graduall concatenation of things we labor
to obtain, that the minds of Learners may not only suffice to raise them to
all things by degrees, but that they may likewise express their joy, fearing
no danger of falling back or swerving: and their minds who are to be freed from
bad opinions, sucked in elsewhere, and to be reduced to right judgments of
things being detained by such a gradation, as it were with bars and bounds,
though they would f^ll off, and slip by through the love of a preconceived
opinion, yet through fear of a Precipice they may be constrained to go forward,
and be carried on even to the top of plain truth

XXXV. Which to be the only Legitimate means of a harmless withdrawing minds
accustomed to the darkness (of ignorance or errors) into the clear light,
that great Artist in teaching truth. AUGUSTINE both saw, and also taught in
these words: Sore eyes are dazzled with that very glister which they much desire
to see, and that being scarcely seen, they retire into the dark with delight.
To which it is dangerous (though being now such as may be termed rightly sound)
to offer to show what as yet they are not able to see. These therefore are to
be exercised before, and the love of those things is profitably to be delayed
and nourished. For first, some things are to be showed them which do not shine
of themselves, but may be seen by the light, as a garment, or a wall, or some
such thing. Then that which not by it self indeed, but yet by the same light
yields a braver luster: as Gold, Silvers and the like: yet not so glittering as
to hurt the eyes. Then perhaps this earthly fire is to be tendered to their
view modestly: then the Stars, then the Moon, then the glistering of the
morning, and the shine of the brightning Heaven: in which (sooner or latter,
either in the whole order, or in some things contained) every one according to
his healthful ability accustoming of himself, shall see the Sun, without
trembling, and with great delight and pleasure. The best Masters take some such
course with those that are most studious and desirous of wisdom, but yet eye
it not with a sharp sight. For its the office or part of good Discipline to
come to it by a certain order; but without order it is a happiness scarce
credible. Soliloq. lib. cap. 1.3. These things utters that happy and prudent
Teacher of truth, concerning the way of teaching the truth prudently and
efficaciously: which we immitating, do purpose so to subordinate to themselves
mutually all things drawn out of the treasures of wisdom, and laid forth to
the eyes of men; as it may not be a business of some extraordinary felicity,
but of ordinary diligence (through Gods merciful assistance) to touch the tops
of wisdom.

XXXVI. For even the very series of the parts of PANSOPHY is in this manner
graduall. For what else will the Praecognita or foregoing notions of PANSOPHY
be, then an eye salve fitly prepared for men's dim eyes? with which they being
anointed, they may begin to see their darkness, and note the ways of
advancing themselves out of darkness into light, (now shining forth to them
after a sort) and perceive desires to bend their study that way. And when they
shall begin to be willing to be wise in this manner, they shall be exercised,
and the love of those things shall be profitably deferred and nourished with the
contemplation of general things. to wit, of common knowledges wherein the
eternal light, God, has impressed certain rudiments of his artifice in the
minds of all men: which they shall begin to mark here (in the first part of
PANSOPHY) by surveying likewise certain beams of that Architectress wisdom
show d through al things. Then they shall be brought forth to behold the more
illustrious works of God in the Court of nature: where they shall see how the
wisdom of God has beautified with lively colors those her lineaments in
creating things. After this being admitted into the Court of Art, they shall
consider that eternal Lights thousand ways reflex, refract, and amongst
themselves by turns variously contemperated rays in a more and wonderful
harmony even to astonishment. Then shall be showed them in their higher
progress at the first indeed that horrid Chaos and boundless bottomless pit
of our darkness, into which we, being left to our selves, fell; and then the
brighter beams of eternal light sent down to swallow this up. Lastly men's
minds shall be raised to contemplate the very son of eternity, as he is in
himself, and shall be seen in his Majesty for ever.

XXXVII. By this artifice of gradation we have hope to obtain that minds may
by little and little insensibly be led on to any pitch or height, no occasion
being left either to the weak of being deceived, or to smatterers, and
prejudicious persons of objecting or quarrelling against the truth: For it is
known to those that are unused to high places, if they be carried suddenly
to the top of a Tower, their sight is troubled, so as they either tremble to
look down, or else wax giddy; but if they wont themselves to look from less
high places, and raise themselves by degrees, they have use of a firm and
steady sight as well on high as below; this is also known: Every matter
contrary to that thing to which any one has accustomed himself, if it come
unawars, it does vehemently amaze and trouble the senses; so as truth likewise
offered over suddenly to them who have been accustomed to any error, sets
their minds a trembling, as they seem injured and oppose themselves and
contradict the very truth, and wrangle with it. Therefore lest this should fall
out in this place, where Barriers are not provided for fencing or fighting
exercise, but a Temple for contemplation, this kind of ladder or scale of
things shall beware before hand: In which even in the first and lowest step (in
the very gate of PANSOPHY, Metaphysics) such universal, by themselves clear,
Principles of all things shall be put, as they being granted (now they cannot
be granted, unless one will either put off modesty and shame, or be willing to
be mad or dote with reason.) Each one must needs grant likewise all the rest
through whole PANSOPHY (so be they proceed also by degrees one from another) by
reason of the already granted general forms and rules of things, which only
he shall see applied every where, and in no place new ones devised: Which
furthermore shall serve to this end, that men differing in opinions about
particulars may be recalled to a consent, and even they themselves straying may
be able to correct themselves: In as much as the general rules of truth being
already granted, they shall not dare (in sighting for their own particular
error) to speak against them; which artifice shall be a certain imitation of
that divine stratagem which the Prophet NATHAN happily used in converting his
King. For as DAVID being detained in the THESIS pronounced against himself, so
as being brought to the HYPOTHESIS he was silent acknowledging his error: So
here whosoever shall admit, and by his assent approve a general truth, shall
by that same make firm and consolidate foundations: At which his wandering
opinions afterward dashing may burst asunder, and fall to pieces of their own
accord.

XXXVIII. The third virtue of Pansophicall method shall be Uniformity: Because
this matter shall not be handled so, another otherwise, but all shall be
handled in the same manner. To wit, as the structu^e of SOLOMON'S and EZEKIELS
Temple did consist of mere Parellelograms, or every where like dist^nt lines;
so as al^ was either four square, or four cornerd throughout: So whatsoever
shall occur in the Temple of wisdom, shall be explained by four cardinal
questions: What? By what? How? And how many fold? with causes, where ever the
matter shall require, thereto annexed. For by these four questions, whatsoever
is essential, becomes known. To wit (1) The thing, (2) The requisites of
the thing. (3) The manners of the requisites. (4) The manners of the manners,
or differences which they call Genuses and Species. The first question is
dispatched by a Definition, explaining what the thing is in its essence. The
second by an entire structure of the Thing, or an Idea resolving the thing into
its essential requisites. The third by Axioms uttering all essential truths,
as well concerning the thing as its requisites. The fourth by the distribution
of the thing by new specificall differences, if it may have indeed any under
it. And then every one of them is taken again as a new theme to be deduced
through the same four questions*

XXXIX. This shall be the perpetual form of our method, as it were a certain
Pansophicall truly artificial Quadrature of a Circle, whereby the wandering
volubility of methods may be reduced to some firmer stability: For that which
Geometricians pronounce concerning the Quadrate, that it is the measure of all
figures, that may be deservedly said of this Quadrangular or four-cornerd
method, that it is the measure of all methods: Now we are minded to illustrate
this with 2 or 3 examples taken as well from Naturalls, as from Artificials and
Moralls, least we seem to speak Riddles.

XL. And we think good indeed to take a threefold natural example;
Substantial, Accidental, and Defective or Privative. The Sun may be of
substance; whose Pansophicall quadrate, brief, and sinewy, and scientificall
handling shall be such like.

The Definition) The Sun is the greatest Star in Heaven, an instrument
destinated by nature for enlightening the earth through its circuit, and thereby
for enlivening all things therein, and for measuring the courses of times.

The Idea) it is constituted therefore of three things: 1. Of a very great
mass of most shining light made up together round into one body. 2. Of a
certain lively virtue flowing abroad with beams. 3. Of motion perpetually
circular.

(N W. If any thing here might seem doubtful it might be proved by the causes
of all the assertions rendered, that we may pass inoffensively to the things
following. As that is which is here spoken of the motion of the Sun,
attributed by others to the earth. But this controversy in this partial or
several handling of this theme, where premises are not to be premised, cannot
be decided. Let this in the mean time be admitted as certain, that the Sun
gives light to the earth on every side, that there is need of circular motion,
whether that be in the Sun, or the Earth.)

The Axioms:) 1. The Sun is the chief fountain of light [For for all the
other Stars we might lead a perpetual night.] 2. The essence of the Sun is
light [For it cannot be taken from it, but it must ceas to be the Sun.] 3. The
light of the Sun flows out by beams. [Its clear to the eye, and is evinced by
reasons.] 4. The light of the Sun issues out every way with beams [To wit, not
only toward the earth, but also to sides: which the illuminations of the
Moon, where ever she shall be, do show.] 5. Therefore the body of the Sun is
round. [For rays cannot be spread through a circumference, unless from a
circular figure.] 6. The Sun where ever he comes with beams, ministers light
and heat. 7. And by either of these puts vigor into things. 8 The Sun
always enlightens half of the earth, the other half remains unenlightned.
9. That presence of the Sun above the earth makes the day; the absence thereof
night. 10. By how much the Sun is more vertical or just over the earth, by so
much the more it shines and burns; by how much the more collateral, by so
much the less. 11. The vertical or direct circlings of the Sun make the
Summer, the collateral the Winter. 12. The return of the Sun to the same
verticality makes the year. And if any thing remain to be said.


The Distribution) Is none at all, because the Sun is a single creature, one
Individuum.

XLI. Light may be an example of a natural Accident, whose Definition is thus.

The Definition) Light is the repercussion or beating back of beams of light
from the superficies of a dark body, and the scattering thereof through
neighboring bodies.

The Idea) Three things therefore are required to the producing of light. 1.
Some lucid or shineing body. 2. A beam darted from it. 3. A dark body upon
which the beam falling may go asunder, and illustrate or make lightsome what
are near.

The Axioms:) 1. Without light there is no beam of light. 2. Without a dark
body there is no repercussion and dissiliency of a beam. 3. A beam is
invisible of it self: It is seen only in the body that is set before it.
(This appears in a beam let in through a little hole, into a dark closet,
where the beam is not seen, but upon the opposite wall; in which if there be a
hole too, into which the beam falls, it will not be seen at all; unless
perhaps little bodies termd Atoms fly in it, or you set your hand before it.)

4. Dark bodies of a smooth or polisht superficies, do only reject the
beam, and send it another way; but such as are of a rough superficies, scatter
and sever it. (For if you set a Looking glass over against a beam, the whole
beam is turned back another way, and carries the image of light wholly
thither: If a board, and any thing less polisht, the beam bursts asunder, and
spreads the image of light upon the light.

5. The brighter the beam, the more glistring the light. (Therefore there
proceeds a greater light from the Sun beam, then from the beam of a Candle,
though let in at the same hole.

6. The more beams, the more light. (For more Candles or Windows give more
light.)




The Distribution) Light is either natural from the Sun and Stars: Or A
tificiall from our fire and candles; or dead coming from glittering Gems, the
scales of certain Fishes, rotten wood, and the like.

XLII. The nature of a shadow is Pansophically explained thus.

The Definition) A shadow is a less light in a b^dy which is enlightened,
proceeding from the intervening of a dark body.

The Idea) It Is made therefore of three bodies: of one bright, spreading,
lightsome rays or beams: of the second dark or duskish intercepting part of
the rays, of the third in like manner duskish or shaddowy, representing the
light, as well spread, as intercepted on its superficies. Take away one of
these, and you take away the shadow.

The Axioms.) 1. Every thing that is bright or clear casts forth beams. 2.
Every thing that is dark being opposed to that which is light or bright
shaddows; 3. Every thing which is dark being opposed or set-over against that
which is dark is shaddowed. 4. A shadow is the shadow of an intermedia^e or
middle body. 5. A shadow is a certain image of a body lying between two,
representing all its greater parts. 6. The greater the light, and dark bodies
the thicker, the thicker is the shadow: And on the contrary. 7. The shadow
upon the opposite of what is light, always increases. 8. If the body
shaddowing be equal to the lucid, the equal shadow is always infinitely
stretched forth. 9. If the shaddowing be greater than the lucid, the shadow
grows in infinitum. 10. If the shaddowing be less than the lucid, the produced
shadow decreaseth, til it end in a Cone and vanish.
(Note. All these for their more easy comprehensions sake, may be shaddowed
out in painted or colored Schemes.

The Distribution.) Lastly, the differences of shaddows, if there be any, are
to be explained.

XLIII. Of Artificials: a Horologe hour-teller or Clock may be an example.

The Definition.) An Horologe is an instrument of measuring time, that is made
by Art (for the very Heaven is a natural Clock, which by the ceaseless wheeling
of the stars measures the greater times of the world, but we have sought for
instruments to distinguish accurately lesser even hourly spaces: and they are
found out to be especially of three kinds. First, such as show the hour by the
Position or place of the Sun, Moon and stars: which we call Dials. Others
even in cloudy or da^k weather by a certain distillation of water or Sa^d,
called Hour-glasses. Lastly, such as proceed of their own motion, termed Clocks
or Watches. W^ speak now of them all in general, he that will m y treat with
the same ease of their particular ki^ds.

The Idea.) The foundation of a Clock is motion (because even the very time, or
duration of things, is a certain motion: now the measure and the thing measured
agree in kind.) Wherefore every Clock requires three things. 1. Something
moveable. ^ Something moving. 3. Spaces designed or marked out for hourly
Intervals.

(We meet with these things as well in Sun-Dials and Sand-glasses, as in Clocks
or Watches.)

1. The Axioms.) Every Clock has motion. (Because without motion there can be
no measuring of time, as we have already seen. Therefore such as are shut up in
deep dungeons, where they have neither the liberty of the Clock, nor of the
Sun, they can count no hours, days, years. Now in a Dial there is the motion
of the shadow; in an Hour-glasse of sand in a Clock of wheels.) 2. Every Clock
has something moveable. (Dials the Shadow, Sand-glasses Sand, Clocks or
Watches Wheels.)

3. Every Horologe or Clock has something moving. (Dials the Sun, which moves
the shadow by its own motion: Houre-glasses the weight of sand, which presses
it self downe-ward: Clockes weights hung at them, or a plate of steel
forcibly wound up, and endeavoring to restore it self to its liberty.)

4. Every Horologe has intervalls or spaces for hours marked out. (Otherwise
it were no Horologe or howr-teller, if it did not show the hours; therefore
the marked out lines and numbers do show them.)

5, The intervalls or spaces of these are accuratly distinguished. (For
otherwise they would not distinguish, but confound.)




The Distribution.) For brevity sake I have conjoynd the several kinds of a
Horologe. Dialls, Houre-glass^s, Cloc^s. But what remains to be spoken
peculiarly of each of them, he may draw it out who takes delight therein.

XLIV. Lastly, let us add an example out of Moralls, concerning Magistracy;
whose Pansophicall handling shall be on this wise.

The Definition.) Magistracy, is a lawful preeminence of certain persons in
humane society, instituted for the containing of the very society in order.

The Idea.) The Requisites of this Eminency are:

1. That some one be fit for such a charge: that is, be able, know, be willing
to rule others, and keep them in order. 2. To be lawfully constituted:
(whether by the right of election, or inheritance, or lawful war. 3. In very
deed to rule and manage all things gravely, vigilantly, constantly. And that
again (1) By setting down laws of order, and taking care when they are set
down, that they be not unknown. (2) By observing order and ^awes, how they may
be kept. () By maintayning Law^s, by defending those that observe, and
punishing those that break them.
1. The Axioms.) Where ever there is a humane society, there is need of the
bond of society, Order. 2. Where ever there is Order, there is there need of
the bond of order, Laws. (That none may be ignorant of his place, and duties.

3. And where ever are Laws, there also the Magistracy has need of a
Lawgiver and keeper. 4. The Magistracy is not to be committed but to such as
are fit. 5. He is fit to handle Magistracy, who can, knows, and is willing to
rule others. (All these are required, because if so be but one be awanting, it
takes away his fitness.)

6. Magistracy may not be usurped, unless lawfully committed. (For all men of
their own Nature being free, having the privilege of Reason and Will, will
not be ruled and obey otherwise then freely, where they both judge how much
that is expedient for themselves, and also for humane society. If they think
otherwise, (as when they see one intrude himself into Magistracy, and judge
that he will abuse his power) they do not obey, save by constraint. Now where
coaction or constraint is, there all things are carried with violence, and
prove enemies to order and long continuance.)

7. Magistracy is lawfully committed to whom it is committed by the consent of
the people, or by Nature, or by God. (That is, either by lawful Election, or
lawful Inheritance, or lawful War; all which things have their Laws and
Conditions, not to be touched here.) 8. Its the part of a Magistrate to give
Laws to the people. (But just ones, and such as to observe may be of public
use.)

9. It concerns a Magistrate to provide that none offend through the ignorance
of Laws. (Therefore they are bound to promulge and publish as well those by
them made, as ancient, divine and humane ones. And therefore to set up
Schools, Churches, Courts, where such things may be taught; and being set up,
to preserve them, and to provide and take care that there all may learn things
to be done, and to be avoided.

10. That all things be done according to the Prescript of Laws is a business
appertaining to the Magistrates watchfulness and circumspection. (For Laws
without execution are Bells without a clapper.)

11. The distribution of rewards and punishments belongs to the Magistrate.
(Therefore much more to make War.)




The Distribution.) There are so many species or kinds of Magistrates or
Rulers of humane society, as there are of societies: Domestic, Civil,
Ecclesiastical, Scholasticall, etc.

XLV. By these proofs or patterns it appears, that all PANSOPHIES things will
be brief, linkt together, graduall, clear of themselves. For if these perhaps
seem not yet such to any one, I would have him think, that something is a
wanting here, which cannot be a wanting in the very body of PANSOPHY, to wit,
that continual draught of the mind, raising it self by degrees from one
thing to another. Now we have fallen upon these things as it were abruptly, and
they being thus summarily and by parcells delivered do savor of that
frustillation or mincing of Sciences, against which we always protest. I hope
the more sagacious by this essay given, may smell out the commodiousnesse and
benefit of this Method: To wit, if the Definition of a thing exactly
circumscribe its essence; the Idea resolve it into its Principles: And also
Axioms flow of their own accord from either: And lastly, the Distribution
advise us to proceed in the Analysis of things, that all things shall be easy
to be perceived, and solid for use. For when the understanding does see all
things rise thus out of themselves, that nothing is inferred or brought in from
any other place, it meets the truth of things with pleasure; that even as
things determine themselves, so it may approve them by its testimony: Being
sure, unless things be that which it sees them to be, they are not at all. By
this means its obtained, that all things may shine by their own light, that
there may be no need that belief be sought, or procured in a beging way,

XLVI. Now it will not be amiss to add, what Laws we set up to be observed
in collecting and making these Definitions, Idea's, Axioms, and Partitions of
things: That if we (peradventure prevented by death, or let by the labors
of our ordinary calling) may not go on, those that will succeed, need not be
ignorant of our mind. For I hope it may be that Christ may send out others who
may enter into our labors, and may bring on our seed-time to an Harvest, that
both he who sowes, and he who reapes may rejoice together, and gather fruit
unto eternal life. (John 4.36.37.38.)

XLVII. Commonly in all these (Definitions, Idea's, Axioms, and Partitions)
these things are to be performed. 1. That all things be plain and perspicuous
in words and sense, needing as far as may be, no Commentaries, to be
illustrated by examples only where there is need. 2. That they may be of
greatest truth, altogether according to the Laws (...): that they may be
neither oppugned, unless Sophistically; nor have need to be defended by any
exceptions, distinctions, limitations (whether feigned or true) which will be
obtained, if pains be bestowed, that not any thing be attributed save to that,
wherein it is first, and by it self. For AMANDUS POLANUS (in the Preface to
his Logic) writes well. That the Vulgar Rules of Arts have therefore so many
exceptions, because special things are delivered generally contrary to the
Law, (...). Therefore (says he let it be observed what things disagree; and
let things agreeing be referred under one Genus, the disagreeing under another;
so there will be no exception, but all things will be comprehended rightly in
distributions. Now against the necessity of distinctions, and limitations it
will be a good remedy, that nothing be used that is ambiguous and homonymous,
but that all distinct things be expressed in distinct words, in the very
Analysis of things already, that not any thing at length be left to be
determined by a Commentary: So it will be that even as things collected have no
need to be collected, things ordered to be ordered; so neither may things
distinct have need to be distinguished, and things limited to be limited. 3.
Let it be attended that the middle Centers of things may be found out, and
expressed, whereby the occasions of contradicting may disappeare. For the most
Controversies rise from this, because they are wont to exorbitate too much to
the extremes on this side, and on that, who do not rightly weigh the equal
balance of things about their Centers: For example sake, in the Book of JOB
its sharply disputed, whether the calamities of life oppress the godly or the
wicked? The first JOB, the latter his friends did defend. But experience
teaches (as SOLOMON taught by experience, witnesses, (Eccles. 9.1.) that
neither is simply true, because we see either of them happen. Therefore a
calamitous condition shall be defined (in its place) thus; that the Definition
may have the power not of solving that Controversy, but of taking it away. For
example sake, if you define it thus: The Calamities of this life are the
Instrument of Divine Providence, to try the good, but to punish the bad: For
who can doubt now, how this Controversy may be decided? Especially when the
true Idea shall come to it; and the Axioms with the Partition: And it appears
too, whether that place (concerning the Calamities or miseries of life) may be
referred? To wit, to the Doctrine of Providence.

XLVIII. But peculiarly we will have definitions to be such, as out of them as
well Axioms as Ideas and Partitions may be easily drawn, and may flow as it
were of their own accord. Also, that proofs of any of the Assertions may be
deduced through the very definitions of things uttered in the Assertion: to the
end that that of the Philosopher may be manifest to be true indeed. That the
Definition if it be perfect, or next to what is perfect, puts an end to
controversies: so as it may be called not without cause, the Judge of
Controversies. The example of the former may be in the definition of Ens, which
we have thus. Ens is, whatsoever is, is spoken, or thought.

N. W. For declaration sake the following things may be subjoyned. As from
Praesum Praesens, Absum absens, Potis sum potens: so from Sum, Ens. Therefore
Ens is, whatsoever it is. Yet there is added, and whatsoever is spoken or
thought: because even those things which are not, are wont to be spoken and
thought: as Cerberus, Pegasus, One-eyd Polyphemus, etc. which kind of things
although they be nothing in themselves, yet because while they are thought or
spoken, and written, they busy or take up the mind, the tongue, the hand,
paper, in that very thing they are now something, and they are not altogether
nothing. Therefore they are reckoned among Enses or beings.

The Idea) Therefore there are three things proper to an Ens or being. 1. To
be. 2. To be able to be thought. 3. To be able to be spoken.

The Axioms) 1. Whatsoever is, is (either truly or feignedly, either in it
self, or in imagination. How it is, so it is.) 2. W^atsoever is, something may
be t^ought of it. 3. Whatsoever is, something may be spoken of it.

(For even when you say any thing is unsearchable, and unsp^akeable then you
say something, you think something of it.

The Partition) Therefore Ens is threefold: Real Notionall, Verbal: or a
thing, a conceit, a word: (things are some thing in themselves without the
mind: notions are images of things in the mind: words are the carrying
instruments of the notions of one mind to the mind of another etc.)

XLIX. An Example of the latter may be the speech of that blind man in the
Evangelist: God hears not sinners. Whether this may be true, we shall judge
by the Definitions of God, of a sinner, of hearing, if they shall be most fitly
true. For because (1) God is the Being of beings, that is, chiefly a Being, and
consequently chi^fly one; true, good, that is, Holy. (2) But sin is an aversion
or turning away from that which is good and holy. (3) Now to hear (is in this
place) to hear perfectly or gently, that is, to admit of any one freely, and
to fulfill his will: how can the most holy, and most jealous God, love and
promote those, who (so long as they are such) turn away themselves from him?

L. Its clear therefore that there is great use of definitions, if they be
such as this method requires. And we must seriously endeavor that we may have
such, though to frame and make them be a business of great labor and wit. For
VIVES (in his book touching the explaining of Essences, after he had taught
that a good definition is, that which is brief, clear, reciprocal) writes
truly. The task or work of defining belongs to some great and excellent man,
who not only has searched out the whole nature of the thing which he is about
to define, but even is not ignorant of all other things (if they ought to be
limitated rightly) about it: Otherwise it is easy to be confounded, and to
confound. Now an error, though small in the defining, becomes great in a short
time, etc. Yet how this great and difficult business (of defining things
accurately) may be a little eased, we will add an observation or two. First,
let it be held firm and sure, that the Definition consists of the next Genus,
and the specificall difference. Secondly, that as I do not deny that that is
the best definition, which expresses the Genus, and the difference in single
words: As this is: Flame is burning smoke.) So I do not superstitiously
determine that the Plurality of words is to be avoided, as often as the
evidence and fulness of sense may be better provided for. And therefore those
of ours, set down a little before, are more full of words. Thirdly, that the
difference as often as it cannot be had from the form (for that these are
sometimes unknown, especially in natural things, we confess as well as
others) it is to be taken from the end: As BELLARINUS gathers out of ARISTOTLE
himself, and shows in the example of an Horse ( Praxi Art. lib. 3. Did. 2.
Number. 5.) Whose end seeing it is found out to be by the effects and use, that he
may serve man in carrying him, or his things from place to place, speedily and
handsomely: He casts away these two, that he may difference him from other
living creatures, which afford the like use: For both the Ox and the Ass
carry, but not speedily; and also the Camel, but not so handsomely:) He makes
from thence such a definition as this. A Horse is a living creature, ordained
to carry a man from place to place speedily and handsomely. Fourthly, yet there
seems sometime to the formal difference there may be added the final or
efficient next to the thing, because that the Essence of the thing may be more
fully expressed, and that (in the following Idea) it may resolve it self more
easily into its Principles. For this end we in the Definition of the Sun and
Magistracy, have added the final; and in the definition of a shadow the
efficient: In the definition likewise of a Horologe, we have set down the
difference taken from the end, and from the efficient. Which if it do not
please, they shall be elaborated more accurately, that they may be altogether
strict. But I tell you before, we shall become obscure, if we will be over
short; which Rock I mainely eschew, and would have it eschewed.

LI. Nor are the Idea's of things to be made with less care and thought;
because there is no less use of them for a true, full, distinct, knowledge of
things. For though the very definition comprehend the whole essence of the
thing; yet because it does that but covertly, and the infoldings of things are
so various, that the unskilful knowing not how to distinguish essentialls from
accessories, snatch oftentimes that, in which there lies nothing, but omit
fundamentalls, by an error most fruitfully producing others; to hold
essentialls in every thing certainly, will be the fairest light of the mind.
Verily what HORACE pronounced concerning the necessity of the foreknowledge of
things for eloquence. Rem been praevisam Verba haud in vita sequentur.

When with a thing our selves we fore-acquaint,
Then words do follow not upon constraint.
This same may be said concerning the foreknowledge of Idea's for the
production of things.

Ideam been previsam Res rite sequuntur.
When an Idea well unto our sight
Presented is, then things do follow right.
But to find out the true Idea's of things, is no less Art, then to define
things truly: Therefore we will advise you of something, by which way they may
be sought out.

LII. It is necessary that all things which are made, and are, should be made,
and be according to Idea's. For unless something were before in an Idea, (that
is, might have some manner or form, by which it might be made and be) it would
not indeed be. Now the Idea's of things are threefold: Artificial, Natural,
Divine. The Artificial are a certain Ectype, or imitations of things
Natural: the Natural of Divine, the Divine are from themselves, the true
archetype of all things which are rightly done. Which yet in as much as they
are hidden in eternity, nor appear to us but as they are expressed in natural
things: Natural things are to be searched out by us as much as may be, as well
for their own sake, that we may understand the Artifice of Nature, as for the
following Artificialls sake, that we have the intelligence of their
foundations: and lastly for precedent divine things sake, that we may penetrate
also more safely into those hidden things, as far as the way of divine things
permits.

LIII. Now all natural things are made after the same Idea's, because by the
same Maker. Who because he is one, has kept one order in all things; and
because he is the best, the best; and because true, truly, and not imaginarily.
Truly therefore seeing that there is order in things, it may be truly found
out, if it be sought in true ways. Now the ways are true, not which our
understanding (which is too voluble and prone to errors) faignes to it self,
and falsely attributes to things, but which things themselves do show in their
proceeding. For from actions and passions come the qualities of things to be
known, and from the qualities the essence, now from all these the essential
requisites. These ways of things if we shall follow, and observe the indelible
characters impressed in things, we shall find a wonderful harmony of things;
after a certain similitude of the first Being. For we shall discern that all
things are found in the lowest Being which are in the highest: but in the
lowest degree, such as uses to be in the rudiments of things covertly: so as
the more special, and always perfecter diduction of creatures, may be nothing
but a greater and perfecter explication ad extra, or outwardly of those things
which are within: which our Metaphysick shall openly do. Therefore all the
creatures, even to the smallest dust or powders are here our Masters and
teachers, if any things be made from them, and of them, let us regard and mark
not with brutish eyes, but reasonable and attentive consideration.

LIVE. For example sake that the Idea's of things may be perfectly found out, I
think we must proceed thus: 1. What ever requisites truly essential are to
be met with in all the species of any thing, there general Idea is to be put
under the very Genus of the same species. For example sake; because in every
particular motion I see three termini, From whence, which way, whither: Why may
I not determine that these are the general requisites of all motion? And why
may I not seek these same things in every Being? Certainly every Being is
from some thing; that is, has some Original. And proceeds from some way, that
is, has some form, by which it is carried some whither, that is, to its end.

2. What ever things are found requisite in the general Idea of things* the
same are to be sought in every species put under that Genus. For either all the
same things will be found out (though under another, that is, a special form
and name: As the journey of Christ, Mark. 7.31. is described by these three,
from Tire, into Galilee, through Decapolis:) Or it will be an argument that the
general Idea is not exactly made; which will give an occasion to mend it: Or
lastly, it will be plain and evident it is no true species of that Genus,
which will serve to rectify the Partition.

3. What things soever are in one species, somewhat Analogous, or like and
answerable in a convenient proportion, to them may be sought out in the species
which is opposite. For it is in it necessarily, although in some different
manner, which that difference infers, which makes that new species. So while I
examine what things are required to the manner of foure-footed creatures, and
search out somewhat analogous in the motion of things which creep, which fly,
which swim. I must needs find out most profitable matters, and such as are
truly in things.

LV. As for Axioms, because none of the learned are ignorant, that the maine
strength of truth consists in them; none also will deny that exquisite pains
should be bestowed on them in making them every way right, that is, in
collecting, ordering, and making them firm and sure, even to an unmoved
strength. For they are indeed, as they are termed, the rules of reasoning, and
the Principles of all conclusions collected, and to be collected by true
reasoning. Whereof there is a greatter number, and more proper order, and
powerfuller force, both to inquire and find out the unconquered truth of
things, and also to free and defend it from error, then yet men commonly
understand. Whereas therefore hitherto they are neither collected, nor brought
into order, they shine forth only here and there from the thoughts, Doctrines,
Discourses, and Actions of men: Nor do men sufficiently know how to insist or
settle on them; and therefore they suffer themselves to be carried away with
every wind of opinions and sophismes, or crafty and deceitful cavills: And in
the mean time there lies hid in them especially both the secrets of the
universal wisdom of God, and also the sparks and fuel of our universal
light; and lastly, the conditions and bonds of procuring universal concord and
peace amongst all men, and all things: It will quit for cost to draw these out
forcibly even with great and importunate labor, and set them in their right
order, that they may be in readiness for any use.

LVI. But we must have a mighty care, lest that be admitted for an Axiom,
which is none: To wit, Propositions in part only, not wholly, not every where,
not always, not by themselves, not reciprocally true. Of which kind are not
only ma^y vulgar Proverbs, as also certain sentences and Apothegmes of wise
men, but even common Philosophies (and I would to God not Divinities) Canons
and Rules, which they lay down so, as forthwith by excepting, distinguishing,
limiting, I know not whether I should defend or betray, certainly they must
needs weaken their doctrine. And to what end is a Rule, which needs another
rule? And of which we must always be afraid lest it deceive us? PANSOPHY
therefore contains Ax^omes truly Axioms, that is, worthy credit (for that the
word signifies) and rules already regulated, not to be regulated still.

LVII. But whence are such Axioms to be taken? For we have said that vulgar
books are not to be trusted, nor has any one as yet taken meet and due pains
in collecting them, and cleansing them from their mixed filth. Excepting the
renowned, and brave spirited HERO in subduing and taming the Monsters of
Opinions, B^RON HERBERT: Who had a Treatise of common Knowledges prepared for
him, as we out of the same Authors book of truth (page 63. and 154.) do
understand For all which writing, because it is hitherto denied the light; what
hinders, why even we may not as well assay, and set upon the business, and
discover our thoughts, how we think they may be woven out to an end?

LVIII. Now Axioms are best collected out of things themselves, by true,
unerring, humane reasoning, but rather by divine, as we have them expressed in
the word of God. For what ever any one thinks, speaks, writes, argues,
proves, or disproves, accuses or excuses, persuades or disswadeth, exhorts
or heartily desires, promises or threatens, etc. He always and every where
meets with certain presupposed things, on which as on a Basis his very
reasoning relies. For just as whatsoever is moved, is moved about something
unmovable; so whatsoever is inferred by reasoning, is inferred by the force of
some unmoved truth; which may appear by examples. If any one offer to beat his
servant with a Cudgel for harm done, and he cries out, I did it not
willingly: Lo here is reasoning on either side from things presupposed! For
the Master presupposes the Axiom: He that does harm is liable to punishment:
Thou have done harm: Therefore. The servant on the contrary: The innocent is
not liable to punishment. I am innocent. Therefore. And he silently lays down
another thing to his Major as known, to wit, this. An offense is voluntary. My
fact is not voluntary. Therefore it is not an offense, etc. Behold such things
occur, in the sayings and doings of all men, even the most foolish, as
remaining footsteps of wisdom created together with man, and indelible (though
diversely stained with the dirt of folly) marks and characters thereof; that it
appears to be true, which JESUS the son of SIRACH said; That wisdom has
laid everlasting foundations in men (Eccles. 1.14.) Such common notions
therefore may be gathered out of the speeches and actions of all men, even the
most simple and foolish: So they be prudently separated from the mingled filth
and foil of fopperies. Whereon to bestow ones pains and diligence, would be
more better then to pick gold out of a dunghill.

LIX. But to gather Axioms out of divine Oracles, that is in truth to gather
Pearls from among Gold: For there lies hid the most precious treasure of true
wisdom. For example sake, when I read, Exodus 22.1. That God commands that the
thief restore that which he has stolen, I gather this Axiom: That which is
unjustly taken away is to be restored. Also that which is restored, is to be
restored to him from whom it was taken away. Now because God for one Ox,
commands five Oxen to be restored, and for one Sheep four, I make an Axiom:
He who dare do more mischief, is the more to be punished. (For an Ox is more
then a sheep: therefore he who offers to do a greater harm to his neighbor,
may smart the more for his iniquity.) Again, because it is said in the same
place, at the fourth verse. If the theft be certainly found in his hand alive,
he shall restore double; from thence I collect an Axiom: An offense newly
committed is to be punished more lightly, an old one more severely. The Reason
is, (for nothing hinders us from adding also testimonies of reason to divine
deeds and speeches, seeing God is the reason of reasons, and reason always
lies under his speeches and actions, although he do not clearly and plainly
express this every where) because first motions are not always in our power,
any thing may be admitted unawares, or through incogitancy, but he who offends
long, offends the more, having spaces to deliberate and recollect himself, yet
not repenting. I read in the same place at the third verse: If he have nothing,
then he shall be sold for his theft: from thence I easily collect that that of
the Law who has not money in his purse, let him suffer in his person, has the
force of divine Law. Whereas I read in the same place, verse 2.3. that the
thief might be killed in the night without danger of punishment, but not so in
the day time: because he may be apprehended, and brought to judgment, or be
certainly known and accused; from thence issue Axioms.

1. We must spare man's blood, as much as may be. 2. Private revenge is
unlawful. 3. Deceitful pretenses are to be taken heed of, etc.
LX. Therefore let the holy Scripture be read orderly, accurately, and
diligently, the reason of all Gods sayings and doings being considered as they
are such (which truly is every where, by so much the more pure and solid, by
how much the wisdom of God is greater than that of men) such kind of rules for
things, and conceits may be drawn out, or principles of reasoning with those
very places of Scriptures (in the place of examples) set under a little after;
that the book of PANSOPHY may be truly a Key both for things and the holy
Scripture. Furthermore other wisely-writ books shall afford the same use; that
whatsoever may be observed to be spoken and done pithily and accutely, may be
brought into an Axiom.

LXI. The second field of hunting Axioms (though perhaps the former in order)
are things themselves, and their proceeding rationably looked on, if we attend
in what admirable order, and by what force this or that is done. For whatsoever
is done in any particulars, it is certain that some general power or force
and form, and end dothly under them all: for Example sake, That we see in
living creatures a desire to preserve themselves, and that by an appetite to
like things, and avoiding of contraries, the use of nourishments for their
propogation sake, etc. does appear: we must think all those things come from
some superior power, which is also in inferior creatures, though in a lower
degree, and though it put forth it self more obscurely. From thence then I
gather the supreme Metaphysicall Axiom: whatsoever is, delights to be: or,
whatsoever is, maintains it self in its being, as long as it can. And by this
way from all particular (Natural, Artificial, Moral, Political,
Theological, so that they be solidly true) Axioms, we may draw out
universal Metaphysics: to which as to common rules all things may square and
agree which are made or done, wheresoever they are made or done.

LXII. And contrariwise, some particular Axioms (about matters Natural,
Artificial, Moral, and Spiritual) may be found out of general
Metaphysics: if you reduce that particular Theme to its transcendent Genus,
and view its general Axioms of substance, Accident, Quality, etc and apply
them to a specialty, or particular. And thus we have indeed these and the other
gallant things, which perchance without this guidance of generals, had not come
to our mind.

LXIII. If we go on diligently in this threefold way, we need not doubt of
having a great Harvest of Axioms, to wit, a very ample furniture and provision
of solid wisdom: which if they be comprised sententiously in choice words,
even as Definitions and Ideas, and disposed in due order according to the
Analysis of things, we shall have that we seek after. For it will come to
pass, by Gods help, that all things may be taught quickly, plainly
fundamentally. Because Definitio^s through their shortness, will notably help
the memory, and Ideas, the manner of their essence being explained, the
Understanding, and Axioms by their solidity will serve specially for Certainty
and Use. For truly by analyzing and defining things, we may soon pass over
the whole Universe, by bowelling the Ideas of things, we may behold the inwards
of things; by understanding Axioms well, we may be assured of knowledge. Thus
all things shall be learned in one perpetual Method, all tautologies shall be
eschewed, causes of disagreeing shall be cut off, the judgment of every one
who passes through these things shall be sharpened, to observe one thing out
of another most gallantly: and that which is the maine and greatest thing, the
Art of convincing shall be had in readiness.

LXIV. By the art of convincing, I mean a plain proving or demonstrative
method: Whereby every thing which is true may be presented with such evidence
to every man's understanding, as none of a sound mind may deny assent; or if he
deny, it may be wrested from him though unwilling and reluctant by the very
force of invincible or unmastred truth. As Mathematicians know how to
demonstrate their own things; so even we wish and labor that the like
knowledge may be extended to all things. The manner of which thing if it shall
be found infallible, that may deservedly come to be numbered amongst the chief
gifts of God, and the principal benefits of PANSOPHY. For now all may be
taught the truth, untaught errors, with that clearenesse and certainety, as
not any one may not understand, not any one draw ought so demonstrated into
doubt, the truth of things powerfully printing it self upon the senses even by
its own light.

LXV. We know they are not a wanting who doubt greatly that this Mathematical
certainety and evidence of demonstrating may be transferred to other things.
But neither are they a wanting, who make with us against them. ALSTED (Eucycl.
lib. 1. c. 4. speaks thus. Mathematicians indeed arrogate to themselves this
praise, that they have the noblest demonstrations. But it is not so, seeing
Metaphysics are the first or independent Principles. And with the independency
of their Principles is joined the greatest nobleness of things, and chief
perspicuity from the nature of the thing. Likewise in his fourth book and
twelfth chapter, Metaphysicall Demonstrations are of all other the most
certain, firm, and evident. And in the thirteenth book, chap. 1. He teaches
that the Naturalist is conversant about scientificall things. Verily BELLARINUS
subjects moral things also to a scientificall Method. (Praxi scient. lib. 1.
did. 3 N. 8.) But surely we must overcome not by Authorities, but by
unconquerable reasons, that an Apodicticall Method may and ought to be extended
to all things. In which, as in a matter of very great moment, we shall not
think much to take a little pains.

LXVI. The Pyrrhonian Philosophers, called Scepticks, disputed in time past
that all things are disputable on either part: Even this very question, Whether
all things may be disputed on either part? So supposing that the truth of their
assertion might be evidently demonstrated, if they could wrap up also this very
assertion in doubt: Whether they play these things in jest or in earnest, it
concerns us not; yet on us urging a serious thing seriously, and affirming
that instead of slippery disputations, necessary Demonstrations ought and may
be brought in, after their example a certain necessity is imposed o^
demonst^a^ing this very assertion so as none can resist or withstand. This then
we now set upon to the honor of ever unconquered truth, and of the eternal
Pres^dent thereof, God, being about to demonstrate these three by a
Mathematical certainty.

1. That every truth is demo^str^ble by its own nature 2. That every
Pansophicall thing is demonstrable by the power of method. 3. That this mystery
of method consists in the accurate Gradation of truth.
LXVII. The first is demonstrated by this Apodicticall Syllogism: Whatsoever
ha^h true, nearest, and immediate Causes, Effects and Proprieties, that is
truly demonstrable. But every truth has true, nearest, and immediate Caus^s
Eff^cts, and P^oprieties; therefore every truth is truly demonstrable.

The major Proposition is necessarily true; because the firmest demonstrations
^re taken from the nearest causes and eff^cts, and ^ss^ntiall Proprieties. Nor
has any of the Logitians ever required, o^ can require other. The minor is in
like manner certain: because if any thing has not causes, actions, passions,
true proprieties, that is not at all truly, that is, is not true. Therefore
whatsoever is true, must needs have true causes, and proprieties and effects,
whether they be known to us already, or not as yet. According to this reason
only that which is false is indemonstrable. For as much as it is not truly
that which it is said or thought to be, neither has it true causes,
proprieties, effects, by which it may be demonstrated. Therefore it remains
always in suspense, like a mist having nothing those solid, whereby it may be
caught and held, and with a certain Fucus or color only of truth (which
fearing it should be wiped off, it will not be touched any whit hard)
bewitching the eyes of those that are not aware. Therefore lest we be bewitched
in any thing, let nothing of all those things which are taught be let go
without this most rigid Apodicticall Examination: that if there be any Paint,
it may vanish* and truth (which has the nature of gold, that is not liable to
corruption by water nor fire) may glister, and be rendered the more firm.

LXVIII. I demonstrate the second thus: where there are afforded all the
requisites of true demonstration, there a possibility of demonstrating is
afforded. But in a theme handled Pansophically there are afforded, etc
Therefore

The Assumption is proved; because every theme that is handled Pansophically,
has Propositions making demonstration, being true (...): to wit, Definitions,
Hypotheses, Theorems, and Problems* For whatsoever falls out to be handled
Pansophically, that is presently defined before all things: Then is the Idea
made; which is as it were an Hypothesis (yet not feigned but real by which
being granted, satisfaction may be had to all demands or Queres about that
subject or as a Problem which says that something may be done, if this and
that be afforded; to wit, essential requisites. Then as for Axioms, what are
they but Theorems utte^ing some true and necessary aff ction touching the
subject? of so evident truth, that as mere principles they may be known by
^h^mselves. Therefore from a good provision of Definitions, Hypotheses,
Theorems, and Problems, why may we not knit good demonstrations?

LXIX. The third thing which I have propounded to be demonstrated is, that the
force of demonstrative method consists in an accurate gradation: And I desire I
may have th ee M^chanicall things granted me, that I may demonstrate it by
Mathematical certainty and evid^nce.

1. Grant me the top, and grant me men, who may strive to get thither with
their maine strength, and yet cannot ascend, seeing they certainly want a
certain medium, to wit, steps rightly made. 2. Grant me that st^ps being
rightly made, one may ascend to any height. 3. Grant that steps may be made
between any altitude and its basis, by a firm medium, one or more.
I require, I say, these things to be granted me as evidently true. But if any
morose or crabbed person will not so much as grant me these things freely. I my
self demonstrate these foundations of my demonstrations in nature.

LXX. Suppose a Tower of the height of fifty Cubits: And some who desire very
much to get to the top thereof; and therefore they may walk round about it,
look about it round, assay all things, within and without, but in vain:
What Is the reason? I will tell you: The defects of some Requisite. Now the
Requisites of the efficient to produce the effect are (as PANSOPHY in its place
does teach and demonstrate) Power, Knowledge, Will: For even one of these being
denied, the effect does not proceed Therefore they either will not go up to the
Tower, or know not how, or cannot But they are not unwilling, or they desire,
and go about it. Nor are they ignorant, for they know how to use their feet, as
their walking shows; therefore they cannot. And they cannot, either because they
want power, or because they are prohibited, or because an instrument is
wanting; For Pansophy apprehends that there are these three hindrances of
works. But power is not a wanting, that is health and strength, which is
plain by their walking and endeavoring: Nor are they prohibited by any
counter-command or violence. Therefore an instrument, whereby they may climb
to high things, is a wanting; to wit, a Ladder or stairs: For because no man's
feet (an instrument to promote them from p ace to place is given them by
nature) exceed the length of two Cubits, nor in going can they stride beyond
it: None also can advance himself beyond the distanc^ of two Cubi^s without
the help of some medium. Seeing then the height of this Tower is of fifty
Cubits and the feet of those that walk about it but of two Cubits, or not so
much: It Is evident that they cannot go up to it without interm^diate steps. And
because they do not go up* that such an Instrument (sta^res or a ladd^r) is a
wanting to them, which was to be demonstrated.

LXXI. But let stairs be made and set very firm, and fenced round with sides,
that there be no fear of a downe-fall; and let them be there, who wou^d, may
and know how to go up (to wit by raising themselves from one staire or step to
another without skipping) the ^ff^ct will proceed; although the height be a
thousand times greater, otherwise it is impossi^le. Now I will demonstrate it
by this Apodict^cal Sorites:

1 Whosoever has feet right and well as they should be, he can go: (For the
prime efficient and instrument being afford^d, the ^ffect may follow. Now feet
are the instrument of going.) 2. Whosoever goes, he moves forward his feet one
after another For unless he did move foreward, he would not go bu^ stand: Nor
can there be this moving forward without a setting of one foot before another
by turns) 3. He who moves forward his feet one after another, or by turns, he
goes. 4. He who goes, he tends forward o^ backward, upwards or downwards For
both to go forward and to go backward* and to ascend or desc^nd, is to go: And
as a going upon even ground is called in Latin Gressus, so a going upwards or
downwards Gradus. 5. He who goes upwards he asc^nds by stairs or steps 6. He
who ascends or goes up by stairs, may go up as far as the stairs go. 7
Therefore whosoever has feet, may go whithersoever the stairs go. Which was
to be demonstrated.
LXXII Now that stairs may be made even to any height, if there may be had a
firm medium joining the basis to the top is without all doubt. For no other
thing hinders st^ires to be made from the earth to the clouds, save that the
intersected medium the Air or smoke ascending thither, are of too weak a
cons^stence not receiving or adm^tting of holl^wnesse nor su^ab^e for bearing a
burden. But if a Mountain, or Rock, or Tower may mount to that height,
nothing hinders why stair^s may not be framed and made thereto by which a man
also may come even thither. Because whether we please to make them wooden ones,
or of stone, ^^on ^^st^uments are not a wanting by which they may be ^hewen
out: If so be we do not irke to take pains and use prudence. To wit, that the
staire 1) begin from the bottom (2) and that they be continued to the top, (3)
and that close together, and without any gap, that where one ends, an other may
begin. (4) And let them be fitted to the statute of them for whom they are
prepared. (Verily for a childish ascent there is need but of little distances of
the stairs, for a man's, the spaces may be larger.) (5) Lastly, if one
continued Ladder be not sufficient to arrive at the height, let more be made,
till it may be attained to. As if Ladders be to set up within the Tower of
fifty Cubits, and Wood of an equal length cannot be had, let there be several
Ladders from one story or loft to another. For example sake take beams of ten
Cubits, and make of them Ladders of ten steps, and let every one be fitted to
their sundry stories after this manner. (See in the following page.)

drawing of zigzagging ladders

A firm medium then being granted between the basis and the top, stairs may
be made up to it. Which was to be shown.

LXXIII. Now that the application of Geometrical demonstration may be well and
fitly made to the D dactick matter, I say, to teach is no other thing then to
lead the understanding into the thing which is to be known; (and to learn is
to be lead by the understanding from things known to things unknown.
Therefore they are altogether finished by the same requisites. For as in
leading, three things concur; the Leader, the pa^ty lead, and the leading it
self: and in this again the terms, from whence, whither, by what way: so in
Teaching, the Teacher, the Scholar, and the very act of Teaching and of
Learning. In this again there are the terms: the first, from what: to wit,
those principles in which the teacher and the Learner first agree. The second
to what, to wit, conclusions as yet unknown to the Scholar, but to which by
teaching he takes pains to bring him: Lastly the way whereby he is to be
brought on thither; which the Scholar is in like manner igno^ant of, but the
Teacher ought to know. Now this unless it both tend thither, whither it ought,
and be likewise explained, that he who is led, may go on without lets, or
doubts he will not come thither. Wheresoever therefore they are, who would lead
and be led, teach and be taught, and yet the effect does not fol^ow according
to their desire, there it is sure that sure mediums are awanting; that is, a way
well explained, and stairs rightly fitted for the raising the mind. Which
also in a graduall method, with the continuing of some few Axioms I demonstrate
thus.

LXXIV. The first Axiom. Every man by nature desires to know. The Maxim is
Aristotle's, which none ever made doubt of, for that it is a clear case: yea
surely a certain pleasure in asking, and experimenting sundry things, breaking
forth even from our infancy follows us through our whole life. So as there is
none (I speak of men, not of carcasses of men) who joys not daily to hear,
see, taste, handle, and assuredly know some new thing. As it is manifest by the
Examples of any of the larg^st sort, and such as are dull d and benumbed with
idleness: who although they do not transfer this force and eagerness of
nature to serious matters, yet they bestow their pains upon any kind of
trifles, rather than they will either deny, or can dissemble the spurs and
instigations of nature.

Axiom 2. He who desires to know, desires to know truth.

For Knowledge unless it be true, is not knowledge, but ignorance and error:
which none can wish or desire. For to what end would one err, that is, be
deceived? yea the mind rather abhors it naturally, and therefore if it perceive
that it has erred any where, or think it has found out an error, it changes
its opinion forthwith either openly or secretly. For causes may fall out why
some one will not seem to think otherwise, but his error being taken notice of
by him, he cannot think otherwise.

Axiom 3 He who desires to know truth, does delight in truth. This is proper to
the heart of man, and even unseperable, that what it covets with desire, if the
hope thereof be offered, it must needs rejoice in it.

Axiom 4 Who delights in truth, coming to the truth does embrace it. Nor can
this be awanting from the nature of desire and love, bu^ she must power out her
self upon the thing loved, and which she has expected with joy, and join her
self to it, and it to her.

Axiom 5. He that embraces truth, holds truth. This also is proper to love,
not to let go the thing loved Hence it is that men in their opinions (whether
they be true or false, sobeit they be but daubed or washed over with the paint
of truth) persist so stiffly, that they had even rather dye, then throw away
their opinions, which they have drunke-in in the name of truth.

Axiom 6. He that holds the truth, wishes others to hold the same. This also is
most natural, and inseparable from the mind of man, whatsoever he thinks
that he perceives truly, to wish that others may perceive the same, and may
have as it were his own mind, accounting it a wrong to him, if any will
think othewise: and by hat act as it were silently upbraid him with error.
Hence arises amongst those that disagree in opinions (and especially about
faith) that displeasure and inward hatred of their minds: Because the mind
reckons it self grieved, and is unqu^et, unless for the secure possession
of truth it may have all men assenting, none contradicting.

Axiom 7. He that wishes others to hold the truth, promotes and furthers
others in the same. In every d^ff^rence of opinions we see it falls out thus,
that some draw on others to their own opinion by what means they can:
Especially they who think they understand more then others, or are more
inflamed with zeal. Hence all places resound and ring again with the noise of
disputes, while one labors to gain, and bring over to his opinion this
person, and the other that, not only one man another, but one Sect another, in
Religion and Philosophy.

Axiom 8. He that promotes to truth, promotes by teaching.

For other means of propogating knowledges, besides teaching, are spurious,
and unprofitable to that intention; as if any one persuade, command, enjoyne,
compel to believe or think this or that, so or so. For to understand, or
believe the truth, is to know: And to know is not a work of the will, which
that it may will any thing is wont to be bent with persuasions, commands,
threatenings, constraint: But the work of the understanding, which of its own
nature is nothing but a Looking-glass of things, receiving into it self
whatsoever you shall off^r fitly and by clear light, offer it therefore in
teaching clearly, and fitly, and it will receive it.

Axiom 9. But many commonly teach and do not promote those they teach to what
they desire. For the world is full of books and pens, wherewith some strive
earnestly to persuade others to be of their opinions; but with what profit?
surely little, and unbeseeming so great contentions. For amongst so many
Troops of Encounterers, if happily some one be converted, an hundred others
remain settled in their place, nor suffer themselves to be removed from their
opinion. And those who are removed are carried away as easily from the right
path, into one that is erroneous, or from one error into another, and from
error into truth. And that which is worse, Controversies are not only not
taken away, but multiplied: And least they should be taken away, they are fixed
in men's minds, being hardened against one another.

Axiom 10. Therefore there is somewhat necessarily a wanting to the common
sorts of Teachers.

LXXV. For what is the cause, that from so good Premises such monstrous events
follow? That all should be desirous of truth, and yet not find it out? Or have
we found it out truly (in some happy course) and are we bound indeed to show
it unto others, and yet cannot? It Is most certain that we deal unskilfully
with one another, and that the way and true manner of propagating truth is not
yet commonly known. For surely those p^inciples which we have already seen
implanted ^n every one by our good God, and to be in all men commonly, are
good; to desire to see truth; to desire and follow if one can see: to desire
also to have others partakers of the same truth, and to wish that, and for that
cause not to be sparing of labor, and yet to avail nothing. Having the end,
and having those who seriously desire the end, and yet the end not to be
attained, is an infallible token that we are either detective in mediums, or
that the use of the mediums which we have are unknown: as here. To wit, that a
true Ladder for man's understanding by which the Leaders and the Led may
certainly and safely ascend, and descend, is as yet wanting: which was to have
been shown.

LXXVI. For if such a Ladder had been made, every man's mind would ascend to
every top of things: which comes now to be shown by a Ladder of some certain
Axioms.

1. Every man has a mind or reason For without the mind he would not be a man,
but a Bruit. 2. He who has a mind, he thinks. For as it is the part of the
eye to see, of the ear to hear, of the tongue to taste, of a nerve to touch;
so it is proper and essential to the mind to think. 3. He who thinks, he
passes from thing to thing. For every thought is a certain motion of the
mind, by which we pass over from one thing to another, and from that again
to some other. Whence also it is called the discourse of the mind. For as the
eye, when it has many things to see, it cannot see those many things just at
once, but one thing after another: So the mind whatsoever it thinks, it
thinks something, of some thing, by something, one thing after another. 4. He
who passes from thing to thing, passes step by step. For men's thoughts hold
together, as a chain, in which link lets in link. Yea, even when something
comes into the mind upon a sudden, being most remote from the former
thought, yet it comes from some occasion; whether it come from within from
something thought, or from without, from some sensible object. Uerily as there
is no vacuum or gap in things, so neither in the understanding: And as one
cannot go on with his feet but from the nearest (whether pace, or staire or
step) to the next; so by thought to come to any thing, unless it be from
something, is impossible. 5. He who goes by steps, may go as far as the steps
go. Therefore every man may ascend by the mind, as far as he sees the steps or
stairs of things before him. Which was to be demonstrated.
LXXVII. Now we must demonstrate that a Ladder for man's understanding may be
made; and while I say made, I do not understand any arbitrary pains, as uses
to be when Ladders are made ready for corporeal tops, so or so, as it pleases
the Artificer; who takes the setting fracture, measure of the steps, from
himself, or from those, for whose uses he prepa^es them. This mental Ladder,
because it shall only be an image or resemblance of the Ladder of things, made
by divine artifice, it will not lie under our arbitrament or pleasure. The very
things here shall give the measure both to themselves and to the understanding.
They err dangerously, who think it may suffice that things be considered as
they are to us, not of what kind they are in themselves: Making our senses a
rule to things, not things to the senses. We must do the quite contrary, and
things are to be made (in which as in its Palace truth resides) the rule, both
to themselves and to us, if we will at length struggle out of the tumult and
clashings of opinions unto harmony, that as that knits things among themselves,
so it may knit our mind about things. Our senses, the fantasy, the very
mind or reason, have nothing which they can bring unto or bring into things.
But things by bringing themselves into the senses, the fantasy, the mind,
form true images of themselves, being perceived aright or orderly, but
monstrous ones if amiss or disorderly. Nothing at all therefore is to be
attributed to the sense or the mind by it self, but they are to be tied most
closely to things, unless we will be deceived and mocked without end and
measure.

LXXVIII. That then a Ladder for man's understanding may be made from the Ladder
of things, is evident: Because all things are disposed according to steps, as
well the Universe it self, as every thing apart. For

1. Whatsoever is, is finite. (For concerning what is infinite, which is one
thing, God, we do not now treat.) 2. Whatsoever is finite has bounds to its
essence. 3. Whatsoever has bounds to its essence, has in its self something
first, and something last, lowest and highest. 4. And where there is the first
and the last, the lowest and the highest, there also there is the former and
the latter, the lower and the higher. 5. Where there is the former and the
latter, the lower and the higher, there are degrees or steps. 6. And where are
degrees, there is distinction; and where distinction, there is clearenesse:
Therefore whatsoever is, has distinct and clear steps to its essence; which
being well observed, lead on the mind into all the first and last, low and
high places of everything.
LXXIX. We trust, that such a gradation, as may lead the mind to all things is
in PANSOPHY, as well in the whole comprisall of things, as in every thing
severally, or asunder. For as touching the whole, PANSOPHY has a firm and
unmovable Basis, or a three fold groundwork and support Necessity,
Possibility, Facility: which are solidly laid in the book of Praecognita's. It
has also a splendid top as firm, Happiness, or the rest of desires; which
the last book of PANSOPHY shall show in the delights of the mind enlightened in
it self; and in the amendment and making better of all humane things, and in
the illustrious propagation of the glory of God. And it has likewise a firm
medium to join the top to the Basis, and fit to receive solid steppings: to
wit, on Gods part, most true Revelation made in works, words, and inward
dictates, which are innate Notions engraven in the mind of every man; and on
our part, Sense, Reason, and Faith, that is to be given to the testimonies of
God. Of which three-paird staff or shank as it were, reared Parallelly, and
every where connexed, that most solid Ladder of things is made: A five fold
parted or broken Ladder, I say, arising through five diverse Lofts or Stories.
For the first and lowest Ladder or pair of stairs is Metaphysick, which
raises the mind as far as it can through all generals, known by themselves.
The second in the second Region or Story of natural things, discovers divine
Artifices through all degrees of creatures. The third teaches how to
contemplate the works of man, the supreme Creature, and shows how far the
force of wit may ascend about created things. The fourth explains the commerce
of man with God himself his Creator, and thereby the mysteries of Salvation
and Perdition. The fifth ascends from thence to contemplate the very increated
God inhabiting his eternity. Where a man can go no higher, but he may go lower,
to the right use of the Creator, of the Creatures, and of himself, that what
life remains to any one, may be passed and spent in wise thoughts and actions,
and that hereby at last there may be had a safe and sure and sweet passage by
the gate of death to happy eternity.

LXXX. These things concerning the graduall frame of all PANSOPHY: that it may
be manifest that there is no other foundation of humane wisdom laid, nor other
end propounded, nor any possibility of coming to that end by other means, than
that we go by here; to wit, whence, whither, and which way. All particular
things may be disposed in the same graduall Series; yea they ought, because
they cannot in another, if we will teach easily or plainly, and powerfully,
that is scientifically. Certainly, as he doats, who being set in the top of a
Tower, would have some one fly from the earth to him, or fly over to him from
the top of a neighboring Tower, being not led on by steps. So doats he who
thrusts his own sense or meaning upon another, the truth thereof being not
showed to him leasurely and by little and little.

LXXXI. The use then of this gradual method shall be to teach the ignorant
easily and plainly, and to unteach those that err powerfully. That these
cannot but see the light of truth, and delight in it; and that the other cannot
but take notice of their error, and be won to the love of better and truer
things. Now we must note, that to teach the ignorant, is but some one and a
single business: but to teach those that err requires double pains. For the
ignorant because they know neither truth nor falsehood, are capable of both, and
may be taught only true things, they need not be untaught false things: the
other because they are pre-occupated or taken up aforehand with false opinions,
are first to be untaught their error, that they may be rendered both desirous
and capable of truth, and then of being taught. Which as we have seen already
cannot be done without gradation: because as the ignorant cannot be advanced to
the top of clear knowledge without steps, by a throw or leap: so neither can
he that erres be cast down from the top of his error, through the stiffnesse of
his opinions, which wheresoever they once cleave to, they cleave to very
closely, even to death, unless they be prudently taken out. For the mind of
man (by the instinct of nature) bears that reverence to truth, that it
constantly adores even the shadow thereof; nor can it endure to be plucked
from it, unless it be well taught things which are more true. Then that truer
things may be taught, there is first need of a certain stepping back, that is a
bringing him off that which is absurd; that the very opinionist may plainly
perceive that his opinion is contrary to the principles of knowledge, to Sense,
Reason, Faith. And then he shall be judged brought off from the top of error
on to the plain, to wit, into the common field of Principles. From whence by
better and firmer consequences he shall readily suffer himself to be led to
the tops of better and firmer opinions, and shall be glad that he is brought
thither, where he shall find that he is better then before.

LXXXII. We must likewise observe this. That where between the teacher and the
learner (or rather the gain-sayer) the gap may be made up by some one medium,
there is no need there of more, and that this demonstration may be dispatched
by one Apodicticall Syllogism; as we in the 67. and 68. Aphorism have done.
And where there is a greater distance, it needs more mediums, that there may be
knit together by them like a chain, an Apodicticall Sorites, as we have done
in the 71. and 74. and 76. and 78. Aphorism. Which manner of teaching,
represents the Scale or Ladder to the eye, and the truth of chained consequence
begins to appear more evidently, then in the severed heaps of Prosyllogismes.
For example sake in Sect. 71.

(1) Who has good feet can go. (2) Who goes moves his feet forward one after
another. (3) He who moves his feet forward one after another, goes. (4) He who
goes, tends upwards, etc. (5) He who tends upwards, ascends by steps. (6) Who
ascends by steps, may ascend, as far as the steps go. (7) Therefore whosoever
has feet, may ascend whithersoever the steps go.
LXXXIII. Here that the Sorites may be truly Apodicticall, and a firm chain
of truth, these things are to be well minded. (1) As in a chain one link
lays hold on or goes within another; so do Propositions cohere and keep
together, here the predicate of the foregoing Proposition, being always taken
in into the subject of the following. (2) As in a chain one link is joined
fast to another essentially, that it may hold together inseperably: So here
every Predicate may utter something essential of its subject, that it may be
true without exception. (3) As in a chain one link is coupled with another,
till the measure of the length be made up: So in a Sorites let one step be knit
to another; till we shall come to that which may put an end to the
Controversy. (4) Lastly, as in a chain every link is strengthened in it self
severally, that it cannot be dissolved, otherwise there being but one broken
the chain is broke too: So we must stay upon the sundry steps of a Sorites
(when any one is led by this Ladder) so far as the truth thereof may be
manifest, and not so much as any matter of doubt may remain. And then we must
proceed.

LXXXIV. But enough. We must make an end of our deliberations, and
delineations, that we may come the better to the work it self. For whatsoever
we say, it may be still objected, where deeds are required, words are not
sufficient. Now we promise not to give words but the work: Though not in that
perfection which we conceived in the Idea. That Is it which we so often protest
appertains not to one man, nor to one Age, and this they understand of
themselves, who discreetly weigh and consider things well. Nature her self
would not have any great matter to be soon done, but has set hard-ship in the
way of every brave and goodly work, and so ordered it in generation, that the
greater sort of living creatures should be kept the longer in their dams
bellies. Then why may not this so great a birth not of our wit, but of an age,
stand in need both of due time, and also a good many mid-wifely and faithful
helpers? SOLOMON'S Temple was not perfected by one Worke-man: There Carpenters,
Brasiers, Masons, Goldsmiths, Jewellers, Engravers, Painters bestowed their
pains. Here Is likewise employment and work for Philosophers, Divines,
Politicians, Physicians, and all ingenious men whatsoever. Therefore let them
make haste hither, and not hold off, or refuse to furnish a common treasury
with common treasure, and to increase it by a common care; for its a common
business which we have in hand.

LXXXV. Nor are present persons only invited to go about the same thing with
the same zeal, but even those who shall be after us. For though we hope the
perfection of this work will be still greater through a perpetual progress,
yet we may never expect it at the height in this life. For as Number has Unity
for its beginning, but going on even in infinitum finds no end: So the wisdom
of God communicated to us, arises from small principles, and diffusing it self
by an infinite, can never be wholly exhausted. Which SYRACIDES observing said:
The first man knew her not perfectly: No more shall the last find her out
(chap. 24.28.) Thus industrious spirits shall have something which they may
continually supply, amend, perfect and polish with the commendation of their
names to Posterity, but no detriment at all to things themselves. For truth is
a solid thing, the more it is poysed and brandished, the more purely it shines.
Nor is there any room for Impostures, when all places are full of numbers,
measures, balances, and touch-stones, nor ought is admitted but what has
undergone a severe and full examination on all sides.

LXXXVI. And O thou our God! who have found out each way of knowledge, and
given it to JACOB thy Son, and ISRAEL thy Beloved (B 3. 37.) take pity on
us, and show us thy ways, teach us thy paths, lead us in thy truth, and teach
us: For thou art the God of our salvation, on thee do we wait. (Psalm. 25.4.5.)

An Advertisement touching the Scenography, or shaddowed description of the
work of PANSOPHY.
AFter that we have shown the Ichnographicall and Orthographicall rude or
gross draught of the Pansophical Temple, I easily foresee that it will come to
pass that some may say, as SENECA to his LUCILIUS: I desire no more of thee
than thou did attempt. Thy foundations have taken up a great deal of room.
Do but accomplish and make good what thou have undertaken: and handle those
things which thou have devised and mused of with thy self. (Epist. 31.) To
whom if I should make reply in the words of LUDOVICUS VIVES: Many things cannot
be brought forth and polisht at once: there cannot be any thing long sought for
both found out and trimmed by the same party: neither is the life of man, nor
the small and feeble strength of his wit sufficient for so many things. And a
little after: I know well that one man (he speaks of ARISTOTLE) could not
concoct and refine all those so many, so various and so difficult things, which
he had gotten or dig'd out. It Is not for one to do those things which scant an
hundred have performed. ( Lib. 1. de causis corrupt. Art.) I fear that this
will not satisfy them, who bring things after any sort promised into the
nature of a debt. Truly VERULAMIUS is by some (who also think themselves able
to judge) shrewdly lasht, and ill-spoken of because he promised a great
repairing of Arts, but did not perform it, which yet was not promised by
himself alone, nor did he ever presume to do that. For he protests so often
and again that he affords an instrument to restore Philosophy, that Philosophy
it self restored could not be afforded by the wit or industry of one man or
age; but by the joint and fresh-supplyed, so long as need requires, labor of
many. After which manner, we protest too so often, that any thing absolute and
perfect in that business, which we would wish to be done, is not to be
expected of us: but only an occasion, and certain rudiments of so great a
work: because it is better to give at length a beginning such as it is, to
things missing and desired, then to see something in an Idea, and never fall in
hand with it. Yet it is apparent that the vulgar rank of men are immitators,
and had rather feed upon things made ready, and sit down and be content with
things gotten and procured for the present, than trace and hunt out both the
hidden and yet mistaken order and truth of things. For it is not enough to show
them the way: they would have a Coach and well-greas'd Axeltrees, and horses
yoakt before it, and a skillful Coachman; and whatsoever other requisites, that
the journey may be speedy, secure, and pleasant. Therefore we see there is a
certain necessity put upon us likewise, that we do not only give advice in
regard of PANSOPHY, but that we may perform too indeed even as much as he
shall give^ who gives all things. At least a further, that is a particular
delineation of the whole work, from the beginning to the end: such as already
in the first preface of this Diatyposis (under the title of Scenography or a
pattern) we seem to have promised. I would give it, yea I had given it
already, but that several things hindered me. And truly first of all the
disdain of so many Praeludiums, by which we might even seem to have a mind
to cheat the world: Therefore both certain good men, and our very conscience
advised us, that we should rather do then deliberate about doing the business.
Then fell out (which gave the second stop to these studies) the thoughts,
Solicitings, and promises of that friend of ours (who by a certain, fervent,
and extraordinary desire of promoting the public good, every way he can, drew
us forth with our endeavors into the public) touching the procuring us some
choyser wits, and the persuading them to joint labors in these matters: and
also advisings about a meeting somewhere, to review the foundations more fully,
and to distribute the tasks amongst us. Some years past on in these
consultations: I, in the mean while applying my self in my place to the duties
of my ordinary calling; and while I expect a freedom from these, and that
promised leisure and co-labourers, doing nothing greatly therein. After
followed a voyage undertaken out of a desire to see certain of these persons,
and to determine our Counsels, which took up a year and an half to no other
benefit save that more incitements were added and the most commended favor of
one MaeCaeNAS. whose spirit the Lord stirred up to cherish these studies. On
whom relying, while I betake my self to the place of my rest, and to my
labors, occasions do happen of reassuming our Philologicall studies long ago
intermitted, (of which business I shall shortly render an account in Public)
wherein I have spent almost a whole year already, nor has the end appeared as
yet. These being finished, at last, I think to return to realls: but now more
fearful then of late, both by reason of the greatness of the work, which I
have learned to value better, and in regard of the absence of Co-labourers of
whom I am destitute. JULIUS POLLUX did also in times past excuse the slower
elaboration or atchivement of his Onomasticall work by the defect of
co-labourers, but such as he himself regarded not to use. For thus he writes
to the Emperor COMMODUS in the Preface of his seventh book: I could get no
colabourer to this work; for I have none whom I can trust to indeed, and here
my judgment must always be assistant. I would willingly use them, if they who
are able would be willing to be made use of: But they pretend that they are
unwi ling to trouble our lines, that the frame is to be finished by us as it
was begun, that their industry shall not be a wanting for the making of it
perfect afterward. Yea one of my chief friends writ expressly of late: As two
mothers cannot be delivered at once of one infant; so neither can two minds of
one Panharmonicall work; but mutual censure will refine produced fruits. I
confess this is spoken not without reason: Yet perhaps it will concern the
Public, that the true cause which I do not suspect but know, (one or other
already openly acknowledging it thus) be not publicly unknown. It is not
thought to be the point of a wise man to desert the Haven of his sure station,
and to expose himself to the uncertain sea and the winds. For these studies
have found nothing as yet in the Public, beside applause, which fats no body.
I say in public; because we are fallen into most unhappy times, which busy
and take up Kings and Kingdoms with Wars, and who not? And they think the
Authority of some private MECAENAS though most munificent, is not sufficient,
on whom many as on an unmoved Rock may rest. They say he is but one man, and
mortal, and mutable, and by whom it may be Heroic Enterprises will be valued,
not according to their endeavor, but their event: And who, if the business
should not succeed answerably to his hope, or to the desires of many, might
construe himself to be made a laughing stock; and such like things as these I
hear whispered. Therefore these things give me an occasion of advertising
publicly what the most illustrious Chancelour of ENGLAND in his time
advertised his King. For I had rather propound in his words, the things which I
now devise, and think are to be propounded to the deliberation of those who in
the place of God govern the affairs of men. Thus then he (in the preface to
his second book of the Augmentations of Sciences:) It suites every way with
your Majesty not only to irradiate (as you do) your age; but also to extend
your care to those things which all memory may nourish, and which very eternity
may behold. Now amongst these things (unless my earnest desire toward
Learning deceive me) there can be no worthyer or nobler act, then to endow the
world with solid and fruitful Augmentations of Sciences, etc. Then again. Let
this be laid down (which any one may grant,) that all the greatest and most
difficult works are overcome either by largeness of rewards, or by prudence
and wholesomenesse of counsels, or by conjunction of labors. The first whereof
extimulates the endeavor; the second takes away Ambages and Errors; the third
helps humane frailty; albeit the wise man does add here: Amongst these three,
Prudence and wholesomenesse of counsel obtaines the chief praise, that is the
showing and the delineation of the right and ready way, to perform the things
which is propounded: For a lame man (as we use to say) in the way out-strips a
Runner out of the way. [In which words our delineations of the Pansophicall
work, if they be good, are approved.] Yet a little after he wishes joint
labors, and liberal rewards to be appointed for them by public Authority,
who are occupied about the universal foundations, and very roots of wisdom,
in these words. Amongst so many excellently founded Colleges of Europe, I
wonder that they should be all destinated to certain Professions, none of them
dedicated to the liberal and universal studies of Arts and Sciences. For if
any one judge all Learning to be referred to Use and Action, he understands
well: But it is easy by this means to slide into that error, which the old
Fable touches sharply: In which the rest of the Bodies Members accused the
Belly, that it neither afforded motion as the Limbs, nor sense as the Head;
though in the mean time the Ventricle does conveigh the concocted and digested
nourishment to the other parts of the Body. Just in the same manner he who
deemes that a vain and idle study which is placed in universal contemplations
does not perceive that juice and strength is administered from thence to all
Professions and Arts. And indeed I am persuaded, that this has not been the
least cause why the happyer Progress of learning is hitherto retarded: For
that in these fundamental Sciences pains is taken only in transitu, or by the
by, nor have men their full and hearty draughts from thence. For if you desire
a Tree should prove more fruitful than ordinary, you vainly think of
remedying the boughs or branches: The very earth is to be loosed about the
root, and better mold to be put to it; or else you do mere nothing, etc.
Afterward it is of prime importance, that such (Searchers-out of things) be
chosen from among the best and most furnished persons: to wit, whose labor is
not employed to a transitory use, but to maintain the issue of knowledge for
ages. This cannot be, unless rewards and such conditions be appointed, with
which every one that is most eminent in that Art may be very well content: that
so it may not be grievous to him to dye in the same business, and that he may
not so much as think on the Practick, etc. Otherwise if there be not very
ample and fair rewards ordained and settled for the Fathers of Sciences, that
will fall out: Et Patrum invalidi referent jejunia nati.
And so a feeble offspring will declare
The slender Pittance of their Fathers fare.


Some things being mentioned between, he adds: Truly the Munificence and bounty
of men is not clean and altogether ceased: for we see there are not only
Books, (Libraries) but Spheres, Globes, Astrolabes, Maps, and such like, etc.
provided and afforded as certain helps to the study of Astronomy and
Cosmography. We see also some places dedicated to the study of Physic; that
they have Gardens for the view and knowledge of Simples of every kind, nor
want they the use of dead bodies for Anatomicall observations. But these things
appertain to few. It may pass for truth in general, that there can hardly be
great progresses in getting out the hidden things of nature, unless men may
have abundantly wherewithal to bear the charges and cost they shall be at for
the experiments either of VULCAN or DAEDALUS. And therefore as Princes
Secretaries and Spies are suffered to give up accounts of their expenses for
their diligences in exploring and getting out new things and hidden secrets: so
likewise should the Scouts and observers of nature be satisfied concerning
their expenses. Otherwise we shall never be informed and certified of very many
things most worthy to be known. For if ALEXANDER gave ARISTOTLE a great sum
of money, wherewithal he should hire Huntsmen, Fowlers, Fishers, and others,
that he might come the more furnished to write the History of living creatures:
Surely some greater matter is due to those who travel not in the Groves of
nature, but in the Labyrinths of Arts, open a way for themselves and others.
Thus far he, whose words I commend to their peculiar consideration whom God
has commanded to be eminent, and to be set as it were upon a Watch-towre to
look carefully to the public good. As for me, I shall willingly do
whatsoever God through my weakness will have done: and as soon as I shall be
permitted to return to these studies, I will make ready a Sceleton of all
PANSOPHY, and expose it to public censure. To the end that either that Series
may remain, if better things shall not be found out, or to yield occasion even
for an eager search after better things: until the best thing which is the
very uncontrouled power and light of order and truth be found out. At the least
wise, that these things of ours may be a witness that all things ought to be
taken for possible and feaseable. Let me end with the words of the Renowned
VERULAM, with which he concludes his aforesaid Preface. What things soever may
be perfected by some, though not by any, and by many jointly, though not by
one, and in succession of ages, though not in the same age, and lastly by
public care and cost, though not by the wealth and industry of single persons.
But if there be any who had rather use that of SOLOMON, there is a Lion in the
way says the sluggard; than that of VIRGILL; Possunt quia posse videntur.
Those matters may be done,
Which seem so unto one.


It shall be enough for me, if my labors may be esteemed only amongst the
desires or wishes of better note. For as he must not be quite ignorant of the
matter who states the question handsomely, so neither may he seem void of
sense, who shall but wish for things which are no way absurd. Courteous Reader
farewell, favor us, and pray to God for us. Dated in my retirement, 10.
September. Anno 1643.
FINIS.
Errata sic corrige.
Page 2. line 3. covets p. 6. 19. things. p. 11. 10. were. p. 16. 11. the
hurting. p 18. 12* tried. p. 19. 27. his lively look and feature p. 25 ^s
variously. p. 37. 7. no small. p. 52. 19. do make. p 54. 7. dele ^ot. p. 55.
14. is. p. 58. 7. minding. p. 63. 23. in. p. 77. 17 the rigider. p. 82. 24. may
be. p. 92. 3 raced. p. 98. 5. its parts. p. 102. 2. Sanctuary. p. 105. 20.
very. p. 111. 3. cannot not. p. 115. 1. That the. p. 133. ult. their, p 138.
21. much better, p. 146. 5. that's. p. 150. 21. interjected. p. 151. 14. to be
set. p. 154. 10. laziest. p. 157. 16. as from. p. 172. 1. horses put in.


