A COMMONWEALTH, AND Commonvvealths-men, Asserted and Vindicated: Wherein The
Necessity and Advantage of putting their Principles into speedy practice, is
briefly repeated; And PEACE and UNITY, Commended to the People of this Nation.

Tacit. Lib. 3. Annal. Postquam exui aequalitas, and pro modestia ac pudore,
ambitio and vis incedebat, Provenere dominationes: multosque apud populos
aeternum manscrit. Quidam statim, aut postquam REGUM pertoesum, LEGES maluerunt.

London, Printed for Henry Fletcher, at the three Gilt Cups in Paul's
Churchyard. 1659. June. 28

A COMMONWEALTH, AND COMMONWEALTHS-MEN, Asserted and Vindicated.
THough in this time of general scribbling, and daily impregnating the Press
with no less seditious then ridiculous Pamphlets, it cannot but be thought an
Act accountable to discretion, for any one of a sober Spirit and settled
Principles to appear in Print among such lewd Company, or to offer any thing of
seriousness, in a way now rendered so unagreeable for business of that nature:
Yet for the better composing and settling the minds of those who may by such
and so many interfering varieties, and spurious issues of corrupt brains, be
rendered tottering from their foundations, either of Piety, Prudence or
Obedience; and for the vindicating the Integrity and Reputations of those, who
for their Love and Loyalty to their Country, are by all means and artifice
endeavored to be rendered liable to Obloquy and Disgrace, I shall adventure to
break that silence which Prudence might persuade: And though neither the Cause
now under agitation, nor the Persons acting, can with rational Men, receive any
disadvantage from such poor pamphleting Opponents, yet the number of the Honest
and Wife being now and always but small, the present state of Affairs, may
justly exact something of Reason and Judgment to be repeated, for the
establishing of Men's Minds in the Equity and Right of that Cause which is
endeavored to be made so dubious, and dangerous, if not destructive.

That therefore a Government is necessary to the consistencie of all Societies
of Men, is not (notwithstanding the Anarchical tendencies of some Men's Spirits)
so much the Dispute amongst us, as, What sort and kind of Government is most
agreeable to the present state of these Nations. And the difference herein (the
Parliament having now freed themselves from all jealousies of introducing an
Oligarchy (the worst of Governments) remains only between the Monarchists and
Commonwealths-men. The first, receiving the specious justification of the
precedent Custom and Use of this Nation: The latter, the disadvantagious
imputation of a Novelism, unpractised, and impracticable amongst us. In which
Case, though it be confessed that Ancient Laws and Usages are not easily, and
upon slight occasions to be changed, according to that Quadrane of Pibrac, La
ley soubs qui l'estat sa force a prise
Guard la bien, pour goffe qu'elle soit:
Le bon heur vient d'ou' ton nes' appercoit,
Et bien souvent de ce que lou mesprise.
Maintain those Laws (however rude and plain)
Whereby before thy Commonwealth has thrived:
Good Fortune often comes by the lowest mean,
How, or from whence, sometimes is scarce perceived.
Yet it cannot likewise but be granted, that Quod recte alio tempore
constitutum est, itidem recte alio tempore potest mutari: That upon a mutation
of the causes of things, the things themselves may (nay must) be likewise
changed, and that without any imputation of Novelty. Augustines Assertion being
indubitably true, Id quod in tempore novum est, non est novum apud eum qui
condidit tempora, and sine tempore habet omnia, quae suis quibusque temporibus
pro eorum VARIETATE distribuit: That which in the present time appears new to
us, is not new with him who appointed that time, and who before the time,
comprehends those things which he distributes to every particular time,
according to its variety and change. So that we may conclude with Seneca, Non
incidunt cuncta, ut putamus, sed veniunt; Things do not suddenly and newly
happen, as we conceive, but come in their due and appointed course. And
therefore where GOD Almighty in his eternal Providence manifested to us in the
present time, has thought fit to change and subvert old foundations, and to
lay new ones amongst us, let it not be thought Novelty in those, who still to
maintain the building upright and firm, relinquish the old rotten and obsolete
foundations, and apply themselves to the erecting of such agreeable
superstructures on those which are now laid amongst us, as shall be most for
the safety of the people, which is the Supreme Law of all Nations.

But to arbitrate more clearly between these parties, I shall proceed upon such
undeniable principles, as receive their confirmation both from Reason and
Experience. And of those, this shall be the Cornerstone, That from the legal
distribution and over-balance of propriety, deriveth naturally all Government.
Which Maxim has had such a general reception, is so obvious to every
capacity, and so manifested by experience, that it stands not in need of any
further illustration. The case has been learnedly and clearly deduced ab
origin from the Government of Families, Mr. J. H.
which may be either Monarchical, or Popular, according to the balance of
propriety. If one Man have 1000 l. per annum, he in such case is absolute
Monarch over his Sons and Servants, who depend solely upon him, and (as has
been well said) are hung upon him by the teeth: And if (as we have too frequent
examples amongst us) this 1000 l. per annum be spent or consumed, his Monarchy
immediately thereupon fails, and he himself is reduced to the condition of a
Servant, and of equality with those who formerly served himself. Whereby it
appears, that the foundation or balance of his Empire was in the 1000 l. per
annum, and not otherwise. But now, if six or ten men having 300 l. per annum
apiece, agree to dwell together as one Family, not any one of these can pretend
to be Lord and Master of the same; But they all agree together upon such
Orders, unto which they consent equally to submit: And the parity of their
Estates, creating in them a parity of minds and conditions, (in which case the
old Rules hold, par in parem non habet imperium, and Aequalibus velle imperare
est contra naturam superbire) they naturally contract a common equal interest,
and devolve into the State of a free Commonwealth, and are only capable of a
Government of Laws and Orders, and not of one or more men. In either of which
cases, being thus put, it is referred to every or any capacity, whether without
violence, or moring of propriety, a Popular family can be made of the
Monarchical, or a Monarchical family of the popular. And we know, a Family is
but a smaller society or Nation; and a Nation, but a greater society or Family.

This therefore being premised as granted; and it being likewise yielded by me,
that the over-balance of propriety in these Nations, as it lately was in the
King and Nobility, does naturally produce either an Aristocracy, or a mixed
Monarchy, as by a sufficient experience has been manifest amongst us, And
which (if the balance had so still remained) we might with some happiness yet
have enjoyed; It remains for the determining the question, only to show that
the balance is altered from the former Monarchical, and now remains in a
popular scale: And then, according to that known rule, Restransit cum sua
causa, It will necessarily follow, that the balance, the cause of Government,
being changed; the Government it self, as the effect, must follow the balance
it is cause. And that, and how the English Balance has been and is varied and
changed, is most politely and politiquely demonstrated by the Excellent Mr.
Harrington (whose writings, if they were received and considered, with that
respect, candor and ingenuity, which the Author and they deserve from this
Nation, they would soon give a conviction to the most strenuous opponents of
this cause.) I shall need therefore only to touch the matter of fact, and (with
him) to affirm, that the Lands now in hold of the people, overbalance those in
the hold of the Nobility at least nine in ten; whereby it is evident that we
now are upon a Popular balance, down-weight; and being so, cannot admit of any
other form of Government then such as is Popular, without violence and force
offered to propriety: which once rightly perceived and understood, would I
persuade my self, soon put a stop to the proceedings of the most violent
Assertors of Monarchy, and rebus loquentibus, nobis tacentibus, convince them,
That Mr. Wrens robustious Arguments, to alter and suit the Balance to the
Government, and not the Government to the Balance, whereby, he says, he has
at once inverted the aim, and overturned the frame of the whole Commonwealth of
Oceana, is but bad Logic, and would prove worse Policy; and which (as he truly
says) would really overturn and destroy the whole frame of this flourishing
Nation.

The necessity of a Commonwealth being now evinced, and that we are forced upon
that form of Government; It might be thought fit likewise to be shown, that
this necessity is no way hazardous, but advantageous to us; and that we are not
constrained to that which is hurtful, but even to the embracement of our own
happiness: Which though I deny not, but that it may be, and has been had under
other Governments, yet it is and has been in a more eminent and grateful
manner, under that of a Commonwealth. But the advantage of this Government is
so clearly already set forth to public consideration, By I. H.
that there is not any thing which may remain further to be desired therein.

It may suffice that we but take notice, that the nature and effect of this
Government is so well known to be Freedom, that it is thereby described; and in
all Writers, the most frequent distinguishing terms between Monarchy and a
Commonwealth, are Servitus and Libertas; as one speaking of the inconstancy of
men's minds, Clapmar. and Tac. in vita Agric. dicit, Principatum ac libertatem
res esse dissociabiles.
under either the one or the other, says, Qui in servitute sunt libertatem
exoptant, qui in liberate servitutem. And we know that Liberty (in what
respect soever) is the most grateful and desirable thing, this world either
does or can afford us; and is that which has been always ingrafted in a most
special manner, in the hearts and minds of this Nation, of whom, even whilst
the name (though not the nature) of Liberty was scarce known to them, Tacitus
thus relates: Ipsi Britanni dilectum, ac tributa and injuncta imperii munera,
impigre obeunt, si injuriae absint, has aegre tolerant, jam domiti ut pareant,
nondum ut serviant.

And now I cannot but enter into an admiration of the waywardness of our people
of this Age, who are so fast and wilfully fettered to their old Usages and
Customs, that though they cannot retain, yet will they not be persuaded to part
with them; being of his froward humor in the Poet:

Nec possum tecum vivere, nec sine te. But instead of endeavoring and applying
themselves to the advancement of such a settlement as the nation in the present
state of things is capable of, they estuate and torment themselves with
repining and dissatisfaction at the Providence and Prudence of GOD, and seem
rather desirous to rush into Anarchy, or like the beast into the Battle, then
to yield their compliance or assistance to the building of agreeable
Superstructures upon that Basis of Government which even GOD and Nature have
laid amongst us. Nay, such is the temper of these times, that those Persons who
are both prudent in understanding of, and faithful in acting for the interest
and settlement of their Country, are forced to complain, That having offered
aid at this loss, they have escaped well if they be scorned, and not ruined, by
their ungrateful Country, whose Liberty whilst they endeavor to procure, they
thereby endanger their own.

-- Pudet haec approbria nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
That this has been, and still is the temper of many amongst us, who are
guided more by Zeal then Kowledge, is more apparent then that it should need to
be shown; and so much a crime, as that it cannot receive the palliation of any
other excuse, then that whereby St. Paul extenuates his persecuting, It is done
out of Ignorance. For the removing therefore of the Cause, and consequently the
Disease; I cannot think of any more wholesome Recipe's then these which follow:
1. That Mr. Harringtons Writings be diligently and seriously read and perused.
2. That before they be taken in hand, the Reader lay aside all prejudicate
thoughts and opinions, concerning either the Author or them; but yield himself
up to be led by them, if he find in them reason sufficient to do it. 3. That
afterward (since opposita juxtase posit a clarius illucescunt) Mr. Wren be
likewise read* And then both together being laid in the Balance of Reason and
Judgment, the Readers restitution to a sound mind concerning a Commonwealth
will be expected.


In the mean time, let us be assured, That Distraction and War, wherein is the
absence of all Government, is infinitely more noxious then the establishment of
the worst of Governments (were such a one intended to be imposed upon us) can
possibly be. And though there be no great cause either to doubt or fear our
being reduced into such a state, yet the frequent Births and public exposing
of the many late pestilent Libels, being the issues of weak corrupted
Judgments, and discontented Minds, cannot but be looked upon as tendencies
and excitements thereunto. It only remains therefore that we be all persuaded
to a free and voluntary, or at least, an Acquiescent submission and obedience
to the present Providence and Power manifested and set up amongst us, and in
peace and patience wait the result of their consultations and actions, which
they have solemnly promised and engaged shall be for our preservation in our
Liberties, as Men and Christians, and for the settling of us upon the solid and
sure Foundation of a Free and Equal Commonwealth; and of their performance
whereof, we have not as yet had, and with much confidence persuade our selves
we shall not at any time have any cause to doubt. I conclude with that
Observation of Tacitus, That it was only our disunion that formerly rendered
us subject to the conquest of the Romans; and for a farewell, give you his
occasional consideration thereupon:

Nec aliud adversus validissimas gentes pro nobis utilius quam quod in commune
non consulunt, Ita dum singuli pugnant, Universi vincuntur.
FINIS.

