THE Comical Dream, OR, The Tempest: A Mock Poem.

REPRESENTING The Humors of some Sea-sick Passengers Their Feav'rish Valor,
and their Aguish fears: WITH The true Description of a False Sea Fight:

Qui ducis Vultus, and non legis ista libenter, Omnibus invideas livide Nemo
tibi.

Mart. Lib. I. Epig. London Printed by H. Bruges, 1674

THE Comical Dream, OR The Tempest. A Mock Poem, etc.
SIR,
HIs humble Pen receives no Aid from those
Who Thunder in Verse, and speak like Guns in Prose:
Such Wit like Powder makes a horrid noise
And with a bounceing-flash it self destroy's.
These Empty-Authors only rich in sound
With glorious Nonsense all their Books abound.
O how ambitiously they Court the Press,
To make the ignorant admire their dress:
To gain the Applauses of a Vulgar breath
Which once sucked in, like Poison, swells to death.
Dull-Soulless-men! instead of natural parts,
Their brains stuffed full with low Mechanic Arts.
Few be so happy to reach DRYDEN'S height,
Or if they should, the wit is out of sight!
Then do not blame me for so low a style,
My Wit's compelled in other sports to toil,
Or rather business calls me from my Pen,
Such business as confounds the Wits of men.
-- Should I thus begin --
It is well known to some, or most of ye,
How Merchants go in Wood, cut out of Tree,
To take fresh Air in crossing the salt Sea:
But who the Devil would like such Ribaldry?
My Taper here, seeing such wretched stuff,
Ner took its leave but vanished in a snuff.
LONDON, that Famous City for Commerce.
Muses assist, to sing her praise in Verse.
Let learned Historians tell her Founders name;
My work is to describe her present Fame.
Hail Queen of Cities! may thou ever be,
As now thou art, the Glory of the three.
Thou art erected on fo firm a Base
As neither time, nor envy, shall deface.
And if one unexperienced, can devine,
Thy glories never shall set, but always shine
In Honors Orb, there fixed, thy Friends to cheer;
But Meteor-like possess thy Foes with fear.
If well built Ships, and stately buildings be
The Effects of Art, and Ingenuity?
And if these Arts do merit any praise?
Thou, out of ruin did thy Trophies raise:
For Phoenix-like from Her bright Ashes came
Another Phoenix to revive her name!
So shall succeeding Ages much admire,
How this great City fell and rise! by Fire!
In lieu of Eggs to fill her empty nest,
A City hatched: equal to none! the best!
Each private building, like a Palace, shows;
Contrived by Art in Uniformal-rowes:
And in the middle of this glorious place,
Is reared an Edifice of Royal-race:
The Royal Exchange, where Merchants daily meet,
Making the Pavements proud to kiss their Feet.
To Noble Gresham, her first being owes,
And now her VValls a Kingly Race enclose:
In Efigie (though dead) they lively stand,
Viewing the relics of their past-command.
Over the Piazzi of this noble-square,
Live tempting Angles selling out their ware,
Whose swe^t-alluring-smiles, and lovely looks,
Take all the Fish that nibble at those hooks.
Pride's sold by'th' Piece, and Pleasure, by the Yard:
But whom you Traffic with, have great regard;
For some Commodities Infectious are --
Though to the outward show appear most fair:
Yet sometimes damaged prove, and burnt within;
It Is punishment to pay so dear for sin;
And for a moments tickling pleasure lie
A Month in pain, then play the Fool and dye.
But here dull- Morpheus with his leaden Mace,
Did throw a pleasing slumber over my face;
Which slid into the Portals of mine eyes,
And seized my senses with a quick surprise.
'Twixt sleep and waking on my back, I lay
When Fancy raised a Visionary-day;
And bad my drousy thoughts, sit down and see,
While she p^esented them a Comedy.
Faith, so it proved -- Thrice had the Music played
When various Antiques, danced in Masquerade.
They vanished straight, and for a Prologue, comes
A fe^l^w in, full of his hauks, and humms:
Dressed up in high-crown'd Hat, and narrow band,
Who for a while did like an Image stand:
Into his mouth he su^kt his snotty snowt,
He spit and spaul'd and gently trod it out:
So having thus prepared himself to speak
His tongue, like Bagpipes, through his Organs squeak.
My thoughts sat sympring at this formal sight,
Had it been real I had laugh't outright.
Mean while t'amuse my thoughts a Sister came,
He touched her flesh, and asked her carnal name;
The spirit moved him to salute her too,
And in the Act, he whispered her, Wou't do?
Doe' (quoth she) what do thou mean by this?
To Increase the faithful; Lambs may play and kiss:
The seed of Faith, sown upon fertile ground,
Will make the faithful every where abound.
His strong desire she faintly does refuse,
And now his zeal the chase more hot persues.
Words, without Presents, take successless pains,
No Love like that of Bracelets, Pearls, and Chains:
Presents, in a dumb Language plead their mind,
And cause the Object quickly to be Kind.
With more than usual have, urging her to it,
He now presents her with some early fruit.
No sooner tasted, but like Grannum Eve,
She fell -- and he upon her -- here I leave.
Should I proceed, 'twou'd titulate your blood,
And make ye stand to things that are not good:
Knowing how apt our Nature is that way,
Though, in a full Career, it forced me, stay.
Here, the Scaene shifted to the Royal Exchange:
My wandering thoughts through every Walk did range.
And leaning against a Pillar, heard some say,
How that the first fair wind, they would away:
And by discursive Circumstance, I found,
They and the Captain, were for -- bound.
No sooner a desire possessed my mind;
Of Place, and Persons, alteration find.
Not lightning flashes swifter through the air;
Nor Lovers fancies gazing on the Fair,
Than did my Thoughts --
The whispr'ing voices, and the silken Clothes;
Now changed to Tarry -- and to ful-mouth'd Oaths.
The Boat-swain, loudest, bad them make less noise;
He lick't the Younckers, kick't about the Boys.
Me thoughts, at this I was concerned and vexed;
And was afraid it might be my turn next.
Hands over the side, the Captain's come aboard:
And with him Merchants, with Provisions stored.
The Anchor weighed, and Ship just under sail:
When in an instant sprung a mighty Gale.
She now begins to bouze it with her snout,
And toss her new Inhabitants about:
They, not inured to this unstable Place;
It changed their mirth into a serious face.
And all confused, cannot tell what to think,
But reel and stagger, like as men in drink.
No pleasing Object, now salutes the Eye,
But ugly Scelletons are stalking by.
A squeasy stomach bids them to prepare
To take a Vomit, and to walk in the Air.
One throws himself upon his little Bed,
And on his hand, he leans his aching head.
Another, over a Basin says his Prayers:
What he eat last, for those will have it, spar^s.
A third, into the Gallery runs, and there
What he intends, those next him, smell and hear.
Strip handsome women, let 'um naked stand;
Should they with looks, entreat; with words, command:
Should they fa^l back, and pluck them with 'um too,
They Would rise again, and little say, or do.
Few hours sickness alters Nature quite,
And makes a Saint, of who before was Right.
Had sea or wind, but any Sense of wrong,
They would not have maintained the War so long.
Boreas, puffed up the Sea with swelling Pride;
Whose proud Ambitious waves, the Ship, defied:
And rising up into a Mountaine's height,
Break in, and stagger her with no less weight.
The Scud flies thick; such threatening clouds appear,
Would melt a hardn'd courage into Fear:
When Cowards, who the danger do not know,
Can with a boldness to their ruin go:
So Asses, in disguise, like Lions show.
The angry Elements, in thunder speak,
As if they would, the course of Nature break;
And all it is order, into Chaos shake.
All darkness is, -- But when the Lightnings fly,
And with their subtle fires inflame the Sky;
Which, like a Prospect-glass, show dangers nigh.
The Land (to many welcome!) now does roar,
With foaming Billows beating on the Shore.
As hungry Lions, though they see their Prey
Make toward 'um, Impatient of delay,
Rouse up, and meet it above half the way.
Even so the Earth contra -- to Natures course,
Moves in a dreadful shape to meet the source:
Which, as Jaccals the silly beasts, decoy,
So would the Seas, this beaten-ship, convoy
To its Destruction; Had not Providence
(Who acts beyond the reach of common sense)
Made the big Clouds, a kind of sorrow show,
And weep down blessings to the world below.
Those, who in Taverns keep good Company,
May partly guess what the disorders be;
For when the Wine does elevate the man,
He thinks, a could do more than others can.
So have I seen, two Hectors stoutly draw,
Whose very looks might keep a Fool in awe:
A MIS (chief) st^ps between, and whispers one,
That he shall use her first. The Quarrel's done.
He takes her at her word, and over a Chair,
Lays her down gently; fumbles out his --
But that, alas! not in condition then;
Peept out its head, and shrunk it in again.
Which when this Rival saw, he little sed,
But sent a bottle to his nodding-head,
And after that, another: Both engage
Armed Cap-a-pe, with folly, Wine, and Rage.
The woman disappointed of her pleasure;
Swears, the next time, that he shall wait her leisure:
She quits the Room, goes to another Friend,
Who of her business quickly made an end.
For Men in drink can seldom go, or stand;
Much less perform a Ladys strict command.
Aboard, confusion much like this appears,
They were surpised with drink, but these, with fears.
For in Reels one, with Breeches in his hand,
And what for fear and sickness, could not stand;
Falls over another, whose gaping faint reply,
Did let him know, he would rather spue, than dye.
Though both helped up, by those which on them wait;
Yet not so soon, but all Contaminate.
An Hamper of wine o'reset, and washed away,
The reeking Mixture, which by its Confines lay.
No sooner they, within their Cabbins stowed,
The Sea was laid, and VVind more gently blowed.
And having thus reposed themselves a while,
Rose up, and at each others Fortunes, smile.
All their discourse on the ensuing day,
Was, of the several postures how they lay.
But one more free than any of the rest,
On his Companions often would break a Jest.
The Ghost of's Mother Came, whose envious frown,
Dash't all their Mirth, and beat their smiling down!
Not that they stood in fear, only because
They would be subject unto Honors Laws.
Such is the nature of true Gentlemen,
To take Abuse, and not to give't again.
For they by Honor, not by Envy led,
Take no Exception what is done or sed.
More, t'allay their Mirth, and raise their Fear:
A Tartan brings News, the Hollanders are near.
Hammocks all down, and all the Guns put out:
The men half frighted, staring, run about!
Some up the Shrowds; one above all Espies
Small Fishermen, the Hollanders, he cries.
No sooner from his mouth the Allarum given:
The Passengers bequeath their Souls to Heaven!
One shivering stands, and whispering to his Friend;
Damme! these Wars will never have an end.
A second stamps, and in his passion cries,
My Friends have sent me, for a Sacrifice!
A little man, more serious than they,
Told them, this was no time, to curse, but Pray.
A fourth, for his Pistols calls; his Hanger trys
Upon a Gun, that when most need on it, flies.
The most Devout, in have runs to his Chest,
For that good Book, which Pious men love best;
But being stowed away beneath the rest
Could not be found, -- faith 'twas a pretty Jest!
For up he snatches one, One which he took
By the Cover, to be a Sermon book;
Into the Cabin presently repairs,
And after he had mumbled over his Prayers;
With a composed and serious look begins
To read, the just reward of all our Sins.
So was the Book Entitled; but alas!
This gran-mistake must now no longer pass.
In stead of such a Chapter, such a Verse;
There was a Duke brought in upon a Hearse.
A Prologue for the Text. One overlooks
Tells him 'a wonders, he will read such Books.
He in a Fury throws the Book away,
The other out of roguery bids him Pray:
Because that he but half an hour before,
Bad him not Curse, but say his Prayers over.
BRight Sol to the Antipodes was gone,
When silver Luna, did ascend her throne;
Whose fainter Beams shone with a glimmering light;
And took her brothers part, made Day, of Night!
Night roused with anger, from a sable shroud,
In circl'd all her glories in a Cloud.
This is the time most Creatures go to rest,
This is the time, which married men love best.
This is the time, that women love to play,
And with Love-tricks, to Kiss Old-time away.
Just here, I wak't, and with my longing arms,
Embraced an empty shadow, without charms.
I turned about, and to my Pillow bowed;
In stead of Juno, I embraced a Cloud.
It would vex you, or any one beside,
To have an empty shadow for your Bride.
Your Pardon Sir, -- I Am out of humor quite,
I shall grow tedious, should I further write,
Therefore, without a Complement, Good Night.
EPILOGVE.
MEthinks I hear some Petty-Critticks say,
In all these Lines, he has not touched the Play:
We did expect his Satyr in a rage,
Might scare the dancing Devils off the Stage.
To undeceive such expectation, know
This Dream was Writ (not many Months ago)
A thousand Leagues from Hence; and by a Pen,
That vallues not the Dammings of those Men,
Whose foppish humors to that pass are grown,
Nothing is Good, but what is like their Own!
Full of stiff-Nonfence, Raill'ry A-la-mode!
Where every Devil thunders like a god.
The very sound of the Words, do drown the Sense,
And their strong Lines are full of Impotence!
Yet if you Read, and not the Verse commend;
Dam 'um, They Will presently a Challenge send.
By ID, ESt, -- That is to say,
The Best, and Worst, that ever writ a Play.
FINIS.

