An Exact LIST of all the Men, Women, and Boys that Died on Board the Indian
and African Company' s Fleet, during their Voyage from Scotland to America, and
since their Landing in Caledonia, Together with a particular account of their
qualities, the several Days of their Deaths, and the respective Distempers or
Accidents of which they Died.
Nota. By Volunteers are meant such Young Gentlemen as went in no particular
station, but only in hopes of preferment as opportunity should offer.

July 23. A Alexander Piery, a Planter Fever August 8. Daniel Martin, a Sailer
Flux 22. Robert Donaldson, a Planter Flux 30. George Menzies, a Planter Flux
Septem. 11. John Forrester, a Planter Flux 16. James Dunnie, a Planter Flux 19.
Robert Hardy, Volunteer Fever 21. John Stewart, Volunteer Fever Robert Baillie,
a Planter Fever 23. John Smith, Sailer Fever 25. Alexander Elder, Sailer Fever
27. Jeromy Spence, Sailer Fever 28. Andrew Baird, Sailer Flux 29. Walter
Johnstoun, Chirurgeon's Mate Fever October. 1. John Duffus, Sailer Fever 5.
Thomas Dalrymple, Planter Fever 7. James Paterson, Volunteer Flux 10. Charles
Hamilton, Mid-shipman Flux 11. Jacob Yorkland, Volunteer Flux 15. James
Davidson, Planter Flux 16. Henry Charters, Volunteer Flux 19. Lieutenent John
Hay's Wife Flux 20. Adam Hill, a Planter Flux Walter Eliot, a Midship-man Fever
22. Adam Cunningham, a Midshipman Fever Adam Bennet, a Midshipman Fever 23. Mr.
Thomas James Minister Fever Peter Mackintosh, Sailer. Fever 24. John Daniel,
Planter Flux 25. David Henderson, a Sailer Flux James Graham, Volunteer Flux
26. William Miller, Volunteer Fever 27. John Chiesly, Volunteer Flux 28. Mr.
John Malbon Merchant Fever Alexander Tailor, Sailer Fever Robert Gaudie,
Planter Flux John Aird, a Planter Decay Lievtenent Hugh Hay Fever Peter
Paterson, a Sailer Flux James Montgomery Flux 31. John Luckison, Volunteer Flux
Novem. 1. David Hay, Volunteer Flux 2. Thomas Fenner, Clerk to Mr. Paterson
Fever 3. Lieutenent James Inglis

After Landing.
Novem. 5. Hugh Barclay, Sailer Fever Henry Grapes, Trumpeter Fever 6.
Archibald Wright, Volunteer Flux 7. James Clark, Vounteer Flux 9. James Weems
Volunteer Flux 11. John Fletcher, a Planter Flux 14. Mr. Patersons Wife, Fever
15. Archibald Mosman, Volunteer Flux 16. John Cannie, Sailer Flux John Sim
Sailer, Flux 20. Mr. Adam Scot, Minister Flux 22. Roger Munckland, Volunteer
Flux Andrew Hamilton, a mid shipman Fever 24. William Baird. Sailer Flux 27.
James Young, Sailer Fever 29. James Montgomery, a Planter Flux December. John
Burrol, a Sailer Flux 3 James Borthwick, a Sailer Fever 6. David Miller,
Planter Flux Ensign William Hallyburton. Flux 7. William Erskin, Planter Flux
8. Robert Bishop Surgeons Mate Flux 10. Recompense Standburgh, one of the
Mates on Board the St Andrew Fever 11. Robert Pendreick, William Tenter Drowned
Wiilliam Maclellan a Boy David White, a Planter Fever 17. William Barron, a
Planter Flux 24 Alexander White, a Planter Flux Andrew Brown, a Boy on board
the French Ship Drowned Peter Telfer, a Planter Flux 25. Captain Thomas
Fullarton, commander of the Dolphin after warm walking died suddenly

This is a true LIST compared by Me ROD. MACKENZIE Scry. to the said Company.

NO doubt, every one will justly Regret the loss of his own nearest Friend, but
it is a great and General Mercy that; of so many as went Crowded in Five Ships,
upon so long and tedious a Voyage as they had, so few are dead; Especially
considering, that on their way they had the misfortune of taking in bad Water,
upon an Uninhabited Island, in the beginning of the Rainy Season, which
occasioned general Sicknss among them; though soon after their Landing in
Caledonia (thanks be to GOD) they Recovered their Health so much (even beyond
expectation) that, when the Express came away, there were but Five of all our
Men who were not at Work in Building of Forts and Houses. And as even a greater
Number of so many as went, might have died by this time, had they all remained
at Home; so it may be some Satisfaction to the nearest Friends of the deceased
that their Names shall stand upon Record as being amongst the first Brave
Adventurers that went upon the most Noble, most Honorable, and most Promising
Undertaking that Scotland ever took in Hand.

EDINBURGH, Printed by George Mosman, in the Year 1699.


