A COMPLAINT TO THE House of Commons, AND Resolution taken up by the free
Protestant Subjects of the Cities of London and Westminster, and the Counties
adjacent.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1642.

A Complaint to the House of COMMONS, and Resolution taken up by the free
Protestant Subjects of the Cities of London and Westminister and the Counties
adjaceat.
LOosers may speak by authority of a Proverb, and then we are sure we ought
not to be silenced; we have seen and perused many Remonstrances, Declarations,
Votes and Ordinances, showing how far we are obliged to complain, shall (in
few words) be expressed, that neither the Kings Majesty, your honorable
Assembly, nor any man may think otherwise, but that we have most just reason
not to be silent, in grievances so intolerable: The privilege of subjects
which we enjoy under you moves us to complain; yet that is not all which
causes the breach of silence, but the multiplied calumnies of Malignants, upon
you the two honorable Houses of Parliament; and the sharp invectives daily
published against you and to beget, and increase distrust, and disaffection
between the King and his Parliament, and the people: and like wicked spirits
of division, and under the false pretexts of the Law of the land, and pretenses
of seeking peace, have not only dared to defame, but even to arraign your
proceedings; oh right Honorable, have not we cause to complain against such
bold presumptions? did ever subjects thus dare to abuse their Senators? the
Priests and Jesuits of Rome themselves durst never (under a Protestant
government) divulge their actions to a public view, though by seducements they
have now brought their accomplices to such treachery, that as much as in them
lies they labor with might and maine to misrepresent your worthy actions, both
to His Majesty, and to the whole Kingdom; was ever Parliament (in all their
actions) more innocent? yet was never any more abused; was ever any more
faithful in the trust of the Church and Kingdom committed to them? yet none
so maligned: surely had you betrayed the trust committed to you, and let the
Prelates, Papists, and all Malignants, have bin their own executioners, in
defending the law, and their own liberties under their own false colors; then
they would have used you better till both have been destroyed.

What a woeful tragedy would then have been to be acted in this Kingdom, when
our lives, liberties, and estates should have been taken from us, and resigned
to them who can lay no other foundation of their own greatness, but upon the
ruin of this, and in it of all Parliaments, an^ them of the true religion, and
the freedom of this Nation, and (...) the men that would persuade the people
that both Houses of Parliamen^ containing all the Peers, and representing all
the Commons of England would destroy the laws of the land and the peace of the
Kingdom; whe^^ in besides the trust of the whole; who can be so blockish as
not to kno^ that you your selves (noble Senators) in your own particular have
so gre^^ an intrest of honor, and estate, that we hope it will gain little
credit.

We, and all that have but the least use of Reason cannot be ignora^^ that if
you intended any misery toward us, your selves must needs ha^^ the greatest
share in it; did you betray your trust to procure a Princes favor, you might
justly be suspected; but your great pains have manifested how faithful you
have been, you have left your houses and ^states, and neglected your own
affairs, to labor together by your h^^ wisdoms to consummate all our
grievances, and settle us in peace, a Parliaments have formerly done; you have
showed a great deal of pa^^ence in using your endeavor so long, and still
going on, notwithstanding those many hazards you still have run both in your
persons, liberties, an^ estates. And yet although God has not yet accomplished
that gre^^ work of Reformation, and by it a true and settled peace, yet God
has so far given both you and us such hopes thereof, by the wonderful things
which he has diverse ways wrought by you, that we doubt not but tha^ in his
good time, he will convince those that are yet blinded, to see you^
faithfulness; when we shall see our desires upon your and our enemies, that
belch out their calumnies against those that stand for Jesus Christ,

You are the hopes under God (with the King in the Lords good time) that we fly
to; for we find that the fountain of all Law is the Parliament; the
establishment of the King in his royal throne is firm and absolute by Act of
Parliament; that we are preserved from being murdered, is by laws established
in Parliament, that we are not slaves, that thieves do not openly rob us,
and spoil us of our goods; that we do quietly enjoy that which we can say is
mine and thine; we are protected by the laws established in Parliament;
Parliaments have power given them to reconcile differences; but some dangerous
Malignants, to the end we might fall out more with our selves, to make a way
to feed their hopes, are daily sowers of division to prevent that happy peace
which you so labor for; we grieve, and our hearts bleed to see the sausinesse
of your, and all true Protestants enemies; but be not discouraged, God will
strengthen you to make presidents for posterity on better grounds of reason and
law then your predecessors have made for you; for what law can limit your
^^oceedings, the fountains thereof. We doubt not but the monsters of these ^^mes
will move your wisdoms to prevent such future disasters.

It wounds us to the very heart and soul to se the noblest Senators that ^^ver
were chosen, and entrusted with all that is dearest to us, laboring at ^ou
have done for our peace and safety, to be affronted by such Andro^acuses as
never age before brought forth, daring to attempt to disaffect ^he people from
a Parliament, when durst ever any be known to har^our such a thought? were
there ever such practices to poison the people with a misapprehension of the
Parliament? were there ever such im^utations, and scandalls laid upon the
proceedings of both Houses? were ^here ever so many and such horrible breaches
of privilege of Parliament? were there ever so many, so cunning, so venomous,
and so desperate designs of force, and violence against the Parliament, and
the Members ^hereof? did ever Parliament suffer as this has done, though they
deserve better then all that went before them? Should they have made some
former Parliament patterns, they had long since made the great incendiaries of
all our mischief to know the power of a Parliament, in revenging and freeing
the subjects from all foreign injuries done unto them; according to the
direction of King James of blessed memory, (...) p. 55. Therefore says he in
another place, if any do urge to embrace their own fancies in the place of
Gods word, etc. Acknowledge them for vain men, and with authority redact them
into order again. p. 20.

Where lies the difference? what is the chief spring that forces the wheels
of this poor Kingdom out of order? Our royal King himself (on whom God
multiply his choicest blessings) is such a loving Prince as his Father
commends, who thinks his greatest contentment stands in his subjects
prosperity, and his greatest surety in having their hearts. (...) p. 25.

And as for the two honorable Houses of Parliament, they have manifested their
earnest zeal for the advancing of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, the glory of
religion, and a flourishing peace amongst us; not like those that carry a
petition for peace in their hands, and murder in their heart, but such a peace
as may be permanent.

The truth of it is, there needs not a fuller Character of the Malignant part
that do so distract us, then that which His Majesty made of them, in one of his
declarations: Those who are disaffected to the peace of this Kingdom; these be
the Hagasians, that long to see England bathed in her own blood.

1. These were the cause of the troubles in Muscovia; there was a great deal
of fidelity protested to the King, and his Council, by a Company of Priests
and their faction, that allured the King to hearken to their ^^deavour in
settling of that peace, which themselves (had indeed) distr^^^ed, but woeful was
the event of it; for they contrived a strong plot and in one night slew both
the King Demetrius, his Queen and his wise counselors, and so the Kingdom
was lost.

These were the men that petitioned to the Parliament for peace, and to have a
toleration in the Reign of King James, at the same time when they were
plotting day and night to blow up the Houses of Parliament, with the King,
Prince, Nobles, and House of Commons; and the^ to have suddenly fallen upon us,
to have slain us all; Oh what a sad day, should this have been to poor
England, but (God be blessed) they were prevented. How have they plotted to
incense the Pope to send so many fulminent Breves to England to hinder the
Kings Liege people from a king the oath of allegiance, and supremacy? How has
father Parson, and other been suffered in that which by the Laws of the Land is
treason.

To practice beyond the Seas, or upon the Seas, or elsewhere within the Kings
dominions, to absolve, persuade, or withdraw any subject, (...) any within his
Highness Dominions, from their obedience to his Majesty or to reconcile them
to the Pope, or to draw them to the Romish Religion for that intent, or to move
them to promise obedience to the Sea of Rome, or to any other Prince to be had
or used within the Kings dominions; every such person and their procurers,
aiders, counselors and maintainers knowing the same, are all in case of high
treason. 23. El. 1.3. Jac. 4. P. Romans 7.

2 The Projectours with their monopolies, that have long gnawed at the bowels
of the Kingdom, they are another party ready to help these divisions forward.
One that was a great Patentee for Butter Casks, etc. Captain Read by name,
went over into Ireland, and became one of the chiefest of the Rebels, now a
prisoner in the Tower of London. And Collonell Aston that had a share in the
wine patten, how does his (...) rage against the Parliament, and against the
Honorable City of London how cruelly did he execute Martial law upon Master
Boys at Redding a Citizen that traveled that way, to see his aged Parents
this Christ^^^, offering no abuse, nor meddling with any man, woman or child,
yet upon his command was put to death.

3 The Prelates cannot endure to be curbed of their Pride, witness that
insolency of the Arch Prelate of Canterbury, who with the Bishop of Ely would
not alight out of their coach when they went with the ^ing to church in
Scotland from his palace of Hollirood house to Edenbrough, His Majesty going
on foot, insomuch that the people asked them, how they durst deny to come out
of their coach seeing their King himself on ^oot; and the Scottish men told
them, how therein they appeared to be ^ags, and servants to the Pope.

Canterbury moved the King another time to erect an high Commission, ^n all the
Bishoprics of that Kingdom by virtue of a Proclamation which he extorted from
his Majesty, wherein it was ordered that the Bishops Courts here in England
should have no subordination to any other Courts, and should proceed without
any dependency, not so much ^s to use his Majesty's Arms in their Seals, but
their own (like the Prelate of Rome) to deprive his Majesty of his supremacy.

Sedferse Bishop of Galloway (a Pedlers son) was so bold as open^y before
other Lords, to give the Earl of Argile a great Peer in Scot^and the ly. And
who has been greater incendiaries to stir up^^ar then they, what a
protestation did they make against the Court of Parliament?

4 The bringing in of Innovations into the Church has bred great distraction
amongst us; which first began when father Leader came from the Pope, then the
Bishops began to erect Altars, and take away the Communion tables, to force all
to kneel at the Sacrament, to be all uncovered during all the time of reading
the service, to sland up at the reading of the Gospel, to bow at the name of
Jesus, and to consecrate a new the Church of Saint Giles in the fields.

5. Cruelty against Godly Ministers. How was Master Ward of Suffolk tossed
amongst them, by a pretended accusation of Symony only to silence him. Doctor
Everard Chaplain to the Earl of Holland, was terribly prosecuted, for
contradicting the unlawful command of innovation of the Prelate of Norwich.
What shall we say of Master Burton and hundreds more, some silenced, some
imprisoned, some died in prison, as master Bates, etc. others were persecuted
our of the Land contrary to that pious saying of King James, Love no man more
then a good Pastor, reverence and obey them as the Heralds of the most high
God.

6 Many men of desperate fortunes care not how a Kingdom perishes to give
them hopes of Pillage, as there are some who have resolved if ever the City
(which God forbid) should come to be plundered what parts they would pillage,
and with strong asseverations they have sworn, and vowed with bloody and
fearful Protestations how glad they would be to see that day.

7 Who are so much disaffected to the Peace of the Kingdom as those who
endeavor to dissafect his Majesty from the Houses of Parliament, and persuade
him to such a distance, both in place and affection? Who are more disaffected
to the Government of the King then such who lead his Majesty away from
hearkening to his Parliament, which by the constitution of his Kingdom is his
best and great Council, and persuade him to follow the malicious counsels of
some private men, in opposing and contradicting the wholesome advices of his
most faithful Council and Highest Court.

And Who are they that set up other rules for themselves to walk by then such
as are according to Law? but they that will make other Judges of the Law, then
the Law has appointed, and so dispense with their obedience to that which the
Law calls authority, and to their determinations, and resolutions to whom the
judgment does appertain by Law: for when private persons shall make the Law to
be their rule, according to their own understandings, contrary to the judgment
of those, that are the competent Judges thereof, they set up to themselves
other ^^les then the law does acknowledge.

Surely, if the Priests, Jesuits, and the power of papists were removed from
amongst us, one great part of the work were done toward an happy peace, a
religious peace, a godly peace. Oh down with them most noble Senators, do not
let them domineere as they do, you shall have our hands, our purses, our
hearts, our lives to assist you, they are too bold, nay even those in prison,
have their Confessions, Absolutions, wear their Beads, and their Crucifixes,
Sing, and roar, and dance day and night at the Tavern with their company: and
do very evil offices in the hinderance of peace: nay there are some of their
Priests will openly affront protestant prisoners and quarrel with them, for
their religion. How backward are the Monopolists to this day, to do any good
for the Kingdom?

And how do the Prelates labor to keep back all the means of an happy peace:
Oh how has your Clemency appeared, Right Honorable, toward these
incendiaries of mischief, who would ruin both you and us, the City, and the
whole Kingdom, forgetting that old counsel which one of them (D. Hall by
name) gave to Canterbury before they came to be Prelates: If you love Peace
without truth (says he) keep peace to your self. Let us have truth, if it may
be Peace too. How many still are there who are as mad after Innovation as ever
they were when the Popes Nuntio put his Arch grace in hopes either of a
Cardinals Har, or a Patriarchs place. And as for those desperate fortunes, who
long to fish in troubled waters, because they have no better hopes to rest
upon, We doubt not, but your Honors will find out a way to pievent the bloody
Tragedy of their desires. Do damned Cavaliers swear, and d^ma^ themselves
with all the fearful oaths that can be imagined, nay there was one of them not
long since offer^d to give 3 l. to any one that could invert a new oath, and
shall such as these be suffered to revile a Parliament?

We have great complaint about the City, some cry out of these wars, would we
had peace again as we had before, not considering the miserable condition of
bleeding Ireland, intended first to have been performed against us, nay to come
to our own doors (as it were) in our own Land: what is the condition of all the
Country places where the Cavaliers come? the Battle at Worster, Keynton,
Brainford; if these murmurers had seen the blood that was shed at the sight at
Edgehill, etc. What would they then have said, they would it seems have peace
with the enemies of God and Religion, the enemies of the PARLIAMENT; of the
City, of the Gospel; alas, what good will such peace do us: Oh Noble Senators
have not we cause to complain against these men, as against madmen, that do so
desperately seek to move you to betray your honors, us and them, yea,
Religion, Lives, Estates, wives, lands, goods, and all that we have into the
hands of those that continue wars against us, in hopes to plunder our houses,
ravish our wives, spoil our goods, and bring the City to ruin; then (say
they) shall the Borough of Southwark be our stables.

Others complain for want of trading; but how would such complain if their
living was out of the Coals at Newcastle, or if they had a shipp there to
fraught therewith hither, to be under tax of 30.40. or 50. pounds, as it is
imposed on them there before they can pass, what a case are they like to be in
about twelve thousand people that live only upon Coals there? how are they
like to be deprived of their trade; alas, the want of trade in the City is
nothing to that it is in the Country in many places: Oh Right Honorable what
cause have we to complain of the poor ignorant people that do not know what
freedom they enjoy by being protected by you to enjoy a quiet and peaceable
Trade, though little. Some there are again that cry our of the Sectaries
amongst us; and the many opinions that are between man and man; But they do not
consider the armies of Papists that are raised against us; and the Standard
sent the Earl of Newcastle from the Queen for their army, to which army is
brought over arms for ten thousand men by Colonel Goring: Oh what cause have
we to complain against those that would have an agreement with these cruel
Papists (that were ever bloody and treacherous to Protestants) that they might
the more freely chide with those that do not meddle with them at home: I pray
God reconcile all the differences both in Church and State; but certainly a
Papist army, cannot but be expected a dangerous reconcild enemy to all true
hearted Protestants: and we have a just cause to complain against them that
desire it.

Others are agreed to pay any thing as they are taxed for the assisting of the
Parliament in their defense of Religion, and the Laws of the Land; one
complains he is taxt 20. s. another 40. s. etc. Look down to the rigorous
manner whereby the Earl of Newcastle does tax men in Yorkshire: 1000. l. a man,
2000. l. and 3000. pounds a man, Mr. Savill of Medbor by name 3000 pounds, etc.
You will say you are forced to pay this money, and that the gatherers have power
to sell your goods for it if you will not pay it: Oh But how cruel did the
Earl of Newcastle use Mr. Wentworth, sent for him, and after he was condemned
to be shot to death for not coming to pay the money he was unreasonably seas'd,
and was brought to the stake the place of execution, and had he not paid what
they would have, he had bin shot to death.

How many Religious Ministers have been plundered, and all that they have taken
from them; our Briefs we have so often read in Churches can testify, and yet
many foolish drones amongst us would have us to believe a covenant of peace
with such desperate Cavaliers; to betray our own power, and give our enemies
leave to cut our throats; oh noble Senators, we must needs complain of these
that are unwilling to help you by Loan upon the public Faith according to
their power, yea and beyond their ability, in such an extremity; surely they
that deny this, it must needs be granted, either that they are old enemies to
the Parliament, and never took the Protestation, or else they respect not their
vows made to Almighty God, and to break such a public vow is an heavy, and
fearfu l crime; God keep such guilt out of our souls; for in the Protestation,
they do profess, vow, and protest before Almighty God, as far as life, power
and estate to maintain and defend the power and privileges of Parliament, and
every person, etc. in pursuance of the same, etc.

Others find fault with the committing of malignants to prison; but they are
used like men, not as Smith the Provost Marshall uses them; not as Captain
Lilburn, Captain Wingate, Captain Walton, etc. are used, like dogs rather then
Christians, almost pined to death for want of sustenance, eaten with vermin*
for want of help, and shifts of clothes; loaded with fetters of iron; debarred
of the company of their wives, children or friends, debarred of the charity
that friends would relieve them with; cannot have the favor which Chaistians
have of Turks; from those blood-thirsty Cavaliers, who use them like
Hackny-Jades, nay worse, like dogs; for though it is true, the King allows six
peace a day; But Smith detains four pence three farthings of it; here is
cruelty indeed, unspeakable cruelty; what would these men do, if they should
suduens? we have cause indeed to complain of those that would (by a pretense of
Peace) betray us into these blood-sucking hands; Good Lord deliver us from
them; it is to be feared, if we submit to them, we shall be more persecuted,
then ever our Predecessors were in the bloody times of Queen Mary.

How publicly have they in their scandalous Pamphlets abused the high Court of
Parliament, the Honorable the Lord Major of London; the City of London and
Westminster, belched forth their threatenings in the speedy execution of their
devilish practices and terible threatenings of their resolved purposee; And give
God thanks that their Papists and Jesuits keep in their heads.

I wonder that many will say (seeming to be juditious men) that they think the
Malignants desire peace as well as pretend to desire it, see how cunningly they
have wrought against the Parliament, first they covertly abuse them by the
defaming of their proceedings in their Petition, this being discovered their
Petition was rejected; then they send a company of prentice-boyes to
Westminster, and they make a vapouring show of desire of peace; And now at last
of all they have brought forth the most rebellious treacherous Pamphlet that
ever was writ, stuffed with insufferable languages, full of bitterness and
railing against the Parliament, and in plain earnest desires the people to take
up Arms to destroy the Parliament; if this do not convince you of the poison of
these viperous generation of damnable Malignants, what will you do; surely if
you be not wedded to your own ruin, you must needs abhor such things as these:
They disturbed Scotland, they have almost overrun Ireland, and they have
gotten too much head in England, if it please God to see it good that it might
be otherwise; and are English people so blind, that they cannot yet see? Oh
noble Senators, we have great cause indeed to put up our Complaints against
these Cerberusses, that dare thus to come up barking to your very doors,
scattering their poisoned Pamphlets about your houses, making Proclamation to
all the Countries in England to assist them against the Parliament, should we
assist a company of Papists, and wicked people of desperate fortunes to attempt
such a damnable design; it is very probable the next Project would be to
murder us, and all the Protestants in England.

Another envious fit they have of railing against the Honorable, the Lord Major
of the City of London, an honest, religious, godly man, one in whose brows is
the very Emblem of Love, chosen by the Votes of the City, confirmed by the
Authority of the High Court of Parliament, and with great care and pains does
execute his office, yet is scorned, and contemned by some wicked, debauched
Shagamuffins, whose words no wise man will regard; such as Dudly that was
hanged for robbery the last Sessions at Newgate; will wise men be deluded by
the examples of such as are fitter for the Gallows, the Cage, or the
Whipping-post, then to meddle in State-matters; surely methinks it becomes not
the gravity of the City, to be so unwise, thus to procure their own ruin.

Right Honorable Senators, they have abused the whole City of London and
Westminster, a few Papists and factious people amongst us, that have seduced
others to set their hands to their Petition, presume they will join with them
in their so great and saucie malipertnesse against you; nay they boast; as if
we would all join with them, but we will not; no, we conceive it concerns us
greatly to complain against them, they have abused us, we disclaim their fact,
and brand it with the desert of condign punishment; amongst all the sauciness
that our Chronicles give report of, we do not find the like; only one of them
now a great Commander, a Papist, to a Petition from Cheshire, against
Reformation, forged hands for dead men, mad men, Sea men out of the land;
brought childrens hands, and Papists; and presented it in the name of all
Cheshire; so have these few rebellious elves belched forth their poison against
you, in the name of all London and Westminster.

And they are very terrible in the threatening of the execution of their
purposes; Resolutions they have, devilish Resolutions, Resolutions for the
overthrow of Religion, Resolutions to destroy the Parliament, and in them all
the privileges of the Subject; Resolutions to set up Popery; Oh most noble
Senators, we had never more cause to complain against a bastardly brood of
Popish Traitors then now, now they are grown (...) now they are every day
plotting, and practicing all the mischief they can against us, and such is the
simplicity of many amongst us that for all this they believe these Incendiaries
of mischief will do us no hurt, they say; is it possible that men should be so
blind, and deluded by them?

They are very terrible in their threatening; they protest to bring us suddenly
to ruin, to dissolve the Parliament, suddenly; and what do you think they
would do next, you that are well opinionated of them; first they say they will
defend themselves by Arms, that is, of Rebellion, and then they will make use
of what is next, as themselves say in their calumnious Pamphlet; Oh what cause
have we to complain of these dangerous Malignants; what, will they spare
nothing? no, they say they will make use of what is next; make use of our goods
by plundering, and robbing us; make use of our wives, and daughters, by
ravishing them; and murder us, our wives and children, as they have done in
Germany, and as they still do in Ireland: shall we trust such as these? Oh let
us take heed how we admit of any peace, or confederacy with them, that thus
despise the Parliament, Religion, and the people of God.

King James does teach what respect should be had to such worthy Peers, he
says, eschew the extremity in slighting and contemning your Nobility. Page,
47. faithful and diligent servants recompensed, Page 71. The worthiest still
preferred, let the measure of your love to every one be according to the
measure of his virtue; Page 152. All subjects relieved, and their oppressions
helped, be diligent to try, and careful to beat down the horns of our proud
oppressors: embrace the quarrels of the poor and distressed, as your own^
particular, Page 34.

Lastly, the fomentors of this Pamphlet give God thanks that their Papists and
Jesuits keep in their heads; These be the Malignants about us, that make us
believe they seek for peace; but you may see it is that the Papists may be in
peace; not we, that their Priests and Jesuits and Papists may hold in their
heads, that they may live without molestation, that the Popes power may be
advanced here; but in 5. Eliz. 1.

The maintaining and extolling the authority of the Bishop or See of Rome,
within any the Kings Dominions, and the procurers, counselors, aiders; and
maintainers thereof; and every of them are guilty of high Treason. This and
other Statutes made at the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign were made says
Dalton.

For the preservation of the Queen, her heirs and successors, for the
preservation of the dignity of the Imperial Crown of this Realm: For the
avoiding of the dishonours, inconveniences, and dangers growing to the whole
estate, etc. We have just cruse to complain against these Traitors (Right
Honorable) because they would expose to hazard the preservation of the King,
nay they do too much prevail herein, in joining with the Pepish party, in
keeping them from his Parliament, the fountain of his safety and preservation,
to endanger his sacred person amongst such desperate Papists and Malignants
with whom he is.

2. They hazard the preservation of the dignity of the imperial Crown of this
Realm, by exposing it to that danger, which by being ayders to, and counselors
with the Papists it is in danger of, for the Papists have their Bulls and
writings from the Pope, the effect whereof is to absolve and reconcile all
those that will forsake their due obedience to the King, and yield themselves
to the Bishop of Rome. Witness that Breve sent by Segnior Georgeo Persona and
others, and the domineering Chavilerios of our age, and the Malignants about us
are all guilty of high Traason; if they be willingly persuaded, withdrawn, or
reconciled, to promise to join in any such obedience to the Sea of Rome, their
procurers, ayders, counselors, and maintainers, except they submit themselves
according to the Statute within six days, etc. 23. Eliz. 1.3 Jac. 4. P. Recus.
49. P. Romans 7 and 8. vide antea tit. Recusants.

3. Lastly, these Statutes being also made for the avoiding of the dishonours,
inconveniences, and dangers growing to the whole State, herein they also appear
guilty of high Treason in joining with the Papists; first to dishonor the
State, the High Court of Parliament, by calumnious lies and slanders laid upon
them, hoping thereby the better to bring in popery; and to hold in their heads
quietly as they say themselves they now begin to do; They call the Parliament a
company of projectors, and such like dishonorable scandalls they cast upon
those worthies, whereby they appear Traitors against the State, from the very
intent of the Statute; and therefore we complain against them as against open
Traitors and Rebels. 2. The inconveniences that arise by their malignancy to
the King and State, both is great: It keeps the King and the Parliament at a
distance, it hazards the Kings person, sent the Queen beyond the Seas and
detaines her there, hinders the great work of Reformation, encourages
Delinquents, projectors, and all Papists, exposes us to danger of Foreign
Nations, hinders trading at home, fill us with troubles, and raised, and
detaines war in the bowels of our Kingdom; and by their scandalous Pamphlet it
plainly appears how they strike at the very root of Parliaments, which Rome
could never endure; but have ever scandalis'd and abused them as their sons now
do, because their cheer is advanced by Synods of prelates. To conclude, we
complain to you Noble Senators of the dangers we are in by these men; we know
that the (...) of the Law is your instruction and direction, and our safety
your end, we yield obedience to his Majesty's Authority, signified by both
Houses of Parliament, knowing that sure ground wherein we walk thereby: And
though the deboycest Malignants have dared thus to affront and dishonor you,
we must confess enough to have dissolved all the bands and sinnues of
confidence between His Majesty and you; yet we know that your endeavors have
appeared most hearty and sincere for the maintenance of the true Protestant
Religion, the Kings just Prerogatives, the Laws and Liberties of the Land, and
the Privileges of Parliament, in endeavors we desire you still to persist,
and we will perish with you in the work rather then desert the cause; for we
are confident, that if evil should befall you, neither Religion, Laws,
Liberties, nor Parliaments can longer live; therefore we are resolved to live
and dye with you: God so bless us according to the innocence of our cause and
integrity of our hearts.

FINIS.

