THE Church-Catechism With a BRIEF and EASY EXPLANATION THEREOF, For the help
of the meanest Capacities and weakest Memories.

By T. C. D. D.

LONDON: Printed by M. C. for Henry Brom and Robert Clavel in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXI.

An Advertisement.
THE end of this short Explication is to render the Principles of Christian
Religion, comprised in the Church Catechism, plain and easy to the meanest
capacities. And the method thereof is this, 1. The Catechism is printed in a
different letter, on the left hand page, that it may be first learned by it
self. 2. The several Questions of the Catechism, are put under a proper Title,
containing the Subject of each Question, and the Answers to them are broken to
pieces by a few brief and plain Explicatory Questions; so that ignorant
Learners may easily understand the full meaning of them. And those who cannot
read, or cannot get long Answers by heart (which want Instruction the most)
need not be discouraged by this method, because they are not required hereby to
Answer any more than Yes, or No, which will be no burden to their memory, and
yet will exercise their Judgment, and as well teach them to understand the
sense of their Catechism, as try whether they do so or no. Yet those of better
capacity may exercise their memory also, and by frequent reading the
Explicatory Questions, will be able to repeat them after the Catechist, and
turn them into an Affirmative or Negative Proposition, thus,

Qu. Ought your name, etc. Answ. Yes, my name, etc. ought, etc.

Qu. Are not Infants, etc. Answ. No, Infants are not, etc.

Now this may be of use, as well to Parents in private, as to Ministers in
Public; who may first ask the Learners so many Questions of the Church
Catechism, as they think fit for one time; and then beginning again, may first
tell them the Title or Subject of each Question, and then examine them by the
Explicatory Questions belonging thereunto. And if the Minister please to
enlarge a little in a plain discourse upon every Explicatory Question, and also
to show unto what part of the Answer in the Church Catechism it does refer, the
Learner will better understand it, which will make the necessary duty of
Catechizing still more profitable, and will drop knowledge by degrees into those
narrow mouthed Vessels, for whose sake this method was contrived. And the
success it has had, on many very young Children, and very ignorant Country
people, has encouraged the Publication thereof, in hopes it may be very
serviceable, not only for private Families, but also for Country Congregations,
as well to invite the Learners to come in greater numbers by its easiness, as
to instruct them by its plainness. And the whole is no other than the Church
Catechism enjoined by Law, briefly Explained, and no more imposed to be gotten
by heart, than that which the Church requires, the rest being only contrived to
make that understood and try if it be so, It is hoped the Right Reverend
Governors of the Church, (to whose censure the whole is humbly submitted) will
not dislike the publication thereof, in order to the sitting the more ignorant
sort, for those great Duties of Confirmation and the Lords Supper. I need not
here add any thing concerning the Divine Institution and Antiquity of
Catechizing; the Excellency of our Church Catechism, both for its agreeableness
to Primitive forms, and its exact Method, nor shall I now enlarge upon the
necessity and use of this Profitable and Pious Duty, Having in a peculiar
Discourse upon Catechizing treated of these particulars, and exhorted, 1.
Ministers to promote not only the learning the Catechism by rote, but the
understanding thereof. 2. Parents and Masters both to instruct their Children
and Servants in Private, and to bring them to Church to be publicly
Catechized. 3. And excited the Younger and Ignorant people to come willingly.
To which Discourse I refer the Reader, Companion to the Altar, page 451, 452,
etc.

THE INTRODUCTION.
. ALmighty God having Created our first Parents after his own Image, did
condescend to enter into a Covenant with them, wherein he promised life to them
and their Posterity, upon condition of perfect and perpetual obedience, and
threatened their disobedience with death.

. Our first Parents through the temptation of Satan, wilfully transgressed the
Commandment of God in eating the forbidden fruit, and thereby brought
themselves, and all their posterity, into an estate of sin and misery.

. God has not left mankind to perish in the estate of Sin and Misery, into
which they fell by the breach of the first Covenant; But has been pleased of
his mere love and mercy to make a second Covenant of Grace, wherein he freely
offers pardon, and salvation, by Jesus Christ, to all those who shall truly
repent, and believe in him.

. And seeing this Covenant is solemnly to be entered into, in our infancy by
Baptism, (which is the first benefit and favor we are capable of after we are
born) It seemed good to the excellent compilers of this Catechism, to begin it
where we begin our Christianity; and by the mention of our name received in
Baptism, to take occasion to mind us of our Obligations, and Privileges
thereby.

THE Church Catechism.
Question 1.
WHat is your Name?

Answer.

N. or M.

Question 2.
Who gave you that Name?

Answer.

My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a member of
Christ, the Child of God, and an inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Question 3.
What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?

Answer.

They did promise and vow three things in my Name.

First, that I should renounce the Devil and all his works, the pomps and
vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh.

Secondly, that I should believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.

And Thirdly, that I should keep Gods holy will and Commandments, and walk in
the same all the days of my Life.

Question 4.
Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe, and to do, as they have
promised for thee?

Answer.

Yes verily; and by Gods help, so I will. And I heartily thank our heavenly
Father, that he has called me to this state of salvation, through Jesus Christ
our Savior. And I pray unto God is give me his grace, that I may continue in
the same unto my lives end.

Question 5.
Rehearse the Articles of thy Belief.

Answer.

I. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth: II. And in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, III. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
Born of the Virgin Mary. IV. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead
and buried, He descended into Hell; V. The third day he rose again from the
dead, VI. He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the
Father Almighty; VII. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
VIII. I believe in the Holy Ghost. IX. The Holy Catholic Church, the Communion
of Saints. X. The forgiveness of Sins. XI. The resurrection of the body. XII.
And the life everlasting. Amen.
Question 6.
What do thou chiefly learn in these Articles of thy belief?

Answer.

First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who has made me and all the
world.

Secondly, in God the Son, who has redeemed me, and all mankind.

Thirdly, in God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the elect of God.

Question 7.
You said that your Godfathers and Godmothers did promise for you, that you
should keep Gods Commandments.

Tell me how many there be.

Answer.

Ten.

Question 8.
Which be they?

Answer.

The same which God spoke in the twentieth Chapter of Exodus, saying, I am the
Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of
Bondage.

I. Thou shall have none other Gods but me. II. Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or in
the Earth beneath, or in the water under the Earth. Thou shall not bow down to
them, nor worship them. For I the Lord thy God am a Jealous God, and visit the
sins of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of
them that hate me, and show mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep
my Commandments. III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain:
For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain. IV.
Remember that thou keep Holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor, and
do all that thou have to do; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy
God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy Son, and thy Daughter,
thy man servant, and thy maidservant, thy Cattle, and the stranger that is
within thy Gates. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and
all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed the
seventh day, and hallowed it. V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy
days may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee. VI Thou shall
do no murder. VII. Thou shall not commit adultery. VIII. Thou shall not steal.
IX. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. X. Thou shall not
covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, nor his
servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is his.
Qu. 9.
What do thou chiefly learn by these Commandments?

Answ

I learn two things: my duty toward God, and my duty toward my Neighbor.

Qu. 10.
What is thy duty toward God?

Answ.

My duty toward God is,

I, II. To believe in him, to fear him, and to love him, with all my heart,
with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my strength: to worship him,
to give him thanks, to put my whole trust in him, to call upon him. III. To
honor his holy Name and his Word; IV. And to serve him truly all the days of
my life.
Qu. 11.
What is thy duty toward thy Neighbor?

Answ.

My duty toward my Neighbor is,

. To love him as my self, and to do to all men, as I would they should do to
me. V. To love, honor, and succor my Father and Mother. To honor and obey
the King, and all that are put in authority under him. To submit my self to all
my Governors, Teachers, Spiritual Pastors and Masters. To order my self lowly
and reverently to all my betters. VI. To hurt no body by word or deed. VII. To
be true and just in all my dealings. VIII. To bear no malice nor hatred in my
heart. IX. To keep my hands from picking and stealing. X. And my tongue from
evil speaking, lying and slandering. XI. To keep my body in temperance,
soberness, and chastity. XII. Not to covet and desire other men's goods, but to
learn and labor truly to get mine own living, and to do my duty in that state
of life, unto which it shall please God to call me.
page 20. Catechist,

Catechist:

My good child, know this, that thou art not able to do these things of thy
self, nor to walk in the Commandments of God, and to serve him, without his
special grace, which thou must learn at all times to call for by diligent
prayer.

Question 12.
Let me hear therefore, if thou can say the Lords Prayer.

Answer.

Our Father which art in Heaven.

I. Hallowed be thy name, II. Thy Kingdom come, III. Thy will be done in earth
as it is in Heaven. IV. Give us this day our daily bread. V. And forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us, VI. And lead us not
into temptation. VII. But deliver us from evil.
. For thine is the Kingdom, and the power, and the glory, For ever, and ever.
Amen.

Question 13.
What desire thou of God in this prayer?

Answer.

I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father, who is the giver of all goodness, to
send his grace unto me, and to all people,

I. That we may worship him, II. Serve him, III. And obey him as we ought to
do: IV. And I pray unto God, that he will send us all things that be needful
both for our souls and bodies, V. And that he will be merciful unto us and
forgive us our sins. VI, VII. And that it will please him to save and defend
us, in all dangers, ghostly and bodily, and that he will keep us from all sin
and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and from everlasting death. And
this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, and therefore I say Amen. So be it.
Question 14.
How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?

Answer.

Two only, as generally necessary to salvation, that is to say, Baptism, and
the Supper of the Lord.

Question 15.
What meanest thou by this word Sacrament?

Answer.

I mean an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace given unto
us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a
pledge to assure us thereof.

Question 16.
How many parts are there in a Sacrament?

Answer.

Two: the outward visible sign, and the inward spiritual grace.

Question 17.
What is the outward visible sign, or form in Baptism?

Answer.

Water: Wherein the person is baptized in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Question 18.
What is the inward and spiritual grace?

Answer.

A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness, for being by nature born
in Sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby made the children of grace.

Question 19.
What is required of persons to be baptized?

Answer.

Repentance, whereby they forsake sin: and Faith whereby they steadfastly
believe the promises of God, made to them in that Sacrament.

Question 20.
Why then are infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age they cannot
perform them?

Answer.

Because they promise them both by their sureties: which promise when they come
to age themselves are bound to perform.

Question 21.
Why was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ordained?

Answer.

For the continual remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ, and of
the benefits which we receive thereby.

Question 22.
What is the outward part of sign of the Lords Supper?

Answer.

Bread and Wine, which the Lord has commanded to be received.

Question 23.
What is the inward part or thing signified?

Answer.

The Body and Blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and received
by the faithful in the Lords Supper.

Question 24.
What are the benefits whereof we are partakers thereby?

Answer.

The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and blood of Christ,
as our bodies are by the bread and wine.

Question 25.
What is required of them who come to the Lords Supper.

Answer.

To examine themselves, whether they repent them truly of their former sins,
steadfastly purposing to lead a new life; have a lively faith in God's mercy
through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his death; and be in Charity
with all men.

The end of the Catechism.
THE EXPLANATION Of the CATHECHISM.
Qu. 1, 2. Of the Benefits of Baptism.
. OUght your name rec^ived in Baptism, to put you in mind of the Duties and
Privileges of the Covenant, into which you did then enter? Yes

. Are not Infants by reason of their tender age incapable of receiving any
benefit by Baptism? No

. Were you in your infancy thereby made and solemnly admitted, 1. A Member of
Christ, and of his Church? Yes 2. A Child of God by Adoption? Yes 3. And an
Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven? Yes


Qu. 3. Of the Vow of Baptism.
. Were these great Benefits conferred on you absolutely, without any Conditions
to be performed on your part? No

. Did not your Sureties who presented you to Baptism, then solemnly promise in
your name and behalf, that you should, 1. Renounce the Temptations of the
Devil, and the World; and mortify the evil desires of your own corrupt heart?
Yes 2. Believe the principles of the Christian Religion, revealed by God in
holy Scriptures, and briefly comprised in the Creed? Yes 3. Sincerely and
constantly obey all Gods Commandments. Yes


Qu. 4. Of our Professing to own, and promise to perform our Baptismal Vow.
. Do not you think your self engaged in your own person, to perform that
Promise and Vow which your sureties did make for you? Yes

. And do you now promise and resolve according to your bounden duty, to perform
these your Baptismal engagements? Yes

. Can you do this without Gods help and assistance? No

. Are you heartily thankful to God for bringing you into this Covenant of Faith
and Repentance, and so into a capacity of Salvation? Yes

. And will you daily pray to God for Grace, to enable you ever to continue
steadfast in this Covenant? Yes

. Shall those who perform these Conditions, fail to reap the blessings of their
Baptism? No

. Or shall those who wilfully break them escape the wrath and curse of God? No

Qu. 5. Of the Creed consisting of twelve Articles.
. Are not the twelve Articles of your belief contained in the Apostles Creed?
Yes

. Is not that Creed a brief Summary of all the Articles of the Christian Faith
necessary to Salvation? Yes

. Is there any Article therein, which cannot be proved by Holy Scripture? No

. Can he be a true Christian who denies any of them? No

. Are you not in this Creed taught to believe and confess, that there is one
only living and true God? Yes

. And does it also teach you to believe, that in the unity of the Godhead
there be three persons of one Substance, Power, and Eternity? Yes

. And that these three Persons are, God the Father our Creator, God the Son our
Redeemer, and God the Holy Ghost our Sanctifier? Yes

Explicatory Questions on the several Articles, See page 8, 9, 10, 11.

Art. 1. Of God and his Attributes.
. Has God a body, parts, or passions, as men have? No

. Is he then a most pure invisible Spirit? Yes

. And is he not Infinite in Being and Perfection? Yes

. Is he Eternal without beginning, ending, or any change? Yes

. Is there any place where God is not present? No

. Is there any thing past, present, or to come, which he does not perfectly see
and know? No

. Is there any person too strong, or any thing too hard for him? No

. Is He so perfectly good that he cannot do, cause, or allow, any thing that is
evil or unjust? Yes

Particularly, Of the Father, his Works of Creation and Providence.
. Is not the work of Creation principally attributed to God the Father? Yes

. Did not He by his word alone make all things, in heaven and earth, of
nothing? And every thing very good? Yes

. Is there any Creature which can preserve it self without Gods Providence? No

. Is there and Person, or thing, which is not under Gods Rule and Government? No

. And does not God order all things most wisely? Yes

. Did not God at first make Man after his own Image, in a holy and happy
condition? Yes

Art. II. Of Jesus Christ, his Divine Nature, Person, and Offices.
. Are not you and all Mankind since Adam's fall born in a very sinful and
miserable condition? Yes

. Can any but He who is called Jesus save you out of it? No

. And was he also called Christ, because he was anointed to Execute the Offices
of a Prophet, Priest, and King? Yes

. Is not this Jesus Christ the Eternal and only Son of God? Yes

. Could we have been redeemed unless the Son of God had taken man's Nature upon
Him? No

. Is Jesus Christ then both God and Man, in two distinct Natures, and one
Person? Yes

Art. III. Of the manner of Christ's Incarnation.
. Had Christ when he took our Nature, any Father upon earth? No

. Was He as man, conceived by the power of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the
Virgin Mary, of her substance; and born without Sin? Yes

. Was the birth of Christ stained with Original, or his life with any Actual
Sin? No

Art. IV. Of the sufferings of Christ.
. Was Christ (though innocent) condemned to die, by Pontius Pilate, the Roman
Governor of Judea? Yes

. Did Christ undergo for us the wrath of God, and the cursed Death of the
Cross? Yes

. Could nothing satisfy Gods Justice for our Sins, but the sufferings and
death of Jesus Christ? No

. Was He also buried? and did he continue in the State of the dead for a time?
Yes

Art. V. of Christ's Resurrection.
. Does Christ still remain under the power of death? No

. Did He by his own power, rise from the dead on the third day, and become
alive again? Yes

. And did He thereby declare himself to have fully satisfied Gods Justice? Yes

Art. VI. Of Christ's Ascension, and Intercession.
. Was Christ always to continue on earth after his Resurrection? No

. Did He (forty days after) in our nature, and as our Head ascend up into
Heaven? Yes

. Is He now at Gods right hand, in fullness of glory, with power over all
things? Yes

. Does He there make Intercession for us to his Father, by pleading the merits
of His Obedience and Sacrifice on earth, for the acceptance of our persons and
services? Yes

Art. VII. Of Christ's coming to Judgment.
. Shall not Christ come again from Heaven at the last day in great glory and
power, to judge all the World in righteousness. Yes

. Shall every one at that day (both those that shall then be found alive, and
those that have been dead) give an account to Him of all their thoughts, words,
and actions? Yes

. Can any escape this Judgment? No

. Or hide their Sins from this Judge? No

Art. VIII. Of the Holy Ghost, his Divinity and Office.
. Is not the Holy Ghost God equal with the Father and the Son? Yes

. Is it not the work principally of the Holy Ghost, to apply unto us the
benefits which Christ has purchased for us? Yes

. Has He in order thereunto, revealed the will of God for our Salvation, in
the Holy Scriptures, of the Old and New Testament? Yes

. Was the same delivered to the Church to be the only rule of our Faith and
Life? Yes

. And does He by the Ministry of this his word, inlighten, convert, sanctify
and comfort us? Yes

Art. IX. Of the Church.
. Is the whole company of believers in all ages and places, (united into one
body under Christ their head) called the holy Catholic Church? Yes

. Can any particular company of Christians properly call themselves the
Catholic Church? No

. Or can any one Man pretend to be the Head thereof? No

. Had God a Church in all Ages to worship Him? Yes

. Can the Gates of Hell ever prevail, to destroy Gods Church upon earth? No

And of the Communion of Saints.
. Are there any privileges belong to us, as members of the Church? Yes

. Have all the true Members thereof Communion, Yes
1. With one another in all offices of Piety and Charity? Yes 2. And with
Christ their Head, in grace and glory here and hereafter? Yes


Art. X. Of Remission of Sins.
. Is there forgiveness of Sin to be had in the true Church? Yes

. Does our mere being of the Church entitle us thereto? No

. Shall all and only those, who truly repent and believe, have all their Sins
for Christ's sake freely pardoned? Yes

. And shall all others, (though in the Church) remain under the guilt of Sin,
and wrath of God? No yes

Art. XI. Of the Resurrection of the Dead.
. Shall the bodies of those that die, remain always in the grave? No

. Shall all the dead be raised up at the last day? Yes

. And shall their bodies be inseparably united again to their Souls which never
die? Yes

Art. XII. Of Life Everlasting.
. Shall every one at the Resurrection, receive according to their works done in
the body? Yes

. Shall the Righteous live for ever with God in heaven, in unconceivable glory
and happiness? Yes

. And shall the wicked endure intolerable and continual torments, both in soul
and body, in hell for ever? Yes

. Amen.
. Do you by the word, Amen, testify, 1. Your steadfast belief of all this? Yes
2. And your desire to live accordingly? Yes


Qu. 6. Of the practical belief of these Articles.
. Are not the belief of the holy Trinity, and of what the several persons have
done for you, the chief fundamental Articles of your faith? Yes

. Is it sufficient to Salvation barely to know these fundamentals, and to
assent to them as true? No

. Is it further necessary to Salvation, that you sincerely pay that duty to
every person, which his proper work for you does peculiarly challenge? Yes

. Do they rightly believe in God the Father, who do not love Him, fear Him, and
serve Him, as their great Creator, and merciful Preserver. No

. Do they believe aright in God the Son, who do not submit to Him, trust in
Him, and obey Him, as their only Lord and Savior? No

. Do they rightly believe in God the Holy Ghost, who do not follow His
direction, and make use of his assistance, as their Guide, Sanctifier and
Comforter? No

Qu. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Of the Ten Commandments.
. Are any in this life freed from their Obligation to obey the Moral Law? No

. Is not the Moral Law (which is the Rule of our Obedience) summarily
comprehended in the Ten Commandments. Yes

Preface. Of the Motives to Obedience.
. Should not [1.] Gods Sovereignty over us [2.] His relation to us, [3.] and
his delivering, (as Israel of old from Egyptian bondage, so) us from our
spiritual thraldom, engage us to keep all his Commandments. Yes

Explicatory Questions on the several Commandments, See page 16, 17, 18, 19.

Of our Duty to God contained in the four first Commandments.
. Is it not the sum of our duty to God to love Him, with all our heart; with
all our mind, with all our soul, and with all our strength? Yes

. Can we keep any of these Commandments aright, unless we thus love God above
all? No

Com. I. Of the right Object of our worship.
. Does not the first Commandment enjoin us, 1. To take the true God for our
only God? Yes 2. And to worship and glorify Him accordingly? Yes


. Do not they then break this Commandment, 1. Who forsake and fall away from
the true Religion? Yes 2. Or who (though they continue in it, yet) do not know
the true God, or not glorify Him as God? Yes


. May we believe in, fear, or love, any so much as God? No

. Or give Religious Worship to any but God alone? No

Com. II. Of the right means, or matter of our Worship.
. Does not the second Commandment require, that we should Worship God, with
such Worship, as He has appointed in his word? Yes

. Has not God there appointed us to worship Him, by 1. Daily prayer and
thanksgiving in the name of Christ? Yes 2. Frequent reading, hearing, and
meditating on his Word? Yes 3. And by the due use of his Sacraments? Yes


. Do not they sin against this Commandment?

1. Who worship God by Images, or any other way contrary to his Word? Yes 2. Or
who corrupt, neglect, or oppose any of Gods Ordinances. Yes
. Is it unlawful for the Church to appoint decent Ceremonies? No

*. Will not the Lord who is jealous for his own Worship, punish those as
haters of him, who break this Commandment? Yes

Com. III. Of the right manner of our Worship.
. Does not the third Commandment require us, devoutly to perform every part of
Divine Worship; and reverently to use every thing which nearly relates to God?
Yes

. Do not they break this Commandment, who profanely or irreverently use Gods
Holy Name, Titles, Attributes, Ordinances, Word, or Works? Yes

. Are not Blasphemy and Cursing; vain and false swearing, and also taking
unlawful, or breaking our ^awful Oaths and Vows; heinous sins against this
Commandment? Yes

*. Will the Lord suffer them to escape his righteous judgment, who wilfully
break this Commandment? No

Com. IV. Of the solemn time of our Worship.
. Dot not the fourth Commandment enjoin us, to keep Holy the Sabbath day; by
spending it, 1. In worshipping God, both in public and private? Yes 2. Or in the
works of necessity and mercy? Yes


. Do not they sin against this Commandment, 1. Who spend the Sabbath Day in
idleness? Yes 2. Or about their worldly business, or recreations? Yes


. May Masters command or permit these things to those who are under their
charge? No

*. Should not [1.] Gods allowing us six days for our own employment [2.] and
his challenging a special propriety in the seventh: [3.] His own Example; [4.]
and his blessing and sanctifying the Sabbath Day; move us to obey his
Commandment? Yes

. Is it sufficient to worship God on the Sabbath Day only? No

. Ought we to set apart some time for it every day? Yes

. And must we religiously observe the Fasts and Festivals of the Church? Yes

Of our duty to man, contained in the six last Commandments.
. Is it not the sum of our duty to our neighbor, to love him as our selves? Yes

. Do we thus love our neighbor, unless we do to others what we would have them
do to us? No

Com. V. Of the duties to our Relations.
. Does not the fifth Commandment enjoin us to perform the duties we owe to our
several Relations; especially to our Superiors? Yes

. Is not this Commandment broken,

1. By Children who are undutiful, irreverent, or unkind to their Parents or
Guardians? Yes


2. By Subjects, who dishonor, disobey, or rebel against the King, or those in
Authority under Him? Yes


3. By People, who despise their Minister, resist his Doctrine, or withold his
Dues? Yes


4. By Servants, who are stubborn, slothful, or unfaithful to their Masters? Yes


5. By any other Inferiors, who behave themselves proudly, and scornfully
toward their Betters, in Age, Gifts, or Estate? Yes


*. Can they expect long life or prosperity who break this Commandment? No

Com. VI. Of Humanity.
. Does not the sixth Commandment require, all lawful endeavors to preserve our
own, and our neighbors life and health? Yes

. Do not they sin against this Commandment, who hurt their own, or their
neighbors life or health? Yes

. May we be intemperate, or urge others to be so? No

. May we use angry or provoking words? No

Or bear malice, or desire of revenge in our hearts? No

Com. VII. Of Chastity.
. Does not the seventh Commandment enjoin Chastity in heart, speech, and
behavior? Yes

. Do not they break this Commandment, 1. Who admit of any unclean thoughts and
desires? Yes 2. Or use any filthy or unchaste words, or gestures? Yes 3.
Especially who commit Fornication, Adultery, or any other Acts of uncleanness?
Yes


. May we use any provocations thereunto? No

Com. VIII. Of Justice.
. Does not the eighth Commandment require the lawful furthering of our own, and
our neighbors wealth, and outward estate? Yes

. Do not they sin against this Commandment, 1. Who wrong others in their
estates; by stealing, oppression, deceit, or any other unjust taking, or
withholding what is another? Yes 2. Or by Idleness or Prodigality wast their
own? Yes


. May we steal small things, because we are poor? No

. May we keep from the owner what is found by us? No

Com. IX. Of Veracity.
. Does not the ninth Commandment enjoin the speaking of truth, and the
promoting our own and others good name? Yes

. Do not they break this Commandment, 1. Who deny, conceal, or oppose the
Truth? Yes 2. Or injure their own, or neighbors good name? Yes 3. Especially
who bear false witness in public? Yes


. May we in any case tell any manner of Lie? No

. May we slander, or flatter others? No

Or vainly boast of our selves? No

Com. X. of Contentation.
. Does not the tenth Commandment require, 1. Our being content with our own
Condition? Yes 2. And rejoicing at our neighbors welfare? Yes


. Do not they sin against this Commandment, 1. Who are discontent with their
own estate? Yes 2. Or who envy or grieve at their neighbors good? Yes 3. Or
inordinately desire any thing that is his? Yes


Catech. Of our need of Gods grace, and of the means to obtain it.
. Are we able of our selves to believe and to do, all these things which we
have promised, and are engaged to? No

. Is not prayer a special means to obtain the assistance of Gods grace, to
enable us hereto? Yes

. Ought we therefore daily, and upon all occasions, to pray unto God for it? Yes

. May we pray less than twice every day? No

. And will our prayers be acceptable to God, unless our minds and hearts go
along with our words? No

Qu. 12, 13. Of the Lords Prayer, consisting of a Preface, seven Petitions, and
a Conclusion.
. May we pray for any thing but what is agreeable to the will of God? No

. Is not the Lords Prayer both a most perfect Form, and also a Pattern of
Prayer? Yes

The Preface.
Does not the Preface direct us, 1. To pray unto God 1. As our Father in
Christ, and therefore willing to help us? Yes 2. As in Heaven, and therefore
able to help us? Yes
2. And to Pray with, and for others? Yes


I. Petition.
. Ought we not chiefly to aim at Gods Glory in every thing? Yes

. Are we able of our selves to honor God aright? No

*. Do we therefore in the first Petition pray, That God would enable us and
others, in every thing, to glorify and honor Him above all, in heart, word,
and deed? Yes


II. Petition.
. Are not we and all men by nature, under the dominion of Sin and Satan? Yes

. Can we rescue our selves from that slavery? No

*. Do we therefore in the second Petition pray, 1. That Satan's Kingdom may be
destroyed? Yes 2. That Gods Kingdom of Grace may be advanced, by bringing us,
and others into it; and by keeping us all in it? Yes 3. And that his Kingdom of
Glory may be hastened? Yes


III. Petition.
. Are not we naturally prone to rebel against Gods Commands, and to murmur at
his Providence? Yes

. And inclined to do the will of the Flesh and the Devil? Yes

*. Do we therefore in the third Petition pray, 1. That God would make us and
others, able and willing to obey his word, and submit to his will in all
things? Yes 2. And both these, with the like cheerfulness, sincerity and
constancy, as the Angels do in Heaven? Yes


IV. Petition.
. Can we by our own Industry procure the outward comforts of this life, or can
they of themselves sustain us, without Gods blessing? No

*. Do we therefore in the fourth Petition pray, 1. That upon our lawful
endeavors, we may of Gods free gift, receive a competent portion of the good
things of this life? Yes 2. And may enjoy Gods blessing with them? Yes


V. Petition.
. Are we not by our sins become debtors to the Justice of God, and liable to
Condemnation? Yes

. Can we or any other Creature make any satisfaction for that Debt? No

*. Do we therefore in the fifth Petition pray, That through the satisfaction
of Christ, we and others may be acquitted, both from the guilt and punishment
of Sin? Yes


. Can we expect forgiveness from God, unless we from our heart forgive others
their offenses against us? No

VI. Petition.
. Are not Satan, the World and the Flesh, always ready by their Temptations, to
draw us to Sin? Yes

. Are we of our selves willing to resist, or able to overcome them? No

*. Do we therefore in the sixth Petition pray,

. That God would so subdue the Flesh, overruled the World, and restrain Satan,
that we and others, 1. May not be tempted to Sin? Yes 2. However may not fall
into it? Yes 3. Especially not live impenitently in it? Yes


VII. Petition.
. Can we hope to escape the evil of punishment, if we so yield to temptation as
to commit Sin, or continue in it? No

*. Do we therefore in the seventh Petition pray, That we and others may not
provoke God by our sinning and impenitence, to punish us with Evils, and
miseries, temporal, spiritual, or eternal? Yes


The Conclusion.
. Ought we in our Prayers to praise God? Yes

Ascribing to Him, eternal Sovereignty over all, Power to do all, and Glory
from all? Yes

. And should we take our encouragement in Prayer, from these Attributes of God?
Yes

Amen.
. Do you by the word, Amen, declare your belief that God can, your hope that he
will, and desire that he may grant your requests? Yes

. Of the Sacraments.

Qu. 14. Of their Author, number and necessity.
. Has God (besides prayer) appointed his word, and Sacraments, to be the
ordinary outward means of grace? Yes

. Has Christ ordained any more Sacraments in his Church besides Baptism, and
the Lords Supper? No

. Does not the wilful neglect of these, highly offend God, and endanger our
Salvation? Yes

Qu. 15, 16. Of their nature, use, and parts.
. Has not Christ ordained the outward parts of a Sacrament to be, 1. Signs of
inward and spiritual grace? Yes 2. Means to convey grace to the soul? Yes 3.
Pledges to assure us that the graces signified shall be conveyed to believers?
Yes


. Is there not then in every Sacrament, 1. An outward part to be seen by the
eye? Yes 2. And an inward part to be discerned, and received by faith? Yes


Qu. 17. Of the outward part of Baptism.
. Has Christ instituted any outward matter besides water, to be used in
Baptism? No

OR any outward form but dipping, or sprinkling In the Name, etc. No

Qu. 18. Of the inward grace of Baptism.
. Are we not by nature guilty of Original Sin, and liable to Gods wrath? Yes

. Is not the pardoning of this Original guilt, the subduing our natural
Corruption, and the restoring us to Gods favor, the inward grace of Baptism?
Yes

Qu. 19, 20. Of the Subject qualified for Baptism.
. May persons of riper years be admitted to Baptism, till they profess their
Repentance, Faith in Christ, and obedience to him? No

. Ought not Infants to be Baptized who are presented by such as profess and
engage these things? Yes

. Will the profession and engagement of your Sureties suffice for you any
longer, than till you come of age to take it upon your self? No

. Do not those who then live in impenitence, and unbelief, forfeit the benefits
of their Baptism? Yes

Qu. 21. Of the end and use of the Lords Supper.
. Is no^ (...) Lords Supper often to be administered? Yes

. Is (...) the^ein offered up a sacrifice to his Father? No

. Is ^^ere not in it a lively representation of that sacrifice of himself
offered upon the Cross once for all? Yes

. AND was it ordained to revive in us the memory of Christ death, and of the
benefits purchased for us thereby? Yes

Qu. 22. Of the outward part of the Lords Supper.
. Are not both Bread and Wine the outward matter of the Lords Supper? Yes

. Is the substance of the Bread and Wine, by consecration changed into the
substance of the body and blood of Christ? No

. Will it suffice to look only on the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper,
unless we also take, eat, and drink of them? No

Qu. 23. Of the Inward part of the Lords Supper.
. Does not the bread broken in the Lords Supper, signify the body of Christ
broken upon the Cross for us? Yes

. And does not the wine poured out represent his blood shed for us? Yes

. Do Believers feed on the body and blood of Christ in the Lords Supper, as
truly and really as they do on the bread and wine? Yes

. Is this done after a Corporal and Carnal manner? No

. Or is it done after a Spiritual manner, while by faith they apply to
themselves the benefits of Christ's death? Yes

Qu. 24. Of Benefits of the Lords Supper.
. Does not this spirirual feeding on the body and blood of Christ in the Lords
Supper, 1. Nourish and strengthen our Souls? Yes 2. And also comfort and
refresh them? Yes


. Are our souls as truly and really hereby strengthened and refreshed, as our
bodies are by bread and wine? Yes

Qu. 25. Of Preparation to the Lords Supper.
. Can any expect to receive these benefits in the Lords Supper, but those who
come to it duly prepared, and receive it worthily? No

. Can we prepare our selves aright unless we strictly examine our selves before
we come? No

. Must we especially examine our selves of the truth of our [1.] Repentance, and
new Obedience [2.] Faith, [3.] Thankfulness, [4.] and Charity? Yes

[1.] May notorious and customary Sinners presume to come without Repentance,
to this holy Sacrament? No


. Ought every one who would come duly prepared, 1. To examine their hearts and
lives by Gods Law? Yes 2. To bewail and abhor, confess and forsake all their
Sins? Yes 3. And steadfastly to purpose, and constantly to endeavor after a
holy life? Yes


[2, and 3.] Can those who are ignorant, unbelieving, or unthankful, partake of
the comforts of this spiritual food? No


. Must every one that would spiritually feed on Christ in this Sacrament,
understand and believe, 1. Their own Misery by sin, Original and Actual? Yes 2.
The sufficiency of Christ's death, to satisfy Divine Justice for all their
sins? Yes 3. And Gods willingness for Christ's sake, to seal a pardon to all
true Believers in this Sacrament? Yes


. And ought they also thankfully to commemorate the wonderful love of Christ in
dying to purchase such great benefits? Yes

[4.] Shall injurious, malicious, and uncharitable persons receive pardon or
grace from God in this Sacrament? No


. Must every one who would be a welcome guest at this Feast of Charity, 1. Be
sorry for the injuries they have done to others and ready to make them
satisfaction? Yes 2. Forgive heartily, and be willing to be reconciled to those
who have offended them? Yes 3. And also give according to their ability to
those who are in necessity? Yes


The Conclusion.
. Is it a very heinous sin in any, either to receive unworthily; or not to
receive at all, upon pretense of unfitness, while they never endeavor to
prepare themselves? Yes

. Is it therefore the duty of every man that is of competent age and
discretion, 1. Seriously to prepare themselves for this Ordinance, by
self-examination, sincere Repentance, and fervent prayer? Yes 2. Diligently
upon every fit Opportunity, to partake of it, with due Reverence, heedful
Attention, a lively Faith, and devout Affections suitable thereto? Yes 3. And
carefully ever after, to fulfill their Vows then made and renewed? Yes


FINIS.
Price stitcht 2 d.


