The COMPANY of SCOTLAND, Trading to Africa and the Indies, Do hereby give
Notice.
THAT their Books of Subscription, will be opened at Edinburgh on Wednesday
the 26 of this Instant February at the House of Mrs. Purdie in the North side
of the High Street over against the Cross, and will so continue every day of
the Week, Lord's Days only excepted, from Ten in the Clock in the Morning till
Twelve, and from Two in the Afternoon till four, until the (...) day of March
next, or until the Complete Sum of Three Hundred Thousand Pounds Sterling
shall be Subscribed; One Quarter part whereof shall be paid to Two, or more of
the Persons Named in the Act of Parliament, upon or before the first day of
June now next ensuing: But in Regard of the occasion the Company may have for
present Money, such as pay in the same sooner, will be allowed a Discompt, at
the Rate of Twelve per Cent* per Annum, or Eight pence per Diem upon each
Hundred Pound Sterling, from the time of their payment to the said first of
June.

And for the greater Ease and Convenience of such as are willing to be
Concerned: The Company do further Declare, That for such as live at a distance,
or cannot come in person to Subscribe; A Deputation in Writing to any other to
Subscribe for him her, or them, together with one Fourth par of the Money to be
Subscribed, or Bond for the same payable the first of June next will be
accepted by the Company, and be as sufficient, as if the parties were
personally present themselves to Subscribe.

And as to the Remaining Three fourth parts of Every Man's Subscription to be
paid to the Company whenever the same shall be called in; it shall be in
Three equal parts or payments. The first whereof will not be called for in less
than a Year to come. And for the Two last payments, The Company Resolve to let
them Remain as a Fund of Security to the Company, and not to call for the same
or any part thereof, unless upon some pressing occasion; And further that no
Advantage or Forfalture will be taken by the Company for the Non*payment of the
Remaining parts of any ones Subscription; But the Company will only Sell or
Dispose of such a share of Stock in the Company to pay the Money to be
advanced, And the Remainder thereof shall be returned to the Owners thereof.

Here follows a Copy of the Preamble for Subscription.
Edinburgh, (...) 1696
PUrsuant to an Act of Parliament, Entitled, Act for a Company Trading to
Africa and the Indies, We under-subscribers, do each of us for himself, become
obliged for the payment of the Respective Sums severally Subscribed by us
subject to the Rules, Conditions, and Constitutions of the said Company.

Form of a Deputation to be subscribed by such as cannot be present to
Subscribe in the Book.
I (...) Do hereby Depute (...) To Subscribe for me in the Books of the Company
of Scotland, Trading to Africa and the Indies the Sum of (...) pound Sterling.

Form of a Receipt to be given upon the first Payment.
Edinburgh (...) 1696
REceived then of (...) The Sum of (...) Being the First Fourth part of his
Subscription in the Capital Fund of the Company of Scotland, Trading to Africa
and the Indies, We say Received for the use of the said Company.

By Us.

The Form of the Bond, to be Subscribed by such as do not pay in their Fourth
Parts.
I (...) Oblige me my Heirs and Execu^ors to pay to the Company of Scotland,
Trading to Africa and the Inlies, or to whom they shall appoint the Sum of
(...) As the Fourth part of the Sum S^bscribed for by me, in the Capital Stock
or Fund of the said Comp^ny, and that betwixt and the first day of June Next,
with the Sum of (...) Money foresaid of Liquidate Expe^ces in case of Failie by
and attour the said principal Sum with the due, and ordinary Annualrent of the
said Principal Sum after the said day of Payment, Yearly, Monthly, and
proportionally, during the not payment And for the more Security I am content
and Consent, That thi^ Presets be Registrate in the Books of Council and
Session, or in any other Judges Books competent, to have the Strength of a
Decree of any of the Judges thereof Interponed hereto, That Letters and
Executorials of H^ning and poinding on a Charge of six Days, and all others
needful may ass hereupon in Form as Affairs; And for that Effect constitute
(...) My Procurators In W^tness whereof I have Subscribed these Presents at
(...) The (...) Day of (...) One Thousand six Hundred and (...) Years


