THE COMPLETE SOLDIER, OR EXPERT Artillery-Man. CONTAINING The several Postures
and Exercises of the Pike and Musket; the various Beats of the Drum; and what
else is necessary for a young Soldier to understand. ALSO, Diverse ways of
Exercising a Company, very useful for all Officers, and others, that delight in
Military Affairs.

Quanta est armorum gloria! LONDON, Printed by A. G. and J. P. for Thomas
Sawbridge, at the Three Flowers-de-Lys in Little-Britain, 1681.

To the Honorable Sir Joseph Sheldon, KNIGHT, Alderman of the Honorable City
of LONDON.
THE very Title of this BOOK is a kind of Dedication; and you may justly
challenge it, by bearing so eminent an Office in the Artillery. Letters and
Arms are the two things that govern the whole World; both seem to have been
monopolized by your generous Family, the former by a Learned Archbishop, the
latter by your self. And though that great good Man has left this World, a
grave and learned Prelate still survives, a collateral Ornament to the name of
Sheldon. The Book I here humbly lay down at your Feet, was compiled by a
Cheshire Gentleman, in Commission for that County; his Modesty will not permit
him to put his name to it. Modesty! that inherent Virtue in all truly noble and
generous Souls. His Labor has been great, for smaller Tracts require more
judgment and industry than greater Volumes, as translating is more difficult
than writing. He has made use of several Authors of the best note upon this
Subject among the Ancients, as Plutarch, Vegetius, Xenophon, Homer, Justin,
Tully, Aelian's Tacticks, etc. the Moderns he has digested in so compendious a
method, that this small Book will be certainly most extremely pleasing; the
bulk of other Books of this nature being so large, that they require much Time
to peruse, and Money to purchase; of which two things, many persons desirous of
Experience in Military Affairs, can spare neither. Useful I presume this small
Tract will be, especially in such dangerous Times, wherein no Posture is more
convenient than that of Defense. Especially considering that many Trades and
Occupations (excepting those of Handicrafts) are sedentary, and in expectation,
those intervals of time may be herein spent by the Youth of this populous City;
by the help of this they may be their own Tutors, and every private Shop seem
an Academy for Arms.

To you therefore, Honorable Sir, I Dedicate this Piece, humbly desiring you
to honor it with your Acceptance; and that you may long live the Glory of this
great City for your Loyalty, Conduct, and Experience, both in Arms and Peace,
is the Hearty wish of,

Your most humble Servant, E. RAWLINS.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. THE Introduction. Page 1 Chap. 2. The Definition of Posture. 6 Chap.
3. Of the Posture of the Pike. 7 Chap. 4. The Postures of the Pike in a shorter
manner, fit for the Service of the Field. 18 Chap. 5. The Postures of the
Musket, the Caliver, with the Match and Rest, and without. Page 15 Chap. 6.
More Postures of the Musket, with or without the Match or Rest. 20 Chap. 7.
The Conformity of the Postures betwixt the Musket and Pike. 25 Chap. 8. The
place of Dignity of a Soldier, both in Rank and File. 27 Chap. 9. Reasons for
precedence of Dignity in Ranks and Files. 33 Chap. 10. Several Beats and Points
of War belonging to the Drum. Page 37 Chap. 11. Of several Distances. 43 Chap.
12. What is meant by Facing, with the words of Command belonging thereunto; as
likewise several Postures and Figures. 46 Chap. 13. Of marching a Company in
Divisions; the Order and Places of the Officers and Drums. 58 Chap. 14. The
first days Exercise of a Company. 63 Chap. 15. Of Conversion and Inversion,
with some words of Command and Reducements. Page 71 Chap. 16. Of
Countermarches, with their several kinds. 81 Chap. 17. Of Wheelings, and their
several uses. 89 Chap. 18. The second days Exercise. 96 Chap. 19. Several
Firings to be performed with any number of Men upon all occasions, either to
the Front, Rear, or both Flanks. 97 Chap. 20. The third days Exercise. 106
Chap. 21. A Doubling to make every Man a File-Leader by Dignity. Page 107 Chap.
22. Eighteen several Doublings, with their Reducements. 110 Chap. 23. Twelve
several Countermarches, with their Reducements. 112 Chap. 24. Twelve several
Wheelings, with their Reducements. 114 Chap. 25. Several Firings, with Figures
of Battle, for 72 Men. 117 Chap. 26. The fourth days Exercise, showing by a
Doubling how every Man becomes a File-Leader by Succession. Page 133 Chap. 27.
Several Doublings by Countermarches, with Reducements. 135 Chap. 28. Several
Figures of Battle, with Firings upon the same, for 72 Men. 141 Chap. 29. The
fifth days Exercise, showing the several Distances, etc. 165 Chap. 30. Several
Figures of Battle, with Firings upon the same. 170 Chap. 31. The sixth days
Exercise. 194 Chap. 32. Entire Doublings to the Right Flank. 198 Chap. 33.
Divisional Doublings to the Right Flank. Page 204 Chap. 34. Entire Doublings to
the Right Flank by Wheelings. 206 Chap. 35. Divisional Doublings to the Right
Flank by Wheelings. 208 Chap. 36. Figures of Battle, with Firings upon the
same. 210
Books printed for Thomas Sawbridge, at the Three Flowers-de-Lys in
Little-Britain.
THE Art of Dyalling; performed Geometrically, by Scale and Compasses;
Arithmetically, by the Canons of Sines and Tangents; Instrumentally, by a
Trigonal Instrument, accommodated with Lines for that purpose, etc. by William
Leybourn. In 4o. Multum in Parvo, or the Pen's Gallantry; a Copy-Book,
containing 24 Sentences in Prose, in Alphabetical order, and as many in Verse,
each Distich comprehending the 24 Letters, and as many Examples of Alphabets;
written in all the curious Hands now practiced in England, and our Neighbor
Nations, etc. by Edward Cocker. In 4o. Hodder's Arithmetic, or the Necessary
Art made most easy; being explained in a way familiar to the Capacity of any
that desire to learn in a little time: By James Hodder. In 8o. Campanalogia, or
the Art of Ringing improved; with plain and easy Rules to guide the
Practitioner in the Ringing all kinds of Changes, etc. In 8o. The Astrological
Judgment and Practice of Physic, deduced from the Position of the Heavens at
the Decumbiture of the sick Person; wherein the Fundamental Grounds thereof are
most clearly displayed and laid open; showing by an Universal Method not only
the Cause, but the Cure and End of all manner of Diseases incident to Humane
Bodies: Also diverse notable Experiments, of great use to all the industrious
Students in Physic and Astrology, etc. by Richard Saunders. In 8o. The
Carpenters Rule made easy, or the Art of Measuring Superficies and Solids, as
Timber, Stone, Boards, Glass, and the like: Also an Addition or second way,
being the Groundwork of measuring Timber, Stone, etc. by John Darling. In 12o.
THE COMPLETE SOLDIER, OR EXPERT Artillery-Man.
CHAP. I. By way of Introduction.
THE first Rudiments of Education wherewithal a young Soldier ought to be
conversant in, is first to learn the right use of his Arms, than which nothing
can make a Man more complete, nor fit for to bear the Name of a Soldier;
neither can any Man whatever attain to the least part of the Art-Military
(which concerns Infantry, or Foot-Soldiers) without the well managing, and
well handling of their Arms. How delightful is it to those who can perform this
first Part? And with what ease, courage, and safety, can they both defend
themselves, and offend their Enemies? Where, on the contrary, the chiefest Arms
(without Exercise) become not only troublesome Burdens unto the unskilful
Bearers, but oftentimes prove hurtful and dangerous, both to themselves, and
others: Therefore I could wish the necessity of this might be considered by
all, who intend any proficiency in this part of the Art Military; first, to be
instructed in the Postures, and well handling of their Arms, that like that
resolute Spartan Isadas, Plut. in Agesilao.
they may with Art and Courage (in time of danger) defend both their King and
Country. If this in our Militia (whereof I am a Member) were but considered,
and that there might be a reasonable time set apart once in every year for a
private Exercise, and once every year for a General Muster, ^o doubt but there
would be given such account to the World, as would make this Kingdom not only
famous, but feared by the whole World: What Exercise does for the making of
good Soldiers, Experience of former Times will teach. It has been the manner
of all famous Generals to bring their Soldiers to perfection by Exercise.
Vegetius l. 2. c. 3.
Vegetius says very well, It is not length of life, or number of years, that
teaches the Art of War, but continual Discipline, and Exercise of Arms; let a
Soldier serve never so many years, so long as he is unexercised, he shall still
be a raw Soldier. The true knowledge of Postures causes a neatness in the
handling of Arms, which makes a Soldier; the gain whereof must be by Action.
As long as a Soldier handles not his Arms, he is no Actor, for all Abilities
in Arts arise out of a number of Actions; so that no Man can attain to a
perfect knowledge of Arms, 'till he has with care and diligence employed both
his study and labor therein, and upon the foundation of Practice, raised the
frame of Sound, and perfect Skill. No man is naturally born a Soldier, one may
more incline to War than another; but the Skill comes not without industry and
pains. Plutarch. in Pelop. Eurotas was a River near Lacedemon; Babyx and
Gnacion were two Rivers within the City.
Plutarch says, That it is neither Eurotas, nor the place betwixt Babyx and
Gnacion, that brings forth Valiant and Warlike Men: But they are to be found
out in all places (in England) where Youth is bred up in shame of Vice, and
Boldness to undergo peril for Virtues sake. The Lacedaemonians were accounted
the most valiant People of Greece. Plutarch. in Lycur.
Plutarch speaks this of the Victory which the Thebans obtained against the
Lacedaemonians, which 'till that day had no Reputation of Valor; but afterward
by Exercise, and use of Arms, under Epaminondas and Pelopidas, they became the
bravest Soldiers of Greece. Not unlike was the saying of Pyrrhus to his
Muster-Master; Choose you (said he) good Bodies, and I will make them good
Soldiers: A strong Body is most requisite in a good Soldier, to undergo the
labors of War; Vegetius l. 1. c. 1.
but it is Exercise, and the desire to handle Weapons, that gives the perfect
Skill. Therefore as Cicer. in Brut. a. 22.
Demosthenes, being demanded what was the first and principal thing in the Art
Oratory, answered Action; what the second, Action; what the third, Action; so
we may truly say, that in the Art Military, Exercise is not only the first,
second, and third principal thing to make a Soldier, but also all in all. I
could have given you a particular of the Exercise used in ancient time, and
likewise of the Victories which have been obtained by a small number of Men
well exercised, against a multitude unskilful and untrained; but being not at
all pertinent to my intent, and having too much transgressed already, I leave
the Curious to peruse those several Authors that have writ at large of this
Subject, viz. Xenophon, Vegetius, Cicero, Homer, Justin, and others, while I
proceed to give a touch upon the Definition of Posture.

CHAP. II. The Definition of Posture.
POSTVRE is conceived to be a Garb or Figure that a Man stands in for the well
handling of his Arms, in which there are Motions attendant unto the same for
the better Grace, and becoming of them: Likewise by Motion it conveys a neat
Agility of the Body, whereby the right handling of their Arms is achieved, and
so becomes easy; Motion being the working part, Posture the alteration or act,
either in circumstance or matter: As to Rest your Musket, being one Posture;
to Shoulder your Musket, another; so likewise for the rest.

CHAP. III. Of the Postures of the Pike.
NOW as to the Postures themselves, I shall first begin with the Postures of
the Pike, before I begin the Postures of the Musket, conceiving the Pike
(which Mr. Elton, and likewise the Aelian, cap. 12.
Tacticks of Aelian makes plain) to be the more ancient, and therefore the more
honorable Arms, which has been the reason (as I conceive) why so many gallant
Gentlemen have trailed Pikes of late years, both in Holland, and elsewhere. The
Postures of the Pike are as follows, the Pike lying on the ground.

Command.

Handle Raise up
your Pike.

To your Open Order. Order. Close Order.


Order, and Open Order, I conceive only serves as a handsome Posture for the
Pikes to be in upon a stand, or when their Arms are to be viewed by the
Muster-Master upon a Muster day. It has been the custom in ancient time to
Charge to the Horse, by putting the But end of the Pike at the inside of the
right Foot, (which is called Close Order) your Pike in the left Hand, drawing
your Sword over your left Arm. But it is the received opinion of the best
Soldiers, that it is a weak Charge, and of no use for Defense; therefore I omit
the Charge, and proceed.

Command.

From Order Advance Shoulder Port Comport Cheek Trail
your Pike.

Order as you were.

Before I proceed I must tell you, that Silence ought to be commanded, and by
the Soldier diligently obeyed.

Command.

From your Order Charge to the Front Right Left Rear


Order as you were.

Note, That Charge to the Rear, is to be understood always To the left about,
because it is three times the nearer way.

Command.

Advance Shoulder Port Comport Cheek Trail
your Pike.

Advance as you were.

Note, That the Advancing of the Pike is useful when the Drum beats a Troop: It
is likewise useful upon all Doublings, Counter-Marches, and Wheelings, only
remember they conform to the standing Party after they are reduced.

Command.

From your Advance Charge to the Front Right Left Rear


Advance as you were.

Command.

Shoulder Port Comport Cheek Trail
your Pike.

Shoulder as you were.

Note, This is useful upon a March: It is likewise useful in time of Fight,
provided the Pikes be upon a stand; it does not only preserve the Pikes, but
the Soldiers also.

Command.

From your Shoulder Charge to the Front Right Left Rear


Shoulder as you were.

Command.

Port Comport Cheek Trail
your Pikes.

Port as you were.

Note, That Port is only fit for the Soldiers to enter a Gate or Sally-Port,
and likewise to ease the Rear in time of Battle, when the Front are at Charge.

Command.

From your Comport Charge to the Front Right Left Rear


Comport as you were.

Note, That Comport is only necessary for a Soldier upon his March, to ease
himself up a Hill.

Command.

Cheek Trail
your Pikes.

Cheek as you were.

The Pike Cheeked is the right Sentinel Posture, which ought always to be made
use of upon that occasion.

Command.

Trail your PIKES.

From your Trail Charge to the Front Right Left Rear


Trail as you were.

Note, That this Posture is only useful in a Trench to move for security of any
Breach undiscovered, likewise in the Marching through a Wood, and upon Funeral
occasions.

Command.

Order your Lay down your
Pikes.

Here is to be observed by this method, That all the Postures of the Pike are
performed particularly, not Commanding one Twice; and no one, be he never so
Skilful, ought to slight any of these Postures, being that at one time or other
he will have occasion to use them.

CHAP. IV.
NOW that our Soldiers are well Trained, and that they rightly understand the
several Postures of the Pike before recited, and are ready to march into the
Field before their Enemies; I shall contract the Postures, and Charges of the
Pike, into a shorter way, fit for the Service of the Field. The Pikes lying on
the ground, the first word of Command will be,

Stand to your Handle your
Arms.

Command.

Raise up your PIKES.

To your Open Order. Order. Close Order.


Note, As before, I shall omit the Charges of Close Order, to the Horse, and
with brevity proceed.

Command.

Order as you were.

Command.

Advance Port
your Pikes.

Charge to the Front.

Command.

Shoulder your Pikes.

Charge to the Front.

Command.

Comport your Pikes.

Charge to the Left.

Command.

Cheek Trail
your Pikes.

Charge to the Rear.

CHAP. V.
HAving now done with the Pike, in the next place it will be convenient to show
you the Postures of the Musket, or Calliver, together with the Rest; which
shall be showed you at large, as it was exercised, and still is, in the
Military Gardens; and after, in as short a method as possible, the way shall be
showed you how it is now exercised, both with the Match, and without the Match,
and Rest.

The Musket lying on the ground, the first word of Command will be,

Col. Will. Barriffe in his young Artillery-Man, p. 2.
Stand to your Arms.

Take up your Put on your
Bandaliers.

Take up your Place your
Match.

Take up your Musket, and Rest.

Rest your Musket.

Now if you please, you may perform your Saluting Posture.

Poyse Shoulder
your Musket.

Take your Rest into your right Hand, and you are Armed ready to march.

Take your Match between the Fingers of your right Hand.

Put your Rest String about your left Wrist, and carry your Rest in your left
Hand.

Return your Match between the Fingers of your left Hand.

Vnshoulder and Poyse
your Musket.

Join your Rest to the outside of your Musket.

Open Clear Prime Shut
your Pan.

Cast Blow
off your loose Corns.

Bring about your Musket to the Sword side.

Trail your Rest, and Balance your Musket in your left hand.

Charge with Powder.

Draw forth Shorten
your Scouring-stick.

Charge with Bullet.

Put your Scouring-stick into your Musket.

Ram home your Charge.

Withdraw Shorten Return
your Scouring-Stick.

Bring forward your Musket, and Rest.

Poyse your Musket, and recover your Rest.

Join your Rest to the outside of your Musket.

Draw forth your Match.

Blow your Coal.

Cock and Fit your Match.

Guard your Pan.

Blow the Ashes from your Coal.

Open your Pan.

Present upon your Rest.

Give Fire Breast high.

Dismount your Musket, joining your Rest to the outside of your Musket.

Vncock Return
your Match.

Clear Shut
your Pan.

Poyse Shoulder
your Musket.

Take your Match between the Fingers of your right Hand.

Take your Rest into your right hand, clearing your String from your Wrist.

Return your Rest into your left hand, the String loose.

Return your Match into your left hand.

Note: This causes the Soldiers to be in a fit capacity for to March; but if
you are to lay down your Arms upon the Ground, proceed.

Vnshoulder Poyse Rest
your Musket.

Set the But-end of your Musket on the Ground.

Lay down your Musket and Rest.

Lay down your Match.

Take off Lay down
your Bandaliers.

Face about to the left, and march from your Arms.

Face about to the right, and stand to your Arms.

This is principally used to make the Soldiers apt and ready to find their
places, if upon a sudden Alarm they be called.

Here ends the Postures of the Musket, together with the Rest, beginning from
the taking them up from the Ground, and by an orderly proceeding to make ready,
and so to lay them down again.
CHAP. VI.
NOW having showed you the Postures of the Musket and Rest, according to the
formal way of Exercise of late used, and still is in those learned Schools of
Discipline, the Military Grounds (which I wish may flourish for ever with good,
able, and loyal Soldiers, that may be ready to do their King and Country
Service) let us see how we can handle the Musket without the Rest, and likewise
with and without the Match: The Musket lying on the ground, the words of
Command will be as before.

Stand to your Handle your
Arms.

Now you are to take notice, That in taking up the Bandaliers, putting them on;
the taking up of the Match, placing of it; and the taking up of the Musket;
these or the like are not Postures, but Motions to the first Posture Therefore
I will leave out the words of Command tending to the Motions, and proceed to
the Postures themselves.

The Mukettier being shouldered,

Command.

Snaphance. Matchlock. Slope Let slip
your Muskets. Sloping and Slipping of the Musket is only Motion, not Posture.


Vnshoulder and Poyse
your Muskets.

Palm Rest
your Muskets.

Secure your Cock.

Draw back your Hammer.

Clear Prime
your Pan.

Put down your Steel. Hammer.


It is not needful to insert every Command, but only add such as are now in use
for the Matchlock.

The Match being placed in the left hand,

Open Clear Prime Shut
your Pan with a full hand.

Cast Or Blow
off your loose Corns.

Bring about your Musket to the Sword side.

Handle your Charger.

Open your Charger with your Teeth.

Charge with Powder.

Draw forth your Scourer.

Shorten your Scourer to an Inch against your right Breast.

Charge with Bullet.

Ram home your Powder and Ball.

Withdraw your Scourer.

Shorten your Scourer to a handful.

Return your Scourer.

Bring forward And Poise
your Musket.

Palm Or Rest
your Musket.

Fit your Hammer, or Steel.

Free Bend
your Cock.

Present your Musket.

Give Fire.

Palm or Rest
your Musket

Clear Shut
your Pan.

Poyse Shoulder
your Musket.

Handle your Match

Blow your Coal.

Cock Try
your Match.

Guard your Pan with your 2 foremost Fingers.

Blow the Ashes from your Coal, or advance your right Foot.

Blow and open your Pan.

Advance your left Foot, and to the front Present.

Unlock Return
your Match.



The Musket being shouldered, you are ready for a March, or in a fit Posture
for any Motion.

That which is called the Saluting Posture, is to be performed from the Resting
(or Palming) of the Musket, when a Soldier has occasion to Salute his Friend,
or in honoring any other person deserving. And for the Sentinel Posture, the
Musket is to be in the palm of the left hand at his resting Posture, but his
Musket to be charged with Powder, and Bullet in his Mouth, his Cock freed, and
secured with his Thumb, so to be ready to execute his Charge. This Posture
rightly performed, is (in my opinion) one of the most becoming Postures that
belongs to the Musket, and will as soon discover a good Soldier

Capt. Ven.
There is a word of Command sometimes used, Reverse your Musket, which is the
marching Funeral Posture: The way to perform it, is to put the But end of the
Musket upwards under your left Arm, holding it in your left Hand about the Lock
of the Musket.

CHAP. VII.
THere is also a conformity of Posture betwixt the Musket, and those of the
Pike; the words of Command to be given, may in many things be received by both
Arms; as the Musket and Pike lying on the ground, these words of Command may
properly be implied to both.

As for Example.

Stand to Handle Order
your Arms.

That is the But end of the Musket standing on the ground, at the outside of
the right Foot, is conformable to the Pike ordered; and in my opinion, the
properest Command for this Posture of the Musket, is, Order your Musket, being
it is so conformable to their Pike ordered; for the most apt and easiest
expressions, are certainly most fittest to be conduced into words of Command:
And I cannot conceive, but the word Order may as aptly be received by the
Muskettier as by the Pikeman, (though Lieutenant-Collonel Barriffe, and others,
be of a contrary opinion.) But to proceed farther in the rest of the Postures,
viz. Elton, p. 6. cap. 7.
The Musket poised, to the Pike advanced. The Musket shouldered, to the Pike
shouldered. The Musket porting, to the Pike porting. The Musket reverst, (as in
the Funeral Posture) to the Pike trailing. The Musket palmed, to the Pike
cheeked; which is the proper Sentinel Posture for both. The Musket presented,
to the Pike charged.


As for the Motion of Posture, which conduces to lading, priming of the
Musket, and the Pike, they are all included in that general word of Command,
properly belonging to the Musketeers, which is, to make ready.

CHAP. VIII.
THe place of Dignity which every Soldier has, and ought to have, both in Rank
and File, shall be declared.

The noble Soldier, being inquisitive after Honor, is much desirous to
understand his place of Worth and Dignity, which he ever conceives to be as due
to him as his life; which was the reason that caused both the Grecian and Roman
Generals to be so exact and curious in bestowing Rewards upon all valiant
Soldiers who were deserving of the same, and according to every Man's Worth and
Dignity, gave him precedence of Place and Command over the others, that they
might lead and direct them as occasion should require, as you may read at large
in several Authors who treat of those Wars; Xenoph. Cyrop. l. 3. c. 85. and l.
8. 203. Ae. Vegat. l. 3. c. 18.
which Custom from that time has ever since been observed, and still is
practiced by all Nations.

Therefore it is sit that the young Soldier should understand his place of
Dignity, which if he would but esteem it of that Credit which all former Ages
have done, certainly they would take more care to put in practice all such
Duties which is thereby required; it is strange to think there should be so
much ignorance, as there is in our Annual Exercises; but finding many very
ignorant of the difference between a File and a Rank, and what Dignity belongs
thereto, induces me to show what is required to the making up of a File, and
likewise of a Rank, with the Dignity of each Man as he stands, both in File and
Rank.

A File.
First, Know that a File is a number of Men beginning at one Leader, and
continuing in order of followers to the last Man; or from the first, which is
termed Protostatai, a File-Leader, to the last, which is termed Epistatai, or
Bringer up.

For the number of a File, our present Discipline only allows six, and no more;
so that there needs no farther dispute concerning the number of a File.

A Rank.
Secondly, A Rank is a Row of Men composed of Files more or less joined
together, as when one File is laid flankwise to one another, standing shoulder
to shoulder from the right hand to the left.

A File of it self works little effect against an Enemy, for what can a Man
alone in front do? Xenoph. Cyrop. l. 6. 167.
Cyrus in Xenophon wishes, That whereas the Egyptians stood 100 in depth, they
had been in depth 1000; for (says he) we should have the fewer Hands to fight
against.

The Rank brings the multitude of Hands to fight; which without doubt the
more Hands that are with convenience brought to fight, the more is the
advantage to him that brings them. V. Vrbinus says, That the File-Leaders
make the front, which they call The first Rank: And farther says, They that
run in an even Line betwixt the two Wings, the Right and the Left, are said to
be Parastatae, or Sidemen. Capt. B. in his Notes, upon Aelian's Tacticks, c. 47.
Likewise the last Rank is called Oura, or The Rear; and the Commander,
Ouragos, the Bringer up. So that in all preparations for Exercise, Files must
first be made up, which being drawn forth, and joined together, Ranks are made.
It is ever the practice of all judicious Commanders first to draw their
Soldiers forth into Files, which being added together, Ranks are made.

By this time the Soldier will expect to know his place of Dignity; wherefore
because that Files are first to be drawn forth, I will begin first with the
precedence of Files. Therefore conceive their Dignities according to the
Figures (or Numbers) hereafter placed, first of File; then of Rank; and lastly,
of both joined together.

Front Half-File 1 1 A File-Leader. 2 5 Middlemen. 3 4 A Bringer up to the
Front Half-File. Rear Half-File 4 3 Half File-Leader 5 6 Middlemen. 6 2 Bringer
up.

Number 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Place 2 6 7 3 4 8 5 2 Number 6 5 4 3 2 1 8 3 Place 2 6
3 4 5 2 4 4 4 3 3 5 3 4 7 6 6 5 6 7 2 6 2 8

A Rank 654321 A Rank dignified 263451

Now for as much as several Authors are of several opinions in this point, so I
will leave them to their own fancies, and only set down the opinion of Captain
Bingham in this point, which is very clear. Aelion's Tacticks, lib. 1. the
Notes of cap. 10.
His Analogy is thus: That if four Magnitudes be propounded in proportion, that
which arises of the first and fourth, is equal to that of the second and
third; so that the first Tetrarch is allowed the first place of Dignity, and is
placed on the right hand Wing; the second is placed on the outside Point of the
left hand Wing; the third next him in the left Wing, on his right hand toward
the middle Section; the fourth in the right Wing, on the left hand of the first
toward the middle Section, thus: 2 3 4 1 5 5

Which comes out of a Geometrical Proportion, which Proportion gives Law to
the ordering of the rest of the Commands, be they never so many, and likewise
for the Soldiers, be they never so many; the Rule is this: Eucl. l. 7. pr. 19.
Four Magnitudes which equally exceed the one the other being compared
together, that which arises of the first and the fourth, is equal to that
which arises of the second and third; and if the Number produced of the first
and fourth, be equal to that produced of the second and third, those four
Numbers shall be in proportion.

CHAP. IX. Reasons for precedence of Dignity in Ranks and Files.
BEING that perhaps some may stumble at this, and say that it is superfluous,
and not necessary in Discipline, I will endeavor to give some Reasons for the
several places of Dignity in Rank and File.

It is the received opinion of the greatest Commanders, that Geometrical
Proportion gives both Life and Being to orderly Discipline; if that be allowed,
then consider that all parts of the Body ought to be answerable; for seeing
that the joining of Files and Ranks produce greater Bodies, it is necessary
that a true proportion should be kept throughout the whole Battle, so that the
left Wing may be equivalent in all respects of worth, skill, and valor, to the
Right, the Rear, to the Front, and the Rear half Files, to the Front half
Files; and that all parts of the Body be balanced with true proportion, so far
as the knowledge of the Soldiers, and number of Men, will give you leave:
Otherwise it would be very unreasonable, that all the chief Men should be on
the right Flank, and all the worst on the left (who must oppose the right Flank
of their Enemy); and likewise the Front to have in it all the best Men, and all
the worst to be in the Rear (who are principally to defend that part); if that
at any time the Enemy approach upon the Rear, it would be certainly thought a
very indiscreet thing of that Commander that should so order his Battle.

First therefore, the File-Leader ought to be the worthiest, because he not
only Commands his File, but makes the first onset against his Enemy.

Secondly, The Bringer-up ought to be the second place in Honor, because he is
the last Man in the Field marching in the Rear, which upon all occasion of
danger he ought to defend.

Thirdly, The Half File-Leader is the third place of Honor, because he is the
Leader of the Rear half Files upon several Motions, as doubling the Front,
either entire, or divisional; or upon any other doubling to the Front.

Fourthly, The last Man (or Bringer up) of the Front half Files, is the fourth
Man in Dignity; for when the Rear half Files are commanded off, he has the
Honor of defending the Rear.

Fifthly, The next Man to the File-Leader has the fifth place of Honor, for
one Doubling brings him to the Front.

Sixthly, The next and last place of Honor is before the Bringer up, for if
the Body be faced about, one Doubling brings him into the accidental Front; or
keeping his proper Front, by once doubling he becomes Bringer up to the
File-Leader.

So that it is plain by this Geometrical Proportion, the whole Body is
equivalent in skill and worth, and as it were (and indeed ought to be) Seconds
the one to the other, so long as life endures.

And then it may be said of them, as Plutarch writes of the holy Band of the
Thebans, Plutar. in Pelop. A.
That it was never beaten until the Battle of Cheroea; after which Battle,
Philip the Father of Alexander surveying the dead Bodies, and coming to the
place where these 300 lay, all close mingled one with another, and struck
through with the Macedonian Pikes, he wondered greatly; but hearing that it was
the Band of Lovers, and beloved, wept, and said, Evilly may they perish, that
suspect any filthiness in deed or suffering to have been practiced amongst such
Men.

So that you see, that in all Ages care has been taken to bestow Honor upon
those Soldiers who have made it their employ to deserve it; and on the other
hand, what indign Punishment has been inflicted upon all those, who either
carelessly, or wilfully neglect their Duty. I might have inserted the several
Punishments that have been inflicted upon the disobedient Soldier, but being
not material, I shall wave it, and proceed.

CHAP. X. Of the DRVM.
IT is requisite in the next place that care be taken, that every Soldier be
rightly instructed in all Military Signs and Directions; for Experience has
sufficiently taught, that the neglect and error in the right understanding
thereof, has not only brought great inconveniences, but the overthrow of
great Enterprises: Therefore the Captain ought to be very circumspect, that his
Soldiers be well acquainted with all the signs of War, which are only these
three used, viz. a Vocal, a Semivocal, and a Mute.

First, A Vocal Sign is, that when a Captain, or some other Officer, so
immediately Commands, that every Soldier shall hear him distinctly.

A Semivocal Sign is that which is distinguished by a Drum, or other Warlike
Instrument, in which, as to Foot-Service, according to modern Discipline, the
Drum is the only Instrument that the Soldier is to take notice of, and ought
well to understand these several Beats, or Points of War, viz. 1. A Call. 2. A
Troop. 3. A March. 4. A Preparative. 5. A Battalia. 6. A Retreat.


Besides these, there are two other Beats of the Drum, viz. 7. A Tato. 8. A
Revally.


The Tato, (as some call it) but rather Tapto, that is, to shut or make fast
your Doors, for when this is beaten, all persons ought to repair to their
private rest, whether in Leaguer or Garrison.

The Watch being then set, and the Tapto being returned to the Corpse due Guard,
there is a Warning-piece discharged; after which, no person ought to be out of
their Quarters, or from their Posts, without the Word be given them; by which
means the Garrison or Leaguer will be in quiet. So that all private Watches and
Sentinels may more distinctly perform their Duty to the safety of the Garrison
or Leaguer.

A Revally is beaten in the Morning by break of day, (I suppose it comes from
the French word Reveiller, to awake from Sleep) at which time the Sub-Officers
usually take off their out Sentinels.

These two last spoken of (as I suppose) cannot be said to be Points of War,
but only private Directions for a Garrison or Leaguer; the one to give notice at
what time the Garrison or Leaguer ought to be at rest and quiet, the other to
show the hour that the Gates shall be set open for all Commerce.

Now as you may learn for what end these six several Beats of the Drum are made
use of, observe Barriffe. Barriffe in his Military Discipline, p. 5.


First, By a Call, you must understand to hear present Proclamation, or else to
repair to your Ensign.

Secondly, By a Troop, understand to shoulder your Musket, to advance your
Pike, to close your Ranks and Files to order, and troop along with (or follow)
your Officer to the place of Randezvouze, or elsewhere.

Thirdly, By a March you are to understand, to take your Open Order in Rank, to
shoulder both Musket and Pike, and to direct your March either quicker or
flower, according to the Beat of the Drum.

Fourthly, By a Preparative you are to understand, to close to your due
distance for Skirmish both in Rank and File, which distance you shall
understand hereafter, and then to make ready, that so you may execute upon the
first Command.

Fifthly, By the Battle or Charge understand, the continuation or pressing
forward in order of Battle, without laging behind, rather boldly stepping
forward in the place of him that falls dead or wounded before thee.

Sixthly, By a Retreat understand, an orderly retiring backward, either for
Relief, advantage of the Ground, or for some politic end; as to draw the Enemy
into some Ambushment, or suchlike: So that for the Drum, it is the Voice of
the Commander, the Spur of the Valiant, and the Heart of the Coward. So far
Barriffe.

As for the Antiquity of the Drum, is is said, that Bacchus was the first
Inventor of it, and so from Age to Age it has been thought a fit Instrument
for the Service of the Foot; as you may read at large in these several Authors
mentioned in the Margin. Polyd. lib. 1. in Bac.. 1. Curtius, lib. 8. 372.
Plutarch. in Crasso. App. in Parthicis 143.


And not only the Drum was thought a fit Instrument alone for the Foot, but
they were allowed some other pleasing Instrument to delight and transport the
Spirits of the Soldiers; as the Flute, Harp, and Pipe.

Plutar. in Lycurgo.
Plutarch much commending the Lacedemonian manner of joining with their Enemy,
says, When the King has offered the Goat (that was the Lacedemonian Sacrifice
when they were to give Battle) he straight Commands all the Army to Crown their
Heads, and the Flutes to sound the Measure of For this Measure, see Jul.
Pollux, l. 4. c. 10.. 2.
Castor; and himself withal begins the Paean is a Hymn proper to Apollo,
Jul. 1. Pollux, l. 1. c. 1.. 33.
fifth Paean, the Song they used when they went to Charge, at the first
advancing against the Enemy. So that it is a brave, and no less fearful thing
(says he) to behold them pacing according to the measure of the Flute, neither
disturbing their Order, nor showing any astonishment of Mind, but mildly and
joyfully approaching the danger of Conflict, dividing out their March to the
sound of the Flute; for it is not likely, that Men so demeaning themselves, can
be transported with Fear or Choler; nay, rather they must needs have a settled
Mind full of Hope and Assurance, as if God were on their side. Thus Plutarch.

Thucyd. l. 5. 393 A.
The Lacedaemonians likewise used Flutes, and made them their Instruments to
measure out as it were the steps of War, for they used an easy and slow pace,
framed to the cadence of the sound.

Athenaeus Deipnosoph, l. 12. 517 A.
Athenaeus rehearses out of Herodotus, that the Lydians used the like
Instruments to Dance as it were the Measures of War by. And he adds, that the
Cretians made choice of the Harp for their Instruments of War, as though it had
been peculiar to that Nation.

Pausan. in Lacon. 193.
Pausanias testifies the like of the Lacedaemonians, that they brought in
Flutes and Measures into the War; and we are not ignorant, that in our late
unhappy Wars, both in Ireland and Scotland, how much the Northern Pipe was
used, being a very shrill and loud Pipe, and much surpassing the Flute for its
shrilness, in pacing out the Measures of War with delight to the Soldiers; for
I have heard some judicious Commanders affirm, That they did believe, the Pipes
did much transport the Valor of the Soldiers: So that they had a sufficient
Pay allowed them, even equal with the Drum.

CHAP. XI.
NOW that our Soldiers have attained some small knowledge in the use of their
Arms, and rightly understand the Beats of the Drum; it will be expedient in the
next place to show them the several Distances, which are these four, viz.

Close Order which is both in Rank and File 1 Foot. Order 3 Foot. Open Order 6
Foot. Double Distance 12 Foot.

There is several Distances to be performed in, First, March. Secondly, Motion.
Thirdly, Skirmish.
The distance of March between File and File is 3 Foot, and between Rank and
Rank 12 Foot. The distance of Motion between File and Rank is 6 Foot. The
distance for entire Doublings and Skirmishes between Rank and File is 3 Foot.
The distance for prevention of Cannon Shots, is between File and File 12 or 24
Foot, which is the Double-Double Distance.


For to deliver unto you the opinions of several ancient Commanders concerning
Distance, will be needless, it being sufficiently made plain by several eminent
Authors; but to proceed with all brevity possible to the words of Command,
which are as follows.

The Company being upon the Ground, at their Open Order you may

Command.

Ranks, Close forward Files, Close inward
to Order.

Ranks, Close forward Files, Close inward
to Close Order.

Ranks, Open backwards Files, Open to the Right
to Order.

Ranks, Open backward Files, Open to the Left
to Open Order.

Ranks, Open backward Files, Open outward
to Double Distance.

Ranks, Close forward Files, Close inward
to Open Order.

Note, That Close Order is useful for the Pikes to be at upon the Charge to the
Horse, or for any manner of Wheeling; or when the Commander is to deliver
somewhat of Concernment to the Soldier.

But if any one have a desire to be farther satisfied concerning Distance, let
them read Barriffe, Ward, Ven, and Elton, who have sufficiently treated of this
Subject at large; it being my design only to model an Exercise with as much
abreviation as possible, being it is only intended a Pocketbook for the
benefit of the young Soldier.

CHAP. XII.
BEfore I come to show the variety of Facings in the Action, I think it will
not be amiss to define unto you what is meant by Facing.

Facing is a particular turning of the Aspect from one part to another, whereby
the Front proper becomes the Front accidental, and a Front accidental may be
reduced to his proper Front. The words of Command take as follows.

Command.

Face to the Right Left Rear Front Center or midst


As you were.

Command.

Face to the Front and Rear Right and left outward Right and left inward Midst
of Files Midst of Ranks


As you were.

Command.

To the Right Right Right Right Right about Left about


As you were.

Command.

To the Left Left Left Left Left about Right about


As you were.

Command.

Half Files Face to the Right Left Right and left outward Right about Left
about Right and left inward


As you were.

There is also a Facing which causes the Body to Face to the Front, Rear, and
both Flanks, which some call Facing square; of which I will prick some few
Figures of Facings, which will be sufficient to demonstrate all the rest to an
ingenious fancy.

Command.

Face square, and March.

The Direction is, Two first Ranks stand, the two last Ranks Face about, the
rest of the Body Face to right and left, then March all.

diagram of military formation or battle array Proper Front Front accidental
Front of the Rear




When your Soldiers begin any Motion, let them Advance their Pikes, and
Shoulder their Muskets.

Now to reduce this Figure to its first Order,

Command.

Face all about to the Right.

March, and Close your Divisions.

To your Leader; who stands at the proper Front.

To Face Square another way, and March upon it.

Command.

Face Square, and March.

The Direction is, Musketeers Face to both Flanks; half Files of Pikes Face to
the Right about; March all.

Now you must understand, when the Command is, Half Files, it is always to be
understood the Rear half Files; otherwise the word Front half Files is
commanded.

diagram of military formation or battle array Proper Front Front of the Rear




To reduce this Figure to its former Order,

Command.

Face all to the Right about.

March, and Close your Divisions.

To your Leader; and they are reduced.

Take another Figure of Battle produced by Facing.

Command.

The two first Ranks stand; the rest Face outward, and move clear of the
standing part.

The two last Ranks move outward sideways two Paces.

To your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array

They may give Fire to the Front, or to the Rear, or to both Flanks, or to all
four at once, falling in the Rear of their own Divisions; this according as the
Captain pleases to Command.

Command.

Front Division advance forward three paces; the two next Divisions move
outward one pace; Pikes in each Division face about, and move two paces; to
your Leader.

Divisions of Musketeers in the Rear advance forward, and range even in Front
and Rear, with the middle Divisions of Pikes; the first Rank of Pikes in the
front Division move three foot clear of the standing part.

diagram of military formation or battle array

They may give Fire in the Front, or in the Rear, or to both Flanks, or to all
four at once.

Command.

The first and last Rank of the first Division of Pikes, Face about, and move
down clear of the Rear, and close Ranks forward to Order.

Outmost Divisions of Musketeers face about, move down, and slank your own
Divisions of Pikes.

The first Division of Pikes move forward, and range even a Breast with your
own Division of Musketeers.

The front Division of Musketeers close into the midst to Order.

diagram of military formation or battle array

As for firing upon any of these Figures, the Captain may use his own
discretion, either to Front Rear, or both Flanks, or to all at once.

Command.

The outmost Divisions face outward, and move two paces.

Face to your Leader.

Move up, until you range even a Breast with the second Divisions next the
Front.

Rear Division, move straight forward two paces.

diagram of military formation or battle array

Command.

Front Division advance forward three paces.

The outmost Division upon the Flanks move up, and range even with the Front.

diagram of military formation or battle array

DIRECTION.

For the first Firing upon this Figure, let them all face to the Rear, and the
middle Division of Musketeers move forwards, and flank the Rear Division of
Pikes: After, let all the Musketeers advance forwards three Foot clear of
their own Divisions of Pikes, and give Fire, falling in the Rear of themselves;
and after facing about, move into their places again.

The second Firing may be to both Flanks, or to all four, as the Commander
pleases, falling in the Rear of themselves.

The third Firing: Let the Musketeers upon the Flanks move down even with the
Rear, and give Fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; and after, move up
into their places again, and face to their Leader.

The fourth Firing: Let them Fire on the Ground they stand, and fall in the
Rear of themselves; and the Pikes in the Rear may Charge on, and after, facing
to their Leader.

You may proceed to the next Command, which will be as follows.

Command.

The outmost Divisions face inward, and march three paces.

The next two Divisions face outward, and move two paces.

To your Leader.

Rear Division, move outward, until you stand straight with the front
Divisions.

diagram of military formation or battle array

You must note, That the Front and Rear Divisions of Musketeers by Firing,
have interchang'd Ground, which causes this

Reducement.

Front Divisions face about.

Front and Rear Divisions march, and interchange Ground.

To your Leader.

The outmost Divisions face inward, and close your Divisions.

To your Leader.

Even your Ranks, and streighten your Files, and close to Order: They are
reduced.

CHAP. XIII.
NOW our Soldiers being somewhat expert in the true use, and handling of their
Arms, and likewise in the several Beats of the Drum, together with the
Distances, Facings, and other Dignities of Place thereunto belonging, it will
be convenient to draw them into the Field; but it will be convenient to show,
1. How to march a Company to the Field. 2. How to draw them up into a Body.
Lastly, To instruct them in the several Doublings, Counter-marches, and
Wheelings. All which shall be performed by six days Exercise, every days
Exercise being digested into several Figures and Forms of Battle, with their
several ways of Firing, Doubling, Counter-marches, and Wheeling, upon every
Form and Figure of Battle.

Of Marching a Company in Divisions: The Order and Places of the Officers and
Drums.
diagram of military formation or battle array

IN Marching, the Officers are to observe the Ranks to be at 12 Foot distance,
and that the Files be closed to Open Order.

The Soldiers must always begin to march with their right Foot first, which is
observed to conduce most to the keeping of due Order in Ranks.

The Captain is to march with his Pike shouldered.

A Lieutenant to march with a Partizan:

And an Ensign to march with his Pike comported, which is the distinction
between the Captain and other Officers.

The Sergeants have no place assigned them in marching, but are to be moving up
and down, to observe that the Ranks and Files be at their due Distance.

diagram of military formation or battle array

The Drums are to fall in behind the two first Ranks of each Division of
Musketeers, and to Beat between the second and third Rank. When drawn up into
a Body, they are to place themselves in the first Rank even with the Front,
between the interval of Muskets and Pikes.

The Ensign is to place himself six Foot before the Body of Pikes, both upon a
March, and when drawn up into a Body. So long as the Drum beats a March, they
are to be drawn up with their Arms shouldered, the Colors flying; but if the
Drum beat a Troop, the Pikes are to be advanced, the Colors furled.

diagram of military formation or battle array

It is very necessary that every Soldier be acquainted throughout with all the
parts of a Body of Men drawn up, with their several Extents and Bounds, and
with the true understanding of the same: Where first note, although you have
been showed the description both of File and Rank, with their Number, Place,
and Dignity belonging to each; yet there is more Parts belonging to a Body of
Men drawn up, than only Ranks and Files.

As first, a Front, a Rear, a Right Flank, and a Left Flank: There is also
Front Half-Files, and Rear Half-Files, Right Half-Ranks, and Left Half-Ranks:
There is the length and depth of the Battle, every one of which have their
particular Extents and Bounds, according to their number of Men. All which is
plainly set forth in the following Figure. Vide Cap. Of Facing


The Front of which Figure is first of all to be taken notice of: There are in
all Exercises a Proper Front, and an Accidental Front, which is, when all the
Company faces to the left, or the like.

diagram of military formation or battle array FRONT. REAR. The Right Flank.
The Left Flank.
A File. Dignity in File. Front half Files. Rear half Files.
A Rank. Dignity in Rank. File-Leaders. Bringers up. Left half Ranks of
Muskets. Right half Ranks of Muskets.




CHAP. XIV. The first Days Exercise.
HAving brought your Company into a place convenient, where you intend to
Exercise them, you may cause the File-Leaders, Corporals, or Sergeants, to
instruct them in the Postures, and true handling of their Arms; which being
performed, upon the Summons of the Drum, each File-Leader with his File is to
march into his place.

The Captain (or other Commander) being at the Head of his Company, Commands
them to even their Ranks, and streighten their Files, and to stand to their
Open Order both in Rank and File. If your Ensign be not already in the Field,
Command a Sergeant with a Drum, and either two or more Files of Pikes, with two
Files of Shot, if necessary, that the Colors be far off, to guard the Ensign
to the place of Rendezvous. This being performed, and every Man in his place,
the Captain (or other Commander) after silence, begins first to instruct the
Soldiers in their several Distances betwixt Rank and File, with the ways to
open and close to them; next in the Facings, then in the Doublings; which shall
be these following.

The Ranks that double are to observe their Right Hand Man, to move at the same
time with him. They begin their Motion with the Foot, next the Hand named,
which Motion is to be performed at three Steps; in doubling the even Ranks,
double the odd. Files doubling is performed in the same manner, and is the same
thing with Reduction of doubled Ranks. The Reduction of doubled Files is the
same thing with doubling Ranks.

To double half Files upon a March, let your Rear half Files move into the
Front with a quicker Motion, the Front half Files continuing theirs.

For Reduction, let the Rear half Files stand without Facing, 'till the Front
half Files have passed them, and then fall after their proper Leaders.

Note, That the Letter C. stands for Command, the Letter R. for Reducement.

Note, That no Leader is tied to observe all these Doublings in his Exercise at
once, but to use as many of them as he shall think fit.

The words of Command for all entire Doublings to the Front.
C. Ranks, to the Right double. March.

R. Files, to the Left double. March.

C. Ranks, to the Left double. March.

R. Files, to the Right double. March.

C. Ranks, to the right and left, double outward.

R. Files, to the right and left, double inward.

C. Ranks, to the right and left, double inward.

R. Files, to the right and left, double outward.

C. Ranks, as you were.

C. Half-Files, double your Front to the right.

R. Files, double your Depth to the left.

C. Half-Files, double your Front to the left.

R. Files, double your Depth to the right.

C. Half-Files, double your Front to the right and left outward. March.

R. Files, double your Depth to the right and left inward. March.

C. Half-Files, double your Front to the right and left inward. March.

R. Files, double your Depth to the right and left outward. March.

C. Bringers up, double your Front to the right. March.

R. Files, double your Depth to the left, every Man falling behind his Bringer
up.

C. Bringers up, double your Front to the left.

R. Files, double your Depth to the right, every Man falling behind his Bringer
up. March.

C. Bringers up, double your Front to the right and left outward. March.

R. Files, double your Depth to the right and left inward, every Man falling
behind his Bringer up. March.

C. Bringers up, double your Front to the right and left inward. March.

R. Files, double your Depth to the right and left outward, every Man falling
behind his Bringer up. March.

C. Double your Ranks to the right entire.

R. Right half Ranks, double your left Flank.

C. Double your Ranks to the left entire. March.

R. Left half Ranks double your right Flank.

C. Double your Ranks inward entire.

R. The inmost Files double your Flanks to the right and left outward, and
after, close.

C. Double your Ranks to the right entire, every Man placing himself on the
outside of his right hand Man. March.

R. Right half Ranks double your left Flank, every Man placing himself on the
inside of his left hand Man. March.

C. Double your Ranks to the left entire, every Man placing himself on the
outside of his left hand Man. March.

R. Left half Ranks double your right Flank, every Man placing himself on the
inside of his right hand Man. March.

C. Half Files, double your Front to the right entire. March.

R. Right half Ranks, double entire the depth of your left Flank. March.

C. Half Files, double your Front to the left entire. March.

R. Left half Ranks, double entire the depth of your right Flank. March.

C. Half Files double your Front inward entire. March.

R. The inmost Files double entire the depth of the outmost Files, and after,
close. March.

Note: Every even Rank from the Front face outward, and double the odd. March.

Next follows, to show some Divisional Doublings by the same.
C. Double your Ranks to the right and left by Division. March.

R. The outmost Files upon each Flank that moved, face inward, and strengthen
the Body. March.

C. Double your Ranks to the right and left by Division, every Man placing
himself on the outside of his right and left hand Man. March.

R. The outmost Files upon each Flank that moved, double the inmost Files to
the right and left inward, every Man placing himself on the inside of his right
and left hand Men. March.

C. Half Files, double your Front by Division. March.

Half Files face outward, and march clear of the Body, face to your Leader,
move up, and double the Front.

R. The outmost Files upon each Flank that moved, double entire the depth of
the inmost Files. March.

Entire Doublings to the Front by Wheelings.
C. Wheel off your Rear half Files, and double your Front to the right entire.
March.

Half Files, face about, and wheel to the left.

R. Wheel off your Right half Ranks, and double your left Flank entire to the
left.

C. Wheel off your Rear half Files, and double your Front to the left entire.

Face outward, and Left half Ranks wheel about to the left.

R. Wheel off your Left half Ranks, and double your right Flank to the right
entire.

C. Wheel your Rear half Files inward into the midst, and double your Front
inward entire. March.

R. The inmost Files that doubled, wheel about to the right and left outward,
and double entire the depth of the outmost Files; after, face to your Leader,
and close Files to the midst to order.

Divisional Doubling to the Front by Wheeling.
C. Wheel off your Rear half Files, and double your Front by Division. March.

R. The outmost Files upon each Flank that doubled, wheel about to the right
and left inward, and double entire the depth of the inmost Files; face to your
Leader. March.

CHAP. XV. Of Conversion and Inversion, with some few words of Command, and
Reducements.
THE difference betwixt Inversion and Conversion is this; Inversion does always
produce File or Files, and Conversion Rank or Ranks: Inversion consists of
Files filing, or of Ranks filing; Conversion of Ranks ranking to the right, or
to the left, or by increase of Files, ranking by even or uneven parts.

Note: That what is commanded to the Right, the same may be performed to the
Left.

The words of Command for Inversion, are as follows.
C. Files, file to the right.

R. Files, file six to the left.

C. Files, file to the right and left by Division.

R. Files, file six to the right and left.

C. Files, file to the right entire advancing.

R. File six to the right toward the Front.

C. Files, file inward into the right Flank. The right hand File stands, the
rest move away, placing themselves in a direct File before the Front.


R. Front half Files, file three to the left; Rear half Files, face about, and
file three to the right; face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.

C. Files, file to the right by Division.

R. Front half Files, file three to the right, and Rear half Files face about,
and file three to the left; face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.

C. Files, file inward into the right and left Flank by Division.

R. Half Files, face about to the right; Front and Rear half Files, file three
to the right and left inwards; face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.

[For filing inward, the half Files are to face about, and so the left hand
File of the Rear, and right of the Front, are to move away 'till they become
one File.

Filing by Division is the same, only the right hand File stands, the rest move
away.

Filing inward into the right Flank by Division, half Files are to face about;
then the File-Leaders, and Bringers up of the right and left, are to lead, and
so successively fall into the Rear of each other.]

Of Ranks filing.
Ranks filing is sooner performed and reduced, than Files filing, and will be
more ready to make resistance against any opposition in the Front.

C. Ranks, file to the right, or to the left, placing your selves behind your
right hand Men.

Direction. If they be upon a stand, they may open to their distance each
Rank, and so place themselves behind their right hand Men.

If upon a March, as to pass some narrow Defile, the readiest way to perform
it, and draw up in order again as soon as past, is to make the Ranks file; if
to the right, the right hand Man files first, and the rest of his Rank follow
him, 'till the Defile be past.

For larger Defiles, the Commander draws off as he judges the way will easily
receive.

R. Files, rank as you were.

C. Ranks, file to the right and left by Division. Tacticks of Aelian, c. 30.
p. 6.


Direction. It is the same with the last, differing only in this; the half
Ranks to the left, fall behind their left hand Men to the left; the half Ranks
to the right, behind their several right hand Men.

R. Files, rank to the right and left inward, as you were.

The words of Command for Conversion, are as follows.
C. Files, rank three to the right.

Direction. In this Motion the File-Leader is first to move to the Hand
commanded, and the half File-Leader is to advance the same way.

R. Ranks, file as you were.

C. Files, rank six to the left. March.

Direction. In this Motion close Ranks forward to order, and open Files to
double Distance; then let every Man in his File move up to the left of his
File-Leader, so every File will become one Rank: This, if the Company be small,
will make it seem more large, Battalion like.

C. Ranks, rank outward into the Front.

Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest face outward, placing your selves
successively into the Front; after, face to your Leader.

R. Ranks, rank twelve to the right and left inward, as you were.

C. Ranks, rank inward into the Front. The twelve middlemost men stand, which
is the first Rank, the rest move successively after the first Rank.


Direction. The first Rank is to move away to the right and left, the next Rank
moving up into his ground, doing the like, and so all the rest, until the last
Rank be come up entire into the Front.

R. Ranks, rank six to the right and left outward.

Direction. The first six upon the right, and the first six upon the left,
stand, the rest move outward, falling in the Rear of the first Rank, ranking
six to the right and left; and after, closing their Divisions.

C. Files, rank to the right into the Front.

Direction. Open to the left to your double Distance, and Ranks close forward
to close Order, and move up to the right into the Front.

R. Ranks, file six to the left.

Direction. To perform which, the first six upon the left are to fall into a
File, the rest doing the like, until they are all converted into Files.

C. Ranks, rank outward into the Front, every Man placing himself on the
outside of his right and left hand Man. This Ranking is by Countermarch.


Direction. The first Rank stand, the rest move forth to the right and left
successively, and advance into the Front, every Man placing himself on the
outside of his right and left hand Man.

R. Ranks, rank twelve to the right and left inward, every Man placing himself
on the inside of his right and left hand Man. Note: The twelve middle men are
to stand, the rest to move six to the right hand, and six to the left inward.


C. Ranks, rank inward into the Front, every Man placing himself on the inside
of his right and left hand Man.

Direction. Right and left half Ranks open from the midst to twice double
Distance, the first Rank of each Division is to stand, the rest are to move to
the right and left inward into the Front.

R. Ranks, rank six to the right and left outward, every Man placing himself on
the outside of his right and left hand Man; and after, to close their Divisions.

C. Files, rank to the right, by wheeling into the Front.

Direction. Files, open to the left to your double Distance; Ranks, close
forward to your close Order; face to the right, and wheel 'till all the whole
Body be brought into one entire Rank.

R. Ranks, file as you were.

C. Files, rank into the Front and Rear by Division.

Direction. Files, open to the left to your open Order; Ranks, close forward to
your close Order; half Files face about to the right and left; then move all in
Front and Rear, and make two entire Ranks.

R. Front half Files, face about to the left; Rear half Files, face about to
the right; then wheel half Files into the midst as they were; then face them to
their Leader, and close their Files at discretion. Observe that those in motion
are to face to the right Flank.


C. Ranks, rank two to the right. This may be observed with any even number.


Direction. The two first in Rank advance forwards to the right; the next two
in the Rear of them, until the first Rank have performed the Command; all the
rest of the Ranks is to perform the like.

R. Ranks, rank as you were.

C. Ranks, rank two to the right and left outward.

Direction. The two outmost Men upon the right and left hand advance forwards;
the next in the same Rank are to follow, dividing themselves two to the right
hand, and two to the left, 'till the Motion be finished.

R. Ranks, as you were: Or Rank twelve to the right and left inward.

C. Ranks, rank two to the right and left inward.

Direction. The two inmost Men of the right and left hand in the midst of the
Battle, advance forwards; the next in the same Rank are to follow two from the
right hand, and two from the left, until all have performed the Command.

C. Ranks, rank 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, etc. by increase and decrease, as they stand in
a Body.

Direction. The right hand Man of the first Rank march forth; then the three
next of the same Rank follow him; then five more out of the same Rank to make
the third; and what is wanting in the first Rank of the Body, to make good the
fourth in Figure, must be taken out of the second in Body; and so to proceed in
the remainder, both for its increase and decrease, until your Command be
produced.

R. Right hand Men, Rank as you were.

C. Ranks, rank to each Flank, by wheeling to the right and left into the same
by Division. Observe, they are to be at double Distance in Rank, and at Order
in File.


Direction. Face them to the Rear, and then let them wheel into their places.

R. Ranks, rank as you were; face to your Leader.

But if you would avoid mixture of Arms, you may place all your Musketeers,
either in Front and Rear, or else wheel only the Musketeers first, and leave
the Pikes standing: Otherwise it may be performed in marching, and then the
Reducement as before, Rank as you were.

C. Ranks of your Front and Rear half Files, wheel outward to your right and
left Flank by Division. Note: They are to observe the same distance as in the
former Command.


Direction. Half Files, face about; Ranks, open to your double Distance; then
Front and Rear half Files, wheel to the right and left outward into both
Flanks.

R. Front and Rear half Files, face to the right and left inwards, and Rank as
you were; and close Ranks forward to order.

C. Files, rank three first, then by increase to the Right two, in each
Division of Musketeers and Pikes. These are termed half Rhombs, or Wedges.


R. Ranks, file as you were.

C. Files, rank first two, and by increase two from the whole Body. You may
make a Wedge of all together.


R. Ranks, file as you were.

Note: You may alter the mixture of Arms at pleasure.

C. Files, rank first two, and by increase and decrease two in each Rank
divisionally, both of Muskets and Pikes. Tacticks of Aelian, page 108.


R. Ranks, file as you were.

CHAP. XVI. Of Countermarches, with their several sorts and kinds.
THE next branch of Discipline which offers it self, are Countermarches, which
we read (in the Tacticks of Aelian) Tacticks of Aelian, cap. 28.
were of use amongst the Grecians and Persians, only these three kinds, to wit,

1. The Chorean, maintaining ground. 2. The Lacedemonian, losing ground. 3. The
Macedonian, gaining ground.
The distance for Countermarch is open Order in Rank and File.

Note: When there is a Countermarch commanded without any other addition, then
it is always intended a Chorean Countermarch.

The Chorean.
C. Files, to the right hand Countermarch.

Direction. The word of Command being given, all the File-Leaders step forwards
with their right Legs, and face about to the right, every File-Leader with his
File following him toward the Rear, passing through the interval on his right
hand, observing to keep even in Rank with his right hand Man, and not to turn,
until he come to the ground where at first his File-Leader began the Motion:
The Command is performed when the Bringers up have attained unto the place
where before their File-Leaders stood.

R. Files, to the left hand, Countermarch.

C. Ranks, to the right hand, Countermarch.

Direction. Face them to the right, then the right hand File is to turn off to
the right, and to march even to the Ground of the left hand File.

R. Ranks, to the left hand, Countermarch.

Note: That any entire Countermarch of Files and Ranks will be reduced, by
making another entire Countermarch to what hand soever; but if you desire to
have them not only reduced to the same Aspect, but also precisely to the same
place; then if the Countermarch be to the right, Countermarch again to the
right, so to the left.

C. Countermarch Front and Rear into the midst.

Direction. Half Files face about, and turn off to the left; Front half Files
turn off to the right, and face to your Leader.

R. Countermarch your Front and Rear into the midst again, will reduce the last
Command; or else by any other Divisional Countermarch of Files.

C. Front and Rear half Files Countermarch to the right.

Direction. Front half Files Countermarch to the right, following your
File-Leaders; Rear half Files Countermarch to the right, following your Half
File-Leaders.

R. Countermarch Front and Rear into the midst; then face to the first Front,
and they are reduced.

C. Countermarch your Flanks into the midst.

Direction. Face to the right and left outward; the right Flank turn off to
the right; the left Flank turn off to the left; March, and close your Divisions.

R. Countermarch your Flank into the midst again, and they are reduced.

C. Right and left half Ranks interchange your Ground.

Direction. Face to the right and left inward; March, and interchange your
Ground; face to your Leader.

R. Interchanging of Ground back again, will reduce them; or Divisionally to
Countermarch their Flanks into the midst of the Battle.

The Lacedemonian Countermarch losing Ground.
C. Files, to the right hand Countermarch, placing your selves before your
Bringers up; to your Leader.

Direction. Bringers up, face about to the right; the rest Countermarch to the
right, every Man turning on the Ground he stands, following their Leaders,
placing themselves before their Bringers up.

R. Bringers up, stand; the rest pass through to the right, and place your
selves before your Bringers up.

C. Files, to the right hand Countermarch, every Man turning on the Ground he
stands.

Direction. The File-Leaders of each File are to step sideways to the right,
and so march even in Rank together, every Man following his Leader, and turning
on the Ground he stands.

R. Files to the left hand Countermarch, every Ma turning on the Ground he
stands.

C. Bringers up, face about to the right; the rest pass through to the right,
and place your selves before your Bringers up.

Direction. Face all to the right about; Bringers up, stand; the rest of the
Body pass through the right, and place your selves before your Bringers up.

Note: This Motion is begun by the Rank, next the Bringers up, and so continued
successively by the rest, 'till the Command be ended.

R. This Countermarch may be reduced, by doing the same to the contrary hand;
or if you please,

C. Bringers up, stand; the rest pass through to the right, and place your
selves behind your Bringers up.

Note: This Command is performed by the Rank, next the Rear, until the
File-Leaders become the Bringers up; then face them to the proper Front, and
they are reduced.

Direction. The last Rank (or Bringers up) are to stand; the rest of the Body
to face to the Rear, and pass through to the right, placing themselves behind
their Bringers up; then face them all about after their proper File-Leaders,
and they are reduced as at first.

C. Ranks, to the right hand Countermarch, every Man turning after his right
hand Man on the Ground he stands.

Direction. Face all to the right, which being performed, the right hand File,
together with all the rest, becomes Ranks, and so begin the Countermarch, every
Rank turning after his right hand Man on the Ground he stands, and so marches
forth-right beyond that which was the left Flank.

R. Right hand File, face to the right; the rest pass through to the right, and
place your selves before your right hand Men.

The Macedonian Countermarches gaining Ground.
C. File-Leaders, face about to the right; the rest pass through to the right,
and place your selves behind your Leaders.

Note: This Motion begins with that Rank, next the File-Leaders.

Direction. File-Leaders, face about to the right; the rest pass through the
intervals to the right, and place themselves behind their Leaders, every Rank
successively passing through, and taking their places.

R. File-Leaders, face to the Rear; the rest pass through the left, following
your Bringors up, placing your selves behind your Leaders.

Note: This Countermarch may be reduced as the rest, by doing the same to the
contrary hand, or by an entire Countermarch of Files.

Direction. File-Leaders, face to the Rear; then the Bringers up begin the
Countermarch, passing forward between the intervals, turning on the Ground they
stand, the (5) following the (6), and so likewise the rest until the
Countermarch is ended; then face them to their first Front, and they are
reduced as at first.

R. For Reducement, observe this for all, That any entire Countermarch of File
or Rank, may be reduced by another entire Countermarch by File or Rank, of what
kind, or to what hand soever.

This may suffice to be spoken of all the several sorts and kinds of
Countermarches, they being the least useful of any part of the Art Military,
and of late not so much as practiced upon Service, either abroad, or at home,
very little in any of our Annual Exercises: Therefore in the next place I come
briefly to treat of Wheelings, being a Subject more profitable for the
intelligible Soldier.

CHAP. XVII. Of Wheelings, with their several Uses.
BEfore you begin to wheel, close both Ranks and Files to their Order.

Two things are to be observed in all Wheelings by the Soldier: 1. That they
keep their due Distance, which is in all Wheelings three Foot, both in Rank and
File. 2. That upon all Wheelings, you must be sure to observe your Leader, and
follow him, keeping your due Distance, your Musketeers being all either
shouldered or palmed, which is the Sentinel Posture; your Pikes to be either
shouldered or advanced, conformable to the Muskettier; for if he be palmed, the
Pike may be advanced, and then he is ready either for Port or Charge.

Entire Wheelings.
C. Wheel your Battle to the Right. Left. Right about. Left about.


Direction. The right or left hand Men in the Front are the Hinges of these
Motions, who with a small Motion move to the right or left; the rest, the more
their places are remote from the right or left Angle, the more swift must every
Man's Motion be to bring their Aspects unto the place commanded, following
their Leaders, and keeping their due Distance.

R. For Reducement, if you wheel your Battle to the right, wheel it again to
the left, and they are reduced, but not to the same Ground; if to the right
about, wheel to the left about; but if you would reduce them as well to the
first Ground, as their first Aspect, face them to the right, and then wheel
them to the left about; which being done, face them to the left, and they are
perfectly reduced as at first.

But the nearest Reducement of Aspect and Place is, If you wheel to the right
about, then wheel to the right about again; if to the left about, then to the
left about in like manner.

C. Wheel your Battle on the same Ground to the Right. Left. Right about. Left
about.


Direction. Left half Ranks move forwards, and wheel to the right; right half
Ranks contrariwise face to the left sideways, falling backward, moving still
unto the place commanded.

C. Wheel off your Front by Division.

Direction. File-Leaders of the right Flank wheel about to the right, the rest
of each File following their Leaders; File-Leaders of the left Flank wheel
about to the left in the same manner, and then close your Divisions.

C. Wheel the Battle off by Division from the Rear.

Direction. Face to the Rear, and turn off to the right and left.

C. Wheel the Battle inward to the Rear.

Direction. Open from the midst to convenient Distance, and turn off to the
right and left.

C. Wheel the Battle inward to the Front from the Rear.

Direction. Face to the Rear, open from the midst, and wheel inward to the
Front.

C. Wheel off the Body by Division from the right Flank.

Direction. Face to the right.

C. Wheel off the Body by Division from the left Flank.

Direction. Face to the left.

C. Wheel the Body inward to the left Flank from the right.

Direction. Face to the right, and open to convenient Distance outward, and
wheel inward to the left Flank.

C. Wheel the Body inward to the right Flank from the left.

Direction. Face to the left, and open outward to convenient Distance, then
wheel inward to the right Flank.

C. Wheel off your Front and Rear half Files by Division.

Direction. Half Files face about; Front and Rear half Files turn off by
Division.

C. Wheel your Front and Rear half Files inward to the midst of Ranks.

Direction. Half Files face about; Front and Rear half Files open outward to
convenient Distance; then wheel inward to the midst of Ranks.

C. Wheel off your Front and Rear half Files by Division from the midst of
Ranks.

Direction. Front half Files face about; Front and Rear half Files wheel off to
the right and left by Division.

C. Wheel Front and Rear half Files inward, both to Front and Rear from the
midst of Ranks.

Direction. Front half Files face about; Front and Rear half Files open from
the midst to convenient Distance, and wheel inward into Front and Rear.

C. Wheel off your right and left half Ranks by Division.

Direction. Face outward, and wheel off to the right and left by Division.

C. Wheel your right and left half Ranks inward to the midst of Files.

Direction. Face outward, and open to the right and left; then wheel inward to
the midst of Files.

C. Wheel off your right and left half Ranks by Division from the midst of
Files.

Direction. Face inward, then move backward to a convenient Distance, and so
wheel off by Division from the midst of Files.

C. Wheel your right and left half Ranks inward to both Flanks from the midst
of Files.

Direction. Face inward, and open to the right and left to a convenient
distance, and then wheel inward to both Flanks.

These are all the entire and divisional Wheelings that have hitherto been
practiced by any, there are other Wheelings which may properly be termed
Doublings, which I have placed amongst the Doublings, which is most proper.

As for the Reducement of every particular Wheeling, you may observe as before
in the Countermarches, so in these; for unto what hand soever they wheeled,
Command them to wheel to the contrary hand, and they will be reduced unto the
first Front; or what part is wheeled off by Division, wheel them inward again
from that place, and it will easily reduce them.

CHAP. XVIII. The second Days Exercise.
YOUR Soldiers being Commanded the second time into the Field, and the Body
drawn up into the ordinary Square, every Officer vigilant in his place, the
Captain may command Silence, with some other general terms of Observation, both
for the Leaders, and the Right hand Men; then to even their Ranks, and
streighten their Files; which being performed, he may proceed (as formerly) to
show the Distances, Facings, Doublings, Countermarches, and Wheelings,
instructing them in all, or so many of them as the time will permit, and he
thinks convenient.

In the next place, that which follows for this days Exercise are Firings,
which shall be performed five ways, that is to say, To the Front, to the Rear,
to the right or left Flank, Oblique or Angular, as shall be fully demonstrated.

So soon as the Drum beats a Preparative, the Musketeers are to begin to make
ready to perform all Firings as they shall be commanded.

CHAP. XIX. Several Firings to be performed with any number of Men upon all
occasions, either to the Front, or to the Rear, or to both Flanks, as follows.
THE Front being the most Honorable part, challenges Superiority; therefore
to begin your Firing, draw all your Shot before your Pikes; These are Firings
to gain ground.
when done, command 2 Ranks to advance ten Paces, make ready, Present, give
Fire, wheeling both off together, and falling in the Rear of themselves, the
rest doing the like, advancing into their Leaders ground. You may do the same
with two Ranks advancing ten Paces, or with one Rank advancing three Paces.

You may likewise Fire by Files, advancing what Paces you please; first,
single; then double; or ranking inward 1, 2, 3, or more at pleasure, falling
down into their places again.

Likewise you may fire by Ranks filing and advancing, moving down, and ranking
in the Rear of their own Divisions.

Fire by Divisions drawn off as many Paces as you think convenient, returning
again into their places.

To Fire by way of Introduction, thus:
The first Rank fires, and stands; the last Rank passes up between the Files,
and placing themselves before the File-Leaders, stand, and give Fire; the rest
doing the like, 'till they have all fired over.

To Fire by Introduction another way.
The first Rank stands, and fires; the next Rank moves up, and places
themselves before the first, then stands and Fires; the rest moving up, and
doing the like, until they have all fired twice.

Firings maintaining Ground.
The Musketeers continuing still before the Pikes, command the five first Ranks
to kneel, the last Rank make ready, Present, give Fire, standing fast, and
charging again; then command the fifth Rank to stand up, Present, and give
Fire, standing fast as before: Likewise the fourth to do the same, and so all
the rest, 'till they have all fired over. Then if your please, you may fire two
Ranks together; likewise four Ranks together, two kneeling, and two standing
upright, falling off. If you think fit, you may fire all six Ranks together,
two kneeling, two stooping, and two standing upright.

To maintain the same Ground still, you may fire them by single Ranks, falling
off to the right and left by Division, placing themselves in the Rear of the
Pikes.

This Firing is termed the Street-Firing.
Then you may Fire by Extraduction, which is, The first Rank passes from the
Rear upon the outside of the Pikes upon the right, until they have placed
themselves in a Rank before the Pikes, Note: The Pikes must be at Charge.
falling off to the left into the Rear, the rest successively doing the like,
until they have fired all over; which being done, you may face them to the
right and left outward; then facing them to the Front proper, you may cause
them to march up, and even the Front of Pikes. Next you may Fire by Ranks
ranking into the Front, or Files ranking into the Front, and filing or ranking
as they were. After you have fired them by Ranks, you may do the same by Files,
wheeling outward or inward into the Front, and filing again as they were. Then
you may fire by the outmost Files wheeling or ranking outward into the Front,
falling off likewise, being lead off by Bringers up, leading up next the Pikes;
this done twice, reduces.

The proper Firings to lose ground are these following.
Firings to lose ground.
The Musketeers being supposed to be all in the front, command the first Rank
to make ready, Present, give Fire, falling off to the right and left by
Division, each part falling Fileways down close by their Flanks of Musketeers,
until the Leaders of the Ranks of Musketeers have ranked even with the first
Rank of Pikes, observing always to leave an interval between the innermost
Files of Shot, and the outermost Files of Pikes: So soon as the first Rank has
given Fire, and wheeled away, the second Rank is to do the like, passing down
between the intervals on the Flanks, placing themselves after their Leaders.
The same is every Rank successively to do, until they have all fired over, and
flanked their Pikes.

The Musketeers being now all upon the Flanks, command the first Rank to make
ready, Present, and give Fire; after they have fired, command the first Rank,
both Muskets and Pikes, to Countermarch to the right, every Man turning on the
ground he stands; the second Rank is to give Fire as they stand, observing to
turn after their Leaders to the right hand on the ground they stand, placing
themselves behind their Bringers up, following their Leaders. If you please,
you may Fire even with the half Files, and fall in the Rear of themselves.

Thus much briefly of Firings to the Front.

Firings to the Rear.
The Rear challenges the next place, where suppose all the Musketeers to be in
the Rear of the Pikes, the Body marching; Fire, 1. To the right or left about,
which is thus performed: If the Enemy appear in the Rear, let the last Rank of
Musketeers face about, and give Fire, wheeling off by Division Fileways,
falling in the Front of their own Divisions. When the first Rank are giving of
Fire, the next Rank are to be in readiness, observing always that so soon as
the first Rank has fired, they immediately blow and open their Pans, stepping
forward with their right Feet, (a little inclining to that hand to which you
are to face about) advancing your left Feet, and to the Rear Present, giving
your Body a nimble turn, and so give Fire to the rest successively, doing the
same at three Motions.

Note: That in this Firing the Rear must be kept full, leaving a vacancy of one
Rank in the Front for the Rank that fired to place it self, still keeping along
with the Body; the Musketeers observing always to advance their right Legs,
and blow; advancing with the left, open their Pans; then turning upon the Ball
of their left Foot to the right about, cast their right Leg backward, and Fire:
This is the nimblest way for this Firing.

2. Fire, and fall off to the right and left, and rank with the first Rank of
Pikes into the Front.

3. Fire even with the Rear, and fall off before the Front of your own
Divisions.

4. Fire even in the Rear, or last Rank, falling off to the right and left with
a swift Motion, placing your selves 10 or 20 paces before the Front of Pikes
still facing to the Body, and making ready again whilst the Pikes make good the
Retreat, observing always to open to the right and left to give room for the
Pikes; then suddenly closing again, you may,

5. Fire, losing ground, falling off to the right and left about just before
the Front of Pikes, still facing to the Body as before, and making ready as
before, the Pikes still continuing the Charge.

6. Fire by Introduction to the Rear, until they come down even with the Rear,
and stand, making ready again.

7. Fire, by commanding the first Rank to Present, and give Fire, both
Musketeers and Pikes turning on the ground they stand (by way of Countermarch)
sleave down the intervals, placing themselves before the Front of their own
Divisions, the rest keeping their own ground; and after having given Fire
successively, turn down after their Leaders on the ground they stand on.

Lastly; If you are pursued eagerly, so that you cannot make a safe Retreat by
marching, face all about, and Fire by way of Extraduction: If you be hard
pressed upon by the Enemies Horse, command the Musketeers to double their
Pikes, and Fire, falling off to the right and left, placing themselves in the
Rear of their own Divisions. And thus much for Firings in the Rear.

In the next place, it will be convenient to show some Firings to the Flanks,
whereby the ingenious Commander may defend that part, if attakced by an Enemy,
either upon a March, or other ways.

Firings to the Flanks upon a March.
1. Fire to the right, File-Leaders leading up their Files next to the Pikes. 2.
Fire to the right, Bringers up Leading away next the Pikes, and their own
Division, which being twice done, reduces them. 3. Fire to the right, leading
up on the contrary Flank, either by the File-Leaders, or Bringers up. 4. Fire,
by facing to the right, and doubling the Pikes to the right, and so fall off to
the right and left by Division as before, the rest still moving up, and evening
the Front of Pikes. 5. Fire by Extraduction to the right, or by half Ranks
drawn forth, and falling Rank after Rank in the Rear of the Pikes: After to
reduce them, cause them to double their Front by Division, so they will be as
at first.
These Firings may be performed as well to both Flanks as to one, the Body
being faced accordingly; likewise to Front and Rear at the same time, or to
Front, Rear, and both Flanks, as shall be showed in their proper places: But
these already may be sufficient to explain the ordinary way of Firings, which
any ingenious Capacity may augment or alter according as time and place will
give leave. And so much for plain Firings to the Front, Rear, and both Flanks,
and likewise for the second day's Exercise.

CHAP. XX. The third Days Exercise.
HAving the third time brought your Soldiers into the Field (as formerly), it
will be very necessary in the first place that they be taught the Postures of
each Arms, either by the File-Leaders, or some other of the Officers, which
must be careful to see the same decently and neatly performed, and in a comely
manner, which is not only the Groundwork of all Exercise; but it is a means
whereby many are brought in to be true Lovers of Military Exercise, as being
well pleased with the sight thereof; which being performed, every File-Leader
ought to lead up his File, and to join into a Body, upon expectation of farther
Command from his Captain, who being at the Head of the Company, commands
Silence, the Officers being all at their several Posts, he may proceed to
instruct them in their several Distances and Facings; which being performed,
the next thing requisite will be to gratify the deserving Soldier, who
earnestly desires to understand his place of Dignity and Honor: To perform
which, the Captain Commands as follows.

CHAP. XXI. A Doubling to make every Man a File-Leader by Dignity.
C. HAlf Files, double your Front to the left.

Files, double to the right entire advancing, every Man placing himself before
his Leader.

This Doubling causes the Bringers up to become the File-Leaders, being second
Man in Dignity.

C. Front half Files, double your Rear to the left.

Double your Files to the left entire advancing, every Man placing himself
before his Leader.

This Doubling makes the half File-Leaders of the Rear half Files to become the
File-Leaders, being the third Man in Dignity.

C. Bringers up, double your Front to the right.

Files, double your Depth to the right, every Man falling behind his Bringer up.

This Doubling causes the Bringers up of the Front half Files to become the
File-Leaders, being the fourth in Dignity.

C. Half Files, double your Front to the right.

Files, double to the left entire advancing.

Files, to the right, double.

Files, to the right, double.

This Doubling causes the second Rank to become the File-Leaders, being the
fifth in Dignity.

C. Bringers up, double your Front to the left.

Files, double your Depth to the left, every Man falling behind his Bringer up.

This Doubling causes the Rank next before the Bringers up to become the
File-Leaders, and are the sixth and last in Dignity.

R. Ranks, to the left double.

Files, to the left double: And they are reduced.

The Soldiers being satisfied now they know each his place of Dignity, the
Captain may proceed to show these Doublings, or such other as the time will
permit, and he shall think convenient.

CHAP. XXII. Eighteen several Doublings, with their Reducements.
C. HAlf Files, double your Front to the left.

C. Double your Files to the right entire, advancing.

C. Front half Files, double your Rear to the right entire.

C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the left.

Direction. Face all to the right, and left half Ranks move forward, and double
your right Flank to the left: To your Leader.

C. Double your Ranks to the left entire.

C. Right half Ranks, double your left Flank entire, advancing.

C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank inward entire.

Direction. Half Files of the right half Ranks, face about; right half Ranks,
move clear of the standing part; face all to the right: Left half Ranks, move
forward into the right Flank; to your Leader.

C. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost entire
to the left Flank.

Direction. The three first, and the three last, face to the left; march clear
of the standing part; face inward; move, and close your Divisions; to your
Leader.

C. Right half Ranks, double your left Flank to the right.

Direction. Face all to the left, and right half Ranks move forwards, and
double your left Flank to the right; to your Leader.

C. Double your Ranks to the right entire.

C. Right half Ranks, double your left Flank inward entire.

C. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost Ranks
entire to the right Flank.

C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank entire, advancing.

C. Front half Files, double your Rear to the left entire.

C. Half Files, double your Front to the right.

C. Double your Files to the left entire, advancing, every Man placing himself
before his Leader.

C. Front half Files, double your Rear to the right, following your Leaders.

Direction. Half Files, face about; File-Leaders, turn off to the left, and
move down upon the right of the Rear, the rest following successively; to your
Leader.

C. Files, double your Depth to the left entire; and they are reduced, being
faced to their Leader.

CHAP. XXIII. Twelve several Countermarches, with their Reducements.
C. FIles to the right hand Countermarch, losing ground.

C. Ranks to the right hand Countermarch, losing ground.

Direction. Face all to the right.

C. Front and Rear half Files, interchange ground.

Direction. Front half Files, face about to the left.

C. Right and Left half Ranks, interchange ground.

Direction. Face inward.

C. File-Leaders, face about; the rest pass through to the right, and place
your selves behind your Leaders; face to the Front.

C. Countermarch your Front and Rear into the midst.

C. Countermarch your Flanks into the midst; face outward.

C. File-Leaders, and Half File-Leaders, stand; the rest pass through to the
right, and place your selves before your Leaders, and Half File-Leaders.

Direction. The second Rank from the Front, and from the Half File-Leaders, are
to begin the Motion.

C. The outmost File upon the right, and the second File from the left, stand;
the rest pass through to the right, and place your selves on the outside of
your right hand Men.

C. Files to the left hand Countermarch, losing ground.

C. Front and Rear half Files, Countermarch to the right.

Direction. Front and Rear half Files, turn off distinctly by your selves on
the ground you stand; face to your Leader.

C. Right and Left half Ranks, Countermarch to the right.

Direction. Face to the right; and right and left half Ranks turn off
distinctly to the right; face to your Leader, and they are reduced.

CHAP. XXIV. Twelve several Wheelings, with their Reducements.
C. Wheel your Rear half Files inward into the midst, and double the Front
inward entire.

Direction. Right and Left half Ranks, open from the midst to double Distance;
Rear half Files, face about, and wheel your Rear inward into the midst, moving
forward, doubling the Front inward entire.

C. Wheel off your Right half Ranks, and double your left Flank to the left
entire.

Direction. Face outward; Right half Ranks, wheel about to the right, and
double your left Flank to the left; to your Leader.

C. Right and Left half Ranks, double the length of your Battle by wheeling
outward into the Front.

Direction. Face outward, and Right half Ranks wheel to the left, and Left half
Ranks wheel to the right, and after, close Files into the midst to order.

C. Wheel off your Right half Ranks, and double your left Flank by Division.

Direction. Face outward; Right half Ranks, wheel about to the right and left
outward, moving forward, and doubling the left Flank to the right and left
outward.

C. Wheel your Left half Ranks inward into the right Flank.

Direction. Face outward, and open from the midst to double Distance; the Front
and Rear half Files, and after, the Left half Ranks may wheel inward, and
double the right Flank inward entire.

C. Wheel off your Rear half Files, and double your Front to the left entire;
half Files, face about.

C. Wheel your Right half Ranks into the midst, and double your left Flank
inward entire.

Direction. Face outward; and Front and Rear half Files that were, are to open
from the midst to double Distance; and Right half Files wheel inward, and move
forward into the left Flank.

C. Wheel off your Rear half Files, and double your Front to the right entire;
half Files, face about.

C. Wheel off your Left half Ranks, and double your right Flank by Division.

C. Wheel off your Front half Files, and double the Rear to the right entire;
half Files, face about.

C. Double the depth of the Battle, by wheeling Front and Rear into the midst
of each Division.

Direction. Front half Files, move forward four paces; then the last Rank of
each Division face about, and wheel into the midst of Front and Rear of each
Division; face to your Leader.

C. Wheel off your Front half Files, and double your Rear to the left entire;
half Files, face about.

C. Wheel your Battle off by Division from the Rear.

Direction. Face all about; and Right half Ranks wheel about to the right and
left outward to the Front, and closing Files into the midst to order, they will
be reduced as at first.

CHAP. XXV. Several Firings, with Figures of Battle for this days Exercise of
72 Men.
This Firing is a Firing by Files.
THE two outmost Files of Musketeers advance forward 'till clear of the
standing part; then rank inward to order, Present, and give Fire all together;
the next File marching up in the Rear of the first, and so ranking inward as
before, the rest successively doing the same. Observe the Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 1.


Having fired, they are to wheel off to the right and left, being led off by
their respective File-Leaders, placing themselves next the Pikes, the rest of
the Body moving to the right and left outward, to give room for them that have
fired to place themselves.

Command.

Musketeers, advance forward 'till you are six Foot clear of your stand of
Pikes; then face inward, and close your Divisions; to your Leader.

Half Files of Pikes, double your Front by Division.

The first Rank make ready, Present, and give Fire, wheeling off to the right
and left, placing your selves in the Rear of your own Divisions. Observe the
Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 2.


Command.

Reducement of the last Figure by way of firing, which is this: The first Rank
is to fire, and wheel off by Division, placing themselves even with the first
Rank of Pikes, the rest successively doing the like 'till they have all fired
over.

Note: That by this Figure they have all fired but the last Rank.

diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 3.


You may Fire a second way upon this Figure, that is, either by two Ranks, the
one kneeling, the other standing upright; or else by three Ranks, the one
kneeling, the other stooping, the third standing upright. After they have all
fired over, the Pikes may Charge, and then advancing their Pikes, Command the
Rear half Files of Pikes that doubled, to face to the right about; march, and
take your places; to your Leader; which brings me to the next Firing, which is,
Ranks advancing from the diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 4.
Ranks advancing from the Front of a standing Battalia.
Front, led up by two Sergeants, who are to fire either by single or double
Ranks, wheeling off to the right and left, placing themselves in the Rear of
their own Divisions, which will produce the next Figure of Ranks firing even
with the Front.

Command.

The first Rank of Musketeers advance with your right Feet, blow and open;
advance with your left Feet, and to the Front Present, give Fire, wheeling all
off to the right and left by Division, placing your selves in the Rear of your
own Divisions; the rest observing to do the like, always keeping an even Front.

diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 5. Ranks firing even with
the Front.


You may if you please fire two or three Ranks together, and if pressed upon,
the Pikes may Charge home, and Musketeers may give Fire even with the half
Files; if the Enemy give on so fast that they force a Retreat, then they are to
Fire upon the ground they stand, wheeling off as before; but if the Enemy give
ground, then you may proceed to give Fire upon the Horn Battle.

diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 6. Ranks firing even with
the Half Files.


The way to perform the Horn Battle is as follows.

Command. The Horn Battle.


Pikes, double your Ranks forward The Horn to the right, and open outward to
Battle. Order; stand.

Musketeers, March, until the Bringers up rank even with the Front.

diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 7.


There is several ways to Fire up this Figure; as, 1. By single Ranks: 2. By
two Ranks: 3. By three, falling in the Rear of their own Divisions: Or you may
fire by Files ranking inward, or wheeling into the Front, being led off by
their Bringers up on the inside of their own Divisions.

Note: If Files Rank inward into the Front, they may fall off to the right and
left by Division.

Command. A triple Firing to the Front.


Front half Files of Musketeers, double your Front of Pikes by Division.

Pikes, advance forward, and range even a Breast with the Rear half Files of
Musketeers.

Rear half Files of Musketeers, to the right and left outward; march six
paces; face all to your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 8.


To fire upon this Figure, cause both the Musketeers of the Front, and both
Flanks, to Present and give Fire together; the Musketeers of the Front
Division are to wheel off to the right and left between their intervals, and
place themselves even in Rank in the Rear of the Rear Divisions of Musketeers:
Then the Musketeers that fired in the Flank march directly down to the right
and left, and place themselves six foot below the last Rank of Pikes, always
observing to leave a sufficient place for the Front Division to place
themselves.

A second way of Firing will be to fire all three Ranks together, the first
kneeling, the second stooping, the third standing upright; then cause the Front
Division of Musketeers to face to the right and left outward, and march 'till
they have given the Pikes sufficient room to march; then cause the Ranks of
Pikes that doubled, to face to the left, and take their places; after, face to
their Leader, march up, and even their Front; Rear Divisions of Musketeers
face to the right and left inward, and close your Divisions, so they are
reduced as at first.

Wheel your Flanks by Division into the Front.

diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 9. The broad-fronted Battle.


As for firing upon this Figure, cause the first Rank to fire, then to march
down through the intervals to the right, and place themselves in the Rear of
their own Divisions, the rest successively performing the same.

For a second firing, they may fire, and fall off to the right or to the left
(as before), and place themselves in the Rear of the Pikes. The Pikes here may
Charge either at hand or foot, and the Musketeers may also fire over their
heads, if they Charge at foot; if at hand, the Musketeers may face either to
the right or left, and march up through the intervals, and place themselves
before each Division of Pikes, and so give fire, turning off to the contrary
hand, placing themselves in the Rear of their own Divisions.

To Reduce them, if it be upon the first firing, Command the Body to close
their Divisions, and wheel their Flanks into the Rear; then face to their
Leader.

But if you fire a second time, and Musketeers be in the Rear of the Pikes,
Command them by Division to double their Front entire, and then wheel both
Flanks into the Rear, as before.

Command.

Musketeers, march, 'till clear of the Body of Pikes.

Front half Files, face to the right and left inward, and close your Divisions;
to your Leader.

Rear half Files, open to the right and left.

Front half Files of Pikes, face to the right and left outward; march, and
flank your Wings of Shot; to your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 10.


For to Fire upon this Figure, Command the first Rank of Musketeers, both in
Front and Flanks, to Present altogether, and give Fire, falling off to the
right and left, placing themselves in the Rear of their own Divisions.

Command.

Half Ranks of the Rear Division of Pikes, wheel to the right and left outward;
march up, and flank your Front of Musketeers.

diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 11.


You may Fire upon this Figure to Front and both Flanks, or to Rear and both
Flanks, by commanding the Front Division, both of Musketeers and Pikes, to
face to the right about; march down, and even the Rear.

But to reduce this Figure as now it stands, Command the two Divisions of Pikes
in the Front to face to the right about; then wheel your Front into the midst,
and march down and take your places; to your Leader.

Front half Files of Musketeers, face to the right and left outward, and
march 'till you file even with your Rear half Files of Musketeers, then stand;
to your Leader.

Front half Files of Pikes, face to the right and left inward, and close your
Divisions; then move all up, and even the Front of Musketeers: So they are
reduced as at first.

Command.

Musketeers, march all, until your half Files range even with the Front of
Pikes.

Front half Files, march forward three paces, then stand.

Rear half Files of Musketeers, face to the right and left outward, and march
clear of the Front half Files.

Rear half Files of Pikes, open to the right and left outward, and march clear
of the Front Division of Pikes; to your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array Fig. 12.


For the first Firing, let all the Divisions of Musketeers fire by Ranks as
they stand, falling to the right and left outward into the Rear of their own
Divisions.

And for the second Firing, cause the four Divisions of Musketeers in the
Front and Flanks to make ready; then let the first Rank of each Division
Present, and give Fire, wheeling off to the right and left as you were, each
Division flanking their own half Files of Pikes; then Rear half Files of Pikes
face to the right and left inward, and march into your places; after, close
Files inward to order, and Ranks close forward to order, and they will be
reduced as at first.

So much shall suffice for the third days Exercise, and now we'll lodge our
Colors, until the bellowing Drum give a forth Summons into the Field.

CHAP. XXVI. The fourth Days Exercise.
HAving the fourth time brought your Soldiers into the Field completely Armed,
according to Bellona's Summons, and every Man in his place of Dignity, the
Captain may proceed in commanding the File-Leaders (which is the first place of
worth) to Exercise every one their File; which being performed, and every
File-Leader having brought up his File into its proper place, the Officers
being all there present, the Captain considers (after he has showed them their
Distances and Facings) which way farther to delight them, being the last
Exercise he showed them was a Doubling, which produced every Man a File-Leader
by Dignity; so in this he may go farther, in showing how by a Doubling every
Man becomes a File-Leader by succession. The words of Command are as follows.

C. Ranks, to the left double.

C. Files, to the left double.

C. Half Files, double your Front to the left.

C. Files, double your Depth to the left.

C. Bringers up, double your Front to the right.

C. Double your Files to the left entire, advancing.

C. Bringers up, double your Front to the left.

C. Double your Files to the right entire, advancing.

C. Ranks, to the right double.

C. Files, to the right double.

For Reducement.

C. Files, rank to the left into the Front.

C. Ranks, File fix to the left; and they are reduced.

The Commander, if he please, (and have time) may proceed farther in variety of
Doublings, either entire or divisional; but for this days Exercise, it will be
convenient that the Soldiers be showed some variety of Doublings by
Countermarches, which although they are something difficult, yet they will afford
much delight unto the Soldiers.

CHAP. XXVII. Several Doublings by Countermarches, with their Reducements.
C. BRingers up, double your Front to the left.

C. Double your Files to the left entire, advancing, every Man placing himself
before his Leader.

C. Front half Files, double your Rear to the right and left outward, following
your Leaders.

C. Double your Files outward entire, advancing, every Man placing himself
before his Leader.

C. Bringers up, double your Front to the right and left inward.

C. Double your Files inward entire, advancing, every Man placing himself
before his Leader.

C. Front half Files, double your Rear to the right and left inwards, following
your Leaders.

C. Files, double your Depth to the right and left outward, following your
Bringers up.

C. Double your Files to the right by Division, every Man placing himself
before his Leader, and his Bringer up.

Direction. Half Files of the even Files from the right, face about; even Files
advance forward, and double the odd; to your Leader.

C. The three first, and the three last, double the six middlemost Ranks to the
right and left inward, following your Leaders, and your Bringers up.

Direction. The three first, and the three last Ranks, are they that double,
and the File-Leaders, and Bringers up, begin the Motion; the rest following
according to Command, always conforming to the same Posture of those they are
to double, and then face to their Leader.

C. Double your Files to the left by Division, every Man placing himself before
his Leader, and his Bringer up.

Direction. The six middle Ranks double your Front and Rear to the right and
left outward, following the half File-Leaders, and the Bringers up of the Front
half Files: The three last Ranks of the Front and Rear half Files face about;
the middle Ranks are to begin this Motion, turning off to the right and left,
every Rank following them until they have doubled the Front and Rear; then face
all to the Front, and close their Divisions forward to open Order.

C. Double your Files inward by Division, every Man placing himself before his
Leader, and his Bringer up.

Direction. Half Files of the outmost Files face about, and move forward,
placing your selves before your Leaders, and your Bringers up; face to your
Leader.

C. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost Ranks
to the right and left outward, following your Leaders, and your Bringers up.

Direction. The three first, and the three last Ranks, march away to the right
and left, and double the six middlemost Ranks; to your Leader.

C. Front half Files, double your Rear to the right, following your Leaders.

C. Double your Files to the left entire, advancing, every Man placing himself
before his Leader.

C. Double your Ranks to the right entire, every Man placing himself on the
outside of his right hand Man.

C. Right half Ranks, double your left Flank, every Man placing himself on the
inside of his left hand Man.

C. Double your Ranks to the left entire, every Man placing himself on the
outside of his left hand Man.

C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank, every Man placing himself on the
inside of his right hand Man.

C. Double your Ranks to the right and left by Division, every Man placing
himself on the outside of his right and left hand Man.

Direction. Every even Rank from the Front move forth to the right and left
outward, and double the odd, placing your selves on the outside of your right
and left hand Man.

C. The outmost Files upon each Flank that moved, double the inmost Files to
the right and left inward, every Man placing himself on the inside of his right
and left hand Man.

C. Right half Ranks, double your left Flank to the right, following your right
hand Men.

Direction. Right half Ranks face outward, and turn off to the left, and double
the left Flank to the right; to your Leader.

C. Double your Ranks to the right entire, every Man placing himself on the
outside of his right hand Man.

C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the left, following your left
hand Men.

C. Double your Ranks to the left entire, every Man placing himself on the
outside of his left hand Man.

These or the like Doublings may be very proper to be used in Exercise
sometimes to the younger Soldier, which will not only delight him, but cause
him to understand the use of them, though perhaps many old Experienced Officers
will condemn these sort of Doublings, and say, that they are needless as to our
present Mode of Discipline: But because that Knowledge is no burden, and that
at some time or other they may be not only useful, but serviceable, I have here
inserted them to delight the young Soldier in his private Exercises.

Having reduced your Men as at first upon these Doublings by Countermarches, in
the next place it will be requisite to proceed to Firings, wherein shall be
showed several Figures of Battle, and the several ways of Firing upon each.

CHAP. XXVIII. Several Figures of Battle, with Firings upon the same, for this
days Exercise of 72 Men.
Command.

FRont half Files of Musketeers, and the two first Ranks of Pikes, march three
Foot.

The four last Ranks of Pikes wheel your Flanks into the Front by Division.

Face to the right and left, and march even in the Rear of the Front Division
of Musketeers.

Rear half Files of Musketeers, face to the right and left, and march clear of
the Division of Pikes; face to your Leader, and march up, and even the Flanks
of Pikes.

diagram of military formation or battle array

1. For the first Firing, let the Front Division fire, and fall off to the Rear
of themselves.

2. Command the Rear Divisions, both of Muskets and Pikes, to face to the right
and left, and march 'till clear of their Front Divisions; then face to their
Leader, and march up, and even the Front; and so Fire all four Divisions,
falling off to the right and left in the Rear of their own Divisions.

3. Command the three middle Divisions, both of Muskets and Pikes, to advance
forward six paces; then fire, and wheel into the Rear of Pikes, the Pikes
maintaining the Retreat 'till they fall even a Breast with the Rear Divisions
of Pikes; which so soon as they are fallen into the Body, the Rear Divisions of
Musketeers are to fire, and fall off as before, placing themselves in the Rear
of their own Divisions, which will produce this following form.

Note: That upon this Firing, the Front Divisions of Musketeers are to place
themselves in the Rear of the Rear Division of Pikes.

diagram of military formation or battle array

Reducement.

The middle Division of Pikes advance six Foot.

The two Divisions of Pikes that are upon the Flanks, face in opposition, and
close your Divisions; then wheel your Flanks inward into the Rear, and face to
your Leader.

Musketeers, march up, and Flank your Pikes; and they are reduced as at first.

Command.

Rear half Files of Pikes and Musketeers, to the right about.

Musketeers, march all, until your Bringers up be even in Breast with the
Front and Rear of Pikes; to your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For to Fire upon this Figure, 1. Cause the two Divisions, both in Front and
Rear, to make ready, and fire, falling off to the fight and left in the Rear of
their own Divisions.

2. Command the Rear Divisions to face to the Front, and march up even a Breast
with the Rear of Pikes; then let the Front Divisions Fire, and wheel off to the
right and left, and place themselves in the Rear of the Rear Divisions of Shot;
the Rear Divisions of Shot at the same time advancing into their Leaders
ground, and so give Fire, falling off as before, which will reduce them.

Next, if the Enemy appear in the Rear, cause the whole stand of Pikes to face
to the Rear, and likewise all the Shot; then command the two Rear Divisions to
fire, falling off to the right and left, placing themselves in the Front of the
Front Division of Musketeers, they at the same time marching down even with
the Rear, and firing, and falling off as before; which done, reduces them,
being faced to their Leader.

Command.

Rear half Files of Musketeers, to the right about.

The two outmost Files of both Front and Rear half Files, march, 'till clear of
your own half Files; then stand; which produces this following Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For the first Firing, let them Fire to Front and Rear, every Division falling
off to the right and left, placing themselves in the Rear of their own
Divisions.

For the second Firing, command the two outmost Files of Pikes to face to the
right and left, and march 'till they stand even a Breast with the inmost
Divisions of Musketeers.

Rear half Files of the two inmost Files of Pikes, face about; inmost Files of
Pikes, wheel your Flanks into the Front and Rear, and march up, and even the
four inmost Divisions of Musketeers; face all to the right about, and they
will stand as in the Figure following.

Upon this Figure you may Fire to the Front or Rear alone, or to both, as in
the other, or to the right or left Flank, or to both Flanks, or to all four at
once, as occasion offers, every Division falling off to the right and left,
placing themselves in the Rear of their own Divisions.

But if the Enemy give on upon the right Flank, you may face the whole Body to
the right, and cause the Divisions upon the right to Fire, falling off to the
right and left, falling in the Rear of the left Division, they at the same time
advancing into the right Flank, who are to fi^e, and so to return into their
places; you may do the same to the left Flank, or to Front and Rear, as
occasion shall be given. Observe the Figure, which is to both Flanks at once.

Note: The two outmost Divisions are to fire first, and to be relieved by the
two outmost of the left; then the two inmost Divisions are to fire, and to be
relieved by the two inmost Divisions of the left, who are to do the like, and
so to return into their places.

Note also, That in this Figure the half Files of the two outmost Files were
doubled to the right and left inward, before they faced, and begun their Motion.

diagram of military formation or battle array

Reducement.

Pikes, face to the right about; inmost Files of Pikes, wheel your Flanks into
the midst, and close forward to order.

The two outmost Files of Pikes face to your Leader.

Half Files of the two outmost Files of Pikes that doubled face to the Rear,
and march forth, and take your places; the two outmost Files advance, and even
the two inmost Files, and close Files into the midst to order.

The four inmost Divisions of Musketeers face to the right and left, and close
your Divisions.

The four outmost Divisions face in opposition, and close your Divisions; then
face them to their Leader, and close Files into the midst to order; and Ranks
close forward to order, and they will be reduced as at first.

Command.

Front half Files, advance forwards three paces.

The middle Rank of each Division face outward, and move clear of the standing
part; face to your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array

The first Firing.

Let the four first Divisions in the Front fire, and fall off to the right and
left into the Rear; the rest at the same time moving up, firing, and
interchanging Ground with them in the Rear, 'till they have all fired over, and
are in their places.

The second Firing.

Let them face to both the Flanks.

Divisions of Pikes in the midst open outward, until you be clear of the
standing part; then Port.

Musketeers, give fire on the same ground you stand on; then let the Pikes
Charge on until the Musketeers have made ready again, and then retreat into
their places: The Musketeers may give fire as before is mentioned, the Pikes
still in like manner Charging on; then retreating into their places, face all
to their Leader.

Command.

Rear Divisions of Pikes, both in Front and Rear Divisions, face to the right
about, and double your Depth to the right and left inward, advancing three
paces; to your Leader.

Divisions of Pikes, both in Front and Rear Divisions, double your Front to the
right and left inward, advancing three paces.

Or thus, as in the third Figure.

Command the inmost Divisions of Pikes to move to the left one pace, and double
to the right Fileways, and face to the Front and Rear, and march three paces;
middle Files of Front and Rear Divisions, open from the midst to double
Distance; face to your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array

The first Firing.

Face to the Front and Rear, and then give fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves.

The second Firing.

Inmost Division move forwards, and rank outward into Front and Rear, and then
give fire all together, and file as you were, the Pikes at the same time
charging whilst they still make ready; then whilst they fire they may fall into
their places, and so continue as often as the Commander pleases.

The third Firing.

Command the Musketeers, and the two outmost Divisions of Pikes, to face to
both Flanks.

The Front and Rear, and two middle Divisions of the inmost Division of Pikes,
face to the right; the four other Divisions face to the left; march and even
the two inmost Divisions of Shot to both Flanks; then give fire, falling off in
the Rear of their own Divisions; then let the Pikes face inward, and take their
places as they were, and face to their Leader. This is so plain it needs no
Figure.

Command.

The outmost Divisions of Musketeers in the Front Division face about.

The two outmost Divisions of Musketeers, both of Front and Rear Divisions,
move forward, and close to Order; to your Leader, and close inward to open
Order.

diagram of military formation or battle array diagram of military formation or
battle array

For the first Firing upon the two foregoing Figures, let the Front Division of
Musketeers advance, and even the Front of Pikes; then give fire, and fall off
to the right and left, placing themselves in the Rear of the Rear Division of
Musketeers; the rest of the Divisions at the same time moving up into their
Leaders ground, and firing, falling off as before, 'till they are all reduced
into their places as at first.

A second Firing may be to both Flanks, or to Front and Rear at the same time.

Command.

Front and Rear Divisions of Pikes, move to the right one pace.

The second Division of Pikes from the Rear, face to the right about.

The second Divisions of Pikes, both in Front and Rear Divisions, move forward,
and double both Front and Rear to the left; to your Leader.

Middle Divisions of Musketeers, open outward to twice double Distance; face
all to the Center, and march three paces; to your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For the first Firing, the four last Divisions face to the Rear.

The two outmost Divisions, both of Muskets and Pikes, face to both Flanks;
likewise the four Divisions in the Front face to both Flanks; then give Fire,
falling off to the right and left in the Rear of their own Divisions.

For the second Firing, command the Front and Rear Divisions of Pikes to wheel
their Flanks into the Front and Rear.

The Rear Divisions, both of Musketeers and Pikes, face to the right about;
then give fire to both Front and Rear, the Front Division falling off in the
Rear of the second Division, the second at the same time moving up into their
Leaders ground, and so firing, falling off as before, the Rear at the same time
doing the like; after, command the Pikes to wheel their Front and Rear into
both Flanks, and face all to their Leader.

For the third Firing, let them give fire by Extraduction, and fall in the Rear
of the Pikes.

For the fourth Firing, let the Pikes charge to the Horse, and the Musketeers
give fire all together over their heads; then move forth into their first
places, and face to their Leader.

Command.

Front and Rear Divisions of Musketeers, open outward to double Distance.

The outmost Divisions of Pikes close inward to open Order.

The second Division of Pikes from the Front face about.

The third Division of Pikes from the Front, and the second Division of Pikes
from the Rear, move forwards to order; face to your Leader.

Front and Rear Divisions stand, the rest face outward, and move two paces; to
your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For the Firings, let the first be to the Front, by commanding the two first
Divisions in the Front to fire, falling off to the right and left into the Rear
of the Rear Divisions, they at the same time moving up into their File-Leaders
ground; after the second Divisions have fired, the two outmost are to fire, and
are to be relieved by the two outmost in the Rear: This firing is to be
continued 'till they have all fired over, and are returned into their places.

For the second Firing, let them fire on the ground they stand, both to Front
and Rear, every Division falling off in the Rear of themselves.

For the third Firing, face the Musketeers and Pikes to both Flanks; then
cause them to give fire unto both Flanks as they stand, falling in the Rear of
their own Divisions, the Pikes at the same time charging; which being ended,
face them to their Leader, and proceed.

Command.

The two Divisions of Pikes in the Front, wheel your left Flanks into the midst
of the Battle; face to your Leader.

The two Divisions of Pikes in the Rear wheel your right Flanks into the midst,
and face to your Rear; then let the Front and Rear Division of Pikes move three
paces, then face to their Leader.

Middle Divisions of Pikes face outward, and move three paces; then face to
Front and Rear; then move forward, until you range even a Breast with the midst
of the Front and Rear Divisions of Pikes; to your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array

Command.

Middle Division of Pikes next the Rear, face to the right about.

Middle Divisions of Pikes move forward six paces; to your Leader.

Divisions of Musketeers face to the right and left, and move three paces; to
your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For the first Firing, command the Musketeers to face to Front and Rear, and
so give fire and fall in between the Pikes, the Pikes at the same time making
room for the Musketeers to fall in betwixt them, the Pikes all the while
charging, 'till the Musketeers have made ready again.

For the second Firing, let them face to both the Flanks, and give fire,
falling into their places in the Rear of their own Divisions; after, face to
their Leader.

By these Firings already set down, any ingenious Commander may alter and form
many others, which may be more pleasing, and more advantageous, than can be
expressed in Writing, by reason of several Accidents which may fall out at the
time of forming any Figure of Battle; so that I shall leave every one to his
own best Experience and Practice, and so proceed to reduce the former Figure
into its proper Square.

Reducement.

Command the outmost Divisions of Musketeers upon the Flanks to face to Front
and Rear, and move forward, and place your selves in the midst of your own
Divisions.

The outmost Divisions of Pikes face to the right and left inward, and close
your Divisions.

Musketeers and Pikes advance forwards, and even your Front of Pikes, and
close Ranks forward to order; and Files into the midst to order, and they will
be reduced as at first.

And now it will be high time to lodge our Colors, and repose our selves,
until by the Beat of the Drum we shall be commanded into the Field. And so much
for the fourth days Exercise.

CHAP. XXIX. The fifth Days Exercise.
HAving the fifth time brought your Soldiers unto the place of Rendezvous, and
all Officers at their respective Commands, it will not be amiss to cause the
Soldiers to be instructed (in the first place) in the Postures of the Pike and
Musket, which will cause the Soldiers, by often practice of their Postures, to
grow so perfect, that they will not only manage their Arms with ease and
safety, but with a great deal of celerity; when on the contrary, the
unpractised Soldier will not only be a trouble to himself, but a danger to his
Fellows, and an encouragement to his Enemies.

After the Postures, the next thing that they are to be instructed in, is the
several Distances, and these are truly the ground of all Motion, for without
Distance the Motions cannot be executed: So that this, as well as the former,
should truly be observed in all Exercises, therefore we will proceed as
follows.

The Company standing in their Close Order, both in Ranks and Files, then first,

Command.

Ranks, open backward to Order.

Files, open to the right to your open Order.

Ranks, open backward to open Order.

Files, open to the left to open Order.

Ranks, open backward to double Distance.

Files, open outward to double Distance.

Ranks, close forward to open Order.

Files, close inward to open Order.

Ranks, close forward to your Order.

Files, close to the left to your Order.

These Commands being sufficient to declare each several Distance, we will
gradually proceed to the rest of the Command intended for this days Exercise.

Command. Note: The same Command may be given to the left.


Face to the Right Right Right Right Right about Left about


As you were.

Command.

Face to the Front and Rear Face to the Right and left outward Face to the
Right and left inward


As you were.

Ranks and Files being at open Order,

Command.

Ranks, to the right double.

Files, to the left double.

Ranks, to the left double.

Files, to the right double.

Half Files, double your Front to the right.

Files, double your Depth to the left.

Half Files, double your Front to the left.

Files, double your Depth to the right.

Bringers up, double your Front to the left.

Files, double your Depth to the right, every Man placing himself behind his
Bringer up.

Bringers up, double your Front to the right.

Files, double your Depth to the left, every Man falling behind his Bringer up.

Double your Ranks to the right or left entire.

Right half Ranks, double your left or right Flank.

Half Files, double your Front to the left entire.

Left half Ranks, double entire the depth of the right half Ranks.

Half Files, double your Front to the right entire.

Right half Ranks, double entire the depth of the left half Ranks.

Files, to the right hand Countermarch, and maintain ground.

Files, to the left hand Countermarch, and maintain ground.

The same may be done in Ranks and Files, either maintaining, gaining, or
losing Ground, as has been showed.

Wheel your Battle to the Right. Left. Right about. Left about.


Files, file to the right.

Files, file six to the left.

Files, file to the left.

Files, file six to the right.

Ranks, file to the right and left.

Files, rank as you were.

CHAP. XXX. Several Figures of Battle, with Firings upon the same: For
performance whereof,
Command.

FIles, to the right and left double inward.

The three first Ranks wheel your Front into the midst.

The three last Ranks wheel your Rear into the midst.

The rest of the Body face to the right and left, then march all; face all to
the right about, and march, and close your Divisions.

Note: You may by doubling Files to the right in each Division, make the Cross
Battle.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For the first Firing, let them give fire either to Front or Rear, or to both
Flanks, falling in the Rear of their own Divisions.

For the second Firing, let them fire to all four at once, falling off to the
right and left, placing themselves in the Rear of their own Division of Pikes,
the Pikes at the same time charging to the Horse.

For the third Firing, they may fire by way of Introduction, thus: Every Rank
of Musketeers is to pass through their Division of Pikes, placing themselves
before the Pikes; then stand, present, and give fire, the next moving up as
before, which will reduce them.

Note, That this last Firing must be performed with the last Rank first, and so
the next to the last, so that the first Rank must be last in this Firing.

Command.

The first Rank of Musketeers, both in Front, Rear, and both Flanks, face to
the right, and move two paces.

The next Rank of Musketeers of each Division face to the left, and move
likewise two paces; then wheel to the right and left outward Oblique before
each Division of Pikes, as in the following Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For firing upon this Figure, the Musketeers being faced all outward, are to
stand, and present, and fire all together in one Volley; or if you would have
the Musketeers give fire one after another, then the Vollies by succession
(which is commonly called The Peal) will be best beginning at the right hand of
the Front, and so taking it round from one another 'till they have fired over,
the rest in the interim making ready again.

Reducement.

1. Cause all the Ranks of Musketeers to face to the right and left inward,
and take their places, the left hand Ranks being the first beginners of the
Motion.

2. Command the Front and Rear Divisions to wheel Front and Rear inwards into
both Flanks, and face to their Leader.

3. Divisions on the right and left Flank face inwards, and close your
Divisions; after, cause Ranks to double to the right and left outward; Files
closing inwards to order, and and Ranks closing forward to order, and they will
be reduced as at first.

Command.

Half Files of Pikes face to the Rear, and march, until you are clear of the
last Rank of Musketeers.

Half Files of Musketeers face outward, and wheel your Rear to the right and
left by Division, and march between the Division of Pikes.

Left half Ranks of the first Division of Musketeers face to the Rear, and
march between the Rear Divisions of Pikes; then even your Ranks, and streighten
your Files, and close your Divisions to an equal distance, and face all to the
right about, they will stand as in the Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array

Note: That all the Musketeers must be in the midst, and the Pikes on the
Flanks, when you begin to make this Figure; if your Muskets be on the Flanks
when you make it, then the Cross will be Pikes, and the Angles Muskets, and
your Command must be contrary; as now you Command Half Files of Pikes, in this
you must Command Half Files of Musketeers to face to the Rear, as aforesaid.

The manner of Firing upon the aforesaid Figure may easily be apprehended;
every Division is to fire by Ranks, wheeling all off to the right, placing
themselves in the Rear of their own Division.

For the second Firing, if your Rear be secure, you may reserve the Front half
Files entire, and so fire either to Front alone, or to Front and both Flanks,
or to each at pleasure.

For a third Firing, if your Musketeers be in the Angles, (which will be very
advantageous) you may then give fire which way soever the Enemy approaches,
each Division being ready to assist the other.

Command. Reducement of the Plinthium into the Solid Square flanked with Pikes.


Rear Division of Musketeers face about; march up on the left of your own
Division of Musketeers in Front, the Pikes being first opened to give them
place.

Divisions of Musketeers upon each Flank face inwards, and close your
Divisions by wheeling into the midst; face to your Leader.

Rear Divisions of Pikes face about; march up, and place your selves right
after your Leaders.

Rear Division, or Rear half Files, of Musketeers, face to the Rear.

Musketeers, march all, 'till clear of your Pikes; then face to your Leader,
and close your Divisions, which produces this Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For the first Firing, let them fire to the Front, every Rank of the Front
Division after they have fired, to fall off to the right and left into the Rear
of the Rear Division of Musketeers; the rest advancing into their Leaders
ground, and so firing and falling off as before, the Rear Division at the same
time moving up into the Front, and fire, falling off into their places.

For the second Firing, if your Rear be secure, Command the Rear Division of
Musketeers to open to the right and left, and sleeve upon the outside of the
Pikes into the Front; then presenting and firing at the same instant with those
Musketeers of the Front Division, each part wheeling off, and placing
themselves in the Rear of their own Divisions, the rest moving forwards into
their Leaders ground; or the two outmost Divisions may fall off to the right
and left into the Rear: You may likewise fire to both Front and Rear at
discretion, or to both Flanks, as the discreet Commander shall think fit.

But the firing to both Flanks at this present time shall be a Reducement, by
commanding the Musketeers, both in Front and Rear, to face outward; Pikes,
face inwards; march, and close your Divisions; which being performed, they will
be reduced to their proper Square flanked with Musketeers, as at first.

Command.

Half Ranks of the left, double your right Flank.

diagram of military formation or battle array Front Proper. Front of the Rear.
Front of the right Flank. Front of the left Flank.




You may fire upon this Figure to Front and Rear, by commanding the two last
Ranks of the Division of Musketeers upon the right Flank, to wheel to the
right and left into Front and Rear.

For a second Firing, let them fire as now they stand, either to the right or
left Flank, or to both at once, as occasion shall serve, falling of in the Rear
of their own Divisions.

Reducement.

Command Half Ranks that doubled to face to the left; march, and take your
places; to your Leader.

Command.

Half Files of Musketeers, face to the Rear; Musketeers, march to the Angles
of your Pikes.

The two first, and two last Ranks of Pikes, stand, and double Files to the
right.

The rest face to the right and left, and march, 'till clear of the other Pikes.

Note: If you Command the two last Ranks of the Front and Rear Division of
Pikes to wheel to the right, the other to the left, the Cross will be equal in
Pikes.

diagram of military formation or battle array

Reducement.

After the two last Ranks have wheeled into their places, and the Front and
Rear Divisions have doubled to the left, they will stand as in the following
Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array

Note: These two foregoing Figures are both as one, only the two first and two
last Ranks are not doubled to the right, according to the word of Command.

For Firing upon these two foregoing Figures, you may produce several, with
some little alteration, either to Front or Rear alone, or to either Flank, or
to both Front and Rear at the same time, by commanding the one half, both of
Muskets and Pikes, to face to the right about, and so give fire; these of the
right Flank to wheel off to the right, the left Flank to the left, in the Rear
of their own Divisions; the rest moving up into their Leaders ground.

Reducement.

Face them all after their proper File-Leaders; then cause the Pikes to face in
opposition, and close their Divisions.

Musketeers of the Front Division, face to the right about.

Musketeers, both of Front and Rear, close your Divisions; face all to your
Leader.

Command.

The two outmost Files of Musketeers march forth, being led by four Officers,
two of which are to return into their places; the Sergeants that led forth the
outmost Files, are to stand to see them do their Execution; the two inmost
Files face inwards Oblique, cross the Front of Pikes; the outmost Files face
outward in an Oblique manner; then to your Leader. Observe the Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For to fire upon this Figure, let the Musketeers present all together, as now
they stand, and give fire; and then suddenly facing after their Bringers up,
march down into their places; then next two Files of each Flank in the interim
moving forwards into their Leaders ground, and so fire, and fall off as before,
which reduces them.

Command.

Musketeers, march, until your half Files range even with the Front of Pikes;
then stand.

Half Files (of each Arms) face outward, and march until you are clear of the
Angles of your Arms; then stand; face all to your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array

This Figure fit to fire to the Front and both Flanks; if to the Front, and
that you would preserve your Figure, then the Musketeers must move forwards
into their Leaders ground.

If you please, you may move forwards your Rear Division of Musketeers, and
make Wings of them, when having fired once or twice over, may retreat into
their places; the Pikes in the mean time are to Advance, Move forwards, Port,
Charge, Stand, or Retreat.

If you would give fire to both Flanks, and to the Front, at one and the same
time, then the Front Divisions, both Musketeers and Pikes, are to stand, and
fire to the Front, falling off to the right and left in the Rear of their own
Divisions, the rest moving up into their Leaders ground; the Rear Divisions, as
well Muskets as Pikes, face to the right and left, and fire to both Flanks,
falling off as before, the rest moving up into their Leaders ground.

Reducement.

Command the Rear half Files, both of Muskets and Pikes, to face inwards, and
close their Divisions.

Pikes, march up, and even your Front of Musketeers; face to your Leader, and
they will be reduced.

Command.

Files, to the right double; then wheel your Flanks into the Rear; then face
the Body to one of the Flanks, and wheel your Battle into a Unequal Half Moon.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For to fire upon this Figure as now they stand, let the Pikes Charge
over-hand, and the Musketeers give fire as they stand, presenting all to the
Front.

For a second Firing, if the Enemy press upon either of the Flanks or Rear, you
may cause the whole Body to face outward, and then let the Musketeers give
fire, falling off to the right and left through their intervals, placing
themselves in the Rear of their Pikes, the Pikes at the same time charging
over-hand.

Command.

Wheel your Flanks to the right and left into an even Front, then face to your
Leader; which being performed, they will stand three deep in File; then Command
Files to file to the right into a Ring, being led away by some Officer, until
the File-Leader of the right Flank falling just in the Rear of the Bringer up
of the left Flank; then face them all to the Center, and let them close
forwards to order; then face them to the right about, as in the following
Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For to fire upon this Figure, command the Pikes to charge round, and the
Musketeers give fire all together; then let the Commander go to the place
where the File-Leader of the right Flank filed first away, and command them to
file as they were; which being performed, they will stand three deep, the Pikes
being all in Front, and thereupon become the File-Leaders.

Next, command the Rear to wheel into both Flanks, and Ranks to double to the
left, and they will be reduced.

Command.

Wheel your Front into the midst: By this Command the Pikes will be all in the
Rear, and the Musketeers in Front, and they will stand six deep.

Then command Files to file to the right into a Ring, by causing the
File-Leader of the right Flank to march away, the rest filing after him 'till
they make one entire File, and close in a Ring. Observe the Figure following.

diagram of military formation or battle array

Fire upon this Figure, if you please, as now they stand, the Pikes at the same
time porting: This may be continued so long as you think fit, round.

For a second Firing, you may cause every Division of Musketeers to give fire,
then fall down even with their Front of Pikes, and so fire again, the Pikes at
the same time charging over-hand to the Horse; or they may fall behind the
Pikes, and then give fire over their shoulders.

Reducement.

Command File-Leaders to lead up their Files as they were, and then to wheel
their Rear into the midst, and face to their Leader, and they will be reduced
as at first.

Command.

Musketeers of the left Flank, and the whole, stand off; Pikes, face to the
right and left inwards, and interchange ground, which being done, the
Musketeers will be all upon the right Flank; then cause each Division, both
Pikes and Muskets, to file to the right, the Pikes within the Muskets at the
same time making two Rings, as in the following Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For to fire upon this Figure, command both Muskets and Pikes to face to the
right about; then let the Musketeers all present as they stand, (the Pikes at
the same time charging) and give fire; then let them make ready a second time,
and give fire, falling off between the intervals of their Pikes, placing
themselves behind their Pikes; the Pikes falling to their close Order, by
putting the But end of the Pike at the inside of the right Foot, the Pike in
the left hand, drawing their Swords over their left Arms. Then the Musketeers
(the Pikemen stooping) may give fire over their heads as often as the Commander
pleases; after, they may pass through again into their places: After which, the
Ensign, in sign of Triumph, may Display his Colors in the midst of the Circle;
which being performed, command the File-Leaders to lead up their Files as they
were; then let the Pikes and Muskets interchange ground, and they will be
reduced as at first.

And herewith we will conclude this days Exercise, and leave our Soldiers to
their Rests, until the morrow's Sun, and the thundering Drum shall call us into
the Field again.

CHAP. XXXI. The sixth Days Exercise.
HAving the sixth time brought your Soldiers into the Field, according to the
accustomed manner; and being (doubtless) well experienced by their former
Exercises, in the well managing and handling of their Arms, and likewise in all
other Commands, as Distances, Facings, Doublings, Countermarches, and
Wheelings, which will not only encourage the Commander, but much delight him,
to see that they are not unmindful of his Commands; and likewise will cause him
to study some new Commands farther to delight them with; so after he has seen
them perform all, or most of his former Commands, such as he shall think fit,
he may proceed to these or the like Doublings; as, 1. To make them all
File-Leaders by Succession: 2. By Dignity; with such words of Command as they
have not yet had in any of their former Exercises.

Command. Note: That these Commands make every Man File-Leader by Succession.


Ranks, to the left double.

Files, to the left double. 2 d Man.

Half Files, double your Front to the right.

Files, to the right double. 3 d Man.

File-Leaders, stand; the rest pass through to the right, and place your selves
before your Leaders. 4 th Man.

Ranks, to the left double. 5 th Man.

Files, double your Depth to the left.

Ranks Files
to the right double. 6 th Man.

File-Leaders, stand; the rest pass through, and place your selves before your
Leaders. 1 st Man.

Command. These Commands make every Man File-Leader by Dignity.


Bringers up, double your Front to the right.

Files, double your Depth to the right. 2 d Man.

File-Leaders, and Half File-Leaders, stand; the rest pass through to the left,
and place your selves before your Leaders. 3 d Man.

Front and Rear half Files, interchange ground. 4 th Man.

Ranks to the right double. 5 th Man.

Files to the right double. 5 th Man.

File-Leaders, stand; the rest pass through to the left, and place your selves
before your Leaders. 6 th Man.

Ranks to the left double. 1 st Man.

Files to the left double. 1 st Man.

Half Files, double your Front to the right.

Bringers up, face about to the right, and march forth into your places.

After you have ended these Doublings, you may proceed farther with these or
the like sort, for the ingenious Commander may find out variety still to
delight the Soldier; but for this days Exercise, we will proceed with these
ensuing Commands.

Command.

Rear half Files, double your Front by Division.

The six outmost Files upon each Flank, double entire, advancing the twelve
middle Files.

Front half Files, double your Rear inward entire.

The twelve inmost Files double the depth of the six outmost Files, and after,
close.

Front half Files, double your Rear to the right entire.

Left half Ranks, double your right Flank entire, advancing.

Half Files, double your Front to the right.

Double your Files to the right entire, advancing.

Half Files, double your Front inward entire.

The six outmost Files upon each Flank, double entire the depth of the twelve
middle Files; to your Leader.

CHAP. XXXII. Entire Doublings to the right Flank.
C. FIles, to the right double.

R. Ranks, to the left double.

C. Files, to the right and left, double outward.

R. Ranks, to the right and left, double inward.

C. Double your Files to the right, advancing.

Direction. Every even File from the right move forwards, and by three steps
double the odd.

R. Ranks, to the right double.

C. Double your Files outward, advancing.

Direction. Even Files from the Flanks move forward, and double the odd.

R. Ranks, to the right and left, double outward.

C. Double your Files to the right and left inward, advancing.

Direction. Even Files from the midst move forward, and by three steps double
the odd.

R. Ranks, to the right and left, double inward.

C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the right.

R. Double your Ranks to the left entire.

C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the right and left outward.

R. Front and Rear half Files, double your Ranks entire to the left Flank.

Direction. Even Ranks from the midst march forth, and double Ranks entire
toward the left Flank; to your Leader.

C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the right and left inward.

R. Front and Rear half Files, double your Ranks entire to the left Flank.

Direction. Half Files, face about; even Ranks from the Front and Rear march
forth, and double your Ranks entire to the left Flank; face to your Leader.

C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the right by Countermarch.

Direction. Right half Ranks, face to the right; Left half Ranks, turn off to
the left; march, and double your right Flank; to your Leader.

R. Double your Ranks to the left entire, every Man placing himself on the
outside of his left hand Man.

C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the right and left outward by
Countermarch.

Direction. Right half Ranks, face to the right; Left half Ranks, face to the
left, and turn off to the right and left outward; march, and double your right
Flank; to your Leader.

R. Front and Rear half Files, double your Ranks entire to the left Flank,
every Man placing himself on the outside of his right and left hand Man.

Direction. Front half Files, face about; and every even Rank from the midst
march, and double the odd, placing your selves according to Command; and every
even Rank of the Rear half Files march forth to the left Flank, and double the
odd according to Command; to your Leader.

C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank to the right and left inward by
Countermarch.

Direction. Face all to the right and left outward; Left half Ranks, turn off
to the right and left inwards; march, and double the right Flank; to your
Leader.

R. Front and Rear half Files, double your Ranks entire to the left Flank,
every Man placing himself on the outside of his right and left hand Man.

Direction. Half Files, face about; then even Ranks, both from the Front and
Rear, march forth to the left Flank, and double the odd according to Command;
to your Leader.

C. Double your Files to the right entire, advancing.

R. Half Files, double your Front to the right.

C. Files, double your Depth to the right entire.

R. Half Files, double your Front to the left.

C. Double your Files inward entire to the right.

Direction. Half Files of every even File from the left, face about; even Files
from the left, march, until you are clear of the standing part; after, face all
to the right, and then even Files from the right march, and double entire the
odd; face to your Leader.

R. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost Ranks
to the right.

Direction. The three first Ranks face about, and move down to the midst by
their own left hands; and the three last Ranks move forward to the midst, to
their own right hands; to your Leader.

C. Double your Files to the right entire, advancing, every Man placing himself
before his Leader.

R. Front half Files by Countermarch, double your Rear to the right; to your
Leader.

C. Files, double your Depth to the right, every Man falling behind his Bringer
up.

R. Bringers up, double your Front to the left.

C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank entire, advancing.

R. Front half Files, double your Rear to the right entire; face to your Leader.

C. Left half Ranks, double entire the depth of the right Flank.

R. Half Files, double your Front to the left entire; face to your Leader.

C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank inward entire.

R. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost Ranks
entire to the right Flank; face to your Leader.

CHAP. XXXIII. Divisional Doublings to the right Flank.
C. DOuble your Files to the right by Division.

Direction. Half Files of the even Files from the right, face to the Rear; even
Files, march clear of the standing part; after, move to the right and left, and
double the odd Files; to your Leader.

R. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost Ranks
to the left.

Direction. The three first Ranks face about; march down by your own right
hands into the midst of Ranks; the three last Ranks move forward to the midst
to your own left hands; to your Leader.

C. Double your Files to the right by Division, every Man placing himself
before his Leader, and his Bringer up.

Direction. Half Files of the even Files from the right, face to the Rear; the
even Files march, and double the odd according to Command; to your Leader.

R. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost Ranks
to the left, every Man placing himself before his Leader, and his Bringer up.

Direction. The three first Ranks face about to the left; move down to the
midst of Ranks by your own right hands, placing your selves before your
Bringers up; and the three last Ranks march forward into the midst, placing
your selves before your Leaders; to your Leader.

C. Left half Ranks, double your right Flank by Division.

Direction. Half Files of the left half Ranks face about to the right; the left
half Ranks move clear of the standing part; face all to the right Flank, and
march, until they have ranged even a Breast with the right Flank; face to your
Leader.

R. The three first, and the three last Ranks, double the six middlemost Ranks
entire to the left Flank.

Direction. The three first, and the three last Ranks, face to the left Flank,
and move clear of the standing part; after, face inward; march, and close your
Divisions; to your Leader.

CHAP. XXXIV. Entire Doublings to the right Flank by Wheelings.
C. Wheel off your left half Ranks, and double your right Flank entire to the
right.

Direction. Face outward; left half Ranks, wheel about to the left; march,
until you have doubled the right Flank entire to the right; face to your Leader.

R. Wheel off your Rear half Files, and double your Front to the left entire.

Direction. Half Files, face to the Rear, and wheel about to the right; march
forward, until you range even a Breast with the Front.

C. Wheel off your Left half Ranks, and double your right Flank entire to the
left.

Direction. Left half Ranks, face outward; wheel about to the right; march,
until you have doubled the right Flank entire to the left; face to your Leader.

R. Wheel off your Front half Files, and double your Rear to the right entire.

Direction. Half Files, face about; Front half Files, wheel about to the left;
march, and double your Rear to the right; face to your Leader.

C. Wheel the Left half Ranks inward into the midst, and double your right
Flank inward entire.

Direction. Half Files of the right half Ranks, face about; Right half Ranks,
march clear of the standing part, then face to the right, and Left half Ranks
face to the left, and wheel inward into the midst; then march, 'till you have
doubled the right Flank inward entire; face to your Leader.

R. Wheel off the six middlemost Ranks, and double your Front and Rear entire
to the left Flank.

Direction. The six middle Ranks face to the right, and wheel about to the
right and left; march, until you are clear of the standing part; then face to
the Front and Rear, and march, doubling the Front and Rear toward the left
Flank; face to your Leader, and close your Divisions.

CHAP. XXXV. Divisional Doublings to the right Flank by Wheelings.
C. Wheel off your Left half Ranks, and double your right Flank by Division.

Direction. Face outward; and Left half Ranks wheel off to the right and left
about, and march, until you have doubled the right Flank; to your Leader.

R. Wheel off the three first, and the three last Ranks, and double the six
middlemost Ranks entire to the left Flank.

Direction. The three last Ranks face about, and wheel to the right about;
march up toward the midst of the left Flank, the three first Ranks at the same
time wheeling about to the left, moving down to the midst of the left Flank; to
your Leader.

C. Wheel off your Front and Rear half Files into the right Flank by Division.

Direction. Face all to the right, and wheel off to the right and left, until
the Bringer up of the right hand File meet with the right hand File-Leader.

R. Wheel Front and Rear into the left Flank; face to your Leader. Note: Upon
this Command they must be all faced to their proper Front before the Motion.


Thus I take leave of all Doublings, leaving the ingenious to make use of so
many as may fit the opportunity, both of Time and Season, and so proceed to
Firings and Figures of Battle: The Ranks being even'd, and the Files
streighten'd, the Captain commands, the Drum beats, and the Musketeers make
ready for Skirmish, upon these Figures following.

CHAP. XXXVI. Figures of Battle, with Firings upon the same, for this sixth
days Exercise.
Command.

FIles, to the right and left, double inward.

The three first Ranks wheel your Front into the midst.

The three last Ranks wheel your Rear into the midst.

The rest of the Body face to the right and left, and march all three paces;
and after, double Files to the right in each Division, and they will stand as
in this following Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array The Cross Battle.


For the first Firing, let them give fire as now they stand, falling in the
Rear of their own Divisions all to the right: Thus they may fire twice.

For a second Firing, command the first Rank of each Division to fire, and fall
off to the right Fileways, and Flank their own Division of Pikes to the right;
the next Rank of each Division present, and give fire, falling off to the left
File ways, being led off by their left hand Man, and so flank their own
Division of Pikes to the left; and as the first falls off to the right, and the
second to the left; so the third falls off to the right, and the fourth to the
left, until they have flanked each their own Division of Pikes to the right and
left, which will produce this following Figure.

You must note, That after the two first Ranks have fired, and flanked their
own Division of Pikes to the right and left, they must open to the right and
left outward, to give room for the next two Ranks to sleeve down betwixt them
and their own Division of Pikes.

diagram of military formation or battle array

You may fire upon this Figure several ways; as, 1. To Front and Rear, falling
in the Rear of their own Divisions. 2. To both Flanks, still falling off as
before, in the Rear of their own Divisions. 3. You may cause them to fire to
both Front and Rear, and both Flanks, falling off to the right and left by
Division, placing themselves in the Rear of their own Division, still moving
forwards into their Leaders ground, still preserving the Figure in the same
order.

Reducement.

Musketeers of each Division face inwards; and Files rank to the right and
left into the Front of each Division, and take your places as you were; the
inmost File of the left hand of each Division is to begin the Motion; then the
inmost right hand File is to follow, and to rank as before; then the left hand
File of each Division; and lastly, the right hand File, until they have all
ranked as they were.

2. Command Ranks to the left double in each Division.

3. Command the Front and Rear Divisions to wheel their Front and Rear inwards
into both Flanks, and face to their Leader; after, cause the right and left
Flank to face in opposition, and march, and close all their Divisions; then
cause Ranks to double to the right and left outward, Files closing inward to
order, and Ranks closing forward to order, and they are reduced as at first.

Command.

Files, to the right double; Pikes, to the right and left outward; Musketeers,
to the right and left inward; march, and interchange ground; to your Leader.

The three first Ranks wheel your Front into the midst.

The three last Ranks wheel your Rear into the midst.

The rest of the Body face to the right and left; then march all three paces;
and after, double Files to the right in each Division, and they will stand as
in the Cross Battle, the Pikes being in the head of each Division of
Musketeers.

Next, command the Pikes of each Division to wheel to the right, and move into
the space between the Angles of the Musketeers, which produces this following
Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For the first Firing, cause the first Rank in each Division to give fire,
falling off all to the right, placing themselves in the Rear of their own
Division, the rest at the same time moving up to their Leaders ground, still
preserving the Figure.

For a second Firing, command the two first Ranks of each Division of
Musketeers to march forwards six paces; then stand.

Command.

Pikes, face to the right and left outward, and wheel inwards, and flank your
Musketeers, which will produce this following Figure. Note: Upon this Firing,
you must cause the Musketeers in the midst to close to the Front, Rear, and
Flanks.


diagram of military formation or battle array

For this Firing, let them fire as now they stand, by Ranks falling off to the
right, placing themselves in the Rear of the Rear Divisions, they at the same
time moving up into their Leaders ground, and so preserve the Figure: This may
be done twice or thrice at the discretion of the Commander.

You may face them to the Front, and only fire them to that part by Divisions,
every Division relieving each other, 'till they have fired all over; then let
them return into their places.

For a third Firing, they are to rank even with the Pikes.

For a fourth Firing, cause the Pikes to move a little forward, and the
Musketeers to lose ground; after, let the Pikes face inward, and close Files
to order, and wheel to the left into the Front of each Division; which being
performed, they will stand as before in the Cross Battle. If you will proceed
to reduce them into the first form,

Command. Reducement to the last Figure.


Ranks, to the left double in each Division.

Front and Rear Divisions, wheel your Front and Rear inwards into both Flanks,
and face to your Leader.

The right and left Flank face in opposition; march, and close your Divisions;
then cause Ranks to double to the left; after, command Musketeers to face to
the right and left outward; Pikes, to the right and left inward; march, and
interchange ground; then face all to your Leader, and close Files into the
midst to order, and Ranks close forward to order, and they will be reduced as
at first.

Command.

Rear Division of Musketeers, (or Rear half Files) face to the right about.

Front and Rear half Files of Musketeers, wheel off by Division your Front and
Rear into both Flanks, and march 'till you are clear of your stand of Pikes;
then stand.

The two first Ranks of Musketeers, both of Front and Rear Division, face
outward, and march until your are clear of the other Musketeers; then stand.

The two first, and the two last Ranks of Pikes, face to the right and left
outward, and march 'till clear of the Musketeers; then face to Front and
Rear, and move 'till you range even a Breast with the inmost Divisions of
Musketeers; then face all to their Leader, and they will stand as in the
following Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array

Upon this Figure, let the first Divisions of Musketeers give fire, and fall
off to the right and left in the Rear of themselves; then face to the right
about, and move down, and interchange ground with them in the Rear, they at the
same time moving up into the Front, and so fire, falling off as before in their
places, the inmost Divisions performing the like Motion.

You may fire to the Rear after the same way, or to Front and Rear, falling in
the Rear of their own Divisions; the Pikes may Charge on, and after, retreating
back again into their places.

Command.

The middle Division of Pikes face to the right and left, and march three paces.

The two outmost Files of the middle Division of Pikes (or the two outmost Men)
move clear of the standing part; then let the two first Ranks face about, the
two first, and two last Ranks, move forward to order; face all to your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For the first Firing, let the Front Divisions fire, and fall in the Rear of
themselves; then wheel off to the right and left in the room of them in the
Rear, they at the same time moving forward into their places, firing, and
falling off in like manner; next, let the inmost Divisions of Musketeers do
the same, who may be relieved by the inmost Divisions of Musketeers in the
Rear.

For the second Firing, let them all face to the Rear, and give fire, as they
did to the Front.

For the third Firing, let them face to Front and Rear, and give fire, and fall
in the Rear of themselves; then let the Pikes charge on to Front and Rear, and
after, retreat back into their places.

For the fourth Firing, let the four inmost Divisions of Musketeers face to
the right and left outward; the two inmost Divisions of Pikes upon both Flanks
face inwards, march, and interchange ground, and so give fire to both Flanks,
falling off to the right and left in the Rear of their own Divisions; after,
they that were the inmost Divisions may fire, and fall off into their places,
the Pikes at the same time moving up into their places, still preserving the
Figure.

Command.

Inmost Divisions of Musketeers, move forward, until you be two Foot clear of
the standing part; then let them face all inward, and move three paces; after,
face them to their Leader, which will produce this following Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For the first Firing, let them fire to the Front, by Ranks falling off to the
right and left, placing themselves in the Rear of their own Divisions.

For the second Firing, let them give fire, falling off to the right and left,
and march, and interchange ground with them in the Rear, they at the same time
moving up into their Leaders ground, and so firing, falling off as before into
their places. The same may be done to the Rear, or to both Front and Rear,
still preserving the Figure, and falling into the Rear of themselves.

For the third Firing, let it be to both Flanks, by facing the whole Body to
the right and left outward; then let every Division give fire, and fall in the
Rear of themselves; after, face all to your Leader.

Command.

Front and Rear Divisions of Musketeers, face to the left, and move two paces,
and double to the right Fileways.

The two middle Divisions of Pikes face outward, and move two paces; to your
Leader.

The Rear Division of the Front Divisions of Musketeers, face to the right
about.

Front and Rear Divisions of Musketeers, move straight forwards, until you
range even a Breast with the Front and Rear Division of Pikes; face to your
Leader, and they will stand as in the following Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array

Upon this Figure, having faced both Pikes and Muskets to Front and Rear, let
the first Divisions give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves, and stand;
let the rest move forward, until they be clear of the Front Divisions of
Musketeers; then let them fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; and after,
face about, and move down into their places again: Then let the Pikes open
outward, and Charge all to Front and Rear; after, retreat back again into their
places.

diagram of military formation or battle array

Command. Note: Upon this Command, the Body must be faced to Front and Rear,
before you give the word of Command.


Front and Rear Divisions of Musketeers, face to the right, and move three
paces.

Middle Divisions of Musketeers, advance right forwards, and double your Front
and Rear to the left Rankways; after, face all to the right and left, and march
three paces; or to such convenient distance, that if the Commander pleases, he
may cause his Colors to be displayed. Observe the foregoing Figure.

As for firing upon the aforesaid Figure, it will be the same as in page 223.
so that if you look back to that Figure, there you will be instructed in the
several ways of Firing, which to repeat again here were needless; therefore we
will proceed to reduce them into their proper Square as at first.

Reducement.

Pikes, to the right and left inward; march, and close your Divisions; to your
Leader.

Front Divisions of Musketeers, face to the right about; Front and Rear
Divisions of Musketeers, march to the Angles of your Pikes; after, face in
opposition, and close your Divisions; to your Leader. Note: That if you wheel
them before they close, it will be the better; then let them march, and even
their Pikes.


Outmost Divisions of Musketeers, face to the right and left inwards, and
close your Divisions; after, let your Musketeers wheel their Front and Rear
(by Division) into the midst, and march, and even their Front of Pikes; then
let them close Files inward to order, and Ranks close forward to order, and
they will be reduced as at first.

Command.

Files, open outward to open Order.

Ranks, open backward to your open Order.

Then let every two Files close outward to order; and Ranks close to Front and
Rear to order; after, let every Division wheel to the right, and they will
stand in twelve Divisions.

diagram of military formation or battle array

Command.

The two inmost Divisions of Musketeers in the Rear, face to the right about.

Inmost Divisions of Musketeers in Front and Rear, move forward clear of the
standing part; then stand.

Pikes, face to the right and left outward.

Musketeers upon the Flanks, face to the right and left inward; the rest face
about to the right; march all two peaces; to your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For the first Firing, command Front Divisions of Musketeers to give fire, and
fall in the Rear of your selves; after, fall off to the right and left, and
march down into the Rear, they at the same time moving up into their ground,
firing, and falling off in like manner as before; then let the Flank Divisions
of Musketeers observe the same order in relieving each other; after, let the
Pikes charge on, and retreat again into their places.

Note: The Pikes are to Charge to Front and Rear, and after, to Retreat into
their places.
For the second Firing, let them face to Front and Rear; when faced, let the
first Divisions give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then immediately
let the outmost Divisions move up even a Breast with the Front and Rear
Divisions; then let them give Fire, and fall off in the Rear of themselves into
their places.

A Firing to both Flanks at one and the same time.
For the third Firing, let them face to both Flanks; then let the outmost
Divisions of Musketeers give fire, and fall off to the right and left, placing
themselves in the Rear of the Pikes, the Pikes at the same time moving
outward, maintaining the ground the Musketeers first fired on, by charging
with their Pikes over hand; then let the Front and Rear Divisions that stand
faced to the Flanks give fire, and fall off in the Rear of their own Divisions,
still preserving their ground; having fired all over, command the Pikes and
Musketeers to interchange ground, and face all to their Leader.

Command.

The four last Divisions next to the Rear, both of Pikes and Musketeers, face
about; move down, and range even a Breast with the Rear; Rear Divisions of
Musketeers that are faced to the Front, move forward, and place your selves
three Foot short of the next Divisions that stand before you; to your Leader.
Note: The Pikes should be closed more to the right and left inward, and not so
great an interval as is in the Figure


diagram of military formation or battle array

For to fire upon this Figure, let the Front Divisions give fire, and fall in
the Rear of themselves; then let them fall off to the right and left, placing
themselves in the Rear, the middle Divisions at the same time moving up,
possessing themselves of the ground the Divisions last fired on, and then let
them give fire, and fall in the Rear of themselves; after, let the outmost
Divisions in the Front move up, give fire, and fall off to the right and left,
placing themselves in the Rear of the Rear Divisions, they at the same time
moving up into their ground, and so firing, and falling into the Rear of
themselves, and so stand.

For the second Firing, let them face all to the right about, and perform the
same to the Rear as they did to the Front, and it will reduce them, both to
their first Aspect and Place; you may fire them to either Flank, or to both, as
you please; but being all faced to their proper Front, as in the last Figure,

Command.

Divisions of Pikes move forward, until your Rear Divisions range even a Breast
with the outmost Divisions of Musketeers; Rear Divisions of Musketeers face
inward, and move straight in the Rear of the Rear Divisions of Pikes; face all
to your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array

For the first Firing, let it be to the Rear and both Flanks, by commanding the
two last Divisions of Musketeers to face to the right about, the rest to face
to the right and left outward; then let them give fire on the ground they
stand, and fall in the Rear of themselves, until they have all fired over, and
taken their places as at first.

For the second Firing, let the four first Divisions of Musketeers, and the
two first Divisions of Pikes, face to the Front; then let them give fire to
Front and Rear, and fall in the Rear of themselves; then face all to the Front,
and so proceed to farther Command.

Command.

The Front and Rear Divisions move outward two paces; Rear Division of Pikes
upon the left, face about; Rear Division of Pikes, move three Foot before the
Front and Rear Divisions that moved outward; close inward to your first ground;
then face all to your Leader.

diagram of military formation or battle array

Command.

The two inmost Divisions of Musketeers in the Rear move forward, until they
range even a Breast with the outmost Divisions of Musketeers, then stand.

Rear Division of Pikes, march forward three Foot short of your own Divisions
which stand before you, and they will stand as in this following Figure.

diagram of military formation or battle array

Then let the four Divisions of Musketeers upon the right move away, and let
the Divisions of Pikes fall in the Rear of them, and the four Divisions of
Musketeers on the left to fall in the Rear of the Pikes; then standing
straight in their Divisions, both Rankways and Fileways, and they will stand as
follows.

diagram of military formation or battle array

As for firing upon the foregoing Figures, it may be according to the Officers
discretion in point of advantage, either in Ground, Wind, or what other
advantage may be then found necessary; but in plain Exercise, the Figures
themselves do sufficiently demonstrate.

Reducement.

Command every Division to wheel to the right, and stand.

Command.

Rear Divisions of Pikes, face to the left, and move, until you file straight
with your own Files of Pikes; then stand.

Front Divisions of Pikes, face to the right about; march down, and take your
places; to your Leader.

Right and Left Division of Pikes, face in opposition, and close your
Divisions; face all to your Leader.

2. Command the right hand Division of Musketeers in the Front, and the left
hand Division of Musketeers in the Rear, to march up, and even their Front of
Musketeers.

3. Command the left hand Division of Musketeers in the Front to face to the
right, and the right hand Division of Musketeers in the Rear to face to the
left, then march, and take their places; to your Leader.

Lastly, Command Rear Divisions of Musketeers to march, and take their places;
then left them even their Ranks, and streighten their Files, and they will
stand in three Grand Divisions, ready to march; or if you please, to draw them
up into a Square as at first.

Command the Pikes, and the Rear Division of Musketeers, to face to the left,
and march 'till they be clear of the first Division of Shot, then face to your
Leader; march up, and even your Front to the left; which being performed, they
will stand as at first: So that upon the Reduction of the last Figure, you may
either march them away as they stand, in three Grand Divisions; or draw them up
into the Square as at first, and march them after.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 26. Line 22. read and priming. l. 23. for and the Pike, read and the
like. p. 32. l. 10. for Commands, read Commanders.


