THE Commission of Array ARRAIGNED AND CONDEMNED: OR, A DECLARATION of the
illegalitie of the said Commission: SHOWING, That it is Destructive to the late
flourishing Kingdom of England, and the Subjects, especially the COMMONS
thereof; and to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government.

Published to the view of the World, principally of Great Britain, and the
Protestant Party of Ireland.

Commended to the view and consideration of the high and Hon: Court of
PARLIAMENT, (the Worthies of our English Israel.)

LONDON, September. 19. Printed by T.F. for H.H. 1642.

The Commission of Array Arraigned, etc.
IT is notoriously known to all the World, especially of this (whilome)
flourishing Kingdom of England (our dear native soil) that Matter being more
than much amiss in Church and Commonwealth, and those occasioned by the
unhappy and long intermission and want of Parliaments, this present Parliament,
being by divine providence called and convened, has from its beginning
endeavored with indefatigable labor and pains to rectify matters in
Religion and ^he State; and amongst many other things their endeavor and
several Ordinances to settle the Militia in the several Shires and Counties
of the Kingdom, for the defense of the same. Now it is also as notoriously
known, that his Majesty suffering himself to be seduced and misse-led by
evil and wicked Council, who for their own ends, to cross and thwart the
Parliaments good, religious, and wholesome proceedings, have caused a strange
and unparalleld thing, called, A Commission of Array, to be sealed and given
unto certain Noble men and others of his evil Counsel, most properly
denominated by both the most Honorable Houses of the Lords and Commons of
Parliament, the Malignant-party: And amongst other the said most offensive and
destructive Commission of Array is given and granted to William Marquess of
Hertford. And he endeavored to put the said Commission in execution in
Sommersetshire, Wiltshire, and other places, until he was driven away by the
Country and Militia, and other Parliament Forces, he fled from Wells to
Sherborne Castle etc. The Copy of which the said Marquess his Commission, as
Lieutenant General for many Counties, being printed and published to the view
of all the World, is thus over-viewed, Arraigned, condemned, and confuted, as
follows:

CHARLES by the Grace of God, etc. To our trusty and well-beloved, William
Marquess of Hertford, etc.

It is wondered how his Majesty, were he not seduced by wicked Counsel, can
term Him Trusty and welbeloved, that to gain Honor has been so untrustie,
and an Apostate to his first vows and Votes in this present Parliament.

And it follows, Whereas there is now in and near the City of London, great
Forces raising, and Money raising by order of our two Houses of Parliament,
etc. We have found it necessary to raise and levy Forces for defense of the
Protestant Religion, Our Person, the two Houses of Parliament, the Laws of the
Land the Liberty and Property of the Subject, and Privileges of Parliament,

O Dens bone! have either Houses of Parliament, or any of the major and
Orthodox Party gone about to raise any Forces against, but for the defense of
the Protestant Religion, the Kings person, their own sacred two Houses,
Property of the Subject, and Privileges of Parliament? If there be any such
among them, as some Tares will always be found amongst the finest Corn; If, I
say, there be any such Monsters of men amongst them that go about to enslave
them-selves and their Posterity, let them be accursed with Anathoma Maranatha,
and to this curse no doubt but all good men will say Amen. Indeed we are not
ignorant that not a few Members of both Houses proving false to their Countries
(that have put their trust or confided in them for good) are for their several
ends, like Renegadoes, run away and become the Malevolent and Malignant party,
such as hate Religion in its purity and the power thereof, and the peace of
the State and Commonwealth; for as the Scripture says, The way of peace (the
wicked) they have not known.

The said great Commissioner by his said large Commission of Array is commanded
and charged to conduct and lead all such his Majesty's subjects Arrayed, tried,
and Armed, as well men of Arms as other Horsemen, Archers and Footmen of all
kinds of degrees, meet and apt for the War against all and singular Enemies,
Rebels and Traitors and their adherents, attempting any thing against Us, Our
Crown and Dignity, etc. for so run the very words.

Verily, if any such singular Enemies Rebels and Traitors, and their Adherents
be to be found, they are not the right Noble Earl of Essex and his adherents,
his Excellency being appointed Captain General by both the Honorable Houses
of Parliament, which were to make both the Houses Enemies, Rebels, and
Traitors, who are the Representative Body of the Kingdom, and the Worthies of
our English Israel, which is most absurd to think or believe by any moderate
minded Christian; but in very deed, the very Enemies, Rebels and Traitors, are
the Malignant party: And his Majesty's Army is too well known to consist (for
the most part) of Papists, Athiests, or Libertines, amongst whom must be found
those Enemies, Rebels and Traitors, and they having purchased the name of
Cavaliers, do glory in it, and for the most part, they are fearful and most
execrable Damne-me Swearers, which fearful execration they never would once
use, much less not usually and often use; if they had any Religion, fear of
God, or spark of Grace in them, and did consider the Word of God in the sacred
Scripture denounced against all wicked and resolved ordinary profane men,
whose Damnation sleeps not: they J say, doubtless would not so often
invocate Almighty God to aggravate and accelerate their Damnation. But to leave
all such to their desired, doom of Damnation.

The said Commission of Array has such a large extent, that if put in
Execution, it overthrowes and destroys all the fundamental Laws of the Land
and Liberty of the Subject, of the Commone especially, and brings all to be
involved in War, thraldom and slavery: and not into a defensive War
against any foreign Enemy, but a Civil and unheard of intestine War and
Bloodshedding amongst our selves. And his Majesty's wicked Council the better
to confirm and strengthen the said Commissions of Array, have caused him to
set up his Standard-Royall as it is called: whereby what else is but a Flag of
Defiance and a denunciation of open War and Hostility with his Parliament,
the great Council of Him and his Kingdom, and His most faithful religious
and loyal Subjects: and never was any Standard set up since K. Richard the
third, against the lawful Competitour for the Crown Henry Earl of Richmond,
in all the Haleyon Reigns of Henry the 8. Edward the 6. Queen Elizabeth, and
King James. But what ill success the Marquisse of Hertford and other great
Lords and Commissioners of the Malignant-party have had in attempting to put
the aforesaid Commission of Array in Execution is well known daily to the Hon:
Houses of Parliament, and to be seen by every ordinary observant Eye in our
printed weekly Diurnals, --

Sitque tota Britannia Testis. The Lord Strange, who is a main man of the
Malignant party and a great Commissioner in the said illegal Commission for
diverse Counties, gives out a Warrant, to all and every the High Constables in
the Hundred of Amounderves in Lancashire, for putting the said Commission in
Execution, The Copy of which his Warrant is as follows here inserted, with
the Animadversions or marginall Notes of some ingenuous as ingenious
Parliament-proofe-Pen-man, And it is a Strange Warrant from a Strange Nobleman.

A true Copy of the Lord STRANGE his Warrant, for putting in execution the
Illegal Commission of Array in Lancashire.
To all and every the High Constables in the Hundred of Amounderves.
WHereas his Majesty by his Proclamation dated at York the 12. day of August
last, has declared; That an Army of Horse and Foot is in a That is a lie.
Rebellious manner raised in the South parts of this Kingdom by The
Commisioners of Array may apply that to themselves.
ill affected persons who are now Traitorously and Rebelliously marching in
Battaile-Array against his Majesty, contrary to their duty and allegiance, and
that he intended upon Monday being the 22. of August, to set up his Standard
Royal: and whereas his Majesty by his Commission under his Highness great
Seal, has authorized and appointed me Lieutenant General of this and other
Counties, to raise forces of Horse and foot Soldiers, to attend his Majesty,
for the defense of his Majesty and the true Here let the world judge whether
Papists will defend the true Protestant Religion, and whether base and beggarly
Cavaleers that have nothing to lose, but (...) themselves, by ruins) will
maintain the Subjects (...), and property, and whether (...) (that are great
incendiaries) would maintain the being of Parliaments, that dare not look the
Parliament in the face.
Protestant Religion, their Liberties, Properties, and the very being of
Parliaments; These are to require and Command you, that you summon and warn
all Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen and Freeholders, within your several
divisions, chargeable with Arms and all such as are of ability to provide and
maintain Arms, and are well affected to his Majesty's service If they be not
Popish Recusants, they may thank the Pope for it, who has given dispensations
to take the Oath of Alleagiance and Supremacy, that they might do the more
hurt with less suspicion.
(Popish Recusants always excepted) that they be at Preston upon Tuesday being
the 23. of August, by 10. of the clock of the fore-noone, where I intend if it
please God to be there, further to acquaint them with the particulars of his
Majesty's Commands, and to confer and advise with them of the best and
speediest way to advance and further his Majesty's Service in this behalf,
which I doubt not, but I hope and believe all good Subjects will not.
all good Subjects will readily and willingly perform, and that they will in
the mean time consider and take into their thoughts, what aid or assistance
they or their neighbors, tenants and friends can and will by their means
yield to his Majesty in this needful occasion, and will prepare to have the
same in readiness: fail not as you tender his Majesty's Service, and will
Answer the contrary at your perils.

Given under my hand and Seal, at my Manor of Lathum this 17. of August, An.
Dom. 1642. James Strange.

We that have read the Chronicles and Histories of England, did never read that
such a Commission was made or granted, nor that ever any King in this our
Fairie-Land did ever cause Arms to be leavyed and taken up with such a large
extent against his own Loyal Subjects, His Bowels the two Houses of
Parliament, etc. God for his mercy sake grant peace, Amen.

And now, albeit both the Houses of Parliament, the Kings great Council, and
the Representative Body of England; Their so solid, and serious Voting,
Declaring, and Demonstrating this aforesaid Commission of Array, to be
illegal and destructive. And Learned Mr. Sergeant Wild, Recorder of Worcester,
(and a Member of the House of Commons) his public confutation thereof; We are
not ignorant that some of the Cabinet or Cavalier-Councell have pumped hard,
and most notoriously abused His Majesty and the Laws, (unto which He is
sworn) to set out in Print in his name, so many sheets (about eight) of paper,
The Book entitled (pretending) to show the legalitie of the Commission of
Array.

And we are not out of hope but some of us may live to see such Apostate
Judges, and Achitophell Council as have caused his Majesty to create the said
Commission of Array, and to prate the legallity thereof, to have Chief Justice
Trissilian his Fate, either upons barren Heath, a high Bank, or up H^lborne,
as far as Tyborne; nor can we exempt the nimble tongued Chequer-Baron. Yea,
though they never so long Hide themselves as Trissilian did under the Kings
wings, having King Richard the second (that unhappy and unfortunate Prince)
for his Lord and Master: And I never think of the late Lord Major of London
Sir Richard Gurney, but we call to mind Sir Nicholas Brembre Lord Major of
London in the said unhappy Kings reign.

We hope by this time sufficient is said for the Arraignment and condemnation
of the Commission of Array.

By the next ye are like to see the illegality of his Majesty's late erecting
His Standard.

FINIS.

