THE Common-HUNT, OR, THE PURSUIT OF THE POPE.
RELIGION having suffered long,
Scarce knowing who had done her wrong;
Her Proselytes together flew
By the Ears, to kill they knew not who.
Here lay, making a heavy stir,
Fifth-Monarchy and Presbyter;
There Independent, after Pause,
Demanding for the Good old Cause:
Next Anabaptist, and his Train,
Put in for Dipping over again;
While Yea and Nay, with his new Light,
Quarrels, although he dare not fight;
Next enters, after many knocks,
Episcopacy Orthodox;
She, propper Lady of the soil,
Composes the unhappy Broil.
Now all is well, and all goes right,
There Is no need now to hate or fight,
Now Pro^elytes may all agree,
And live in Love and Liberty:
But hold, poor Church! and thou shall find,
That thy worst Enemy's behind,
Who with his superstitious Crew
Does seek thee utterly to undo.
It Is he who, in Queen Mary's Regions,
Sent Saints to Heaven by whole Legions:
It Is he who did, in Eighty eight,
Strike both at Englands Church and State:
It Is he who did, in Powder Plot,
At England aim, but mist his shot:
It Is he who has so often, at Pleasure,
Exhausted Englands well got Treasure:
It Is he whose greatest Envy is
Against Englands fair Metropolis:
It Is he, that Dam'ner great of souls,
Who Christianity Controuls:
It Is he who did in Sixty Six,
His flaming Sword in London fix:
It Is he who, big with fire and Nitre,
It Is Suburbs Sacrificed to the Mitre:
It Is he, who Nursing Mother sent
Unto our Church, with this intent,
Not to be kind to it, but rather
T'orelay the Babe, and kill the Father:
It Is he, grand Patron of Confusion,
Who works in Houses Dissolution:
It Is he who, true Arch-Rebel Monger,
Against elder Brother sets the younger,
And nothing less than Saint-ship brings
To Villains that dare kill their Kings:
He who, at distance, can Prefer
In any Realm a Treasurer,
And Murder Minister of Justice
That dare act up to what his Trust is:
And yet, though he have nothing less,
No Name fits him, but Holiness.
Now then, So Ho! methinks I see
This Monster in Effigy,
The Unkennel'd Fox with speed pursue,
He stinks already, Boys Halloo;
Fling in fresh Zeal and Loyalty,
The Leaders of the Chase to be,
Let all Mouths open, that ful-cry
We may run down this Enemy;
Stop all his Grounds, that he may be
Defenseless against his Destiny:
His Jesuitick Cubs Immure,
If Jesus Flock you would secure;
Spare not for Horseflesh, follow on,
The Day already is half gone;
Chase him through every Disguise,
He Will piss on's Tail to blind your Eyes,
But run him home, for soon he Dies;
If he chance t'Earth, dig after him,
The Country will with Spades come in.
Never then let your Spirits droop,
Till you have caught, uncas'd, and cried who whoop.
FINIS.

