THE HISTORY Of the Bohemian Persecution, From the beginning of their
conversion to Christianity in the year 894. to the year 1632.

Ferdinand the 2. of Austria, Reigning.

In which the unheard of secrets of policy, Counsels, Arts, and dreadful
Judgments are exhibited.



LONDON Printed by B. A. for John Walker at the Star in Popes-Head-Ally MDCL.

To the Godly Reader.
AFter that some of the banished Bohemians, who were in Holland, understood
that the Edition of Fox's book of Martyrs, was by some learned men, and
well-wishing to posterity, again intended in England, and that Additions were
every where sought for, and that they were admonished to add unto it, the
History of our present Persecution and banishment; they did not intermit
forthwith to write to their exiled friends, in Misnia, Polonia, and Hungaria,
that so far as they could, they would declare those memorable things which
were acted in this unhappy tragedy, we thought nothing could be declared by us,
of which there was not sufficient example, whether we consider the most bitter
h^tred and rage of Satan against the Church, or the fraudulent machinations of
Antichrist, or humane fragillity in persecutions; or the most wise counsel and
help of God in preserving his: but because it is neither unpleasant nor
unprofitable for Godly spirits to look upon many examples; partly, to see upon
what various occasions God does exercise his Church with afflictions; partly,
how craftily the old Serpent does circumvent the Saints of God, likewise how
men being exposed to trials do several ways fall; and lastly, how valiantly
God does corroberate some valiantly to undergo disgraces, banishments, prisons,
deaths, and all things grievous, for his Name, and how they overcame the World
by bearing. Therefore we were willing to communicate our affairs to the
Churches of Christ dispersed through the World, and Godliness it self does
command us to declare unto posterity, as much as in us lies, what waters we
have past through, and in what furnaces of fire we have been heated, that
knowing to what vicisitudes the Church millitant is subject (as the Moon which
sometimes increases and sometimes decreases, sometimes with a full countenance
she defuseth her light, sometimes she suffers a sad Eclipse) they may be the
less troubled in future times, that they may seasonably prepare their minds
for all hazards, and may learn to seek securities and blessings, not under the
Sun, but in Heaven, for this reason from the first Original, we have have
briefly deliniated all the most famous mutations of the Bohemian Church,
especially since the story of our Martyrs under Gentilisme, Papacy, and fained
Protestantisme is communicated but to a few; for beside Hus, Jerome of Prague,
and Milisius (whom the Catologue of the witnesses of truth remembers) the book
of Martyrs is silent of other sufferers: we thought good therefore by this
occasion to join old stories with new, comprehending them both with as much
brevity as possible, and faithfully to declare them in a Historical style; the
former stories we have taken out of our Historians; the latter are faithfully
collected, either out of our own proper observation, or from the testimony of
eye witnesses: and this last persecution of Ferdinand, although it may seem to
be raised on politic causes, and a great part of those miseries which befell
the faithful, to be acted by the licenciousnesse of Soldiers, by the course
of War, yet none will deny, but that the constant asserters of the Gospel were
Martyrs, who will consider those words in the 13 Revel. 7. and it was given to
the Beast to make War with the Saints, and overcome. Had not Nebucadonozor a
politic cause to destroy Jerusalem (to wit) the rash and obstinate defection
of the Jewish people from him, yet you may know what account God makes of his
destroying them: consult with Isaiah 47.6, 7. Jer. 50.18, 19. Zach. 1.14, 18.
and in many other places. Did not the Jews give occasion to the persecution of
Antioch, by their Domestical tumults, as may appear in the 2. of Machabees
5.11? there is another intention in God, who chastises his Church for their
faults; and in the enemy who seeks to destroy it, therefore we lawfully say,
with that Martyr mentioned 2. Machabees 7.32. We suffer for our sins. Yet
thou who does wage war with God in persecuting his servants, thou shall not
escape the judgment of the Almighty. We could have wished these things more
copiously to have been collected, and more accurately set down, than our
present state will suffer us; but in regard we have been often admonished to
communicate some late transactions done in our Country and Church, we had
rather give this, than not to satisfy the desires of those that are good. When
God shall bring us home again, which we hope, other memorable things may be
added and these things which are now written, declared with more evidence.
Farewell.

In our banishment in the year, 1632. N. N. N. etc.

THE HISTORY Of the BOHEMIAN PERSECUTION.
CHAP. I. The conversion of the Bohemians to Christianity; the Persecution that
followed.
THe Bohemians (...) Being Idolaters lived without the knowledge of the true
God, and of Religion, till the year of Christ 894. In that year, their Capraine
Borivoius, being entertained by Swato Plaus, King of Moravia, by the strange
providence of God, received the knowledge of Christ, and with thirty Palatines
were baptized at (...) the 23 of June, who returned home with joy, taking with
him Methudius, the Bishop of Moravia (who was an opposite to the Bohemians:)
amongst whom (when the seed of the Gospel was sown) suddenly a great harvest
was gathered, partly in regard Ludomilla the Captains wife laid aside the Idol
Rosina, which before she worshipped. Likewise a confluence of the Nobility and
Commonalty were daily baptized, partly by reason of those Churches and Schools
which were in many places erected by Borivoius.

2. Thus the Bohemians received the first light of the Gospel; but the Cross
was the concomitant of it, according to the will of Christ, who as he did
establish his Church by his own blood; so he sprinkles it with the blood of
Martyrs, that it may be fruitf^ll: this is the counsel of Divine Wisdom,
that we may hope in Christ, not for the things of this life. Therefore the
Gospel cost the Bohemians some of the^^ blood. The chief of those that
witnessed the truth, were the Princes Ludomilla and Winceslaus, and some
hundreds of the common People: the story of whom we shall briefly relate,
chiefly out of Duhratius.

3. First of a^^ Borivoi^s was banished by the wicked faction of Infidels;
Stoinurus was placed in his room, who was banished thirteen years in Bavaria;
but when they knew him to be a Christian, they sent him again into exile.
Borivoius being recalled, they compelled him to resign the dominion to his son
Spitigneus, who was more favorable to the Heathens. He being dead, Drahomera a
heathen (made famous for Nobility and Beauty) was given in marriage to
Worutislaus, the younger son of Borivoius, who at first was courteous to her
Husband, and the Christian Nobility, and promised after her Catechizing that
she would be baptized: but this wicked woman did boldly deceive both those that
instructed her, and those that were her Sponsers in baptism; for she was more
cruel against Christians, then Iezabel was against the Prophets.

4. Whilst her pious Husband lived, she cunningly dissembled that hatred which
was evilly conceived against the Christians: but he being buried, when the
Grandmother Ludomilla did undertake to educate the elder son Wenceslaus,
Drahomira requiring the younger Bolislawes to be under her tuition, she
usurped the Government, and straightway commanded by a public Edict, that the
Churches should be shut against the Christians, that the exercise of their
Worship should be hindered. She likewise prohibited Ministers from instructing
the people, and Schoolmasters from teaching Youth: those that disobeyed were
liable to imprisonment, banishment, and death. At Prague, the Magistrates were
changed. and the most cruel Idolaters were substituted in the places of the
Christians, by whose incitement the Christians were secretly, openly,
unworthily abused and murdered, without any punishment to the perpetrators of
that mischief; but if a Christian had killed another in his own defense, ten
were massacred for one.

5. The insatiable cruelty of Drahomira could not be satisfied with this
punishment, her great desire of driving away and sudden destroying all
Christians excited her to deal with Ballioius, a most cruel Citizen, whom she
had set over the City of Prague, under title of Praetor, to him she does reveal
her most execrable desire, and does earnestly entreat him by fraud or force to
effect this, promising him a rich reward for his labor done. He entertains the
cursed motion, and arms six hundred conspirators at his own house, with them he
hastens to those that were designed for slaughter; but the plot being
discovered to the Christians, above four hundred met to defend their own lives,
the issue of the fight was victory on the Christians side, the streets being
poluted with the blood of about eight hundred that were slain.

6. Drahomira did much resent the evil success of her council, and therefore
fained that tumults displeased her, she commanded that the arms should be
laid down on both sides, and be laid in the city Magazine, severely
prohibiting any person to walk with dart or sword.

7, The Christians although they suspected her treachery, yet least they should
seem to disobey the commands of the Magistrate, brought their arms to that
place to which the enemy seemed to carry theirs. Drahomira commands in the
silentest part of the night to set upon them being thus disarmed, least in the
day as lately, there should be tumults made; there were killed in one night by
alured Ruffins more then three hundred, half asleep and half naked, Drahomira
rejoicing at this slaughter, although not satisfied, speaks to the bloody
Proetor at Prague to destroy christians: he obeys and besets all passages and
streets with Ruffins, and executes and slayes all that he meets withal,
(until the Christians, who chose rather to die valiantly in fighting then in
slothful idleness) gathered themselves together, who incountring with the
P^oetor, overcame him and put him to flight, and in pursuit slew this wicked
person.

8. Drahomira was enraged at the loss of this Minister of cruelty, and when
she could not destroy the Christians at Prague, she intended the subversion of
their Churches, there being but two left, in one of which the Sepulcher of her
husband was, both which she commanded to be burnt.

CHAP, II, The Martyr Ludomilla
1. Whilst Drahomira did thus rage against the Christians, Wenceslaus, who
hitherto excused himself from undertaking the Government in respect of his age
and studies by the advice of his Grandmother Ludomilla and the Christian
nobility; took the Government into his own hands, and that he might establish
tranquillity by the consent of his nobles, he does assign the city of
Boleslavia with the adjacent grounds to be inhabited by his brother Bolislaus
and his Mother Drahomira,

2. Drahomira therefore laid aside her Government, but not her hatred and
bloody imaginations against the Christians, which did first break out against
that holy Matron Ludomilla for when she perceived that Wenceslaus did favor
Ludomilla more then her self, who was his mother, and by that means the
Christian religion was much promoted, she did seek, til at last she found
fitting instruments to accomplish her cruelty, which were Juhuman, and Cuman,
who were men of the highest nobility and of impudent audacity, who being sent
forth by Drahomira in the night, they found out the holy widow intent at her
prayers, in her Oratory; they break in, and break down, and robbing the vail
from her head, they strangled her, her jaws being open; there were some who
did inflame Wenceslaus (who was exceedingly disturbed for the death of his
Grandmother) to revenge that cruelty, or if he would be wanting, they desired
Commission for to do it themselves: but he gravely tebuked all of them, in
regard they did persuade him to do that which is contrary to that duty which is
owed to any mother, and contrary to the modesty and patience of a Christian,
not remembering what the Lord says, vengeance is mine, and I will retribute it.

CHAP. III. The Martyrdom of Wenceslaus, Podivinius, and others.
1. BUt Wenceslaus was evilly requited for his pity to his impious mother, for
she desiring to subject all Bohemia to Bolislaus, who imitated her superstition
and manners; began to defame Wenceslaus, and to stir up hatred against him, as
if he were unfit to execute the offices of a Prince, which ought to be
performed, not by sacred things and ceremonies; but by arms and sighting; at
length when she perceived that he was confirmed, and his name began to be
glorious she did not only agitate wicked counsels concerning the taking of him
away, but whispered them to his Brother.

2. There happened an occasion suitable to her desire Bolislaus the infant
being born, to whose Baptism she honorably invites Wenceslaus to come to
Bolislavia; he going thither, was entertained by his mother and brother with
kind imbracements and kisses, and with a delicate feast, which was held til
late of the night, Wenceslaus when he suspected all things for a resting place,
went to the Church, and there decreed to spend the night in sighs and prayers.

3. Whilst he was thus busied, his brother Bolislaus invades him, being
excited by his more vigilant mother, to that wickedness: at first he lost his
blow; in regard his sword by a sudden amazement, fell out of his hand, but
those who were hired as coadjuters in this wickedness, inflamed him with new
rage and fury, so he repeats his stroke and easily kills his disarmed brother
who patiently receives his wound. This was done in the year, 929, the 28 of
September, which was afterward consecrated to the memory of St. Wenceslaus.

4. Bolislaus when he had thus attained the Government by his boldness and
impiety, threatened prisonment and death to all Christians and Clergy, who did
not depart from Bohemia, his mother added that the slain should not be buried,
but left as food for dogs and birds: this edict terrified many, and caused
their flight, many were seized upon and tormented diverse ways to death, amongst
the chief Podivinius who was of the Bedchamber of Wenceslaus, that was most
dear and intimate with him, was hanged.

5. But when the revenging eye of God, could not longer bear the deaths, and
Martyrdomes, the Banishment and crosses of his own, he declared a dreadful
example of his wrath upon Drahomira; for on that place where the Ministers
bones lay unburied, the earth opened of it self and devoured Drahomira alive,
with the Chariot and those that were carried in it, which place is now to be
seen before the Castle of Prague.

6. And those were punished from heaven, who drew their swords and were helpers
in that massacre, some of them losing their reason in their rage, and madness,
cast themselves headlong from high places, others destroyed themselves with the
same swords wherewith they had murdered the innocent; furthermore, that part
of the Church near which Wenceslaus was killed; could never be washed from that
blood wherewith it was then sprinkled, as an eternal witness of that villainy;
these various prodigies did so affright Bolislaus, that he dealt more mildly
with the Christians.

7. And though Caesar came upon him to revenge his Fratricide and Tyranny, and
so straightly besieged Bolislaus, that he was compelled to recall the banished
Christians, to restore the Churches, to expiate all his former wickedness, and
to promise that his children should be instructed in Christianity, Religion did
flourish better, Heathenisme vanishing (though not quite extinct) when godly
Bolislaus his son succeeded him.

CHAP. IIII. Woytichius, otherwise Adalburtus Bishop of Prague, with his five
own Brothers were Martyred.
1. FOr when Woytich (the second Bishop of Prague, who was the beloved pupil
of Adalburtus, the Archbishop of Magdeburgh, so that he took his name, and
Histories call him Adalburt) about the year 970. did seriously labor in
converting the relics of the Gentiles, and in amending of their corrupt
manners; there was raised a great sedition by the fury of the Heathens; which
Bolislaus was necessitated to keep down by arms; but VVoytichius was forced to
a voluntary banishment.

2. When therefore he went toward Rome, the Pagans rose against his own
Brothers, and killed five of them together, Coleborius, Spitemerius,
Prebislaus, Borita, and Czalaus, and make a conspiracy against their Prince,
but are overcome in battle.

3. Woytichius being carried into Hungary, by some sermons he converts to the
faith, and baptizes Stephen their Prince, who was not long after made their
King; then returning home he is again banished, he departs in Polonia, being
about to confirm that nation, which was lately converted to the faith, by the
marriage of Dubrawka, the daughter of Bolislaus the Bohemian, with Miceslaus
the Leader of the Polonians.

4. From thence he makes his passage into P^usia, and there near to Pistashium
is murdered by the darts of the Infidells, and is beheaded, his body was
redeemed from the Barbarians, and carried to Gu^sua in Polonia, where he
established a Bishopwrick, and according to the superstitious custom of that
age, he was canonised for a Saint.

CHAP. V. The first witnesses unto the truth against the Papacy in Bohemia.
1. FOr when in these times (as Histories testify) the Pope of Rome, having
usurped domination over other Churches, would have had the rites and ceremonies
of his will worship, every where received and kept, it happened that such
things as were offensive unto the minds of the Godly, were obtruded upon the
Bohemians also; but most especially the use of the Latin tongue in the
Ordinances, the unmarriageable estate of the Clergy, and the maiming of the
Eucharist by debarring the people of the cup in that Sacrament. Of which it
will not be tedious or in vain here to recite what we find expressed in our
Annals; because they were the first incitements unto the Bohemians and as it
were the first sparks, which afterward (in the time of Husse) burst out into
open flame.

2. In the year 965 when Boleslaus Pius had founded Episcopacy at Prague, was
chosen Bishop, and confirmed by Hatto Archbishop of Maguntium, Dethmar the
Saxon then Pope of Rome, instituted a form of Church Government, expressly
charging that none should any whit decline from the rites ceremonies and Roman
canting, by him prescribed; which the Bohemians took very ill, for that the use
of their native language was taken from them. Now therefore Dethmar the the
Bishop shortly after dying in the same year, and Woytich his successors having
freed Rome from the whirle wind of persecution; two of the Clergy Bolehost and
Mistibor with four others viz. Krzwan, Rosislaw, Waymire, and Iarek, were sent
to Rome unto the Pope in the year 977, for to act with him both for the return
of the Bishop, and restoring unto them the use of their mother tongue, in the
Ordinances, who (as the Annals tell us) did both obtain their desires of the
Pope, and had sent them from the Bishop a form of Prayers writ in their natural
language which is yet extant.

3. But when their successors, by reason of certain inhibitions issuing from
Rome, suffered the use of their natural language again to fall, Wratislaus
Duke of Bohemia (who shottly after for his heroic acts, and deserts in the
Roman Empire, was created King) sent Ambassadors to Rome, and by them requested
of Gregory the 7. a confirmation of the liberty heretofore solemnly granted
unto them. But what he obtained is manifest in Hajecius (a Popish-writer) who
fully sets down Pope Gregory's answer page, 136. which translated out of the
Bohemian language (for the Latin version, is not extant, or not to us) is as
follows.

Gregory the Bishop, servant of the servants of God, to Wratislaus Duke of
Bohemia, health and Apostolical benediction. Amongst other Petitions your
Highness by letters has requested of us, that we would permit you to exercise
divine service in the free use of the Slavonian tongue. Know therefore beloved
son, that we cannot by any means grant your Petition. Because frequently
meditating upon the Scripture, we find that it has been, and is well pleasing
to the Omnip^tent God, that divine worship be performed in an unknown tongue,
least it be understood by every one, and promiscuously, espceially by the more
ruae and ignorant, for if it should be openly and commonly talked of by all, it
would easily come into contempt and disdain, or if it could not be understood
by some of the middle sort of men, by their often repetition, and not
understanding thereof, error (what not) may easily be hatched, which would
hardly be rooted out of the hearts of men. Nor can it be pretended, that the
simpler sort were sometimes a little indulged, especially after their
conversion. True indeed, at the desires of sincere and ignorant people,
indulgencies were grantod in the primitive church; but in regard it was found,
that many evils even heresies, have had their rise from thence, Christian
order being now established, it is not convenient to connive at it. And
therefore it cannot be granted, what your people does so earnestly but
inconsiderately desire, and this we forbid in the power of God and most blessed
Peter, exhorting thee also by the honor of the omnipotent God, to withstand by
all means such like vain rashness yea we command thee. Dated at Rome, anno
1079.

4. Lo here a Cover worthy the Dish! for Histories do term this Gregory (alias
Hildebrand) an ungodly man, a Magician, a vehement firebrand of the wars in
Europe: Could therefore any thing of truth or holiness be expected from him?
But time it was, to punish the worlds ingratitude, wherein the seducing power
of errors should be sent into the world (as the Apostle foretold, 2 These. 2.)
and so necessary it was. that Bohemia it self, (but lately converted to the
Faith) should participate of the dimnesse which preceded the approaching
darkness, and more and more be fettered with Antichristian bands.
Nevertheless Bohemi^ never committed any abominations (which were visible to
her through the darkness) without reluctance and compulsion. From whence it
was, that Rome from Antiquity did often in large expressions, bestow the title
of Heretics (before all others) upon the Bohemians.

5. When in the year 1197. Peter Cardinal of Broad way, being sent to Prague by
Pope Celestine, urge^ the necessity of single life, and enjoined Divorces unto
those who were ordained for the Ministry, he was even upon the point of being
stoned by the Priests and and Prelates. Haiec. fol. 212.

6. About the year 1350. in the Reign of Charles the fourth likewise (Emperor
of Rome) the sacriledgious administration of the Lords Supper under one kind,
was first heard and seen in Bohemia, under the first Archbishop Ernestus of
Eardubitz the Italian, French, and Germane Divines and Magistrates, whom
Charles had chosen Professors for the newly founded University of Prague, very
much persuading him to it; Foreigners also well learned in the Arts, who came
thither in great troops, drawing away very many by their Example.

7. Certain of the Bohemians distracted by these factions, apostatized, and
began to assert; That the Custom in other places received ought not to be
rejected there, that the Sacrament ought not to be easily granted, much less
daily disttibuted in both kinds and that not without the peculiar indulgence
of the Archbishop.

CHAP. VI. John Melice and Conrade Stickna,
1. THese clamours increasing, Mr. John Melice (...) of Prague, a man descen^ed
of a noble family, and of a fervent spirit, (of whom ^lso men^ion is made in
the catalogue of witnesses un^o the Truth) whether by word or writing, was the^
first that stood out in opposition. For when for his are Learning and Holiness
of life, he was made Pre^ect of the Clergy in the Cathedral Church of (...)
and had a great Auditory, he began to exhort the people unto a frequent
communion in both kinds, to com^lain much of spiritual desolation, to rebuke
diverse a^uses and abominations, being much helped with the god^y endeavors of
his faithful colleague Conrade Stickna a man eminent for Learning and Eloquence.

2. These two by their zealous preaching effected (amongst other things) that
the notorious Brothell house at Prague (called Venice) was thrown down, and
in ^ts place Mary Magdalen church erected, which per^dventure was a praeludium
of the speedy destruction of the spiritual common Stews,

3. Nevertheless Melicius himself has left a writing concerning himself, (for
some of his writings are preserved) that he was pricked in conscience, that he
should go to Rome, and there testify that the great Antichrist was come and
did then reign. He prayed unto God with fasting and tears, that unless these
cogitations did proceed from his spirit, he would deliver him from them; but
because he could find no inward quiet, he went to Rome, and writ upon some o^
the cardinals doors, Antichrist is come, and sittet^ in the Church; and in his
conferences with many, he averred the same.

4. There is a Bull of Greg. the 11. now extant whereby Melice with his
auditors were anathematized. He therefore imprisoneth him: but afterward
(perhaps for fear of the people) he releaseth him, i^ the year 1366. Melice
continued eight years in the hatred of Antichrist, and (in the year 1374, and
fourt^ Nones of February) he (Swan like) ended his life five years after the
happy dissolution of his colleagu^ Stickna.

CHAP. VII. Mathias Janovius, or the Parisian.
1. MAtthias Janovius of Prague (commonly called the Parisian, because he
continued Student in Paris nine years) succeeded him: he wa^ confessor unto
Charles the fourth, and more ferve^^ and zealous then his Predecessors in
defending communion in both kinds. He wrote many things, as, O^ the life of a
Christian: Of Hypocrisy: Of Antichrist: Of the frequent receiving of the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. In which book, at the end it is
thus written; It expresses the work of Mr. Matthias of Paris, a man famous for
his admirable devotion, who for his constant preaching suffered great
persecution, and this for the truth of the Gospel.

2. Histories tell us, that this Parisian together with some other learned men,
went to Charles (promoted unto Kingly Dignity) and requested him to call an
Oecumenicall Council for the churches reformation. But the King returned unto
them this answer, That it was not in his power, but belonged unto the Ghostly
Father, the Pope of Rome; and therefore he would write in their behalf, and
entreat a council from him, which after he had done, the Pope was provoked,
and did so importune him for the punishing of those rash and heretical men,
that Charles being madded with the authority of the Pope (although he loved
this Parisian,) yet commanded him to depart out of his Kingdom: who though
indeed he returned afterward, yet lead he the remainder of his life in
private, deceasing in the year 1394. November. 30. See mention made of him in
catalogo Test. Verit,

3, Now Ianovius being banished the adversaries forbad and abol shed communion
in both kinds, not only in the Church of Aix, but every where at Prague, and
through the whole Kingdom: so that the more constant among them, could not
celebrate and receive the Sacrament after their accustomed manner, except in
private houses, and after that in Woods and Caves; and there not without
hazard of their lives, and persecutions: for they were set upon in the ways,
plundered, beaten, and drowned in rivers, so that at length they were
necessitated to go together armed, and in strong companies. Which from that
time continued until the days of Husse.

4. Letters Patents also were extorted from Charles (although Hajec. says, it
was sent to the Prelates of his own accord) wherein an inquisition is ordained,
and punishment by fire determined to be inflicted upon those, who departed
from the faith and ceremonies of the Church of Rome. It is extant in Hajec.
fol. 349. throughout proclaimed the 18. of September in the year 1376. where of
this was the chief effect, that diligent care was afterward had, that none but
the Popes-creatures, might beadmitted unto places of Magistracy, and public
Offices, which might be a bridle to restrain the Commonalty. And therefore
Wenceslaus the King son to Charles, chose 16 Germans, and only 2 Bohemians in
reforming of the Senates of Prague, supposing that the Germans were more
constant in the Pontificiall Religion (as they were) than the Bohemians.

5. We find it also recorded, that this Parisian, his death approaching,
amongst others gave this comfort to his friends: The rage of the enemies of
truth has now prevailed against us; but this shall not be always; for an
ignoble people shall arise without sword or power, over whom they shall not be
able to prevail. Which Prophecy where and when it has bin fulfilled, we
shall hereafter acquaint you.

CHAP. VIII. John Husse and Ierom of Prague with some other Martyrs.
1. IN the year 1392. Mulhaymia, called the Temple of Bethlehem, was founded by
a Citizen of Prague, and was to be dedicated unto the Academy, by the name of a
Chapel; whereunto Mr. Stephanus of Colon was first admitted Preacher: but he
dying in the year 1400. Mr. John Husse was constituted his Successor,
Professor in the Academy, a man of an unblameable life, and famous for his
zeal.

2. And forasmuch as he had long before, that all orders were dissolute, and
none did his office, the King, Bishop, Citizen, Clergy, Nobles, only pursuing
covetousnes, pride, drunkenness, luxury, and all manner of wickedness, having
an occasion put into his hands as from above, he set upon the work publicly,
to oppose those public sins. And indeed so long as he shot his darts against
secular men, he was highly esteemed off amongst the Divines, as one out of
whose mouth the Holy Ghost spoke: but as soon as he began to thunder against
them also, their minds being altered, they cried out that he was mad, and the
Devils Agent.

3. Those that write of him tell us, that the first complaints against him,
were put up by certain of the Nobles unto the King (to wit, Wenceslaus) whom
the Pope presented unto the German Princes, as a sluggish person unprofitable
unto the Empire, hateful (yet not infamous in Historyes) because of his
unwillingness to execute his Bulls, and his indulging the Heretics, against his
will) and required him to forbid Husse of his turbulent preaching. But the
Archbishop (Wolbrom) denied that it could be done, because Husse had bound
himself by Oath at his Ordination, to speak the truth without respect of
persons.

4. But when in the year following, this same Husse much more sharply reproved
the Coveteousness, Luxury, and Sacriledges of Spiritual persons and the
Archbishop, requested of the King the same which the Nobles did before. The
King answered that it could not possibly be done, because Husse was obliged by
oath to speak the truth without respect of persons; the Lord himself thus
frustrating the wicked plots contrived against this holy man, as his own
Instrument.

5. There returned out of England the same year, (1400) Ierom of Prage,
bringing with him the writings of Wickliffe, which came into the hands of many
and was received by many, with good approbation: some indeed approving of them
(among whom this Husse was chief) others disliking and damning them, especially
the Academians, who (as we have formerly said, did flock from diverse Countries.

6. In the year 1404, two English men, Batchelours of Divinity (one James, and
Conrade Caddelaurgh) came to Prague, and being entered in the University, they
began to move disputes, concerning the Popes Supremacy, and the like; but
shortly after were prohibited by public command. They therefore (because that
which was forbidden unto men, was lawful for the walls to receive,) caused to
be painted in the Parlor, where they Lodged; with the consent of their
Landlord, the history of Christ's Passion on the one side, and the pomp of the
Pope, and Cardinals Court, on the other opposite; and of this picture when John
Husse made mention in his preaching, as of a true Antithesis between Christ,
and Antichrist, great numbers of people came thither to view it.

7. In the year 1408. May 24. the Articles of Wickliffe were again examined and
condemned, by forty Masters and an infinite number of Batchelors; and it was
forbid that any should teach them, upon pain of banishment.

8. John Husse, when he saw the Vniversity-men of Germany so strongly to side
with the Pope, deeming that something was to be done to restrain their
insolency, he made an Oration in a great concourse of people (in Carolin
College) asserting that the plurallity of voices belonged to the Bohemians,
who were natives, and not to the Germans, who were strangers: for although
Charles, from the first institution granted three voices unto strangers, the
fourth unto the Bohemians, in respect of their forcity, who then studied
learning, in his last pattin he explicated his mind, that the custom of the
Parisian University should be observed. Now it does abundantly appear in
France, strangers have but one Suffrage, but the homebred have three, the
Germans being angry for this, Appealed to King VVenceslaus, the Bohemians do
the same, but the King after a years protraction, decides the Cause for the
Bohemians, in the year 1409. the 27. of Sept. the Germans interpreting this a
disgrace, leave Prague, and going into Misina (a neighboring place) and there
give occasion to the founding of Lipsick, and Erphord, Schools: in the mean
time, the Bohemians created by voices, John Husse their Rector.

9. The Monks being thus deserted of the King and University, instigate the
Archbishop Shico of Hasenburgh an unlearned man, and obtained in the year
1410, the 16. of July, that the books of John Husse should be condemned and
burned, there were therefore burned as Eneas Silvius testifies, above 200
volums fairly written, adorned with golden Bosses, and precious covers. There
are extant some Bohemian Rimes composed by one of the common people, in which
that unlearned censor of books was wittily jerkt, for being made an
Archbishop, then he studied letters, but Husse in that time wrote a tract
concerning the reading of Heretical books, and instituted a particular dispute
for the defense of John Wickliff, concerning the holy Trinity which they also
burnt.

10. In the year 1411. when Pope John the 23. sounded an alarm against the
King of Naples, he gave Indulgencies to those that would take up arms for the
Church: One that sold those toys came to Prague, and publicly in the pulpit
divulged those vanities. It so happened that in three Churches some opposed them,
asserting the Pope of Rome must be Antichrist, who brought misery upon the
Christians, and stirred them up to mutual wars. Those three were taken Martia
Krzidelko, John Hudek and Stainis Lapolek a Tailor, and are carried to prison,
although the university and town, interceded for them, yet they were brought
forth into the market, and were beheaded. When this was noysed abroad, the
university running, took away the bodies; and in a sollemn Procession sung These
are the saints who gave up their bodies for the testament of God. They carry
them to the Church of Bethlehem, and there bury them.

11. The day after Husse did propound certain theses to dispute against those
superstitious indulgences, and publicly with Mr. Ierom, (who did as strongly
impugn there errors in the School, as Husse did in the Church) showed their
vanity: but when notwithstanding all this he impudently proceeded, the company
of Studients did violently snatch from him his Bulls and they do cloth one of
their own company in a whorish habit, put him into a cart, adorn his breast
with Bulls, carry him about and acclaime unto him: the whore in the mean time,
with sweet words and gesture alluring the company, and distributing blessings:
at the length they burn all the Bulls with many of the Popes in the midst of
the market.

12 In the mean time the Pope cites Husse to appear at Rome, who in regard of
the disswasion of the University and nobility, did not appear, Pope John 23 in
the year 1413 in June did interdict their celebrating of Mass, in regard of
the presence of Huss a contumacious offender, upon this when he saw the
Magistrates rage, and the common people divided into contrary factions, and all
things to be disturbed, he of his own accord leaves Prague, and from town to
town teaches the word of God: until the time that he was called to Constance,
to give an account of Doctrine, receiving letters of safety from the Emperor:
Histories report, how he was there handled by the Romish Council, to wit, in
the year 1415. The 6 of July, Husse, in the year 1416 the 30 of May Ierom
were burnt. Consult the book, of Martyrs.

CHAP. IX. All Bohemia condemned.
1. THe adversaries were not satisfied with their blood, but suddenly took
bloody Council for the destruction of the whole nation: for when the chief
nobles of Bohemia 58 in number, in the name of the whole Comonalty in the year
1416 the 2 of September, sent letters from Prague subscribed with their own
hands, and signed with their own seals, to the Council, complaining and
expostulating that their Pastor, an innocent and holy man, a faithful teacher
of the truth was unjustly condemned, the Synod did not answer them, neither did
they answer the Nobility of Moravia, which complained of like matters in
letters of their own, but the Council writ to the persons who were besotted
with the Romish superstition men in eminency namely John of Mecklesburg,
Alsiscopeck of Dubba, Alburt of Colditz, entreating and obtesting them, that
they would regard the Romish-Catholick Church, and that they would help the
Legate of that council, John Lotmislenia Bishop, in oppressing Heresy and
Heretics: these letters were dated at Constance in the year 1417, the 22 of
March.

2 Thus the Bohemians being incited to mutual dissentions by the Council,
contensious brawlings, and hatred were exasperated every day, more and more.
The Pristes did divulge from the Pulpit, excommunications against the Husites,
and devoted them with direful execrations, and that they might render them the
more hated, used certain lying signs, amongst the rest, they cast some dirt
into the lamps of the wax candles, and when the flame had burnt the wax candle
to the moistness of the dirt, it was extinguished: then cried they out, that
God did by miracles declare, that the wicked Heretics were unworthy to enjoy
the light, they drove them therefore out of their society, and persecuting them
all manner of ways, breaking open their churches, wheresoever they could,
which business in the year 1419, the 13 of July, raised such a tumult at
Prague, that the common people enraged, threw 12 Senators of old Prague, with
the City Magistrate out of the windows, of the Senate house, who fell upon the
points of spears.

3 There was a new Pope elected of the Synod, who was named Martine the 5, who
with kind letters, dated at Constance in the year 1418, invited the Bohemians
to renounce the errors of Wicklif and Husse. But afterward in the year 1420, he
publicly excommunicated them at Florence, and excited the Emperor, Kings,
Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, Governors, Cities, Commonwealths,
to take up arms against them, and did entreat them by the wounds of Christ,
and their own salvation, unanimously fall upon them, and quite extirpate that
sacrilegious and cursed nation, and promised a universal remission of sins
to the most wicked person, that should kill but one Bohemian.

4 Sygismund the Emperor being inflamed by this incentive, with all Germany
and the neighboring Kingdoms, yielded himself a servant to Antichristian
Tyrany and in the same year he enters Bohemia with a strong army, and wearies
them with 13 years continued war, and this was called the Husite war,
concerning which Eneas Sylvius writes they would rather be admired than
believed of posterity, in regard Siska the Bohemian Captain and his
successors did always vanquish the contrary party.

5 But the state of the Bohemian affairs were very confused at home, when some
of them stood for the Emperor and Pope, others defended the use of the cup,
from whence they were called Calikstiles, upon this ground, with horrible
cruelty they were inflamed to destroy each other.

CHAP. X. The Martyrs of Tabor.
1 BUt some things are to be d^^coursed of more briefly in respect of places
and persons, and distinctly it must be opened, how the Roman faction being
incited by the Antichristian alarm of Martine did persecute the faithful.

2 When after the death of Wensislaus in the year 1419, Sygismund took the
Kingdom, and by his De^egates (he not being present there, till he came after
with an army) ordered several things which d^d streighten the liberty of their
consciences, some thousands of those that embraced the pure Religion, gathered
together to a stony mountain, ten miles from Prague, which they named Tabor,
that mountain they compassed about with a wall, and constituted a
commonwealth determining to defend it by arms if need were.

3. The Papists and those that were called Calikstins, being enraged against
them, persecuted them all manner of ways: and first when they sent their
Ambassadors, Gallus Perstenus, and Mathias Blacils, for peace sake, to
Cuttenburg, these men were cast headlong into the most deep mines of metal,
but the Cuttenburghians, who were devoted to the Emperor, and for the most part
the German nation, because of the working in the mines; not long after John
Codeck Minister of Gurim, which had admitted the Emperors party and many
others, both Priests and Lay people were thus served, for they bought those of
Tabor, giving five florence for a Priest and one for a Laick, which was the
cause of horrid butchery.

4. Thurmenus does witness that which follows to be found in a certain
manuscript, in the year 14^0. there were cast in at Cuttenburg in the first mine
about 1700. in the second 1038. in the third 1334. therefore every year in the
18. of April there was a solemn meeting at that place, (where a Church as yet
stands) and commemorations were usually made of the Martyrs to the year 1613.
which Woresowetz the chief master of the mint did in vain endeavor to
hinder, at length it seized, in year 1621. when persecution prevailed.

CHAP. XI. John Krasa.
1. THis was a chief Merchant of Prague, who coming to trade at Preslaw a Town
of Silesia (where at that time Sigismund the Emperor, and Fernandus the Popes
Legate, were met to consult about the carrying on the war against the
Bohemians) and upon a fit occasion in his Inn disputing strongly, for the
innocence of Husse, who was unjustly condemned, and for the partaking of the
Eucharist in both kinds, was taken, and cast into prison.

2. The next day Nicolas de Bethlehem a student, was cast into the same prison
who was sent by the inhabitants of Prague to Caesar at Preslaw; by whom they
declared themselves, that if the Emperor would permit them the cup, they would
acknowledge him to be their King; But Caesar was very cruel to the messenger.

3. Krasa exceedingly encouraged him with many religious exhortations,
rejoicing that he had such a companion in his Martyrdom. Oh my brother, says
he, what an honor is this, that we are called to bear witness to the Lord
Jesus. Let us undergo with cheerfulness so little trouble! The fight is but
short, but the reward is eternal; Let us remember our Lord, what a cruel
death he under went for us, and with what guiltless blood we are redeemed,
and what torments the Martyrs have patiently endured. With these and the like
words he was constantly exhorting him. But when they were brought to execution,
and the ropes by which horses were to drag them through the City, were tied to
their feet; Nicolas being terrified with the thoughts of death, and fed by
Fernandus who was then present, with the hope of life, presently yielded and
recanted Husse his Doctrine, which then began to be called Error.

4. Krasa standing like an unshaken rock, against all the persuasions of the
Legate, told them. That all their hopes of any recantation from him were in
vain. He was drawn slowly through the streets, the Legate at every turning
inveighing against him, and oftentimes (commanding the hangman to stay) crying
to him. Pity your self and recant those errors which the Bohemians have so
rashly spread abroad. But he answered I am ready to dye for the Gospel of the
Lord Jesus. At length being brought half alive to the place of execution, he
was burnt, This was done in the year 1420. March 14. and presently on the
following Lords day (being the 17 day of March) the Legate commanded the
excommunication of the Bohemians, made by Pope Martin, together with (...) to
be stuck on the Church-gates, and to be declared in the Pulpits.

CHAP. XII. The Litomerician Martyrs,
PIchell the chief Magistrate of the City Litomericia a cruel and deceitful
man, having taken four and twenty of the chief Citizens (and among them his son
in law) put then in the highest Tower at Michaells gate. At length having taken
council with some Captains of Sigismunds, and guarded with a band of
Soldiers he commanded them to be brought out half dead with hunger and cold,
and pronounces a sentence of death against them, and causing some horses to be
harnessed, he sets them in carts and brings them to the banks of Albis to
drown them in the river.

2. In the mean time there is a great concourse of people, their Wives,
Children, Kinsfolks, and friends crying and mourning. The Consuls only
daughter comes, wringing her hands and throws her self down at her fathers
feet, beseeehing him to save her husbands life. But her father harder than any
rock, commands her to leave weeping, telling her she knew not what she asked.
[What says he, cannot you have a worthier husband than this is] she,
perceiving by these words that it was impossible to persuade him, rises. [Oh
father says she, you shall never more espouse me to any.] So beating her
breast, and tearing her hair she follows her husband, with the rest of the
people.

3. When the Martyrs were brought to the banks of Albis, they are taken down
from the carts, and while the Ferries are preparing (for there was not then a
bridge over Albis as there is now) they with loud voices call heaven and earth
to witness their innocence, and take their last farewell of their wives,
children and friends, exhorting them to constancy and zeal, and cleave rather
to the word of God than man's inventions, and at last pray for their enemies,
and commend their souls to God. Then being taken into the boats, and brought
into the middle of the river, they are cast in with their hands and feet bound
together, and are drowned. Some Officers stood upon the banks with iron forks
and poles, watching that none of them might be cast on the banks and saved, and
stabbing those that were rouled to the bank, although they were half dead.

4. The Consuls daughter, seeing her husband, leapt into the river, and
clasping him about the middle, endeavored to save him from drowning. But she
being not able to wade, by reason of the depth, nor he to unlose himself, and
having swallowed down much water she sank, and was drowned together with her
husband. The next day they were taken up embracing one another, and buried both
in one grave. This was done 30. day of May in the year 1421.

5. This History was shortly after engraven, in Golden letters, on the Church
of All Saints, at Litomericia for an eternal memorial, and was also to be
seen in a table before St. Michaels gate: and now lately (in the year 1623. 8
of July) was razed out by the command of George Michna, a Commissioner for
Reformation.

CHAP. XIII. Wenceslaus Preacher at Arnostowitz, with eight more burned.
Conrade Archbishop of Prague converted.
1. IN the same year when Albert of Austria sent Auxiliaries to Prague to
Sigismund his father in law, a party of his horse at Arnostowitz (a village
near Milizine) brought Wenceslaus the Curate of that place, a Divine both dear
to God and men, with his Officiary, three Countrymen, and four boys (the
eldest of them not above eleven years of age) to their Colonel at Bystrick,
where the quarters were, The Clergymen were apprehended for administering, the
other for receiving the Sacrament under both kinds (that is to say) of Bread
and Wine. The Bishop commanded Wenceslaus to abjure for the time to come the
administration of the Sacrament under both kinds, which if he should refuse to
do, he would expiate his rashness by fire. To whom the Pastor returned a
resolute and gallant answer. But the Gospel does teach me otherwise, so also
your own Missalls have it, you must approve what I teach or blot it out of the
Bible. The standers by being ex^sperated by this liberal reply, one of the
Troopers struck Wenceslaus on his face with his Gantlet, and so violently, that
the blood did plentifully issue, from his mouth and nostrills. Whereupon the
Bishop returned him to the Colonel who again sent him back to the Bishop, who
after he had made him his subject of mirth and scorn for all that night; on the
day following being Sunday, they were all brought unto the stake and fastened
with such a method that these poor champions of the Truth (as near as the
invention of their malice could dispose of them) were placed in the lap of
Wenceslaus. And when the Bishop did admonish them to abjure that part of the
Sacrament in which the Cup is used, the faithful Curat made answer for him and
his. God forbid, we had rather suffer under a hundred deaths than deny a truth
so clearly revealed in the Gospel. On this the executioner was commanded to
give fire unto the faggot, who immediately with the flame did send them up a
grateful sacrifice to the Almighty, Wenceslaus being the last that gave up the
Ghost. This was done in the year 1420. on the 8 day of July,

2. On which very day Conrade the Archbishop of Prague being offended at such
horrible cruelty, having first expressed himself against the unrighteousness
of the Papal cause, and declared himself for the Sacrament under both kinds,
he put off his Miter to put on his Helmet, and was commander in chief in the
Militia of Prague against the Church of Rome, having chosen four Divines of
that City to be Administrators for him in the Consistory, who were by name Mr.
John Prz^bram, Mr. Procope Pelsen, Mr. Iacobell, and John Zeline, this was the
beginning of the administration of the Sacrament under both kinds, which
Sigismund afterward restoring, did permit unto the States, and confirm by Oath.

3. Howsoever the enemies of the truth did murmur themselves into tumults, and
raged with petulant fury. In this place I shall give you an heroic exploit of
one of them which on this year was performed on the 26. day of December: Hinck
Czerwenohorsky a captain of Jarom having violently entered the Church at
Kerchzim, in the time of divine service, he killed some, and took others
captive. Amongst other acts of profaneness this was not the least, that from
the Communion Table he took the cup, being full of wine, and drank unto his
horse, who having pledged him, he said, his horse was now one of the
Reformadoes, and a communicant under both kinds.

CHAP. XIIII. Wenceslaus Swets, Martin Loquis, Procopius Jednooky, and others.
1. IN the year of our Lord 1421. and on the 23 of July, there was burned at
Prague, one Wenceslaus, a Tailor by his trade, who was shut up in a tub. It was
objected against him, that at Monstrance he dishonored the Sacrament, not
only by refusing to rise, but afterward by turning his back against it.

2. In the same year on the 26. of February, Martin Loquis, was apprehended,
being accused for renewing the error of the Waldenses, in the solemnity of the
Sacrament, and forasfirming by a horrible prophanenes that both the bread and
the cup were to be given into the hands of the communicants, but by the
intercession of the Taborenes, he was delivered from his bondage, and the
better to give way to the envy and the madness of the times, he removed into
Moravia, having taken with him Procopius Iednook for his associat: but being
discovered as they traveled through Chrudim, they were taken by Captain Denis,
and being both manacled and fettered with Irons, they were examined, what their
Judgment was concerning the Sacrament, Martin made answer. The body of Christ
is in heaven, for he has but one body, not many. The Captain not enduring
(forsooth) so great a Blasphemy, out of the liberallity of his choler, did
give him a box on the ear, and called for the hangman to devour the Heretics
with fire, but Ambrose the Pastor of Hrada being happily present, he desired
that these two men might be bestowed on him, who for fifteen days kept them
prisoners at Hr^da, endeavoring to make them acknowledge, and r^^cant their
errors: but when he found them more resolute in their opinion, he sent them to
Raudnice where being thrust into a dark Dungeon, he detained them for two
months, none of the people being suffered to come unto them. They were
elabourately tormented with variety of executions, for they were consumed with
fire until their bowels came forth to confess from whence they derived their
errors, and who were their accomplices at Prague, insomuch that by the
unadvisednesse of the pain, they were enforced to discover the names of some of
their friends. Howsoever being advised to return from the maze of their errors,
into the path of truth, they smiling answered, not we but you must think of
returning, for you are drawn aside from the Word of God to the impostures of
Antichrist, and you do worship the creature for the Creator.

3. Being therefore brought to the punishment of the fire, when they were
admonished by the shavelings that they would desire the peoples prayers, they
replied. We do not need their prayers, pray for your selves O Christians, and
for those who do seduce you, that the everliving Father of Light, may bring you
out of darkness. Being brought to the place of punishment, they were shut up
in a tub both together, and so committed to the fire. This was done on the 21
day of August, in the year of our Lord 1441.

4. Not long after there were taken at Prague some other men addicted to the
same opinion, amongst whom were three Divines, with one Casca a Citizen, and
George de Clatowe, and a certain man called Abraham, it was laid to their
charge that they forbad the torches to be lighted, at the Altar before the
taking of the Sacrament.

CHAP. XV. John Zeline.
1. A Monk of the Order of Premonstrates or Exemplars, was Pastor in New Prague
and a Teacher in White Maryes Church, one of the designed Administrators of the
consistory, a man more famous for his eloquence than his learning. He having
always a most frequent audience, did advance in his Pulpit the purer Doctrine
of the Thaborites, and was author to the inhabitants of Prague for the
reformation of their Senate, But Haschek de Weltsch a Captain of old Prague,
whom the said Monk had often rebuked (having conspired with the Senate who were
half Romanists) betrayed this Monk with twelve more into the Common hall at
Prague, and making a heady process, did suddenly behead them.

2. This was done on the 9 of March, in the year of our Lord 1422. which being
discovered by the blood, was the occasion of a mighty Tumult. For the flowing
of the blood did cause such a confluence of people, that they did break open
the doors, and beholding the lamentable spectable, one of them brought forth
the head of the Monk, and showed it to the multitude standing round about him,
on which so general was the outcry, and so loud the lamentation, that no pen
is able to express it.

3. Not long after, a Priest ( Gaudentius by name) carrying the head about the
City (laid in a Charger) did incite all that met him, to revenge. By reason
whereof, the anger of the multitude being heightened and inflamed into a fury,
they put to death some of the Senators, others saved themselves by flight. The
Colleges themselves were plundered; the bodies of the deceased good men were
brought into the Church, and solemnly interred. The Preacher having heard the
complaint of the people, and observing such a consternation in their minds,
that many of them fainting away, did almost tremble into death, he became
speechless himself. Having recovered his spirit, he did read his text out of
the Acts of the Apostles, the words were, And godly men buried Stephen. At the
end of his Sermon he did fervently exhort them, with many words, and tears, and
obtestations, showing the head of Zeline to the people, that what they had
learned from so faithful a Master, they would be mindful of it, and give no
belief to any who should teach the contrary, although he were an Angel from
Heaven.

CHAP. XVI. The Martyrdoms under the future Hussites.
1. WE are now come to declare the Schism of those men, who did profess the
name of Hus, and how the greater part of them did by degrees degenerate, and at
last did persecute the faithful: They all had a zeal, according to the example
of Hus their Master, to oppose Antichrist; But when by his remarkable death,
they were destitute of a discreet and courageous Captain, who should contain
the incensed people within the bounds of rule and order, it so came to pass,
that they were distracted into diverse opinions, and nourished most grievous
dissentions among themselves. For the Commonalty of the people, and the
greatest part of the Clergy, being bent only upon the Cup, and from thence
called Cuppeirs in the Story of Security, neglected the other documents of Mr.
Hus. But the Thaborites (amongst whom Wenceslaus Lorenda, and Nicolas
Episcopius, two excellent men, were most eminent, with some few others) did
press the purity and simplicity of his doctrine, in all the Articles and
Ceremonies thereof. On the one side it was cried up, that the Rites of the
Church were not essential, on the other side all Superstition was cried down:
neither were there wanting some disguised men, who to promote the cause of the
Pope and Emperor, did kindle new flames of dissension, and did stir up the
hatred of the people against the professors of the pure doctrine, traducing
them by the hateful name of Piccardines; for you are to understand, that they
called the Waldenses by a nickname, Piccardines, who not long before being
forced from France, did sit down in Austria, and were now famous for the infamy
of the foulest of Heretics: So distractedly did disorder and confusion manage
al things, I told you before how zealous Zealine was made shorter by the head.
There were also some found, who so possessed Zisca, Commander in chief of the
Thaborites, that he should unite himself with the Calixtines, who were only and
altogether for the Cup, and persecute the Piccardines, as he did the Papists,
with fire and sword.

2. In the year 1427, the Administrators themselves, of the Consistory of
Prague, Mr. Przibram, and Mr. Procopius de Pelsna, being at that time
Chancellor of the University, with Peter de Mladoniowitz, and Dr. Krzostan a
Physician, were first imprisoned, and afterward banished for the profession of
the pure doctrine. It was no wonder indeed, if the intrests of Rome, and her
Agents had not utterly dissolved them, so disagreeing amongst themselves: but
the wonderful goodness of God did otherwise dispose it, which knew so wisely
to temper the folly of men, that neither friends nor foes had any place left
for the glory of Triumph; for as often as Caesar (taking advantage of their
dissentions) did grow upon the Bohemians with his Armies, they always (a happy
peace being suddenly concluded) did defend the common cause with common Arms.
Zisca and Procopius leading their men, and managing their affairs, and God
giving them success, and wonderful victories.

3. The Emperor therefore with the Pope finding that they could profit nothing
by the sword, did employ their cunning, and having called a council at
Basilea, in the year of our Lord 1432. they most courteously invited the
Bohemians to a peaceable transaction, promising them to give them satisfaction
on the public faith, as they themselves should desire. Commissioners were
therefore sent unto this council, amongst whom the most eminent was John
Rokizane of Prague, and Nicolas Episcopius of the Taborens both famous Divines.
Of the nobility of that Kingdom, they made choice of Procopius General of the
Taborens, and William Rastka Baron of Postupicz and others, who being
honorably entertained, and asked what their demands were, they offered four
articles, desiring that either the Council would grant them, or allow them by
argument to defend the righteousness of them: The Articles were these.

1. That the use of the Cup may be restored to the people, and that the service
of the Church might be in their own tongue,

2. That the Clerks or Ministers might usurp no authority in secular things.

3. That the word of God might be freely preached, and without disturbance.

4. That there may be public punishment for public offenses.

4. The Legate of the Pope demanding if that they had not any more articles to
propound, because he heard it reported that they affirmed that the Order of the
Monks were from the Devils, Procopius made answer, from whence otherwise could
they derive their Original, which was instituted neither by the Patriarks nor
Prophets, neither by Christ nor the Apostles, etc.

5. After this Delegates were deputed who on both sides, for forty days
together, disputed on the articles. And when the Bohemians could not be
confuted, they were drawn at last to a friendly composition. John Rokizane with
the hope of an Arch-Bishopprick, being corrupted himself, and seducing others
of the Commissioners, the affairs were so carried, that the Bohemians promised
to return unto the obedience of the Church of Rome, and to observe all their
traditions and their rites, the use of the Cup being among other demands
excepted. These four Articles were afterward named the agreement, and
Commissioners were sent into Bohemia from the Council and Caesar, who were to
declare that the Bohemians were received into the bosom of the Church, and
were again to be esteemed as deer children. Here a Parliament being called,
Rokizane, Rhetorically enough, did expound himself, how according to his desire
he obtained these things, in the fighting for which such an excess of blood
was made and the Kingdom was made so great a Ruin. He was now pleased to
style the Pope and Caesar in some other language then heretofore, when he
called them the Whore and the Beast.

6. It gave an occasion of great grief to many, especially to the zealous
Thaborites, to depart in this manner from the Discipline of Hus, and to return
into the profession of the Church of Rome. They endeavored what they could to
restrain them, and at last they had recourse unto arms again, in which the
Thaborites were overthrown, and their defeat was so remarkable, that after this
they defended themselves only by the Word of God and patience. This happened in
the year of our Lord, 1434.

7. In the year following at a public convention, Rokizane was solemnly chosen
Archbishop, but when the Emperor endeavored to hinder from the solemn Rites
of consecration (peradventure because he did distrust a man so deceitful) he
being impatient that he was thus deluded, did again make a new faction, and
bitterly inveighed against the unrighteousness of the Emperor, and the
domineering of the Pope of Rome, and for fear of Caesar he for the space of 3
years, withdrew himself from Prague, for Sigismund not long after died, and so
did his successor Albertus within two years space, having left his son
Ladislaus behind him, who had his education in the Court of Frederick the
Emperor.

8. In this time and intervall of Government, and especially not long after the
sudden death of Ladislaus, when George Podebrade did succeed him whom Rokizane
did infinitely possess, was that of the Prophet truly fulfilled, Manasses
shall devour Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasses, and both shall be against Juda. For
the Pope did rage against George Podebrade, and the Calixtines, who were those
that used the Cup, with prohibitions, censures, and with curses, and they as
eagerly did inveigh against the Pope and Monks, but the truly faithful were on
both sides oppressed.

CHAP. XVII. The Taborites persecuted.
I. IN the year of our Lord, 1444, the Relics of the Thaborites were utterly
oppressed by force and fraud, for Rokizane by himself and others most
flatteringly alluring them unto him, did profess, that he was ready to turn
to them, if they could hold out unto him a purer Truth, than what he did teach:
neither in this cause did he intend to make either himself or any of his,
Judge, but that the Assembly of Divines in their public meeting should
determine of it. To this the Thaborites consented, and relying on the goodness
of their cause they appeared at the assembly, where after many Debates
Arbitratours being chosen that should pronounce the definitive sentence, which
was so to be confirmed by the Authority of the Assembly that neither part for
the time to come should ever again provoke one another, but forthwith should
join themselves to that on which the Arbitrators should pronounce the greatest
truth to be.

2. It was so carried (for Rokyzan had on purpose betrayed the Thaborites to
this assembly) that the Arbitrators did pronounce the greatest truth to be on
Rokizan's part: and the poor and simple Thaborites found themselves
circumvented by deceit: but not daring to go against the Agreement, promised to
perform it, in the Rites thereof. But returning home, when they delayed to
reform their Church, George, who then exercised the Kingly power, coming down
with his Army, did closely besiege their City, and struck such a terror on it,
that the Citizens giving it up unto him, did with it deliver their Ministers
into his power, who throwing them into Dungeons at the Castle of Podebrad, and
at Lititz, he killed many of them, Lupatius with some others, having addressed
themselves to Rokizane.

CHAP. XVIII The beginning of the fraternity in Bohemia.
I. BUt when the Bohemians for certain years, did in vain desire, that their
Archbishop might be invested in his Dignity, having for that purpose sent so
many Legates unto Rome, and the Pope refused to do it, unless that Rokizane
should renounce the Cup: The Cardinal of Saint Angelo being also sent to
Prague, in the year 1448. was commanded under the pretense of Treaty, to call
for the Agreement on the four Articles, and to bring them with him: which
having gotten into his hands, he stole away with them, but was quickly
overtaken, and enforced to return them. Rokizane finding himself thus deluded,
re-assuming new hatred against the Pope, when out of the Revelations, and the
Prophecy of Daniel, he had showed that the Pope was the great Antichrist, and
we, says he, unless we shall withdraw our obedience from him, are but a
miserable and a damned crew, he proceeded and told the people that the law of
Christ, and not the agreement on the Articles were to be held for the rules of
Religion, that all things from the sea of Rome were polluted, foul, and to be
forsaken, and Religion to be taken again from the fundamentalls of the
Apostles. In this way he persevered, so thundering against Antichrist that many
believed him to be another Husse, and that the hope of the new Reformation did
shine forth again.

2 But when he put no hand unto the work, the more forward amongst his
Auditors (amongst whom one Gregory was the foremost, a Nobleman and Nephew unto
Rokizan) having joined in counsels together, they repair to Rokizan, discover
the anguishes of their Conscience and desire counsel of him. Who friendly
entertained them and extolled their zeal, and gave them some Treatises to read
against the abominations crept into the Church, and in this manner he the more
inflamed them, but persuaded them to silence and patience. But when again and
again being now more considerable in their numbers they importuned him, that
he would defer any longer to exhibit in deeds what he taught in words, he
replied, that it was a business of great importance, in which nothing but with
deliberation was to be c^ncluded on.

^. In the mean time Rokizane did attempt what he could against the Pope, and
consented with the Church of Greece. For when the dec^ee of the Sinod at
Florence was proclaimed, in which the Bohemians were the second time to be
abalienated from the Church as Heretics. There was a convension of the States
at Prague, and a Synod of the Divines, in the year 1450. in which by the
advice of Rokizane, but by the common consent of all, an appeal was made to
the Greek Church, and Ambassadors sent with letters to Constantinople. The
Greeks received the Heads of the Doctrine from them, and rejoiced in their
mutual consent, and letters in the testimony thereof, being returned to the
Bohemians, they confirmed them in the faith, having made a promise that they
would ordain them Ministers for their Church. The Letters were engrossed in
Parchment, and sealed with wax of a red color, with the subscription of the
Patriarch, and the chiefest of his Bishops, which being afterward committed to
the press, are yet extant to be seen. But when these things afforded but a
lingering hope, Rokizane did again encourage his, and gave them new hopes of a
Reformation, suddenly to appear: for taxing diverse abuses, he said: We ^nly now
do grow on the outside, but shortly some will appear, who from the depths
shall draw forth the foundation of true religion.

4. When in this manner for seven long years, he delayed to give satisfaction
to the minds of so many pious men, being again demanded his advice, he said.
That he now had seriously observed, and considered all things, and could not
yet find what to determine on, unless there should be a separation as well from
those that used the cup in the Sacrament, as from the Papists themselves, for
all things did abound with abominations, and he found the evil irrecoverable.
Lupatius also delivered himself after the same manner: when it was replied to
Rokizane, Let therefore a separation be made, we will acknowledge thee for our
Captain, we will worship thee for our Doctor, we will follow thee for our
Father, he made answer. You offer me too great a burden to undergo? You are
too bold and forward, it is a thing full of danger.

5. In the mean time, in the year 1453 Constantinople was taken by the Turks,
and two of the dispersed Grecians being come unto Prague, were courteously
entertained by Rokizane, and suffered to celebrate the Mass, after many
disputations in religion. Where when it jointly appeared to them, that the
sincerity of the faith, was overwhelmed with superstition: The good zealous
people were more inflamed in spirit, finding what they were to avoid, but
having none whom they might follow.

6. They therefore address themselves to Rokizane again, and besought him for
the Glory of God to take compassion on their souls, and on the seduced people,
and not to abandon them in so great a hazard of their salvation. But he good
man, when (forsooth) he had not so much power to prefer the Cross and
^gnominy of the people of God to the but vain hopes of an Arch-episcopall
Glory, in a great rage did upbraide them with their importunity, and at last
entreated them to let him alone, and begin the separation without him, and
promised them that he would so prevail with the King (who was George Podebrade,
and to enjoy the Crown, did swear obedience unto the Pope) to allow them a
place where they might live securely, and serve God with an undefiled
conscience.

7. He obtained for them the Territory of Liticitz one of the hilly countries
near unto Silesia, whither immediately after those citizens of Prague,
Batchelors and Masters did address themselves, and from other places not a few
as well Plebeians as Nobles, learned and unlearned, their greatest confluence
was to a Town called Kunwald, devoting themselves altogether to the reading of
the Scripture, to prayers, and to works of piety. This was in the year 1459.
They chose them teachers, that is to ^ay, from the Calixtines, who used the cup
in the Sacrament, who throwing off superstition did compose themselves to the
form of the primitive simplicity the chiefest of them was a devout and pious
old man, by name Michael Zamburgh. A^l of them by the name common to Christians
and acceptable to good men, did call themselves brothers and sisters, which was
the reason that by a remarkable distinction the Title^ of the Bohemian Brothers
was attributed to them, and so much of this.

CHAP. XIX. The first persecution of the said Brothers.
I. THe beginning of this new Church displeased the Devil, he therefore raised
a sudden and a violent Tempest to overwhelme it, for the fame thereof being
spread abroad, the Priests in every Pulpit did stir up the hatred of the
people against them, crying out, Blow out their sparks, blow them out, before
they grow into a flame. Rokizane himself (who would belive it) did put on again
the mind of an Enemy, and did accuse them of wicked rashness, for there were
not wanting who informed the King and Consistory, against them in diverse
accusations.

2. It came to pass therefore, in the year, 1461. when Father Gregory with
some others did come to Prague, to give a visit to his friends that they were
betrayed, and taken in a house to which they came to supper. At which time this
was observeable, The Officers stood on the threshold, and speaking to them in
the scripture phrase, said, all who will live godly in Jesus Christ must suffer
persecution. You therefore that are here, come forth and follow me to Prison.
He was himself an honest man, and thought not evil of the Brotherhood, but
being commanded by his superiors, he could not but put his charge in execution.

3. The King believing the slanderous accusations of these evil men, that the
Brothers attempted some sedition, as the Thaborites before them, he commanded
the holy man Gregory to be tortured, who being transported into an ecstasy, did
feel no sense of pain at all, and being believed by the Tormentors to be
dead, he was taken down from the Rack. His Uncle Rokizane coming to him (for
he heard he dyed on the Rack) did with many tears lament him, repeating
again, and again, O my Gregory, would I had bin in thy place, but he after
some hours coming again to himself, revealed the Vision which he had seen,
which was, that he was brought into a most pleasant field, in the middle
whereof, there stood a tree laden with fruit, on which diverse Birds of
several kinds, sitting on the branches, did feed, and in the midst of them
there stood a young man, who did so rule them with his rod, that not one of
them did move or stir out of order. No doubt but by this Revelation, God
showed him the Image of that little Church, of which he was as Patriarck. He
saw also three, other men who seemed to be keepers of the said tree, whom six
years afterward, when by suffrages they were chosen to be overseers in his
Church, he witnessed that in this Vision he had seen, and knew them to be the
same, by their Physiognomy, and the linaments of their Countenance.

4. Gregory by the intercession of Rokizane being dismissed, there came forth
by the Kings command Edicts from the Consistory, forbidding all Pastors to
administer holy things without Ceremonies, and whosoever should administer to
the Brothers (being now notorious by the infamous Name of Piccardins) the loss
of life was denounced to him. The Brothers therefore being brought into great
extreamities, and like sheep forsaken by their shepherds, wandering up and
down, they at last, again and again, came to Rokizane, beseeching him, if he
does respect the glory of God, or his own salvation, that he would not desert
that cause in which the cause of God was interested, and that by his own
example, he would not hinder the conversion of so many men, to which they were
so happily prepared, nor for any cause whatsoever, detain the acknowledged
Truth in unrighteousness. They told him that he was the head of all the Clergy
in the Kingdom, and was to give an account of them all to God; and other words
were used to this purpose. But when they found him obstinate, they bad him
farewell, those words being inserted to the latter end of the Epistle. Thou art
of the world and shall perish with it.

5. With which being much provoked, he again exasperated the King against
them, and new Edicts were published in the Name of the King and Consistory,
that these pernicious men should no where be suffered, either in Bohemia or
Moravia, some were not wanting who gave advice to have them all apprehended and
put to death, but Jod^cus Rosenburgh Bishop of Wratislove did dissuade from it,
and gave this reason, that Martyrdom was but a kind of boiling which was half
raw, from whence Magots would easily proceed, intimating thereby, that the
Faithful did increase by Martyrdom, he said that more easily they might be
recalled, if they were every where proscribed, For if they knew not where to
turn themselves, they would soon return to a better mind.

6. This so severe an inquisition against the Brothers being instituted, It
came to pass that many, especially the chiefest of them being dispersed
amongst the woods and mountains, did dwell in Caves, where they were scarce
secure enough, wherefore they dressed not their meat, nor made any fire but in
the night time only, for fear the smoke ascending should betray them, and in
the extremity of the cold in winter nights sitting near the fire, they gave
themselves to the reading of the Bible and to holy discourses. When in the
depth of the snow they went forth to provide them necessaries, they went close
together, least they should be discovered by their footsteps, and the
hindermost of them did draw behind him a great bough of Beech, to cover the
print which their feet had made in the snow, that nothing might be seen but the
impression of some Country lad drawing a bush behind him. From which their
dwelling in Caves, they were afterward in scorn called by their enemies
Jamnices (that is to say) livers in the holes of the earth.

CHAP. XX. The Brothers erect to themselves a peculiar Ministry.
1. THose brethren had constituted amongst themselves a certain order, elders
by suffrages being chosen, who having the Government and direction of things,
obedience was promised to him. By the counsel of these men the chiefest of the
disperced through Bohemia and Moravia, being called together, they had Synods
in chose mountains, and ordained statutes how they should behave themselves
amongst themselves and others, how they should carry themselves to their
friends and Enemies as also toward the King and all Magistrates oftentimes
appointing solemn days of prayer and fasting for themselves and the dispersed,
and taking council out of the Word of God, concerning those things, which are
required to the fuller Reformation both of life and Doctrine.

2. The deepest care that did afflict them, was for Pastors of souls, where
they should find new, after those were dead, who then lived with them. To
expect that some of the Ordination of Rome, should come unto them for the love
of the Truth, was an uncertain hope. And they remembered that Rokizane did often
protest, that all things were to be restored from the foundation again.
Therefore that there was an Ordination at Rome to be erected, by that
authority, which Christ gave unto the Church, that whiles they had yet amongst
them ordained men, they might ordain others, who again should have power to
ordain others to succeed them. To this, as their desires so their judgments
did incline, but a fear invaded them, whether this Ordination were lawful or
no, because not a Bishop, but a Presbiter here did create a Presbiter, and how
if any controversy should be, they should defend such an Ordination either
among others, or themselves.

3. At length after certain years most serious deliberations, the most eminent
of them in all Bohemia and Moravia, about seventy in number, convened at a
village not far from Rich-nove, and many tears and prayers being poured
forth to God, that he would vouchsafe to manifest if their purpose were
acceptable to him, and whether this were the time of it, they appointed to try
by lots the pleasure of the Almighty. They therefore by the suffrages chose
from the midst of them nine men, whom above others they thought most fit for
the taking of the Ministry, and twelve little Papers closely folded up, being
put into the hand of a little boy, sent for on purpose, and not knowing what
was to be done, he was commanded to distribute those twelve lots unto the nine
men. Nine of these lots were blankes, on the other three were inscribed the
word I S, to wit the Will of God, which they desired might be revealed to them.
It might therefore come to pass that these nine men every one might have a
blank, which would be a token to them that God was not at that present pleased
at what they went about. But so it was, that the three lots were given into the
hands of three of them, Matthew Kunwald, a most Godly man, Thomas Przelauce, a
learned man, and Elias Krzenove, a man endued with singular abilities of
understanding.

4. These being with great joy embraced, as men sent from Heaven unto them:
they took new counsels for the Confirmation, and the Ordination of them. And
having understood, that there were some of the Waldenses in the confines of
Moravia, and of Austria, that they might provide for the present, and for the
time to come, for the scruples of theirs and other men's consciences; they sent
unto them Michael Zamberge their Pastor, (who received his Ordination from a
Roman Bishop) with two others, who should relate what had been done, and
desire their judgment in this business. They find there Stephanus the Bishop,
who, another Bishop, and some of the Ministers being sent for; they declare
unto them their Original from the time of Constantine, they repeat unto them
the Articles of their faith, and what a horrible persecution they suffered for
it, both in Italy and in France. Then they hear our men make a report unto them
of their departure from the Pope, and the Calixtines which they approve of and
congratulate. Moreover, giving power to those three to create Ministers, they
create them Bishops with the imposition of hands, and return them to those that
sent them.

5. Our men receive these things with joy, and being desirous of the Chri^tian
Unity, they deliberate whether they should join with the Waldenses, and so be
one people and one Church. The purity of their Doctrine, and Ch^^stian
conversation of life, did much please them. But it again displeased them that
they concealed the truth, neither did openly profess it as they ough^, but
under a desire to avoid persecutions, they frequented the Churches of the
Papists and communicated with Idolaters. It was concluded that they should be
admonished concerning this and other particulars. Therefore some able men being
sent again to them they acquaint the Waldenses withit, who affirm, that the
Proposition for being in an Unity with them is very grateful to them. As for
the Vices objected against them they said, they were not so ignorant of them,
neither would defend them, but would rather confess that they had departed
from the ancient purity of their Forefathers, and would therefore labor an
amendment. They concluded to have a meeting on a prefixed day about it, in
which they would take some further order concerning this business. But before
that time, this being discovered, the Papists began to rage very violently
against the Waldenses, Stephanus one of the chiefest of them is consumed with
fire at Vienna. The rest of them some scattered into Marchia, and others into
Moravia, and most of them brought unto Fulnerha, did provide for their safety
by flight.

6. From this tr^nsaction of the Bohemian brothers with the Waldenses, it
appea^es it did arise that they were called also by the title of the Waldenses.
Howsoever they would never admit of it, and have often complained in their
printed papers, that by error that title was given to them. And this they did
for the cause of truth and necessity; for the cause of truth because they took
not their Doctrine from them, neither did they on their persuasion establish
the unity, neither were they reformed by them, but desired rather in some
defects to be reformed of them. For the cause of necessity, because they
wisely judged that the decrees published by the Magistrates against the
Waldenses were no way to be derived to them, but rather to be avoided.
Howsoever they never denied, that they received the power of ordaining
Ministers, and by that, the external succession of them from the Waldenses,
although, and this also oftentimes accordingly as they saw occasion, they
wisely did pass by in silence.

7. Nevertheless God would have the Brothers in Bohemia to be partakers of the
persecution of the Waldenses in Austria, against whom in the year following
viz. 1468. George the King (the States being solemnly called to council) did
publish a bloody Decree. Which was, that every one of the Peers within the
Territory of his Jurisdiction should endeavor to apprehend as many of the
Piccardines as he could, and having apprehended them, to prosecute against them
accordingly as he saw occasion, by this means of cruelty attempting to hinder
the separation.

8. Many therefore were apprehended, and for a long time kept in prison, until
the Death of the King, among whom was one of the chiefest of them, by name
Michael Zambergh, with which unjust and cruel proceedings the Brothers being
moved, did write an Apology to Rokizane, and to the Consistory, and afterward
to the King, and at last to them All altogether. And it came to pass by the
wonderful Counsel of God, that by the greater endeavor as they labored to
put out this spark, by so much it brake forth into a greater flame, many of
the Peers to wit the Barons of Kragir, Kostkie, Zerotine and others,
submitting themselves to the Discipline of the Brothers, and building Oratories
for them in their Towns and Villages, there being Churches by the public
Authority of the Kingdom, allowed to the Calixtines, insomuch that about the
year 1500. they had in Bohemia and Moravia about 200. Churches, and so was the
Prophecy fulfilled of Matthew of Paris, that an ignoble people should arise
without sword or outward power, over whom the Enemies of the Truth should never
prevail.

CHAP. XXI. Abominable Lies cast upon the Brothers.
I. BUt to return back a little, in the year, 1471. Rokizane dyed, having
wrastled with despair, and citing King George, who came to visit him, to
appear with him before the Tribunal of God, who one month after followed
him: and Wladislaus a Polonian did succeed him, a mild and a gentle Prince. To
whom, the Brothers being again overwhelmed with many false Accusations, did
write an Apology, desiring him that he would suffer nothing by force to be
acted on them.

2. Which did so exasperate some wicked men that in the year, 1476. they
endeavored by a most impudent invention, to stir up against them the hatred
of all men. They had suborned a most light man, by art a Polender, by name
Lezka, which if you interpret it signifies a liar, the sound agreeing with the
thing, who upholding that he came from the Piccardins, and was an Elder amongst
them, would seem to discover wonderful secrets, as how in their conventicles
they would blaspheme God, the Virgin Mary, and the Saints, traduce the
Sacraments, with their scoffings, mingle them selves incestuously after the
manner of the Adamites, commit murders, practice witchcraft, heap up most
vaste sums of money, etc. This man they did lead through Towns and Cities
as a spectacle, they brought him into their Temples, where he should abjure his
errors, and most heinous crimes, and beseeched the people to pray for him most
wretched sinner, and to take heed by his example, of the most wicked
Piccardins. They took also his confession in writing, and published it, being
confirmed with the seals and subscriptions of some Deanes and Priests, that
where Lezka himself could not come in person, his confession might be read in
the Churches to the people.

3. But this endeavor of the Devil did come to nothing, for the Brothers by
public writings did confute their Lies, and Lezka trembling so often to
forswear himself in the sight of the people, and to speak lies in the stead of
truth, refused any longer to obey them, and confessed that he was suborned to
do what he did, and that he knew not any of the Piccardines.

4. Howsoever this impudence, and these obloquies of the Devil, by the
accustomed goodness of God, did prove good for some, who making experience of
so great a Villainy, began privately and in disguises to frequent the Assemblies
of the Brethren, and finding it to be far otherwise, than was reported they
did associate themselves with the brothers, as' with true Christians.

CHAP. XXII. The Brothers prescribed from Moravia into Moldavia.
IN the year 1488. Matthias King of Hungary, proscribed the brothers from
Moravia, some hundreds of them having taken a Minister with them by name
Nicholas Slansky, came through Hungary and Transylvania into Moldavia, unto
whom some two years afterward, the Brothers sent one of their Elders, Elias
Krenowski, with letters desiring them with patience, to endure their banishment
for the Truth, but Moravia being not long after restored to the King of
Bohemia, Wladislaus being made King of Hungary, after the death of Matthias the
brothers were restored.

CHAP. XXIII. The Brethren in Bohemia cited to a colloquy.
IN the year 1503. the most gentle King Wladislaus did again suffer himself to
be transported against the brothers insomuch that he gave order that they
should be delivered to the Magistrates, imprisoned, and at pleasure afflicted.
The causes of this were not only the open enemies raging against the little
flock according to their manner, but certain false-brothers. For a question
being propounded concerning the secular power, whither it were lawful for a
Christian with a safe conscience to govern as a Magistrate, or to use the
sword, or to give or to exact Oa^hs, many were of the negative opinion as they
are now in this Anabaptist age, but the greater part affirmed, that it was
lawful. The descent did so greatly increase, that those of the negative
opinion did separate themselves, and had by themselves a peculiar meeting at
Prague accusing the other that they did admit of the sword and propounded to
defend themselves by outward force. This Calumny being greedily received and
brought to the Kings cars, was the reason that the King said, What do they
think to bring back Zisc^ again to us, We shall take a speedy course to
suppress this insolence. The brothers hearing of it, did write a new Apology
to the King, giving him an account of their faith, and removing from themselves
the late accusations, and the blasphemies attributed to the Piccardins, which
occasioned the King by one edict to mitigate another, and commanded that those
of the University and the consistory should have a friendly Colloquy with the
Piccardins in which the chiefest of them should endeavor by the strength of
reason to recall them from their errors.

2. Therefore in the Calends of January, in the year, 1504. The Patrons of the
Brothers, the Barons, were commanded to bring their greatest Doctor, to this
Colloquie, with the Academians and these of the Consistory. The business of
the Edict being deliberately canvassed, although they feared treachery, yet
because it was held inconvenient to forsake so good a cause, and to exasperate
the King, it was resolved that there should be a meeting, they sent therefore
but as Sacrifices to the slaughter, Francis Lucas of Prague, and Laurence
Krasonice, two P^llars of their Church, with some others, who were commended to
the prayers of all the Brethren. There is extant an Epistle of Bohusza Kostka
Baron of Postupitz, Lord of Litomissa, which he sent to Francis Kraso^ice, not
long after he had taken his farewell of him, I conceive it to be no lost
labor, to insert in this place some part thereof. To love life (said the
Baron) is natural, but thou (my Brother) having learned better things, must
remember that thy life is buried in Christ, which that thou may enjoy thou
must dye in Christ. Thou know whom thou have believed, and how able he is to
keep thy pledge unto that day, etc. Be strong therefore in the Lord, and in the
power of his might, that thou may fight the good fight, and may receive a
Crown of life. What is the manner of this fight thou need not to be taught,
though peradventure thou may be admonished, But that I may no longer detain
thee, stand fast beloved brother: As far as humane providence can direct us, we
have provided for your safety, neither will we be wanting to you. But if the
fury of the enemy shall prevail, and it shall please God by your death to
glorify the cause of Christ, be you prepared to say with Job. God has given
and let God take this life, as it pleases him so let it be. Farewell my
brother: Dated at Litomissa on the day of the first Martyr Stephen, 1503. There
is also extant the farewell of Francis Lucas to the Brethren at Bolislave, a
most comfortable letter.

3. But God who would preserve these instruments from the jaws of the Lions,
Mr. Martin Poczatece not the least of the Enemies of the truth, dying suddenly
that morning about the break of day, in which they should appear at the
consistory. By which example the rest were feared, and the whole City meeting
together, they desired that the colloquy might not be in private but in
public, but they pretending I know not what new businesses, adjourned the
disputation to another time, the brothers being lovingly dismissed.

CHAP. XXIIII. The Proclamation of King Wladislaus for the banishing of the
Brothers, made frustrate by the intervention of some wonderful Judgments: The
Martyrs at Bora.
I. THe enemies of the truth could not be quiet, but a new destruction was
again designed, to this small flock of the brothers, for John Bozake Bishop
of Warade in Hungary (a Moravian by his birth, a subtle man, and burning with
an implacable hatred against the enemies of the truth) entering into crafty
counsel with other Bishops of Hungaria and Bohemia, the Queen her self was
suborned, who great with child, and so near unto her delivery, that it was
believed the King would deny her nothing in that estate, she solicited him for
a new edict against the Piccardins, and coming to his Chamber, as it was
afterward known by some Gentlemen of his Bedchamber, and most worthy of
belief, she desired that favor that the King would give way to so many
Petitions, and severely prosecute against that so much hated fraternity. The
King being sad to hear that request, only nodded with his head but gave no
answer at all.

2. Presently upon this the Bishops in the presence of the King did begin to
write the Copy of the Mandate. The King going into his chamber, did fall on
his knees, and with tears besought God to forgive the guilt of those bloody
Councels, and grant no success unto them. God heard his voice, and showed some
Examples of horrid Judgment on the authors of this conspiracy. The first
example was the Queen her self, who (before hand delighting her self with
the immagination of it) did propose unto her fancy, what grateful spectacles
she should behold at Prague, when being delivered of her Child she should come
to that City, and see the Piccardines some burned, some beheaded, and some
stifled in the water. But Oh the Judgments of God, for before the time of her
delivery, being prevented with the pangs thereof, and not able to bring forth,
The Physicians, that they might preserve one, were of opinion that the Child
should be cut out of the mothers womb, and the Chyrurgions being come, took
out the child alive, but (because it was brought into the world before its
time) as yet unable to see. This was Ludonick, who afterward succeeded his
father in both Kingdoms, but the Mother no longer able to endure the torment
did expire, and with her dyed the wicked contriveances of the enemies of the
Truth for that time. This was at Buda in the year 1506. on the beginning of
July.

3. Two years after this, the Bishops obtained what before they attempted, and
the King overcome by their importunity, who cried out that sharp remedies must
be used to take away such a growing Evil, he commanded that all the Piccardins
whatsoever without difference either of sex, or Age, should be punished with
the loss of life. This was in the year 1508. on the tenth of August.

4. Ionh, Bishop of Warade, and Stanislaus Sturzo, Bishop of Olumitz brought
this Edict unto Bohemia, and a full house of the states being called, gave it
to them. But because many of the chief of the Nobility complained, that this
Decree was made without the knowledge of the Parliament, they could not consent
that it should carry any force with it. The execution of it therefore went on
but slowly, and almost eighteen months were spent in disputations only, and
debates about it.

5. At the last by the cunning Artifice, and proceedings of Albert Chancellor
of Kolowratte and his Accomplices, this bloody Edict received force by the
assent of most of the Nobility, in the presence of the King, at the Parliament
held at Cu^na in the year 1510. and it was ordered that it should not only be
engrossed in the Records of that Kingdom but there was a mutual exhortation,
and confederacy that they should prosecute it with an armed power. But God
having laid Albertus and some others on their backs, who were contrivers of
this cruelty, he almost brought altogether to nothing these endeavors of their
cruelty, of which more hereafter.

6. In these troubles the Ministers of the unity of the brothers were almost al
turned out of their places, neither did they dare to preach or pray but in
private. The most chief of them were by name cited into the Chancery of the
Kingdom, but were forbidden by their Patrons to appear, neither did the
published edict do any more hurt, but only took hold on some of the poorest of
the people, and brought them to be punished.

7. For the Baron of Schwanberge having apprehended six of the hearers of the
brothers, at a Village called Augedz, not far from Tust, he brought them to
Bora where he commanded them to be burned, their names were.

Matthias Procopius, by his trade a cobbler. John Simonowitz, a Weaver.
Bartholomew Hranowitz: a Lether-dresser. John Herbek, a Potter. John Nadribke.
two brother Germans both bred up to the Plough. Nicolas Nadribk. two brother
Germans both bred up to the Plough.
7. Being examined by a Papist parson, whether they would obey them as the
Pastor of their souls, they answered they had Christ for their Pastor. And
being brought forth to punishment, they did go cheerfully to it. And when the
chief Officer taking an affection to Nicolas above the rest did offer his life,
if he would recant his error, and would give him a whole years space to
consider of it. He stood still a little as if he would consider of it, and by
and by he made answer. It is too much by too long a deliberation, that I should
lose my brothers, and went along with them to the fire.

CHAP. XXV. Some examples of Gods Judgment on the enemies.
I. IN this place it is conceived requisite to give an account of some examples
of Gods judgment, showed at this time and a little before upon the bloody
endeavors of some cruel enemies, Albert Kolowrat Chancellor of the Kingdom
returned from the Parliament above mentioned, and in his way gave a visit to
the Baron of Coldice, and with great pleasure reported to him what there they
had al agreed upon, Coldice asked his servant Simon, that stood by him, a man
addicted to the discipline of the brothers, how he liked it. He made answer,
that they had not all agreed to it. The Chancellor presently sets upon him as a
man knowing some new conspiracy, and commanded him to declare, who he o^ they
were who durst oppose all the States of the Kingdom, whosoever they were he
said they were Traitors to the Kingdom, wretched Villains, and to be
involved in the same punishment with the Piccardines. The servant lifting up
his hand, in heaven (he said) there is one, who if he were not present at your
counsels, you have taken counsel in vain. The Chancellor replied, knave thou
shall find that, as well as the rest; and full of fury he rose up, making have
to his own habitation at Krupha. But in that very moment, a Carbuncle grew
upon his foot, which turned into that disease called Ignis sacer, which being
to be extinguished by no Art of the Physicians, did extinguish the impious man;
from whence it came to pass, that the Bellows of division being taken away,
the others did break more gently.

2. But the great Artist of Warade hastening from Bohemia into Moravia, and
willing to a light from his Chariot not far from Olumitz to make water, his
breeches (according to the fashion of that time) being not on, he so struck
his Member on a sharp nail that was by the boot of his Chariot, that in his
hasty descent, he drew out his entralls with him, some part of them sticking
upon the point of the nail, and not long after he gave up the Ghost.

3. Doctor Augustine, a civil Lawyer who by a most false and slanderous
libell, endeavored to stir up the Kings and all good men's hatred against the
Brothers, died suddenly much about the same time at Olumitz as he was at supper
at his own house.

4. Puta de Swihow did forego these, who was also one amongst the foremost in
the bloody counsels. A great Tempest then arising about his Castle, he ran
into the Cellar and there locked him self. Not long after some Courtiers
knocking at the door, and finding no man open to it, they sent for a
Blacksmith, who brake it open, four of the chiefest of them entering in, and
making no long stay, they took order for the making of a Barge, which being
covered with pitch, they put the master of the house in it, and gave fire to
it, neither for a long time was it known who did do it.

5. Henry de novo Domo, a man of great authority of the Kingdom, and not the
least enemy in the truth, delighting much in hunting, when he was thrown off
from his Carriage, his hunting shaft being fastened to his side, coming up upon
it, was forced so violently into his thigh, that the point thereof came forth
at his loins, and brought unto him a most painful death.

6. To conclude, so many and so prudent were the judgments of God in
protecting this little and unarmed flock of his faithful servants, that it was
used as a proverb among the adversaries themselves, If any man be weary of his
life, let him but attempt against the Piccardines, and he shall not outlive a
year. In the mean time, the particular and personal persecutions of them were
not few, to which maybe referred this which follows.

CHAP. XXVI. Andrew Policka a Martyr.
HE was a Citizen of Cuttenburgh, but by reason he had changed his Religion,
he came to Litomissa to which place his wife being unwilling to follow him,
when on a certain time he came back to see her, she betrayed him. Therefore
being taken, he so long was vexed with the Calixtine Priests, that he promised
to live again with his wife, and to obey the Priests. This he did outwardly;
but his Conscience inwardly did check him for it: therefore on a solemn day,
when the Parson, his sermon being ended, had brought forth the Host, and
placed it on the Altar, and the people falling down did worship it, Andrew
being not able to contain the fire burning within him, cried out with a loud
voice. Hold thy peace thou wicked Sacrificer, It is now my turn to speak. And
turning to the people, he said, What do you do, deer Brethren, what do you
worship a God of Bread? Oh worship the living God in heaven, blessed for
evermore. The Parson forbad the people to return an answer to him, and willed
them to lay hold on that most wicked knave the Piccardine. At the first, all
were amazed, no man would lay his hand on him: at the last some were found, who
falling on him, did buffet him with their fists, and beating his head against
the pillar, did draw him almost covered with blood unto the prison.

2. The next day he was brought into the Court, the Senate and the Parson being
present, and being demanded whether he would speak those words again which he
spoke yesterday, he affirmed that he would. Being asked again, By what Instinct
he durst do it. He answered, by what Instinct did Abraham depart from the
Idolaters, and worship the euerliving God. They pressing on him to tell them
precisely, by whose persuasion he durst commit so heinous a fact? he
answered, By whose persuasion did David oppose himself against the worshipping
of Idols.

3. On this they cried out, Hold thy peace, we know these things better than
thou, we need not be taught by thee; We know that thou have here some
accomplices, whom, since by thy own accord thou will not discover, thou shall
do it by force, whereupon they commanded him to be carried back to the prison,
and by and by to be put on the Rack, but not able by torment to rack any thing
from him. they condemn him to the fire, as an obstinate Heretic the chief
Officer being desired by the Priests, not to suffer him to speak as he was
going to the execution, least he should infect the people with his words, The
Officer agreed with him to forbear speaking, or otherwise he would stop his
mouth. Andrew promised silence, and performed what he promised, speaking
nothing all the way, but praying softly to himself. At the last, when the fire
began to sindge his head, he cried out, Jesus the son of the everliving God, be
merciful, be merciful, be merciful to me a sinner, which were all the words
he spoke. The Priests turning to the people, said, Behold at last he calls on
Jesus, in whom he living would not believe, nor reverence his Sacraments.

CHAP. XXVII. The persecutions which the more reformed of the Calixtines did
endure.
I. IN all these times, the condition of the church of the Brothers was most
heavy, but neither were the Calixtines free from affliction, especially the
purer sort of them, being those who were most zealous against the Papists; for
in the year 1408. Mr. Michael Polach, pastor of St. Ades in old Prague, a man
of unblemished life, and an excellent preacher, with three other Parsons, Mr.
Wenceslaus Slane, John Miezta, and Mr. Wenceslaus Piscene, were apprehended by
the command of King Wladislaus, because they affirmed the Pope to be
Antichrist. They were carried into the Castle of Calreisteine where the first
of them perished by hunger, and the nastinesse of the prison; the other with
much ado were dismissed by the order of the States. At which time, many other
who were more reformed in their judgments, were either driven from Prague, as
Mr. Mathias Macheeke professor of the University, or willingly departed, as
Lucas Pragene, Batchelour of Art, an excellent man (who afterward, as before I
have recited, was a Bishop amongst the Brothers) there also forsook the
University of their own accord, Mr. John Snow a Physician, and others.

2. On the same year, the King forbad the singing of the ballads made against
the abominations of the Church of Rome, and because they would not refrain,
many of the best rank of the Citizens were apprehended, and a long time
detained in prison. One or two of them were stead alive, as Matthew Serling,
Martin of the golden wheel, Scheynohin, who was also a Citizen of Prague,
through the violence of the torment did break asunder.

3. On this the Monks having taken new courage, began more freely to inveigh
against those that took the Sacrament in both kinds, and condemned the
Hussites, the people variously, but vainly, murmuring at it. The Senators also
of Prague, and many Papists and Germans, abusing the clemency of the King, did
grow so intollerably bold, that some noble men, who were adversaries to the
Religion, conspired together, and on the 24 of December at night, intended to
put to death the chiefest of the Citizens who received the Sacrament under both
kinds. But they were deceived of their expectation and hope, God so ordaining
it that the evil returned upon the heads of the contrivers of it. For their
treachery being betrayed, their was a mighty Tumult in which the places of
justice of the three Cities, and all the Monasteries were pulled down, and
many of the Senators and Monks were slain. This was done in the year 1413. at
which though Wladislaus was much afflicted, yet inquiry being made, and it
being found that the Papists gave the cause thereof, he pardoned the
inhabitants of Prague. And in the year 1485, he established by Parliament an
agreement betwixt the communicants under one and both kinds, howsoever the
hatred betwixt them and the reproachful words did still continue.

4. In the year 1491, on the 28 of January at Laeta Curia a chief Temple of
the Hussites. The Eucharist being administered under both kinds, a German
coming behind a Gentlewoman, as she was drinking of the cup, he struck her
head so violently, that her mouth being cleaved, blood issued forth abundantly,
for which notorious offense he was apprehended, and thrown into prison, but
not long after dismissed.

5. But in the Vacation of the Arch-Bishopprick, the Calixtine Priests could
not receive their Ordinations but in Italy, where most of them were bound to
renounce the articles under both kinds, and to perform obedience unto the sea
of Rome, which was very grievous to the Bohemians, therefore in the year 1482.
there Sanctuarensis a Bishop came into Bohemia from Italy, for the love as he
said of the pure Religion, whom when Augustinus Lucian and others, had received
with much joy and honor, he died i^ the year of our Lord 1493, whom whom
after eleven years Philip Bishop of Sidon and Mutina did succeed, He being
resident sometimes at Prague, sometimes at Cuttenburge, did for three years
space ordain Calixtine Ministers, which being passed they were again enforced
to flatter the Pope and Bishops of Rome, so miserable was their slavery, that
willing to seem to have forsaken Antichrist, yet they did not stick to fight
under his standards.

6. But some of the scholars amongst whom was John Bezhink so truly hated the
Pope, that having received letters of commendation from the University, they
went as far as Armenia to be ordained Ministers. And because that there the
fame had arrived of the Heresy of the Bohemians, they were the more strictly
examined: and it being found that they agreed with them in the chiefest
Articles of Religion, and also in the language, they were ordained Ministers,
in the year 1499. Two of those did afterward suffer the flames of Martyrdom
by the Romans, to wit, Martin a Taborite, with his Deacon, who were both
burned at Radnice.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Persecution of the Orthodox Divines, under Zahera, or
Trahere, the administrator a false Hussite.
IN the mean time, God had stirred up in Germany courageous Luther, the
Thunderbolt against the Pope, at which many of the Calixtines in Bohemia being
awakened, resolved to embrace the purer Doctrine of the Gospel, and to seek
for the Ordination of their Ministers, rather at Wittenberge then at Rome; but
the Devil interposed and made wonderful obstructions,

2. For when in the year 1523. in the month of January, the States of
Bohemia, and Moravia being in a great number assembled at Prague, the Pastors
also of the Church being called, amongst whom were of Moravia, Paulus Speratus
(afterward burned at Aumitz, by the commandment of the Bishop) and Benedist
Optatus, Wenceslaus Litomislius, Doctor of Divinity, and John Charpe, Orthodox
men, who propounded to the Regent Masters of the University, twenty Articles,
which were as it (were) the forerunners of Reformation, amongst which, these
were observable.

That if any man should teach the Gospel without the Additions of men, he
should neither be reproved, nor condemned for an Heretic.

That mercenary Masses, serving for Lucre, should be abrogated.

That the elevation of the Host should by degrees be cancelled.

That the consecration of Herbs, and such like superstitious rites, should be
forborne, etc.

And whereas likewise they had constituted Gallus Zahere, an Administrator of
the Sacrament under both kinds, and pastor at old Prague, at the Church called
Laeta Curia, a familiar friend to Luther, (for he had lived heretofore at
Wittenburgh, and publicly extolled Luther as an excellent Instrument of Cod,
and afterward incited the inhabitants of Prague to write to Luther concerning
the Ordination of Ministers) the hope indeed was great for a better condition
in the Government of the Church, but it was of a short continuance.

3. For not long after, this turne-coat declining, to give an occasion of
offense to King Jews, returned again to the falser doctrine of the Calixtines,
and in the Parliament held that year, in the month of June, he began to
publish Articles contrary to the former, and to solicit the renewing of the
Agreement, and furiously to persecute the Orthodoxe Ministers, to favor the
King and Papists, and that on this occasion.

4. The Pope understanding how the affairs were carried as well in Bohemia as
Germany, sent a Legate to Lewis in Hungary, who coming afterward to Prague,
and having delivered letters to diverse, nay even to the consistory, and to
Zahere, he most flatteringly did insinuate that there might be an union in the
Church. In the mean time John Pasoke was made Consul at Prague, a deceitful,
cruel and superstitious man, whose faction potently prevailing, Zahere joined
himself with that part, and wrote in that nature to the Legate in the name of
the consistory, that it was an evident testimony that he was delivered over to
a reprobate sense, for after other things he concluded with these words. As
always heretofore so now also we hold nothing more dear or ancient, than
that we may be found constant in the body of the Church by the unity of faith,
and obedience to the Apostolical seat, neither can your reverence expect any
thing more welcome than what it shall receive from our Legates, whom shortly we
will send unto you. For truly our Bohemia supporting it self on the most sure
foundation of the most sure Rock the Catholic faith, has sustained and broken
al those waves of errors, with which our neighbor countries in Germany have
been shaken, and as a Beacon placed in the midst of a tempestuous sea, it
holds forth a clear light to every Seaman, and shows them a Haven safe from
Shipwreck. We trust therefore most reverend father for the business concerning
which your sacred reverence did write unto us, shall be so promoted, that this
divine building being established on a most sure foundation, shall be preserved
from ruin, only let your most sacred reverence not think ill of a little
delay, until our Legates shall come unto you, and then the walls of our
Jerusalem shall be confirmed, and our feet shall stand in the Courts thereof,
and the God of Gods shall be seen in Zion, and we shall go from virtue to
virtue, etc.

Your most humble servants Mr. Gallus Zahere, with all the Consistory do
commend themselves unto your most venerable paternity.
In the time of Lent 1625. 5. Being demanded how he durst persecute the
doctrine with so great severity which so lately he approved, he answered, he
was with Luther for no other end, then after having more diligently discovered
his conversation and Doctrine and other Piccardins with him, he might find a
more easy way to oppose them; which Judas that traitor did before him, when
he betrayed the son of man with a kiss.



CHAP. XXIX. The Protestants banished from Prague, and whipped with Rods.
I. THerefore that Zahere and Passoke might the better please both the King and
Pope, they enforced all the Pastors and citizens to subscribe to their new
Articles, and those who refused were to be banished the city. In the first
place six Pastors were proscribed, Wenceslaus Poczatek, Pastor of St. Gallus,
George Smahal, Pastor of St. Henry, Matin Betlem, Paul de St, Michaell, Martin
de Opatowitz, and John Marussa, after threescore and five of their chiefest
citizens were proscribed, amongst whom was Burian de Cornitz Doctor of law and
Chancellor of Prague, John Hlawsa, who was Exconsull and others. Likewise a
color was sought for the greater cruelty, a malicious invention being spread
abroad concerning a certain conspiracy of the Gospellers against the
Calixtines, that they might extort the confession hereof, they did bring three
citizens John Bonussa, Matthew Hrzebenarz and John Sliwkam to the rack, who
rather chose to suffer innocently; than to bear false witness, a thing they
utterly detested in their conscience.

2. In the mean time while these firebrands of sedition confirmed an
agreement, between those of Prague, that no man should be questioned,
concerning his faith (to wit the Piccardine and Lutheran) but that al should be
restored to their former freedom and enjoy the liberty of the city. It was
requested that an Ambassador should be dispatched to Buda unto the K. for the
confirmation of this ordinance. It was now lawful for any to do what they
pleased to those of a good and right opinion. If one of them were found that
was unwilling to pay what he owed, they would lay to his charge that he was a
Piccardine; some were not simply banished, but shamefully brought forth, as
Ludovicus Pictor, because at the end of his sermon he had admonished the Monk
of St. Barbara prating foolishly. That it was far better that the people should
be instructed out of the Gospel, than be detained with such fables. By the
clamors of the Monk he was laid hold on by the common people that were called
together, and hurried to prison, and afterward by a Sergeant was led out of
the City.

3. A certain Cutler because they had found about him a book concerning the
Sacraments, penned by a man of a sincere opinion, was whipped openly in the
market place and banished. The like happened to John Kelenetz, but he was
branded in the forehead, because he being a Layman, was said to administer the
Eucharist to himself and his family. George Lopatski, being one of those that
was banished, when as the King had wrote that he liked not such proceedings,
and had commanded the banished to be restored; supposing that it had been
confirmed returned home to his house at Prague, but being apprehended, he was
thrust into prison and there murdered.

4. In the mean time the Assemblies of the Kingdom being held, and those
wicked pragmatical men urging it, it was agreed upon, that the communicants
under one and both kinds, by the violence of those that were joined together
should be one body, but the commands of Wladislaus should be put in execution
against the Piccardins. From whence arose a new persecution to the brethren,
their Church doors being shut up, and their exercise forbidden.

5. Seeing these things were so way wardly done, one Matthias an Eremite, a
plain man, but of an holy conversation of life, who came to Prague in the year
1419. and hitherto was wont to exhort the people in the streets and market
places, flocking unto him in great companies in the fear of God, and
repentance, the Clergy in vain striving to inhibit him, felt the severe hand
of Zahera. For when he had admonished Zahera the chief Magistrate by letters
which he wrote unto him in the year 1525 of Theological moderation, that men
should be converted to the faith by Scripture, not by imprisonments,
scourgings, tortures, and wrackings, etc. being invited by him to a
communication, was delivered to the Praetor, and was kept in prison until that
day Ferdinand was chosen King, but afterward he was banished the city. Very
Godly letters of that man dated out of the prison are yet extant.

CHAA. XXX. Nicholas Wrzetenarz, with his Hostess Clara burned.
I. IN the year, 1526 on the 9 day of December Nicholas Wrzetenar, being well
stricken in years and withal a learned man, is accused of Piccardisme, before
the Senate by Jacobus Parochus, and appearing according to his citation, he was
demanded by Zahera what he did believe concerning the Sacrament of the Altar,
answered. That which the Evangelists and St. Paul taught me to believe. He
that at that time sat as chief asked him; beleevest thou that Christ is there
present having flesh and blood, but he answered, I believe that when the
Ministers of Gods word does declare to the faithful congregation, the benefits
which are received by the death of Christ, the bread and wine are then made the
supper of the Lord, wherein they are made partakers of the body and blood of
Christ, and the benefits received by the death of Christ. What needs many
words after the discussing of some questions concerning the Mass, and
intercession of Saints, etc. they do condemn him to the fire together with his
Hostess Clara being a widow of threescore years of age, who would not deny
that faith whereof she was instructed by her inmate.

2. Being brought to the place of torment, and being commanded to pray to the
sign of the cross, lifted up toward the east, they utterly refused, saying. The
law of God permits us not to worship the likeness of any thing either in
heaven or earth, we will worship the living God of heaven, who alike inhabiteth
the South, the West, the North, the East, turning their backs therefore unto
the image, and prostrating themselves toward the West, with their hands and
eyes lifted up unto heaven with great ardencie of spirit they called on Christ,
then they took leave of their children, and Nicholas with much cheerfulnes
ascended the heap of wood, and there stood, and did repeat the Articles of the
Creed, which when he had finished, he looked up to heaven, prayed, and with a
loud voice said. Lord Jesus Christ, thou son of the living God who was born of
a pure virgin, and did vouchasfe to undergo the shameful death of the Cross
e for me a wretched sinner, thee alone do I worship, to thee I recommend my
soul, be merciful unto me, and forgive me all my sins. Then he repeated this
Psalm in latin. In thee O Lord have I put my trust. In the mean time the
executioner had laid Clara on the pile of wood, and then bound them both and
casting the books which were found about them on the heap he set fire thereto.

CHAP. XXXI. Martha Porzizia burned.
I. IN the next year after Martha de Porzizia a woman even beyond her sex of
an heroicke spirit, being examined as well by the Masters in Colleges, as by
the Judges in the Common Hall, with much boldness gave an account of her
faith, and upbraideth the Hussites of folly, for that they flattered the
Papists, the chief Magistrate admonishing her that she should prepare her
garments against the time she was to be laid on the pile of wood, answered, I
have both my petticoate and mantle command me to be led away when ye please;
the crier declaring openly that she had blasphemed, she with a loud voice
denied, saying, it is not so, but I am condemned for that I would not confess
to please the Papists, that Christ was contained in the Sacrament with bones,
hair, sinews, and veins, and speaking aloud to the people she said: Give no
credit to these Priests, they are dissembling Hypo-crites, Gormandizers,
Adulterers, and Sodomites. Being brought forth and commanded to pray unto the
image of the crucifix, she turned her back to it, and having lift up her eyes
unto heaven she said, there is our God, thither we must look, and then she
hastened to mount the pile, and endured the pains of the fire with a strong
courage the 4 of December, 1527.

CHAP. XXXII A potter and a girdler burned.
IN the year 1528. and in the reign of Ferdinand the 1. two German artificers
the one a potter the other a girdler, accused of Lutheranisme by the Monks,
were condemned by those of Prague to the fire. As they went unto the place of
execution, they argued so religiously out of the Scriptures that they caused
tears to flow from the eyes of many, being laid on the pile, they exceedingly
encouraged one another; the girdler saying. Since our Lord Jesus has suffered
very grievous things for us, let us also suffer this death, and rejoice that we
have found so much grace and favor with him, that we are accounted worthy to
die for the law of God; to whom the Potter answered, but I at the day of my
marriage found not such rejoicing of mind as now I do. And when fire was put to
the wood they prayed with a loud voice. Lord Jesus Christ, thou in thy
sufferings prayedst for thine enemies, threefore we also pray, forgive the
King, the men of Prague, and the clergy, for they know not what they do, and
their hands are full of blood. Well beloved people, pray for your King, that
God would give him the knowledge of truth, for he is misled by the Bishops and
Clergy. And having ended this most Godly exhortation, they with it ended their
lives August 29.

CHAP XXXIII. The judgment of God upon Zaheram and his accomplices.
I. DVchoslaw a citizen of Prague, and a chief pickthanke of Zahera, so
violently hated those of the true faith, that he wished all the Piccardines
either to be hanged, beheaded, or burned by his own hands, all which by the
just judgment of God befell him. For being greatly in debt in the year 1525
on St. Andrew's day, he hanged himself at his own house, whom his kinsmen
privily conveyed away, and buried obscurely near unto a certain Village, but
when the country people had notice thereof, they dug up the carkase and cast
it way, which by the commandment of the Magistrate was delivered to the
executioner to be burned, but when the great Wood-stack was consumed, and he
notwithstanding was not burned, his head was taken off from the can case being
very much scorched, and so at length were buried.

2. Zahera himself, when under a color of inquisition against the Piccardins,
he had raised up civil commotions, by King Ferdinand his command, in the year
1529. on the ninth of August, he was proscribed and presently on the self same
day (instead of the procession which the day before he solemnized in the
commemoration of St. Lawrence) is forced to leave his own country from whence
he went into Misnia, but notice being taken by the Electour, what kind of man
he was, he was again banished, and died miserably in Frantonia.

3. The same likewise happened to that cruel Paschus the chief Consul, in the
year 1530. who in vain cast him down at the Kings feet, and sued for pardon.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Perpetual oppressions under Ferdinand the first.
I. ALL the Hussites for denying the absolute obedience to the Pope, were
hated; but the Brethren for quite casting him off, were utterly detested.
Neither for any other end did the Papists dissemble the observance of the
Confederats, then that they might especially make use of the Calixtines in
suppressing the Brethren; they therefore press the Ordinance of Wladislaus,
neither did omit doing what mischief they could to the Brethren.

2. The Brethren therefore through the whole Kingdom suffering many things,
send again unto Ferdinand by the Baron William Krzinezium. and Mr. Henry
Domausitius, to Vienna, an Apology, or a Confession of Faith more copious than
before, to which twelve Barons, thirty three Knights had subscribed in the
year 1535, complaining and declaring how unjustly they were accused of the
errous of the Piccardines, and how nevertheless, certain parish Priests
boldly and bloudily cry out, that the Piccardines may be slain scot-free, and
that a less sin is committed, than if a man had killed a dog: against all
which injuries they with tears desire the justice of God, and the pity and
protection of the King.

3. Ferdinand did not approve of their stubborn perseverance, and denied that
the book could be read at that time so exactly as necessity required, in
regard of many incombrances, but promised that nothing should be permitted to
be done either against Law or Equity, until he had a fuller knowledge of the
cause.

4. While this controversy was depending, the Brethren were very much urged at
home, and encouraged from abroad, letters passing very frequently from Luther,
Bucer, and Capitone, But God (maugre the enemies) added great increase to the
Church, and to the Churches where the Gospel was preached through all Germany,
even unto that lamentable year 1547,

5. For Caesar Carolus putting into execution the Decrees of the Tridentall
Counsels, with his brother Ferdinand and the Pope, taking counsel together,
raise war against the Protestant Princes of Germany, and Ferdinand soliciteth
the Bohemians for aid: but they pretending their ancient leagues with the house
of Saxony, and their mutual affection and fidelity, as well the chief
Magistrates of the Kingdom, as the free Denisons, as it were with unanimous
consent (for most of them began to incline to Lutheranisme, and decline
Hussitisme) excuse themselves.

6. Ferdinand therefore having in war overcome the protestants in Germany, in
the year 1547. enters into Bohemia with an army of Germans and Hungarians,
seizes upon Prague, calls forth the chief Magistrates, and casts into prison
the principal Barons, Noblemen and Citizens, some he scourges, some he
beheadeth, on some he lays a large fine, and some he despoileth of all their
goods for ever. He takes all their arms out of their armories, as also their
privileges: some he banisheth, others of their own accord exiled themselves.

CHAP. XXXV. The Churches of the Brethren every where shut up: and some of
their Churches publicly sold.
I. IN so sad a condition of things Satan has his, incensors, who lay all this
blame upon the Brethren, and for that cause were very diligent to bring them
into hatred with the King, the Peers and the people: the King therefore giving
credit to these malicious surmizes, first by open proclamation commanded all
the Churches of the Brethren to be shut up. and then of five Signiories (
Litomislena, Brundusina, Chlumecensi, Bydzoviensi, and Turnoviensi, which for
that they were suspected of Rebellion, among other things of note, he took
away their Peers) all the auditors of the brethren, (unless they had revolted
to the faction (under one or both kinds) he banished out of his confines.

2. By which thunderbolt no small part of them being cast down, they agreed,
that they would be more constant to God. and faithful to their Consciences:
by common consent they went into Polonia in three companies. The first gathered
out of Lytomislenians, Bydzovinians, and Clumecensians, to the numbtr of 500
souls: there went with them 60 Wagons, by the County Clacensis, and the upper
Silesia. Another company having Turnovians, and some Brundusians about 300
souls, they went with 50 Wagons by the mountains of Giants, and Silesia the
lower. The third the same way, containing the rest of the Brundusians. Yet all
of them had experience of an admirable divine protection in their journey: (for
both in one and an other place they met with such as would have robbed the^)
and also in most places the Christian commiseration and liberality of men, yea
even in Polonia (though they stood for the Pope) for at Posuania (where they
all met) they were courteously admitted and entertained, before the Bishop had
obtained a Maudate from the King concerning the driving them out.

3. Which as soon as it came, they are forced to depart from thence, and to go
into the farthest parts of Prussia, by the leave of Duke Albert Brandenburgh
(unto whom they had sent before some to solicit concerning a place of abode
for banished men) and there they that were known for brethren being examined
of the Lutheran Divines of Regiomontum (for they had with them Ministers of
their own, the chief of whom was Mathias Sionius the Elder one) and another
town (by name Soldavia Guidzina, etc.) were showed to them, wherein they might
live quietly, and one Paulus Speratus Bishop of Pomesania being very courteous
and charitable unto them, who in former time passing through Bohemia, honored
the Church of Lytomislena, and well knew the manners and doctrine of the
brethren. He rejoiced for that he had such guests at Borusia, and recommended
us to the Prince, who was also very friendly to us.

CMAP. XXXVI, John Augusta, James Bileck, and George Israel taken,
I. THe third Edict that Ferdinand set forth against the brethren, was
concerning the taking of the Ministers of the brethren prisoners: wherefore
they are dispersed, part into Morauia, which at that time was free from
troubles, part, that they might not forsake their auditors, in private places,
from whence coming forth (but for the most part, in the night) they visited
the faithful, and where need required administered in houses, which continued
for some years.

2. Three of them fell into their enemies clutches, John Augusta, the elder,
with James Bilke his colleague and George Israel, pastor of the Church of
Turnovia, but he by the admirable help of God was freed from the deep dungeon
of the Castle of Prague, and followed his friends into Borussia, being from
above made an Apostle of the Polonians. For when he had once or twice traveled
from Borussia into Moravia (where the Ministers forced from Bohemia did lurk
and had gone through Polonia the greater, in some places (as occasion offered
it self) he preached the Gospel with such success, that he gained many of
the nobility, and in these the Pallatines and Castellanes, and within few
years erected about twenty Churches in Polonia the greater: and this was the
first original of Churches in Polonia, which as yet retain the Ceremonies of
the Bohemian Confession.

3. The enemies so rejoiced for the imprisonment of John Augusta, as the
Philistims did when they had taken Sampson; for he was a man renowned through
the whole Country, not so much for that he was the chief bishop among the
brethren, but for his disputations both by words and writings with his
adversaries the Calixtines, who as Luther, the Pope in Germany, so he
confounded his adversaries in Bohemia. For he was sometimes Luther's auditor,
and did often afterward receive Letters from him. By which means the enemies
laid all the blame of the disobedience of the Orders toward Ferdinand, upon
Augusta alone, as if he with his, had caused (the rest of the Order cunningly
being drawn into the faction) that Ferdinand being driven out, they might
advance John Frederick the Elector of Saxony unto the Kingdom; which had
assuredly been brought about, if Caesar had been overthrown in war.

4. That this cruel conspiracy might be disclosed, Augusta being called forth
by a feigned friend to discourse, as if to advise with them concerning the
allaying of that mischief, he is taken and carried back to Prague, and was by
order three times miserably tortured by the hand of the hangman, his colleague
John Billek, fared no better. But no unlawful act being known, or any sign
thereof appearing, they are left in prison for the space of 17 years, at the
length after the death of Ferdinand they are dismissed in the year 1564.

CHAP. XXXVII. Veey many of the Ministers of the Gospel banished.
I. WHen it was evidently known, that the brethren were not the authors of any
conspiracy, but that the Orders in regard of the ancient league with the
Saxons, and a new desire against the protestants had acted this, Ferdinand bent
all his endeavor to persecute the Lutheranes also, having called a meeting in
the year 1549 he caused those things which were formerly agreed upon to be
confirmed, and the decree for the abolishing all other sects, (to wit the
brethren and Lutheranes) to be published.

2. The effect whereof was, that as well the Calixtines as Papists, might have
the more liberty to vex the Gospellers with malice, calumnies, and injuries,
and until the year 1555 by the Kings command, the Ministers that had received
orders in Germany, and those that were married in Cities and Towns were
removed, one after another, and banished the Kingdom, to the number (as some
have affirmed) of near upon 200. These men being dispersed through Misnia, and
the Palatine Philip Malancthon greatly comforted with his letters.

For the King had promised that some of the chief of the Gospellers, upon any
pretense whatsoever should be proscribed, and hurried to prison, among whom
was John Prostiborskt, Baron of Schanow, an eminent man, not so much for his
wealth, as his learning and good experience. He, for a suspicion of a certain
plot against Ferdinand, and for that he had consulted with the Saxons after an
itterated verbal diligent examination being laid on the rack, with an
heroical indignation, cut out his tongue and cast it away, being demanded why
he did so, what he could not with his tongue in those tortures, very humbly
with a quill set it down on the wall) for that end (said he) I did it,
because I would not be brought to it, by any tortures to say any thing that is
false against himself, or others. And here by a written parchment upbraiding
the Tyrannical proceedings against them, and other innocents he cited the King
and his counselors to appear before the tribunal of God, and a little after
died in the same prison, notwithstanding the King had taken order that a
Chyrurgion, and a Physician should take care of his health.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Jesuits brought into Bohemia.
FErdinand strove with might and main to suppress all those whom he accounted
heretics, he brought Jesuits into Prague and founded a very sumptuous and
rich College for them: as he did a little after at Chonotowa, Crolowre and
Hradecij, which is called Henry's College, and these pretending the education
of youth, after their accustomed manner, sought by all means to overthrow the
Churches, and added fuel to that fire, which had now almost inflamed the
whole country.

CHAP. XXXIX. The state of the Churches under Maximillian, under one common
confession are reconciled.
I. NEvertheles under Maximilian (as afterward under Rodolphus their sleights
and plots succeeded not so prosperously; for Maxamilian in the year 1562 being
crowned King (a Prince of a peaceable disposition well instructed in the
knowledge of the truth) would by no means be induced that any should suffer for
their faith; insomuch that the churches not only gathered breath, but
flourished under him.

2. For he had John Fauser preacher of his court, (his father Ferdinand being
yet alive) a very Godly man, and well skilled in the Evangelical doctrine, who
did not cease to infuse good principles into the young Prince, for which he
incurred very great displeasure, but did not suffer martyrdom. For upon a time
Caesar Ferdinand) alone going into his chamber sharply rebuked him, for that
he had seduced his son by his erroneous (so conceived by him) opinions, he
mildly notwithstanding, answered him, which no wa^y allayed his fury, which was
so great, that having in his left hand his sword drawn, and with his right hand
seizing on the throat of Fausereus, threatened a blow; yet he refrained and
went out unto his son and charged him to put him from him, (this John
Blosislaus minister of the bre^hren in Moravia, afterward an elder and then an
inhabitant of Vienna, took from the mouth of Fauserus, and sealed it in
writing. Neither did Maximilianus after that as long as he lived admit of any
but such as should be well ordered governors of his conscience, and was wont
to say, and moreover, wrote to Lazarus Swendius a Baron, that those men would
invade Gods throne who did Lord it over men's consciences.

3. Among others who if need were did instill into this good Prince peaceable
principles, was that discreet man John Cratis a physician: him he made choice
of for his chief Doctor, and esteemed of him as his special friend and
acquaintance. This man alone with Caesar going into the field for the
recreation of himself, was taken up into his Chariot, and recounting unto
Caesar with much grief, the many differences in Christianity, demanded of Crato
among all sects that of late sprung up in the Church, which he thought came
nearest the Apostolical purity, answered. I know not whether I may say to the
brethren which are called Piccardines. Caesar replied, I am of that opinion.
Crato took that boldness to persuade the brethren, whom he knew had set forth
a new edition of a Germane Hymn, that they should dedicate it unto the
Emperor; which was done in the year 1566, where the Dedicatorie epistles
mentioned, that al their hope was in him, both for the preservation of them and
their goods, and that his Majesty would promote the universal Reformation of
the Church: and encouraged him by the example of David, Jehosaphat, Josiah,
Constantine and Theodosius, and at length did not doubt, but that he would
employ that talent which God had given him, for the advancing of so good a
cause, even as the preface shows, which all the books of those Songs do
prefer. And it is probable that the Prince did not want a will, if in regard of
the policy of those men who had the Scepters of Kings in their possessions, and
had bound up their hands, it might have been lawful.

4. In the third year of his reign, 1565. the haters of the truth forged a
new process against the Brethren, abusing the authority of Ioachim de Nova
Domo Chancellor of Bohemia; who going to Vienna, wrought so by continual
diligence with Caesar, that he should urge Wladislaus to subscribe (though
unwillingly) the old Mandate, with a new one against the Piccardines. But the
goodness of God had a watchful eye over his, and would not permit so good and
innocent a Prince to have a hand in blood, or be burdened with the cries of
the oppressed. For when the Chancellor returned strengthened with the Princes
Letters patents, and scarce entering the ports of Vienna, coming over the
bridge Danubium, it so came to pass, that the yoke of the ox being loosened,
the bridge cleaved asunder, and he with his train was drowned in the water,
six Knights only swimming out, saved their lives, and one young Nobleman, who
at length in his old age died, but escaped alive to be a witness of the daily
revenging hand of God, but he avouched the Religion of the Brethren, for which
he had had experience that God was watchful. This man saw his Lord swimming
above the waters of Danubium, and held him by his golden Chain, until
fishermen, who were then coming toward him in a small ship, came to help him.
So the Baron was taken up, but dead: but the chest wherein he had locked his
deadly instruments, sunk into the Sea, that it was never seen any more,
neither was there any one that would look after it. Thuanus, makes mention,
of this Story in his 36 book, and reports this accident to have happened on
the fourth of the Ides of December.

5. Ten years after, in the year 1575. Maximilianus called a Parliament at
Prague, and permitted all the Orders in the Kingdom under both kinds to be
reconciled, by the common sign of the confession of one faith, the Jesuits
and false Hussits endeavored with might and main to hinder it. Among other
things when they had used their best endeavors by petitions and protestations,
alleging that the Orders in both kinds do not agree in their faith, but that
they have among them Piccardines, Calvinists, Lutherans, etc. The Orders that
they might evidence their consent, consulted together about the registring of a
common confession: for which purpose they made choice of certain Divines, who
with some of the Barons, Noblemen and Citizens, were overseers. The chief men
of Prague brought forth the books of Hus, and the Synodicall and Parliamentary
decrees of the ancient Bohemians concerning Religion. The greater part of the
Order who stood for the Augustine confession, produced this their confession,
as the Brethren brought forth theirs. Then they compared the Articles together,
and the sense and manner of setting down of each part, and expressed them in
such forms that each part might subscribe unto them, not intending to trouble
themselves too much with particular and subtle Scholasticall disputations;
which Christian moderation and wisdom, did not only then benefit them, but
also pleased many eminent men, as well in Germany as elsewhere: for Caesar
confirmed their confession of faith, and did receive such as did subscribe,
into his Kingly protection: but he gave them not power according to their
desires, for the appointing of a Consistory, or Academy at that time, yet
promising very faithfully, that neither he nor his son, (whom they had
designed his successor) would be wanting in giving full satisfaction to their
desires (you must observe that this confession of the Orders was written in the
Bohemian language, and not translated into Latin, neither was it printed
unless in the year 1619. when as well the University as the Consistory at
Prague offered it to King Frederick, therefore in the Harmony of Confessions
it is not extant, and that which the Bohemians now call their Confession, is
the peculiar Confession of the brethren of Bohemia, not the common Confession
of the Orders. This Mr. Bohuflaus Felix a Lobkowitz, and Hassenstein being
appointed by the Order to have the sole managery of the business, took care
to convey it into Germany, and in the year 1575. submitted it to the Censure of
the Divines which were assembled at Wittenburgh. The Wittenburghian Divines
approved of it, and among others used these expressions in their answer to the
Baron, although this Confession be brief, and we easily observe that in the
composing them the chiefest care was, that they might be concisely, elegantly,
and properly expressed; for the avoiding of tediousness, and contentions about
scrupulous questions, which peradventure some wrangling Sophisters in our
Germany would have taxed, if it had been set forth in their own native
language: We therefore cannot but approve of your Christian prudence and
temperance. Therefore we willingly advise you publicly, that however opinions
may arise from other places, that you adhere to this, and suffer not your self
to be led away, from this holy and pure truth. For this is certain that the
church is very well provided for, and is then chiefly built up, and kept in
unity, and unanimity, when the pure doctrine of the Gospel without far-fetched
subtilities, and emergent contentions is propounded to Christian people, in
simplicity of truth, as it is in Psalm the 25. Let integrity and uprightness
preserve me. Dated at Wittenbergh 3. November. 1575.

CHAP. XL. Under Rodolphus the Gospellers had full liberty.
I. IN the year after 1576 Maximilianus being dead, his son Rudolphus
succeeded him, who trod in his fathers steps, he reigned peaceably until the
year on thousand six hundred and two no persecution being in all that time
concerning religion. In this year it was so brought about by the private
practices of the Jesuits and their instruments, that Rodolphus should
subscribe to, and cause to be published an Edict drawn by them, concerning the
renewing of a Decree of Wladislaus against the Piccardines; for noe other end,
but that their Churches might be shut up for a time, the Patrons of the
Brethren, the Noblemen protested that it did no way concern them, since these
men are not such as the Piccardines are described to be, and therefore Caesar
did connive and looked not so narrowly after them, as that they should so
strictly observe his decrees herein, neither was it lawful for the enemy to
press the Orders so far, and it was related by a man of credit, that the
evening before the 22. of July, when news was brought to the King that Alba
Regia was taken (being the chief City of Hungary) in great astonishment said,
I looked for some such things, since this day I began to usurp the Government
of God, which is of consciences.

2. Neither intended he any thing else than to make good the promise of his
father, and to settle liberty of conscience, as he declared afterward, when in
the year 1609 to the Orders of the Kingdom under both kinds (the Pope the
Spanish faction and their counselors not consenting thereto) he committed the
lower consistory, and the university to be reformed at the pleasure of the
Orders, giving them Patents whereby this donation was confirmed to them, and
gave leave that the churches and schools should be inhabited, or if need be,
should be built, and forbad that any of his subjects whether Catholic or
Spiritual should be punished for his religion, and obliged those Kings that
should succeed him, religiously to observe these things, and also gave power to
the Orders to make choice of some among them to be defendors of this liberty.

3. The Orders therefore reform the consistory, and for quietness sake they
choose 3 Hussites, 3 Brethren, and 3 Gospellers, to these they add the 3
Professors of the University, and command these twelve chosen men to order all
affairs concerning Church Government throughout the Kingdom. And because it
was generally agreed that the confederates should be cashiered, and Church
government be according to the rule of Gods law. Elias Shudim of Semanin a
Hussite is chosen first Administrator, and afterward to be elected out of the
ordinary sort of Ministers. But concerning the brethren it is concluded (the
order of whose discipline was granted for the better reconciliation) that they
should have their Seniour, being the next Colleague of the Administrator, so
long as the diversity of this order yet in a friendly concord should endure. To
whom at Prague a Church is given by the University, as it were to the true
offspring of Hus called Bethlehem, famous for the preaching of Hus. All which
things were done with the public acclamation of all good people, and all
things rung out with divine praises, and were fastened to the doors of the
church these lines.

The Temples ope'd, the Lion joys, that Raph,
To Maxamillian kept his promised faith. etc.
4 The orders under both kinds made a friendly agreement with the orders under
one kind, for the consideration of peace and mutual concord among them, which
having digested into articles, they promised to enter into the Registrie of the
kingdom, but to be confirmed by the subscription of Caesar and his
Counselors. But three were found who did refuse, being two or three times
solicited, having some scruple of conscience. Zaenko Adalbertus Popel de
Lobkowitz. Chancellor of the kingdom, William Slawata ^e Chlum, and Iaroslaus
de Martinitz Smeczanskie. Therefore they solemnly protest against the orders
under both kinds, that if hereafter they shall attempt any thing against this
liberty granted to the whole kingdom by Caesar, that then they would punish
them as disturbers of the public peace; which protestation of the orders,
Rodolphus assenting to it, is entered into the Registrie of the Kingdom, and
kept among the privileges, and confirmed by the same oath with other
privileges of the Kingdom, by Rodolphus and his successors.

5. False Hussitisme being taken away, a more pure Religion flourished
throughout the whole kingdom, so that there was scarce one among a hundred who
hid not profess the Evangelicall doctrine. But alas! with the liberty of
Religion (as usually it happens) by little and little, two much liberty of life
began to increase, and learning (even among whom formerly it flourished) began
after a strange manner to be dissolved. Wherefore this liberty bringing along
with it carnal security, did not please all godly men, and some began to
presage ill, that so a horrible tempest from some Ferdinand should again
overwhelme them. It was a Prophetical speech, in peace my bitterness is most
bitter. and fullfilled, of which it follows.

CHAP. XLI. New stratagems of the enemies under Matthias.
I. I Must begin higher, that the bottom of our calamity may be more apparent.
The occasion of the grant of this ample Religious Liberty, by Rodolphus to the
Bohemians and Silesians, was, because the Hungarians with Austrians and
Moravians forsaking Rodolphus, for some civil causes, had created his brother
Matthew Archduke, King, Duke and Marquis, and with a great army in the year,
1608. entering into Bohemia, even unto Prague, did not only demand the Crown of
Hungary, which was there kept, but courted the Bohemians to a revolting, but
they with the Silesians, were faithful to him, and Matthew with the Crown of
Hungary, and hope for succession in the Kingdom of Bohemia after the death of
Rodolphus, being sent away, they asked and obtained, for that they had sworn
fealty to Rodolphus, the former promised favor of Religious liberty, and the
power of the Consistory and University.

2. In the mean time, for this affront put upon him by his Brother, he was
very much vexed, and the more, because foreseeing the Spanish plots began to
boad no good luck to his Bohemians, and all Germany, he began to enter into
new consultation with himself, and he was troubled in mind not konwing whom he
might trust with his secrets; at the length he made choice of two Barons, whom
he hoped would be faithful unto him, the one from Austria, Mr. Kahu, the other
from Moravia, Mr. Schamid, both which were of Stiriacus, but both by Ferdinand
the Archduke, in the year 1600. reforming Stiria, with many other banished
there country, these he calls to Prague to him in the year 1610. and opens his
case to them: he is sorry that Matthias must succeed him, who because he was
but a young man, and was altogether at the beck of the Clergy, very much
feared that he would come, and that they would recommend Ferdinand to be
adopted, and by that means get the Scepter. He resolves therefore upon
Leopaldus of his own family, that he shall be the successor of his Kingdom,
whom he knew, though now a Bishop, and brother in law to Ferdinrnd was of a
more mild temper, and would hearken to good Counsel. And that he might not be
seduced, he would undertake some memorable thing, to wit, that he would erect
an Order of Peace for the liberty of Consciences, and that he should be
blameless, that called upon Christ any way; and to the fellowship of this
order, he would invite all Kings and Princes that were promoters of the
Gospel, and also Catholics, if they would come. When he had got a Catalogue
of their names, he signed it, and showed it to them, the number being about
fifty; and reading the form of the Covenant, or society of that Order made by
himself, and bringing forth two gold chains, giving to each of them one, with
the ensign of Peace made by his own hands, of which sort he said he would
make more according to the number of the society of that Order.

3. He demands of them, even with astonishment harkening unto him, whether
they were ready to promote so holy and pious resolution. They know not, they
say what can be hoped for in so great a matter in regard of his poverty, but
he answered, I intended to make use of your two best endeavors on an Embassy.
Yours Rakin to the Prince of Germany, yours Schmedi to the chief of Bohemia
and Moravia, but in the first place I must provide for the safeguard of my
self and my Kingdom, ye shall therefore first go unto Leopaldus and give
this advice unto him, and by letters written with my own hand, I will give
testimony of your fidelity, and if he shall consent which I know he will, it
shall be your care that an army be raised, and then to return to me, being
amazed at these things, Caesar gave them three days to consider of it. What
needs many words, they return, undertake his commands, and execu^e them but
with ill success. For although in the year 1611 the army of the Passavians had
entered by force as far as Prague, yet Matthias following them with his army
gave them a repulse, and was made King of Bohemia, and Rodolphus with grief
died.

4. I cannot pass this over with silence, when the Baron Schmidius, returning
from Passavia, was sent on an Embassy to the chief of Bohemia and Moravia,
intimating the intention of Caesar, all things happen contrary to their
expectation, for they gave no credit to them, all of them interpreting, that
they came with colourab^e pretenses, and that some crafty plot lay hid, or else
fearing a war between those two Kings. Schmidius having declared this to the
Emperor being very angry, he suddenly arose from his seat, and hastened to the
window, and opening it violently, looking toward the City, said, Prague,
ungrateful Prague, thou have been made glorious by me, do thou now reject
me your benefactour, the vengeance of God follow thee, and may a curse light
upon thee, Prague, and all Bohemia. I heard all this from the mouth of the
Baron Schmidius in his Castle at Kunstat, where the good old man, being
threescore and ten years old, showed me the chain, and ensign dedicated to
the Order of Peace, and weeping said, this, that religious and godly Caesar
made with his own hands, and presently after the malediction of godly Caesar,
toward whom we were ungrateful, falls upon us.

5. That purpose concerning the founding the Order of Peace, without all doubt
was so pleasing, that it is a wonder that it went not forward. Some
peradventure may suppose, that they much erred from Politic counsels, that
this business was not otherwise, and by others begun, but if we look higher,
they are the just judgments of God, bringing this whole nation and all Germany
to punishment, and suffering our enemies to fill up the measure of their
fathers. For they filled it up to the top, and utterly undid us. We shall collect
this history by parcells, we cannot give you yet the full. Because his
Antichristian plots forged in secret which we have rejected, being outward are
manifest, we must expect that God would bring to light the inward.

6. But we under Matthew being intrapped, did not perceive our ruin, nay we
exceedingly did rejoice, as if the liberty of our Consciences were well
provided for. When behold new on all sides contrivances of the enemies come to
light, but never mo^^ openly than afterward they came, which thing that godly
King Rodolphus formerly did much fear: that Ferdinand from Stiria, should be
advanced to the Kingdom.

CHAP. XLII. Ferdinand the second a sworn enemy of the Evangelists is thrust
out by the Bohemians.
I. IN the year 1617, Matthias came into the Kingdom unhoped for, accompanied
with his Cossen Germane Ferdinand, and the decree being sent out to the Orders,
that the Assemblies speedily should come together he went to Dresda Elector of
Saxony, desiring to get Ferdinand into his favor, and returning he goes to
the Assembly, some few of the Order in hope, not by any desire of their own,
appearing. For it was now harvest time, neither did any one then take pleasure
in being taken from his household affairs.

2. There Caesar complained that he had no issue, and therefore told them that
he would adopt Ferdinand his son, he commends his virtues, and desires
that he may be received and crowned; the Orders answered, that a matter of that
consequence in the absence of the united Provinces, could not be done. Caesar
urges; that Bohemia is the chief seat, and whatsoever they should do, would
be confirmed by the rest, that he grew faint, and therefore the business could
not be deferred until another time. It came to that pass that the Orders did
protest that, that Term of receiving him King was new, he ought first to be
chosen before he were received. But all these things by diverse devices, and
private affections of some men, and the affrightings of others were deluded and
dashed. Whence it came to pass, that some perceiving that there was no place
for a free voice, departed. But they which stayed and were present at the
Coronation, caused this, that before he were crowned, he should give something
in writing to the Orders wherewith he should bind himself, that Matthew being
alive he should meddle with none of the affarres of Bohemia, much less
Religion. He is therefore crowned, and presently went into Moravia, and then
into Silesia and Lusitania, and there requested that he might be received.

3 And after this time the enemies being made more confident, boast themselves
outragiously, and began to wish ill luck to the Evangelists, as also to
threaten them openly. And Ferdinand going into Moravia, to receive homage, the
Jesuits erect at Olumatium a Triumphall Arche, and paint upon it among the
Arms of Austria, with the Lion of Bohemia tied to it with a chain, and the
Eagle of Moravia, with a sleeping hare lying with open eyes, and this Emblem
written under I have practiced. casting a jeere upon the Orders, for suffering
themselves so to be bound and tied to drowsinesse; but the year following a
book of Moltzarmius Alsatia from the new erected Academie of the Jesuits came
forth, in the dedication whereof encouraging Leopaldus to zeal they urge the
example of his most peaceable Brother the founder of the University, that
howsoever at his coronation in Bohemia after the usual manner, he performed
his oath to the Heriticks, yet first he left it in the Vestrie of the Church,
that he would not give way to the Heriticks, whereby the Church might be
defrauded.

4. And it appeared most sufficiently that Ferdinand swear to the Orders with
his mouth, in his heart to the Pope; truly from that time something has bin
attempted, whereby it might not be well with the Gospelers, either by passing
from them their right by cosening, or by overcoming their patience, that by
open injuries they might give them occasion to oppose them. Presently after
Ferdinand was gone, they went about, not only the Bishop and the Clergy, but
the Laity, with those that did belong to the Pope. Slawata, Smeczanski and
others (in Moravia, Olomucensis the Bishop; and also the chief Duke Ladislaus
de Lobkowitz, the Lord of Holds^orvia) to vex his subjects for Religion,
contrary to the express assurance of the obligation of his Majesty, and then
they attempt the like also even in Prague, and other free cities of the King.
From the Chaires of the Jesuits, not only the Gospellers, but also that
bountiful Rodolphus now dead, and the Liberty of Religion granted to the
Kingdom by him, shamefully defamed and taunted at; and threatened that their
Liberty should not last long.

5 They did likewise inhibite by a special command, that they should print
nothing unless perused and approved of by the Chancelour of the Kingdom,
divulging in the mean while their own slanderous Pamphlets, and dangerous
writings against the Gospellers. Also instruction was given from the same
Chancery of the Citizens of Prague, to the Captains and Judges, of Caesar (who
were Popelings) to require earnestly of the parishoners the foundations of the
Churches from the Original. And that they no way give nor consent to any
meetings unless they themselves were present, and to join with the chief
overseeres and Parson, of the said Parish under one kind, (which after was done
in some Churches) and at length to deny unto the defendors and those of the
Consistory, any executing process of Law.

6. And they dealt under hand with the Pastors, whom they did believe, they
might reduce to Psudo-Hussitisme, that they should require, by presenting to
the King an humble declaration, that the new Consistory under both kinds after
the form of the former under the obedience of the Archbishop, might be
granted, and about twelve of them being drawn into the net subscribed; the
chief of them being Matthew Praczuda (whom they fed on with hopes that he
should be promoted to the dignity of Administrator.) When he perceived himself
to be very sick, so that he was ready to die, and calling to mind his former
act and detesting his perfidiousnes, and dehorting his confederates from that
fact, their Stratagems are brought to nothing.

7. Since this exploit of theirs took no effect, they went another way to
work. The Church of Bethleem which from its first foundation was dedicated to
the University, was lately by the Reformation of the Consistory, disposed of to
the use of the brethren in the year 1609 after the death of the Senior of these
Matthew Cirus in the year 1607. the Papists threaten to sue them at the law and
endeavor to deprive them of the Church: but the Professor of the University
making use of their own right they bring in John Cyrillus for Senior according
to their solemn form. these and the like they made trial of in other places,
but still without success.

8. The Burgrave Carelsteinensis (that is to say) the safeguard of the Crown
and privileges of the Kingdom) is also taken away by the Count Turnensis, a
President never before heard of, and against all the Laws of the Kingdom, not
for any crime (unless it were that in the late Parliament he had more freely
stood for the free election of a King) and is delivered to Smeczanius the
bitterest enemies of the Gospellers, perchance that he, because lately he
could not inhibite the privilege of Religion, might by cunning now begin to do
it. He therefore began to disturb them by inhibiting, the subjects of that
dominion baptism and burial.

9. The same enemies go forward elsewhere, and destroy the Churches of the
Gospellers in the Archbishops Town, Grob, (and by virtue of the Kings Patents
the new built Church, Braumow of the Abbot Braumow. Also in Krumloviana they
beginn the persecution of the Gospellers being Subjects, the government
belonging to the King.

CHAA. XLIII. The Bohemians being often provoked take up arms.
I. THe Governors of the University and consistory in communion under both
kinds, being warned of these and other matters (which were published in the
States Remonstrance) were assembled together at Prague about the beginning of
the year 1618, and having power formerly given them by the States and
confirmed by Rodolphus his letters Patents they chose six persons out of
several Lordships (two Barons, with as many Knights, and Citizens) to consult
jointly what was best to be done in this ti^e of their enemies insolence. But
presently there arrived an injunction in Caesar's name, that neither the
Governors should attempt to call any together, neither should any man who was
called, dare to appear, and if any did contrary to this command, they should
be guilty of high treason, and that Caesar would not acknowledge any man the
Governor of his Kingdom but himself.

2. Notwithstanding the Major part of the States met, and when as new
prohibitions and threatenings were spread abroad, and those States were
certified by sufficient proofs, that the thunderbolts were not brought from
Vienna (where Caesar had his residence) but forged in, and shot from the Castle
of Prague by the Deputies: Their wronged patience was suddenly changed into
severity, and being guarded with a great troup, they go up to the Castle and
apprehending Smeczanius, and Slawata, the chief authors of these troubles,
they throw them headlong out of the Castle windows, together with their
secretary Philip Fabricius, who was privy to all their designs. This indeed was
done rashly, and without mature deliberation, but they were engaged to it by a
protestation made against the disturbers of the peace in the year 1609 (for
Pope Lewis was then absent.) The enemies looked upon it as a miracle that none
of those that were thrown down lost their lives; but truly it was not so
strange, that men falling on the soft ground strewed with papers (under the
Chancery window) should remain without any hurt. It was rather a sign that God
would have them preserved to be the Bohemians scourges.

3, Having begun to put their intent in practice against these men, and
appeasing the tumult which was upon this occasion raised through all the cities
of Prague. They banished the Jesuits out of the Kingdom as the chief
contrivers of these mischiefs, whose instruments only these men were (in the
year 1618. 23 day of May) which act administered a welcome occasion to the
enemies, of kindling the War about Religion, wherewith all Europe is in a flame
at this day. And although the Bohemians by Ambassadors did protest to Caesar
that they had no intentions against his royal Majesty but only to bring to
punishment the disturbers of the public peace (being thereunto authorized not
only by his Majesty's letters, but engaged also by their protestation made at
that time) humbly beseeching Caesar that he would not otherwise interpret the
action: Yet Caesar by the instigations of Ferdinand and those of the league
resolved to revenge this treason (as they called it) or by the force of arms
and the Bohemians on the other side resolved to defend themselves by arms, and
therefore chose in that Interregnum 30 directors; the Moravians and Silesians
in the mean time taking the Bohemians parts, when they perceived Religion to be
the cause of the quarrel.

4. It did appear that this was that which the enemies labored for, and that
to this purpose they diverse ways provoked the Bohemians, because the Jesuits
applauded themselves in this fit occasion, of a total conquest of the
Bohemians: as the States declared in their Apology of some out of their
intercepted letters.

5. Those of Caesar's counselors which did advise them to use more moderation
were not regarded. The Cardinal Cleselius Bishop of Vienna, was accused by the
Spanish Ambassador before Caesar as a traitor to the house of Austria, and
imprisoned, because that he was against the War. They report, that when
Cleselius affirmed that the destruction of that flourishing Kingdom would
undoubtedly follow (if they were forced to a desperate defense of their
liberties) Ferdinand should answer,

We would rather have the Kingdom destroyed then damned. An Imperial Army
presently rushed into Bohemia, under General Dampier, afterward a Spanish
under General Bucquoy.

6. In the mean time Matthias Dies, and the Bohemians with the Moravians,
Silesians, and Lusations consult whether Ferdinand who wa so open an enemy both
of their Religion and Liberties, and rather obtruded on them by subtilty, than
chosen by their free consent, and who had intermedled with their affairs,
while Matthias was yet living, contrary to his own Letters Patents, should be
admitted to the Crown, and at last conclude that he should not succeed.
Whereupon they send Ambassadors to Franckford where the Electors were assembled
for the choice of a new Emperor) to signify this, and to desire that
Ferdinand might not be admitted among them by the name of King of Bohemia,
whom they would not acknowledge for their King. But this was in vain, for he
was admitted and afterward chosen Emperor, the Bohemians in the mean time
electing Frederick Count Palatine for their King.

CHAP. XLIV. The Bohemians being overcome undergo a terrible storm.
I. THose of the League being provoked by this, are hurried into fury, and
raising greater forces, rush again into Bohemia under Maximilian of Bavaria,
and taking by storm Pracatice and Pisek, (Protestant towns) put the Citizens
to the sword for a terror to others, and every where make great slaughters of
the Protestants. At length they came as far as Prague the Metropolis of the
Kingdom, which being struck with a Pannicke fear, after the overthrow of
their forces in a set battle before the Walls (in 1620. the 8 of November) and
the flight of their new King, is delivered unto them, and all Bohemia, Moravia
and Silesia. The Conqueror promising to keep articles, but afterward
performing them according to the manner of the Council at Constance.

2. And now began the face of the Bohemian Church to appear in sadness, at
the raising that most cruel persecution, which has brought an utter ruin and
destruction of the Protestants. They now carried on their designs otherwise
than they formerly did in England, the Low Countries and France: doing more
mischief by their mild (as they would have it seem) proceedings, than lately
by their outrageous fury, when the sword, and fire, and wheel, were the
instruments of their rage against the faithful. Which was a new policy of the
Whore of Babylon, to appear couretous that she might scare fear from her by her
cruellty. For that their Privy Council is open and manifest, wherein, when it
was debated at Rome, about the time of the preparation for the war, in the year
1617. how they should deal with the Bohemians and other Germans after the
Conquest; it was agreed That seeing those strong purges, which had bin
administered for the expelling heretical humors had wrought weakly, they would
try whether they could be cured by a temperate d^et. And therefore it was not
commodious to put the Hereticikes to death (wherein they did glory as in
Martyrdom) but to use some other means whereby to weary them and reduce them
to their obedience. And to change the hateful and rigid name of Inquisition,
into the milder name of Ref rmations.

3. And according to this decree they proceeded aganist the Moravians,
Bohemians and Silesians, so that all that professed the pure doctrine of the
Gospel were oppressed, and had only the favor of not being utterly
extinguished, few among them obtaining the glory of Martyrdom. Don Martine de
Huerda (by Nation a Spaniard, by trade a Tailor, but being brought up from his
youth in Bohemia, had enobled himself by the stealing away the Countess of
Serivia of the house of Kolowrat, and afterward for hs valor advanced to a
Barons degree, and enriched with a great estate) was often heard to boast to
the Protestants faces, that when he brought the news of the victory to Vienna,
standing at Caesar's side, he advised him to command them to be slaughtred
without distinction of sex or age, that there might not be any remainders of so
rebellious and Heretical a Nation. To whom Caesar answered, that hope of
favor was given them by the Duke of Bavaria, but there would not afterward
want means whereby to quell the Haeresie and rebelious desires of so barbarous
a nation. What those means were is manifest, by the event and practice: which
shall now be declared but compendiously and briefly.

4. For if all the cunning Imposters and deceits, or the cruel pressures and
vexations which they used should be reckoned up: it would require a sharper wit
than the Dove-like simplicity of our nation is capable of, and vaster volumnes
should be then written, than our present purpose permitts. That which the
Evange^^st spoke, If the works of Christ should every one be written, the
world would not contain those books, may be also said of Antichrist, that his
evil actions have been managed with so much craft and malice, that the world
can hardly contain them. This we protest in the sight of God, that we have had
good proof for those things which we have gathered, and shall now relate
clearly though every thing is not demonstrated by particular instances, partly
because of my designed brevity, and partly because all examples cannot be
gathered while the persecution remains.

We shall speak distinctly, 1. How they proceeded in general? 2. How they
proceeded against the Ministers of the word? 3. How against the Governors and
Nobility? 4. How against the free Cities? 5. How against the Common People? 6.
What they did about the Churches, Books, Hospitalls and Burying places? 7. We
shall add some examples of those judgments and prodigies, wherewith God did
often affright the enemies. 8. We shall lastly join something concerning the
relics of the Bohemians, who in this sharp persecution undauntedly
maintained their faith.


CHAP. XLV. The General proceeding against all. Their first beginning with the
Anabaptists.
I. THey have said in their hearts (says the Psalmist.) Let us destroy them
altogether 74. Psalm. 8. Which is the constant rage and disposition of the
Churches enemies, To destroy all, one after another. When therefore our enemies
resolved to exercise their cruelty against us, they began the year after the
victory with the Anabaptists in Moravia who possessing about 45. houses or
Colleges (many families dwelling together in them) having al things in common
according to their custom lived peaceably under their own discipline,
troublesome or grievous to none, but beneficial to all by their trade and
callings. They banished these first in the year 1622. about Autumn (laying to
their charge that they had entertained Frederick passing through Moravia,
making a trial how this would be received, that they might more confidently,
set upon the rest. They leaving their houses, lands and Vineyards (though the
time of Vintage was at hand) and carrying the weaker sort with them in some
hundreds of Carts, went in great troops into the neighboring countries of
Hungaria and Transylvania, where they sound fit seats for them, and avoided
those evils, which were to be suffered by us who were left.

2. These being gone they then consulted about the election of the Piccards as
they called them and Calvinists: but this succeeded not according to their
minds. First, because they had many noblemen to take their parts, who had not
given Caesar any cause to suspect their fidelity. Neither could any color be
found, why all should be involved in the same punishment, neither could their
banishment be effected so easily as the Anabaptists was, who were destitute of
all humane help. Then they could not well put a difference between the
Lutheranes and Calvinists, as they did between the Anabaptists and Protestants,
and lastly it was not now a time to provoke the Princes of the reformed
Religion. At length it was agreed that they should be looked upon alike, and
prosecuted promiscuously, as opportunities of oppressing them should be offered.

3. By the event it appeared that it was their general end in these actions to
drive the opressed Protestants to Apostasy, and to cast out the remainder of
the faithful more easily. Which seemed to be the policy of that secret
counsel at Rome, which we spoke of before (in the 44 Chapter 2 section) and
for this Paul Michna a crafty and Pragmaticall man labored very dilligently.
He was borne of obscure Parents, (being a Butchers son in the town of
Budu^s) but skillfull in the Jesuits practices, and by them first promoted to
be secretary of State, and afterward for the pains he took for the house
of Austria against his country and religion he was Knighted, and presently
after created a wealthy Baron, and at length an Earl. It is reported of him,
that when the grand forgers of these plots met after the establishment of their
victory to consult what was to be done? Whether they should be banished the
Kingdom, and how they should begin, that he should answer, It was not a fit
time, because they would carry many things with them, and spoil the Province
and endure banishment with greater ease: They were first to be well squeezd
and deprived of all their goods, and then other things would be carried on with
greater expedition. They carried on their designs by these means.

CHAP. XLVI. The burdens of Taxes.
I. AFter Prague was yielded, the soldiers were authorized to plunder the
houses of the Noblemen and citizens, but yet at several seasons and chiefly in
the night time were their plots cunningly forged by their Captains. By which
means as the enemies themselves boasted, were taken from the Protestants some
millions of Gold, and it is not unlikely. For almost all the treasures of all
men, and the jewels and best movables, were brought hither in the time of the
War as to the centure of security, no man considering that God had provided a
rod for their backs. But all this rich prey within the Walls of Prague fell to
the shares of Commanders: but the neighboring places were exposed to the fury
of the rest, where the Germans, Italian, Spanish, French, Polonian, and
Croation soldiers (for with the scumme of so many Nations fighting for
Antichrist in Caesar's name were overflowed) robbed, and utterly spoiled
Villages, Towns, Parishes, and Churches, burning and killing without any
restraint.

2. The Garrison Soldiers that were afterward dispersed into several
Lordships and Cities, would not only have free quarter, but would extort money
from their Landlords every day.

3. Presently Commissioners were sent to promise security to those Cities and
Noblemen, that were taken into Caesar's protection. But with this condition,
that every Baron, Knight, and Corporation, and also the Ministers, should bring
in a good sum of money for the payment of the Soldiers stipends, which (as
they often said) they would not receive as a free gift, but only borrow it.
Caesar's protection was promised to those that were liberal, and the rest were
threatened to be given up to the soldiers fury to be plundered. Neither were
they content with that which every one did freely offer according to his
estate, but set a price as it were according to the custom of buyers, writing
down in particular Tables made to that purpose, what sums were to be paid
within the compass of some days: viz. a hundred, a thousand, two, three, six
thousand Florence. And because they promised that upon the payment of the money
the Soldiers should be removed, therefore every one brought in his part more
willingly, and some readily bringing in their plate and Jewels.

4. A little while after other Commissioners sent to require certain Cities of
the Nobility to maintain the standing forces of the Kingdom (for the greatest
part of the Army was drawn into Moravia and Hungaria) and to contribute Corn,
wherein also public Granaries might be erected. This business cost them much
money and pains.

5. In the mean time all were fed with a vain hope of the removal of the
Soldiers, but none were removed but rather more were lifted, which increased
new pressures and raised the taxes so high as was impossible for people to pay,
even in those places which had revolted to them. For when some who were allured
to deny the truth from a vain hope of freedom from taxes and quarterings of
Soldiers, complained that promises were not performed, the Jesuits answered.
That they had no cause to wonder, for that this proceeding was safe for them.
For they were to deal with Heretics as with children and madmen, to whom if
you would get a knife from them, you must show and promise some other things,
though you do not give them. They might be content that they had provided for
their souls, and therefore to testify their thankfulness might more
cheerfully help the Emperor by contribution and quartering of Soldiers.

CHAP. XLVII. The horrible adulterating of Money.
I. Whilst the Kingdom is emptied of gold and silver, the Emperor commands
that Cijpris money should be made, and silvered over, of several values, and
that with such abundance, that the common people not perceiving the deceit
might imagine their great abundance, in the mean time the soldiers extort
only good money: the value of gold and silver rise to ten times the price of
it, so that an Imperial Shilling was worth ten Bohemian Florences. But in the
year 1624. the Emperor unexpectedly did diminish the vallue of that money, and
commanded that every piece of that money should be worth only the tenth part:
by which thing it is incredible, into what streights all were brought, they
report that Paul Michna the chief politician, did brag that the Bohemians
were more compendiously thus impoverisht, than if they had layne under the
burden of a continual army for ten years, and those that were
understanding did assert, that the loss was more than if half the Kingdom had
bin consumed in ashes.

2. After they were exhausted of their money, it was ordered for the debtors
sake, that the creditor should loose the whole sum that he lent in the time
of the Rebellion, he should loose the use and part of that sum which was lent
before the Rebellion, the payment of the rest was deferred for ten years;
this was proclaimed by the Edict of Caesar the Emperor, in the year 1628. the
18. of August.

CHAP. XLVIII. The cruelty of their mockings.
I. THe first way whereby we were brought to desparation was poverty, the
other, was various insolences, whereby they did insult over our affairs as
absolutely lost: I shall not speak of those applauses, and Jubiles, wherewith
the Churches, Courts and markets did ring, I shall not speak of those infamous
books, insolent pictures, and proud words wherewith they did encourage
themselves, and arm themselves against us: this was matter of grief to godly
spirits, but did deject the hearts of those that were inconstant, because they
promised to themselves in words and actions an uninterupted course of
victories, to us an inevitable destruction, those whom they saw to be more
constant, and prepared for banishment they mocked as fools, who fancied they
should obtain security which could not be had but under the obedience of the
Emperor and Pope. Whither madmen (says he) have ye so speedily, where will ye
hope to fly from Caesar's hands, that which you see done here, will be done
every where. Ye will by experience find that within these few years the whole
world will be Catholic, why will ye rather some where else abide even with
great fear, and the hazard of your estates, rather than here cheerfully undergo
it? Our Native soil is sweet unto us: because ye cannot subject your self
unto their desires, will ye wast your selves with discontent, or return with
greater confusion? it is not certain whether the Gates of Caesar's mercies, will
hereafter as now they do) stand open unto you.

2. For they promised in their own and Caesar's name as well in public as
private conferences, that if there be any error in the Catholic Faith, or any
danger in this conversion, that the blame shall lie upon them, and that they
will answer it to God, and with the hazard of their own souls free you from
all danger. With these and the like sometime, flattering and enticing words,
sometimes with threats and menaces, the hearts of the simpler sort did begin to
fail them. And many, because of the removal of the Ministers of the word, and
debarring them the reading of profitable books, were so besotted, that as it
were lulled asleep with the charming of the Sirens, they suffer themselves to
be ingulfed in the abyss of all abomination.

3. These are the first fruits of Apostates, who before they had suffered the
least cross forsook Christ their Captain, and entered into the Camp of
Antichrist. Those who were found to be more stiff and harder to be brought to
their bow, having changed their flattering alurements into Savage cruelty, they
go about to torment with threats, proscriptions, woundings, fines and
imprisonments, and other kinds of afflictions, of which heareafter.

CHAP. XLIX.
I. IN the mean while they appointed the Jesuits and Monks to be comissaries
of the Reformation, joining unto them some one Nobleman or more, or Baron, who
passing through Towns and Villages, used their best endeavor to bring Heresy
into disgrace, and highly to magnify and set abroach the Roman Cause. The
chief and most eminent men both for honor and estates are invited to Apostasy,
the meaner and inferior sort either are fooled, by their examples, or compelled
by threatenings. At length the Thunderbolt of Proscription is cast with great
violence against the former Orders; and the chief Commissaries of the
Reformation, are nominated and appointed, namely the Archbishop of Prague
Cardinal de Harach, the Abbot of Strohavia, Parislaw, Borzita Count of
Matromitz, most commonly called Smeczanski, Frederick de Fallenbergh and
Christoph^r Wrotislaus. This Bark of the Universal Apostasy in this Kingdom
was committed to these Pilots, but through the persuasion of Smeczanius they
refused to undertake the Government thereof, except they may have absolute
power of determining any thing against any man, without the compulsion of any
man, or the contradiction or alteration of their sentence, even by Caesar
himself, so that now in stead of the Counsel of Inquisition in Spain, a High
Court of Reformers is set up, from which if they did depart, being required to
have a testimony, they were many ways troubled by the Jesuits, with diverse
censures, sollicitings, protestations, and temptations. If any one refused,
they demanded of him whether at the least he would learn, if he consented,
they set him a time, or gave him leve to make choice of his time and whosoever
admitted it, it scarce goes well with him. For presently he had a Mass
Priest appointed him, who daily would trouble them. Very many underwent this
trouble, whereby they might gain so much time, as to dispose of their affairs.
But when their time being almost expired, they said, that they did acknowledge
no other thing in their conscience, they were said to make a mock of Caesar's
power, and so run themselves into fresh dangers. But more particularly we shall
recount hereafter in their places how these pretty Reformers handled businesses.

CHAP. L. The Proceeding against the Ministers of the Word, and chiefly the
several cruelties acted against them by the overmuch liberty of the Soldiers.
THe Preamble of this future Tyranny was the barbarous license of the Kings
Soldiers against the Ministers of the Word even before the Victory against
those who fell into their hands, amongst these who had experience of this, I
will make mention of Wenceslaus Woticius of Bystrick (under Hostinus a Pastor
in Moravia) whom the Polonian Soldiers being led this way into Austria,
without either regard of the infirmity of this man, or his old age, not being
able to move out of his bed, they not only robbed him, but pierced him through
with a bullet February the 5. 1620 as the next day following, Paulus Capitoneus
Pastor of the Town of Napaieldus, at his own house, they desperately wounded
and murdered.

2. In like manner when Prague was taken, there in that Country certain Pastors
had experience of the fury of Antichrist, afterward in other places. For power
being granted to the soldiers to plunder, they supposed that they might do
what they pleased to those Ministers which were termed Heretics. We will put
you in mind of some.

3. Paulus Mollerus Pastor of the Town of Zrutche as he was preaching to his
Parishioners, the Caesarian soldiers broke in, wounded him with a bullet, and
he gave up the Ghost.

4. The L. Smilo of Lukawetz, being Patron of Martin Maresch who was Pastor in
the Village Kressin, was conveyed by his Lord and Patron for fear of the guard
that passed that way, into a more safe place of retire, the guard as soon as
they broke in, did examine the Schoolmaster Frederick Damhosky, whom they
apprehended, and bound with cords, where the Lord and the Pastor were, or where
they did hide their treasures. He professes that he neither knew the one nor
the oath, they notwithstanding urge him, and first they beat him with their
fists, and cudgelled him, at the length having him naked, so cruelly they
singed him, that not being able to endure the pain, he promised to show them
where the treasure was. He shows unto them a ditch full of stones, which they,
out of the great desire they had of the gold, did empty, but finding nothing
there, they exclaim on him, and beat him afresh. He acknowledges that he knew
of no treasure, but through extremity of pain had said so much, when they had
soundly cudgelled him, they with clots afterward beat him into the ditch, and
so buried him under that heap of stones. The third day after, these
bloud-suckers light upon the Pastor in the Village of Popowitzh, and after they
had miserably tortured him left him half dead, but he recovered, and lived five
days after, but never saw his two daughters, whom those lewd fellows had led
away with them, and shamefully abused.

5. Wenceslaus Iakessius was Minister of Kaunicium, four miles distant from
Prague, whom they carried to Kostelicium beyond Albis, and for the space of one
month and somewhat more, they many ways perplexed him with new invented
mockeries: They spit in his face, buffeted him with their fists, and not only
so, but left him to the mercy of every vild rascal to be beaten: They so
strained his head with a knotty cord twined about his head with a stick, that
his very eyes swelled in his head. Also they let loose a wild horse upon him in
the midst of a Courtyard, which no sooner came near him, but he leaped
quite over him and did him no harm; at length he redeemed himself with much
ado, by paying five hundred Florences for his ransom. They took also with him
Paulus Welwarius Pastor of Czelakowcense, whom, because he had a far greater
estate, they handled more sharply, and sometime covered him over with hot
burning Coals, and sometime with ice, until he was constrained to pay one
thousand five hundred Florences, but after some few days by reason of those
extreme pains he yielded up the Ghost.

6. Andreas Stembergius Budinus being brought by fifteen horsemen from his
Parish to Kostelicium, was miserably tortured by twisting a cord about his
head, and not only so, but they tied his hands behind him, and bound his feet
with a small cord, and so flang him on his back, with an intent the next morning
to have tortured him with fire, but in the night time most miraculously he was
set at liberty, for being earnest and at his prayers among other portions of
the Psalm. reciting these words. In thee O Lord is my trust, he perceived his
feet and his hands to be loosened; he therefore raises himself up and goes
unto the gate, and does pass by the watchmen, being three in number; the one
stood at the passage with his hand upon his sword (yet all of them as it were
drowzy, whether it were that they had slept soundly, or by reason of a great
wind which suddenly did arise, they did not perceive the noise. At length he
came to the gate of the Town, and is known by the Musqueteer that stood
Centinell. And he, because he was a Bohemian and being overcome with his
entreaties, took compassion on him, and not only let him pass, but led him
over the bridge unto the other Rivers bank.

7. Johannes Mo^ses was Minister to the Queen of Mesteca; whom, when they had
taken as also his wife they cruelly burnt.

8. Simon Aenecanius apprehended in the town Horzitz, they fastened to a post
and did extremely burn him, until he had told them where his money wa.

9. The Pastor of Bakovia (his name was not mentioned) was hanged upon a cross
perch of a Hot-house (wherein after the manner of their Country, they were wont
to hang their clothes and other things) and a fire was made under him, and he
was there broyled to death.

10. But the Minister of Mimonia, whom the Polonians having broke in upon, and
in hope to have their prey, they cut into small peeices.

11. Andreas Iacobid Pastor of Aurenowsium escaping by flight, they vented all
their rage on the Secretary of the Questor, being a young man; which act a
notable example of the Romish Religion was showed. For casting the miserable
man flat on his back, they filled his mouth with Gunpowder, set fire to it,
and tore all his jaws and there devilish dispositions taking pleasure in so
barberous spectacles, miserably killed him.

12. Adam Pisecius was Pastor of Byreschrum in Moravia in the Dominion of
Charles of Zerotina, who because his Patron had kept faith with Caesar, feared
no hurt, and entertaining courteously both in language and gesture, the
Soldiers that came unto him, being wanting in nothing that might speak their
welcome, but they as soon as they began to have knowledge of the Minister, were
mad, and first of all beat him shrewdly, and then kill him as he was flying to
the porch of the Temple, and stripped him of his clothes, and robbed the house. And
when some godly people intending to bury him, had cast a cloak over him, the
Soldiers running thither not only do take it away, but tore it in a great
rage, neither content with this, they burnt his library which he had disposed
of in three places; and because no man durst come so long as this company of
vile and naughty men remained there, this Martyr lay seven weeks unburied, and
then was buried by some certain Scholars.

13. In the same year 1621. on the 17. of January Laurentius Curtius Pastor of
Netimense, a man of threescore years of age, and his wife were cruelly burnt
by a Soldier that demanded money of them, insomuch that both presently died.

14. Paulus Pssenizzka Pastor of Bochdalovia, very near seaventy years of
age, was hanged by the privy parts by an impious soldier, and his own books
burnt under him, in the midst of these torments crying out for mercy, by one
of the company of soldiers, he was periced through with a bullet, and by his
merciful pity ended his pains with his life.

15. Bartholemew Jaworski of the parish of Kerkovia a godly man, and a good
pattern for other men to follow, about the same time was assessed by certain
robbers to pay seven hundred Florences, after that they plundered him of all
his household stuff; and then attempting to murder him, he fled forth of the
doors from them, and flying from them pursuing him, his bowels burst out, etc.

16. Elias Severinus Pastor of Pribicen, did not escape their wicked hands,
whom they left for dead, after they had very much wounded and had cut him more
then half through his neck, yet he by the commiseration that some took of
him, was carried to a Surgeon that was an Anabaptist, he lived after that
obout two years, but in extreme pain and torment.

17. John Beraeck, an old man, above seaventy years of age, a godly minister
of Zdanicense in Moravia, when he had fallen into the hands of these Harpys,
was first beaten, and after that laid upon a fire which they had made in the
midst of the market place of the Town, and was there burnt in the year
1622. on the 17. day of March.

18. About the same time Gallus Celech Minister of Chetochovia in Moravia, was
most cruelly beaten to death by soldiers, and about three days after died.

19. The Jesuits daily laid wait for Cyprianus Peschinus an eminent man for
learning, and a man in great authority among the Kuttebergensians; at last they
suborned Burganis Cuchelius a notable Apostate, who should betray him to the
soldiers, and give him up to their mercy. Peschinus therefore going in a Coach
with Gasparus of Zirotina a Baron, forty horsemen suddenly coming upon him, he
is taken from the Baron, and carried to Choltitium. But the same Baron, and
many more sue for his enlargement, and he is given to them, provided, that he
pay for his ransom the sum of four thousand Florences at the length he
ended his life in banishment at Hirschberga.

20. John Buflerus Minister of Wyprachticense, being brought forth by the
soldiers, was bound to a tree, and was made a mark for the musketeers to
shoot at, not that they did intend to hit him, but only to terrify him, but
he dismayed by these affrightments, died within three days after.

21. Wenceslaus Kutzeram at the Village Libkon, was met with by William
Lukawsky a notable Papist, who said, do I find thee here thou beast? run him
through with a spear. But these, and the like may be said to be done by the
untamed liberty of Soldiers. We will therefore come to them which were acted
by Process of Law.

CHAP. LI. The first compelling the Ministers of Prague to to Apostasy.
I. ABout the beginning of the year 1627. George Dicastus Administrator of the
Consistory of the Gospellers being called forth to a certain place, six
Articles are exhibited, which he should exhibit to the Parishes of Prague
(Germans and Bohemians) to consider upon: take them from the Crowner being
lately made the Kings Mr. of Requests.

1. That by course money being gathered, they should lend unto Caesar some
certain thousands of pounds for the Soldiers pay. 2. That they should revoke
publicly the coming of Frederick. 3. That they should bring into the Church
the ancient Rites and Ceremonies. 4. That they should reiterate the Ordination
of Ministers by their Archbishops. 5. They should depart from wedlock, or
else should require a tolleration of wedlock from the Archbishop. 6. If any
leaving Ecclesiastic functions, would turn to politic functions, that they
should have public promotions and the favor of Caesar.
2. But they unanimously answered, that they would do nothing against their
conscience, and as this first assault of Satan was in vain, he went afterward
another way to work working by force, and violence, that which he could not
effect by craft and subtilty.

CHAP. LII. The first publ^ck edict against the Ministers of Prague.
I. Civil affairs in what manner soever settled, and the thirst of the whore
of Babylon, either being slaked or more inflamed by the blood of the Peers (of
whom on the 21 of June in the year 1621 they had slain 27. With more violence
now they set upon the Churches. For about the time of the birth of Christ an
Edict came forth in the name of Prince Lichtenstine (Governor of Bohemia)
wherein all the blame of the fore-past rebellion was laid upon the Parishes of
Prague, because they had stirred up by their seditious, and lying sermons and
writings as well the common people, as the Peers and Nobility against Caesar,
because they were the Authors of new and pernicious confederacies, and of
creating a new King: and neither as yet do cease like turbulent rash and
seditious men openly to disturb all things, and by degrees to possess the
people of Caesar's new and fresh hatred. Publicly therefore for the
accommodation of quietness, that all those in Prague within three days,
others throughout the whole Kingdom and united Provinces within eight days
should be banished, and that for ever. And that if any under pretense
whatsoever, shall stay within the confines of the Kingdom or should ever
return again, or if any one should presume to harbor or conceal them, by
the same law both the one and the other shall suffer death. Dated at Prague 13
December, 1621.

2. Thus the Ministers of Bohemia (for there was care had of the Germans in
favor to the Saxons) were cast out of Prague, their Churches given to the
Jesuits; what drooping of the Godly, what anguish of Consciences, what
lamentation of them that followed their Ministers was there, and what bidding
farewell to them even for ever, cannot now be expressed.

3. These that follow were the names of the Parishes and Ministers of them.

George Dicastus was Minister near to the delectable Palace, and Administrator
of the Consistory under both kinds with his two Colleagues Wen^eslaus Viccarius
and John Lansman?

Old-Prague.
M. Victorius Vurbenins of St. Nicholas, M. Samuel Martinius of Castuly.
Jacobus Iacobides of Martins. Vitus Iakessius of St. Gallus Johannes Lunacius
of Giles. Gallus Zolanius being a little before dead, a man very eminent for
his Orthodoxe writings, with the Deacon John Vurssovius. M. James Jacobus of
St. Michaels.
New-Prague.
Vitus Pagellus of Henry's. M. Tobias Adelbertus of Clemens. Matthias Stecius
of Adelbert the greater. Matthias Janda of Michaels. Nicholas Matzick of
Adelbert the lesser. John Hartvi^ins of Stephens. Adam Clemens of Wenceslaus.
John Rasaceus of St. Nicholas of the lesser Prague.
4. The Ministers of the Brethren John Cyrillus Senior of the Consistory and
John Corvinus, and Paul Fabricius, partly departed and partly hid themselves,
for since their Auditors were not limited to one Parish, but were dispersed
throughout Prague, for they fearing that the Church of Bethlehem, might not be
taken from them, or not always lawful for them to make use of it, began to
build them a Church, and had for a while to their use the Jesuits Church
(being at that time void) of which when Prague was taken, they possessed
themselves. In the mean while all places were full of Soldiers, and
affrightments, they desired that they might not be called together in the
Church of Bethlehem (for none would appear, until this hurly burly were over.
But these multitudes ceased not but rather were increased daily, a public
army once leaving off, will not easily be brought together again.

5. And because the people of Bohemia were deprived of their Ministers, they
flocked to the German Churches as many as understood the German language (for
they had free exercise in their own Temples built in the time of Rodolphus, the
one at old Prague dedicated to our Savior, the other at the lesser Prague
dedicated to the Trinity. The Jesuits thought it better to move the Elector
than to suffer this, press hard and obtain, that not a proscription, but a
gracious dismission should be given notice of to the Ministers of Germany to
be packing on the 29 of October of the year following, M. How, and the Elector
protesting against it. Therefore the Ministers of the Germans went from Prague;
M. Gasparus, Wagner, Mr. David Lippuck, Mr. Fabinus Natus, great company of
people of both sorts follwing them. Of whom in the middst of the field with
great lamentation and howling they heard their farewell Sermon.

CHAP. LIII. The Ministers are removed out of other Cities.
I. THe next thing that was in agitation was to remove the Ministers out of
other free Cities, which immediately in the same year they attempted, and with
several insolences put it in execution. By Commissaries, whereof I will give
you one or two instances.

2. Amongst those Commissaries of Reformation that were named in the Country of
the Slanensians and Litomeritians, George Mich^a was one, who having a troop
of horse went about the Cities; As Soon as he came to Slana on Saint Katharines
day with his Guard, he enters into the Church, and there he beheld their
Minister and Deacon Mr. John Kapillius, a learned man, and a man of a fervent
spirit reading the Gospel, and sends one of his Soldiers to bid him desist,
but he notwithstanding persisting, he himself goes to him, and having his
sword drawn, cries out aloud to him, Thou foolish Preacher leave off your
babbling; and withal dasheth the Bible out of his hands with his sword. The
Minister with eyes, hands and voice lift unto Heaven, repeatteth often, Woe,
woe, unto you, who neither enter into heaven your selves, and forbid those that
would enter, woe, woe, woe be to you. but those words were made a mock off, and
presently they laid hands on him, and he was taken and thrust this way and that
way. When again he said. But I for the name of my Lord Jesus Christ am ready
to suffer all this and whatsoever else. Some of those caitiffes repeated those
words of my Lord Jesu, my Lord Jesu in scorn and derision, cast the words back
again and we have a Lord even Caesar. In the mean while the people being
affrighted, and lamenting their sad condition, The chief men of the Senate
came, and undertook before the Commissarie for the Minister, that he should
appear wheresoever they should command him, so that he would not suffer them
to lay violent hands on him. He threatens him now being under arrest that he
will send him to Prague, but importuned by the intercession of good women, was
the next day moved to let him go, provided, that within three days he should
depart the City, and thus the good and faithful shepherd, not without great
lamentations banished, and about 3 years after dies of the plague, lying on his
deathbed, he told his dream to his friends. He thought he saw himself placed
in a very large Library, which when he had surveyed round about, he found a
book which had this Title in Latin, in golden letters, It is Just that the
Just should be slain and then crowned. Which book he having an earnest desire
to peruse, cunningly placed it under his left arme-pit, that he might read it
over at a more convenient season. But as he awaked, in stead of the book, he
found in that place a Pestilentiall swelling, whereof within four days he
dyed. He wrote in the time of his banishment a book concerning Apostasy, in
his own mother tongue: Also another, calling it the Idol of the world, and of
the true knowledge of the Crucifix, which being printed have benefited very
many, not only teaching them perseverance, but also stirring up their zeal in
the known truth.

3. And in the neighboring City Laimensis, when the Minister for fear of such
barbarous proceedings went away, yet notwithstanding the Commissaries in the
place of punishment extort a great sum of money from the Church, and banish
him though absent.

4. And they entering into Zatreum (Zaza) commanded the Deacon, John Regius to
appear in the Consulls House, and immediately to forbear going to the Church
and to depart from his parish within three days, the City within eight days.
Who when he had modestly required the cause of their so sudden proceeding, was
answered, that Caesar by victory had made all the parishes of the Kingdom
subject to his power, and that Preachers hitherto were tolerated, but now they
must be packing, and he would put whom he pleased into their places. And thus
his will stood for his deed, and the Ministers of the Gospel were expelled the
Cities.

CHAP. LIIII. Ungodly men are put into the places of the Ministers of the
Gospel.
I Am sorry to tell you, who, or what sort of men they be that are placed in
the rooms of the Preachers of the Gospel, to wit, unclean men, wicked
blasphemers, foolish men, in a word men of no account. It was impossible, that
so many hirelings could be had for the present as there were churches in
Bohemia, they did therefore appoint one Parish Priest, for two, three, four,
nay ten or twelve Parishes, who knew how so well to play his game, that he
abounded in covetuousnesse, and luxury. Some Churches being deprived of their
Ministers the flock did wander without a shepherd for the space of two or
three years, but it was more tolerable to want wholesome food, (as they did)
than to be droven to the Pastures aad there become a prey to the Wolves.

2. They therefore brought Monks out of Polonia for neerenesse and affinity,
of their language, slow bellies, and unprofitable members of the earth,
although they were brought unto it as the scourges of God, very fit without all
doubt to punish the ingratitude of the Gospellers (so commonly called.)

3. Concerning the lewd life of very many of them, I am ashamed to speak. We
see the Whore of Babylon, who was formerly wont to be half ashamed, has now at
the last slung of all modesty and discovered her nakedness. It was usual
sometime for a man to have his Concubine, Adulteries, Incests, Sodomies (sins
never heard of by our Nation) are now almost publicly practiced. Davia Sissius
Chaplain of Hadrianus Hradicensis of Caelestine (but more truly Scelestine)
that is ungratious, a most unsatiable reveller, an impudent Sodomite, a most
obscene scoffer, in one word I shall term him an Atheist, coming unto his
lodging upon a time drunk, exposed himself to the view of al men naked at his
window falling from thence he wallowed in the dirt of the street, although
Scelestinus with whom he had continual War, said, that the rascal was thrown
out of the window by the Devil and carried away.

4. Bohemo Brodensis a Deacon and a Polonian by nation, after the committing of
many horrid acts; carried away with him the wife of a certain Citizen, being a
beautiful woman in man's apparel her husbands name was John Paupessek, and
fled with her into Polonia.

5. The Parish Priest of Pakovia being reprehended by a worthy and eminent
Gospeller, by nam^ Knauponus, for his lewd and dissolute life, with h^ Comrades
as good as himself, broke in upon hi^ and beat him shrewdly, and in the night
time breaking the windows of the Citizens left the Town.

6. I recount not many things more abominable, being willing not to offend
chaste ears; let their memory perish, whose names the Apostle thinks not worthy
to be reckoned among the Christians. I return to the Ministers that are Martyrs
of Christ.

CHAP. LV. The Ministers in Cuttenburgh removed.
I. William Vrzesowetz entering into Cuttenburgh with some troops of horse, the
the 22 day of December in the year 1622 being famous for these many years for
maintaining the Orthodox faith, and also for his peculiar place of being Deacon
there, besides that of the chief Treasurers place, he bestowed the Churches on
the Jesuits, and not only the Ministers three, but also he calls unto him the
neighboring Ministers there, upbraiding them of Heresy, and rebellion, and I
know not what; demands of them, whither they would be received into the lap of
the Church, if they refused, he resolved to debar them the Communion, and if
they did not abstain from receiving thereof, he did threaten to punish them
severely.

2. In the year following on the 27 of July the Jesuits urging it very hard,
they are commanded to depart out of the gates of the City, before the break of
day, and to depart the Kingdom within eight days. Upon this command one and
twenty went away, by name Georgius Paul, Cyprian Pelchinus, Vitrs Iakessius,
Wenceslaus Kerion, Gregorius Viti, Johannes Kubinius, Nicholas Debastus,
Johannes Claudianus, Sigismundus Tassicius, Johannes Ioramus, Johannes
Neustupius, Thomas Dentulinus, Johannes Pristracus Johannes Martis, Johannes
Podaski, Sigismundus Piscis, Johannes Luxinus, Nicholaus Nowokolinus, Georgius
Siskarz, these being accompanied with some hundreds of Citizens, to whom
Johannes Matthiades expounded those words of Christ. They shall cast you out of
the Sinagogues. This farewell Sermon did exhort to constancy, the whole
Congregation much bewailing their loss; at the lenghth, the Heavens ringing
again with their songs, and their lamentations, with mutual imbracings, and
kissing each other, they did recommend themselves to the divine protection and
favor.

3. It was no where else permitted; but that either the Ministers are cast out
of their livings, or cast into prisons, some whereof after some few days or
months are dismissed, and commanded to depart the Kingdom under pain of
death: others, as it then happened to Bohuslaus Bolvinus, are stifled with th
stench of the prison.

CHAP. LVI. An Edict for the expulsion of all the Ministers out of the Kingdom.
I. AT the length in the year 1624, in August the Kings decree went out,
whereby all and every the Ministers of the Gospel, not omitting their crimes
(to wit, because they were seditious men, and seducers of the common people)
should be banished the Kingdom, a peremptory day of six weeks being prefixed
for their abode there. But herein they used some deceit, for they did suppress
it for the space of one whole month, so that it could not come unto many of
their hands until the date therein mentioned was expired, and to some it came
after the date; Hence it is that there is so general a dispersion of them,
some being scattered and dispersed into the neighbor Provinces, and some
concealed themselves in caves and dens.

2. But many of them not unmindfull of their duties, either returned privately,
and gave a visit to their auditors; or comforted such as came to them unto the
mountains and the woods with spiritual consolations, exhortations, and the
administration of the Sacraments.

3. Which as soon as the enemies perceived, they produced a new Decree of
Caesar's, in the year 1625 in July, wherein a punishment was to be inflicted on
such as did conceal the Ministers, and a reward to such as would betray them.
These things were arbitrary, and not fully determined, yet it pleased some to
put this in practice, and to make it a capital fault, and proportioned to the
Traitors fifty pieces of silver, and for the betraying of a Minister, they
would increase it to such a sum, as Judas could not reach unto, for the
betraying of his Master.

CHAP. LVII. The imprisonment of many of the Ministers of the Gospel, and the
Martyrdom of one, by name Mattheus Ulicius.
I. SOme of the Ministers were taken, and thrust into prison, with whom this
was the common way of proceeding, they were solicited by the Jesuits and
Monks persuasions to Apostasy, or with their Sophistry in arguing and
disputing, or promises, or threatenings, or affrightments, But the success
proved not alike in all; for some either for fear of death, or perpetual
imprisonment, or else not being able to endure hunger, and the noisome stench
of the prisons, before hand fainted, and renounced the Ministry, of which sort
there were some: others bore up manfully, persevering in their firm and
constant resolution, being fully persuaded, that although God had permitted
them to fall into their enemies hands, yet they bridled their rage and
madness; as happened to Wenceslaus Lipenius, and Daniel Tychikius, aged men,
of seventy years of age, dwelling at Boslavia, Mr. Dan^el Alginus of
Strakonicium, Laurentius Schramius of Czalavia, Victorinus Adam of Prague,
Joseph Thomaid, Petrus Grinaeus, Jacobus Viterius, Johannes Hradsc^us.
Wenceslaus Pasovius of Niclaspurgum, Daniel Stephanid^s of Znoyna, and many
others in many other places, but none were dismissed, but such as gave
something under their hands that they would never return into their Country
again. Some on the other side were fined, and compelled to pay a great sum
of money, others in disgrace were led out of the City in a disgraceful manner,
as Daniel Alginus and others.

2. There was one man whom the rage of Antichrist spared not, by name Matthaeus
Vlicius (Vl^ckie) Deacon of Czaflavia, who was on this occasion taken. A
certain nobleman of Bohemia by name George Techemitz, who came with a Danish
Army well appointed in the year 1927. and privately brought them into Silesia,
and had gathered together about four hundred men in a wood near to Gurimia: the
rumor of this came to Prague, that the Country people in those parts were
drawing to head with an intent to rebel: for the surprising of which, some
troops were sent against them: they apprehended near unto that wood Matthew
Vlickie, (but Techenitius with his men were escaped.) This Vlickie was not
privy to this insurrection, only came from visiting his wife, who at that
time was sick, and was returning to his own place of refuge, being Kizchebla.
But they bring him, with one whose name was Michna with them to Czaslavia, unto
the chief Commanders there assembled together. Of these he is examined whether
he were in the company of these country men, who denying it, was immediately
delivered to the executioner to be tormented. The overseeing of this torturing
was committed to two Citizens, to wit Nicholas Holub, and George Kosischu^k
Apostates, they enquired of him not only concerning the insurrection of the
country men, but likewise concerning his function, When, where, to whom he had
administered the Lords Supper or Baptism. For they suspected that for three
years past he had not been far off, and had encouraged the people of
Czaslavia to perseverance, which suspicion of theirs proved not true, for being
banished (he went through Moravia, Hungary and Austria,) but did return
within half a year, to the the same intent, that he might not leave his
auditors though in persecution.

3. They made a fair show, and gave him some hope of life if he would turn
Catholic, but the Lord so strengthened him, that he sealed with his blood the
truth of the Doctrine in the same City wherein he taught it. He ingeniously
confessed that he neither quite laid down, nor for a time did slack those
parts of the Ministry, which he had received from Christ not from Caesar, being
demanded of the Mass Priest, whether after the manner, of the Calvinists he
gave the bread in stead of the Host, and gave the Cup into the Communicants
hands? He answered; That was Christ's institution; whose example to follom, and
command to-obey he accounted most sacred. When they endeavored to extort from
him the confession of the sedition against Caesar, and Kosischink one of the
examiners admonished him not to burden his conscience by concealing what he
knew, he answered, thou perfidious fellow I have a greater regard of my
conscience than thou have of thine, at which words he being astonished in
Conscience within a small while after languished and died, being again promised
hope of pardon if he would change his Religion, he answered, since this body of
mine is subject to corruption, and now it does begin to decay, why would you
have me hinder it.

4. On the 11 day of September he is brought forth to be punished, and the
crier proclaimed with a loud voice that he was guilty of sedition, with a loud
voice he said I suffer for the truth of Christ, when he wa^ going through the
gate, one John Aquile a Bachelor prese^t^d him with a book of Psalms, but was
forced to fly for it, not without a beating from the Captain. Vlicius with a
very cheerful voice and ready memory singing that Psalm. Have thee O Lord, etc.
None of the Citizens were permitted to accompany him, or look out at the
windows on him, whosoever should presume to do otherwise, was threatened to be
shot, and that his voice might not be heard what he sung, or said, the Trumpets
sounded, and the drums beat continually about him.

When he was led to the place of execution, he cheered up himself saying, this
day my soul shall be with Christ; the Captain H^^zowski, answered: with the
Devil in Hell, but the Martyr turned back again these words upon him, but
you with your impious crew will run headlong thither excep ye repent, and
kneeling down on his knees he recomended his soul to Christ, presently after
the executioner cut off his right hand, wherewith (say they) he gave the Cup
into the hands of the Laity, after that they cut off his head, and cut out his
bowels and wrapped them in his shirt, at the length he was quattered and his
quarters set upon four stakes and his head on the fifth, and was set about the
Gallows to be seen. Some that have passed by affirm, that the head and
members have been seen fresh all the year after, and untouched by the birds.

6. After his death the enemies began to disperse themselves, and some letters
were in his possession found, the which (if he could have happily joined
himself to the multitude of seditious countrymen) he intended to have
dispersed throughout the whole Kingdom, and incited all men to take up arms
for the defense of administering the Cup in the Sacra^ent. But with those that
knew the man better, this forgery got no credit; for that he was known to be of
a quiet disposition, and truly Godly, and was wont to say very often that tears
were the arms of the Church; nay, he was so far from any such thing, that he
seemed not to approve that the Orders should defend their religion by arms.
Unless by chance being mastered by impatience, he might happily join with them
in their desperate Counsels, which he only knows from whom nothing is hid.
This we are certain of, that it is no new device, for the enemies of the
Church, to lay such notable aspersions upon the Godly, that they might put a
fairer gloss upon their tyranny. We will hereafter acquaint you how the Father
of this Martyr (a man of eighty years of age) laid his life down for Religion
in the same year at Prostanna in Moravia.

CHAP. LVIII. Ministers cast out of Moravia.
THe same year 16^4 as in Bohemia, so in Moravia, the Edict was published
against the Ministers, and Commissaries were appointed who should see the
execution done. These going through all the Provinces, remove the Ministers of
the Gospel, and at the last banish them.

2. But John Jacob the greater an Italian, and a man that was very rich, and
John Ernestas Platesius, a Canon of Colmucensis, came unto that illustrious
Baron, Charles of Zerotina, a man for his wisdom, and other Heroieall
Virtues, famous through all Europe. And under Matthias for the space of eight
years pro-Mazchio, and being in great favor with the house of Austria for his
fidelity to them, only envied for his constancy in Religion, for even at that
time he maintained 24 of the fraternity in his jurisdiction, for which they
required that he should give satisfaction to Caesar, neither could Caesar loose
any privilege thereby: They say they have an express command from
Ditrichsteinus the Cardinal, the governor of Moravia, he tells them again,
that in matters of Religion he ought not to be subject to the Cardinal, and
therefore from the Cardinal he appeals to Caesar.

3. Very willingly they agree to this, and therefore do grant him but
fourteen days, which being past and the Baron in regard of the ill
disposition of his body, could not go unto Caesar, the next day after the
Epiphanie they return, and press hard for the execution of Caesar's will, yet
it was left to the Barons choice, whether he would promise to send the
Ministers away, or whether he would leave this thing for them to do. The Baron
said, that neither of these was convenient, that either he should banish those
whom he knew to be the servants of Christ, or that the Commissioners should
prescribe it to him; but that he would appeal to Caesar. They protested that
they ought to put in execution the commands of Caesar, and therefore
immediately go into the town, and make ready the citation, and having called
the the Burrouhg Master of the Town, require him to provide them a messenger,
and presently, even that night, (that they may declare themselves to be of the
number of those whom the Scripture says, cannot take their rest unless they
may do some mischief, or those whose sleep departs from them except they
may destroy, Proverbs 4, 16.) commanding all that inhabit that village, that
they appear next morning very early.

4. The Ministers and they appear, they read Caesar's Edict, and ask them
whether they would submit thereto, to which they answer; That they rely wholly
upon the will of God, whom in the Gospel of Jesus Christ they serve, relying
therefore on Gods will and pleasure, they did resolve to undergo what
punishment they would inflict, since they suffered only for the name of Jesus
Christ, not for any ill deeds. Again they demanded whether they will repent,
and return to the Catholic Church from which through schism and haeresie
they had departed. Unanimously they do deny it. The Commissaries dismiss them,
having given them some time to consider of it, and that every one particularly
might come in and speak for himself; but they repeat again their common
answer, that in so religious a cause as this there needed no deliberation.
Therefore the Commissioners in Caesar's name banish them, and command them to
depart out of the City within eight days, under the pain of death. These
godly men did obey, and went into banishment, for whom the Baron at his own
charge took care, that they should be carried into Hungary.

5. Going afterward into Wienna the Baron complains unto Caesar of the
injury done unto him by the Cardinal in Moravia, and the Prince of
Litchtensteine in Bohemia, (for there he had a town with some villages, and the
Ministers were there also cas^ out, but all to no purpose as shall be showed
heareafter under the title of the proceedings against even the Peers and
Noblemen.

6. And thus the Ministers of the Gospel throughout all Moravia and Bohemia,
the slaves and vassalls of Antichrist are given to the Churches for Doctors,
blind guides to seeing men. It is high time to see how they dealt with the
other Orders.

CHAP. LIX. Proceedings against Peers and Noblemen, how many eminent and
chi^fmen were taken, and some condemned to death, others to perpetual
imprisonment.
I. THe enemies of the Gospel trained up in Phalaris and Machiavell^ school,
aimed at topping the chief and principal heads of the Poppy: for which thing
they had a fair pretense, which formerly they sought, viz. The accusation of
taking up arms against them, for though after the fight a certain hope of
pardon was granted, if laying down their arms they would submit themselves to
Caesar's mercy, (by which slight they are caught who otherwise might have
escaped.) but afterward, whom they had appointed for slaughter they
apprehended, saying that the public liberty without the ransom of some heads
could not be redeemed.

2. First of all therefore they took all such whom they could have out of the
rank of the Defenders and and Directors, and then all those whom they knew had
done any thing for the common good of the country and religion, or feared that
they might be able to do (those excepted who adhered not to Ferdinand) or that
feared to break their faith to Frederick) these they accompany going unto
banishment. About fifty men far excelling others in godliness, wisdom, and
courage, who had passed over their younger years in learning, in millitary
affairs, and in traveling the rest of their age, sety apart for the Church
and Commonwealth to wit by watching, by showing dangers to the imprudent,
adding courage to the prudent, by exhorting unto concord, and advising in
common what they could for the best: in a word the very flower of our nation,
the lights, delights and safeguard of our Country. How therefore those were
examined condemned and after what manner they were punished, how cheerfully
they did suffer Martyrdom for the truth of the faith, and liberty of the
Country, with my most accustomed plainness and brevity I shall declare.

3. The Pipe makes sweet music while the fowler catches the birds: more than
three months nothing is heard but fair promises of favor, and hope of
impunity for all by gone trespasses; insomuch, that some came out of their
lurking holes, and some returned home that were exiled, but when many had
despaired of hoping, suddenly and in one hour which was the first hour of the
night (even about supper time, on the 20 of February in the year 1621, they
laid hold on, and captivated as many as they could come at; for every one being
in their houses, unlooked for were visited by the Captains of the City of
Prague, and Caesar's Judges (even as they had cast their business before hand)
and were commanded to get up into the Wagon, wherein some were carried to the
Castle of Prague, others were carried to the Praetors lodgings.

4. The next day after, Writs were issued out, whereby, as well the absent as
those that departed the Kingdom: allowing them six weeks to appear in.
Therefore on the second of April, being commanded by the Herald to appear, and
not one did appear. On the 5 day of April, the same common crier pronounces
sentence against them, that all such as were guilty of Treason should forfeit
goods, honors, and lives. The 25 of April was the day perfixed for the
execution of this Writ. And their names set on the Gallows. And the next day
after the sentence is pronounced against the Heirs of such who lost their
lives in the Rebellion, that all their goods be confiscate to the King.

5. In the month of May, they proceeded to the trial of the Noblemen they had
taken, and Otton Melander, and Daniel Capper, civil Lawyers, and wavering
Apostates are appointed examiners, with some of the Nobility, who tire out the
accused persons with a thousand unnecessary questions, desiring to extort that
from them that never was, which importunate inquisition Count Schlikius was not
able to endure, insomuch that rending asunder his garments, and opening his
breast he said, Tear into a thousand pieces this body, and search into the
innermost part of my intraills, you shall fi^d nothing there but what I have
expressed in my Apology. The love of Liberty and Religion has made us sheath
our sword^, and because God would have that Caesar's sword should prevail, and
deliver us into your hands, Gods Will be done. In like manner Budowecius and
Otto de Loss using much vehemence maintained stoutly that the cause of the
Orders was not made a whit the worse in regard of the success.

6. And thus a Month or two is spent in inquisitions, when none would yield,
none would acknowledge himself in an error, none would sue unto them, they do
therefore proceed to execution; The judgment is committed to some of the
Nobility under one kind, who were sworn enemies of the Gospellers. And that
their cruelty may have some show of clemency, Caesar commanded the sentences as
they were delivered to be brought to him to Vienna, which after he had
mittigated he sent back again. It is reported by some of credit, that Caesar
slept not all that night for considering on the business, and in the morning
calling his confessor to him (P. Lainormaini) said, I adjure thee upon thy
conscience to tell me, whether I may with a safe conscience pardon those that
are condemned, or suffer execution to pass upon them? To whom the Confessor
made this answer, O Caesar, both are in thy power. Caesar therefore setting pen
to paper, wrote therein a pardon for some, but for others left them to the
execution of the sentence with a great addition of shame and ignominy, as does
follow.

7. June the 19. which was Saturday, I know not whether on set purpose or by
chance it was appointed for this days actions, the Judges being gathered
together in the Palace of the Tower, gave order they should be brought forth
singly, and that the sentence of condemnation (some ceremonies of terror being
added for affrightment) should be proclaimed, to some death, to some perpetual
imprisonment, to others banishment, and some are reserved to the further
pleasure of Caesar, after this manner.

8. Willielmus Popeliu of Lobkowitz, and Paulus of Rziczan, were condemned to
be beheaded, yet by the clemency of Ferdinand Caesar, who was always
inclinable that way, he was adjudged to perpetual imprisonment, and his goods
confiscated to the King.

9. Joachimus Andrea Scehlikio Count of Passaun, was adjudged to have his right
hand cut off, and his body to be cut into four parts, and to be hanged up in
high ways: but by the special favor of Caesar, he was only to be beheaded,
and his head and hands to be fastened to the Lattice-windows of the Tower of the
Bridge of Prague on the top of a spear.

10. Wenceslaus de Budow^, in like manner to have his hand and head cut off,
and his members to be fastened in a certain place, and his four quarters in a
public place that looks four ways, to be fastened to a stake, yet by the
indulgence of Caesar only his head was cut off, and to be fastened to the Tower
of the Bridge.

11. Christopher Hazan of Polcitz, to have his head cut off.

12. Casparus Kaplirius of Sulewitz although he had very much offended, yet
having regard to his age (for he was very near ninty years of age) he had the
favor to have his head cut off, and his head to stand with the rest for a
spectacle.

13. Procopius Dworzetskz, Bohuslaus of Mi^chalowitz, Frederick Bile, and Henry
Otton o^ Loss, had the same punishment denounced against them: yet they said,
for a greater severity of justice they were to be cut into four parts.

14. Johannes Westrowecius was to have his head cut off, yet he was reserved to
perpetual imprisonment.

15. The same sentence was pronounced against Wene^slaus Felix Petipeski, but
that unfortunate man a little after redeemed his shameful liberty with shameful
Apostasy.

16. Dionysius Czerninus, was adjudged to have two of his fingers cut off, and
after that his head, yet his fingers were not cut off.

17. Woolfgangius Hoslarus, his doom was to have been banished for ever; yet
the mercy of Caesar did so far extend to him, that he was confined only for
one whole year, to Raab a garrison Town in Hungary.

18. William Konec Chlumski was only beheaded. Hitherto of the mittigation of
the sentences that were passed against Barons and Nobility; The Citizens follow.

19. Johannes Theodorus Sixtus; M. Valentinus Cochanus, Tobias Seeoffeck, and
Christopher, all of them chief men of Prague, lost their lives.

20. John Scultesi^s a Ruitenburgian, and Maximilianus of Zatemen, being
eminent Citizens, had their heads cut off, and fastened in the marketplace to a
pair of stocks in their respective Cities.

21 Johannes Jessenius a Physician and governor of the University of Prague,
who formerly had been sent on an embassy to Hungary, for which cause he was
condemned to have his tongue first cut out, while he was alive, and to be
quartred alive, lastly his quarters and head to be disposed of to several
places which had two paths; yet through Caesar's clemency the execution was not
according to that sentence, but he was first killed, then his tongue was cut
out, and then he was beheaded and quartred.

22r John Kutnave, Simeon Sussicius, and Nathaniel Woodmanius, were sentenced
to be hanged.

23. Melchior Triprechius Advocate, George Zawjetam Secretary of the Chancery,
and Paul Perczkam Auditor are condemned to perpetual imprisonmenu.

24. Wenceslaus of Gisbite, a citizen of Prague was beheaded.

25. George Hunschlidius, and Leander Rippelius. Germans both and Lawyers,
Agents for some Princes of Germany, having appealed from an inferior to a
higher Court, were condemned to have their hands and heads cut off.

26. Nicolaus Dionysius, of the Senate of the greatter Prague was to be burnt,
his tongue being first cut out, yet his punishment was so mitigated, that he
was only to be nailed to a gallows for the space of an hour, and to depart
from that place.

27. Wenceslaus Bozesius was to be burnt, John Swelham, and Joseph Kubinu, to
be whipped and then banished.

28. Matthew Bozbonius a Physician should have been beheaded, but Caesar taking
commiseration on him only kept him in prison.

26. Casparus Vslar, and Henry Kozell, Senators of new Prague were to be hanged
out of the window of the Court of that City, but Caesar out of merciful
clemency assigned the former to perpetual imprisonment, and the latter died by
the sword.

30. Elias Rosinu an Elder, and Lucas Karbanus should have died by the sword,
but Caesar gave them their lives, but the former was imprisoned, and the other
banished.

31. Andrew Kacaur, George Rzecitius, Mich-Witman, Simeon Wockez, to loose
their lives by the sword, but John Kamaritus tasted the favor of Caesar and
was only banished for the space of one whole year.

32. Some other citizens, Abraham Angelus, Johannes Pelz^zinowski etc. were
reserved until Caesar were certified concerning them.

CHAP. LX. Twenty seven glorious Martyrs.
I. THe judicial proceeding being over, which lasted for the space almost of
three days, each sort of prisoners were carried to their several prisons, the
Noblemen into the inner prison of the Castle, the Citizens into the Praetors
houses. Some rakeshames were suborned to insult over them, saying, why do they
not now sing The Lord reigns. The ninety ninth Psalm, as it should seem
being, used to be sung amongst other Psalms in the time of Frederick.

2. The Prince Lichstenstein going out of his Palace, and going to Mass that
day, as well as the next day following, the wives, children and the kinsfolk of
each sex of the condemned persons humbly suing for their lives; but answer was
made, that all the favor that they could now expect was that they should have
leave to bury the corpse of their friends. And yet there were some insinuating
fellows, such as would swallow bribes, who took moneys both of widows and
orphans, making fair promises to them.

3. In the evening the condemned men had notice given to them, that the time of
their execution drew near, and that the one and twentieth day of June was the
appointed day: And therefore they did advice that each of them would have a
care of his own soul, and therefore that they should send for a Jesuit, or
Capuchin, or Minister of the Augustine Confession and so fit himself for
death; but that none of them must have any thought to have any Minister of the
Order; because that would not be granted unto them. Which was sad news to
them; because the greater part of the Martyrs had been auditors of the
Brethren: neither could this inhibition otherwise be taken, than either from
some exact or some ancient rooted malice against them; or to cast a mist before
the eyes of the Saxons, as though Caesar did not much dislike their Order.

4. Which thing being done, the foresaid Jesuits and the Capuchines, not
staying till they were ^alled for, flew thither like so many flies, using many
persuasions to them, even to desparation and denial of the truth, and by
putting some in hope of life. But God so strengthened them, that all those
endeavors of Satan and his Imps were in vain, whatsoever they protested to
the contrary; calling Heaven and Earth to witness, that they shall not be
guilty of their eternal damnation, since that they so obstinately refused the
Grace of God.

5. The Ministers of the Gospel are therefore called, Johannes Rosucius from
the lesser Prague went to the Castle, M. Victorinus Verberius, and Vitus
Jakessius into the Court in old Prague. Adamus Clemens into new Prague. And
David Lippech was with the Germans, whereof three which were at this time
condemned were doctors. Jessenius, Haunschildt and Rippell: These Divines spent
the remainder of time (which was Sunday and Monday even unto the time of
execution in religious exercise colloquies, prayers and Hymns; lastly they did
prepare the holy Martyrs by the administration of the Sacrament for the future
agony.

6. They which were of the Brethren and reformed, did admit those Ministers
willingly, protesting that they have acknowledged them for brethren, and do
acknowledge them to be the Ambassadors of Christ, howsoever they have differed
unhappily in some Articles. Two only, the Baron of Budovia, and Otto of Loss,
conferred religiously with Rosacius, but did not partake of the Sacrament,
because happily it might give occasion of some false accusation) comforting
themselves with this saying believe and thou have eaten.

7. It is worthy remembrance, how on the Sunday they which were in old Prague
prisoners in the Praetors house did suppe. For as they were conferring with M.
Werbenius, and even in his presence, the chief Jailer had told them that the
hour for supper was at hand, they looking one upon another, protested that they
did not want that material supper, yet for recreation sake they would not
scorn to sit down. And then one is busy laying the Napkins, another in
setting on the Dishes, another pouring out the water for such as would wash,
another having given thanks to carve to others, another puts them in mind, that
this was their last supper upon earth, but to morrow they should feast with
Christ in Heaven. The Master of the Court being a man of evil disposition, and
a Papist took this saying not very well, who going out to some of his friends,
made a scoff at it saying, does Christ provide them Cooks in Heaven. Which
when it was told unto them, the Minister Vitus Iakessius discoursed very
religiously concerning Christ his last supper here on earth, and of Judas that
did trouble Christ and his Disciples. One of these D. Haunschildt, would eat
nothing: saying, this pouch meaning his panch) is sufficiently stuffed with
worms meat.

8. In the mean while it is told them that the Barons and Noblemen, were led
out of the prison of the Castle into the Court of the ancient City, near unto
which in the market place that direful Theater for that shambles was appointed:
which they, as if they were going to meet with them, hasten to the windows, and
looking out entertain their fellow Martyrs with the forty fourth Psalm with a
loud voice, while the amazed multitude flock after them in great swarms,
sighing and lamenting.

9. After that, the whole night is spent in Psalms and prayers, and godly
discourse, and mutual exhortations: (that because it pleased God to call them
before others, to this glory of Martyrdom,) they should not doubt, by their
true constancy, to confound the world, to glorify Christ, and to leave a godly
example to posterity. And when amongst others they sung the sixty eight Psalm,
(occasion being taken by the last verse of that Psalm, where David prays, Show
some token of good upon me,) John Kutnaur broke out into these words, Show
therefore on us some token of thy goodness O God, whereby we thy unworthy
servants may be strengthened by thy goodness, and our enemies confounded. And
as it were answering for God, being full of faith, he says, Be of good cheer,
for even in this God has heard your voice, and to morrow he will show some
wonderful sign, and will witness that we suffer for his cause. The Minister,
M. Werbenius when he heard this, answered, They will rest satisfied herewith,
when they shall perceive that death which is bitter to the wicked, is sweetened
to you.

10. Early in the morning, having washed their Faces, they put on clean
clothes, as though they were going to a wedding, fitting their Dublets and
jackets to their bodies, and cutting their collars, that being brought to the
scaffold, there should be no need of a new making ready. Kautnur, in the mean
while, with others pray and earnestly desire of God, that if his Majesty would
be pleased to strengthen and confirm both themselves and the people
concerning their innocence. And presently after the sun rising, a beautiful
bow appeared and compassed the heavens, the Ministers, the soldiers, and many
others, go to see it. But the Martyrs looked out at the window and they all
see, (as well as those all over Prague) a Rainbow of an unusual color, and
the Heavens very clear, neither was it observed that any rain had fallen for
the space of two whole days before. This sign being showed from heaven, the
Martyrs lifted up their voices and hands, part of them in whose company
Verbenius was, fell on their knees and praised God, here one calls to mind the
Covenant of Noah, another thinks one the Rainbow in the Revelation, about
the Throne of Christ's tribunal, who was judge of the living and the dead, and
very much to comfort themselves herein.

11. But as soon as this heavenly sign of grace was vanished, another sign of
approaching Martyrdom, the noise of a gun, being let off, sounded in their
ears, which when being heard by the Ministers of the word, the Champions of
Christ, going to each other, salute one another, and pray that each of them may
be strengthened, they also encourage one another, and exhort to fight manfully,
presently the Troops of horse come, and some colors of footmen, and encompasse
the Theater, wherein, on their seats, the Judges of Caesar with the Senators
did sit; the Market place, the streets, and all the houses, are filled with
numberless numbers of spectators,

12. The Martyrs are called forth one after another, and do go to their death,
and undergo it without daunting, for whoever was called forth, hastened with no
less chearfullnesse, than as if he had gone to a banquet, or some other
delights; and it was done after the same manner by each of them, (as M.
Rosacius does describe) speaking to the other. Most loving friends farewell,
God give unto you the comfort of his Spirit, patience and courage, that what
formerly with your heart, your mouth, and your hands, ye have affirmed, ye may
do the like by your glorious death, behold I go before, that I may see the
glory of my Lord Jesus Christ, ye will follow me, that we may together behold
the face of our Father, even in this hour all sorrow departs from me, and
joy^ull eternity shall enter in. And they which remained behind answered, God
above whether and to whom you are going prosper your journey, and grant you
pass happily from this vale of miseries this desert of goodness, unto that
Heavenly Country let the Lord Jesus send his Angels to meet thee. Go dear
Brother in thine and our Fathers house, and we will follow, presently we will
meet in the Heavenly glory, we are confident of this through him in whom we
have believed.

13. These and other things, being accompanied by the Ministers, through the
yard of the Court, to the Scaffold, they spoke with a brave resolution, and
with such ardency of Spirit, that even the Praetors, and the company of
Soldiers, standtng round about wept, and had they not deafned the ears of the
bystanders with the noise of Drums, and sound of Trumpet, it had been
impossible but that every one had paid the tribute of one tear if not more.
When the Ministers returned, and had reported how valiantly the one and other
died, the rest praised God, desiring of him the like aid of his assisting Grace.

14. But it will be worth our labor to remember some thing of each of them in
particular.

CHAP. LXI. Joach^mus Andreas, Schlik of Holeytsche Count of Assaw Lord of
Swi^an.
I. HE was a man of above fifty years of age, as of ancient noble family; so he
of very good parts. For Heroical magn^nimity, with admirable modesty of mind,
a readiness of acting businesses with a Religious care and circumspection, as
also with a wonderful temperature excelled in him. Deservedly therefore by the
Orders he was made choice of to be director of their Councels; and afterward
by Frederick he was chose chief Judge, and made Pro-Marcio of Lusatia.

2. Flying from the conquering hands of Ferdinand, he went into Lusatia. But
the Elector of Saxony taking of him, although in his youth he was his chief
Officer, and one that did deserve very well of him, yet by the persuasion of I
know not what Antichristian Parasite, he delivered him over to the fury of the
enemy. With what resolution he answered the examiners, is before mentioned,
when he had received that horred sentence of death, especially that he was to
be quartered, and his parts to be scatered here and there, he answered, The
loss of a sepulcher is easy, when Rosatius the Minister came to him, and
wished to courage and fortitude, he answered, I thank you my Father for your
good and godly wish, but know that I have Gods grace and favor, so that no
fear of death does trouble me; once I have dared to oppose Antichrist, and I
shall dare to die for Christ. I am now judged by the world, but a more horrible
judgment waits upon them.

4. When on Monday morning after five of the clock he heard the report of a
Gunne, he said, This is the signal of our death; let me go first; but thou O
Jesus have mercy on us. The Jesuits troubling him, as before he resisted
manfully, so now when he came upon the scaffold, and Seditius the Father of his
sect, with others called unto him, saying, Sir, remember yet, he answered, pray
dispatch me presently.

5. When he went further on the scaffold, and beheld the Sun shining very
bright, he said, Christ thou Son of Righteousness, grant that through the
darkness of death I may pass into thy eternal light, then meditating, he
walked about the scaffold with that gravity, and a countenance so composed for
sober mirth; that even the chief men there could scarce refrain weeping. Having
ended his prayers he fell upon a cloth that was spread there for that purpose,
and so received the blow of the sword. After that his right hand was cut off,
and was hung up with his head, on an iron spear upon the high Tower of the
Bridge; but his carcass was wrapped in a cloth and conveyed away by some in
mourning habits to a cave, and a fresh cloth is spread, which is observed to be
done for all of them, that none of those that suffered might see the Corpse or
blood of those that suffered before them.

CHAP. LXII. Wenceslaus Baron of Budowa a Monk of Graetium, Lord of
Klastericke and Zazadka.
I. THis man had an incomparable wit, famous for his learning as appears by
his writings, renouned for his travels through Germany, Italy, France,
England, and Turkey, where he lived seven years, he was very zealous, deserving
reverence even for his age, (for he was seventy years old) eminent also in
regard of his places of preferment. For under Rodolphus he was a Counselor,
and was called to the place of one of the Directors of the reformed Consistory,
and Academie. By Matthias he was made a Counselor, and by the Order, Director
of the Kingdom in the vacancy, until a King was elected. Lastly he was
President of the Court of Appeals, the glory of his Country, and the bright
shining star of the Church; he was none that Lorded it over his inferiors,
but was rather a Father to them. In a word, he was right dear both to God and
man.

2. After the Victory of Ferdinand, he accompanied his family out of Prague,
(his Wife, his Son, Nurse, Nephews,) and (least he should seem to have
forsaken the Crown, whereof with one Otto he was appointed keeper) he
returned. His house not long after was plundered, even to his wearing apparel,
he only saying, that the Lord has given and the Lord has taken.

3. Paulus Aretinus being Secretary of the Tribunalls, talking with him, (for
he was now kept under arrest in his own house) and being demanded, that since
he had b n once in the deeps, why he would trust himself to those tempestuous
storms, he did answer, his conscience pressed him to what he did: It was
Religion that persuaded him to forsake his Country, and a good cause. But I
know not Gods pleasures, whether he will that I should seal it with my blood.
And rising up he said, I am here my God, dispose of me thy servant as it
seems good in thine eyes; I am full of years, take from me my life, that I
may not see those evils which I see are now coming on my Country. Being
another day visited by the same party, and being before acquainted of the
report that went on him (that for very grief he died) smiling he answered;
What me? I had never had he happiness to enjoy so much pleasure as now: b^hold
my Paradise (showing his Bible) it never yielded me so much Nectar and Ambrosia
as now, I live, and will live as long as God please, neither, I hope, shall any
man see that day wherein good old Budowecius, was said to die with grief. Being
examined of the Inquisitors often, he stiffly maintained the equity of the
cause; and being condemned, he said to the Judges, Ye have long time thirsted
after my blood, but know withal, ye will find God a revenger of innocent
blood, for whose cause we suffer.

4. The third day before the execution, he told his dream to his servant
Zidnowskie. He dreamed that he thought he saw himself walking in a pleasant
field, and thinking of the event of these things with a heavy heart; when
behold one coming to me offered me a book, which when I looked into, I saw
silken white leaves, and nothing therein written, but the fifth verse of the
thirty seven Psalm, Commit thy way unto the Lord, and put thy trust in him,
and he shall bring it to pass: when he began again to think what that meant,
another came, and brought a white Robe, which he cast upon him The old man
awaking, told it presently to his servant: and as he went on the Scaffold, he
said to him, Now I go covered with the cloth of Righteousness, that I may
appear before God in whom I hope.

5. After the pronunciation of the sentence, as he was going into the Cross,
two Capuchins met him, and told him the cause of their coming, which was, to
afford him mercy in these straits, he demanded of them, what that mercy was.
They did answer, that they might show him the way of the Lord. He replied
again, I know that by the mercy of my God. They again said, Sir, you are
deceived in your opinion. Unto whom he answered, I rely not on opinion on but
the infallible truth; for I have no other way, but him who said, I am the way,
the truth, and life. But they replied, there is no salvation out of the Church,
and here they fall into discourse of the authority of the Church, to trifle
away the time, and would gladly confine it to the Pope, and Cardinals, in which
discourse they use vain repetition, in desiring their principles to be
granted, whereat the Martyr incensed, said: but I think your Pope is a Devil,
and Antichrist, and the son of perdition, and that Beast that was made red with
the blood of Saints: depart with him to the place ye have deserved, and let me
alone: yet if ye will learn from me the way of truth, stay ye, it will not be
tedious to me, to spend some time and pains to save your souls. Here they
beating their breasts, and signing themselves with the sign of the Cross they
departed, complaining that they never met with such a blasphemous Heretic.

6. In like manner (on the day of Martyrdom) very early in the morning, two
Jesuits came into the Court, and began again to trouble these holy men: and
when some slighted them, they came to the Baron, and said, We perceive that
this Baron is very learned, we do desire to gain his soul, and afford unto
him the work of mercy: to whom he said, What! would ye gain my soul? Would
ye were assertained of your salvation as I am of mine, the Lord be praised, who
by his holy spirit, has assured me of my salvation by the blood of the Lamb.
The Jesuit replied, Good sir, do not presume too much, and assume that to your
self, whereof no man can promise to himself any certainty; For does not the
Scripture say, No man knows whether he have deserved grace? To whom the Baron
answered, Is it therefore that I have need of your mercy? Ye unhappy gainers
of souls, ye rather infuse desparation into me, but ye err, not knowing the
Scriptures. And here he expounded, and gave them the sense of this place, and
brought other portions of Scripture, which prove the infallibility of the
salvation of believers. Amongst others that of Saint Paul, I know in whom I
have believed, also I know that a crown is laid up for me. The Jesuit
interrupting him, said, This Paul said of himself, not of others: The Baron
replied, Thou lie: for it follows, not for me only, but for all those that
wait for his coming. Here the Sophister was mute, and the Baron went forward.
As for that saying, No man knows whether he deserve grace or hatred, do you
thereby seek to coope me up? pray tell me where you find it written? here is
the Bible, where do you find it? The one said, If I be not deceived, in the
Epistle of Paul to Timothy. The Baron being very angry, said, Thou Ass,
would thou teach me the way of salvation, which knows so little of the word
of God? Satan be gone from me, and tempt me not. At length (being confuted)
they went their way, and stood a far off, while the Martyrs prepared themseves
for suffering, as they use to paint Devils, when they are forced to leave and
forsake the sinner, looking (as we use to say) as if he had eaten Bull-beef.
And it is probable, that nothing so much troubled Satan, than that all of them
slighted him and his factors.

7. Presently after, the Baron was called, and as he went on the Scaffold, he
carried his head stately, and stroking his long beard, he said, My gray hairs,
Behold what honor remains for you, that you should be crowned wi^h Martyrdom:
and then directing his speech to God, he prayed for the Church, his Country,
his Enemies, and recomended his soul to Christ: whose head being cut off, was
set on the Tower, and his body buried.

CHAP. LXIII. Christopher Hara^t Baron of Bezdruzitz, and Polzciz Lord of
Petzka.
I. HE got himself a name, and much experience by his travells in Europe, Asia,
and Affirica, which he published to the world in his native language, he was
made, by Rodolphus, one of his Privy-Chamber, by Matthias a Privy-Counsellour,
lastly by Frederick chief of the Kings Chamber. This was the cause why the
sentence of death was pronounced against him, because he was present at the
expedition of the Orders in Austria, and not being absolved of his former Oath
took an oath to be true to Frederick, which thing was as well done by others as
by him, so that it was evident, that these Politicians sought their pretenses,
merely out of the hatred they did bear unto religion.

2. Going to suffer, he called unto him Rosacius, a Minister of the Gospel,
and told him how much he was troubled for his wife and children, for he knew
his wives coldness in religion, and therefore feared what he should commit to
her, she now wanting a counselor. He remembers that he left in witing
something with her, which he does desire to remember, and therefore desirteh
the Minister to rehearse them to him. First, that she should be constant in the
Gospel Religion, nor suffer her self by any allurements to be persuaded from
it: for he tells there that therein is the readiest and most infallible way of
Salvation, and assurance of the mercy of God by the merits of Christ, being
mindful of him and of that which she had heard from him, that he had tried all
Religion, and compared them with the Scriptures, and that he found none more
sure and solid, than that which he was about to seal with his blood, that we
attain Salvation by the blood of the Lamb, which he is certain very shortly to
find. Of which glory if she would be partaker, she should persevere in the same
faith. Secondly, he prayed that she would use more clemency to his Subjects,
and rather ease, then overcharge them with burdens; last of all to command
that she would have a care of her Children and bring them up in pure Religion,
otherwise if through carelessness they were seduced, he would cause them to
appear before Christ his tribunal. This he spoke with much zeal and solemn
protestations; but this mere woman, being perfidious to God, her conscience,
her children, and her subjects, observing nothing of all this. For within a
while after she did marry an Apostate, committed her sons to the tuition of
Jesuits, she her self swerved from her Religion, and did exercise tyranny over
the souls and bodies of her subjects.

3. Being called forth to execution, he said, I have traveled so many
Countries, so many barbarous nations, have undergone so many dangers by sea
and- and, now I suffer innocently in my own Country, and by their hands, both
for whose good I and my forefathers spent our Estates and Lives. Father
forgive them. As he went forth he prayed, In thee (O Lord) have I hoped, let me
not be confounded for ever. Going on the Scaffold, he lift up his eyes and
said, Into thy hands (O Lord) I commend my spirit. Walking on the fatal cloth
that was spread on the floor, he made a little stand, and brake forth again
into these words, In thee (O Lord) have I trusted in my Youth, I am confident
that I shall be accepted by that ignominious death of my Savior: and falling
down on his knees he added, To thee (O God) I commend my spirit, thou God true
and just have redeemed me. And seeing the Executioner came not, (for he was a
Gospeller, neither did he make too much have, until they had finished their
prayers) he perceiving some delay, prayed again, Lord Jesus, Son of David, be
merciful to me, and receive my spirit: and the sword from behind him cut off
his speech with his head.

CHAP. LXIIII. Caspar Kaplirz of Sulewitz, a Knight 86 years of age.
I. When Rosacius the Minister of the Word came to visit him after his
condemnation, he received him with tears in his eyes, but with a merry heart,
with these words; Behold me a miserable old man, who have often entreated my
God, that he would have compassion on me, and take me out of this life, but I
have not obtained it; For God has reserved me to be a spectacle in the world,
and a sacrifice to himself. Let Gods will be done. My death indeed is
disgraceful in the eyes of men, but glorious in the sight of God: for God will
account that death precious in his sight, which I suffer for his glory and
truth. And when the Minister would have comforted him, he desired him to hear
his confession, and to pronounce his absolution, and to have that faith and
hope which he had in God strengthened by the Lords Supper. Having therefore
confessed himself a sinner, but especially that in his youth he committed
something according to the custom of that age, to please the world he praised
God that had not suffered him to be swallowed up, but had called him to a more
holy and upright course of life.

2. At length he said, [Through the mercy of my God I have preserved my trust
and conscience, both to God, my King, and Country. I have faithfully served
four Emperors, and that now such a reward should be given unto me, I leave to
God the just Judge, who knows that I sought not either honor or riches, by
any thing which I did in this business. But I could not wink at the
oppression of liberty and Religion: and because we saw our selves circumvented
by subtilty, we thought something was to be done; and would rather lose our
lives, rather than by a dull silence yield to the yoke, and betray posterity. I
acknowledge that it was the will of God that we should outwardly fall, who has
chosen me and my beloved fellows in this last age to honor the truth by our
blood, and to make it glorious by our constancy. And although the flesh began
to tremble at the hearing the sentence of death, yet now by the goodness of
God, I feel no fear of it.

3. When the Minister often interrupted him, persuading him not to hang his
salvation upon a good Conscience, but upon the mercy of God thiough Christ, the
pious old man continued on his speech. [Yesterday it was told me from my Aunt
Pruakovia, that if I would petition ^o Prince Lichtenstein, I might have a
grant of my life, but so as to remain in prison all the days of my life. To
which I answered, that such a grant would be both unprofitable and
inconvenient. For if I should desire pardon, I should give an occasion to some,
to suspect that I had committed some crime, and had deserved death, which I
have not deserved. Tell her therefore, that I will desire pardon of him against
whom I have committed many sins all my life: but I never offended the Prince.
But if they should of their own accord offer me a prison instead of death,
such a change would be very troublesome. I am a decrepit old man, and have
lived long enough; for when I cannot distinguish the tastes of meats, or relish
the sweetness of drink, when it is tedious to sit long, and irksome to lie,
when I cannot walk unless I lean on a staff, or be moved to and fro in others
hands; what profit (I pray you) would such a life be to me? And if I can hardly
endure it while it is free, how shall I be able to suffer imprisonment? God
forbid that J should be pulled from this holy company of Martyrs.

4. The next day (being the Lords day) having received the Lords Supper. he
said, [Behold now being reconciled to my God through Christ, I have peace,
neither do I fear man. J will confidently say with David, Let my flesh and my
body be consumed, but God is the rock of my heart, and my portion for ^ver.
Now there is nothing that may stay my thoughts on the earth, besides my
Nephews, for whom (O servant of Christ) J entreat you, that you would as much
as you can, exhort them without intermission to piety, and to imitate that
constancy whereof they see an example in me: although J know that you who are
the fathers and shepherds of our souls are not without danger. We go before,
but you will follow: but God keep you for his own glory, and let him not suffer
his Church to be wholly trampled on by the Babilonish beast.

5. On the day of execution, when the Minister of the word came to him, he
said: J had laid this miserable body upon a bed; but what sleep could J have?
Yet J did sleep, and saw two Angels coming to me, who wiped my face with fine
linen, and exhorted me to be ready to go along with them. But J trust in my
God that J have these Angels present with me, not by a dream, but in truth,
which minister to me while J live; and shall carry my soul from death into
Abraham's bosom. For although J am a sinner, yet I am purged by the blood of my
Redeemer, who was made a Propitiation for our sins. Therefore let the hour
of Death come, J am prepared.

6. Having put on his clothes he commanded that a garment of the finest linen,
which hung down to his heels should be put over him, and then said to M.
Lippuch, Behold I put on my wedding garment. To which the other answered. The
garment of Christ's righteousness adorns more gloriously within. He answered
again, I know it, but yet I desire to be adorned without, for the honor of my
Bridegroom. At last he put on a velvet Cloak, and being called out, he
answered: In the name of God; for I did even now expect it. And then being
helped by his servants, he arose and bid farewell to all, and went away with a
slow pace, by reason of the weakness of age. Being to go down by certain steps
to the scaffold, he said. Oh my God strengthen me left I fall down and become a
matter of scorn to the enemies.

7. When he came to the appointed place, he had much ado to kneel down, being
half crooked. He desired that that the Executioner might be advised to strike
as soon as ever he should see him lie down, lest he might happen to fall by
faintness. But the Executioner seeing him so crooked, and to hang down his
head so much would not strike him. Therefore the Minister Rosacius by the
appointment of the Sheriffs, said to him. My Noble Lord, as you have commended
your soul unto Christ, so now offer up your hoary head cheerfully to God, and
lift up your self toward heaven. In the name of God answered he, and so
lifting up his head as well as he could, says, Lord Jesus into thy hands J
commend my spirit; and then his head being cut off he fell down.

CHAP. LXV. Procopius Dworzecski de Olbramowitz, etc.
I. HAving heard the sentence of death, he answered. Does the Emper^ur promise
himself any thing when my h^ad is taken off? Let him take it th^n. The next
day he said unto the Minister of the Word. [I have had a contention all this
night with the old Adam, even so as it made me sweat: But thanks be to my God,
by whose help my soul has overcome all temptations.] He added this also [O
Almighty God, I have commended my soul to thee, do thou protect it and cherish
it, and withal strengthen thy servant, that I may not be made a derision to my
enemies by any fear of death. And as thou were wont to encourage the holy
Martyrs, so I strongly believe thou will comfort me.]

2. When he was called out to execution, he readily answered, Thanks be to my
God, who does now call me to himself, for him I have lived, and for him will I
die. For because my Savior has therefore died and risen again, that he might
be Lord both of the living and the dead, I know that this soul of mine shall
live, and my body shall be raised like to his glorious body.

3. Coming upon the scaffold, he turned himself to the Imperial Judges, and
said: Tell Caesar that we now undergo his just judgment, but that he shall
undergo the more grievous but yet just judgment of God. And while he put off
his clothes, he gave his purse with an Hungarian Ducket to the Minister of
the word: Behold here my last riches, and these which are unprofitable for me,
I resign to you.

4. And when he saw a piece of gold coin hang about his neck, wherein was
engraven the Coronation of Frederick, he takes it, and delivers it to one of
the standers by: I adjure thee, that whenever my dear King Frederick shall
recover the Throne of his Kingdom, you deliver this to him, and likewise tell
him that for his sake I wore this even to the moment of my death, and that now
I lay down my life willingly for God and my King. Having thus spoken, he
kneeled down, and being struck with the sword in the midst of his sighs, he
gave up his soul to God.

CHAP. LXVI. Frederick de Bile Lord of Rzchlovice.
I. A Man of ancient credit, and honesty, and learned, and Counselor to the
then King of Bohemia, afterward appointed Governor to the States in the time
of the interregnum, suffered punishment patiently and piously.

CHAP LXVII. Henry Otto de Loss Lord of Komarove.
A Man of a quick wit and great judgment. Therefore in the time of Rodolphus
he was in the number of the Defendors of Religion, and afterward chosen one
among the Governors of the Kingdom. By King Frederick he was made assistant
to the Chamber of Justice, and Burgrave of Carleistene with the Count of Thurne.

2. He having received his sentence of condemnation, said: My Caesar, do you
indeed establish your Throne by our blood. But you shall try in the day of
judgment what account you shall make to God, I have seen barbarous nations,
but I never saw or heard of the like cru^lty: that a man should be cut in
pieces, their heads sent one way, their hands another way, and the other parts
of the body to other places, what cruelty is this! Let them send one part of
me to Rome, another to Spain, another to Turkey, the rest beyond the seas where
they please: I do believe that my Savior will gather them together again and
will cloth them with my skin, that I may see him with these eyes, hear him
with these ears, praise him with th^s mouth, rejoice with this heart for ever.

3. When the Minister Rosacius returned into the Court from the execution of
the L. Dworzeski, (others in the mean time bearing the Lord de Bile company)
the Lord Otto like one in anextasie arose hastily out of his seat, and spoke
these words to him: Oh how do I rejoice at thy coming, O man of God, that I
may with joy relate unto you, what now has happened to me. I sat in this seat
troubled within my self, because it had not been my fortune to have a Minister
of my acquaintance, who might administer absolution and the Eucharist unto me,
I began to grieve, and indeed J do grieve, that J was not present at your holy
mysteries. Amongst these thoughts J fell asleep, and behold my Savior appeared
unto me, who said: My grace is sufficient for thee: for J purify thee with my
blood. And then infused a drop of his blood into my heart, at the feeling of
this, I awaked and leaped for joy. And now believe that J feel a wonderful
refreshing in my heart. And then he added with his hands lifted up: I give thee
thanks most merciful Savior, who has been pleased to fill me with so much
comfort, and to assure me so much of thy grace! Now I understand what that is,
Believe and thou have eaten. Oh now I fear death no longer! I will die with
joy.

4. Being presently called out by the Sheriff, he desires Rosacins to
accompany him: who granting it said; just now the Lord Jesus appeared unto you
in your sleep, now he will appear in a beautiful vision as he is in his
glory. I am sure (answered he) that he will meet my soul with his Angels,
that he may bring it to an everlasting marriage, where I shall drink of a new
cup, a cup of joy for ever. Ah this death I know shall not separate me from
him.

5. He went forward being intent on his prayers to the Scaffold; where lifting
up his eyes he cried out: Behold I see the heavens open, And stretching out
his hand he pointed to a place about the top of heaven, where others also did
observe a certain kind of brightness dazeling their sight. Being come to the
place of execution he fell on his face and prayed silently: then putting off
his doublet, and kneeling down, cried; into thy hands O Lord God I commend my
spirit, have pity on me through Jesus Christ, and receive me, that I may see
his glory. At this word he received the stroke of the sword.

CHAP. LXVIII. Dionisius Czervins de Cludezitz.
BEing conversant in Caesar's Court for many years he had addicted himself to
the Popish Religion. The crime which was laid to his Charge was, that when he
was Captain of the Kings Castle, he let into the Castle the armed States of
that first tumult, (in the year 1618.) But this was only a pretense. For he
demonstrated that it was done by the command of the chief Burgrave, whom he was
bound to obey, and by that means sufficiently cleared himself. But because for
his moderate counsels always prejudicial to the Jesuits, he lay under
suspicion of heresy (which afterward was manifest) it was thought fit that on
this occasion he should be taken out of the way. But chiefly they hoped that
upon this account their whole process should be made less obnoxious to
suspicion, as if it were not carried on against religion, when as they spared
not the Catholics themselves.

2. When Mr. Rosacius administered the Eucharist to the Lord Harans, and
Konetzchlumskie, and and for a preparation exhorted them to repose the hope of
their salvation in the mercy of God, and merits of Christ, and related the
promises made to the people of God, concerning the pardon of sins, and
assurance of salvation to those that believe in Christ: He being present,
struck his breast and with tears in his eyes cried out: [This also is my faith,
and in this J die.] And when absolution was conferred upon them by imposition
of hands, he also received it, which gave them hope that he would also partake
of the Eucharist with them. But he separated himself from them at the
Communion, and kneeled down, and prayed so fervently by himself, as was an
astonishment unto the rest. When every thing was ended, the rest gave thanks to
the Minister, and he brake out into these words; J also give thanks to my God,
who would have me here present, and for you, my beloved friends, I heartily
rejoice at this pious and holy preparation for death. Rosacius answered; And to
you my Lord, the way of Gods grace was open, and we hoped, that after you had
professed the same faith with us, and had admitted of absolution, that you
would have subscribed the Testament of Christ, etc. He answered: That might,
and perhaps ought to have been done. But! And at this word holding his peace,
he struck his breast, sighed and wept, and afterward added: J rest in that
grace, which has happened unto me: and J trust in my God, that he will
graciously accept my contrite spirit. It was certain, that he had reposed some
hope in the favor of men, of which he was deprived.

3. A certain Canon with a Jesuit brought him upon the scaffold, unto whose
speeches, exhortations, comforts, and the rest of their trifles, he seemed
little to attend. For he turned himself from the kiss of peace (as they call
it) and turned his back to the sign of the cross; and falling down on his
face he prayed softly: afterward lifting up himself and looking up to heaven,
he cried out. They can take away the body, but they cannot take away the foul:
O Lord Jesus I commend that unto thee, so he ended his life being about fifty
six years of age.

CHAP. LXIX. William Konezchlumski.
HE was about seventy years of age and had been for some years deprived of
the use of his feet, They laid this crime to his charge, that he had aided the
Emperors enemies with his counsel and wealth. Being called to execution he
said. I will go and die but I know not wherefore. O Lord Jesus who being
innocent did undergo death, grant that I may die the death of the righteous,
and receive my soul into thy hands.

CHAP. LXX. Bohoslaus de Michalowtz Lord of Rugenice-
I. HE was a man excellent in abilities of the mind and zeal for God, having
deserved much both of the Kings and Kingdom of Bohemia.

2. Being adjudged to die, he said it was more welcome to him, than if the
Emperor had commanded him to live, and restored him to all his goods with an
addition of more. For he knew their secret counsels, and perceived what would
follow. The fear and grief of Death (says he) is but for a few hours, and
then comes the desired Rest. Being asked with others, by the Minister of the
Word, whether they did acknowledge themselves justly condemned to the death?
He answered: If we did think that we were the causes of these evils, we would
not be ashamed to confess and detest it. But we will not fall down and desire
favor, lest we give to man that honor which is due to God, and betray our own
innocence. For God knows, the Papists did that secretly by their plots, which
we see now done: They provoked us to take up arms, and now they slanderously
lay to our charge many things, which never entered into our thoughts. God is our
witness, that we sought for nothing but the liberty of Religion: and in that
we are overcome and condemned to die, we acknowledge, that God will not have
his Truth defended by swords, but by our blood. We will die therefore with an
assured hope, that our death will be a Martyrdom in the eyes of God: therefore
let us hasten to die, that we may be numbered in the assembly of the holy
Martyrs.

3. Which desire of Martyrdom did demonstrate it self in the instant of
death: For when the Lord de Bile was called out by the Sheriff, he (as if
there were yet place for emulation) said: Why is de Bile preferred before me in
death, of whom I always took^ place in life? But yet arising, he embraced and
kissed him, saying: Go before (Brother) according to Gods will, and I will
follow. When in the mean time, the Lord Otto, Czervin, Konez, Chlumskie were
called out in order: He (as if he were afraid to be passed by) said with a
loud voice: What is the matter, my God? Thou know that I resign my self
wholly to thee. Ah do not despise thy servant, but make have to take me away.
The Minister having espied the Sheriff returning, told him, That that glory
which he made such have unto, was now present; for now they come to call you.
He exceedingly rejoicing, said: Praise be to thee my God, that I shall now be
taken out of the world, that may be with Christ. And went forward to meet hem.

4. When the Minister of the word put him in mind of Christ his speech, I will
not leave you comfortless, he added: So our Savior has promised: but he has
also added, Father, J will that where I am, my servant also may be, that he
may behold that glory which thou gave me. Because therefore our heavenly
Father has the same will with the Son, I know that this is confirmed.
Therefore I make have to die, that I may be with Christ, and see his glory,
etc. And then he suffered Martyrdom courageously.

CHAP. LXXI. John Theodore Sextus.
HE was a man skillful both in learning and experience, eminent also in
Religion, a chief Citizen of the old City, being brought to the Scaffold, he
received a grant of his life, from Platesius a Canon, his Nephew of his Sister,
who procured the pardon.

2. Being then banished with others for Christ, he is in banishment while we
write these things, and as a new-risen Martyr, does hitherto triumph in the
Cross of Christ.

CHAP. LXXII. Valentine Kochan, a Citizen of new Prague.
I. HE was a man well learned, and a Mr. of Arts, being about sixty years of
age. Because he being in Rodolphus his time chosen a Governor of the
Consistory and University, in the year 1617. When Ferdinando was thrust upon
them as their King, he being the Deputy of the inhabitants of the City of
Prague, did protest, That by no means a King should be chosen, without the
consent of the Moravians and Silesians, much less crowned: and by that means
did draw so much hatred upon himself, that he was first cast out of his Office
of Protonotary in new Prague: now the directorall dignity intervening, he was
thought worthy of death.

2. Having called Mr. Rosacius, he desired that the Eucharist might be
administered unto him; complaining much of those which did not sufficiently
respect that Agreement which was made among the several degrees of
Protestants, and who had promoted this Antichristian persecution, by stirring
up strife and debate, because of some difference in opinions and Ceremonies.

3. He discoursed very piously concerning many things in the time of his
imprisonment, and did exceedingly encourage both himself and others. Among
other things, a little before the time that he was to suffer death, he
explained that place of Paul [For our conversation is in heaven] saying, The
faithful while they live are in body on earth, but in their conversation in
heaven; that is, their shadow is only here, they themselves do reign indeed
with Christ in the heavens: much more their souls being separated from their
bodies are immediately with Christ, and it cannot be thought to be otherwise.

4. Going on to the Scaffold, he said: Grant me (O God) that J may pass
through this valley of death, and presently see thee in the land of the living;
for thou know (my God) that J have loved thy Word. Then he sung the last
verse of the 16 Psalm in meeter, [Bring me (O Lord) through the paths of life,
that J may see a fullness of joys in thy presence, etc.] and presently [Now
let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy
Salvation, etc,] At length kneeling down, reciting the words of the Psalm in
Latin, [Into thy hands (O Lord) J commend my spirit] and so holily ended his
life.

CHAP. LXXVII. Tobias Steffek, a Citizen of new Prague.
I. ANd this man for his wisdom was chosen by the States, into the number of
the Directors. A man of a quiet and composed temper, and sincere in Religion,
who spent almost all the time of his imprisonment in silent sighs and tears.

2. Before his execution he said: I have received many good things at the hands
of the Lord all my life, shall I not therefore receive this cup of affliction?
I embrace the will of God, who by the ignominious death makes me conformable to
his son, and by a narrow way bring me to a heavenly Kingdom. Therefore I
praise the mercy of God, because he has joined me undeservedly to these
excellent men, that I might receive with them a crown of Martyrdom. When he
was called to die, he clapped his hands and looking up to heaven with a sad
countenance and weeping eyes: My Savior being about to die, said father, not
as I will, but as thou will; thy will be done; shall I therefore who am but a
worm, ye dust and a shadow contradict his will. Be it far from me, yea I
come willingly my God, only have mercy on me and purge me from my sins, that
no spot or wrinkle may adhere unto me. that I may appear pure in thy sight.
The Minister of the word seeing him so sad, did comfort him with the words of
God (who answered.) Yet a little while and the Lord will take all tears from
my eyes, sighs, griefs, and mournings shall cease, being exchanged for
everlasting joies. so he lifted up himself full of sighs and yet full of
hope among which perpetually praying, he rendered his spirit to God.

CHAP. LXXIIII. John Jessenius a Doctor of Physic.
I. HE was a Hungarian by birth, a Nobleman, and famous for his learning over
all Europe. He was made Governor of the University of Prague He had the charge
of an Embassy from the States (in the year 1618) to the Hungarians, which when
he had faithfully performed, being taken in his return and brought to Vienna,
he was set at liberty by Matthias the Emperor, by the exchange of a certain
Italian, taken by the States. But Ferdinand being possessed of Prague, gave
order that he should be taken and kept with the rest. Whose bloody mind
toward the Protestants, and chiefly toward himself when he knew, he expected
nothing but that which happened.

2. He related to his friends, That being to return from Vienna to Prague, he
wrote on the prison walls the letters, I. M. M. M. M. which when after his
departure many read, and could not understand, Ferdinand at length entering, did
thus interpret them: Imperator Matthias Mense Martio Morietur, The Emperor
Matthias shall die in the month of March. And taking a piece of chalk, writ
also a Prophecy, Jessenius Mentiris Mala Morte Morieris, Jessenius thou lie,
thou shall die an evil death. Jessenius remembering these things, addded: As I
did not lie (for Matthias deceased the same month) so without doubt, Ferdinand
will do his endeavor, that it may not be said he was a false prophet: as it
after was effected.

3. Having heard his heavy sentence, he said: You use us too cruelly and
disgracefully: but know, that some will not be wanting who shall bury our
heads, which you ignominiously expose for a spectacle. Which was done in the
year 1631. when after Gustavus his victory at Leipsick, the Elector of Saxony
entering Bohemia with his Army, took Prague: the Martyrs heads were taken from
the Tower on the bridge, by the Count of Thurne, with the Electors leave, and
were in a solemn manner brought into the Church ad Laetum Curium, with great
concourse of Nobility, People and Ministers, returned from banishment, and
after a Sermon in commemoration of the Martyrs, they were delivered to certain
men to bury in a place which was not known by any of the enemies.

4. The Jesuits took great pains but in vain to convert Jessenius unto
them. When they urged justification by works (says he.) Although I would now
pass to your side, yet I am exceedingly afraid, that when I have a little time
to live, I am not able to make up so great a heap of good works as you require:
and what then shall become of my salvation. At this one of them said, as though
the victory were already gained. My Jessenius if you have a will ready to do
them, although you should die this very moment, yet we promise that you shall
presently fly into heaven. Then Jessenius. Ho! where is your Purgatory then
designed for those, who cannot fill up their number of good works here? so they
seeing themselves derided went away.

5. Being brought upon the scaffold, and turning to the Judges (but scarce
heard for the noise of Trumpets and Drums) he said: In vain does Ferdinand
establish his Kingdom by Tyranny: Frederick shall yet reign. When the
Hangman came and required his tongue to be cut off, he readily put it out,
although he did before confess, That it grieved him very much to be so
disgracefully deprived of that tongue, wherewith he had pleaded with applause,
before Emperors, Kings, and Princes; but this base rent would be no
hinderance to his Resurrection. He falls upon his knees, and calling upon God
after a stuttering manner was beheaded; which was laid by to be set up with
other heads: and the body being thrust into a sack, and (after the execution of
the rest was finished) quartered under the Gallows without the walls, and hung
upon four stakes.

CHAP. 75. Christopher Khober a Citizen of little Prague.
BEing endued with an Heroicke mind, and elder then the other Citizens, he
discoursed piously of many things which were helps to constancy. Among other
things he exhorted them, to consider how glorious is the memory of the
Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs, also of Hus and Jerome; and for no other
reason, but because they laid down their lives willingly for the Testimony of
Jesus Christ. Why therefore should they envy themselves, when God would have
them be in the number of this most holy company. He cited the words of
Ignatius: I am the Corn of God, and I shall be ground with the teeth of
beasts. We also, says he, are the Corn of God, sown in the field of the
Church, and that we may be for our Mr. we are now to be torn by beasts; but be
of good cheer, the Church is founded in bloods and has increased by blood,
God is able to raise up a thousand worshippers of himself, out of every drop of
our blood; for although truth does now suffer violence, yet notwithstanding
Christ reigns, and shall reign, and no man shall throw him from his throne, etc.

2. Being called to execution he said, I come in the name of my God, neither am
I ashamed to suffer these things for his glory; for I know whom I have
believed. I have fought a fight, and finished my course, etc. He went
courageously to the place designed for his execution, as though he would
wrestle with death; to which when he came, he stood up and said, Must I dye
here? Well, I shall not dye, but live and declare the works of the Lord in the
land of the living. Then pulling off his clothes and praying, into thy hands
Lord I commend my spirit, he received the Crown of Martyrdom.

CHAP. 76. John Shultis, Primate of Kutteberg.
BEing about h to come on the Scaffold he comforted himself with the words of
the Psalm, Why art thou so sad O my soul? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet
praise him for his salvation given to me. When that he was gone a little
further he said, The righteous seem to dye in the eyes of fools, but indeed
they go to their rest; and a little after, Lord Jesus Christ thou have
promised, that who so comes unto thee, thou will not cast him off. Behold I now
come, look upon me, have pity on me, pardon my sins, receive my soul to thy
self; then he threw himself upon his face, stretching out his hands, and
crying with a loud voice, Come, come Lord Jesus and do not tarry: and lifting
himself upon his knees, he received the stroke of the sword; his head was
carried to Kutteberg, and was fixed on a stake before the Gate.

CHAP. 77. Maximillian Hostialek.
HE was the chief Consul of (...) a learned and pious man, therefore he was
admitted into the number of the directors; being condemned to death, he
appeared sadder then the rest; being asked the reason by the ministry of the
word, answered: The sins of my youth do now come into my mind. For although
he knew there was nothing did remain, to condemn them which were in Christ
Jesus; yet that God did exercise justice as well as mercy toward his own. And
being called to death he said, Look upon me O Lord my God, and enlighten mine
eyes least I sleep in death, and least my enemies say, I have prevailed. At
last he repeated the words of Simeon, Now let thou thy Servant depart in
peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. And so he was beheaded, and his
head put in the Marketplace at (...) at the Cross for a spectacle.

CHAP. 78. John Kutnaur Senator of old Prague.
HE was younger then all (for he had scarce finished his fortieth year) but yet
almost superior to all in courage, when the Jesuits coming to him began to
speak, he interrupted them, and said, my Fathers, we pray you that you would
not trouble our consciences, we are sufficiently furnished with comforts
against the fear of death, we need none of your help. When they proceeded to
speak, he said, we will not hear you, hold your peace Why do you create
unprofitable labors to your selves and trouble to us? A Jesuit speaking to
his companion, that they were hard rocks and would not suffer themselves to be
removed; he answered, You say right Father, for Christ is a hard rock and we
are firmly fixed in him.

2. It is above mentioned (60. S. 9.) how he did by a certain special full
persuasion of faith prophecy of a certain miracle about the hour of his
martyrdom, and that did happen, he said unto his companions, I understand I am
designed to be hanged, but whether by the neck, feet or middle I know not, but
howsoever it be done, I care not; this only is my grief, that my blood may not
be mingled with yours, that we may be made one Sacrifice to God.

3. Being called out to die, he was sprinkled with the tears of his friends
between their embraces and kisses (especially at the prisons of those that were
preserved, Abraham Angelus, Jyprechtus, and Hoslawrus) he did not only not
shed a tear; but did courageously speak unto them. Play the men Brethren, and
refrain from weeping, I indeed go before, but it is but a short time, and we
shall meet in the heavenly glory. And then with a Lions face, as if he were to
wrestle with some body, and hopeing for victory, he went forward singing in his
own tongue, Behold the hour draws near etc.

4. When he had finished his prayer, and the Hangman coming to him and asked
him pardon, he gave him his purse with some money, and presently reached out his
hand to be bound, he did admonish him, that he would do his office in a
Christian manner. When he went up the Ladder, to be tied to the beam, that was
fastened to the Court-window, he cried with a loud voice, as if it were a
certain roaring, I have plotted no Treason, I have committed no murder, I have
done no deed worthy of death; but I die because I have been faithful to the
Gospel and my Country. O God pardon my enemies, for they know not what they
do, but thou Christ Jesus have pity on me, for I commit my soul unto thee.
Being thrown off the Ladder gave up the Ghost.

CHAP. 79. Simeon Sussickey.
HE was Kutnaurs Father in law, being otherwise not much elder; when he saw
thorough his window the Jesuits coming, turning to his companions, he said,
the Birds of prey are flying hither, but they shall not feed on these carkases,
but they shall fly away hungry; For God has promised a faithful care of his
own as the apples of his eyes, and therefore he will not suffer them to be
seduced.

2. The last night he had a great conflict with the flesh, because the
Scripture pronounced every one that hung upon the Cross accursed; but when
that the Minister Werbenius told him, that that curse was taken away by the
death of Christ, and ceased in him, he was satisfied.

3. When he heard the noise of the Ordnance he said, This is a token of our
approaching death, let us prep^re our selves, that we may give place to our
enemies that cannot endure us. We hope that we shall courageously undergo this
death, but an eternal death waits for them unless they repent.

4. Being called afterward, praying and singing he went to execution, and was
hanged upon the Gebbit next to his Son in law; and after he had given up the
Ghost, he turning unto him (which was a wonderful thing to behold) so near
that their mouths touched each other; Which their enemies did cavil at,
saying, that they were such obstinate Rebels that they did not cease to plot
after death.

CHAP. 80. Nathaniel Wodniansky.
WHen the Jesuits solicited him to Apostasy, he said, you take away our lives
under a pretense of Rebellion, and not content with that, Do you seek our
souls? Glut your selves with the sight of our blood and be at rest. But we
shall leave stings in your consciences.

2. When the day before his execution his son ( John Wodniansky a married man,
and a Citizen of Prague) bidding him farewell, wept and said, My father, if
hope of life should be offered you upon conditioon of Apostasy, I pray you be
mindful of keeping your faith to Christ, He answersd, It is very acceptable to
me my son, to be exhorted to constancy by you: but what has come into your
mind that you should suspect such a thing of me? I rather advise and exhort
you, that you would follow your fathers steps, and exhort your brethren,
sisters, and children to that constancy, whereof I leave them an example.

3. He was condemned to be hanged: but he knew not that a peculiar gibebt was
set up for him in the middle of the Marketplace. When he was commanded to go
from the Stage, he turning himself to Kutnaur and Sussickg hanging out of the
window, he said, O my dear Fellow Soldiers, how do I grieve that I am
separated from you, and carried to a place more abominable! But when the
Minister of the word said, The greater the disgrace is for Christ, the greater
should be the glory with Christ; he took courage and patiently under-went the
disgrace of the Gallows.

CHAP. 81. Wenceslaw Gisbitsky alias Masterooussky.
HE being a Kinsman of Playteysuy first Canon of Olmitz, afterward Bishop, he
was nourished with a great hope of life; therefore the rest at their farewells
congratulating his life commended to him their Wives and Children. But the
Minister of the word fearing Satan's stratagems, advised him to take heed of
security, and notwithstanding, to prepare himself for the encounter. He coming
on the Scaffold, looked about to receive the News of his life. And when a
youth came to take his cloak he pricked up his care to him, hoping that some
joyful news was brought him.

2. When he saw there was no hope left, he desired a Cantionall, and having
found a certain song, he fell on his knees, and sung the four last verses with
a loud voice, in this sense; Therefore we are prostrate before thee O eternal
Father! Do not forsake us have, pity on us through Jesus Christ! We would say
more but we are not able to express it. Into thy hands we commend our selve,
do thou perfect that which thou have begun to work in us: Render to us our
inheritance that we may sing, Holy, holy, holy, etc. Laying aside his
Cantionall, he arose and put off his doublet, he fell down again, and in the
midst of his prayers offered himself up a Sacrifice to God.

CHAP. 82. Henry Kozel with others
Afterward the Citizens of new Prague were called out in their order, Henry
Kozel, Andrew Kaeaur George Rzetschius, Michaell Wittman, and Simon Wockacz,
which were all beheaded. Of whom we cannot write any thing in particular,
because Mr. Adam Clemens, Pastor of Wenceslaus his Church, was their companion
at their deaths, and nothing of his observation has come to our hands.

2. The execution continued from 5 of the clock in the morning to ten. Their
bodies (except Jessenius his) were delivered to their friends to be buried.
Twelve heads were put in two Coffins by the Executioners, and carried to the
Bridge-tower, and exposed to public view through Iron-grates. (only the head
of Ripelius a Citizen of old Prague, was set up with his right hand on the
Court-wal) Those that were hanged were buried by night privately.

3. The following day Nicholas Dyonisius Town Clerk of old Prague, who had
welcomed Frederick at his entrance into Prague in the peoples name, and had
wished well to him upon his departure from the City, had his tongue fastened
with an awle to the Gallows (while three other Lawyers Joseph Kubin, John
Swehla, and Wenceslaus Bezjeaus being whipped were brought out of the Gates) and
kept there for two hours, afterward imprisoned, and 4 years after sent into
banishment.

4. Upon this sad tragedy followed the lamentations of the godly: many being
grieved that it had not been their privilege to die with the rest. In the mean
time the enemies insulted over the poor oppressed Protestants; But Martin
Fruweyn de Podoli, is not to be passed over in silence.

CHAP. 83. Martin Fruweyn de Podoli.
AN eminent Citizen of Prague, and famous for pleading in the Courts of the
Kingdom, whose Council the States had used for many years. He upon the taking
of Prague was taken at his own house, and scoffed at by the Soldiers, who had
the possession of the whole house, beaten with their fists, and at length by an
unheard of and exquisite kind of torture, he was so cruelly burnt even to the
privy parts, that for six months being troubled with most grievous pains, he
could neither live nor die. When the rest were imprisoned the 21. of February,
he was brought from his own house first, into the Court of the old City, and
from thence carried into a Tower of the Castle, which they call the
White-Tower, and there shut up from all company. Lastly the 7. of June he was
found dead in the Castle-Ditch under that Tower.

2. The enemies reported, that being driven into despair by the remembrance of
his wickedness, he had thrown himself down headlong; therefore they commanded,
that he should be taken by the Executioner, carried into the White-mountain,
and there beheaded, and quartered, his entrails to be buried, and the other
parts to be set upon staves in the four quarters of the world before the City,
and his head to be fastened to a Gibbet in the Horse-market. But it seemed
doubtful to many how he could throw himself down, being always guarded by
Soldiers. It is most likely that he was cast down by some privily designed to
that purpose, which God knows.

3. This one thing is not unknown to us, that he was troubled with great
temptations all that time. For when being confined to his house, the Minister
of the word ( Adam Hartman with Dr. Erasmus a Physician then with him) did
visit him, he heard these words proceed from him, O my brother Adam, I hoped
that in these late transactions, I was serviceable to God and the Church. Now
seeing the event contrary, and considering how great a slaughter of many
thousand men there has been, I think that we have done something erroneously
which has displeased God. The coming of the Soldiers interrupted him being
about to speak more: and he desiring them to visit him again, before that
could be done, he was removed into the aforesaid Tower of the Castle, none
being afterward admitted to him, but his Wife sometimes; Who visiting him the
day before his death being the 6. of June, (which she often afterward related)
found him very sad, and troubled by the Monks, which did infest him (as he
complained) and desiring comfort, there lay by chance upon the Table, a great
Cantionall of the Brethrens, to which reaching out his hand, Seek says he,
comforts for my soul, She not being able presently to satisfy his desire, he
opened it himself, and sung these verses with weeping out of the penitential
song which is under the letter G. XVIII. where God is brought in speaking to
the contrite soul (out of 30. Jer. 15. Why cryest thou for thine affliction?
Thy sorrow is incurable, there is none to help, (out of the 2 Kings 14, 26.) I
will bind up thy wound, and heal thy stripes and will not take away my
chastisement till I have healed thee. Then he continued in the Apostrophe which
was in the same song. Lift up thy self thou believing soul, who art cast down
with a sense of thy sin and misery! He is faithful that has promised, who
has partly fulfilled his promise, having sent a Physician to thee, viz. his
son, who has by his own blood provided a plaster for thy sore. He will
restore thee to the full, when he shall raise thee up and glorify thee, etc.
Which are all signs of a soul wrestling with despair though not as yet
despairing.

4. But although he had perhaps cast himself down for a fear of greater evils,
or with a hope to escape a resolution to dye; yet the glory of Martyrdom does
not perish with them, who (as long as it is Christ's cause) fearing the enemies
fury, do themselves anticipate death; which may be made probable to the Papists
themselves, by the authority of the Fathers, to whom they in other cases
attribute much. Let them look upon Ambrose (in his third book of Virgins)
relating such a thing of the Virgin Pelagia, and also praising the deed. Let
them resort to Augustine, although he answers more doubtfully of the like
business. But something may be had out of Eusebius to cause a milder opinion,
who in the 8. Book 12. chapter writes thus, What need we revive the memory of those
who were burnt at Antioch with hot coals not to death, but to lengthen out the
punishment? (which also happened to Freweynius) And of others who would sooner
put their right hands into the fire then touch the profane sacrifice? The
trial of which some avoiding, throws themselves headlong from the house-tops,
before they would be taken and fall into the enemies hands; and thought rather
to hasten their death then to undergo the malice of wicked men. More may be
there seen.

CHAP. 84. Matthias Borbonius a Physician.
AMong the condemned persons was Matthias Borbonius, a most excellent and
succesfull Physician, being chief Physician to three Emperors; whom when the
Prince Lichtenstein knew to be innocent, of the civil broils, he obtained his
pardon, and entertained him for his chief Physician. But that exceedingly vexed
his enemies, especially the Imperial Judge John Chrysostom Schrepelius, who
induced by the hope of gain (for he gaped for Borbonius his stately houses) had
laden him with slanders. He therefore no longer able to conceal his dissembled
rancour gave command to the Sergeants, to set upon Borbonius in the street of
the City as he returned from the Prince, and to beat him with their clubs even
to his own house; Which deed however it seemed to displease the Prince, yet it
remained unrevenged.

2. This Physician is rightly accounted among the Confessors of the truth,
although he obtained not a Crown of Martyrdom. For as often as the Prince or
some privately stirred up, dealt with him seriously about changing his Religion
(which they often did) yet it was always in vain. His answer to Smeczanius is
remarkable; For when he entreated him with most eloquent words, and even with
embraces above his ordinary courtesy, that he would turn Roman Catholic,
saying, Ah my Borbonius, how much might thou promote the Catholic cause,
and the salvation of many by your example! He replied, There is nothing more
certain, then that I should disadvantage your Church if I should become a
Member, When he asked the reason, he answered him, Let your Honor think, that
my Conscience is so tender that it will not by any means suffer any violence
to be used against it. If I should therefore revolt when that speaks to the
contrary, I can expect nothing from it but gnawings, and rendings, and torments
which will drive me headlong into despair. And I departing with roaring and
what honor should I be made else but an example for others to take heed of the
same precipicies? When he saw him so unmovable, he began to hate him, and with
others (in the year 1623.) banished him the Kingdom.

3. Borbonius then went into Poland and was admitted by the King himself to
practice Physic, and at length he departed this life being an old man of 70
years of age at Thorun in Prussia in the year 1629, 16 of December.

CHAP. LXXXV. Noblemen of Moravia imprisoned.
I. A Little while after the execution at Prague (4 of June) the Protestant
Noblemen of Moravia, who were thought above others to promote the Bohemians
cause, being assembled by the Emperors command were carried to prison, some to
Brune, others to Olumitz. Without doubt these had been punished if the
Emperor had not solemnly promised indemnity, when they yielded themselves
after the battle at Prague, and the Duke of Carnovia, with Bethlehem Gabor
(being that year Victors in Hungary) had procured the liberty of some by
exchanging certain Canons: others being kept in prison three years obtained
their liberty, not without the intercessions of diverse men. But their goods
were confiscated (as well as theirs who sought their safety by slight) to the
Emperor and afterward used and abused by the Popish Nobility and Jesuits.
This was only the difference, that those who were freed from prison, were
restored to their credit and honor; but those that had escaped by flight, were
commanded to be held as infamous, as those, whose names had been fixed on the
Gallows

CHAP. LXXXVI. Wenceslaus de Betow a Knight.
I. OF their number was Wenceslaus Bitowski de Bitow, Lord of Prussiwick (one
of the Governors of Moravia in the time of the vacancy: and when Frederick
created him Captain of the Order of Knight,) Who when he was taken in the
Marquisate of Brandenburgh, in the year 1627. in the month of August, and
sent back into Moravia, he was put to the torture by Cardinal Detrichsteine,
(who hated him deadly) and being examined a long time, but in vain, concerning
diverse questions, at last he was condemned to be beheaded, and courageously
underwent it on a scaffold, at the Court of Brune.

2. If there had been leave given to any to have visited him, or accompanied
him to his death, we should certainly have had something which might have
been an example. For he was a stout man and exceeding courageous, and although
formerly he was given to excess, (as the custom is with such natures) yet in
his banishment he gave himself wholly to reading the Scripture, and
meditation, and amending his life, so that nothing but piety and modesty and
zeal for the glory of God, and his own salvation, could be observed in him.
But because no man was admitted to him all the time of his imprisonment (except
a foolish boy that was left to serve him) and a noise of drums and Trumpets
was made at his execution, his speeches could not be noted by any one: But his
perseverance in the faith worthy of a Martyr, and the firmness of his hope did
sufficiently appear in his farewell letters to his wife, and his gestures of
his coming forth and at his execution.

CHAP. LXXXVII. The Protestant Noblemen are deprived of their Goods.
I. THe seventh day after the execution at Prague (being 28 of June) the
confiscation of the Goods of those that were executed, and those that were
banished was ordered, the rest of the States being brought into extreme
danger, wavering between Religion and a Rock. The year following a
Proclamation was published, wherein a general pardon of all crimes was offered
to all the inhabitants of the Kingdom, The sum was this: That all those that
were guilty of the abominable and horrid Rebellion and consequently of
Treason, and all those that had already been punished, and lost their
privileges, honor, life, and Goods: But Caesar out of the small clemency of
the house of Austria, did grant them their lives and honors, and would only
have their Goods confiscate and brought into the Kings Exchequer, and least any
should have occasion to complain that his Imperial Majesty winked at the
keeping of their Goods, who had not grievously offended: It was ordered that
every one of them should resign some part as a subsidue to his Imperial
Majesty to pay the debts which were contracted by this necessary War. That
every one should be commanded to appear at Prague within the space of six:
weeks before the Viceroy (Lichtenstein) and exhibit a confession of his fault
(wherein he had offended his Imperial Majesty) and should detest the crime, and
whosoever did not appear should be excluded from all favor, if any man
concealed any thing of which he might be convinced, he should loose the whole
cause, but if he did freely confess, he should hear the sentence. These
letters were given at Onespont, 3. Feb. in the year 1622

2. There was a form of confession prescribed by which all were commanded to
confess and detest their crime, which was deceitfully done as afterward
appeared, For when the Princes of Germany advised the Emperor not to punish
all without any difference for the Delinquency of a few persons, it was
answered. None were punished but such as were convinced by their own confession.

3. It was presently forbidden by Letters Patents sent through all the
Lordships, that no man should diminish or wast his Goods by selling any of
them, or by any other pretense translating them to any other, but should
possess them as he did at that present. A penalty was imposed upon those that
should do otherwise; that whatsoever any man should send to another place
should be lost, and that whosoever received any thing of another man's should
pay so much of his own to the Emperor.

4. Many were afterward cited one after another to receive their final
sentence even some that were dead (as the L. Nicholas Bukowski de Husteizan
purged two years before, etc.) others that had been for many years bed-ridden,
some that were blind who could not in any thing offend, whose names were found
in the Registers of the Kingdom, and who were thought to be rich, which
happened to the Lord Peter Skopek of Otradowitz Lord of Belehrade, and the Lord
John Charvat of Bielossesky: to whose charge this crime was laid, that they had
been present in the expedition of the States at Vienna, and had shot bullets
against the Emperors window: of whom one had lost the use of his eyes ten
years before, the other being sick of the Palsy, could not move himself in
his bed: by this it appeared that not so much the faults of the Protestants as
their goods: And that appeared, that they made not so exact an inquiry unto men
of a meaner estate: Yea (I tell a truth) those merry Judges turned their
wickedness to a jest, and had it not seldom in their mouths, when any one had
purged himself of a fault in no wise committed by him, that although he had
not actual sins, yet he was infected with Original sin, heresy, and
wealth, and therefore could not be exempt from punishment. This was heard
often from the mouth of Cardinal Ditrichstein. That was some comfort to the
Godly, that they suffered not as evil doers but as Christians.

5. Then were but eight days given to those that were warned to appear; when
otherwise in the business of money a longer term was usually granted. Those
that did appear, had the Articles of the crimes read to them, not only
according to the confession published, but whatsoever might be slanderously
framed against any man. Neither was time given or permitted to answer: but if
any one would offer, or had offered to purge himself, he was commanded to hear
his definitive sentence in that place. The form of which was: That he had
incurred the loss of life honor and goods, but by the grace of the Imperial
Majesty life and honor was given to him, but only his Goods he owed to
Caesar, whether every farthing or only a half, third, or a fourth part, etc.

6. So that it had an appearance of mercy, that all were not deprived of all
their Goods, but the proceeding of the execution showed it to be mere cruelty.
For they took from the possessors all the Castles, Towns, and Villages giving
them a paper for that which was left, whereby they were commanded to expect the
payment of their part from the Chamber. But no man has as yet seen a farthing
of any payment, and so by the process of law, the Protestants were deprived of
their goods after a Tyrannical manner, and driven into strange places, some
were freely received through the Cities, others betook themselves to their
kindred, and friends of the Popish Religion, others became servants to the
destroyers of their own goods: few of them kept their own and their wives goods
for a time by the favor of the Commissioners by bribes, or by a second lying,
it increased there cruelty, not only their immovable Goods were taken away,
but there movables also were sequestered, scarce having so much as a garment
left wherewith to cloth them, for example sake, Burjan Slebowski may be named,
and that did not happen to him alone but to many others who returning home at
that very time when the Commissioners had entered his house to confiscate his
goods, he was commanded to alight, and told that his coach and horses with
these chests must be seized on for the Emperor.

7. And because they thought that many had money at use, that they might also
squeeze out this, they commanded that every man should bring what bonds he had,
upon pain of losing the whole sum, if any one did but conceal the least. In
Moravia there was a peculiar judicature erected for this thing, which they
called Grida, at Nulasbergh, where all were bound to appear; some were
restored whole, viz. those of a less value, for an appearance of justice;
others were suppressed for counterfeit reasons; from others a part was set
apart for the Emperor, If any certain sum of money was brought u into the
Kingdoms Register, according to the accustomed manner, the Kings Treasurer was
at hand (for all things were stuffed with Traitors and Treasons,) who protesting
that the Emperor had need of it, to defray the charges of the War, took it
away, giving to the Creditor a written note, to testify that such a sum was
due to him from the Emperor.

8. So the ancient inhabitants being commanded to depart, those that were
addicted to the Popish Religion, divided the confiscated goods among
themselves, as it was commodious for any of them to add this or that Village,
Town, Castle, or other Lordship to their own bounds, and as they could
obtain it from the Emperor as a gift, or upon any other account. The greatest
part fell to the share of strangers, Spaniards, Italians; Germans, the
Commanders of the Imperial Army, instead of their pay.

9. If there remained any goods of Widows, or Wards that were not taken away
by color of Law, there scarce wanted Ahabs to covet Naboths vineyard: For if
any one was pleased with another man's ground, bordering on him, he would
circumvent him by craft, or allure him by promise as a favor or compel him by
quartering Soldiers on him to sell it. Whereas the buyers for the most part
performed the part of pricers, cheapners, and contractors: obtruding such a
price on them as they themselves listed, and afterward not paying it.

10. The Emperor commanded the Charter of the Kingdom granted by ancient
Kings, to be brougbt to him at Vienna, which when he received (he said) Are
these the Papers which have procured so much trouble to our Ancestors? And
viewing the several Parchments seals and subscriptions, he rent them, and
threw them into the fire. Adam de Waldstein Burgrave of Prague and supreme
Official of the Kingdom, who brought them, standing by astonished and
secretly sighing.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. The Protestants are prohibited from the exercise of Religion,
and the benefit of the Law, even those that had not offended the Emperor.
I. IN the mean time the Ministers (as is spoken of in this place) were
banished and thrust out of the Kingdom, and a great charge published, that
none should receive any of them upon any pretense whatsoever. Which when they
who had in no kind broken their allegiance to Caesar, or whom Caesar had
already pardoned, boasted not to belong to them, they were charged by
reitterated commands to dismiss them. Neither were the most part disobedient
to those commands.

2. Charles de Zerotine alone (as we formerly mentioned) dared to oppose
himself against this cruelty, and did not only withstand Cardinal of
Ditrichstein (Governor of Moravia) and his Commissioners, but when he found no
help here (went to Vienna, complaining to the Emperor of the wrongs of the
Cardinal, that he extended that punishment to him who was innocent, which was
inflicted on perjured persons (as they pleased to call them) and desired that
right might be done to him. But he received this answer of the Emperors
Counselors who excused this proceeding: That this business of Reformation was
badly und^rstood, as if it were instituted merely for the imposition of
punishment, when it was rather a fatherly care which the Emperor bare for the
salvation of his Kingdoms and Provinces: and that the Emperor was bound,
though no crime was intervened, to provide as well for the eternal salvation
of his subjects, as for their outward tranquillity: At this the Baron was
astonished, when he saw those plots which had been covered with darkness so
openly manifested, and Tyranny over consciences cloaked with an appearance of
piety. He went forward yet to expostulate with the Emperor himself. The
Emperor answered. That he would grant him nothing for his conscience. The
Baron replied: That in his conscience he was obliged to God, and that he
desired that Caesar would not oppress it. The Emperor answered. That he did
not oppress it, but that Preachers could in no wise be granted. The Baron
replied: That he could not want the holy worship of God, and that this could
not be done without a Minister of the Word. And with this Protestation he
departed from the Emperor not only openly retaining Paul Hronovius his
household Chaplain, but like pious Obadiah sustaining the most religious old man
John Lanctius above 70 years of age, and George Drastus superintendent among
the brethren in Moravia, and many others privately in their Caves with bread
and water. And setting aside all fear of men, he doubted not to give liberty to
his own subjects, but to others out of the neighboring places of what degree
soever to come to his holy exercises, which were performed in his own Castle
Namesch, by Hronovius. In which thing he had in Bohemia, the Baron of Slaupna,
George Sadorius, and some few others his pious imitators: until themselves as
shall afterward be related, were commanded into banishment.

2. In the mean time when wicked men are like Euripus, neither can be quiet,
but cast out mire and dirt, as the Prophet speaks, it came to pass that they
invented a new kind of rage. By banishing the instruments of the truth by a
peculiar writ: that whosoever of the Barons Noblemen or Citizens, did keep a
Non-Catholick Tutor for their Children, should presently dismiss him: otherwise
he should be taken and punished.

4. And that all might understand that this was done seriously, and that Caesar
could endure none but Roman Catholics, a decree was published in the year
1625. 22. of June, whereby Non-Catholicks were for ever prohibited, the use of
the laws of the Kingdom.

5. The good Protestants understanding that the laws were not serviceable to
them, and that nothing was remaining in which they might appeal, when they
were wronged, besides Heaven: did this one thing (those that were capable to
understand this mystery of iniquity) viz. Solicit God with sighs and groans to
be the revenger of such malice, otherwise there was no help left.

CHAP. LXXXIX. The Protestant Nobility are banished out of the Kingdom.
I. THe enemies being every day puffed up with the success of their victories,
set upon an action unlooked for, that all the Protestant stocks (of whom the
Kingdom did partly consist) should altogether and at once be banished the
Kingdom. For they hoped that when the Provinces of Germany round about were
subdued, and the King of Denmark with Mansfeild, and Winariensis, and others
were overcome, and upon that the hearts of many faint, it would come to pass
that at length being struck with this thunderbolt, most would forsake Religion,
which happened accordingly.

In the year therefore 1627. July 31. (a day consecrated to Ignatius Loyola, to
witness that it was coined by the Loyolites, as the first inventers, a solemn
Mandate of the Emperors came forth, wherein he affirming heresy to be the
sole cause of the so many miseries of the sometime flourishing Kingdom of
Bohemia, whereby the minds of the inhabitants were as well divided among
themselves as from their Magistrates, and diverse judgments of God drawn upon
them, declares his will thus: We therefore, our conscience urging us, neither
can nor will any longer tolerate any one of the inferior, much less
superior States among all the subjects of our hereditary Kingdom of Bohemia
of either sex, who is infected with heretical Errors. And therefore we do
grant unto the same superior States the term of one six months to learn the
holy and only saving Roman Catholic faith. And that there may not want some
from whom they may sufficiently draw saving instructions, and informations, we
do upon our religious counsel, appoint certain Commissioners of Reformation
as well Civil as Ecclesiastical men. It was our pleasure therefore by this
public act to assure all men of our Fatherly care, for the salvation of this
Kingdom, as likewise to warn, that all and every person, making account both
of his temporary and eternal salvation, would not fail to yield themselves
obedient to our will, and to be diligently instructed by the aforementioned
Commissioners of Reformation, and unless any man shall obey our will, and
agree with us in the same faith, he shall not be licenced to tarry in our
Kingdom, much less to possess his Goods. For we Will, that all those who
are obstinately stubborn, shall, selling their Goods among the Catholics,
depart out of the Kingdom of Bohemia at the end of the term, and never
promise themselves any return, unless they turn Catholics, etc.

3. Here one might see strange alterations of minds and diversities of
Counsel. Those that loved Religion and constancy at their hearts, did
instantly separate themselves by banishment, others were troubled and wavered
seeking holes and hiding places, soliciting Caesar by Petitions either to
change the decree or grant them a longer time or else endeavoring by words to
obtain it, as much as was in any man's power. There were not some wanting who
pretending the discomodities of banishment, poverty, age, sickness, duties,
and every thing else, thought it best to satisfy the Emperors will. Others
were found who thinking to deceive the Emperor and Pope did buy with their
gold, false testimonies of the Priests, that they had performed confession and
communicated in one kind. And it was so, that some did by those bought bills,
make a show of dissembled Apostasy and by that means avoided banishment.

4. But such a Merchandise of souls did not prosper well with some. For
Lawrence Niezburski, Pastor of Alberts in New-Prague, who did too freely use
that imposture, and for such bills had scraped together a great sum of money
from the Citizens, Noblemen, and Barons: being betrayed was taken, and with him
above a hundred Citizens of Prague; who being all accused of Treason both to
God and the Emperor, were adjudged to death. The Laymen redeemed their lives
with a pecuniary fine, and a true Apostasy: the false Priest was degraded and
put to death in the marketplace in old Prague, in the year 1631. the seventh
of April. But we must return to those fears which did arise upon the first
publication of the Act for banishment.

5. The enemies having understood so great wavering of minds, and conceiving
some hope that more in tract of time would either be dashed against the rock of
despair, or thrown down headlong into the bottom of doubts: obtain of the
Emperor that another six months may be added to the end of that term. A new
decree is thereupon published (December. the 6. of the same year 1627.) whereby
a longer time of staying within the bounds of their country is granted, but yet
sharper than before; for all were forced to embrace the Romish religion, partly
by promises, and partly by threats. Besides the said act of banishment is
extended to Widows: Children only are excepted, whether their mothers were
alive or no, and commanded to be delivered to the care and instructions of
Catholics, or else to be shut up in Monasteries. And this was a cause of many
groans and tears to the godly, when their Noblemens Sons and Daughters
(even marriageable mayds) we pulled from the lapp of their Mothers, Aunts and
Uncles, and thrust into the Jesuits Colleges, or the Monks cells: Their
goods were taken out of the hands of their lawful tutors, and managed by
Papists.

6. The fawning craftiness of these seducers, whereby they deceived unwary
persons, and did more hurt then by their rigor and terrors. As often as any
one that did well know the foundations of religion, came before these reformers
to be examined, they granted many things, and permitted most of the foundations
to be believed, yea even the Article concerning justification by faith: saying
that this one thing was required of them, to give obedience to the Church, and
to acknowledge the Roman Bishop to be a visible Head of the Church, seeing it
was necessary for good orders sake; so the simpler sort supposing that they
were not constrained to any other faith then that which they had learnt,
thought they might with a safe conscience promise that outward obedience. If
they saw any one sprung from a more noble family, or to be either the sole, or
with a few others, remainder of the race, or in any otherwise delicate, and
they suggested to them how much it grieved his Imperial Majesty, that those
ancient families which formerly were the ornaments and props of their Country,
should run themselves into the danger of banishment through mere
unadvisednesse, that it would be better for them to remain and flourish under
the favor both of God and Caesar. By these and the like Stratagems of Satan,
there was a great ruin of the Protestant Nobility, all of them, who thought
their earthly Country better then the heavenly; or whose consciences were
stupefied by their subtilties, sliding into apostasy or hypocrisy.

7. Notwithstanding about a hundred families of both Sexes that loved heavenly
things above earthly, (and who did reverence that command of the heavenly
Emperor, Come out of Babylon my people*) leaving their inheritances, and all
their possessions went away. Some were dispersed through the neighboring
Provinces. Votland, Misaia, Lusatia, Silesia, Poland, Hungary; some who were
more easily able to endure the troubles of banishment, went as far as
Prussia, Russia, and Transylvania. Among these was the goodly old man Charles
de Zerotine: who only could obtain leave to stay in his Country all the days
of his life, if he would deprive himself of the holy worship of God, or
covertly use it: yet he would rather be afflicted with the people of God, then
enjoy temporary profits. Having sold his possessions (but for half the price,
a part of which also they extorted from him under color of a certain Suit and
Judgment, and other devices) he departed with Caesar's knowledge and leave to
Presland in Silesia: but a little after a Declaration was annexed to the
Imperial letters, that if the Baron would depart from that City, it should be
lawful for him to go whither he would, so that he came not back into the
Emperors Provinces, or went not to the Emperors enemies.

8. The Enemies in the mean time not vouchsafing such as had departed out of
their Country, the name of banished persons, called them Departers, either in
scorn, or else to upbraid their headiness (as not being ejected by Caesar,
but being blinded by mere obstinacy, had passed out of their Country.) But
when as they could not endure them in banishment, a proclamation came forth (in
the year 1628. August the 18th.) wherein the Emperor accusing the perversity
of some, who had departed from Bohemia and Moravia, into Silesia, and Lusatia
only, protested that it was not his intention to remove those obstinate persons
out of Bohemia, and to suffer them in the accorporated Provinces. And therefore
he commanded them to depart, otherwise they should be brought to punishment.
Also by the same edict they were commanded to send hack those children which
they had carried with them, upon the penalty of loosing all the goods which any
of them could require in his Country.

9. Presently after another Act is published, whereby the Non-Catholick wives
of the Catholics were commanded to be punished with banishment, unless they
did repent. But when none (for no example is extant) would not suffer
themselves to be frighted, and some of the prime and chief Officers of the
Kingdom had Protestant wives, and could not endure divorces; leave was
obtained for them to stay. And an edict came forth (the first of May, in the
year 1629.) whereby they were tolerated till the death of their husbands, and
then should be excluded from the inheritance, and sent into banishment; in the
mean time they should be absent from all nuptial and festival solemnities,
or else should take the lowest place after the Catholics. This was to strike
terror into them.

10 But the Emperor had added expressly this clause to the first Act (1627. the
31. of July) Lest that any man should think these things to be done for money,
or depriving any man of his goods, and not for the sole honor and glory of
God, and the salvation of the souls of our Subjects; we declare in his part
our clemency, that if any will be refractary to our gracious will (which we
hope not) he shall have leave to depart quietly, and without any imbezlement of
his goods. We do therefore promise, that if any one cannot sell his goods
within the aforesaid term of six months, or get in his debts (in the getting
of which we wish that all the Courts be a help to him) he may choose any one of
his kindred, or any other Catholic person, whom he may appoint and furnish
with full power for the selling his goods, and recovering his debts, etc. Which
thing had such a color of justice, joined with clemency, that not only the
banished persons did thankfully accept that moderation of the rigor, but also
it did beguile forraigners, making them think that nothing had happened to the
Bohemians worse then that departure. But these were but words.

11. For first, what could they sell when as all things had been taken from
them under the name of fines? Besides, if any had retained any lands, whom
should they sell it to in this fury of war, and almost a universal
departure? For those who remained were reduced to extreme poverty; and the
Papists, although well monied, did not do this that they might furnish the
banished persons with provision, but drive them by despair to apostasy
Besides, if any offered to buy, they would scarce give half the price. And
lastly, there was scarce any one who would offer ready money, but papers and
bonds, whereby no man could expect to avoid hunger among forraigners. Most
therefore who had any villages, farms, vineyards, or other grounds remaining,
took this course, to commit their goods to the care of some friend (such as
could be got) who should lay title to those things as bought by them, and
should send something every year to the true possessour out of the revenue. But
as every one gathers sticks from the felled oak, so in so great a liberty to
commit any thing against those that were condemned and banished, it was easy
to become malepart, and most knew by experience that those to whom they had
committed the managing of their affairs, were perfidious and false.

12. Some therefore privately returning labored diverse ways to order their
business for themselves: but as soon as that was known, commands were issued
out to the Captains of several Divisions, that whomsoever of the
Non-Catholicks they could apprehend (either those who were not already
departed, or who had returned) any where staying, gathering corn, exporting it
out of the Kingdom, or selling it, and receiving moneys, they should take care
to seize on them, and arrest them, sending them into the chief Towns of their
Divisions, taking notice of every one his name, Christian-name, and family. And
they should warn those that had nourished such on their allegiance, and
honor, to appear before the chief Officers of the Kingdom, in the Castle of
Prague, etc. These were given at Prague the 11th. of September, in the year
1628. the said commands were reiterated to diverse divisio^s the second of
November, and sometimes also in the year following, being 1629. At length the
20. of July in the year 1630. instruction was given, That knowing where any lay
hid they should secretly and suddenly attach them, and bring them prisoners:
adding the reason, because they obstinately resisted Gods will, and the
Emperors.

13. But this was granted that whosoever had any business to dispatch in the
Kingdom, should desire leave to come back of the Commissioners of reformation:
but what that leave was, and with what conditions it was limited, will appear
from the form which was this, The most illustrious and honorable Lords, the
Lords Commissioners being appointed for the work of reformation in the Kingdom
of Bohemia, by his Imperial Majesty, our most merciful Lord: understand by
letters for what end N.N. craves leave to return for a time into this Kingdom.
Seeing therefore he has afforded a good hope of himself (but thus to others:)
Seeing the Lords Commissioners conceive good hope of him) they grant his
Petition, and give leave, and permit him with safe conduct to come hither
freely and quietly, and safely to dispatch his business, being molested by no
man upon the account of Religion, within the space of six weeks. But with this
express condition that presently upon his entrance into the Kingdom, he appear
before the most illustrious Lords Commissioners, and recite what business he
has to do, and within that time admit of instruction by spiritual men, pious
and learned, that so being made a member of the Catholic Church by an humble
confession of sins, and receiving the Sacrament in one kind, he might also be
received at the end of the term, as a member of the Kingdom. There could be
no longer time of stay granted to any that did otherwise. For this was the
unchangeable will of his Imperial Majesty. These were given from the
Commission of reformation at Prague, N. N. N etc. With which kindness
(forsooth) most being affrighted, had no desire to return into their Country,
and give up themselves to such dangerous snares, but commended their and the
Churches cause with sighs to God.

14. The Emperor in the mean time, that he might preserve his Kingdom in a
flourishing condition, or else increase his glory, filled the empty places of
those that departed with spiritual persons: to whom (being advanced to the
dignity of State) he assigned the first place, and commanded that they should
go and sit before Princes, Counts, and Barons: which thing was never till that
day heard of in Bohemia.

15. He also abrogated the ancient Statutes of the Kingdom, and established new
ones (which were printed) declaring that he did confirm all the privileges of
the Kingdom, except those; Concerning Religion: Of the free election of a King:
Of the use of the Bohemian language in public Courts: (that he might by little
and little extinguish the language with the Nation) Of the goods of persons
that can make no wills, (...) falling to the Commonwealth; Of not alienating the
lands from the male-stock by marriage. That by the marriages of Bohemian
maids, with forraigners, or new persons, the ancient families might be thrust
from their possessions, or else more easily rooted out, which was manifest by
the effect, when some were thrust out by others from fine inheritances, whether
they would or not; As if it had been on purpose desired to oppress every where
the Kingdoms privileges, and to appoint a Government not over men, but over
beasts.

CHAP. XC. Their Proceedings against the Free Cities.
IT follows how tyrannically they used the free Cities. Especially, for that
instead of an halter, they placed Chief-Officers and Judges in the Cities,
without whose license no man could move himself: those of the Order of Knights,
these of Citizens. But what such men? even such, as in the great scarcety of
homebred Romans they were able to procure: Bannites, Italians, or Germans:
or else apostate Bohemians, covetous muckwormes, who drove their own designs,
infamous homicides, base-begotten persons, Spirits, such as sell persons free
born, Fiddlers, Stage players, Smiths, certain also not so much as A. B. C.
darians, without estate, without any certain abode, without Conscience, (all
this we could easily demonstrate in particular and pertinent examples:) so that
projecting villainy with all impudency, they obliged their faith to Antichrist,
(under the name of Caesar) for to invent treachery, and lay snares for others:
men, unworthy to have place in our writings.

2. To such as these, were all businesses in Cities committed, upon their
determination the City-Councells were commanded to depend. Nor could the
public complaints of the ataxie and confusion of affairs prevail any thing
to the contrary: but only that they being unable to bear it, (in the year
1624.) did afterward displace the Capitanes (or head-Officers) and referred
all to the Judges only, which nevertheless were assisted by the chief of the
Soldiery, as a super-attendant, lest the Kings affairs should suffer damage.

3. Their care in the next place, was to suck juice and blood out of the
Cities, which they notably effected by Taxes and Contributions for some years
continued, and extorted by the Soldiers power.

4. Then the Ministers of the Churches being removed, and Mass Priests (for
the most part by force of Arms) introduced, they begun to compel people to
frequent the Mass. Marriages also were prohibited, except amongst the
Catholics: by which stratagem of Satan, very many in every place carnally
affected, were brought to Apostasy, and afterward promoted to the dignity of
Senators, even men of no judgment or experience.

5. The number of Apostates being thus augmented, the Popish Senate began to be
enraged against the rest of the Citizens diverse ways: which will not seem
tedious particularly to describe, how their proceedings were contrived, only
we shall in the interim set down the general instructions given to the
Capitanes of Distresses, in the year 1624.

CHAP. XCI. Articles gathered out of the Instructions given to the Capitanes of
Distresses, July 1624.
1. WHosoever do refuse to join with the Kings Majesty in point of Religion,
all traffic and commerce shall be debarred him.

2. Whosoever shall permit private Preaching, Baptism or Matrimony in his
house, shall pay an hundred taleres, or, if he be not able, shall suffer
imprisonment six months. But he that shall be found to harbor a Preacher in
his house, shall loose both goods and life.

3. The ordinary Catholic Pastor of a place, may not accompany any dead
person which was not Catholic with ceremonies to his grave: nevertheless,
the funeral duties shall be paid him.

4. If any shall follow his work upon Catholic holy days, he shall be
imprisoned; and shall not be dismissed till after payment of ten florences.

5. If any shall be caught in a victualling-house in time of Mass, he shall
pay ten florences, and the Victualler double.

6. Whosoever shall laugh at the Catholic Priest, or his Sermon, his words,
gestures, and so at the Catholic rites, he shall be banished, and his goods
confiscated.

7. Whosoever shall eat flesh upon days prohibited, without an indulgence from
the Pope, shall pay ten florences.

8. If at any time the Master of the Family shall be absent upon the Lords day,
or upon festival Massedayes, if he be of the richer sort, he shall pay four
pounds of wax, toties quoties: if of the meaner sort, two.

9. Let the youth be taken notice of throughout all Cities, Towns, and
Villages: those that place their Sons in non-Catholique Schools, let them
call them thence by the feast of All Saints, under pain of 50. florences, for
the wealthy; and of 25. for the poorer sort.

10. If any bring up youth privily in his house, all shall be taken from him,
and himself cast out of the City by the common Catch-pole.

11. It shall not be lawful for any non-Catholique to make a will: but if he
shall, it shall be null.

12. No young men, whether at home with their Parents, or Prentices, may be
admitted unto any Arts or Trades, as Masters, unless they first have learned
the Catholic Religion.

13. If any shall speak unbeseemingly of God, the blessed Virgin the Mother of
God, of the Saints, Ecclesiastical rites, or the famous house of Austria; he
shall loose his head without all pardon or favor.

14. Whatsoever any Citizen painteth in his house (within or without) to the
dishonor of the Catholic Religion, he shall be careful that it be blotted
out, forthwith under pain of 30. florences. In like manner, whatsoever shall
be engraven or painted upon Gates, Temples, or other public places, that they
cause it to be broken in pieces, or blotted out, and the memorial of Christ
crucified, or something else set up in its place.

15. The poor people in Hospitalls, unless they shall be converted before the
feast of All saints, this present year, let them be cashiered, and not
readmitted unless they turn Catholics, etc. The conclusion was this: Herein
the constant and unalterable will of his sacred Majesty, and Lord of us all
will rest satisfied, etc.

Charles Prince of Lichtenstein.
But these were general things, and common to all: we shall now add some
particular examples, whereby a thousand of Satan's stratagems will perchance
more clearly appear.



CHAP. XCII.
SHortly after the taking of Prague, the Catholic Citizens were cited by the
Kings Judges, and examined upon oath, to declare if any of them knew that the
Evangelists had stubbornely spoke or done any thing; which, as every one
answered, for truth or affection-sake, were received as Oracles, and afterward
became the cause of death to many, even altogether innocent.

2. An Act or Decree was published unto the rest of the Citizens (who thought
themselves received into favor) in the year 1624. Febr. 23. That they had
forfeited their Estates by their Rebellion; nevertheless Caesar desired not
that they should be altogether sequestered, but that every one should contribute
part of his fortunes to support the wars. And here an exact estimate of their
possessions was required of every one of them upon oath: And according to this
confession (or also by a suspicion or guess which they had, from their ready
money) a ransom of favor was imposed upon each of them, (for the obtaining of
Pardon, as they called it; but indeed, that they might undo him:) a hundred,
two hundred, a thousand, two, three, four, six, etc. thousand florences, were
straightwayes or at certain days to be paid.

3. Afterward all Non-Catholiques were ( April 15.) forbid to be enrolled in
the City-Catalogue: As for those which were inscribed since the year 1618. all
trading and negotiation was prohibited them. By which Thunderbolt some were
brought to faint heartedness, and others to poverty.

4. Shortly after (to wit, May 29.) Letters were hung upon the doors of the
Common Halls in all Cities, the tenor whereof was thus:

The most illustrious Prince, Lord Charles of Lichtenstein, etc. has
understood by credible persons, that certain of the late exiled Preachers, do
not only lurk privily in the Cities belonging to the people of Prague, but
also exercise divine service about the Houses, Gardens and Vineyards, and
thereby do draw away the People from their lawful obedience unto the
Magistrate. Which thing, since it can be no way agreeable to his illustrious
Highness for the dangerous example of Rebellion lately raised; he therefore
strictly charge the Judges of his sacred Majesty, that they be most
diligently watchful, and whenever they find any Conventicles, straightwaies
taking with them public officers to break into those houses (without respect
of persons,) and having apprehended the persons to arrest them; whether
Predicants, Readers or Singers. He has also understood that Piccardy Songs
and Rimes, composed under the name of Psalms are sung up and down, not only
privately, but even publicly in Villages and streets: They are therefore
diligently to observe that it be amended, and that nothing but what is allowed
by the Catholic church, be said or sung by any man. And as great
circumspection is to be used, that all Schoolmasters not Catholic, be
expelled out of the houses in all Cities and if they shall be taught for the
future, that they be hailed to prison and punishment, etc.

5. Another Edict succeeded, Sept. 13. yet somewhat more moderate, whereby the
Kings benevolence and all their privileges were declared to be performed unto
the people of Prague after payment of the Tax: with both of which
notwithstanding they rejoiced not long, for (that I speak not of continual
vexations for Religion sake) there issued forth in the year following, from the
Officers of the Kingdom, unto the Counsels at Prague this same Decree. [The
supreme Officers and Judges of the Kingdom, in the name and place of his
Sacred Majesty, do command by their Commissioners chosen for this purpose, the
Consul and Senate of Prague the less, and also of old and new etc. that they
perfectly instruct all Non-catholick Citizens, called into the Court, of the
final will and pleasure of the Kings Majesty, which is no other, than that all
men renouncing their heresy, do betake themselves unto the Church. But if any
shall be found refractorily obstinate, they shall signify unto them that they
are to be not only cashiered the City, but also deprived of all means of
getting their livelihood. Decreed in the Chancellors Court in Bohemia, in the
year 1626. Feb. 13.

6. In the year beginning 1627. There were supreme Commissaries for Religion
chosen by the Emperor: whose names we have before recited. These therefore
entering upon their Commission from those at Prague, do send a decree to the
Chieftaines of the Cities of Prague: wherein after a large commendation of the
Kings fatherly care for the good of his subjects, as also of the Learning,
Godliness, zeal, and watchfulness, of the Spiritual Pastors (whereof there
was such abundance at Prague, and throughout the whole Kingdom: and lastly of
his wonderful clemency, and forbearance heretofore used toward heretics: and
on the contrary lamenting the heretics great obstinacy: do now seriously
protest to act for the Kings sacred Majesty and for him only. They do
therefore command, that each of them do cause the citizens in the Cities
committed to them, to be catalogued, and carefully sent unto them, and
distributed into four rancks. In the first order the native Catholics are to
be inscribed, in the second, those that were lately converted: in the third
those that have given good hopes of their conversion, and in the last the
obstinate, etc. Given as above said.

7. These chief Officers give the commands unto the Kings Judges: they to the
Tribuns of the people and Senators, and these walking from door to door,
examine the father and mother of the family, the man and maide-servants, and all
other the Inhabitants in every house, and ask them in what order they would be
placed, and so did accordingly. These Catalogues thus made, are brought to the
Commissaries: who when they find but few of the first, second, or third Order,
they consult with great anxiety what is necessary to be done to such a troop
of Heretics, that all tumults may be prevented. At length they conclude that
the heads should be removed, viz. That those men which were of any rule and
authority with the people should be expelled.

8. The beginning was effected upon four venerable, grave Citizens of Old
Prague, the thundering Edict against them (ommitting Court complements) runs
thus

Whereas with grief of heart we have observed certain persons of Prague, to
be of such incorrigible obstinacy as that the Kings Majesty's most indulgent
care, and all his fatherly admonitions for their good being nothing set by,
they proudly refuse good and wholesome instruction, and as men incurable, admit
of no counsel, thereby giving a dangerous example unto others, which would
suffer themselves more willingly to be amended. In which number since, these
are noted: John Theodore Sixtus, John Peldrzimowsky, Abraham Angel, and John
Jacob Heydon, We give command to the worthy Ioachim Salwate, Baron of Chlum
etc. Chieftaine of the old City Prague, that he give Commission to the Kings
Judge for the aforesaid City, the Consul and Senate, to call the four
forementioned persons before them, and to set a peremptory term of time before
the last day of that month, if peradventure they will repent. But if they will
persist in their blindness and obstinacy; We will and straightly command, that
they depart before the seting of the Sun the same day, not only from Prague,
but forthwith out of the whole Kingdom. Nevertheless before they depart, they
shall pay their debts and also their fine for Rebellion to the Kings Majesty,
if they have not before fully paid it.

Finally, we command that the aforesaid Chieftain, the Kings Judge, and the
Senate sworn by Catholics, do tax all their goods, moveable, and immovable,
and accordingly deduct a part thereof for the payment of the public Faith,
and to send the other part with the residue of the fines. As for the rest of
the Inhabitants of the Cities of Prague, we will that they be seriously
admonished, that they by these men's example may at length learn wisdom and
prevent the like punishment: as knowing, that the good will and pleasure of his
most Sacred Majesty will be thereby satisfied. Dated at Prague by the
Commissioners for Reformation July 12. 1627.

9. The Exiles in a small Petition complaining of the too short time allotted
them for to dispose of their Goods, earnestly requested the term might be
lengthened: But it was answered them by another decree (23, of July) that this
their request was a mere cousenage, that nothing indeed might be granted.
Nevertheless, lest there should remain any cause of complaint, the term
appointed should be prolonged 14 days; yet with this condition, that in the
interim, they promise seriously to study and be taught the Catholic Religion,
or if they shall not have perfectly learned it within the space of 14 days
limited, that they prepare themselves for prison. They being affrighted with
this edict, and seeing all hopes of mercy gone, made have to depart, leaving
their Wives to order their businesses. Howbeit, against them also they shot
their darts, for a new Edict is proclaimed ( August 28.) to this effect:
Whereas it was never the Kings Majesty's pleasure to institute a divorce
between man and wife, therefore it is ordered that every woman follow her own
husband, unless she be minded to turn Catholic.

10. After the same method having banished other Citizens of chiefest note and
esteem, sometimes fewer, at other times more, sometimes seventy together
contained in the same act, after they had expelled some hundreds, they
desisted; supposing that the rest might be more easily compelled: even as it
came to pass. For by these imprisonments, and other pressures (such as we
shall speak of happening to other Cities) were brought to universal Apostasy,
some few only excepted, which fled of their own accord. And thus the
threefold City Prague, most populous, and always hating and disdaining the
Pope. is now, though most unwillingly and with great reluctance, made
Antichrists harlot.

CHAP. XCIII. The Reformation at Kutterberg.
I. THis harsh dealing with the people of Prague, might nevertheless have been
colored over with the paint of justice and equity; for they had license to
enjoy the benefit of departure, as they mollified and minced their tyranny with
this specious name; those goods which were unmoveables they were permitted to
take in sunder and the movables to truss up and freely carry them away. But
lest others should do the like, both the fury of the Kings Officers in the
Cities, and the insolency of the Monks and soldiers appointed to keep ward,
did greatly withstand them; for those miserable men when almost all (for fear
of those harpies) fled from their houses, they were plundered most ravenously,
and permitted to carry nothing away of their goods and household stuff, but
what they removed away privily. Their houses and grounds were left destitute
and forsaken, yet afterward found those that also possessed them, some few
that were expelled their possessions, received the same favor which those at
Prague had formerly. This will be more fully manifested in that which follows.

2. Kutterberg is a City of B^hemia, and (nex unto Prague most eminent; very
famous for abundance of silver Mines, multitudes of citizens, and zealous
Professors. This City by the Kings appointment has in it a chief President,
the Master of the Mint, a Baron, or Knight; and an Archdeacon, the chief
Prelat of the Church, with other Pastors and Collegiats, in number seven. So
soon as it began to be molested by the mony-master (Wresowecius) under the
pretense of Religion; the Incomes of the Kings Revenue began also to be
diminished; their Mettall-Artists (most of them being Germans) failing them in
most places. This inconvenience being well observed, the King covenanted with
the Citizens, that they should be Masters of the Mettalls for ten years, paying
unto him a certain sum of money yearly, they in the interim being safe from
the Soldiers violence, and quietly enjoying their Religion. The King
Subscribed, and confirmed the Covenant by setting thereto his Seal, June 24.
1625. Which was received by the Citizens with incred^ble joy, many others there
promising to themselves Sarepta, and the Cave of Abdia.

3. But it grieved Satan, that any receptacle remained for the faithful; he
therefore prevailed by the buzzing Jesuits, that the King moved with I know not
what fear of some new Rebellion) having scarce stood five months to his
Covenant, he took care to have the soldiery brought in again: who ( December
the sixth) entering the City, the business of Religion is taken up again. The
Citizens astonished with the news hereof (against such manifest Covenants)
they again humbly petition, that so much favor might be granted them (to keep
the Workers in Metal) that no violence be offered them. But in stead of an
Answer, a command is given to the Captain ( December 22.) that for Hlawse the
Consul, Paul Screte, John Schreyter, John Agathon, Sigismund Kosel, and M.
Peter Capo, Senators, and chief Citizens, the abettors of the heretical
obstinacy, to place twenty Musketeers in their houses upon free quarter,
until he had received a Schedule from the Confessor, as a testimony of their
Confession made before him. The Soldiers domineering by reason of the license
given them, did not only suck out and exhaust good men by their profuse living
upon them, but did also abuse them diverse other ways after their own
pleasure: whose patient constancy notwithstanding overcame their tyrannical
behavior: For so long as they were able, they afforded them provision; but
this failing, part of them wihdrew themselves by flight, to further danger;
others resigned the Government of their goods at home, delivering the Keys to
their landlords.

4. When they see their design could not well proceed this way, the task of
reforming Kutterberg is committed to Don Martin of Hursa, who guarded with a
troup of Curasiers (armed from top to toe) and brandishing a naked sword with
his right hand, enters the City, the day before Easter, anno, 1626. The
Citizens affrighted at his coming, who had before given public tokens of his
cruelty in other Cities, do forthwith that night, take their flight in great
multitudes, thinking to lurk privily in the neighbor-villages and towns. Don
Martin observing this, returns to Prague, and gets an Edict published, for not
receiving or favoring any Exile, under mulct of an hundred Jmperials.

5. And now when all hopes of returning were taken away from the people of
Kutterberg: another Edict came forth (August 17.) promising impunity to those
that would return: Some hereupon returned, but to their own grief and
damage. For in the year following, a Senate being elected out of the most
wavering Apostats (whereof some, and of them the Major of the City, not long
before a hors-courser were illiterat persons) were so diversely molested with
the soldiery, that multitudes of them being broken with daily pressures, at
last shook hands with the Persecutors, and submitted their necks to the
Antichristian yoke: others together with their wives and children (leaving all
behind them) willingly betook themselves to banishment.

CHAP. XCIIII. The Reformation of Bolislavia.
I. THE City for 200 years having embraced the Orthodox religion, was made the
principle seat of the Brethren, and chiefly upon this account was hated by the
Pope, in the year therefore 1623. after the ejection of certain Ministers,
they placed in their room, two crafty Capuchins who ^ndeavoured with
indefatigable pains to pervert the ^nhabitants from the faith, but for the
space of three years notwithstanding all their cunning, they scarce engaged so
many Apostates as would reform the Senate.

2, In the year therefore 1626 a Garrison of three bands being brought in,
force began to be used, and first of all in February certain of the Citizens
were banished, others cast into prison, upon the 20. of March Adam Trubacz,
John Bukac, Peter Stehlik, were sequestered, to strike a terror into the rest.
Having given them into their hands certain square staffs, two Cubits long, in
which each of their crimes were engraven, the first thus: Adam Trubacz, is
therefore sequestered, because he said, that there was none so powerful who
should command his Conscience, also that he would not give his soul to the
Devil as the rest had done, on the other side of the staff was written, you
would have ejected your K. but now your King has ejected you, upon the third
was written, go to, and learn to obey God and the King (for he had said to the
Reformers that his soul was not of so small a value as to neglect it, also he
asked if the Emperor should destroy this soul whether he could give him
another? Bukatius his staff had the same written excepting the crime which was
expressed in this manner. John Bukac 's is therefore sequestered, because that he
said that all the new Catholics were wicked Traitors and persidious to God. It
does not yet appear what Stehlikius his staff had written upon it, for so soon
as he was past the gates of the City, he brake it, and threw it away.

3. After the ejection of these men, when the rest did not (as yet) seem to
repent of what they have done, they are again warned into the Court, and shut
up into several Rooms, and thence called out one by one, and examined singly.
Amongst the first was Daniel Miconius Towne-Clarke, upon whose entrance, they
hired a certain Rogue to stand in a corner, with a weapon in his hand: whom so
soon as this fearful man law, from his too greedy desire of life, promised
to turn Catholic. They being glad at so happy a beginning, commanded the rest
to return and go home, and exhort them to do the like, but he going to his
friends; being amazed, tells them of the Rogue before mentioned: and that they
were in danger, beseeching his friends that they would be circumspect, and
have a regard of themselves. There was in the company of these men that were
warned to appear, two Burgo-masters, learned men and Mrs. of Arts, by name
George Kezelius, and Henry Daniel, of Semania, Upon whom seeing the rest
depend, they did encourage both themselves and others exceedingly, and did
exhort them that they should not at all value those imaginary terrors. By and
by Kezelius is called out, and what with sundry flatteries, and what with
threatenings, he is wearied so long, till at last unawares he desires time to
consider. They being contented with this demand, commands Semaninus to be sent
for, who being certified concerning the wavering of Kezelius, began the more to
be resolved: and when an old man, one George Dernikarz, propounded him as an
example for his imitation, he spit in the old man's face, saying, Traitor: is
this your constancy. Also he goes on, and presents himself to the Reformers
unmovable as a rock, as also all the rest that followed, at length Kezel us,
considering that his failing was greater in Gods sight than possible it could
be in man's, repenting himself, and with a very positive answer took away all
that hope which they conceived of him, and with the rest is sent to prison.

4. One Bartholomew Lang a Serivenor was one of the stourest, who protested he
had rather die by the sword than deny the faith, he was thrust with certain
others into a stinking place designed for the racking of malefactors, and there
he was held for 1^, weeks: his own house, and the houses of the rest, in the
mean time, being possessed by the barbarous Soldiers. But one of this Society,
Georg Smidarskey, having contracted a disease from the stincke and filth of
this prison, dyed in the said prison very religiously: but they could scarce
procure so much favor from those wicked ones, that he might be buried.

5. When at this time, and by this means; they could shake none of their
constancy, they let them go, prefixing a further time to deliberate upon the
business: especially, since the same year 1626. Behlem Gabor, waging war
with the Emperor, Count Mansfeilds and Wamors entering Sylesia at the same
time with the King of Denmarks Army, struck a terror into these Tyrants; for
in August there are sent Proclamations to the Towns that it is not his
Imperial Majesty's will that any man should be forced to the faith by violent
means, but that upon supposition they could not agree with his Majesty, it
might be lawful for them to depart etc. and this Proclamation gave these
people of Bolislavia a little respite.

6. But the year following after the war with Hungaria was appeased, and the
King of Denmarks Armies were beaten out of Sylesia, this tyrany again revived;
and there was an Edict sent to the Senate of Bolislavia in the form as
follows.

To our trusty and well beloved the Major and Jurates of the Town of new
Bolislavia.
Trusty and well beloved, we hear, that many of your fellow Citizens of new
Bolislavia, continue still in their obstinacy, adverse to the constant and
fathe^ly admonition of our clement Lord and King his Imperial Majesty, as also
to the friendly Church inquisitors, and they do despise the sacred, wholesome,
and Catholic Religion: but that especially there be two (to wit) George
Kezelius, and Henry Semanaina, who do persist to oppose the will and command of
his sacred Imperial Majesty, to the scandal and evil examples of the
Non-Catholicks; wherefore in the name and lieu of his sacred and Imperial
Majesty, our most clement Lord and King, we command you, that you seriously
advise those your two fellow Citizens, arch-sectarie^ and schismatics, that
they do not corrupt others with their errors, but that they abjure their
erroneous opinions and at length embrace the true Religion, and so return into
the bosom of the Catholic Church, and that they do this by the feast of the
Ascension, or at utmost by Whitsontide, under pain of banishment from the
City, and ejection from the Kingdom of Bohemia, but since you have been
certified concerning the late Edict made by P. Lichtenstein of blessed memory
Viceroy of Bohemia, in the name and lieu of his sacred Imperial Majesty, that
all privilege and trade be denied to all your Citizens and Burgers, who are
schismatics non-Catholicks and not agreeing in religions, with his most
Imperial Majesty, as disturbers of peace and concord. And as yet we are not
satisfied, whether this has been by you put into execution. If th refere
hitherto it has not, we command you in the name of his Imperial Majesty, that
you do execute it timely, and seriously admonish all your Citizens and
inhabitants, inmates or servants of other sects, elder or younger, who are
non-Catholickes or hold schisma^icall opinions, that they so far consult both
for their temporal and eternal advantage, as to return into the bosom of the
holy Catholic Church under pain of severest and inevitable punishment, in
which business you shall in good time inform us what h^th been by you done,
that so by this means you may fulfill the will of his Imperial Majesty.

Given at Prague 17 of April. An. Dom. 1627. N. N. N. Appointed Commissioners
by his Imperial Majesty, for the Reformation of Religion in Bohemia.


7. Others of their letters sent the same year to the same persons.

Grave trusty and well-beloved friends, we did expect, that you would in
obedience to us, have executed our late Edict, delivered unto you in the name
of our most clement Lord his sacred Imperial Majesty, that your fellow Citizens
who are Non-Catholicks, would have forsaken their schismatic opinions, and
have returned to the holy Catholic religion, but especially that those two
obstinate Heretics George Kezelius, and Henricus Seminina, would h^ve made
auricular confession and have received the Sacrament of the Altar in one
species, according to the institution of the holy Catholic Church, within the
time by us allo^ted, but we perceive that the two sectaries before mentioned,
and the rest of your Citizens still continue in their inbred obstinacy, and
despise the Catholic Religion, and all wholesome doctrine, and that none of
them hitherto have embraced the Catholic Religion, wh^refore since his sacred
Imperial Majesty, will not afford h^s royal favor, nor allow any to abide or
trade in the Kingdom of Bohemia, who shall refuse to embrace the same religion
with him, but follow the fancies of their own brain, and thereby become
incendiaries, and brochers of sundry heresies, whence arise for the most part
several factions and disturbances of the Commonwealth, and the whole
Kingdom, therefore we seriously command you, that those two Schismatics be
not only outlawed, and disfranch^sed, but that they be presently banished
from the City and whole Kingdom of Boh^mia, without any respect of persons or
conditions, and that the very day allotted for their banishment, or the day
after, they go out of the City by sunset, and for the future that they never
return into the City or any part of the Kingdom of Bohemia, upon pain of
severe punishment, if at any time they shall return, and be apprehended.
Likewise we do seriously and strictly command you in his sacred Imperial
Majesty's name, that you deny to all the Citizens or inhabitants of the city of
new Bolislavia, who are not Catholics the benefit of the law or their
revenews, or to bu^ or sell, or any other civil contract, and that you strictly
forbid that none of them for the future do attempt to do the things forbidden
without our privity, unless they do desist from their obstinacy, and
heretical opinions, and submit to the fatherly commands of his sacred
Imperial Majesty, and embrace the holy Catholic Religion, and produce a
testimony of their doing so from their confessor. And again seriously advise
them in our name, and strictly command them, that without any delay, they
embrace the holy Catholic Religion, by the last day of June this present year.
Let every one of them make confession to their ordinary Catholic Priest, and
receive the Sacrament of the Altar devoutlie and reverentlie according to the
custom of the Roman Catholic Church, under pain of banishment from the City,
and the whole Kingdom of Boh^mia. We will deligentlie promote your Petition
concerning the removing of the soldiery from your city, only you shall
endeavor that all your fellow Citizens, so much the sooner profess the
Catholic faith, for by this means things will better suceeed with you all in
this life, and the life to come, and the will of his sacred Imperial Majesty
will be fulfilled.

Given at Prague the 15. June. Anno. 1627. N. N. Commissioners in ordinary from
his sacred Imperial Majesty, King of Bohemia, and Hungary, for Reformation of
Religion in the said Kingdom of Bohemia.


8. These Edicts were executed, those two were banished with some others. Some
of the City of their own accord, departed for better security, or rather
secretly run away, others were denied traffic, the Capuchians went about the
Market, and from house to house, they shut up all the Mercers Shops, Taverns,
and Alehouses; and from those, that notwithstanding this Edict; sold any
thing, they took away their cloth, and linen, and other commodities no man
daring to gain say them, the greater part therefore of the Citizens took the
mark of the beast that so they might buy and sell.

CHAP. XCV. The Reformation of Litomeric.
IN the year 1517. the 21. of August the Town of Litomeric did ordain by the
command, and unanimous consent of all the Citizens, which order they had
regestred in their public books and kept in their several Companies; which
order run that none should be inrouled into their catalogue of Citizens (...)
no; though he were borne in the City: and this Edict they made for their better
agreement, and if at any time any man should move that this order should be
nulled he should be disfranchised and depart the City within a month. This law
was ratified and observed inviolable for a hundred years, until the time of
Ferdinand, for in the year 1617. two Jesuitical brats were suborned (to wit)
Nicolas Marazek, and Bartholomew Collins, who threatening their houses,
demanded to be made freemen of the City, which being denied, they entered
their complaint in the Chancery of the Kingdom, whither were warned three of
the principal Senators, with the Town-clarke, who were entertained with rough
words by the Chancellor and Paul Micna the Secretary, and were kept in the town
of Prague for nine days, till they should agree; so what was the effect of
this? After five months space the forenamed Marazek is chosen the Senator,
that so by this means they might have their Spies in all places. But he
whilst the States were in arms to oppose the enemy of the Protestant
Religion, namely the Kings Viceroy, was forced whether he would or no to be
quiet; till at length by the Emperors victory he encouraged himself and was
made Judge for the Emperor at Litomeric, who proceeded to trouble and disturb
the town as much as he could, but they endured all things patiently in respect
of other Cities; for they never went to the popish Church although they were
deprived of their own Ministers, neither did any of them suffer himself to be
enticed into apostasy, although two subtle deceivers Valerius Magnus and
Franciscus Rozdazovius, did strongly endeavor it, often times discoursing with
certain of the chief Citizens.

2. When they see they could profit nothing this way; they used force in the
year 1625. upon Easter Ev^, they wrote down the names of all the Citizens in
certain papers, and by their officers they delivered every one his paper with
a command that they should come to Church upon the morrow, and henceforward
upon all holy days in the year to hear there, Sermon and Mass; and for a mark
of their coming, as they went out of the church, they should show unto the
Sexton every one his paper; otherwise they should forfeit five pounds every
time, but the business did not proceed according to their desire neither.

3. At last therefore they bring in more soldiers, and begin to act more
furiously upon Corpus Christi day, (as they call it) they command all the
people to be present at their Idolatrous processions, and because Paul
Stranski, Recorder of the Town would not be at this foppery, nor appear, they
send a whole band of soldiers (he hiding himself in his house) they plunder
him, and abuse, and threaten his wife Katherin, whom they found sitting by the
fire. Mr. George Colssin, son in law to a principle man in the City, is carried
before the Council of War, and is accused of Treason against the Catholics,
that he did endeavor to shut up the Querister in the Church, for which thing
Hiparchus Loreulius Medicius, an Italian, threatened he should die, but in the
interim he commands him to be kept in the court, but because this was a
scandalous fiction, with which Colsinus was abused, as also their other plots
intended against the rest, no way restraining the fury of the enemy, til these
threatenings vanished into smoke, the soldiery being presently commanded away
into Germany against the Dane.

4. In the beginning of the year 1626 they again oppress them with soldiers,
and quarter in the principle men's houses ten, in some twenty, in others thirty,
abusing them fearfully, either as they were richer or more resolved, but they
efther escape, or else by God assisted manfully to suffer all things, brought
their enemies to such a pass, that they were even weary with plaguing of them,
and so began to be more moderate; whereupon they published an order, that if
there were any who would not change their Religion, they should depart with
their wife and children with in a certain time from the City and Kingdom,
therefore the greater part of the religious, conceiving they might lawfully
obey their command in this respect, they take themselves into Misnia, (hard by)
the rest yielded.

CHAP. XCVI. The Hradicensian Reformation.
I. HRadecium Reginae, a fine and large City, being deprived of its chief
Pastor, James Hrabaeus with the rest of his Colleagues, had gotten a merry
Archdeacon John Celestine who oftentimes protested, that all violent ways was
displeasing to him, had given hope to them and to others, that would carry on
their affairs with mildness, therefore going to the Citizens houses, or else
inviting them to him, he did every day delight their minds with his jests and
merry speeches in their drinking and playing, he was an insatiable devourer of
wine, and a great gamester.

2. When in whole four years time, he saw no one to be converted by this
way; he put on a severe Countenance. He did desire that the Croation Soldier
being then there, would be a help unto him, and therefore, gathering the
Assembly together on a Holy Day, he does explain the missteries of the Mass,
and does invite and exhort them from the Sermon to perform the Procession;
having privately suborned some of his Army (Colleagues) who might promote the
business: when then that no man would follow him (going before with the Host)
the Croations rush into the Temple and with drawn swords compel them to follow;
the people being affrighted, and fearing slaughter, run as if they were
distracted, but are repulsed by some troops of his men placed in the
Marketplace; other some, whether they would or no, were compelled to go that
way: others, notwithstanding, escaped: but the thing was a matter of slaughter
to both.

3. In the year 1626. The Commissioners of Reformation send the whole
Brenavian Regiment hither, with an express command not to depart unless the
City were reformed. The Archdeacon thinking to take the chief men, first he
goes to some of them, bringing along with him Captain Stranssius, and first he
did imperiously inquire of Nicholas Acontius, a Physician dwelling hard by him
(being for some years lame by reason of the pains of the Gout) whether at
length he would become a Catholic. He replied, as long as I feel no other
notions in my heart, I can do nothing against my conscience: But the
Archdeacon being very angry said; Your sauciness has been sufficiently
tolerated, there is now no place left for any sophistication. The Physician
replied, Credit, Eye, and Conscience, will not endure to be mocked. The
Archdeacon Replied; As long as three or four heads are not cut off, this
City will never be reduced to a better state. The Physician again answered. If
that you think that my head hinders you, you have power over it, and command
it to be cut off; I would rather that this halfe-rotten Carkess should be
dragged through the fields, and torn by piecemeal, than to do any thing
willingly and knowingly against my conscience. The Archdeacon arises and
flings out of doors. The Captain following him, spoke with a low voice to the
Physician, Sir you shall not want counsel, the world is large and wide enough.

4. Presently the whole Community of the Citizens are assembled together, with
the inhabitants of the Suburbs, and the Gates being shut, they are caled out
one after another: and struck with grievous threatenings, the fearefuller
promise obedience, those which deny, are thrust into prisons: all the corners
Sellers, and Rooms of the court are filled with arrested persons. Presently,
the Soldiers (being licentious enough) are scattered to every ones house and
rage after a most insolent manner, the fearful Women and children and
Families, run to their arrested husband and fathers, and weary them with
tears and cries: most of their courage began to fail, and one after another
do give their hands to the enemy, and desire that some time might be granted
them to learn the Romish Religion. So one way and one fear drove these
miserable wretches into the Nets of Antichrist which had been so long avoided
because they did not remember that they must resist to the shedding of their
blood, and not only to imprisonment.

5. Eight and twenty only, are found of so great a number of citizens, who
would redeem the treasures of their consciences with the loss of their
earthly wealth. And going out with their families to banishment (to wit) Simon
Daniel, of Semianina, John Iobolecius, John Zak, John Nigrinus, Paul Iacobius
etc. most of them learned men, Amongst whom was Aconsius, who not without
trouble took care to be put in a coach and carried to Lesthua in Poland, whom
a certain Doctor of Divinity of Selesia, being his friend when he dwelt in the
University, and now being a companion of his banishment, wondered at his
constant mind, under this most afflicted estate of body, received him with
these following verses.

Above the rest of exiles I behold,
In thee Acontius: what may be condol'd,
And wondered at I wonder how you came,
From your own soil so footlesse and so lame.
And that in you which I condole no less,
Is, those great mischiefs, which you still oppress.
The prowess of the soul illustrious is, unspent,
Though all the bodies vigor be deficient.
6. But Acontius did quietly finish his life in Christ after he had patiently
undergone a miserable scoffing life for the space of nine years (in the year
one thousand six hundred and thirty two February the twenty five) Simon
Semianina was there made a citizen and Consul, so the others elsewhere.

CHAP. XCVII. The Reformation of Bidsove.
I. THose things which we have hitherto already related, may seem very
moderate, in comparison of those which we shall now add, (to wit) Don Martin
de Henerda, played the part of a Commissioner of Reformation, and certain
others full of Spanish zeal. For example sake at Bidsove, a Town standing
three miles from Hradecium and ten from Prague. When he arrived here with his
soldiers, and calling the citizens into the Court, he commanded the Catholic
Religion with an oration full of words; and John Kolacznik, whom they had
chosen for themselves, answering, in the name of the corporation, that it was
not in the power of man that one should unlearn that in the space of an hour,
which he had been learning all his life, neither was it convenient, that any
man should forsake that which he had embraced for the truth of God, unless
he were taught better things out of the word of God. There Henerda, as it were
distracted and forgetting, all civility, rose hastily from the place where he
sat, and assaulting the man with a club which he held in his hand, gave him
many strokes, and being full of rage commanded the Officer to come, and to
carry him out of the City: (which among us is a note of the greatest disgrace)
not so much as grantng him time to visit his house. The rest being terrified
with this example, and fearing the fury of the enraged, did submit themselves
unto his will and promised to be taught within a cettain time.

2. And when that some thought to have saved their consciences by flight, they
sent their wives before privately with their goods (with whom some Godly widows
joined themselves) the things being betrayed, they had those things taken away
from them by soldiers sent for that purpose, and they were brought back and
put in fetters, and were not dismissed till they became catholics with their
husbands.

CHAP. LXXXXVIII The Reformation of Zaticum.
1 Za^icum (called in the German tongue,) is that City which Prince Anhaltinus
Georgius in his Sermon concerning the Sacrament says, they did never receive
the Communion under one kind, but did constantly, even from its first
conversion to Christian Religion retain the custom of communicating', or
receiving it, under both kinds. This lets me ad, that it did even maturely
shake off the follies of the Calickstines, and followed always more pure and
received opinions.

2. The Monke's being by the help of an Army, always lying about the City,
settled in the place of that Orthodox Pastor, John Regius, who was banished;
did several ways trouble this City not only according to their manner in
their Sermons railing against heresy and Heretics, but also beating their
heads, and other parts of their bodies with canes, pulling off their hats, and
giving them to the soldiers, who would not be present at the carrying about of
the Host, and kneel and uncover their heads. In the year 1625. they carried
things in a more severe manner upon the day of the body, they bear about there
breaden diety, accompanied with no small number of the common people: the
consul Bohuslaus Sirialus being absent he was fined fifty royalls, the
soldiers spent three whole days in junketting and using the creatures not
only to saciety, but also horribly abusing them in like manner, other Senators
and whosoever were absent were by them fined.

3. The same year, the twelfth day of August, Don Martin de Hewerda, caused two
Mandates to be proclaimed both in the church and Court, the former concerned
the bringing in of Bibles and other Evangelicall books into the Court, and
that upon pain of payment of a hundred Bohemian Florences, or five weeks
imprisonment, in the other was required a constant attendance upon Church and
Mass, upon the pain of payment of five Florences and three pound of wax:
whereupon there arose great alterations and he^itations among the people, there
being a great quantity of books brought upon the 22 day of the same month into
^he Court, they were forthwith burnt without the walls.

4. In the year 1626 the 6 of January the Martinian horsemen, having finished
their intended deformation in the neighboring Lunencian Church, go with speed
to Zaticum, and being brought into the houses of those Citizens that did refuse
to dissert from the Gospel, they did extort from them a great sum of money,
to be paid day by day. Upon the 20 of Jan. Don Martin himself follows these,
upon whose coming, many of the faithful, through fear, did forthwith forsake
their houses, and other enjoyments, and yielded themselves up to the hardships
of a banished condition. He in the mean time proclaimed, that none without his
consent should go out of the gates, under pain of death. Which Proclamation he
caused to be set upon the doors of the Court. The day following the Consul was
arrested, nor could he have his liberty restored, unless upon the promise of
Apostasy: but two Senators, Matthias Litomiskie, and Samuel Klatowskey (because
that a little before they had refused to adore the Host) were bound with Iron
chains, and for fourteen days together grievously tormented, till that they
also by reason of their sufferings were forced to consent to the like Apostasy.

5. The 26. day of January the Senate and the people being called together, he
being accompanied with Jesuits, and the chief Commanders of the Soldiers
enters the Court, and Commands that all should submit themselves to Caesar's
will to Auricular Confession, and should receive the Sacrament under one kind:
withal, telling them that those that were obedient, should be eased of the
Soldiers, but that those that were disobedient, should have their burdens
doubled, and likewise commanding that every one in order, should answer for
himself: whether he would promise to perform this within three weeks.

6. There being none of the Senate through fear of the Tyrants refusing,
Wenceslaus Wysotsky, Tribune of the people modestly pretending the Laws of
Conscience, desires a freedom for himself, but the furious deformator leaping
out of his seat, beats him about the head, abused him with most cursed words,
among others take these, Thou art an unworthy knave, that thou should be in
this place, I will command thee to be bound all four, and to be thrown into a
deep Dungeon, where thou shall not see the light of Heaven, and when thou have
vomited out thy wicked soul, I will deliver thee to the Hangman to be buried,
etc.

Presently he commands the Praetor of the Soldiers that he should command
chains and fetters to be brought, Officers were then present, they bind his
hands and feet with Iron, and put upon his neck an Iron choler, with a thick
chain from whence Manacles hung down, and so bring him thus bound into the
Dungeon, where for the space of three weeks, [none being permitted to come to
him, no not his Wife nor Children] being tormented with hard chains, and
sustained with nothing but bread and water, he was also continually vexed and
infected by the Jesuits, when that they had discovered unto him the sentence
of death [because that in a rebellious Sermon he sought to move tumults among
the common people] he seemed willingly rather to choose this then Apostasy. P.
Chanowskie the Jesuit said, that he was possessed with the Devil, and
commanded that he should be more strictly bound; so the good man seeing himself
neither to be in likelihood of life or death, being in a most weak condition,
does now at last consent to the auricular confession, and having obtained leave
to go to the bathes, for the recovery of his health, he betook himself to
Aniburgh of Misnia, intending not to return to the Tyrants.

7. In like manner all the best of the Citizens did desire banishment, and
because that the gates were more strictly beset, least that any should get out
or carry away any thing of their Household Stuff, many went about to take out
of the hands of Babylon which way soever they might, even by the ruins of the
walls, their miserable lives, or rather their souls, by which way more then
thousands went out leaving all to the persecutors: and among these the wife of
the Lord Kralitz, a rich woman, who having left behind her abundance of good
Housholdstuffe, got out of the City through a Channel of the wall, by which the
filth of the City was carried out, and so followed her Husband.

8. But if any of the banished were oppressed with want (for Misnia could exhaust
money out of the banished) but did not know how to afford never any Council or
help, they went into Bohemia, seeking every where help, or rather alms, and so
being betrayed, were taken as it happened lately to two Masters, ^itizens of
Zalicum, Mr. Lucius and Stalco, which the Popish Priest [the good man
Woolfegang Sekera being already thrust out of pay] Paulus Sekera not worthy to
be a blower of Coals, having taken them, did punish them first with a years
imprisonment at home, afterward Don Martin sent them into Welhartice Castle to
be tormented, who being by their long imprisonment deprived of their health,
and almost of the use of their reason, they are sent away half alive to
certain places.

CHAP. 99. The Reformation of Tustan.
DOnazelce is not accounted the meanest among the free Cities in the Kingdom,
which the neighboring Germans call Tusta, Przikik Jeuissek an Officer of the
Kingdom, did solicit this City to a defection but in vain, and when he had
made complaint of, and bemoaned their obstinacy at Prague, in the College of
the Jesuits, Don Martin being by chance there present, laughed at him, and
promised that if he did not effect it, he would be liable to pay 500. Crowns.

2. Taking therefore with him some of his Soldiery, he enters the City, and
sends forth 20. Soldiers against ten of the Senators, giving them liberty of
troubling them in what way they would, and so by this means in a short time,
many if not all of them, were forced to an Apostasy, and so he receive again
the pledge which he had left with the Confessor.

3. But he being bitterly set against the Citizens of Tusta, because not for
his sake, but for the sake of another, they became Catholics, sets a fine
upon them, and so the miserable Professors of the Gospel were made like
Tennis-Balles, being tossed up and down to make pastime for those Tyrants.

CHAP. 100. The Reformation of Rokezan.
IN the year 1624. Zdenko Leo being a Baron, is created Earl of Colourat, and
sent by Authority of the Prince Liktenztinus, with a band of Soldiers to
Rokezau, do not only plunder the Citizens of their money, but do also
tyrannically oppose their Religion, no insolency can be thought upon which they
did not give their minds to; among other things in the close of the year, the
Bohemian song concerning the coming of Christ to judgment, which they were
used to sing, which runs thus, That day shall be a day of anger, a dreadful
day, a swift, great, and terrible day, etc. This song was brought to him, and
by way of scoff, sung to the Citizens that came unto him.

2. The 20. of December he calls the Citizen together, and with indignation
does upbraide them for their late Rebellion, as also Mansfield and Seska, and a
certain Citizen named John Rokiszan (he that was before chosen Archbishop of
Prague, a man as they say altogether unconstant) and forthwith compelled them
to write their names in three Register-books. In the first, the names of those
which were already Catholics, (there were six Apostates lately made.) In the
second, the names of those that would become Apostates in two weeks. In the
third, the names of those which were refractory and opposite to God and Caesar;
but when he saw that those of the third sort were far more in number then the
other, he began to devote them to all cruelties, pronouncing them worthy of the
Cross, the wheel, yea of hell it self.

3. The day following being Thomas day, he compells all to appear in the
Temple, and he, as an example to the rest going before them, receives the
Sacrament under one kind after dinner, again he commands that notice should be
given by the Bells, and entering the Temple when he saw no body present (for
even the Monks themselves were not as yet come) he runs out, and going
through the Market, the streets, yea into the very houses, drives all that he
meets with his stick to the Temple, being entered again, and there seeing M.
John Felixtessius a chief Citizen, and most odious unto him, because a
Calvinest sets upon him, beating him with his knobby Club (which he had taken
from a certain Countryman standing by) and follows him even to the Altar,
saying, Thou wicked fellow who have set thy name in the Register-book of the
damned, and refusest to confess. He thereupon desires the Earl, that he would
consider the holiness of the place, and he would deal more mildly with him,
but the Earl beats him still more and more about the head, shoulders, and
hands: Felix thereupon bending his knees, desired help of God; but the Tyrant
seeing his blood in a great measure flowing out, at last says thus to him, Get
thee hence O thou beast with thy cursed Calvin-blood; he rising up, goes out of
the Temple, and several asking what had happened, answers them thus, My blood
has dropped from me, between the Temple and the Altar, but it was for his name
who did abundantly power out his blood for us.

4. He being gone out of the Temple, the Earl compelling the Citizens that were
gathered together, to confess, did furiously rage against them, belching out
his curses against all, but beating some with his staff, and spitting in the
faces of others, but his cruelty did most appear in pulling of the grave beard
of that most honest Citizen Wenceslaus Crosinus, and strowing it about the
Temple.

5. Being returned home, he Commands that Felix should be again called, and
threatens that he would act another Trajedy with him, unless he did discover
himself to be of another mind, on the day following, but he thinking that the
morrow was not to be expected (saying that nothing was done by reason, but all
by spleen and fury) withdrew himself by night, leaving behind him his Mother of
four score years of age, his wife and most dear Children.

6. The Earl seeing his hopes and expectation failed him, commands his goods to
be confiscated, his wife to be imprisoned, and those that he had before forced
to an Apostasy: he now compells to subscribe to a certain paper wherein the
Citizens of Rokizan did testify, that they did owe their safety to God, to the
Virgin Mary, to the Lord Deacon of Collerate, and that they did embrace the
Catholic Religion freely, and with all readiness of mind, only the cowle
being the occasion of it, and this they did testify by the subscription of
their hands, and the Seal of the City, and so that miserable Earl being so
(...) as to attempt the deceiving of God, Caesar and himself, within a short
time was commanded to appear at Vienna, and for some facts was there imprisoned.

CHAP. 101. The Slanenseon Reformation.
SLana, otherwise a City for the King, yet yielded to Phalaris Martinit^, and
by him cruelly handled, over whom Nicholas Hansbursky was made Captain by the
same Martinitz, who a little before (for some fact) was delivered to the
Hangman of Prague, and had redeemed his life by Apostasy. This man that he
might ingratiate himself with the Jesuits, did strongly promote the persecution
of the faithful. In the year 1624. he appointed a solemn procession at Slana
(in that pompeous feast of the Body) most of the Citizens being brought to it,
either by deceit or force. John Bleyssa being cited by him, and solicited to be
a companion of his Idolatry, refused. When he asked the Reason, he said: As
often as I have received the Lords supper, so often have I obliged my self to
God, to shun these abominations. The other telling him, thou shall not resit
the Emperors pleasure; he answered, In these things which belong to Caesar it
is otherwise: but here, Gods business is acted. He inferring that there should
not be means wanting whereby thou may be forced, he answered, God seeks
willing, and not forced Worshippers: The end of this disputation was a public
prison, where Bleyssa suffered punishment for his disobedience (as they called
it) nine weeks.

2. But John Jahoda was fined a sum of money. For when he would not be
present at an Idolatrous procession, neither would erect an Altar before his
house, he being called into the Court, was accused of blasphemy against God,
and Rebellion against the Magistrate. The punishment pronounced to him was
imprisonment for 9. weeks, and the payment of 50. dollars (to help to get a new
host) when the time of his imprisonment was run out, he laid down his money,
protesting, That he gave nothing to the Host (for he knew no other to wash
away the sins of the world, then that which was lifted up on the Cross) but
in obedience to the Magistrate, who might convert this money to what use he
pleased. For which words being sent back to prison, he was not dismissed till
after a month, and with the payment of 50. shillings: But instantly driven out
of the City with his wife. He was a very zealous man, who a little after dying
of the plague at Prague, he piously slept.

3. John Bleyssa when he had again offended, (having offered his Daughter
privately to a Protestant Minister to be baptized) was first put into a
stinking prison, and after (with his wife lately delivered) punished with
banishment: The third part of his goods was only granted unto him, the other
two parts being brought into the Lords Coffer: But when he saw this taken away,
and getting nothing of the whole, he committed himself to divine providence
with a full confidence, and endured the miseries of banishment, even to death,
dying at Pern in Misnia.

4. In the year 1626. The same Captain, that he might bring a universal deluge
of Apostasy, brought in Soldiers, and compelled some by diverse tortures to a
desperate obedience. Among the rest, he forced 50. men into a narrow place of
the Court, where they could not stand, much less sit, or lie. While they were
kept in this place three whole days, and there having all passage out denied
them, they performed the work of nature (Sr. Reverence) it could not be, but
that they, being troubled with the stink, and likewise sad and angry, should
faint. Therefore promising to learn, they are dismissed. In the same manner the
wicked man handled women in his Chamber. But those that loved Christ went
afterward into banishment.

CHAP. 102. The Reformation of Prachatice.
THe Reformation of the Inhabitants of Prachatice (as a little after the
Inhabitants of Pisek) was begun in blood. For when the Citizens with a small
force courageously resisted for three days the Imperial Army passing that
way, then being about to yield themselves, they came down from the walls and
forts, and prepared to carry out the keys, the enemy furiously assaulting the
gate, broke it open, and first killed the Mayor of the City, bringing the keys,
and then other men whom they met, and the youth; that within three hours one
thousand six hundred and sixty Citizens were slain; scarce ten, whom flight or
some deeper lurking place had saved from their fury. It was a fearful
spectacle to see carcases thrown about through the streets and houses,
exceedingly dirty, and shamefully naked: neither was there any one for some
days to bury the dead bodies. At length two pious Matrons Christina and
Beni^na (sisters of Alexander Rumpalius a Citizen and Alderman of Prague) put
to their hands, and bring their husbands, and Maximilian Rumpalius their
brother (an Alderman) to the grave which they had dug with their own hands,
and cover them with earth, persuading those that remained with their example
and speech to the imitation of their piety.

2. This City when it begun again to be inhabited by the Survivers, and others
flocking from other places, the Emperor gave to the Prince of Eckenberg,
together with the Towns subject to it Baworow and Strunkonitz, and all the
Villages. In the year 1625. it was promised them by the Commissioners of
reformation, that if they would become Catholics, their Liberty, Privileges,
and Towns, with the Villages, should be restored. They refusing, were
prohibited from their works and trades: and so put the disobedient persons,
men, women, sons and daughters, in diverse prisons, and miserably afflicted
them four whole months. At length being made Catholics, nothing was restored
to them, that there might not want a testimony that these bloody promisers were
his progeny, who promises all things, and performs nothing.

3. But what need we relate more? It is sufficiently apparent by these, how
wickedly, cruelly, and impudently they proceeded against freemen. For
whatsoever was done with the other free Cities, not mentioned here, was made up
of the same impostures, deceits, tyranny, and impudence. We shall add some
examples how they handled the mixed multitude.

CHAP. 103. The Proceedings against the Common People.
WHen the Shepherds are removed, and the dogs fled, how easy is it for the
Wolves to assault the flock; but yet Satan here found some obstructions that he
was not able (as he hoped) to blow away all by one breath; we will relate some
of these things briefly, and by degrees intermixing some particular examples
for the credit of the history.

2. First, They removed every where the Ministers of the Word, even when they
had not any of their own to succeed, then they endeavored to take the Bibles,
and other profitable books from the hands of the Laymen, both for this end,
that heresy (as they called it) might grow out of fashion, and the heat of
Religion might grow cold.

3. The Monks being afterward brought in, did not presently thunder, but did
deal very fairly, beseeching and confirming the truth of their religion with
oaths, and dreadful cursings of themselves, promising a firm peace, the
success of affairs, and the whole blessing of God, professing also their
great hope of the kindness of the Emperor, and their Lords, and the
diminishing of their burdens, and they also themselves being but little
liberal in such a grievous dearth of provision, did offer either money, or
corn, if they would change their religion, by which stratagem some are
deceived; examples of this thing are extant every where, and also in
Kossimberg, Cerket; where when a Monk being more greedy of praise for the
conversion of Heretics, or rather of meriting heaven did promise to every one
that confessed a bushel of wheat, the poorer sort ran to him, bringing their
confessions to the Priest for corn, he being afraid of his Granary, lest it
should fail, if he did so largely distribute, resolved to dispense more
sparingly, and gives to one of a mean estate that came to him, but half the
measure; but he taking away his share, returns and requires the rest. The Monk
denying him, What, says he, is my soul more vile then the rest? so he
departed angerly. Is not this grossly to make merchandise of the souls of men,
as Peter foretold? or rather to bring the miserable common people to such a
pass as they should think gain to be godliness, which Paul in the first of
Timothy notes of certain false teachers, and men of corrupt minds, and averse
from the truth.

4. But when they saw that few were drawn unto them by their fox-like subtilty,
they returned to their wolvish cruelty, and compelled some by force to frequent
their Mass, and therefore Catalogues are made through all the Churches, and
punishment to those that were absent, the Sexton being to give notice.

5. If any went privately to the Neighbour-Churches of the Protestants (while
there were some yet remaining) or to their private religious Exercises, being
known they were fined, imprisoned, and whipped; sometimes soldiers were suborned
who might distribute, and ruin the Protestant meetings, by their invasion of
which thing I will relate one example, when that the year 1623. was brought
about, when as much people had met upon the Feast of the Nativity of Christ, in
the Temple near to Kutiburg, and the Village Wysoke (in the Oratory of the
Barons of Dona) Beneda and Lazgeausky, Bohemian Noblemen, Colonels of Horse,
remaining in the Garrison of Kutiburg, on a sudden fly hither with their scame,
incompasse the Temple, rush in, and draw from the Altar the Minister George
Barthius, strip off his clothes, and carry him away prisoner (but yet he
escapt) and cast the holy bread upon the earth, and pour out the wine, and
trample upon it. They then take away with them whatsoever stuff was ordained
to holy uses, they stripped persons of both Sexes, so that it happened that some
being utterly naked, running homewards in a deep snow through many furlongs,
being vehemently hurt through the sharpness of the cold, died. Some were
wounded, others (among so many glittering swords) fell into diseases by reason
of fear, what besides they did with the women-kind in the Temple, modesty
forbids me to speak; the spoils, as if taken from an enemy publicly sold at
Kutiburg; and in their feasts they merrily drunk out of the cup which was taken
away, and all without any punishment. I forbear to speak of more of the like
cases.

6. They afterward tried to weaken their courages by threatening greater evils.
For an example of which, a command was given by the Prince Lichtenstein to the
Captain of Pirglisky 1624. on the 20th. of December, That whosoever should deny
to obey their orders, in forsaking their heretical errors, whether they were
men or women, old men or young men, free men or forraigners, in-mates or
servants, he should send them to the Council of the Kingdom by name, and from
thence he should expect instructions what to do with their persons, and their
goods.

7. Afterward Marriages, Burials, Baptism were forbidden to those that were
Non-Catholicks, that which indeed was a thunderbolt which shook the minds of
many, especially those which intended to marry. The want of baptism and
disgrace of burial (because they were to be buried by the gardens, fields, and
highways, without any ceremony) could be endured more easily: if any one were
privately married, or had his infant baptized, his punishment was a long
imprisonment, unless that he could procure his liberty either by apostasy, or
by some great fine.

8. In the Towns, both those that belonged to the King, and to the Nobility,
works, and trades, and all means of getting their living were forbidden, at
length buying of food was prohibited, as at Litomste, being oppressed therefore
with want and hunger, there was a necessity either to fly (but whether so for
ever while the same face of things did appear) or despair or apostatize, as
most of them did.

9. They did set the Contrymen into the Towns, they took those who denied to
come, either by a Troop of Soldiers sent, or by their Court-flatterers, or
else they did apprehend them in the night, draw them out of their chambers, and
drive them by troops like beasts, even in the sharpest cold; and filled the
common-prison, the Towers, Sellers, Stables, and Hog-sties with them, where
they were killed with hunger, and thirst, and filth, and cold, and heat.
Joachim a Chyrurgion with others, was cast into a Tower full of snakes at
Plumlone. At Prostanna were put together into the Castle Stable, and the window
every where closed up, that being almost strangled for want of air, fainted;
among others James Vlicky an old man of above 80 years of age was drawn out
for dead (being an Inhabitant of Kosteleck, a little Town of the said Kelted,
whose son Matthew Vlicky, a Minister of the Word, was tormented at Czaslavia,
as we have related in the 57. Chapter) but Kunash the chief persecutor often
times repeating that they did counterfeit death, said that he would raise the
knaves, and so commanded that good store of water should be poured upon them.
Some came to themselves, but the old man died in his sight, whom he commanded
to be carried out and buried, the rest not being dismissed, unless they would
promise confession. In some places they proceeded to that degree of Barbarism,
that they shut up men in Privies to be poisoned by the stink of excrements,
which Nicholas Szarowetz, among others had experience at Kosenburg, also some
of Slunen at Letomisle, and elsewhere, they thrust men and women together into
the same place, that there was scarce any room for modesty.

10. They invented new prisons to torment more grievously, and to ruin more
speedily. For example sake, at Folessovie in Moravia, Dracovius a Jesuit,
being presently reformer upon the reception of Ferdinand for their King, in the
year 1617. there were holes made, and spikes put in them, wherein those that
were shut, could neither lie, sit, nor stand, by reason of the narrowness of
the place, but bending and crooked, they with their knees half bent, and their
backs pressed: they hung half to the ground. It was scarce possible that any one
should endure this pressure above two or three hours, their sins in the mean
time quivering, their Members trembling, and their hearts ready to faint with
trouble and fear. In the mean time some came, who asking them whether they
would volentarily embrace the Catholic Religion; most seeing to be fed with
lies did grant it, the simpler sort denied it, and were brought back to
torture, until they also did lie, in saying, they were made voluntary
Catholics.

11. The like imprisonment happened to John Rederius, a freeborn Subject, and
Treasurer of Pardubicium, (an imperial Town) who all the rest forsaking faith,
only continued constant; but when he prepared himself for banishment, he was
kept in prison, because there was no body found who might take the charge of
his accounts, a delay being always made for some fained reason or other, the
good man perceiving himself abused, and fearing some devilish snares, laid in a
certain place with letters of Protestations, and those books of account, and
in the year 1625. betook himself into a neighboring Town called Brundus, upon
Orlisen, a Town of Charles Lord of Zeratin, where hitherto Religion had been
professed; but being by craft removed from thence, was cast into prison, and
not suffered to depart, before he changes Religion, although he did patiently
endure his imprisonment for three whole years, and often desired to be
banished, yet his adversaries more and more by degrees endeavored to shake his
constancy; at length they devised a prison upon the water, very narrow, and not
above a Cubit and a half in length, that so when he lay down, he could by no
means lay himself at length, and they had provided so, that if he should turn
himself unawares, he must then fall into the water underneath, and be dipped: now
it was wintertime, and he himself was sick of the Gout, and no body was
admitted to come to him, except some instruments of the Devil, who should
tempt him to turn, he being tormented with this kind of punishment for three
days and nights, at length begun to faint, especially when his wife came to
him, who was newly turned a Papist, and oppressed him with her clamours,
therefore half doubting, he consented, and was carried into a Monastery, and
was received by the Guarden into the number of the Catholics.

12. If Commissioners were sent any where, that the business might not be
delayed, they took this policy in hand, that they should first assault the men
of greatest authority, either by cunning, or force, and make them an example to
the rest, in the Town Minion, when Commissioner Zenkow de Kolowrat demanded a
positie answer from the Subjects of that Country, convened together, whether
they would be Catholics or no; and one of them, in the name of the rest, began
to speak boldly concerning Religion, That conscience would nor could not be
forced, he presently commanded him to he apprehended, and in the sight of them
all to be laid upon the ground, and beat, withal asking whether he would be a
Catholic, but he continually denying, yea when he could hardly speak, the
Commissary commanded him to be torn in pieces; when he was half dead, the rest
were affrighted at the dreadfulnesse of this spectacle, and promised obedience,
if time would permit them. When the Senators of Fermanno Mestecia, a Town hard
by Chruda, refused to be made examples to others of apostasy, they were thrown
in a scurvy prison, the president of them being forced to ride the wooden horse
in the Marketplace (used formerly to punish mutinous soldiers) although he
was very ancient, yet endured this ignominy, and contempt, and pain, for above
six hours, but at evening after the Jesuits had continually solicited him with
their suggestions, and his wife and children with their lamentation, he
yielded, and was taken off the wooden-horse half dead for he could neither go,
nor make use of any member, and so he was carried by other men to a Confessor.

13. When some desired rather to die, then to be forced to Apostasy, it was
answered, That the Emperor did not thirst after their blood, but only the
welfare of their soul; some others put questions, and they were thus answered
in a scoffing manner, O you affect the glory of Martyrdom, but ye are base
knaves, and are unworthy to have any thing to glory in: this Answer had John
Polacicus of ( Franisium in Moravia) who being solicited by the Soldiers and
Jesuits severally to Apostasy, he fell down upon his knees, and held up his
hands, and entreated, That they would cut off his head, rather then force his
Conscience: And this Answer had John Elius of Stubnecimus, and others in other
places, and this was the true cause why in all these daily persecutions of
Ferdinand, Bohemia as also all Germany did not produce more Martyrs, there were
not wanting who would have died in maintenance of the Christian faith; but
there were none who would inflict death upon bare account, for it was
determined by these cruel Tyrants, brought up in the Devils School, not to
kill the body but the soul, and therefore they had rather by lingering and
continued punishments, render men unstable and wavering in the truth, then by
their patiently maintaining the faith, make them victorious, they only put
them to death, upon whom they had any color of a civil crime, as is manifest
in these Martyrs of Prague. Andreas Chebdovius, a sweet and hopeful young man,
was thus dealt with, whom they apprehended at Dorbusta, as he was in his
journey from Podebradium his native Country, going to the Court of Inowen,
into his service he had engaged himself at Faradissium, they fastened him to a
sharp stake, because he was a Messenger, to carry about several treasonable
designs, when nevertheless they found nothing about him, but a few Letters
written from friends to friends, nor by any tortures could they force him to
confess any thing, and this was done in the year 1622.

14. They likewise took another course which was both tyrannical over the
Consciences of men, and dishonorable to God, that because they see they could
neither convince nor convert any one by the word of God: therefore they
resolved with themselves, to make no use of any argument from Scripture;
especially to the vulgar multitude, but by Authority of their Church, and by
force compelled them to obedience; wherefore if any man did appeal unto the
Scriptures, they were answered with scoffs and jeeres, and taunts, they
accused the Scripture of imperfection, of obscurity, of ambiguity, that it was
the fountain of heresy, the sanctuary of Heretics, and that Laymen had
nothing to do with it: this was nothing with them, nay, these blasphemous
wretches were not afraid with their foul mouths to nickname the Bible
Wiblia, that is in our Language vomit, and so they spit in the very face of God
himself, wherefore they took away all religious books, from the people, that
so the blind leading the blind, they might overspread the Kingdom with
darkness; and also they perceived that the people by this means being deprived
of all light from the word of God, might more easily be overspread with the
darkness of error.

15. Some of the Nobles after they had forced their Tenants into their Church,
and shut the doors, compel them to receive the Eucharist in one kind, as
Severinus Talho in the village of Andercze, in the County of Pilsnen, in the
year 1628. with his sword drawn, went about in the Church, and solicited those
that refused to fall down and worship John Adams, Czeyka in Newcitz, a Town of
the same County, did beat the joints of their legs with Clubs, and so forced
them to fall down, which was also done by William of Klenow, Lord of Rupovia,
John Stepkenick being sent for by his Lord George Metrowsky at Mautina, when he
perceived that he was to be fettered and chained, leapt through the window into
the trench of the Castle, endeavoring to escape Apostasy by his flight; but he
being pursued by the Guard, was brought back again wounded, and was therefore
sent to prison at Pilsna, not to be released before he had abjured his
Religion, the same Metrowksy kept another man of his own ( Ambrose Sterpothus a
skinner by trade) in prison a whole year, because he continued firm in his
Religion, and thrice he sent the Hangman to him, and commanded him to be
racked, and by the torments of his rack forced him to confession: at length he
was let go, and was fined 100. Imperials: the Townsmen of Knesovesia upon Slana
pursued with drawn Swords, the poor Country people that fled into the fields,
and brought them back again, some of them wounded; some they brought from the
Victualling houses, and forced them to confession, and received the Sacrament
in one kind, Baron Kolowrat, set Muskets to the mouths of those that refused
to receive the Sacrament after the same manner, or else by gags forced their
mouths open, and commanded the Host to be thrust down, perhaps in imitation of
Smeczanius, who was used to do so before.

At Ronspurg in Tosta, and in certain other places, these wicked reformers are
reported to have gone so far in their wickedness, as to force some of the
people not only merely to abjure the Cup, but also to throw it upon the
ground, and spit upon it, and tread it under their feet; and this was the
usual form of abjuring the Cup, and swearing to the Catholic Religion.

I swear before God Almighty and the Virgin Mary, and all the Saints, that I
am not forced, but do voluntarily return to the holy Roman Catholic faith;
and I do profess, that it alone is true, ancient, saving faith: I do abjure
the Cup, neither will I partake of the Cup for ever. Yea moreover, I will by
all possible means diswade my Children, and those that are committed to my
trust, from partaking of the Cup: I do also promise, that I will constantly
persevere in this Religion, and that I will oppose men of contrary Religion, so
God help, and the Virgin his Mother, and all the Saints.

17. It is not alike provided, how those that were now made Catholics, should
for the future behave themselves, some being content that they had not once
filled their lusts upon these heriticall Subjects, let them alone and molested
them no more, yet these poor miserable Creatures, when ever they had
opportunity to see an Evangelicall Minister did bewail their Apostasy, and
did again communicate in both kinds; but others were a second time compelled,
especially, when it was suspected that they did not in their hearts return to
the Popish Church, concerning which certain Edicts of the Emperor, and
Commissioners came forth to compel them again and again: a certain Butcher at
Colone upon the River Elve, they forced and compelled to communicate in one
kind, his stomach began to rise, and he went from the Altar and vomitted all
the way home; when this was told the Captain, he chect him, but yet let him
alone, because he thought it sufficient that he did obey them.

18. If any through fear of those tyrannical proceedings betook themselves to
flight, their safety was not, neither indeed could it be long-lived; for hunger
drove those out who had hid themselves in woods and secret places of mountains
and as for those that fled for refuge to neighboring places, they found
themselves beset with such as would betray them, and so were either streightway
summoned and commanded to return, or brought back by the Soldiers, or by such
like forceible means: certain edicts also were published in some Villages,
forbidding any to entertain or covertly to keep in his house any of them that
fled, and whosoever should, was to pay an hundred pieces of silver. Afterward
in the year 1628. upon the third day of March, there was Proclamation made,
that those that should act contrary to the former command, should for each
nights entertainment pay an hundred pieces of silver. What then should these
miserable people do? it was hard for them to go out of the Kingdom, not being
acquainted with any other language; nay, being ignorant both of the places and
the ways; and these Goliahs the troublers of those Israelites reported, that
the same Tragedy was acted, or ere long should be acted every where.

19. Hereupon some not knowing what course to take, applied themselves to
desperate remedies: viz. raising tumults and seditions, and taking up arms not
only against the cruel Soldiery, and those impostors the Jesuits; but also
against the lawful Magistrate: the event of whose undertakings was somewhat
various, the Inhabitants of the Mountainous places of Wsetinen in Moravia, (the
Walacks by name) did so defend themselves by Arms, that they did not only
continue free from Apostasy, but also from the power of the enemy, so that by
war they could not be brought under their yoke; sometimes the German and
Italian Soldiers, as also the Polonian Kozacks attempted to break through the
passages of the Mountains, and so to overpower them, but in vain; so that
those Alps or high Mountains of Moravia, serving instead of a City of refuge;
these men having set an example (as also some Countrymen of the upper Austria,
who being gathered together into great bodies, cut out good store of work for
Caesar) were followed by the subjects of Baron Terozkius (in Bohemia) who being
in number about 4000. took up Arms in the year 1628. in March; but being
vanquished by Troops suddenly assaulting them, they were diversely punished.
Likewise in Fridland (in the year 1629.) sedition being sprung up among the
Commissaries violently reforming (in which a Jesuit was killed, and the
Commissarie scarcely escaping by flight) gave occasion to many of several
places, to rise up in Arms, and resist their violence; but presently the
Soldiers of Caesar set upon them, and many of the poor Countrymen were
slain, many taken, two of those that were taken were beheaded, two quartered,
and the rest by Apostasy saved their lives.

20. Their safety was greater, who persuaded themselves that by constancy alone
they should prove invincible: of this sort some were found of every rank. We
have mentioned some Ministers before in their place: we will now speak of one
of the Nobility Catharine Otti of Loss (formerly a Lady of Teschobuse) who,
notwithstanding the banishment which Caesar threatened against widows, did
neither forsake her Religion, nor her Country: when the Commissaries required
that she should choose one of those two things, she answered them, That she
could not suffer banishment, because she wanted an estate, but yet that it was
not lawful for her to change her religion, and that because of her conscience;
and therefore she would do neither: if that they would ordain a third thing
concerning her, she would leave it to their wills, but commit her self wholly
unto God: hereupon they dismissed her, either for shame, or else because it was
not yet appointed that any should lose their lives merely for religion: we have
already mentioned some Citizens, unto which we may join these; Martin Strausky
Citizen of Daczicum, and Simeon Siakowsky, Citizen of Crumlovia, in Moravia;
neither of which could be bowed by fair promises, nor be prevailed upon by
cruel miseries, being both of them resolved to die for the faith: the
Adversaries therefore overcome with their patience, let them out of prison, and
suffered them freely to take up a banished condition.

21. There is also a memorable example of constancy in four handy-crafts-men,
in the reformation of Kossumberg, for when among three hundred Subjects, there
were only ten that remained courageous, so as to endure imprisonment; It came
to pass also that six of those ten (unable to endure hardship, and cold, and
famine, in prison) forsook their cause: only four ( Sigismund Krussowsky,
Nicholas Szarowetz, John Aksamit, and Laurence Karlick) were left to be
tormented by the hands of the Tyrants: who, after they were much and daily
upbraided with their obstinacy, were at first exposed to cold, for five weeks
together (in the months of February and March) and afterward for nine days
were pined with hunger, not having a crum of bread allowed them; only they had
a small portion of bread of their own, with which they did all that time
sustain themselves, drinking their own urine: a Jesuit entering in with the
Governor of the Castle, in many words threatened them harder usage, unless
they did repent; to whom Sigismund answered, We willingly embrace all
afflictions, famine, hanging, burning, rather than we would sin against God:
and as they were going out he calls out to them, saying. What ye do, do
quickly. Forthwith it was commanded, that twice a week, and not oftener, there
should be given them a mouthfull of bread, and a draught of water: and then
they were kept apart one from the other: Aksamit was left there, Nicholaus
thrust into the sink of the prison (saving your presence) Sigismund into a
furnace, and none permitted to visit them, at length, having for the space of
twenty one weeks, used all means for the working upon them, and despairing of
their conversion, they set a fine upon them and so banished them, who with joy
leaving their possessions directed their course into Polonia, but Karlik having
got a disease in prison, died of it in his own country.

22. But we may more rightfully, bestow the praise of constancy (and why not
of Martyrdom) upon them, who even to their death endured hardship in prison;
of this number before this universal persecution, was John Burjan Kochowetz, a
most honest and learned man, whom the Governor of Lobkowitz, because that at
his pleasure he would hot subscribe to the Popish superstitions, caused to be
bound; which he (although perpetually vexed with the Monks and Jesuits) did
valiantly endure for the space of three years: and in those bonds he died,
and afterward was ignominiously buried near the place of punishment at
Raudnice.

23. There was also in the reformation of Litomislen, a certain Countryman, of
the village of Strakow (his name I have heard, but it is now slipped out of my
memory) who did endure a long imprisonment, vexed with the insultings of the
Priests; and of three thousand Subjects, (for so many that Lordship did
contain,) was alone found constant and immov^ble. He being sick by reason of
the filthiness of the prison, was visited by a Jesuit, and of him admonished,
to whom he thus answered: Get thee hence thou tempter, this day shall I sup
with Christ, and a little after he died, and was buried in that place where
they were wont to behead Malefactors.

24. Yet more admirable was the constancy of a certain Scribe (there was not
any of whom I could learn his name, but the thing it self I have read from
the hands of faithful and worthy witnesses) in the Town of Dobrzisse. This
Town, as many of the neighboring places, were given by Caesar to Don Martin
de Huerda: but he disliking the service of so hard a Master, resigned, and
lived with a certain Miller (in the territories of the Suticens) took upon him
the office of a Schoolmaster: when Don Martin came to hear of this, he sent
thus, that they should bring the Scribe and the Miller bound in chains to the
Tower of Welharti^z, and commanded that both should be cast into a deep place
of the Tower, in the year 1623 upon the Wednesday, from whence the Miller was a
little while after sent, but the Scribe was kept there a whole year, even to
his death: the prison was so foul and noisome, that both his feet were rotted
off: but he being endued with a great measure of faith, past away the whole
time, in singing Psalms, and hymns, as if he were in the enjoyments of all
delights. And it is worthy the notice taking, when a little while before his
death, it was reported that both his feet were rotted off, and that his body
was full of worms, Don Martin not believing it, commanded that he should be
brought forth, that he might see him, he refused, saying, The Tyrant was
unworthy to enjoy the sight of his body. And so remaining immovably united unto
Christ, he died about the same time, upon the same Wednesday following, namely,
1624. When he was brought forth, the Tyrant forbad that he should be carried
out through the gate of the City, through which he entered in: but commanded
that he should be cast over the wall into a ditch, and from thence carried away
by a Shepherd, and buried.

CHAP. CIIII. George Balthazar Martyr.
I. THis appendix of the former chapter (showing how the persecutors dealt with
the common people) will be a History famous to posterity. In the year 1629. the
fifth day of May, two and twenty country men were brought captives from the
village of Zlonice into the City of Slana singing with a pleasant voice, and
triumphant hymns about the resurrection of Christ; it was brought in as a
matter of charge against them, that having before turned Catholics, they
returned to Heresy, and ministered to themselves holy things. Being sent into
several prisons, they were forthwith brought to examination: the Chieftain of
these was said to be one George Balthazar, an inhabitant in the village of
Tmanus, who had no learning, and yet was a preacher among them: his Master
therefore Bohuchwal Walkaun having a little before turned Apostate (least that
he should draw upon himself Caesar's anger, or evil surmizes, accuses him in a
letter written to the Senate of Slana, and therein requires that justice should
be done upon such a Rebellious fellow. The Senate having summoned this man to
appear, causes this writing to be read by the Solicitor, and asked what he
would give in by way of answer. He requires time, and promises that he would
answer the writing; leave being given him, he frames this answer, which out of
the Bohemian tongue we have thus translated word for word.

I Have understood what charge was drawn up against me by James Swojanovius,
under the name of Mr. Bohuchwal Walkaun. The first article is, That I have been
pernicious to God my Creator, and to men in obligation, in that having turned
Catholic, I have again fallen from the Roman Catholic faith, and have
violated my Oath. To this I answer, That heretofore being in a cruel prison, I
was prevailed upon to sin against God, my most righteous Judge, because then
I was weak in the faith, not trusting God, that he was able to deliver his out
of the hands of men: but God chastised me for this my fault, holding my
conscience captive for a whole year together, so that I could have no hope in
Gods mercy: and yet I recalled to mind former sinners, who did upon their
repentance obtain mercy at the hands of God. Thereupon I cried to my God, a
whole year, night and day I did water my bed with my tears, because I thought
my self damned: but that true and righteous God who is not the cause of our
destruction, neither would that a sinner should die, but rather that he should
be converted and live, when he saw a fit time, did not hide his mercies from
me; for I obtained what I did desire, he sent his Angel unto me, and mine
eyes saw his glory brighter than the sun, and there was given to me in a moment
the holy spirit, and I was born again: there was likewise afforded me a
discerning of the Spirits, so that I could distinguish between good and evil;
and with this great gift, I did likewise receive a command of reproving the
sins of men. Nor am I deceived, for the Spirit of God does not hide himself
from any man to whom he is given, that he should not declare to the wicked,
things future, but mercy to the penitents: and therefore I was likewise forbid
by the spirit to do any more the works of the flesh, according to the lusts
of the world, which had conspired together, what they might, against the just
Judge of the living and the dead, and against the anointed ones whom he has
chosen to himself. Nor is my Mr. Walkaun ignorant of this; for they did hinder
me from speaking the truth for the space of four years: but by how much the
more they hindered me, so much the more did God confirm me by his Spirit.
Likewise they may remember, that I came to the Palace of Zlonice, that I might
declare unto them the truth, and invite them to repentance, even as the Lord
Jesus had commanded me by his holy Spirit, and so to continue for three days
together, Friday. Sabbath day, and Monday; upon which last day, I had also my
book with me, (but where he says, I am a seducer of souls, I answer and
affirm, that it is the certain will of the Lord, that all you also should hear
me) neither were they so strong as to snatch the book out of my hand.
Nevertheless they did despise the glory of God: for I ought to teach all, how
they might come to repentance, but they had a sign given them, when those
three spiritual men went from me, asking me a sign from Heaven (but they are
without excuse, for they themselves held the books in their own hands) and I
wept greatly, because they did not receive the Lords Anointed: which indeed is
no matter of wonder, seeing even from the beginning of the world, they did
persecute those, who being renewed of God, do good works. And it was
necessary that it should so happen to me, that every one might know the world
to be an hater of the truth; because the truth is not in it: and that it also
might appear, that the world is an enemy of God. Nothing therefore could so
far affright me, nor had I respect to any thing that should hinder me from
the cheerful doing of that work which God had vouchsafed to deliver unto me. I
would therefore know of you, who are made of earth, and of a lump of clay as
well as I, what place you will show me, that I might freely teach you without
impediment: if that you do refuse this, there will a time come, wherein you
would desire to show me a place, but ye shall not have it. Wherefore in the name
of God I do exhort you, that you would not receive this grace of God in vain,
nor despise it; for Gods rod is already took up, with which God will shortly
lash those that do not acknowledge his voice. There are more things for me to
write unto you, but seeing my self knows not how to write, I must have
respect unto others whom I do employ, and so briefly do conclude. When I shall
speak with you face to face, I shall distinctly unfold all things: in the mean
while the grace of our Lord God be with us all. Amen.

2. This Epistle being read, and they looking upon it as being of an unusual
Style, there went to him (but access was denied to all others) the Pastor of
the place, and strange Jesuits, conferring with him face to face, and
endeavored to dissuade him from his purpose: but he remitting any thing of his
constancy, did confess, that he was indeed a Lay man, and had no learning: but
yet whatsoever he did preach, or afterward should preach, he had it not from
himself, but from the Holy Spirit. For so it is, said he, as lately I have
written, and often I have said, that I (after that my abominable fall) did
speak a whole year in weeping, but at length the Lord Jesus had mercy upon
me, showed me his wounds, with which the wound of my conscience in a moment
was cured, and he gave me also the revelation of the Holy Spirit, and
commanded that I should declare unto others the grace showed to me, and exhort
them to repentance; which I have done this four years, and will do as long
as my life shall last. I know truly, that the wicked world does endeavor to
take away my life, but I am prepared to die, because by my death I shall
glorify Christ. He declared also, that when he did call upon God in the
prison of Zlonice, the Spirit of God answered him in his heart, and spoke great
things, which were not lawful to be uttered; as also that he was taken upon
high, above all the powers of this world, lest there should be any which might
prevail against him. As he had formerly declared all these things to the
common people, so he did now declare them in prison to the Jesuits themselves:
if they did descend to controversy about the Supper of the Lord, and about one
Mediator, Christ, etc. he did fitly quote Scriptures, and urged them strongly:
he did likewise denounce punishments to the persectuors of Gods people, the
seducers of souls, and Mass Priests. He foretold also the bringing back, and
gathering together of the flock of Christ, now scattered abroad by the wolves.

3. In fine, when all these things did show a spirit more noble, than that it
should be resisted, they took care that he should be brought to Prague, the
tenth day of August, and upon the fourteenth day of the same month, they
punished him, and that in such a manner as was a sign of a seared conscience:
for before morning light, the people not knowing of it, they commanded that he
should be brought forth, and without the gates at the gallows be beheaded, and
quartered; the several quarters being as a sight set in the highways, as
being the members of some wicked Malefactors.

CHAP. CV. The fury of the adversary, against Churches, books, and the dead.
I. NOt without reason do we believe that the Kingdom of Antichrist was showed
to John under the form of a beast, for it does indeed appear before all eyes,
if we do but consider the cruelty, and madness of that beast both against the
living and the dead, and against all things contrary to it, and therefore yet
it remains to be showed what rage they exercised against livelesse things,
Churches, Books, Images, Sepulchers, and the bones of the dead.

2, As for the temples, it is not necessary that we should remember or record
how they did cleanse them from that heresy with their holy water, a
superstition (forsooth) among them for whom this sanctification by the Word of
God and prayer which the holy spirit taught the Christians, (1. Timothy 4, 5.
is not sufficient, this was ridiculous to the common people, but to the wise a
clear and evident token of their hatred to the word of Christ, that they beat
the Pulpits of the Churches from whence the Word of the Gospel sounded, and the
Altars from which the Sacrament was distributed under both kinds, with rods,
and whips, which was of all done in those chief cities Prague, Iglavia,
Znoium, the Jesuits of Prague being about to purge their Temple which under
Ferdinand was granted to the Brethren, they sprinkled powder upon the pavement
and kindled it, thinking to root out the contagion of heresy with fire and
smoke.

3. And because in most, if not all, the Churches, and Towers, and City-gates
(in memory of the religion, of receiving under both kinds, maintained by the
sword) there were erected Challices made of stone or brass, they went about to
take this away, a golden Chalice of great capacity in the Church at Prague was
taken away, in the year 1623 the 23 day of Jannuary, and in its place the
statue of Mary was erected, the picture of Ferdinand armed with a sword against
the Heretics, was placed in the room of George Rex, standing by with a sword
in the maintenance of the Challice at Hradicius, they blotted out the picture
of the cup which was over the door of the house of Antonius and in the room
of it painted the Host, and under that a cup turned upside down with filthy
thick water running out of it, and writ this, They have drunk up the dregs and
all. At the lintell of the door they writ this sentance in golden letters, [My
house is a house of prayer, but not thy house O most cursed Calvin.] They
carried out of the Church the most ancient Pictures of Litomeritius, Hus, and
Ierom, and so burned them; afterward they showed their rage against the holy
Martyrs.

4. How they set upon the books every one perhaps have already heard, a
thousand bibles (that I might not mention other good books) were taken away by
these Furies, that Antichrist might show himself nothing inferior to Antiochus
(1 Macabees 1.5, 9.) commonly they burned them (only the Count of Nahud that
most perverse Apostate having covered his holy books with silk and Gold (for
he was sumptuous and proud) having taken off only the gold and the silver,
commands that they should be buried in the sink (himself being present) but
the manner was diverse, some having taken them away from the Christians did
burn them privately at home simulating the modesty of Joochim (6. Jer. 23.)
others brought them in baskets to the marketplace, as was done at Fulneck;
others brought them in carts without the walls, as was done at Zalicum and
Frutnovia: others brought them in heaps to the Gallows, and other places
destined for the punishment of mallefactors, as at Hraditium and so in great
heaps burned them: but you shall see O good men! that the innocent ashes of
these livelesse Martyrs being scattered, through heaven and earth, will spread
further the doctrine which you would have abolished.

5. The adversary being unmindfull of Ovid; Lions vent not their rage upon the
dead:
And the fight ends when foes are vanquished.
But savage Wolves and Bears not only prey
Upon the living, but the dead assay.
imitating the cruelty of Wolves and Bears counted a part of their glory thus
to express their rage and madness upon the dead continually. It is a
wonderful beastiallity, not to be able to endure the living above ground nor
the dead under ground, there are many examples of those, who were by these
pulled out of their graves, and had their members burned at Horasdovisius, in
the year 1621. The monastery which the Bohemian Brethren for a long time
possessed was restored to the Monks, who opened the graves of the Ministers of
the word, first of all the bones of Jacob Welchi (both in name and in truth,
two worthy men buried in the year 1600.) were taken up, which Severinus
Budetius the Warden did with an iron bar, beat in pieces, using with all
cursing words, and commanded that they should be burned in the Churchyard with
the bones of John Popelius, John Iaphet, and Matthias Cobar, who were buried in
the year 1599. 1614. 1616. and because the Barons of Squil^ve, the Lord of the
place were buried in the same Church, the wicked warden visiting their
sepulchers, took off from their bodies their rings and gold chains, and
whatsoever was precious, lastly, the body of Theobold Squiovius being taken out
of the vault and out of the leaden chest wherein he lay, he commanded it being
put into a wooden coffin, that it should be cast into some ditch about the
Churchyard, and covered over with dung.

6. In the year 1623. the Church Czaslavia, being taken from the Christians,
when they had found an Epitaph with this inscription, In the year 1424 upon
Thursday John Lyski of Callis, departed this life, Governor of the
Commonwealth, laboring in the name, and for the name of God, is buried in
this place. Presently they put to their hands that they might remove him from
thence, that had rested there for the space of two hundred years within one:
but having dug very deep, they found nothing besides dust: their rage
therefore being turned against the Tombstone (upon which his effigies were
formerly engraven but now worn out) they beat this to powder, and with the
dust of the grave they sprinkled it upon the ground without the church, so
forsooth taking revenge upon him being dead, who whilst he was alive troubled
them living.

7. In the same year when that they were a purging the Church of Prague of the
buried heretics, they brought out a marble-stone, laid upon the grave of
Rokizane, and beat that to powder, but they could not find the grave. Lastly,
in the year 1630. when P. Lucas the Jesuit, the twenty fourth of December
died, and there was in that place a most deep grave prepared for him, there was
found at the bottom a certain bed of brick, which being plucked out, there
appeared putrified bones with two cups, one of brass, and the other of Wax,
uncorrupted, and a piece of Damask cloth, the Relics of his Priestly
covering, long red hairs stuck still to his skull. These bones being gathered
together, they brought them in a basket into the Vestry, until they did know
what their Superior would command concerning them: but what was afterward
done with them, we do not know, but what we do declare, was related to us by
an eyewitness. So Rokizane having lain in his Sepulcher about 159 years and
7 month (for he died ^n the year 1471 the 21 of February) gave place to
another.

8. At Trebovea there were extant some stony Statues of some dead Pastors, in
the Churchyard, the eyes of which a Jesuit beat out with his mallet, he
being himself blind, blinded those that were before blind.

9. But yet their fury did not only express it self against those that were
already buried, I will not mention how they did deny them an honest burial in
the Churchyards, and forced them to be buried in fields, gardens, highways,
and in those places that were set apart for the punishment of rogues. Certainly
this was too barbarous that they did altogether deny, that some should be
brought out of their houses, and restored to our common mother the earth, for
this only end, that they might vomit out their hatred against those that slept
in Christ, and that they might deter the living almost killed with the stink
of their carkases, from the imitation of their constancy, this happened to a
most holy man, John Mathrada Muslen, preacher at Kutiberg, at Saint Barbera,
who dying at his own house (in the year 1625 the 4. of October, who being
privily returned from banishment departed;) the Archdeacon Apian, denied
altogether that he should be buried, not suffering himself to be wrought upon
either by entreaties or by offers of money; at length after eight days, some
good men by stealth taking away his carcass in the night time buried it in a
certain place. That Belial in vain inquiring after the authors of so great
wickedness, and threatening death unto them, for a little while after the
thirty of October the like example o^ charity was showed to one whom the Pastor
did use with the like cruelty, for a little son of his baptized elsewhere.

10. Why should I produce more examples of their cruelty, O that it were
lawful to write upon the foreheads of these men, that which Semirames is
reported to have commanded, should be writ upon his chests, If thou had not
been a wicked man thou, would not have disturbed the quiet of the dead.

11. Yet perhaps it would not be far from our purpose, to hint out how they
did express their rage upon the very name of Frederick (merely for the hatred
of that most pious Prince) who was an Evangelicall King; for an Evangelicall
people, in the year 1622 a Citizen of new-Prague by name Mr. John Libertine,
because that he had given the name of Frederick to his little son, was at
first without all reason tormented with the numerous soldiery, and for a
punishment, was commanded to pay 500 Dollars, it was a most usual thing for
them to pull in pieces the pictures of Frederick to trample them under their
feet to dig out their eyes, and ignominiously to handle all those withwhom
they were found; so that it was almost a capital offense even to think of
Frederick.

CHAP. CVI. Examples of Prodigies and punishments, whereby God sometimes
affrighted his enemies.
I. THe Godly indeed (at that time) were able to deplore this whirlwind of
persecution, and Apostacies, but only the Lord to stay and cease it. Who
although he stirs up wicked men to chastise his Church, yet nevertheless he
uses severely to punish them (after his paternall premonitions to reduce them)
when behaving themselves obstinately exceeding the measure of cruelty, they
become incorrigible. We shall touch upon some of this sort.

2. The first forewarnings, were diverse strange sights which appeared in
heaven and earth. As for example the miraculous bow seen at Prague, by all,
about the hour of execution: yea, such amazement seized upon the people,
looking thereon, before execution was ended, that they fled by troops from the
place of Judicature into the streets, no man pursuing them or declaring the
cause thereof. Fiery torches also were seen in the night, environing the
Martyrs heads which were set upon the tower, and a singing heard. Certain of
the Watchmen did confidently aver it; but for our parts in regard we were not
eyewitnesses) we leave it undetermined. But this is certain that many suns
were diverse times seen, in the year following, the sun also was seen by a
great multitude of people at Prague, to dart out, as it were, balls of fire.

3. In the year 1623. exceeding thick smoke did proceed at set times from the
pinacles of the chief Church of the Gospellers at Joyful Court so that men
supposing it to have come from fire within, ran thither to quench the burning;
but the Towers being well searched within, they found it otherwise. The
Jesuits because they could not deny the truth of the miracle so often
repeated, did interpret it to their own advantage, saying, the relics of
heresies do now smoke and fly up into the air.

4. In the same year when upon Corpus Christi day, the first solemn
circumgestation (or carrying about) of holy bread, was celebrated at
Kutterberge, with the noise of Trumpets, Timbrels, Fiddles, Gunnes, and the
like, the Heavens (the Clouds being compacted on a sudden, poured out such a
flood of waters, that within half an hour, the Marchants-shops, Carts, and
other heavy bodies, did swim in the streets, which also was mingled with so
great a shower of hail, that not only the windows of Churches and houses
were broken, but even the sheep in the fields, and the wild beasts in the
woods, were knocked down, some wounded, and others slain.

5. In the year 1624. in Autumn, a flying Dragon, flaming horribly was seen
throughout all Bohemia and Silesia. And that this was no whit below a miracle,
we may gather from hence, because in the same day and hour (about Sunsetting)
it was observed in so many and remote places, that our faith could scarce
elevate it self so high to credit it, if it were not confirmed by a thousand
witnesses.

6. In the same year at Podebrade blood flowed out for a whole month together
(the spring near the highway being broken up.) Which some have used as a
Rubric (and to beget the more credit) have writ the story thereof with that
very blood. Nor perhaps ought we to omit that which these eyes have seen in
the same year: Upon the City-gate of Chrudim, the Arms both of the King and
Queen were painted, with a distich written in Golden letters. These were
thrice at least drawn over with Chalk since the Emperors victory: and all the
rest being quite blotted out, only the name Frederick at several times
became extant and legible by all.

7. In the year following 1625. near Beneslow, then in the Dominion of Paul
Michna, a Fish Pond was wholly turned into blood; for the space of three days,
as also it happened in other places at other times. In the confines of Moravia
and Silesia great flocks of Crows and Dawes, flutted up and down; which at
length by a great fight continued for a whole days space, suffered a great
destruction at the village of Bartoschowitz, near Fulnek; and indeed with
other success then could be expected; for the weaker part overcame the
stronger, some thousands of the Crows being fastened in the Dawes-bills, fell
and perished, without the ruin of scarce any of the Dawes. The Countrymen
also running to behold this spectacle, filled their sackes with Crows.

8. In the year 1626. at Prague it rained Brimstone, and not long after the
Image of the Crucifixe set up at Waltave-bridge, was smitten and thrown down
by a Thunderbolt. In the same place Kutterberg-gate opened of its own accord,
the post being removed for two or three nights, to the great astonishment of
the Watchmen; which they were forced to aver upon oath. The like wonder was
seen at Prostanne in the City of Lichtensteinium.

9. It cannot be deservedly spunged out of the catalogue of miracles, that
which we know happened to the Bibles at Zatek, in that they could not be
burned. For when in the year 1630 the Books long before carried out of that
City, by the joint authority of the Magistrates, were condemned and sentenced
unto the fire by the Commissaries, and kindled with wood-stacks piled in order
without the walls, upon an hill near the watercourse: the sacred Bibles of
Simeon Swoboda (all other books being consumed) suffered the flames without
harm (saving only that their margins were somewhat singed) as also an other
book of Ecclesiastical Psalms, of an old Edition, both whereof are preserved
for a memorial by the Exuls of Zateck, at Friburg.

10. God also the revenger of wickedness, did sometimes put forth a sign of
wrath and indignation against some in the very act of their villainies. Many
Apostates, driven and tormented by the sting of conscience, cried out, that
they were damned; others not suffering the torment of conscience, did hang or
drown themselves. And amongst others that exceeding rich Merchant at Prague,
Hans de White, John Campan the famous Poet (who after he had changed his
religion) thus said to his wife, this day salvation is come to our house:
whereto she answered, this day a curse is brought into our house. he ended his
life in despair. Daniel Basil professor in the University of Prague, was
surprised with sudden death. John Chytraeus Pastor at Slawkowia, in Moravia, as
he was ready to recant and abjure the Doctrine of the Gospel in the Church,
he was struck dumb: and from thence was carried home, being possessed with
an horrible trembling all over, and gnawing his tongue, at last, he died of
unknown griefs.

11. Doctor Daniel Knapper, a public professor of injuries against the
Gospellers (under pretense of justice and right) was slain by the suborning of
his wife, an Adulterer, who afterward was hanged and perished. Thomas Hrich
was created Consul at Rokysan, for his example of Apostasy given to others: but
within one year after (upon Michaelmas-day) as the other Dragon, the hater and
accuser of the Brethren, being cast down from off the Throne of pride, he
vomited up his ungodly soul with blood.

12. Adam Primate of Suffick, promoted the business of universal Apostasy with
such fury in his Country, that (without all respect unto Consanguinity) he gave
out with great boasting, That if his Father should rise again, he would not
spare him: this wretch (by the just judgment of God) fell mad, and flying up
unto the highest rafters of his house, from thence he cast himself down; and
roaring fearfully, he tossed himself restlesly. When his Stepmother running
to him, put him in mind of his sin, saying, O my Adam, remember what thou have
done: give glory to God, speak, pray. He only drawing his mouth aside, and
putting out his tongue, in an astonishing manner, breathed out his last.

13. Florianus Libochovius, the Governor of the Horazdovian Dominion, a
perverse Apostate, a betrayer of the Citizens, shot himself to death with a
pistol bullet. Hodina, a Citizen of Czaslavia, but a man of great unconstancy,
induced with hope either of reward or dignity, did show himself so eager in
slaying Zisca (continually raging with his virulent and malicious tongue,
against the deceased Nobleman) that within a few days after, he breathed his
last; either being broken with the sedulous attempt, or else perishing by a
peculiar vengeance.

13. A certain novice Churchwarden, very wicked and audacious in defacing the
Churches of Litomerzicium, dug out the bottom of a stone Chalice, above
Lawrence-house-gate, shortly after he fell into a sharp disease. For accusing
himself of wickedness, he tore his clothes from off his body, pulled off his
hair, not suffering his wife or any other to come near him, although for
horror and stink none could come to him. At length after that he had belched
up an incredible torrent of blood, through his wicked throat, he was choked by
his own blood, being an utter enemy to the blood of Christ. When this was known
to the whole City, there was no man (no not the Mason) though of the Popes
faction, (being terrified with this fresh example) which would so much as touch
the marble Chalice, all gilded over found in the entrance of the other Church
of Al-souls, (laid up in the wall of the larger Tower) in the year 1485. and
afterward trimmed up, which also was adorned with this inscription, Veritas
vincit. Truth at last triumphs. They therefore brought in a Malefactor, whom
they called out of prison: and gave him promise to set him at liberty, and give
him his life, if he would take the Chalice out of the wall, and break it in
pieces. This he did for the reward of his life: but a few days after, he was
re-taken at Austium, and racked by a wheel.

15. Tobias Konig, Consul of Trutnovia, a cruel Apostate, and tormentor of the
faithful, which adhered constantly to their Religion, in the year 1629. being
taken with a sudden disease, and waxing as black as a coal, uttered his speech
like the barking of a dog: and so being made a spectacle for the space of three
days did vomit up his soul with terrible anguish.

16. George Kanasz, Prefect of the Dominions of the Prince of Lichtenstein in
Moravia: when as the day before Christ-^ide (in the year 1627) staying with
Jesuits in the Prostan court the whole day, he had brought many of the
citizens into Apostasy (he indeed at that time not professing it, but was
induced by the promise of a thousand crowns, to whip his fellow Brethren) and
had sent the rest into prison: after a most delicate Supper, he returned in the
middle of the night, unto the Tower of Plumlovia (being one mile distant from
the city) and having well drunk, he slept soundly. But because he had commanded
that they should raise him for to celebrate the night service, to the end he
might triumph for the executing of so ^are an act. It came to pass (according
to his wives after-relation) that he often started and awakened himself out of
his sleep, supposing that he heard the ringing of bells in some other place. At
length fearing to be prevented, he arose, and made have to the walls of the
Tower, and commanded the Engineer to discharge seven Canons, and the eighth he
would dispatch himself; he therefore took the Perch, and gave fire. But oh the
terrible judgment of God! the Gun brake asunder, and the splinters retorted
upon him, which tore both his legs, both his thighs, the one arm, the one
side, and in fine, took away the skull of his head. This was the reward which
this unhappy man received from divine vengeance, for his treachery and tyranny.
But the miracle was the greater, for that none of the standers by (being
fourteen in number) were hurt, or so much as touched, excepting only a
certain old hunter, whom he thrust out by force beyond the Bulwark, to be
received by the Guns, if they had fallen into the bottom: but his girdle
sticking upon a pale which was set in hurdles for a protecting basket filled
with earth) did preserve him from falling, until shouting out for help, he was
drawn up and saved by those which were there present. This he afterward
related to the Prince, and obtained a privilege, that he should not be
compelled to forsake his Religion. Surely this was an evident example of divine
vengeance: yet notwithstanding, blind men attributed this, even as all others,
not to divine appointment, but to blind chance.

17. George of Machod, Auditor and Patron of the Brethren in Moravia from his
youth, afterward (from a Nobleman being made a Count) he became a most
perverse Apostate (who buried holy Bibles in stinking channels, as we have
noted in the chapter immediately preceding) and was punished by God after a
miraculous manner, with a terrible disease in his throat, whereby his tongue
putrified, and many holes were eaten out below his chin: so that whatsoever
nourishment or medicines entered into his mouth, did either straightway flow
forth, or distilled out by little and little. All remedies therefore being used
in vain, after his suffering cruel torments about two months space, he
breathed out his soul, which was most unsteadfast, and sold to Antichrist, for
the smoke of honor.

18. At Niclaspurg in the Tower of Cardinal Ditrichsteinius and Governor of
Moravia, (in the year 1626) a shrill voice was heard two hours before day,
doubling, Woe, Woe, Woe. Many raised by this voice (the Secretaries arose at that
time to their businesses) and astonished with the noise, heard this voice four
times. And because the voice seemed to sound from under the house tops, they
went up with lights for to know the matter: they then heard the same words
abundantly repeated, sometimes in Dutch, Weh, Weh, Weh, other times in the
Bohemian language, Beda, Beda, Beda: but so as those that stood in one corner
heard the same things sounding from an opposite place: when they went thither,
from another part; so that it seemed altogether prodigious. This truly happened
and was done for three nights together, as is manifest by the Testimonies of
eminent men, who themselves were then present, and became Auditors thereof
(amongst whom was John Wodiz. by a noble Lawyer.) The like voice was heard at
Wienna as recorded in a public writing.

19. Nor is it unknown, how that in these times certain persons as in trances,
declared in diverse places by hidden revelation what horrible punishments should
attend the Tyrants and persecutors. Amongst whom was Christina Ponitovia, a
Bohemian virgin, whose visions writ with her own hand, and translated verbatim
into Dutch, are now extant in print, she being commanded by him that revealed
the things unto her, writ also to Walsteinius the Prince, certain dehortatory
letters, not to persecute the faithful under pain of temporal and eternal
destruction; she sent them also to Gizinia, delivered them into the hands of
the Princess, to the great astonishment of her and Gynecius her chief usher,
she falling into an ecstasy at the same time in their sight. The letters before
they were delivered to the Prince, were opened and read by Jesuits, who
laughed at them as a Piccardy fiction; so also the Prince seemed to interpret
them. For he smiling, said, that his Lord the King had received letters from
Madrid, Constantinople, Rome, etc. but he from Heaven. But he found how meet
it was to jest with holy things: in a short time after he died miserably of
that kind of death which Christina had foreseen and foretold, though indeed he
promoted the oppression of the Confessors of the truth, his conscience
regretting as is well known only to gratify and please those about him,

20. The Lord many times smote Ferdinand himself with diverse plagues, for
perversely hardening himself against Gods people. For first of all he stirred
up enemies successively against him, which grievously tired him with Wars.
Yet his Baal-Priests, interpreted this, as desired occasions of continuing the
victory and trampling the heretics on every side: notwithstanding, they often
perceived into what streights they were brought not without hazard of their
overthrow: yet because all this did but contribute to harden them, the more
they returned again to their wonted course.

21. For shortly after the execution at Prague the Emperors Army was routed by
Bethlemius in Hungary: where Bukwoy himself, a rare General, was slain. Not
long after the confiscation, where the Goods of very many Gospellers were set
to sale, in the year 1623. all the Emperors Army was again reduced to such
extremity at Hodoninum in Moravia, that all was given for lost; had not the
Count of Black-Mount embraced conditions of peace in the Emperors behalf,
which were so low and base, as that he let not to kiss Bethlemius his feet.
Afterward the Subjects of Austria the lower, Rebelled, and much increased
their extremity, This likewise is very memorable: the same day, whereupon the
first proscription of the Citizens of Prague was published (July the 12. 1627.)
the Lord afflicted Italy by an horrible Earthquake, whereby many Towns and
Villages with many thousands of men were swallowed up.

22. In the interim God struck the first born of these Egyptians, these
principal men dying (to wit) Pope Paul the 5. and Gregory the 14. Philip the 3,
King of Spain, also Charles Albertus, and John Charles Duke of Austria, the
Emperor Ferdinands brother, his uncle, his son, and some others.

22. At last (when not only Bohemia but also all Germany was full of
Prodigies, and yet these enemies did not cease to bring all things into
confusion, and to fill all places with their Tyranny and impiety God stirred up
a Northern Whirlwind, which, to this day shakes the Walls of this wicked
Babylon.

24. To whom that Gods word might the more appear, even France it self
(although professing the Roman-Religion) not enduring any longer to behold this
daily Tyranny every day increasing and the growth of the Emperor, brought about
by the ruins and oppressions of other Kingdoms, join counsels and strength
of which passages God only knows the issue, for the present we observe the
just judgment of God who knows the Nations that deal at War, and to those that
spill the blood of his Saints, he can give them blood to drink, as he has
threatened in the 68 Psalm. 34. Revel. 16.5.6.

CHAP. CVII. Concerning the remainder of the faithful in Bohemia after all
this persecution.
I. SO soon as the Popes sword began to prevail, there were found some learned
Doctors of the Church who did publicly and privately, by their Sermons and
writings, admonish and strengthen the hearts of the people, against those
tempests of persecution which they apprehended coming, but because God scarce
at any time makes his way through the storms and whirle-winds (Nah 1.3.) but
at the sight of his wrath, the very mountains are covered and the rocks are
dashed in pieces (1. King 19.11.) so likewise it happened here, that some of
the Pillars of the Bohemians were overthrown, to wit the greatest part of the
Nobility and some part of the Ministry with the General ruin of all the
people whereupon they rejoiced and were glad, who spoiled the inheritance of
the Lord, because ye were glad because ye rejoiced O ye destroyers of mine
inheritance, because ye are grown sat as the Heifer at grass, and bellow as
bulls. But how the Glory of God and man's salvation was promoted by this is not
known, nor can sufficiently be lamented.

2. For because in so great a number of Apostates from the Gospel, there were
scarce any who were persuaded within themselves that way which they were
commanded to follow, was the true way of salvation, but merely out of the fear
of men, or else to please men, or some other blind and brutish inclination,
most of them follows the example of the rest, and offered violence to their
consciences, and so forsook the truth; what can we determine otherwise
concerning the whole root then to say with the Prophet (Isaiah 1.4.) a sinful
nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers, children that are
corrupters, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the holy one of
Israel unto anger, they are gone backward.

3. Truly you have done very praise worthy, and you deserve very large
trophies, you soul deceivers, you have made a company of Epicurians, who love
their flesh pots, and who would return again into the bondage, of Egypt for
their cucumbers, and onions, and Garlic, yea, and you have imprinted the seeds
of Athism in the hearts of men, most men now believe in nothing at all, and
least any thing should bite their consciences, stupefied by your opinion, they
desire that all worship of God might be taken away. But to speak more mildly,
what gain is it that you should force men thus to lie. Do you believe that all
those whom you have compelled to profess your Catholic Religion, are really
yours? Pray take away from one part, your gold and your temptations, from the
other your swords, your racks, and other instruments of cruelty, and restore
liberty of conscience, and you shall presently see, how seriously they have
embraced your religion, if therefore he be a false friend who loves another
man's estate, and not his person, why are you so foolish as to please your
selves in the thoughts of those men, who either out of flattery, or else
through force, seem to comply with your present prosperous estate? The
Babylonian pride induces you, that men should be either enticed or forced by
any means, to worship this your golden Image of the people, and that all
nations and tongues should fall down before the sound of your pipe, your harp,
and of your violl, and of all other musical instruments. Whilst you
intoxicated with the wind of fornication, may securely and jocondly dance
amongst the great number of spectators and beholders. But our comfort is we
know the time is coming, wherein the Lord will make the sound of the harp, and
of music to cease in thee O Babylon. Rev. 18.22.

4. Yet there was something good in these men's madness, as it was ordered by
the wisdom of him, in whose hands all Tyrants are but as a Fan, to cleanse
the grain of his Church: for by this means the chafe was separated from the
wheat, and the dross from the gold, that now it might appear who loved Christ,
and all hypocrites might be discovered. We certainly have seen, as in a glass,
something which does presage that which the Lord foretold should come to pass
when he comes, That there should be two in one bed, one should be taken, the
other should be left: two in one Mill, the one taken, the other left. Here it
was apparent what was the strength of them that truly love God, and what was
the weakness of them that dissemble godliness. For I will not reckon up what
friends were separated from their friends, what kinsfolk from their kinsfolk,
parents from their children, children from their parents, brother and sister
one from another: yea, some wives, their husbands not enduring the trial of the
Cross, was separated and disjoined: some husbands are banished, whose wives
could not be persuaded to forsake all for Christ: there are some women, who
that they might profess their faith in Christ, have forsaken their husbands for
their Apostasy. Thy judgments (O Lord) are very deep. Psam. 36.

5. But what shall we do with those that they had seduced, whom the fear of
this burning Babylonian furnace, had forced to fall down, and worship this
Antichristian Idol? We must do as Paul did, who was much in sorrow, and was
grieved at the heart for the Brethren, who carried themselves so, as to become
forsakers of God: and we may hope, that Gods mercy will not be wanting to his
Elect, in bringing them into the ways of repentance. But because God is a just
Judge, and has assigned a portion to the fearful and liars in a lake of fire
and brimstone. [Rev. 21.8.] Now what will become of those hypocrites, who deny
that with their mouths, that which they believe in their hearts; but fearful,
and lies in the sight of God. God has denounced the cup of his eternal wrath
to all those who have taken the mark of the Beast, either upon their forehead
or on their hands, that is, have joined themselves to the Beast, either by
their profession, or by their works. Rev. 14 9. It is most certain, that these
are in a more dangerous state than many will believe, Since it is scarce
possible, that those who have been once enlightened, and tasted of the heavenly
gift, and have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have savoured of the
good word of God, and the power of the world to come, if they fall away, to be
restored to repentance: Heb. 6.4, 6. Be not deceived, God will not be mocked:
Gal. 6.7.

6. But since this is the condition of our country in general, we may cry out
with the Prophet, Unless the Lord had left us a very small remnant, we should
have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorra, Isa. 1.9. by
whom the field of Gods Church in Bohemia being planted again, might yield an
acceptable harvest to God: for there were many went away, who had rather cleave
to Gods Worship, than to flatter Jeroboam, and by their filthy Idols break
their Covenant with God, and of these there are above twelve thousand.

7. Among the Nobility and Knights, in the year 1630. according to compute
calculated as exactly as could be, there were found in banishment, 185
families, which had gone out out of Bohemia, and each family 1.2.3.10.20. yea,
there were found unto 50. male persons, as in the families of Caplirzor,
Gerstoref, and Keblor.

8. And by Gods mercy, there was a good part of the Ministry found (but I do
not know how to give you a just account of them) among all the brethren, I am
certain, that about 200, who were alive in the year 1620, in Bohemia, and in
Moravia, there were alive about 96, the rest, in the space of 10 years, either
by sword or pestilence, or diseases contracted by frights, and cold, or famine,
or prison had destroyed.

9. The townsmen and tradesmen of Cities and towns, went away, in some places
more, in some places fewer: yea, among the very Countrymen, and Husbandmen
there were not a few, who followed the rest, and forsook the Country.

10. The greatest part placed the seat of their abode in their absence from
their Country, in the Duke of Saxonies Dominions in Misnia, in Lusalia, in
Voitland, and there was not a small number, that betook themselves to the
protection of the Duke of Calumbac, and the Marquis of Berruteis; some betook
themselves in Marquis Brandenburgs Country, yea, even into Holland it self.

11. They that went into Poland, found for their friend, the most Illustrious
Count Belzensis, the Lord Ralph Count de Lossnia, who in their Dominions of
Lossnia, Wlodavia and Baronavia, friendly entertained above 1000, and protected
them from the cruelty of their Enemies. The towns Ostrorog, Roki, (under the
government of the most Illustrious, the Counties of Ostrorog, and the most
Potent Lord Nicolas Ray of Naglowitz's) as also Kobillium, under the Lord
Abraham Szenintaw; and last of all, Thorunium, an Empire City of Borussia, was
a receptacle to very many, to whom the most Illustrious Prince, Christopher
Rodzivillius, behaved himself very bountifully, in relieving the misery of
their banishment, as also other pious people, whose hearts the Lord stirred up.

12. In Hungaria the Lord stirred up the heart of the most illustrous George
Rakozius now Prince of Transylvania, to make his Dominions of Puchovia and
Ladneseus as a sanctuary to the banished, whether also some went from it self,
as also to the Dominions of Count Trurion, Count Eleshazius, the Lord Revius
and others.

13. In Silesia under the Government of the Emperor God strengthened the heart
of John Christian Duke of Briggs, that he durst rather obey God than men, who
entertained in his Duchy many of the banished Bohemians and Moravians, to whom,
as also to the rest under the heat of the day: Isajah 16.3.4.5. Take counsel,
execute judgment, make thy shadow as the night, in the midst of the noon day,
hide not the outcasts, bewray not him that wandereth, let mine outcasts dwell
with thee, Moab be thou a covert to them from the spoiler, etc.

14. Besides those before named, who shunned Apostasy by their banishment, In
very Bohemia it self, and Moravia, ihe midst of these abominations, God
reserved to himself more than 7000, who did not bow their knees to Baal, nor
kissed him with their mouth. I do not mean Infants, who cannot distinguish
between their right hand and their left: but men of growth, who in many places,
under moderate Governors, did not undergo such a bitter persecution as the
other, but kept constantly in the faith: as for example, many in the Dukedom
of Fridland, in the County of Westineus, of which we spoke before, under the
Barons of Zerotin and Waldstein, and some others, who suffered not their
Subjects to be so tormented. But let no godly man envy this their happiness:
for all things are done by his disposing, who said, Jesus said unto him, If I
will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me.

15. Finally, we know many of those who Apostatised do with Peter, bitterly
bewail their fall, and do testify it by their letters to their ejected
Ministers, yea and some of them that have the benefit of Ministers, and a
Ministry, have reunited themselves, unto the Church; others with great desire
and anxiety of heart, do wait for the time of their freedom, ready upon the
least occasion to be reconciled to God and the Church; and therefore more
fervently then the rest they do implore Gods mercy, and they do importune
heaven with their tears and sighs mitigating their losses with a resolute
hope, and expecting the Lord to come with succor to them.

16. Thou therefore O our God look upon us miserable creatures, whom thou have
so humbled by afflictions, that the shadow of death covers us, who for thy sake
are put to death every day, and are carried as sheep to the slaughter. Awake O
Lord why sleep thou? do not cast us off for ever? why do thou turn away
thy face, and forget our affliction and oppressions? for our life is brought
down to the dust, and our belly cleaves to the ground. Arise O Lord, help us
and deliver us for thy name sake. Psalm. 44.21. etc. Israel is a scattered
sheep, the Lions have driven him away. First the King of Assyria, has devoured
him. Return O Lord, and be reconciled unto thy servants, satisfy us right early
with thy goodness, and we will be glad and rejoice all our days; comfort us
according to the days where in thou have afflicted us, and for the years
wherein we have seen evil. Let thy work appear unto thy servants and thy
glory unto their children (Psalm. 90.14.) Amen, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

