THE Commissioners last Desires to the King, FOR THE Settling of Religion WITH
His Majesty's Answer delivered on Saturday last. And his Majesty's Engagement
to a positive Answer on Monday October 9. 1648.

With some other Overtures between the King and the Commissioners.

depiction of enthroned king with orb and scepter

Printed for the general satisfaction of moderate men.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown and flanked by
the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish unicorn and
thistle on the other
A LETTER FROM The ISLE of WIGHT Concerning the TREATY
Sir,
THE Commissioners presented to the King, the desires enclosed for settling of
Religion, desiring his Majesty to pass them. There has been great arguing
about them on both sides, some of the particulars whereof I have formerly given
you.

In sum, his Majesty has strove much for the Bishops, and (I hope) has
received satisfaction therein.

The greatest matter herein, seems (now) to be about the taking of the
Covenant, wherein much has been said to satisfy his Majesty.

And His Majesty has now promised to deliver in His Positive Answer on Monday
next, by nine of the Clock.

If we were but got over this rub, I believe there would not be such another
in all the rest.

I am persuaded that the Bishops, and Doctors being about his Majesty, has
caused this long dispute, about the Church: for they are very loath to have
their Diana go down.

Sir Peter Killigrew stays here ready to come away on Sunday, if his Majesty
give a satisfactory Answer.

If His Majesty give us but a good Answer on Monday, I hope (yet) that there
will be a good conclusion of all, to an happy peace.

Newport 7 October, 1648.
THE Commissioners Desires presented to the Kings Majesty.
THat your Majesty, according to the laudable example of your Royal Father of
happy memory, may be pleased to swear and sign the late Solemn League and
Covenant; And that an Act of Parliament be passed, for enjoining the taking
thereof by all the Subjects of the Kingdom; And the Ordinances concerning the
manner of taking the same, be confirmed by Acts of Parliament, with such
penalties as by mutual advice of Parliament shall be agreed upon.

That a Bill be passed for the utter abolishing and taking away of all
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, and Comissaries, Deanes, and
Sub-Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Archdeacons, Cannons, and Prebendaries; and
all Chaunters, Chancellors, Treasurers, Sub-Treasurers, and Succentors, and
Sacrists, and all Vicars Chorill, and Choresters, old Vicars, and new Vicars of
any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, and all other their under Officers, out of
the Church of England and Dominion of Wales; And out of the Church of Ireland.

That the Ordinances concerning the calling and sitting of the Assembly of
Divines, be confirmed by Act of Parliament.

That Reformation of Religion according to the Covenant, be settled by Act of
Parliament, in such manner as both Houses have agreed, or shall agree upon,
after consultation had with the Assembly of Divines.

That for the more effectual disableing Jesuits, Priests, Papists, and Popish
Recusants from disturbing the State, and deluding the Laws; and for the better
discovering, and speedy conviction of Popish Recusants, an Oath be established
by Act of Parliament to be administered to them, wherein they abjure and
renounce the Popes Supremacy, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
Worshipping of the Consecrated Host, Crucifixes and Images, and all Popish
Superstitions and Errors; and refusing the said Oath, being tendered in such
manner as shall be appointed by the said Act, to be a sufficient Conviction of
Popish Recusancy.

An Act or Acts of Parliament for education of the Children of Papists by
Protestants, in the Protestant Religion.

An Act or Acts for the true Leavie of the Penalties against them, which
penalties to be leavied and disposed in such manner as both Houses shall agree
on, wherein to be provided that His Majesty shall have no loss.

That an Act or Acts be passed in Parliament, whereby the practices of Papists
against the State may be prevented, and the Laws against them duly executed,
and a stricter course taken for to prevent the Saying or Hearing of Mass in
the Court, or any other part of this Kingdom, or the Kingdom of Ireland.

FINIS.

