A CONTINVATION Of our weekly INTELLIGENCE From His Majesty's Army. Dated
September. 12.

Printed, September 16. 1642.

Northampton, Septem. 12. My good Friend,
I Sent fuller, but it was intercepted in the way; In brief, the King wants
money, the pay is nothing but Dollars, the town is forced to take that for 6.
s. which is not worth 5. s. besides the King called the Gentry of that Shire
together, to desire of them 500. li. a relic of Ship Money left in the then
high Sheriffs hands, the beginning of Parliament, the middle-sized Gentry,
though they made appearance, were not called up, did not give their consent
(being discontented) however the 500. li was taken; many of the Kings servants
go away for want of pay; for Ordnance there is no more noise of any, only I
hear an inckling, as if they were making some Iron ones: for foot they have
some more: The King desired to see them complete, there were of them nigh
3000. men and boys, but not above half armed, and 80. of them were hired for
i. s. a man for a day, and to mend the matter, to deceive to the full, they
gave up in a List to the King 5000. The Parliament Army disquiets Nottingham,
and so they are resolved to go further off, to Darby first, and then Westward,
or perhaps Northwest too therfrom, I do believe it is yet to be resolved, it is
sure two pieces of Ordnance went to Darby on Wendsday last, some Arms and
Ammunition, on Saturday it was exspected more should go, and this day the King
was to go, whether to return, it is not yet resolved, but its most probable
they will leave Nottingham, they threaten to pillage it before they take their
leaves, and some Rascals talk of worse, but sure they dare not do it. The
King summoned the trained bands of Nottingham shire, the appearance was thin,
they told him, he never received so much loyalty and affection from any County;
and though he called them to appear in person with their Arms, yet because of
Harvest, and because of their Wives and Children, it should suffice to send him
their Arms, and in the Word of a King to return them when he had settled His
Kingdom in peace: They cried out, They would go with him: However their Arms
were commanded to the Castle for that night, and next morning they were forced
to return disarmed; so they served Leicester shire: I guess, his Councels
vary, and did he know how to bestow His Ordnance, he would be altogether in a
flying posture, and turn his Foot into Dragooneers, which yet he may do, if
Foot come in no faster; they will incline Westward, or Northwest, and in the
way, get up what Arms they can, by speeches, and perforce. Darby was forced to
resign some, that Shire is righter then most: we get nothing in the Counties
by this deliberation, and I find, if they were not seeing people, they would
to the Cavaliers, as Nottingham, and such Towns, when promises have been made
in vain.

Here are Letters come this day from Scotland, that tells us of a defeat given
by General Lesly to 4000. Irish, who had raised a Fort near Charlmount, which
he beat them from, notwithstanding it was a great advantage to them, and was
maintained with indifferent courage, he went not forward against Charlemount
for want of Ordnance: The Letters speak likewise of the resembling of the
Counsel of Scotland, which will be the 21. of this instant, at which time most
believe here, somewhat will be agreed for the furthering the peace of England:
Here is Letters also, that 5000. Arms are come to Newcastle for His Majesty:
Here are diverse dangerous Books come, Printed at London, I wonder no more care
is taken, some of them are enough to put the world into a combustion.

Hence is dispatched a third Message to the House, you will see large
expressions for the defense of the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and of
the true Protestant Religion: Sir, the Kings Majesty has not a Subject that
wishes him more happiness than my self, nor is willinger to believe he means
as he says, but when I consider what I have heard my Lord Keeper Coventry
often say in Star Chamber, That his Majesty had commanded him to say, that he
would lose his life rather then leave his Religion, and yet all those times
none were in favor about him for the transacting his affairs, but such as
were agents for Spain and Rome, and none were preferred, but such as were
Popish, and done somewhat by way of Innovation: And likewise for Laws the like
Declarations have been made, and yet nothing has been countenanced but that
which was destructive to the Law: and now Sir, the principal transactors of
his Majesty's affairs, and that Byas him, are such as are Popish, and enemies
to Laws and Lawmakers: I shall leave the application to your self, and
conclude with this secret; Here is much whispering of Massacring the Puritan
party, yea, some great ones have put it forward with much violence, but others
have rejected it, not as barbarous, but as not advantageous to his Majesty's
designs, things standing as they do.

FINIS.

