CONSCIENCE PUZZEL'D, ABOUT Subscribing the New Engagement; in the Solution of
this Quaere: Whether a man that has taken the Oaths of Allegiance, and
Supremacy, the Protestation and Covenant, may, upon the alteration of the
Government from a Monarchy into a Free State, subscribe this ensuing
Engagement? I A. B. declare, and promise to be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth of ENGLAND, as it is now established without King and House of
Lords.

Zach. 8. 17. Love no false Oath: for this is a thing that I hate, says the
Lord.

Romans 14. 22, 23. Happy is he that condemns not himself in that thing which
he allows.

And he that doubts, is damned if he eat.

Printed in the Year, 1656.

I A. B. declare and promise, That I will be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth of England, as it is now established without King, and House of
Lords.
The Question is, Whether a man that has taken the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, the Protestation, and Covenant, may upon the alteration of the
Government from a Monarchy into a Free State, subscribe this Engagement.

Premise.

THere is no doubt, but unengaged men may: All Governments being of themselves
equally lawful. And, were we upon the point of choosing a Government, we know
no reason to compel us to pitch upon a Monarchy more then a Commonwealth. And
(whatever may be said in Law for the childs virtuall obligation to the Oaths
of this nature, wherein his father was personally engaged) we see no reason in
Divinity, but our children, who never were engaged by the Oaths, Protestation,
and Covenant abovementioned may (when they shall come to years of discretion)
oblige themselves either by promise, or oath of fealty unto this Government.

But the Question is concerning Engaged men: (as all, but a very few, of those,
who are liable to this Subscription, are.)

Answer to this may be made in the affirmative, upon two Concessions.

First, if the words of the Engagement import nothing contrary to those Oaths,
Protestation and Covenant.

2ly, If (upon supposition that they do import something contrary to those
Oaths, etc.) it may be made good unto us, that the obligation of our former
Oaths, etc. does cease upon this new Establishment.



Commonwealth be meant the whole company of men and women, both of higher and
lower rank, contained within the bounds and territories of these Dominions. So
we were wont to call the Commonwealth in the time of Monarchy, unless when we
took it for the Civil State, as contra-distinct unto the Ecclesiastical. And,
if it have that large signification here, and if the words (as it is now
established) be to be understood adversative, and not reduplicative, and so
bind us to be faithful to the Commonwealth (in this sense) Licet stabilitae,
and not qua stabilitae absque Domino Regis, etc. it will be nothing contrary to
our Oaths and Covenants to subscribe thereunto. For unto the Commonwealth (in
this sense) we must be faithful, whatsoever Government it be under. And he
that will not be true and faithful to this Commonwealth, now it is without
King and House of Lords, was never (conscientiously) faithful to it, when it
was subject to a King, and House of Lords.

And we are somewhat inclined to think, that this may be the meaning. Because
not only all of lower rank, but also all of superior rank (as the Speaker, and
the House of Commons, the Lord President, and the Council of State, the Lord
General, and Council of War, etc.) are enjoined to subscribe. If they (or any
of them) be the Commonwealth here meant; we somewhat strange at the
Injunction. Our Kings were never wont to swear fealty to themselves, or
Monarchy. If it may be declared that the words are intended in the sense above
specified, we believe the Engagement cannot want Subscribers. But,

(Common wealth of England) be taken for a certain State of Government, as it
stands contra-distinct to Monarchy (as it is generally conceived they are) then
(without perjury) engaged men cannot subscribe thereunto, unless they fetch
some help from the exposition of the words, True and faithful.

(True and faithful) be to be understood only negatively, and oblige a man
only, not to be false, or treacherous to, or turbulent in the Commonwealth:
we conceive, that a pre-ingaged man may (with a safe conscience) subscribe to
this present Engagement. Insomuch as whatsoever we were formerly engaged unto
was to be compassed by all lawful ways and means, by every man in his
vocation and calling. But for any private man by treachery or turbulency,
raising tumults and factions to disquiet the present peace (though it be to the
attainment of those ends whereunto he was pre-ingaged) is to do evil that good
may come thereby, out of his calling and vocation to act for a public good,
which no man (without an immediate call from heaven) has warrant to do. So
that, if it be declared that no more is intended by the words, then what may be
comprehended in the negative sense of them, we shall not refuse to subscribe
the Engagement, though it be to a Commonwealth, as it stands contra-distinct
to Monarchy.

(true and faithful) be to be understood positively (yet in a strict sense) so
as to oblige us to submit and yield obedience to this State of government in
licitis, honestis and necessariis, we may (notwithstanding our former Oaths)
subscribe thereunto. For, as for those things that come within the number of
necessaria, necessary duties to be performed to God, we are obliged unto them,
though we were never enjoined them by men, whose command puts a tie upon us, as
subjects, but such as is of inferior nature to the tie which Gods command puts
upon us, as creatures and Christians. And though we obey not the Command
(merely) for the Civil Sanctions sake; yet we hold our selves bound to
reverence the Civil Sanction so much the more for the Commands sake. And as
for those things which come within the number of licita and honesta, things
lawful and honest, though not necessary, we count our selves obliged to the
performance of them for the Commands sake (merely.) Uncommanded, we may neglect
them, because not necessary: but commanded, we shall not refuse to observe them,
because lawful. But we trust (in the mean while) that none will be so
irrational, as to bring that yoke upon us, which neither we nor our fathers
were ever able to bear: viz: to enslave us to the performance of mere
indifferent things, as necessary duties, where the performance of them does not
necessarily argue us good subjects, or good Christians. But,

(true and faithful) be to be understood positively, and in a large sense, so
as to oblige us to assist, and defend with our lives and fortunes the present
Establishment, against all whatsoever (though it be the Parliament of England
it self) that shall (hereafter) endeavor by lawful means to introduce a
Monarchy, or any other State of Government in this Nation; we humbly conceive
that (without perjurious forcing of our Consciences) we cannot subscribe
hereunto. For this is expressly against the words of our former Obligations,
wherein we are bound with our lives, power, and estates, to maintain and defend
the power and Prot: May 5. 1641.
privileges of Parliament. And this were to pawn our souls to oppose a lawful
Government in doing a lawful thing.

Quaere.

viz: such as concerned the person of our late King, etc. God has disobliged
us from such: and our hands are upon our mouths, because God has done it.

schism, profaneness, etc. as may be seen in the particulars of those Oaths,
Covenant, and Protestation. Some of which seem to cross the very intention of
this present Engagement, as that particular of our swearing, to bear faith and
true allegiance to the Kings Heirs, and lawful Successors, etc. Unto such
things as these, we are still bound, if there be not sufficient reason alleged
for our disobligation to those Oaths, by virtue of the present Establishment.

Now we conceive there may be three grounds, whereupon a people may hold
themselves dis-obliged from their Oaths to former governments, upon the
succession.

First, If those Oaths were vincula iniquitatis, (i. e.) if they did oblige men
unto any Government that is of it self unlawful, and contrariant to the rule
of Gods Word. When Monarchy shall be made good to us to be so, we shall not
refuse to engage against it.

2ly, In case the alteration be made by such, who, by the fundamental Laws of
the Land, have the power of making such alteration. Which power, by the Statute
of 13 Eliz: is expressly conferred upon the three Estates in Parliament. If this
alteration come to us with such an Authority, we hold our selves disobliged
from our Oaths to all former Establishments, and are ready to subscribe.

power must needs cease, because the power it self is ceased.

This Case if it be ours, and it be declared, avowed, and owned that we are a
conquered Nation; We are ready to make the best conditions we can for our
selves. And the former power (under the shadow whereof we breathed) being
vanished, whilst we cry Quarter, and look for protection from the succeeding
Power, we declare, and promise that we will be true and faithful thereunto in
all things, whereby we may not draw upon our selves the guilt of disobedience
unto God.

FINIS.

