ARTICLES AGREED By the Duke D'ANGVJEN, Lieutenant General of the Kings ARMY
in Flanders and Luxenburgh, to the Marquess De Leden, for the rendition of
Dunkirke, and Fort Leon, to the obedience of the King of FRANCE.

ALSO, A Letter from Chester; containing the surrender of DENBIGH-CASTLE in
North Wales; to be agreed, to be delivered to Major General Mitton.

And the last News from Ireland.

OCTOBER. the 19. 1646.

These Papers are examined, and published according to Order of Parliament.

London Printed by E. E. 16461

THE COPY OF A LETTER FROM The City of Chester.
SIR
FOR the Rebels proceedings in Ireland, we hear little since the last only
that they increase, and that a Siege is feared at Dublin, to prevent which,
great preparations are made, and care taken to mend the works and take in such
supplies as is needful; Digby is gone to Water ford, to treat with the Popes
Nuntio: intending from thence to pass beyond Sea, probably to act their
designs; we hear that they are glad there that he is gone out of the City;
it being said, that had he not come thither (by all likelihood) there had been
an agreement between the Parliament, and the Marquess of Ormond before this.

For news here in Northwales it is thus, Major General Mitton has had a
possible denial at Conoway castle, and has given order to prepare to batter
it. Farlish castle will stand or fall with the other 3. it being more
considerable, by reason of those within it, then of the place it self.

The Major General after a long capitulation with Salisbury, the Governor of
Denbigh castle, has agreed to have it surrendered to him.

I hear that there are in Denbigh castle, of Denbigh only one piece of Canon,
which was made in the castle since they kept it against the Parliament, and but
few Arms, nor any great store of provision. There is with Mr. Salisbury, sir
Will. Gerhard, and some 20 Officers, or thereabouts, and about 2 or 300
soldiers, but few horse. The particulars you shall receive more fully by the
first opportunity (God willing.) Holt castle is parlying, and there is hopes of
the rendition of it also, but no conclusion as yet. On Friday next we are to
choose Officers for this city, (God grant that we have good ones.)

Sir, This is all at this present, to trouble you, from

Chester October. 4. 1646. Your very humble servant E, A.

Articles agreed by Monsier, the Duke of Anguien, Lieutenant General of the
Kings Army in Flanders, and Luxemburge, to Monsier the Marquess De-Leden,
Governor of the Town of Dunkirke, for the rendission of the said Town, and
Fort Leon, to the obedience of the most Christian King.
1. IT is agreed that the said Town of Dunkirke, with the Fort of Leon, and
all the fortifications, and dependances be restored to his Highness, by the
said Marquess D^-Leden, on Thursday next the 11. of this present month, in
the same condition that all is at present, by 7. a clock in the morning, with
all the Ordinance, and Ammunitions of war, and of worth, that are in the said
Magazines, of the said Town, and in any other reserve whatsoever; for the
defense and conservation of the said Town: At which hour shall issue forth of
the said Town the Mr. De-Led^ with the Sargeant General of the battle, all
the Colonels, and Officers, and generally all men of war that are in the
said Town, and Fort Leon, both Horse and Foot, with Arms, Baggage, Matches
lighted, Cullers flying, and Drums beating, and 2. Piece of Ordinance without
any let or molestation under what pretense soever; and that they shall be
conducted the same day (in all safety with a good and sufficient Convoy) to
Newport.

3. That on Wednesday next the 10. of the said month, at 6. of the clock in
the after noone, the gate of the said Town, called Newport Gate, shall be
delivered, and put under the power of his Highness to be kept by his forces,
which he shall appoint for that purpose.

3. And (for a more easy execration of the present treaty) it is agreed that
there shall be (from this present time) a general Cessation, between both
parties, until the said day (viz.) Thursday the 11. During which time there
shall be no shooting neither from the one party, nor the other: And that all
the forces shall (every one) remain in their quarters without working,
advancing, or having any communication, but such as shall be permitted by (the
generals of) both parties.

4 That (on this present day) Sentinels shall be appointed (by both parties) to
stop the further continuation of making works, only what shall be permitted
to be prepaired, by both parties, and in presence of the Sentinels, they
advising with the other party, in case that the works shall happen to fall to
ruin.

5. There shall be also a Sentinel upon the sea port to take care, and advice
of what may pass in; or out of it, to whom it shall be permitted to visit all
vessels, boats, that shall pass in or out.

6. It is likewise agreed, that all Officers and soldiers of the Navy, and
admiralty, the Councellers, Officers, and other servants of the Catholic King,
(which are in the said Town) may go out with the same liberty.

7. As also the said Marquess De-Leden shall have liberty to march out with 2.
Piece of Ordinance aforesaid, and 6. other small pieces of Cannon of the Baron
of Lamboyes Army, with their Horses, Charets, Officers, and Servants.

8. That all the Inhabitants of the said Town (as well Ecclesiastical as
others) of what quality, and condission soever they be, shall be concerned in
their Estates, Privileges, and Franchises, (which they have hitherto enjoyed)
without any new charges or impositions.

9. That all (as well the said Inhabitants as residents) in the said Town,
that shall be willing to go forth, with the said Garrison, or 2. months after,
may do it freely without any interception, with all their moveable Estates: And
2 years space granted unto them to sell their movables, and dispose of them,
as they shall think fi^.

10. It is likewise agreed, that if within the said time (viz.) before
Wednesday next at 6. a clock at night, the said Town shall be releived by
land, by the Army of the Catholic King, and that it shall cause the Army of
the most Christian King to retire, that then all the said things agreed upon,
shall remain null: And the said Town remain in the same condition that now it
is: And in the mean time the besieged shall not receive any succor, neither by
sea, nor land, other then that which shall forse the seidge to raise; And in
case that any shall put themselves in defense, nor shall make any hostill, out
in favor thereof.

11. That if (within the said time) any succor (sent from the enemy) shall
enter the said Town, that at that very same instant, pasports shall be
forthwith given them to retire.

12. It is also agreed, that if before the said day: (viz.) Wednesday the 10. a
peace (between the two Crowns) shall be published, then both parties shall
remain in the same state as at present. And that the present treaty shall not
prejudice those at Munster, if published as aforesaid.

13. A pasport shall be speedily given unto him who shall be named by the said
Mr. the Marquess De-Leden to go unto Mr. the Duke D' Amalphi, and to return
in all safety.

14. And for the entire execution of the present treaty (which by our faith and
peroll we engadge) there shall be given (this day) for Hostages, from the Sir
Marquess De-Ledens part, one Colonel of the Kings, another of Lamboyes, A
Captain that commands the Spaniards: two Burgases of the Magistrates, and one
Officer of the admiralty: And at the same time that the gate of the lowne shall
be delivered into the hands of his Highness, there shall also be given by his
Highness (for Hostages) 2. Colonels, and 4. Captains.

15. The prisoners of either party shall be set at Liberty.

16. That Charets and Bela^des shall be provided for the sick and wounded, to
carry them to Newport.

17. And this present treaty is signed by both parties, one to remain in the
hands of highness, and the other in the hands of the Marquess De-Leden.

Made and agreed in the Camp before DVNKJRKE, the 6. of October 1646. Signed.
LOVJS de BOVRBON. DE-LEDEN, Marquess.

There marched out according to the Articles.
20. General Officers, and Colonels. 100. Other Officers. 800. Soldiers,
with 40. Carridges. 200. Horse. 8. Piece of Ordinance. 1300. Arms. 30.
Cullers.
There were left in Dunkirke Fort Lion on the River.
50. Barks and Boats: 100. Piece of Ordinance. 500. Arms. Provisions for a
month. 20. Barrels of Gunpowder. 200. Soldiers lame, sick and others to pass
away after they were conveyed to Newport.
FINIS.

