A CONFERENCE Between The Pope, the Emperor, and the King of Spain.

Holden in the Castle of St. Angelo in ROME, Upon the entertainment of some
great persons after mentioned, touching the subverting of the Protestant
Profession in England, and other parts of Christendom.

And concerning the present distractions here in England between the King and
Parliament.

London, Printed for A. Coe, and T. A. July 14. 1642.

A Conference holden at the Castle of St. Angelo in Rome, betwixt the Pope,
Emperor, and the King of Spain.
Pope. WElcome dear Sons unto our Court of Rome, Apostolic and holy
blessings shield all the house of Austria from evil, and advance both your
fortunes and your Crowns.


Emperor. Thy feet most (holy Father) I do kiss, if I miss thy blessing,
the Imperial Crown from Austria will be lost which heavens forbid, for then
we are undone; Bohemia Rebels do join with Sweden, the Heretics from Danawe
to the Rhyne; they combine both heads, arms and forces against Rome and
Austria to help the Palatine that cursed Calvinist with his partakers, those
damned Schismatics and Heretics, who upon our ruins seek to build their
fortune, which makes me thus to move you Holiness, and crave your help now in
this extremity, for if we fall, the worser it will be for you.


Pope The keys of Peter, and the sword of Paul shall shut, open, and cut in
pieces the gates of Heaven, Nations, Laws, and Rights, and turn the darkest
nights into clear days; and those lands which have denied our dignities, I Will
make a Keldoma and field of blood: I Will thunder out my Bulls against Heretics,
and make their land a place of dead men's sculls, I will implore the Saints, and
Hell, and Purgatory, both shall roar, ere any Calvin or of Luthers Sect with
Roman bays shall insult on our teritories.


Emp. Your threats and curses are now despised by those vile Heretics, they
hold your blessings of no more force then is the skipping of a foxes tail; in
brief, they are all so disobedient, that whether you bless or curse they do
not care, they fear not what your Holiness can say, there is nothing that can
drive them from their Heresy, help by your counsel therefore holy Father,
and show us means to quiet all this stir.


Pope. Thou may by reasons and Ambassages, by questions, answers, and the
like, win time a while, but these be out of date now, now swords, not words,,
do arbitrate Kingdoms, and we have still used delays, and shifts so often,
that all our enemies perceive our craftines; send unto thy neighbors, friends
and subjects, that thou may thy self defend from surprise my Legates and my
Nuntioes, I will have to hatch more forces amongst the Catholics, Mentz,
Cullen, Triers, Catholic B. vary, thou have with others in Germany, from
Flaunders, Brabant and the Popish King, thy true friends will quickly bring
thee succor; and though my self, with Florence may not send our arms so
soon, we will lend our money: the Cantons and the Switzers shall be hired, who
do hold themselves engaged to our See, I Will send to Urbin and to Martina, to
Ferar, and to Genoa, to Savoy, and to Venice, and to Piemount, to France our
eldest son, and to Saint Dennis, I Will fetch the Saints from heaven, the fiends
from hell, but I Will quell those drunken Germane Traitors: Is not thy Spanish
Cosen here with thee? Who do fear Europe, and the new found world, the
Churches Atlas, and the Empires prop? We hope to stop by strength, wit or
gold those proud attemps and daring of the Dutch, and break their forces cost
it never so dear.


King of Spain. If Caesar, and your Holiness have ended, observe the answer of
the Spanish son, no Germane Prelates, nor Bavaria can do it, nor King of
Pole, your self, nor any man, nor Florence Duke, nor Brabant joind with
Flaunders, nor Cantons, Switzers, nor the greatest Catholic if all were
joined in one, yet could they not with all their force that can be got by them
bring timely succor against the combination those Almaines, Graves, have in
every land, expect no help from Venetia or Savoy, who deadly hate and fear
the house of Austria, I look for no help from my brother France, for if he
see us down heel sing and joy: and Caesar if thou lookst at home for aid, thy
state is tottering, and thy strength perishes. Thy Austrian subjects are
infected also with Luthers heresy, and have forsaken the Papal dignity, and
may combine with their fellow Lutherans, and if thou do send to Thracia for
succor, the faithless Turk (thou know) will not from Asia, Spain, thou
must help, or what will Caesar do, and how can Rome help Spain, and Caesar
also having so many places to supply which stands in need? wherefore
doubtless, if I shall cause India Armies to be recald from thence, and our
Italian forces march from us, leave Millaine, Naples, and our silver fountains
unguarded, naked, and march over the hills through Grissons Country, leave the
strength of Spain, or venture our Armado once more to narrow seas, and so lose
more at once then we have got in threescore years before, then thou at Vienna,
I at Arragon may shave our heads and turn Monks, you count your friends but do
not count your foes, whose strength, whose numbers you cannot quel, the
Northern tract of Europe from Britain, tending to last as far as
Transylvania, save Holland and some other of their own trifles (Oh me) in
fourscore years how they are grown you see, three Kingdoms, England,
Scotland, Ireland be, with Denmark, Norway, Sweden, six besides those two
which they have won being eight in all, and our Kings are but three, the number
of their Princes, Dukes and Earls, with their free Lords and States are a
great number, besides their many Palsgraves, and their Mootgraves, with all
their Landgraves, and their Burgraves; and as their numbers, so their spirits
are made great with hopes of their prodigious star which blazed over Germany
the last December, portending change of State, and their expositions and their
combinations of situations, times and Scepters; and of Rome, of Babell, and of
hills and dales, of beasts of Dragons, and such fearful things wherewith they
cheer themselves, and triumph as though they would give us all the overthrow:
the eleventh and twelfth of Esdras they apply against the Imperial Monarchy,
and that the Lion coming from the wood is understood of the King of Sweden,
and that the Lion should the Eagle foil, and in triumphant sort divide the
spoil. The Rebels thus interprets this, whereby the Catholics are vexed
greatly; therefore they say that as the Eagles they do spread themselves ore
many Catholic Kings, even so the Lion in the Arms of Sweed, will sure
protect those Heretics from fear, and Sued (they say) turned Anagram, is the
Christian Macchabeus; they further say Gustavus is his name. The fame of this
man's fortune does so much them cherish, that their good success makes me now
to stand in fear to be put down, wherefore I pray you see now if any means
be left to set me free.


Pope. An uncouth shivering makes my blood to chill, and strange amazement does
fill my sinews; I wonder much that they are so skillful against us, thus to
apply this Prophecy: I also do admire how they would frame such Anagrams on
Swede; but though those hopes do cheer their froward minds, yet let our
Emperors thoughts contemn all fear, for it is not Fortune turning of her
wheel can make our noble resolutions stagger: I wonder much those blind
Heretics cannot remember in their hardened mind, how I am on Saint Peter's
Chair so placed that they can neither waste nor ruinate the place which is
within my grave protection, though (for a time) they put them to perplexity,
for I will so trouble them with my band of Jesuits, they shall not withstand
them; doubt not but I will find a Stratagem to save Romes Caesar's, and the
Diadem of Spain.


King of Sp. But holy Father I am certified that they deride your Council and
Policy, and how of you they make an Anagram, can frame the best and betterest
of their wits: as thus, Supremus Pontifex Romanus. ANAGRAMMA. O non sum supra
Petram fixus.


Most sacred Pastor of the flock of Christ.

They say thou art not fixed on the Rock, but I suspect that they are all
inclined, that they do believe in mind what they say, alas for Rome, alas for
Ferdinando, alas for Philip, must I be forced to withstand my own, the
Emperors, and the Churches enemies, and so lose both my self, the Church, and
Empire all at once!


Pope. And they find out such strange prodigies to fill the Cathliques with
fear and doubt; I Will make them know that I am fixed firm upon Saint Peter, and
shall never be cast down, my benediction, or my malediction can raise a State,
or ruin a Nation: The Heretics on Saint Peter's do build their faith, and I
am upheld as from his person, and from him all power is given unto me, to bind
and loose, to shut and open heaven: And whilst I keep the Keys none shall
come in that have been in those mad rebellious wars.


Emp. All you can say, and all you can devise, they value not, but despise it
utterly: the Duke of Saxon is gone from our side, and joined with the King of
Sweden, and why should we expect for more from him then Charles my Predecessor
did before, who gave them all and more then I can tell, yet shortly after in
that great contention twixt him and Luthers Rebels, he forsook his
benefactors and turned against them; and by these Civil Wars what is our
gain, more then millions of our people have been slain, Dampiere, Bucqu^y,
and valient men, whose like we have no hope again to enjoy, our subjects with
great taxes are compelled, our Provinces laid waste, our Cities sacked, our
fruitful fields untild, and unmanured, past hope to be recured, maids, wives,
and widows, defloured, ravished, our Lands with spoil and ruin all
destroyed, fire, sword, and famine, has these twelve years reigned ore mine
Empire in every place, our friends fall off, our treasure is rackt, and all we
have well near consumed and wasted, and all the mischiefs that can fall, we
and our people by war have endured, whilst many thousands that were wont to
give, do beg or starve or live miserably; and late that most unluckie
overthrow, my trusty Tilleys loss and deadly stroke, Prague and Bohemia
Kingdoms, all is lost, our Towns of Franckford, and of Anow won, Hall,
Hervested, and Hurst, with mighty Mentz, out chief Elector Bishop, fled away,
my General W^lstan and Don Balthazar fled to Polonia from the Swords fury;
This makes our foes to swell with victory, and all is worse then tongue or pen
can tell.


King of Sp No Prince can compare with my losses, for I have had more then a
double share; great damage have I had in Asia, in Brasill, and in Farnambuck,
the furious Rebels have caused me to feel with places of importance, their
civil hatred to our State and Realm, by foyling, spoiling, and ruinating
them, my India is surprised and taken by them, wherein subsisted all the hope
of Spain; besides at Belgia, I have had misfortune, my Town of Weazell's
taken in a trap, the Busse, a place of great importance lost, long time
defended, with exceeding charge, and late that unrecoverable blow in Zealand,
where our forces all were broke, Sloopes, Puicks and Lighters, 78. perished,
6000. men, taken prisoners, many wounded, 4000. hand Grenades, and of Brass
430. pieces was taken, eleven harrells of good money likewise taken, and many
hundreds of our soldiers slain, with store of Ammunition, shot, and powder,
all lost in that unlucky expedition; all this past the last September, for
which our foes rejoice, our friends are grieved, whilst only Dunkirke are
rude Rennegadoes, have made bravadoes against mine enemies, they only have
done things of special moment, taken from Merchants and small fisher boats,
and now and then a Collier, or a Catch of Oysters, seldom meeting with their
equals, for which rare acts their fame abroad is spread, as though they had
subdued and won the world, when every wise man knows their Towns and Ships to
be but dens of Thieves. Have all my Ancestors to six discents, by conquest,
wedlock, and such like other Ligaments, tied fast Earldomes, Dakedomes Crown
and Empire, hoping for Western Monarchy at last, and is the period of our
greatness, hope, and our declining now begin to haste? Nassaw, Nassaw, you
hateful Father and Sons, cursed be your name and house, you first did gather
the fearful Rebels into warlike bonds, which now do State it in the
Netherlands; there where you writ nil ultra once more, and set stern pillars
bars to Spain.


Emp. Thus holy Father have you briefly heard the cause of all our anger and
our grief, by reason of those dangers now related, which so perplexed our
minds and hearts, by these so many losses, and we fear ere long will befall
us; wherefore if Rome have any sercret wisdom laid up in store for evil
times, or evil did make wicked Heretics feel the power of the Church; then
Father now is the time and hour: Remember how Frederick heretofore frighted
thy Predecessors, this may hazard thy fortune more, utterly suppress thy
self, the Roman Church, and us, except by some prime stratagem fetched from
beneath, thou may thy self and friends from danger keep, for if these
Heretics be once our masters, then farewell Pope and Papal dignity.


Pope. And are our friends so few and false? and be our foes so many and so
lusty? Once Innocent of Rome in former ages, has used three Kings for Lackies,
and dare they now make wars against Caesar without our leave? Then our furies
wake, help me to store of Pistols, poisoned knives, to fire, and powder, and
Manacles, bid Raviliack, and Clement high them hither, let Guido Faux, and
Garuet, all come, all those that do excel in policy, are Sons of Iskariet,
and Achitephel.


FINIS.

