A CONFERENCE Between THE TWO GREAT MONARCHS OF France and Spain, Concerning
these our present proceedings in England. Wherein is discoursed of the being of
our Runawayes under their Dominions, with a consideration of their dangers
past, in the wars betwixt England and them.

portraits of Louis XIII king of France and Philip IV king of Spain K. of
Spain.

K. of France.



A Conference between the two great Monarcks FRANCE and SPAIN.
France. HOw now brother of Spain? how run the Cheating dice of this
unconstant world?


Spain. Sometimes fives, sometimes sevens, sometimes nines, all upon odd
numbers; but if you will but give me the hearing of it, I will tell you such a
sack full of news from England that will make you laugh, hold buttons hold.


F. Prithee be brief, I long to hear the news.


S. Then thus; There is a thing held there at this time which is called a
Parliament, in which as it seems they use to chide offenders: now there was
some which favored our religion somewhat more then others, and faith for fear
of chiding they are run for it, and lie now some under the Court of thy wings,
and some under mine; and on the other side, (for they are) a many of them in
the extreames^ some are so puffed up with pride that honesty has got the upper
hand, the Cobblers and Weavers, Sowgelders and Tinkers, Chimney-sweepers and
Butchers, do not stick to say but that the spirit moves them to preach; nay
they do, do it as jealously as our ancient sex has done at Amsterdam over a
hotchpotch.


F. Faith this news makes me smile indeed; but prithee tell me, have thou not
some armado intended against that little Island, that Temple of delight, that
Paradise in comparison of all the world again? has the Jesuits no brains left
to invent a second powder plot, or one as bad or else worse? does the Dragon
always wake that keeps these golden apples the tree of Minerva?


S. Yes they have brains enough, and courage enough in setting such plots a
foot, but a pox on it it takes no effect, for one had as good shoot arrows at
the stars and have a cracked coxcombe for ones labor, as any ways meddle with
them, for God does overlooke them and keep them safe, else could they never
have escaped all those plots which I and mine had laid for them.


F. Why sure they are as wicked as any Nation under the Sun, how then should
God be said to protect them?


S. For the love he bears to some, for there are very honest meaning men
amongst them, which do make a conscience of their ways, which thing is most
acceptable of any thing in the sight of God.


F. But in faith now were the time whilst the Scots are entrenched and their
subjects distracted, some on this side, some on that side, to come with some
armado, or forward some gunpowder plot, or some such grand treason. Oh the
fruition of that same little sweet garden plot would make France and Spain
flourish.


S. Hark a while, and you will soon grant how ridiculous this childish folly
of yours is; a wise man will never attempt impossibilities, for certainly it is
as easy for any single arm to equal a whole troop of men, as for you or I
to effect our wishes in this thing: for certainly they have borrowed from
Jupiter the heathen God, Argus with his hundred eyes to overlooke all our
actions.


F. Tush, tush, thou art just like a coward, who if he be once beaten will
hardly come on to the combat again; because your invincible armado (as you
termed it) was bumbasted by the subjects a maiden Queen, therefore it is
impossible for us to do any good upon the same land; come thou talkst idly for
want of sleep.


S. Why brother of France, did you never feel the force of England, look you
but back to the black Prince where you shall find that the then predecessor
sent him a tun of tennis balls instead of his right he held by the Salique
Law, but he turned his balls into gunstones, and kept such a racket about
France that he made the whole Court of Gallia shake.


F. I do not deny but that we have both smarted enough, and that is the reason
I am so willing to take an advantage against it.


S. I tell thee what brother, I can compare England more commodiously to
nothing then to a Lion which lay sleeping by the way side, a travellor coming
by, would needs make sport with the Lion, as he said, by hollowing in his ear
to awake him, which he did; the Lion being not used to such unaccustomed noise,
rose, nor quite awakt, and rore this travellor in pieces. Just thus it fares
with us at this time, for England is asleep, and unless it be awaked, we need
not to fear any thing, but if we compel it to draw its sword once, it is not
all our entreaties will sheath it again.


F. Well, thou have given me such an Item that I will look before I Will leap,
I Will surely have some great occasion before I will meddle with them.


S. Faith we have business enough of our own if we would but look after it.


F. True, yet I thank God I am at peace with the whole world.


S. I would that I could say so too, for I protest ingeniously I can scarce
tell which way to turn my self, for on one side of me the great Turk lies
like some unseene monster, devouring all which shall come before him; on the
other side the Hollander is as a Devil to me, for I cannot have a ship on the
seas, but if espied by him he is sure to sink for it. And again, I look
every day when the Portugalls will fasten on me, and above all things I fear
them because they have been for men in England.


F. Why, I prithee whither will thou fly in this distress?


S. I know not whither, unless I shall do as the fool said he would, put on
a clean shirt and drown my self.


F. Then what will become of thy soul?


S. Sheh, I Will have a pardon from the Pope before I do it.


F. That was well thought on indeed, but hark I prithee, what do thou
think of the Pope his imperious government? do thou think it to be lawful
according to the hests of God?


S. Faith I cannot tell, but I had a little pity and compunction rose the
other day in my stomach toward the Protestants, but they were presently down
again, I hope it is the right way.


F. I hope so too, for if we be not, I protest we are in the wrong way, and a
wrong will leads us to a wrong place and that wrong place will not yield us
half the delight we expect, wherefore it behooves us to take heed what we do,
and for all the pox look to our selves.


S. As you think, so think I; for certainly we are guided by some wandering
Planet, for such sudden changes in such great personages as I have seen many
stand for example to confirm their assertion to be true. But has, me
thinks I could even love the English Heretical Religion, what music has
transformed me from my self? where is now the pride of our ancient Religion
that it is thus turned topsie turvy? what have we lost out bosted freedom?
what unknown desires are these which invade and take possession of my frighted
soul? Are all those virtuous objects which I heretofore perceived in our Roman
Religion vanish? Have I stood the Shocks of so many fierce wars for Religion
sake, stopped mine ear against all Syre^nnotes that Heresy ever sung? to draw
my bark of faith (that with wonder has kept a constant and honored course in
this channel of my Religion) to be carried into the gulf of a continual
Heresy: But now me thinks I feel my soul return again, and answer: I will
first with mine own hands dig up a grave to bury the momentall heap of all
my years before I Will change my plighted faith unto the Church of Rome.


F. Well said at last, in troth I was afraid that the beast of Rome had been
some kin to a Stagge, and had used to shed her horns; but thank God it is no
worse.


S. If I Have offended at the worst, to dye is a full period to calamity.


F. But is there nothing to be felt after death? do thou think that thou
thus sing'st a requiem to thy soul before thou dyest, I prithee consider, and
tell me what thou think out?


S. Why, I have heard that there is a place called the Elisian fields, where
those that have done well shall rest in peace. I Have heard again, that our
English Heretics hold that there is only a heaven and a hell: those that do
well shall enjoy the joys of heaven, and those that do ill shall feel the
torments of hell: but our Pope makes us believe that there is a Purgatory, but
faith I cannot tell what to think of it.


F. Well; farewell brother, I protest I persuade my self that the world is
almost at its end, for I hear it is buzzed abroad in England that the
Monuments of the Kingdom shall all be pulled down, and Crosses, of whom I have
heard that Abington, and Cheapside Crosses excel all: also there must be no
Organs to the utter undoing of all singing men. But brother farewell, the news
you hear I pray inform me of.


S. I will; farewell, farewell.


FINIS.

