The continuation of our Foreign occurrences: With the confirmation of the
late cruel and bloody Battle fought betwixt Wesell and Collen.

And The particulars of the losses on both sides, and what Towns the Weymarish
and Hessish have since taken.

Also ^ome Letters and passages of note from other parts of Christendom.

Translated and collected out of good Originalls.

^ondon printed for Nath. Butter, at ^t. Austins Gate in Paul's Church yard, at
the sign of the Pyde Bull. 1642.

Vienna Inn 13.23.
THE general Treaty of peace betwixt the Emperor and the King of France, and
the Crown of Sweden is ^ppointed to begin the 25. of March with the French,
they will treat at Munster, and with the Swedes at Osnaburg, and during the
treaty the garrisons shall be drawn out of both places, and the said places
shall in the mean time remain neutrall, yet if so be that contrary to all
expectation the treaty should be dissolved without an happy effect, the said
garrisons shall enter those Towns again as they marched out, and the first
day of May an Imperial Diet shall be held at Frankford on the Maine, or
Speier, what good success it will have time will show.

Basil Ian. 12.22.
The French and high Dutch troops under the command of General Major Erlach,
which relieved the Fort of Hohenwiel, and provided the same again with all
necessaries, have fired the Imperial Camp, demolished the Sconces, and
thereupon are gone again to their old quarters, Erlach to Brislack, and
Oissonville and Lieutenant Colonel Rosa (unto who is given Colonel Mullers
Regiment of horse) are gone for Paris: in this siege has been in the Fort of
Hohenwiel 400. soldiers; 300. women and children, and a good store of
provision, and most that they wanted was water.

Hamborough Ian. 15.25.
The King of Denmark is at Christian Pries, and is willing now to enter into a
friendly treaty with this City: They write for certain that the Count of
Aversberg (as Imperial Ambassador) is appointed for the treaty of peace
betwixt the Emperor and the King of France and the Crown of Sweden, and is
arrived at Wolffenbuttle to go to Munster. Some few days ago diverse Swedish
regiments marched toward the Bishopric of Magdeburg, where they took away
many horses and cattle at H^l^nstat also: they have ruinated two Luneburgish
companies, insomuch that the Swedes and Luneburgish are now enemies one against
another: The Imperial Army is broke up, and is marching toward the
Bishopric of Halberstat directly against the Swedes; the sick soldiers and
dismounted horsemen are sent to their appointed quarters: The strong Castle of
Mansfeld remains besieged by the Imperialists, which they have begun now to
undermine; some are of opinion that it will not be able to hold out long.

Vienna. Ian. 19, 29.
Concerning the Palatine treaty there is now good hope; it is reported that the
Duke of Bavaria will restore both the upper Palatinate, and that part which he
has in the lower Palatinate, if so be that the King of Spain will accommodate
himself in like manner: Incontinueth that the general treaty of peace shall
be reassumed a new at Munster and Osnaburg the 20. or 25. day of March, to
which end the letters of safe conduct are delivered out already for France and
Sweden.

Leipzigk Ian. 13.23.
At this instant we receive letters from Magdeburg certifying that the whole
Imperial Army has kept general randevous at Ashersleben, being resolved to
go in three several places, as namely at Stasfurst, Egglen and Gennersleben
over the River of Pude, and to march against the Swedes, to which end they
labor here to repair a shipbridge for them; the Swedrs are resolved to expect
the coming of the Imperial Army: From Silesi they write, that Carlach has
yielded upon discretion, and Stolhans has likewise forsaken at Beuthen one of
the Sconces, the rest the Imperialists hope likewise to muster shortly; it is
reported that the Imperialists have taken prisoner the Swedish Colonel
Shulman, together with 500. horsemen of Stolhans his army.

Collen Ian. 14.24.
The great flving of he inhabitants both of Cities, Villages and Cloisters by
water and land toward this City continues still because of the great
progress of the Weymarish and Hessish forces which take one place after
another: Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld with his troops is retiring toward the Yffell
and Mosell to join with the Lorraine troops which are arrived about Wormbs:
The City of Bonne is to take in a 1000. foot, and 300. horse of Hatzfelds
forces: The Magistrates of this City cause the Drums to be beaten day and
night to take up some 1000. volunteers for the securing of this City; within
the space of three days the price of the corn rose from 8. to 10. florens:
this City is so full of the Country people that are fled hither, as it has
been by men's memory, and these troubles stop now all trading: the City of
Doringen the Imperial soldiers themselves have fired: The principality of
Bergk and the Duke of Newburg have already agreed with the Weymarish and
Hessish forces to pay contribution unto them: The overthrow of Lamboy is far
greater then at first was mennoned, some that lay amongst the dead, and
afterward through a secret way came hither to this City, look most miserable
and pitiful, which say that their army is totally ruinated, and that not
above three or four hundred men could escape. General Lamboy with eighteen
other Colonells was brought prisoner into the Cloister of St. Tunes, and from
thence was carred toward the Rhyne: The Nobility and Gentry, upon which
heretofore we did much rely, run now all away, and will not fight, leaving
behind them all their lands and goods.

Dusseldorp the 14.24. of Ian.
What great overthrow General Lamboy had near Huckelsheim the 7.17. of this
month, hereof we see daily sufficient witness. In this overthrow about 5000.
of his men were taken prisoners, and he lost all his baggage, artillery, and
the most part of his Standards and Ensigns: The City of Ordingen was forced to
pay 3000. Rixdallers for a ransom. The flying of the poor inhabitants both
women and children, and a number of the Clergy, which for diverse years
together did not once come out of the Cloister, we have continually seen from
the 8.18. of this month till yesterday. Our Prince the Duke of Newburg has
obtained the Neutrality for his subjects, but the Nobility and Gentry are
excluded.

Collen the 15.25. of Ian.
Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld has propounded three points to our Magistrates. 1 To
grant him a free ferry before this City over the River of Rhyne. 2 That in case
of necessity he may retire under the protection of this City. 3 That they shall
take into this City two or three thousand men of his forces for a guarrison:
the two first points they have granted him, but the third they have denied. The
townsmen at Bonne flee for the most part hither to this City.

Emmerick the 15.25. of Ian.
The 9.19. of this month two Weymarish Colonells went from hence toward the
Hage to the French Ambassador, to fetch order whither the imprisoned Commanders
shall be carried. General Lamboy was wounded in his thigh.

The 10.20. of this instant, the City of Kempen was surrendered unto the
Weymarish by composition, wherein they found above 3000. sackes with corn, and
other rich booty. Colonel Newenheim Governor of Kempen, who heretofore
ransacked the Palatinate, and made great spoil in it, seeing that the battle
was lost, fled with his best goods from thence, but he was overtaken by the
Weymarish, and himself and his wife with much ado saved themselves into
Gelder.

Duyren the 15.25. of Ian.
Diverse of Lamboyes soldiers that fled out of the battle, and came hither,
unanimously relate, that in many years so many men were not slain and taken
prisoners, as in this battle, they could not save one Wagon. On Sunday last
Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld lay round about this City, and retired in a great
confusion.

Three days ago the dispersed Lamboyish troops recollected themselves before
this City, and did great mischief in the Suburbs, which have been 600.
horse, and 400. foot, and 1000. horsemen of Hatzfelds forces were with them to
conduct them to the Army: in Dormagen the Weymarish have surprised and totally
routed and defeated 800. dragooners, and afterward fired the Town: The other
day 3000. Weymarish horsemen came before this City, and having understood which
way the remainder of Lamboy's forces had retired, pursued close after them as
far as Seligh, where at last they lighted upon them, totally touted and
defeated them, and obtained twelve standards more: Colonel Rosa sent a
trumpeter hither into this City demanding quarter for his men, whom the
Magistrates answered, that Lamboy and Hatzfeld had demanded the like, but being
they were neutrall, they hoped that he would likewise spare them, whereupon
Rosa replied, That he would shortly break the Neutrality with his Canons. The
other day the Weymarians passed here by with a great booty.

A perfect List of the Imperial Commanders and Officers that were slain and
taken prisoners in the last overthrew of Lamboy, as the same was delivered up
to Count de Guebrian the 7.17. of Ian.
The prisoners are General Lamboy, General Mercy, 16. Colonels, 9. Lieu. Col.
amongst which is Paradyser and Beuting, 8. Sergeant Majors, 28. Captains of
horse, 38. Captains of foot, a Captain Lieutenants, 1 General Adjutant, 4.
Regiment Quartermasters, 46. Lieutenants, 31. Standardbearers, 35. Ancients,
46. Standards, 97. Ensigns, 17. Trumpetters, 3. Mass Priests, Upon the place
of battle were slain 423. high and under Officers, as namely, Sergeants,
Adjutants, Quartermasters, Corporals, and such like, and about 3000. Soldiers;
and above 4000. are taken prisoners of the common Soldiers, which have taken
pay under the Weymarish. On the Hessish and Weymarish side were slain Colonel
Flesheimer, Major Bushel, Major Conrad Kauffman, 3. Captains of foot, 2.
Captains of horse, 4. Lieutenants, 3. Ancients and Standardbearers, and about
50. common S^uldiers. Those that are wounded, are Lieutenant Colonel Latomus,
Lieutenant Colonel Beuthen, the Lieutenant Colonel of Conte de Guebrian,
Rittermaster Costputh, Captain Frease, 2. French Captains, 1. Regiment
Quartermaster, and about 260. common Soldiers.

Collen the 17.27. of Ian.
The Hatzfeldish Infantery lies enquartered at Bonne, Andernach and Lins, on
this side of the River of Rhyne, and the Chavallery is gone to Andernach to the
other side of the River. The dispersed Lamboyish troops which recollected
themselves here and there, are totally routed and defeated again by the
Weymarish. All the Weymarish forces lie now about Nuys, which they batter
fiercely. Here in this City the Drums are continually beaten to take up 4 or
5000. men. Every night watch here in the City 6. Companies of Citizens.

On Friday last the Elector of Collen and Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld came hither
into this City to put all things in order.

Collen the 18.28. of Ian.
When the Weymarish and Hessish forces lay with the maine Army about Neus, and
caused the said City to be summoned, but the besieged resolved to defend
themselves to the last man: wherefore in the mean time Colonel Rosa with
3000. horsemen, pursued after the remainder of Lamboyes Army, which under the
command of Colonel Zell, and Sergeant Major de Grange 2000. horsemen strong
were marching to join with Hatzfeld, upon which he lighted about Zulch,
encountered with them, and pursued after the fugitives as far as Munster
Eyffell. It is said that he has obtained 12 Standards more, insomuch that of
Lamboyes whole Army very few are remaining. It is not yet known whether the
abovesaid Colonel Zell and Grange are taken prisoners, or escaped. The
foresaid City of Zulch has paid for a ransom 5000. Rixdallers: hereupon they
summoned the City of Duyren, but it is doubted whether they will accommodate
themselves before the Canons are brought before it. General Tupadell lies
before Neus, which City he batters fiercely, that we can hear under the gates
of this City: mean while the parties over-runne the whole Country, and take
away all what they find. The other day they met with some Carts and Wagons
coming from Cleve hitherwards, which they took away. Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld
is yet here, and his Infantery at Andernach, Bonne, Breul, and other places,
using the inhabitants very cruelly. The Cavallery is gone to the other side of
the Rhyne into the Country of Bergk, insomuch that the Weymarish have no
resistance at all.

Wesel Ian. 19 29.
All the Colors and Standards which were taken from General Lamboy, are
brought to Oysey, about 130. in number: the Standard of Lamboyes Life Regiment,
together with others, shall be sent to Cassell to present them to the young
Landgrave of Hessen. The Governor of Gelder offers to pay a ransom for those
that were taken of his guarrison. In the Cloister of Knechlenberg and Brouwyder
the Weymarish found great store of provision, and not one man. The fair Castle
of Dyck, and the little City of Hulckerat they have likewise taken, the houses
of Ners, Hulcdunck and Calenburg they have pillaged, and Nelen they have
burned: in a word, the whole County of Kempen is under their devotion, which in
all this war has suffered almost nothing* The Duke of Newburg has bestowed
upon Cont de Guebrian a great Vat of wine, and stands now in a treaty with him.

Collen the 19.29. of Ian.
The 16.26. of January the Weymarish forces begun to batter fiercely the city
of Neus and to fling fire balls into it, whereupon the 17.27. of this instant
about ten of the clock in the forenoone it was surrendered by composition, the
besieged wanted powder and shot: Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld who is expecting out of
all garrisons, and from the river of Rhyne more assistance, will go to field
very shortly against the Weymarish, and being the Weymarish are for the present
Masters in the field, and no resistance can be made, we must let them domineere
as they list, we look only to the principal cities to keep them strongly
guarded: Into Nuys the Weymarish have laid 1500. men for a garrison, and
yesterday they came before Sons: the citizens in Nancy plotted to the said city
and castle, and to deliver it over to the Duke of Lorraine, but the French
garrison was too strong for them, and killed a great number of them.

Amsterdam the 20.30. Ian.
The 17.27. of Ian. the city of Nuys was surrendered unto the Weymarish and
Hessish forces. The Swedish army under the command of General Terstensehn is
broke up, but which way it will take we shall shortly hear: 6000. men of the
States forces lie likewise ready to go to field, if the Spaniards stir to aid
Hatzfeld, in so much that the seat of war will wholly be removed into the
Bishopric of Collen, and it is certain, that Colonel Rosa has totally
wasted and defeated again about Zulch 2000. of Lamboyes fugitive horsemen, and
obtained twelve standards, in so much that they have got now about 130.
ensigns and standards, and the 14.24. of this month they lighted also upon
600. Spanish foot with fire locks, the most part whereof they have put to the
sword.

Collen the 23. of Ian. the 2. of Feb.
The 17.27. Ian. the Imperial garrison marched out of Nuys, which was
conducted to Duseldorp and used very well: the said City is to pay for a
ransom 30000. Rixdallers, which City the Weymarish fortify exceedingly, and
is guarded by Colonel Oheim with 1500. men: Zons, Kempen, Bergem, Caster,
Grevenbruck, Betper and other places have likewise accommodated themselves: the
Weymarish horsemen ride in and out at Dusseldorp, at Orringen; some of their
troops are passing the River of Rhyne, it is thought that they aim either at
Keyserswerth, or intend to assault Hatzfeld; in their camp they have published
upon pain of high punishment, that none of their soldiers shall undertake to
attempt any thing upon this City of Collen: the other five Commissioners were
sent from hence to the said army to desire that this City might stand neutrall
with them, which the Weymarish will not condescend unto: I believe we shall
not escape without paying them a great sum of money. General Tupadel and
Rosa are marching now toward Duyren and Herpen: It is reported that Ma^shall
de Chastillion is likewise to come unto them from France with 18000. men, mean
while the Spanish troops draw together on the River of Maase to join with
Fieldmarshall Hatzfeld, who lies yet still expecting the Duke of Lorraine with
his troops.

Wesel the 23. of Ian. the 2. of Feb.
After that the Weymarish had left their regiments in Nuys for a garrison, the
maine army broke up again and came the 19.29. of January before Kempen, and
yesterday they battered the said place fiercely that we could plainly hear it
here; it is said, that some Spanish forces have got into it, how they will
speed time will show. At this instant a horseman coming from the Bishopric
of Collen, relates that those of Kempen stood in a parley, so that it is not
doubted but that the Weymarish have already taken possession in it.

There is not one Boore to be seen all the way long from Collen as far as Aken;
the soldiers find every where the houses so full of victuals, bacon and
smoked flesh, that it is not to be expected: Our bridges with some men of
war are gone up higher the Rhyne, it is thought the Weymarish have an aim
either at Keyserswerth, or that they intend to assault Hatzfelds forces, which
time will show.

Amsterdam the 29. of Ian. the 8. of Feb.
The Duke of Newburg has obtained the neutrality with the Weymarish and
Hessish forces: He has delivered unto the Weymarish for their quarters the
Cities of Glebbeck, Grevenbreck, Custer, Bebber, and the strong Castle of
Reidt: The City of Duyren has paid a sum of money to be freed of
enquartering: Those of Collen have likewise desired the neutrality: Some
letters mention that the Bishop of Collen is dead, others he is very sick, if
he should dye it would cause a great alteration in his country.

From Munster they write that Captain John Tersiegh has defeated betwixt
Borcken and Wesel a Hessish convoy of 100. foot and 40. horsemen, in which
encounter the said Captain himself also was slain.

FINIS.

