A CONTINVATION OF THE TRVE NARRATION OF THE Most observable Passages in and
about Plymouth, from January 26. 1643. till this present; Wherein you may
observe how the Lord does always work, for that poor, and remote Garrison.
TOGETHER WITH The Letter of Sir Richard Greenvile, with the Answer to it, as
also the burning of a book enclosed in his Letter by the hand of the Hangman,
the Book being entitled, The Iniquity of the Covenant. With the discovery of a
she Traitor together with the Articles prooved on oath against Her at a
Council of WAR. Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard, May 10. 1644.

The Preface to the Reader.
PLymouth, being a Town far remote, and the passage being by Sea, an account
of Gods workings (for Plymouth) against the Enemy, cannot so speedily be given
as might be wished and expected, besides the Commanders (being more desirous to
serve their God and Country, then to gaggle like hens on the laying of every
Egg) are contented to be silent, until there is enough acted to fill up a
Relation. Now therefore not willing that Gods mercies should be stifled, but
published for his glory, and the heartning of such as stand up courageously,
for the Lord against the mighty, this ensuing Narration (as a continuation of
the most observable passages in and about Plymouth) is thought fit to be
published.

Our last ended December. 25. and this begins Ian. 26. for in the Interimour
great care was, and still is, to fortify the Town, in pulling down Hedges,
without our Works, in repairing decayed and ruined Outworks, in building new,
where they are wanting, and running Breastworks from work to work: Two new
works are made, two repaired that fell down, December. 25. at night, the very
night, after the enemy removed the strait siege, and let not the world wonder,
that we lay still a month, without encounters, when we had so many hundred
hedges, to pull down, and 3. miles of ground, to be new fortified against the
Enemy, besides the sleighting of the Enemies works.

If none of this had bin Necessary, it might have bin needful to refresh such
a tired, and almost worne-out Garrison, it being common in the winter, for the
poor Soldiers to endure 6. or 7. nights duty, without releife, besides their
hard bickerings, and encounters with the Enemy.

But if the world knew, what rubs against action has lain in the way, it would
not wonder that, that gallant garrison has given no better account to the
Parilament, how-ever take this Narration for a truth without questioning it,
and bless God for this, and pray for them that are (by Gods assistance)
resolved to do more.

A CONTINVATION of the true Narration of the most observable passages in and
about Plymouth.
January 26. 1643.
THe Enemy lying at Plympton, and at Buckland, and in other Parishes in their
Quarters, sallied out and fell on some of our Men, that were abroad in the
Country, but when we heard of it we drew forth our horse, Major Halsey
commanding in Chief, fell upon the Enemy in Tamerton 4 miles from the Town,
where we took nine horses, and nine Prisoners, and one slain.

February 24. Captain Lieutenant Chafin was sent out with a party of horse to
fall upon the Enemies guard at Trenimans or Trenl^mans Iumpe 4. miles from the
Town where we beat them off their guard, and took 25. horse, and one
Prisoner, and lost but one horse.

March 15. One of Col. Goulds men, and some others going into the Country, upon
some occasions, the Enemy came upon them and took the Colonels man (since
redeemed) and when the Alarm came into the Town, Major Halsey commanding in
Chief, we drew forth our horse and pursued the Enemy to Trenimans Iumpe, where
we fell upon their guard, and beat them out of their guard house, slew 3 of
their men, and took 10 horse, and six Prisoners, 2 Drums and 9 Muskets, and
lost not a man.

March the 20^h, Captain Leiutenant Chafin Commanding in Chief, was sent out
with a Party of 60. horse and fell upon the Enemies guard aforesaid, where we
beat them out of their guard, and pursued them about a mile upon the Down
toward Tanistocke, and (...) about ten men of them, and took ten Prisoners,
one Captain, one Leiutenant, one Quartermaster, and took thirty horse besides
what was wounded of the Enemy, and ran away over the Hedges forsaking their
horses, and we lost but one horse and two men wounded, and so returned safe
home to Plymouth.

March 27. That Unparraled (in respect of the West) Colonel Gould parted this
life, being called to Jesus Christ to have a Crown of Gold, set on his head, for
his golden activity, and fidelity, and undefatigable Patience and expense, to
help the Lord against the Mighty, in purging the Church and Commonwealth,
being lamented of all but malicious and ambitious Malignants.

By his death, the affairs of the Town likely to be out of order, a
Commission was granted to the Major of Plymouth, Colonel Crocker, Lieutenant
Colonel Martin for the ordering of the affairs of the Garrison, until a
Commander in Chief was sent from the Parliament.

The command of the Island, remaining in the hand of Captain Henry Hatsell, a
Captain of such known integrity, that though envious stomachs, may rail
against him yet they cannot draw off the affections of the well affected in
Plymouth, from a high esteem of his approoved valor and fidelity.

The command of the Fort, is in the hands of Captain Samuel Birtch, who intends
to keep them, as they have signified to the Parliament, for them and none
else, the Garrisons of both protesting the same constancy and fidelity.

The 16 of April (the Major of Plymouth and Colonel Crocker having
transferred the power they had from Colonel Wardlaw, unto Lieutenant Colonel
Martin alone)* Intelligence being brought that the Enemy (near 500.) drew
near us, and quartered at Saint Bud^aux (commonly called Saint Buttocks, two
miles from Plymouth on Devonshire side) Lieutenant Colonel Martin, sent out
about 600. Commanded Musketeers, with some Horse, to fall upon them, 17.
Colors being sent to face Plymton (a grand quarter of the Enemy) In the mean
time, but our forlorn hope of Horse, (by mistake of the guides, went one way,
and the body of foot another, notwithstanding our foot coming up undiscovered
fell on the Enemy, and put them to flight, killed two of them, and took in
Saint Budeaux Tower, and in their flight 44. prisoners, besides Leiutenant
Corey, sometimes servant to Sir Bevile Greenvile, Leiutenant Colonel Porters
Ensign, three Barrels of Powder 20. horse above a 100. arms, Major Collins,
Captain Vacy of Tamerton, Captain Tavernor hardly escaping by reason of the
absence of our horse; most of these prisoners having taken the Covenant, and
have taken up arms for us since.

We have omitted one barbarous act of Sir Richard Greenvill, (that Runnagado)
committed the week before, who having taken two of our Soldiers, going out
into the Country, enforced one to hang the other presently at the next tree
they came to, the Cavaleers dispatching the Survivor, Skellum Greenvile sitting
on his horse beholding the spectacle.

April 19, 200. Musketeers with some horse were commanded to fall on the
Enemy, at Newbridge (in the way to Plympton) and the command was, that our
forelorne hope should not fall on until the Releife was in sight, but
disobeying the command fell on when the relief was a mile behind, yet they
beat them from hedge to hedge, and one breastworke on this side the bridge,
but their Powder being spent and the greatest part of the Enemies forces at
Plympton coming into the relief, our forlorn having spent their Powder they
were compelled to retreit, but fairly without the loss of a man only two or
three wounded.

April 27. 40. foot sallyed from Prince Rock, to Plumlet mills, a quarter of
the Enemy lying in a Creek against Prince Rock, the Enemy fled like Hares,
and our Men took 16 foot, Arms, one Drum, five Hogs, five Cowes.

As our Forces have not been altogether idle and succeslesse at Land, so they
have not of late been loyterous at Sea, our Remora's being removed, for our
Seamen at three several times have fallen on the Enemies Country and brought
away a 100. sheep.

April 25. the Packet boat took a Bark laden with Irish Cloth, Tallow,
Hides etc. and since this another boat has taken a Hoy laden with three
Butts of French wine, wherein were three Grand Cornish Cavaleers, and it is
without exception, that if our Ships might have Commission to land men on the
Cornish shore, we should not only help Plymouth to many necessaries, but
also fill the Cornish hands so full with watering their own shore that they
should have little liberty and less heart to fall on Devonshire or Plymouth.

We cannot conceal what we have by our intelligencers from the Country.

1. We are informed that Skellum Greenvile has seized on the Lord of Bedfords
Estate, and Master Cuttiners Estate, and sent him Prisoner to Exon, making
havoc of his goods and Corn.

2. That the said Runnigado Greenvile builds very much at Fitzford, (I hope
Castles in the air, or houses without foundation) and boasts that he little
doubts of having Plymouth speedily, but the Garrison, and Plymouth will not
believe him.

3. That the Enemy endeavors all he can to raise Forces, to fall on Plymouth,
and carry them East-wards, threatening to hang such as refuse, and having
pressed six in Lifton Patish (according to which Proportion, their whole number
of pressed men will amount to 2500. men in the whole County) they were
compelled to send a guard with them to Exon.

4. That there were lately expected 7000. to appear at Exon (as the Cavaleers
report) but there appeared but 700. which so moved Sir John Berklies worship
that he pressed the Constables; a fit reward for their Activity.

5. That the generallity of the Country (notwithstanding the Oath,) are well
affected to the Parliament, but want some force to countenance them in the
Country to cut the Cavaleers throats, to free themselves of their iron bondage.

6. That Arundell of Chiddock in Dorsetshire, a Papist is carrying his goods
into Cornwall, and has seized on the Pious Lord Roberts ch^ldren, and
committed them to safe custody at Bodmin, this is confirmed once and aga^n.

7. That the Lord Mohun Edgcombe and lane are returned from the Feminine Junto
at Oxford.

8. That it is reported that the Queen is at Exon, whence since her invisible
arrival, diverse warants have been issued out to command the Train bands to
make their personal appearance, and to bring all fat cattle into the City,
whereby it is likely they expect a Seige.

9. That the Kings Privy Seals are abroad to make up a 100000.l. given (in
words) to his Majesty, for the re^^uting of himself, and his destroying Army,
by the perjured Junto at Oxon

10. That the County is ordered to prepare 3. Subsidies, speedily, which they
cannot well digest, you may visibly see the misery of the County, let not the
Countries Patriots be forgetful of that County, that have expended above
150000l. for their defense, let it not seem small that it sits in dust and
ashes like a widow looking for some to help, but none appears; You may see
how God has preserved that poor Garrison at Plammouth, being as it was said of
Britain, Divisos orb I hope non cura et amore, of such as have the care
committed to them. Let it seem most equal to them, to take care of their
necessitated friends that account not their lives too dear for them; and it
cannot but be very pious for the gods on earth to imitate the God of heaven, in
taking care for Plimmouth town and Garrison.

April 25. The Constable of Edg-Buckland was brought in hither who had a
warrant from St. Thomas Hele (not all of the wisest) requiring the appearance
of his Parishionets with their arms at Modbury, and for the providing of new
arms (if they can get them) in the place of such as are wanting.

It cannot be superfluous to give intelligence of Gods gracious discovery of
feminine Malignants and traitors in Plimmouth, one whereof is committed to the
Castle for holding correspondency with the Enemy.

The Articles prooved against her on Oath are, first that she has sent suits
of apparel to one Collens a runnigado of Plimmouth, who endeavored with Pike
his confort to betray the town, as in our former narration we have expressed.

2. That by message she discovered to the Enemy what store of Powder was in the
town.

3. That she invited the Enemy to aslault the Town.

4. That she desired Major Harris (a Cavaleer) to quarter in her house, viz.
when the Town was taken.

5. That she seconded her former invitation with entreaties of a specdy
onslate, falsely informing them that the Protestant Reli ion (since our
covenanting) was decaying and breathing its last gaspein Plimmouth.

For the other Virago we shall let her sleep for a while, that her shame and
doom may be the heavier.

It is not to be omitted to see how providence watches over the town, for
though ever since the gaining of Mount Stanfort the enemy has daily continued
shooting into the town. Some days scores of great shot liberally spent, yet
the hurt that they have done is but a trifie, and the People so far from being
affrighted, that they slighted it being hardened, our boats daily going into
the Sound, and to Milbay under the mouth of the Cannon, and within less then
Musket shot.

It is worth knowing for imitation, that Col. Gould has much purged the
Carrison, from swearers, drunkards, and abominable livers, causing the town
and Garrison to be very careful in observing the Lords day, days of
humiliation, and to be frequently present at the ordinances of the Lord of
Hosts.

Sir Richard Greenviles Letter.
For Col. Gold, together with the Officers and Soldiers now at the Fort, and
Town of Plimmouth, These.
Gentlemen,
THat it may not seem strange unto you, to understand of my being engaged in
his Majesty's service, to come against Plymouth as an Enemy, I shall let you
truly know the occasion thereof. It is very true, that I came from Ireland
with a desire and intention, to look after my own particular fortune in
England, and not to engage my self in any kind, in the unhappy difference bet
wixt the King, and the pretended Parliament now at London. But chuicing to land
at Liverpoole, the Parliaments forces there, brought me to London, where I must
confess I received from both the pretended houses of Parliament, great tokens
of favor, and also importunate motions to engage me to serve them, which I
civilly refused: afterward diverse honorable persons of the pretended
Parliament, importuned me to undertake their service for the Government and
defense of Plymouth: unto which my answer was, that it was fit (before I
engaged my self) I should underst^nd what means they could and would allow and
provide for the effectual p^rformance of that service, upon that a Committee
appo^nted for the West, thought fit with all speed to send a present relief
of Men and Munition to Plymouth, which with very great difficulty was brought
thither, being the last you had, afterward there were many meetings more of
that Committee, to provide the means that should give Plymouth relief, and
enable it to defend it self, and notwithstanding the earnest desires, and
endeavors of that Committee accordingly, I protest before God, after six
months expectation, and attendance on that Committee by me, I found no hopes
or likelihood of, but reasonable means for the relief and defense of Plymouth,
which made me account it a lost Town, and the rather because I being by
Commission, Leiut. General to Sir William Waller, had an ordinance of the
Parliament for the raising of 500. horse for my Regement at the charges of
Kent, Surry. Sussex, Hampshire, who in 3 months time, had not raised 4
Troops, and my own Troop, when I left them having 2 months pay due to them,
could get but one month, for which extraordinary means was used, being a favor
none else could attain, it being very true, that the Parliaments forces, have
all been unpaid for many months, in such sort, that they are grown weak, both
in Men and Moneys, and have by only good words kept their forces from
disbanding. The process of so long tune spent at London, made me and many
others plainly see the inquity of their Policy, for I found Religion was the
cloak for Rebellion, and it seemed not strange to me, when I found the
Protestant religion was infected with so many independants and Sectaries of
infinite kinds, which would not hear of a peace, but such as would be in some
kind as pernicious as was the war. The Privileges of this Parliament I found
was not to be bound by any of the former, but to lay them aside and alter them
as they advantaged their party. This seemed so odious to me that I resolved to
lay my self, as I have done, at his Ma: feet, from whence and his most just
cause, no fortune, terror or cruelty, shall make me sweru, in any kind: and to
let you see also what has formerly past, I have sent you these enclosed. Now
for a farewell; I must wish, and advise you, out of the true and faithful love
and affection, I am bound to bear toward mine own Country, that you speedily
consider your great charges, losses, and future dangers, by making and holding
your selves enemies to his Majesty, who does more truly desire your welfare
and safety, then it seems you do your selves, wherefore, (as yet my friends)
I desire you to resolve speedily of your Propositions for peace, by which you
may soon enjoy your liberties, contents, and estates, but on the contrary, the
contrary which with a sad heart I speak; you will very soon see the effect of.
Thus my affection urges me to impart unto you, out of the great desire I have,
rather to regaine my lost old friends by love, then by force to subject them to
ruin, and in that consideration I must thus conclude.

Fitzford 18 Martij. 1643. Your loving friend Rich. Greenvile.


In Sir Richard Greenviles letter was enclosed a book Entitled, The iniquity
of the Covenant, which was burnt in the Market place, by the hand of the common
Hangman, according to the order of the Council of War, and a Proclamation
that if any person had any of those books and did not bring them forth they
should be accounted and dealt withal as enemies to the state and Town.

The Answer of the Commanders of the Garrison of Plymmouth to this Letter.
Sir.
THough your Letter meriting our highest contempt and scorn, which once we
thought fit by our silence, (judging it unworthy of an answer) to have
testified. Yet considering that your self intends to make it public, we offer
you these lines, that the world may see what esteem we have of the man,
notorious for Apostasy and Treachery, and that we are ready to dispute the
justness and equity of our cause in any lawful way, whereto the Enemy shall
at any time challenge us, you might well have spared the giving us an account
of your dissimulation with the Parliament, we were soon satisfied and our
wonder is not so great that you are now gone from us, as at first when we
understood of your engagement to us: and to tell you truth, it pleased us not so
well to hear you were named to be a Governor for this place, as now it does to
know you are in arms against us; we accounting our selves safer to have you an
enemy abroad, then a pretended friend at home: being persuaded that your
principles could not afford cordial endeavors for an honest Cause. You tell us
of the pretended houses of Parl. at London a threadbare scandal sucked from
Aulicus, whose reward, or a Bp. blessing, you may chance to be honored with for
your Court-service: and how they make Religion the cloak of Rebellion, a
garment which we are confident your Rebellion will never be clad with: you
advise us to consider the great charges we have been at, and the future
dangers we runn our selves into, by making our selves enemies to his Majesty,
who more desires our good then we our selves; and thence would have us propose
conditions for Peace. That we have bin at great charges already, we are
sufficiently sensible, and yet resolve that it shall not any way lessen our
affections to that Cause, with which God has honored us, by making us
instruments to plead it against the malicious Adversaries. If the King be our
enemy, yet Oxford cannot prove that we have made him so. That his Majesty
desires our welfare, we can easily admit, as well, as that its the mischeivous
Counselors so near him, who render him cruel to his most faithful subjects:
and as for our proposing conditions of peace, we shall most gladly do it when
it may advance the public service; but to do it to the enemies of peace,
though we have bin thereto formerly invited, yet has it pleased the disposer
of all things, to preserve us from the necessity of it, and to support us
against all the fury of the enraged enemy: the same God, is still our rock and
refuge, under whose wings we doubt not of protection and safety, when the
Seducers of a King shall die like a candle, and that name which by such courses
is sought to be perpetual in honor, shall end in ignominy: forth want of money
to pay the Parliaments soldiers, though it be not such as you would persuade
us; yet certain we are their treasury had now bin greater, and honest men
better satisfied but that some as unfaithful as your self, have gone before
you inbetraying them both of their trust and riches. Whereas you mind us of the
lost condition of our town, sure it cannot be you should be so truly persuaded
of it, as they are of your personal, who subscribe themselves, and so remain
friends to the faithful.


FINIS.

