INTRIGUES OF LOVE: OR, THE AMORS AND GALLANTRIES OF THE FRENCH Court, During
the Reign of that Amorous and Warlike Prince HENRY IV. (Surnamed the Great.)
Being a true and pleasant History.

Newly made English from the French, By Sir Edwine Sadleyr Baronet.

London, Printed for R. G. and sold by Benj. Crayle at the Peacock and Bible,
at the West end of St. Paul's. 1689.

To his Beloved Consort THE LADY, S -- In return for the Original from Her
received.
THE first Fruits of my Pen (My Dear) are at thy Feet, The History of the
Amors of King HENRY the Fourth, (Surnamed the Great) of France, as in an
English dress, (so far they being properly and genuinely my own) and I hope not
unfaithfully rendered from their native French, wherein it is pity (tho so
Elegant a Language) that the Beauties they contain should have so long lain
hid; (from such at least who are unseen in that Tongue.) Whether now I have
performed with an equivalent success, and made my Author speak English with the
same advantage as he does his French, I must leave Thee and my Readers to
judge. I know, I have endeavored to do him Justice, and so to Copy from the
fair Original, as not to leave so much as one good Lineament behind; and if I
have failed in this Attempt, I shall yet have this honor, to fall a Sacrifice
to Thy Self, and the better Sex, (for whom the following Leaves are principally
intended) and it shall be my Boast that I am such a Sacrifice. But may Thy Self
and those Created Deities, but smile upon this first Essay, and the
Encouragement may produce some better Services from Thine and Theirs eternally
obsequious.

E. S.

The Author's Address to the Reader.
REader, it is not the Epidemick itch,
That often so many does bewitch,
That odd fantastic strange Disease,
That makes men lust so much for Praise;
No such Capricio prompt me on
To undertake what here is done.
Let then the Learned contest the Bays,
Whilst I (...)
Although the free commodity of Wit,
Was never Monopolized yet,
Vnvail'd the ensuing History lies,
Seeking alone the ambition'd Prize,
The blessing of the Ladies Eyes;
Before whose Altars it is a Sacrifice.
A l'Autheur sur son Ingeniuse Traduction Epigramme.
AUtantque dureront les Intrigues d'Amour,
Tandisque sur des Coeurs Cupid aura l'Empire,
Les Hommes si long temps, and les Dames de Cour,
Cette Traduction prendront plaisir a lire.
Elle est douce, elle est male, elle est pleine d'attrais,
certainement elle est fidelle;
Si le Francois est bon, meilleur en est l'Anglois,
^
Si l'Autheur ne paroist, c est, qu il vole fort haut
Parmy les Traducteurs il vole, comme l'Aigle
Au dessus des autres cyseaux
Lors qu'elle prend l'Essort, and vole a tire d'ailes
P. B.

To the Author on his Ingenious Translation.
AS the skilled Gardener does, by kind remove
The growth and beauty of rich Plants improve
With no less my stick skill, kind Sir, you here
Transplant, and better from the Gallick Air;
Lo here an instance, of its choicest Fruit,
Whilst richer Juices feed th'impov'rish'd Root.
'Twould please (methinks) Great HENRY's Shade to see
This noble Task so well performed by thee.
Smiling, the Story of his Loves he would read,
And bless the Hand that raised him from the Dead;
That Hand that gives him hopes to live as long
And great in'th' English as the Gallick Tongue.
France then no more thy nobler Climate boast,
Since we perform as well, and with less cost:
The naked Matter, true, we do receive,
Yet Life and Spirit to that Matter give,
Th'unpollish'd Lump invests it self anew,
Casts off its old, and takes a nobler Hue.
Even as the Snake its tattered skin lays by,
And through that means grows fairer to the eye.
Since then, Dear Sir, here in few vacant hours,
With such success you can Transplant these Flowers,
Let some fresh Subject flow from your soft Pen.
Charm the fair Sex, and gain the praise of Men.
B. C.

THE AMORS OF King HENRY the Fourth, etc.
KIng Henry the Great arriving in histurn to his Succession, in the Kingdom of
his Ancestors; found no little difficulty in putting himself into Possession,
for as much as he was of the new Religion, and for the Rancounters which he
upon that account met with from many of the Greatest of his Subjects, that
would not acknowledge him, (the most part also of the principal Cities and
walled Towns holding of their Party) it behoved him in good earnest to labor
for so brave, and honorable an interest.

The first Arms that he took up was Normandy: But that which there pass' (both
at Arques and at Diepe) being Recorded by most Historians of the Times, I shall
here praetermit, and content my self with the Relation only (...) what I have
both learnt and seen in his Court.

In the time of the Royal Henry the Third, there was a countess i^ Guienne of
whom he was very much enamored the Countese o^ Guise, who appeared to be the
sole and unrivaled Monarch of his Will (...) those being the only Favorites
whom she recommended, and amongst the rest the Marquess of Parabere, whose
Sister was at that time with this Lady. But he meets another Lady in his
passage toward the Frontiers of Normandy (...) to whose new Conquest the first
must resign. Widow of Philibert Earl of Gramont, who died at the Siege of La
Fere, in the Year, 1580.
A Widow young and of so amiable an appearance in the Eyes of this Great
Prince, that with ease he forgot her to whom he had made so many contrary
Protestations. And in truth, she had those Charms that were not to be found in
the first. Both being of equal Quality, and the The Marchioness of Guercheville
was Anthoinette of Pons, first Wife to Henry of Sylly Earl of Rocheguion; and
second to Charles du Plessis, Lord of Lyancourt, first Esquire of France, and
Governor of Paris.
Marchioness of Guercheville (such was the Name of the latter) being Educated
in the fairest and best governed Court of those times, that I mean of the
deceased King Henry the Third, a Prince, than whom none knew better to play the
King and rule his Honors, and all things that belonged to Majesty.

To her therefore this new Captive Prince gave himself wholly up; and In such
sort forgot the Countess of Guise, as that nothing remained of her in his
memory but her very Name. And the Marquess of Parabere, who had been the
Confident of that Amor, could do no less than tell him, that he ought at least
to conserve a Friendship that he had all his Lifetime professed* Tho
transported by his new Amor no other thoughts could possess him, but those of
motioning a Marriage to the Marchioness of Guercheville, whom he knew would not
harken to him upon any other terms.

His Love-affair being in this posture, he advances toward his Enemies, whom
the main concern, the prosecution of his Imperial Right, which so unjustly they
would extort from him, does necessitate him to attend; and is by so many good
Successes encouraged, that he undertakes the Siege of Paris. Sed cedant iterum
arma Cupidini, But Love, an unseasonable God, must revel again, though in the
midst of Arms; A young and Beautiful The Abess of Montmartre was called, Marie
of Beauvilliers, Daughter to the Earl of St. Aignan.
Abess of Montmartre of the House of Clairemont, strikes him at this siege, and
so infatuates the Royal Lover, that the Siege being yet dubious, he takes her
away from Montmartre, and causing her to be conducted to Senlis (a Town under
his Obedience,) she reigns the Mistress of his heart for some little time.

In the mean time, the Marchioness of Guercheville, that his Honor may not be
too much blotted by her desertion) is to be some Eminent The Lords of his Court
is Monsieur de Lyancourt before mentioned.
Lord of his Court, and the King Mediates the Match, soliciting her as much
now, in favor of her new Lover, as before he had done of himself. Hitherto
therefore yielding a modest Ear to the King, she is periwaded to the Match;
receiving the Royal Testimony (as shall afterward be related) that she
continued still in his Favor. After the accomplishment of this design, the
King taking his rounds to confirm and establish his Authority, comes in the end
to Mantes, whither the Ladies having resorted, had made some figure of a Court,
so fair a concourse of Beauties, and particularly those of Quality, whose
Brothers and Husbands heknew, and who had been so much at his Service, gave no
small pleasure to the King. The rest, who in his younger age he had known in
the Courts of his Predecessors, he treated likewise with all Civility, and
received from them no less than an answerable respect.

Some time before his arrival to this place, the Duke of Bellgard (an old
Favorite of the deceased King Henry's) had Characteris'd to him the Beauty of
a young Lady (a proper Entertainment for so amorous a Prince) with whom he was
very much enamored, and as she was to admiration Fair, so he could not forbear
to Commend her; She was not at that time at Mantes, and the Relation of the
Duke of Bellgard had excited in the King a Curiosity to see her; but his
affairs would not suffer him for this time, though soon after when he departed
thence for Senlis, he obtained the desire he had of seeing Madam D'Estree (such
was the Name of Bellgard's Mistress) and at Senlis entertains her with all the
possible Gallantries, that his time would give him leave to perform; which
done, and departing from thence, after the seeing of many other places, he
returns to Mantes, where the unfortunate Bellgard asking his leave to go see
his Mistress, too late discovers that his own Tongue had betrayed him to the
loss of her, and that the King had been too much taken with the sight of her at
Senlis; thus proved the poor lover the Author of his own misfortune; and indeed
we are all too often more obnoxious to hurt from our selves than others. By
this view does he loose not only the permission of seeing of his Mistress, but
hazard the Friendship of his Master and the good hour of his Fortune.

Some time before, he had stayed long at Mantes, and had been extremely ill;
the Ladies that was there, rendering Him all the conrtesie and assistance that
they could, and amongst the rest the young and beauteous Madam de Humieres, who
was resolved to approve herself to him by her Services, not only for the
reputation that he had of being one of the greatest Gallants of the Age, but
also for that particular esteem she had for his Person. This accident gave a
fair oppertunity to express her respects to the fair Madam d'Humieres, and to
the afflicted Duke to receive them, who was so happy as by this to find an
occasion, which he might otherways have long sought for and in vain. But not so
great are the Lover's long, for Bellgard upon a visit to the The Lord of Estree
was John Antonie of Estree, Marquess of Caeuvers who had married Francess
Babou, of du Bourdaissere,
Lord of Estree, falls passionately in Love with his fair Daughter the
aforesaid Madam d'Estree; Who tho at first she with some reluctance received,
(Loving and being beloved of the Admiral d'Villars, a person, most amiable and
deserving,) yet was she not long cruel; being also passionately in Love with
her new Lover, to whom the Admiral (seeing clearly what was most for her
interest) offers a thousand reproaches, which served only to advance his Rival
in his Affairs, and so began to neglect her, that instead of reclaiming her
from her other Lover, he threw her into an utter despondency of his Affection.

It was now that the King became enamored of Madam d'Estree the Mistress of
Bell'gard, tho through the importancy of his Affairs inevitably diverting him
another way, he could see her but once (...) Voyage; however in his Heart (...)
the kindled Fires, and is of nothing more thoughtful during the Voyage than of
her, which is long enough.

In the mean time the The Duke of Languille was Henry of Orleans, who
afterward Married Catherine of Gonzakes, Daughter of the Duke of Nevers,
Duke of Langueville (no more proof against the Arrows of the blind God than
her other Lovers,) at Mantes commenceth Captive to the All-conqu'ring Madam
d'Estree, a Lady so universally effectual by her Charms upon all that beheld
her, that to love and look upon her, was only Synonimous Terms, or terms
expressive of the self same thing.

This Prince had before loved Madam d'Humieres, the late beauteous Subject of
our Pen, who having lost her first Lover, had now imbarq'd herself a fresh. And
indeed so little constant was he always to his choice, that he loved (...)
present best, whilst Madam^ (...) on the other side, who thought to too
insufferable a detraction from her Excellences to be without an admirer, had
likewise furnished herself afresh.

This intreague continued during the Voyage of the King; but he resents it so
strongly at his return, that he becomes most furiously jealous, insomuch that
he began to remit of his favor to Bellgard, giving him to understand that he
would no more of a Companion in his Amors, than in that of his Kingdom, and
that his passion was dearer to him than any thing else. Bellgard was troubled
at this Language and more especially at the tone and action with which it was
delivered, and promised the King all he desired; whilst Madamoisell d'Estree,
who loved not the King, and had bestowed all her Affections upon another, was
so inveterately enraged, that she protested she could not love him, and ceast
not to reproach him with the hindrance of her Marriage to the Duke of Bellgar'd
that made his Court to that end, and immediately departed Mantes, and retired
herself to her Fathers House.

The King, to whom his Enemies never gave any astonishment, conceived so great
an impression from this Action of his Mistress, that he knew not what to
resolve upon. Sometimes he fancy's with himself that seeing her the next day
might reduce her to her former clemency. But this pleased him not in Company,
and to go alone was matter of the extreamist hazard, War being of all sides of
him, and two Garrisons of his Enemies in his way which must lie through the
great and wast Forest; so that he could not devise with himself what Counsel
to take but his passion surmounting all, causes him not withstanding, to
undertake the Journey; four Leagues of which he rides on Horseback, accompanied
by five of the most Trusty of his Servants; And being come within three leagues
of the Ladies House, he Assumes the habit of a Peasant, puts a sack of Chaff
upon his Back, and goes thither on foot, (having intelligence it seems the day
before where he should see her) and find her in a Gallery, with only her Siste^
with her, who was espoused to the Marquess of Villar's

She was so surpised to find the King Madam of Estree, the Person meant by
She, was so surprised, etc. was Sister to Hippolite Juliette of Estree Daughter
to the Lord of Estree, and Wife he says to the Marquess of Villars or Cerisay
being styled as well one as the other, and afterward one of the King's
Mistresses upon the decease of her Sister.
in such an Equipage, and so ill satisfied with a Change that appeared so
ridiculous in him, that she gave him but an ill Reception, yet this rather for
the Clothes that he had on than for himself, and staid but just long enough
with him to let him know that they misbecom'd him so much she could not look
upon him, and so left him.

Her Sister more civil, excuses her coldness, and persuaded him that it was
the fear only of her Father that caused her to retire, and did all that she
could to qualify such a coffeehouse; which indeed was a thing not difficult
for her to do, he being a Prince so effectually captivated that nothing could
loose him from his chains. Now as this Voyage was not only perilous, but to
very little purpose, so it put the people into an equal astonishment to think
what should become of the King.

He reduces them to their former Temper at his return, and to the end, that he
might no more be racked by so ungrateful a thing as a disappointment in this
case, he invents this stratagem to remove the cause; the Father of this Lady to
whom the hinted absence was imputed under color therefore of his service, (the
old Gentleman being under some Provincial Trust,) he causes him to come and
live at Mantes, (not a little pleased with the happy acquest of his desire,)
the means of seeing his Mistress as often as he should have thought fit, if the
necessity of his occasions had not determined him another way.

In the interim, we must not pass ver the adventure of the The Marquess of
Humieres was Giles of Conflans Armantiere Son to the Earl of Auchy.
Marquess d'Humieres, who at the Age of two and twenty years defended the Town
of Senlis, during the rigor of a great Siege, running the very utmost hazard
of his life, and susteining two such great Assaults, that it was contrary to
the opinion of all those that was with him in the Garrison and even of the
Governor himself; not yiedling the least to Capitulate, but bravely and
stoutly maintaining it, till such time as he gave oppertunity to the King's
Servants to relieve the place, who hastened in their relief as soon as
possible, the chiefest being related to the Marquess, not insensible of his
danger and unwilling he should be lost where he also gained a The Battle fought
at Senlis, in the month of May, 1589.
most memorable Battle, and much advanced the affairs of the King on that side
the River Loire.

This young Warrier in so green an Age, had rendered a thousand Proofs of his
Valor, and had thought of nothing hitherto but his Honor. But after this so
brave and Masculine an Action, having not only raised the Siege and discomfited
the Enemy, but also trayl'd in the greatest part of their Cannon into the Town,
and nailed down the rest, he begins to bethink himself of some diversion. And
at Mantes, whether he went for that purpose, the Hero that before had smiled at
the reports of Cannon, and frustrated the improsperous aims of his adversaries
at Senlis Siege, is by the resistless powers of Love and Beauty wounded and
incaptiv'd; the fair Object was Madam d'Simie, whom seeing there he fell most
passionately in Love with. This Lady besides her beauty, was so agreeable, and
had so many Charms, that she put him into such a condition that he had neither
Eyes nor Thoughts but what was hers; this continued wholly unperceived for some
time, and the Husband of this Lady was the last of those that discovered it,
the Husband I mean of Madam d'Simie.

But no sooner came it to his knowledge, but all over enraged, and in a jealous
and brutish fury he conveys her away to a Castle more fit for Lions than for
her, yet notwithstanding is careful neither to say nor do any thing that might
enrage the Marquess d'Humieres, having no desire to grapple with so rude and
potent an Enemy; but during this Treatment of the Lady, the Marquess however
contrives with himself to relieve her, and to apply a remedy, with which the
present state of Affairs does furnish him; indeed he did not esteem it the
best, yet it was such as served at the least to the main purpose, to redeem his
Mistress from her Prison.

Now the King being returned back from his Voyage to Mantes, Besieges and takes
the Town of Diepe, commiting the Government of it to Simie who retired thither
with his Wife. This fair and commodious place ministers an oppertunity to the
Marquess d'Humieres, of having some intelligence of his Mistress, who used all
imaginable means to continue his amor. To this purpose therefore ho causes a
Christning to be made, to which Madam d'Simie and her Husband are invited; who
could not fail to come since they were persons of such Quality that invited
them, and their Company likewise so much solicited by their own Relations, but
the Marquess d'Humiere and Madam d'Simie could not here be discreet enough,
perhaps through a little too much rapture with the interview, to prevent the
Jealousy of her Husband from breaking out, and almost expressing it self in
the horrid Murder of his own Wife, whom he brings back to his own Habitation,
takes away all her Servants and claps her up close in a Chamber.

D'Humieres, informed of this ill usage, sought all possible means to redress
it, but could not openly attempt it, least it might justify the conceived
^ealousies of Simie, who would certainly upon this have killed his Wife. The
next recourse therefore that he made, was the seeking some occasion to die, to
which end he thoughtfully retires himself to one of his The Castle of Ham in
Piccardy.
Castles, where all the Nobility and Gentry coming to visit him, and observing
so many of them together, he proposes an Adventure of Storming an adjacent
Castle of the Enemies in open day; which Motion, though all at the first
resisted, (such an-Enterprize appearing to be too hazardous in the daytime,)
yet in fine, overcome by his persuasions, they unanimously consent, taking
therefore along with him some of his Infantry, he comes at so lucky an hour to
the Castle, that applying his Petards he blew open one of the Gates, the Guards
of the Castle being then gone off; but the Inhabitants recovering, let fly a
Volley of Muskets, and so ruffly saluted the head of this young Generous
Warrier, that at once it put an end to his growing Laurels and his Love; having
scarce yet attained the Age of 22 Years. When the King heard this, he
infinitely resented it, not only for those Services which he had already
received from him, but also for those which he might very probably have
expected from so much Virtue if he had lived. And I think I am obliged to give
him the Character, of being one of the generousest of Men, and one of the
Valiantest perhaps of the Age.

Madam d'Simie, bore this Death very impatiently for a little while, but no
sooner did she something recover her self, but she solaceth with the thoughts
of a new Amor. Thus far Madam d'Humieres and her Lover.

During all this interval, Madam d'Estree continues her Affection to the Duke
of Bellgard, notwithstanding her Amor with the King. And likewise gives
encouragement to the Duke of Longueville, both writing to him and receiving
Letters from him; But Bellgard resolves to desist, and not hazard his Good
grace with the King, for the loss of a Mistress which he might so easily
regain. And Longueville too, seeing his Prince return, Entreats back the
Letters she had received from him, promising to do her the same Justice without
discontinuing of his Affection to her. In brief, he managed the business so
well, that the time and place are appointed this action, but in Contradiction
to to his Promise, deceives her of the most Important part of what he had
received from her, thinking to Influence her by this politic Reserve, and to
aw and oblige her to his Will. But so mortally provoked is Madam d'Estree with
this Gullery, that in the end it cost no less than the Life of this Prince.

For ceasing not from this time to render him all the ill offices to the King;
and the Duke not enduring the Displeasure which he received from the King upon
it, becomes a Party against him, and at his entrance into the Town of Daurlens,
finished his Life by the receipt of a Musket shot upon his Head. People
generally believing that Madam d'Estree had now obtained her desire in his
dispatch. Thus ended the Duke of Longueville for having been too politic.

In the mean time the Lord of Estree the Father of this Lady, much troubled to
see the Royal Amor each minute so much advancing, was willing to rid himself
of this Tyranny. The most probable and equitable expedient for which, seemed to
be to Marry her; And a Nicholas Damerval, Lord of Lyancourt, which near to
Nesteen in Piccardy.
Person of Qua^ity in the Country offering himself ^o this end, of an Estate
not incom^etent for the alliance, (though of (...) Body as much deformed as his
Mind) Madam d'Estree consents, yet Swares ^he King not only to be present at
the ^ay of her Nuptials, but that he should so emphatically conveigh her ^way
thence from the sight of ^er Husband, that she should never ^ee him again, or
at least, not other^ise than by the King's permission, ^erswading him that she
could never ^onsent to any that should make her ^nfaithful to him.

But the Day passing, and the King ^ot being there, (who was now engaged (...)
an enterprise of importance,) she ^wears a hundred Oaths to be revenged ^f the
King, and yet that she would ^ot lie with her Husband who thinking his
Authority over her, would be greater in his own House than in the Town he
Married her in, over which the Lord of Estree was Governor, carries her away
thither, who notwithstanding caused herself to be so well accompanied by the
Ladies her Kinswomen that were at the Wedding, that he durst not attempt any
thing upon her, but what was pleasing; and the King arriving in the interim at
the next Town, commands back his Mistress who was thus conducted at least upon
some hopes of advantage by it at the Court. And conveys her away with him,
Accompanied by her Cosen, and her Sister, presently going on to Attaque the
Town of Carthens, which Siege held so long that it gave time enough to an
Isabelle Babou Wife to the Marquess of Sourd^^ Franciss of Escoubleau.
Aunt of Madammoise^ d'Estree to bestow a Visit upon her Neice, a subtle and
discreet Woman, by whom she was so well instructed that she wholly submitted
the Royal Captive to her Devotion. And the Marquess of Sourdre, her Uncle was
Created Governor of this Town as soon as taken by the King.

The King thus in Love with Madam d'Estree, is now essaying to disanul his
Marriage with the The Queen of Nuvarr is Marguerite of Vallois of France,
Sister to Henry the Third, first Wife to Henry the Fourth.
Queen of Navarr, a Princess not only of Extraction from, but Sister to a King,
yet alas! to Crown whose other Virtues the valuable one of the Chaste Luoretia,
was too much wanting, for which they had been long since separated, and the
Royal Sinner betaken her self to one of her The Queens Castle, was that of
Vsson in Auvergne.
Castles; a place not only by its Fortifications rendered Impregnable, but also
by the advantages of its situation upon a high Mountain, and in a very cragged
Country. This Queen gave out that she was willing to comply with the King upon
Terms, upon which they had agreed had not this new Amor not only interrupted
the Treaty, but put an utter bar to any further proceeding in it; the King
fearing least the dissolution of this Marriage once effected, those of his
Servants that affected him, might be urgent with him to Marry again, which he
could by no means endure; Being one that neither could nor would love any thing
but his Mistress, whom this would have much offended, her self being (as before
was intimated,) contracted.

During this, was depending the Match between Catherine d'Bourbon, the King's
Sister, was Wife to Henry of Lorrain Duke of Bar, who died at Nancy in the
year 1604.
Catherine d'Bourbon the King's Sister and the Count of Soisons, to whom the
King had proposed her, but changing his mind, he resolves to bestow her upon *
the Duke of Monpensier, a Prince though young, yet in truth far submitting to
the other in point of Amiableness, and so very disagreeable to the Humor and
Fancy of the Princess, that she could not forbear upon the sight of him, to let
him audibly understand, that she could not love him; the Duke is not
discouraged with this, but perceiving the King of his side, cease not to
render her all the Endearments that he could; and o^ the other side, the The
Duke of Montpensier and the Earl of Soisons both of the Family of the Bourbons,
Princes of the Blood.
Duke of Soissons offended at this Suit, in which his Rival was Patronized and
encouraged by the King, withdraws himself to his House.

In the interim came Madam d'Bourbon to the Town of Diepe, wherein she finds
Madam d'Gabrielle, (who is the late Madam d'Estree, thus styled after her
Marriage,) and consesseth she Esteems her for the greatness of her Beauty not
to be unworthy the Affection of her Brother; a thing for which she had so much
detested her before, and envied her, that if she beheld her with a pleasant
look, it was with a visible force put upon her self. And Madam d'Gabrielle on
the other side, not being able to dispense with so insufferable a Grandeur in
the Princess to whom she must always bare so profound a deference, often
reproached the King with her coming. Whose only remedy was to be moving, (as
his Affairs frequently called upon him to do) to another place, and to carry
his Mistress along with him; who now began in good earnest to interest her self
in all Affairs; which indeed was not difficult for her to do, by the
forementioned Instrument her Aunt, with whom the Chancellor The Chancellor
Chiverney, is Philip Hurault Earl of Chiverney.
Chiverney is in Love. See hence the efficacy of so Great a Masters example!
how strange is it that so Sage and Eminent a Man as this, should not be able to
resist his Passion! but so it is, and the King willing that all the World
should be as much in Love as himself, was glad to see him fettered in the
common Lot. At this time died very Tragycally Madam d'Estree, Mother to Madam
d'Gabrielle, who as she had Infamously lived, so was she justly inflicted with
such a Punishment.

Still continued the Love betwixt Bellgard and Madam d'Gabrielle; of which the
King had some suspicion; but so slight as yet, that the least show of Kindness
from her, made him condemn it as Criminal. But there happened an Accident, had
like to have made it much more visible. For being at one of his Houses, in
order to a certain Enterprise on that side, and being gone the space of three
or four leagues to that effect, Madam d'Gabrielle stays by the way, pretending
that she was ill, whilst Bellgard counterfeited a Journey to Mantes, which was
not far off. But no sooner was the King gone, but Arphure, the chief Confident
amongst the women of Madam d'Gabrielle, (being one tht she entrusted upon all
occasions) gave entrance to Bellgard into a little Closet of which she only had
the Key, who had also admittance into the Chamber, as soon as her Mistress had
disposed it into that order as she thought fit. As they were together, came
back the King, who though he could not find what he had sought for, had like
now to have found what he did not seek; All that could be done to prevent it,
was to shut up Bellgard in the Closet of Arphure, which was at the Beds-head of
Madam d'Gabrielle, a Window from which looked into the Garden; no sooner did the
King come in (having possibly some item given him of this business) but he
called for Arphure for some of those Sweetmeats, that she kept in this Closet.
But was answered by Madam d'Gabrielle, that she was not at home, and that she
had given her leave to go see some Relations of hers that was in the Town;
notwithstanding the King still insisted that he resolved to eat some of them,
and that if Arphure was not to be found, or some other Person to open it, he
would break open the Door, and forthwith strikes it with his Feet. The surprise
sure is inexpressible these two Lovers must be in, to find themselves so near a
discovery! But Madam d'Gabrielle, if possible, will prevent it, and therefore
feigns so great an illness in her Head, that noise would very much disturb her,
which yet does not at all dissuade the King from his resolution. And Bellgard
seeing there was no other remedy, leaps out of the Window into the Garden, from
whence though it was very high, he had the fortune to do himself little hurt by
the fall.

Now Arphure (who had only hid her self that she might not open the Door) came
in very hot (as if upon some hasty Summons she had posted from her Friends out
of the Town, whom Madam Gabrielle had pretended she had given her leave to go
see) and satisfies the King with what he with so much impatiency demanded. Upon
which Bellgard, (as before was hinted) having so fortunately made his escape,
and the intreague being undiscovered, the subtle Gabrielle a thousand times
reproaches the King with the unkindness of his action which she tells him, she
believes was only to find some plausible occasion to break with her, as (his
Humor changing,) he had done with those that he had loved before, but that she
would prevent him by returning again to her Husband, whom his Authority had
caused her to abandon. I confess (says she) through that extreme Passion which
for you, I have entertained, I have forgot both my Honor and my Duty, whilst
you have repaid me with most innumerable Inconsstancies under color of
Suspicion, for which I have not given you grown'd for so much as a Thought; and
with this the Tears flowed down her Cheeks. Upon which, so great was the
disorder of the Royal Lover, that he begged her Pardon not only for what he had
done, but the false deluding Passion also proved so much the cure of his
Jealousy, that it was long before he entertained it again.

During all this, the Enemies of the King was in possession of the Town of
Paris; In which so great and numerous was the Quality, that they composed a
Court in which several things passed that are worthy of our notice.

The The Duchess of Montpensier, was Catherine of Lorrain, Daughter to Francis
of Lorrain the Duke of Guise (and Ann d'Est his Wife) Father to Charles
d'Lorrain, Duke of Mayenne.
Dutchese of Montpensier a Widow to one of the Princes of the Blood, and Sister
to the Duke of Mayen (Chief of that party which held the first rank against the
King) omitted nothing that might tend to the advancement of the affairs of her
Brother, or rather of his eldest Son (her Nephew) of the same Party, of whom
she had a very good opinion. This Lady loved a Gentleman of the King's Party,
that was really as well, as in Repute, a gallant Man; yet showing him all the
kindness that the best assurance (with any reserve of Modesty) could admit of,
still he could not return it, having a Passion for her Neice (the Daughter of
her eldest Brother) Mademoiselle d'Guise, was Louyse Marguerite of Lorrain,
Daughter to the aforesaid Henry d'Lorrain, and Catherine of Cleves.
Mademoiselle d'Guise, a Lady under the Character of one of the Handsomest of
those times. But being one to whom the King (as in the entrance of this History
is signified) had given some hopes of Marriage as soon as he should be free,
out of a prospect of thus preferring her self to the Royal Bed, she contemned
all her other Lovers. Amongst whom Lord of Guiry, who afterward Married
Mar^erette Hurault Daughter to the Chancellor d'Chi^rney.
Guiry (such was the afore-nam'd Gentleman) was the first that perceived it.
For having done all that he could think of to oblige her, even so far as to
supply them with Provisions in Paris, in the time of its greatest necessities,
he received from her so angry and apparently disdainful a look, as gave an
utter stop to his any-farther Vanity in aspiring.

Indeed all the more brisk Gentlemen ^f the Army of the part of the Duke of
^ayen, as well as the King's, had no less than a Passion for this Lady. For
though her Mother and her self had, as they thought, withdrawn themselves to a
very private recess, yet so great a confluence of Admirers was there even to
this place (through the attraction of this Beauty) that it might properly
enough be styled the Court of that Party; yet after all, not so much was her
Beauty, but her Envy was more at her Competiton Madam d'Gabrielle, not only
because she really exceeded her in Beauty, but also in that her far more envied
happiness, her favor with the King; and therefore sought all possible means to
be revenged upon her.

Now when the King (as before hinted, had laid such close siege t^ Paris, where
assaults were often mad^ on both sides, with such frequent interchanges of
Sallies and Repulses, Madam d'Guise appeared sometimes o^ the Walls. At such
times it was the su^tle Guiry always took his occasions (...) insinuate
something or other that should signify his Passion, though she as often with
an assumed state, especially at this time, appeared not to understand him, the
King having now sent for her Picture, (who was not yet so wholly embarked in
Madam d'Estree,) and it was likewise believed that the Peace, and this Match
would have been concluded together. So that (flushed with these hopes) she not
only despised Guiry, but all her other Lovers.

Excepting the happy Bellgard, for a Truce being made upon some Occasion for
six hours, and the Ladies diverting themselves upon the Ramperts to which the
Gentlemen of the Army came up to confer with their Acquaintance, and more
particularly to contemplate the famed Beauties of Madam d'Guise, and Bellgard
amongst the rest: The scornful Dame that before had made profession of defying
all the World, perceived upon the sight of this Chevalier, that she could love
something else besides a King. And Bellgard himself was so much ensnared and
ravished by her Charms, that he forgot Madam d'Estree, and all the sacred
Oaths he had made of loving nothing but her, and wholly devoted himself to the
present Object; and from that time forth, they began to love one another. How
strange are the effects of resistless Passions? Bellgard being (as it is said)
only come hither to justify himself to Madammoiselle and the Duchess,
concerning the imputation he was under of being guilty of the death of the Duke
of Guise, (which the Duchess had believed him to have a share in, and had
vowed him revenge for) the Mother falls in love with him, and he with the
Daughter, who was not wholly obdurate to him, yet both kept their Fires secret
enough, the one that she might not give cause of suspicion to her Mother; and
the other that he might not offend Madam d'Gabrielle, who was too much the
present prop and buttress of his Fortune, for him to be willing to lose. All
that he could do in this little time, was by his Friends, to inform and
satisfy the Duchess of his innocence in this Case; whose justification was so
well received, that it convinced the Duchess (who could not but believe those
his execrable Imprecations he made upon himself) and caused her to relinquish
her former Opinion; and to command Mademoiselle d'Guise no more to accuse him,
who was not difficult to be persuaded so to do; because, supposing him to be
Guilty, yet not being now free to condemn him, she thought it more suitable to
her present Circumstances to be credulous. Heu! Quid non possis amor?
Omnipotent Love! What is it thou can not do, even to the justifying of the
greatest Crimes?

Every one returned after the Truce was expired, and Bellgard amongst the rest,
tossed with ten thousand various Cogitations; he could not nor would not quit
Madam d'Gabrielle, and his new Passion gave him a most resistless Inquietude.
In fine, he resolves to love them both, to conserve the one and not to
relinquish the other, and from this time seeks out means to please the Duchess
of Guise, who received his Letters and Messages so well, that there was soon a
fair Intelligence betwixt them.

At this time came the young Duke of Guise out of Prison, in which he had been
ever since the death of his Father; and Bellgard knowing him, takes an occasion
to send a Trumpet to visit him, with Letters for the Duchess; who was cunning
enough privately to conveigh as much into the hands of the young Princess. His
Letters was received by the Duchess her self very well; and the Princess,
though she had not an opportunity of speaking to him now, yet intimated by
Signs, that any thing of this nature was not Ungrateful to her from this
Knight; with which the expecting Bellgard was not a little pleased.

In the mean time the War continued, and the Duchess of Guise desirous of a
Passport to one of her Houses, the King not only grants it, but likewise that
she may pass through the same place where he himself was with all his Court;
where the young Lady (pleased with this Voyage) hoped both that Bellgard might
now find some means to speak to her, and that she might also have an
opportunity to see whether the envied Beauty of her Rival, answered that
Character that was given of it: And Bellgard (a Convoy for them to the Court;
being but a due Respect to Persons of this Quality) takes occasion to beg one
of the King, (who was himself of too courteous a disposition not to grant it)
and of which, (by virtue of that Rank which he held in the Court) he had the
Commission himself.

Arrived, both the Duchess and the young Princess, received a thousand
Caresses from the King, of which the former, could not refrain from commending
the Beauty of Madam d'Gabrielle, who yet thought she found Mademoiselle d'Guise
too handsome for her liking, and Mademoiselle d'Guise on the other side was
surprised with the Beauty of her Rival; yet both concealing the opinion which
they mutual had of each other, received one another with all the coldness that
was consistent with a due civility; and Mademoiselle d'Guise, as soon as she
had seen Madam d'Gabrielle, turned her self toward Bellgard, and said, Truly I
thought she had been more handsome, to which Bellgard answered nothing, being
too much taken with this Lady. Now the King, who knew well all Passions, and
likewise those of the Duchess of Guise (not unpracticed in the affairs of
Love) did not doubt but that this Chevalier, (as indeed it was true enough)
only amuz'd and blinded the Duchess, and used his pretended Addresses to her,
only to facilitate his Access to the young Princess, with whom he judged he was
in Love: This Opinion had these two effects; It repressed the King's suspicion
that he had entertained of his being in Love with Madam d'Gabrielle, and caused
him to put an end to all farther designs upon Madam d'Guise.

But Madam d'Gabrielle, who above all her little Interests, esteemed the
affection of her Lover the Duke of Bellgard, took so narrow a scrutiny of his
actions, that she knew that he loved Mademoiselle d'Guise, and that he also was
not hated by her; at which she conceived so strong a jealousy of Madam
d'Guise, that she was under no small pain to suppress it. With which the
Princess (still pushing her on) was (not ill pleased) proposing to her self
this Advantage by it, That if upon her departure from the Court, she could not
boast her self of gaining any thing upon the King, yet she might at least
triumph over his Mistress.

The next day they departed, the Duchess having obtained of the King a
Neutrality for the House she was to go to, to which Bellgard, (so much inflamed
by the attractions of the fair Mademoiselle d'Guise) did not a little
contribute; the King making no scruple to grant him all that in this nature he
could desire, as a Bait to lure him from his Mistress Madam d'Gabrielle, who
was so excessively enraged by her jealousy of Mademoiselle d'Guise, that she
would not so much as bid adieu to either the Mother or the Daughter, feigning
her self ill, and not suffering her self to be seen all that day by any Person
whatsoever.

Bellgard and all the Court conducted these Ladies on their way so far as that
they returned not till the next day, when the incensed Gabrielle beheld her
Lover with so much fury in her Eyes, that it began to trouble him; And seeing
the beloved Princess no more, the present Object retook him again, to whom
(inclined by his Interest, as well as by losing the fair Ideas of the absent
Beauty) he resettled himself; cursing his former inconstancy and indiscretion.

In the mean time the Duchess of Guise, to whom her Life was of less value
than her Love, and especially with this Knight, contrives a means to continue
it by instating her Son in a Treaty with the King, (for which she might easily
persuade her self, the Favorite Bellgard would not be left out of the
Commission) and to make way for it, sends advice of it to the King. Who
desirous that all his Subjects might return to their Allegian^^ particular a
Prince that was one of the Chiefs of the Adverse Party, and of whom he had so
great an Opinion, dispatched Bellgard immediately toward her.

To which Madam d'Gabrielle opposed as much as possible, averring that Bellgard
was not a Man of Business, and that the Mother (intimating the Passion that she
had for Bellgard, and probably suspecting some contrivance now of the
Dutchesses in relation to it) might be more pleased with his Mediation than the
Son; But in the end, the Duke of Neverrs, in kindness to Bellgard, (a Person
then amongst the first of the King's Favorites) prevailed upon her (to do
pleasure to Bellgard, whom he loved most extremely) no longer to oppose it; And
did no small favor by this to the Duke of Guise; For this Treaty not quickly
concluding, and Paris soon afterward being surrendered into the King's hands,
the Love of Bellgard to his Sister was of no small import, (this Surrender so
much infeebling the Enemy.) A kindness he had never received, unless from the
Benevolent hands of the Duke of Nevers, who did all that this Knight desired,
and with so great a zeal (and this seconded by the active and cooperating heat
of the Duke himself) that he put an end to an Affair, that all the World stood
astonished to see so soon and so advantagiously accomplished.

Behold how the Affairs of this Court are carried on, and directed to such ends
as was the least thought of by all, by very few known to be certainly in
persuit, only there was some discourse of it indeed in the Court. The Duke upon
his coming was very graciously received by the King, and likewise so well from
his Sister, that he commenced Servant to her from this time.

At this time it was (the King being now gone to besiege a Town that was yet on
the Party of the Duke of Mayen) that Madam d'Gabrielle was brought to Bed of a
The Son borne by Madam d'Gabrielle, upon which she was made Marchioness of
Beaufort, was afterward the Duke Vendosme.
Son; At which the King conceives so great a Joy, that he causes her to quit
her Name, and assume the Title of Marchioness of Beaufort. And began not to
love her more because his love was before so extreme it could receive no
augmentation, but more to Esteem her, Honor, and Respect her.

Seeing her self in this condition, she began to search out all means to hinder
her Marriage, and to assume to her self higher Expectations; Her Counselor,
her Aunt, Madam d'Sourdis, insinuating into her, that she might arrive to
better Fortunes. And her Gallant the old Chancellor of Chiverney, gave her
likewise useful Councels toward this end, which she began in good earnest to
execute, making Friends for her support, and establishing, and preferring those
that depended upon her, and endeavoring by her Friends to persuade the Queen
to break a Marriage, from which she could expect nothing but much uneasiness
and mistrust; But for this time could gain nothing upon her Spirits: In the
mean time there is a Reconciliation twixt Bellgard and his Mistress, (who had
so strong an inclination to Love him, and be Beloved of him, that she helped to
deceive her self even when she knew he flattered her, for which cause he was
the more industrious, seeing her now more Puissant than ever.

The Sister of the King, and the Duke of Guise, hid now no more their Passion,
and the Duke began to take ill Bellgard's often Visits to his Lodgings; (who
notwithstanding his Service for the new Marchioness of Beaufort, could not
wholly relinquish his Amor with Mademoiselle d'Guise his Sister) the Duke
taking notice of his frequent Visits at his Lodgings, resents it, and began to
examine the cause, in so much that Mademoiselle d'-Guise, who feared her
Brother might make some Rumor of it abroad; gives Advertisement of it to
Bellgard, who a little pausing upon it with himself, had recourse to the Duke
of Nevers for Advice. The Duke informs him of the most proper Expedient that in
his present Circumstances he could use; which was, That some distant Service
might be allotted, in order to his remove from the King, to the Duke of Guise;
which (he advises) may be the Government of Province; and engages himself to
employ his Interest toward the accomplishment of it, if it should not be
opposed by the Marchioness of Beaufort. Bellgard therefore (assured of his
Friend) speaks of it to her, taking occasion from the Affection she bore to
this Prince, to tell her it was now so publicly known, that it was even come
to the King's Ear, to which it gave such offense, that in her own Justification
she ought at least to solicit his remove to some distant Service, which his
Courage rendered him so capable of for the King, and proposed the Government of
Province. In short, he managed his Business with so good a Conduct, that the
Duke of Guise was soon dispatched for Province. But for what happened there, I
must refer you to the Historians.

The King's Sister infested with this Accident, recurrs to another Object the
Duke of Espernon, a Man brave, though in his Age, and had acquired the Favor
of the last King, being by him preferred to great Honors and Dignities. This
lasted till her Marriage with the Duke of Bar, to whom she was soon after
actually married, and conducted into his own Country. The Marchioness of
Beaufort remaining for this time the sole Mistress of the Court.

Now the Duke of Bellgard fearing least his love to the Duchess of Guise
should occasion him to lose his first Mistress, resolves to introduce a good
Correspondency betwixt them, and seeing he could do what he pleased with the
Marchioness, he persuades her since she was likely to be Queen, it might
advance him to a Station in which he might be more Serviceable to her, if he
could espouse Mademoiselle d'Guise; However, if she could not approve of the
Marriage it self, yet the pretext of it would be a plausible means to remove
the King's Suspicion, which he had already entertained, and into which it was
more than probable he might again relaspe; and farther told her, that the
Suspicion of the King was a great stop to his Preferment, and that whatsoever
in appearance he might do, yet she knew that his Heart was still with her. In
brief, he knew so well how to Cajole her, that she resolved to give Countenance
to Mademoiselle d'Guise, who Was glad to obtain a good Understanding with a
Person of her Quality, and so Engagingly deported her self, that she indear'd
the Marchioness to so extraordinary a Kindness for her, that they not only
dressed every day alike, but was as it were, knit like Joynt-Twins inseperably
together.

This blinded for a while the King, and diverted the Suspicion that he began to
have. But one of his Vale d'Chambers having seen a Letter which Bellgard writ
to the Marchioness, which he had found one morning when she was ill, upon her
Twy-light, where Arphure had left it, not believing that any one should have to
do so early in the Room; he commanded him to have an Eye upon them; Which
doing, (and believing like a good Servant, that his Master was espoused to this
Lady,) and imagining that he saw Bellgard one night entering in with her, he
gives advice immediately of it to the King, who presently sends Praslin, (the
afterward Marshall of France,) one of the Captains of his Guard, to Sacrifice
him in the Chamber.

Praslin was much surpised at this Command, and the Love he had for them both,
made it very ungrateful; but however he must go; He takes with him such a
number of the Guards as he thought fit that was walking in the Hall, takes so
far a way about, and makes so much noise, that he found no body at his entrance
into the Room, but Madam Beaufort alone, to whom he delivers his Message. Who
seeing him so unwilling to surprise them, promises never to forget so great a
Kindness; and the Duchess of Guise that was also privy to this action,
conceived so good an Opinion of him for it, that she assisted him in his
progress to those signal Preferments, which he afterward enjoyed till his
Death.

Madam d'Beaufort in the interim, complains mightily of the Jealousies of the
King; at which the King, seeming to be sensible of, and relent her wrong,
promises her that it should be never the worse with her for it. But ceases not
a little to Reproach her with Bellgard's Letter, which she swore she had not
read, and justified her self (which was not very difficult to do) very well to
the King. Though Bellgard himself found so ill a Treatment upon it, that he was
forced to absent himself from the Court; and with no less a Condition, than
that he should never presume to return again till he was Married, and brought
his Wife with him to the Court. The Duke of Nevers, his supporting Friend, was
dead, and Madam d Beaufort, found it too ill taken when she spoke for him, that
his shortest and best course was to Obey what was Commanded, though it was with
the greatest Regret.

During this Voyage, a The Wife to the Constable of Montmorancy, was Louise of
Budos, Vicount of Ports, and of Catherine d'Clermont.
Wife of the Constable of Montmorancy's, whom he had lately Married, came to
the Court, a Lady who by the Excellency, or perhaps rather novelty of her
Beauty, attracted the Eyes and Hearts of the Men, and by so doing the Envy of
the Ladies, though (perhaps) through the natural height of her Temper, as well
as of the exalted pre-eminency of her Place, regardless of both, she as much
undervalu'd the hatred of the Ladies, as the addresses of the Men.

The King also himself was a little touched, (for which I suppose the
Marchioness will not pardon him) However it hinders him not from taking all the
occasions of manifesting his Affection to this new Beauty. Sacred and
Inviolable is the Prerogative of Kings, and Unlimited, (especially in that of
Loving whom they please) and the Marchioness must not oppose it. Though Madam
de Montmorancy suffers it more to excite Envy from the Ladies, than for any
Pleasure that she could take in it, being not only loved, but adored by the
Marquess of Biron, a Son of Mars, who had acquired the greatest Reputation for
Arms of any one of his time. But oh Unhappy Fortune! the admired Beauty does no
sooner, (as it were) show her self to the World, but she goes out of it again
in one of her Childbeds; yet leaving two such fair Copies of her Excellencies
behind her, a The Son brought into the World by her before her death, was Henry
Duke of Montmorancy, the second of that Name, Peer and Marshall of France, and
afterward Beheaded at Thoulouse in October 1632. and her Daughter Charlotte
Marguerete Montmorancy, Wife to Henry of Bourbon first Prince of the Blood,
deceased 1646. who had Issue the Princes of Conde and Conty and the Duchess of
Longueville.
Son and a Daughter, made the World some competent Amends for the loss of so
incomparable a Person. But these I shall speak more of elsewhere, being
desirous now to finish the History of the Marchioness of Beaufort.

Who during this interval had a Madam d'Beaufort her Daughter, was Catherine
Henriette Legitimate of France, Married 1619. to Charles of Lorrain, Duke of
Elbeuf, of whom she had diverse Issue, and the Son she had soon after upon the
disanulling of her Marriage, was Alexander Vendosme Grand Prior of France, who
afterward died Prisoner in the Castle of Vincennes.
Daughter, and not long after a Son, but the last of these, after the
nullifying of her Marriage. Which so much elevated the Marchioness, that she
left no stone unturned to bring to pass her Marriage with the King. Who now
more Amourous than ever, upon the Birth of these two Sons, gratified her in all
that she could desire, removing one of the Greatest of his Council, who
endeavored to thwart this design. Knowing that he could obtain the Consent of
his Queen, and that there wanted nothing more but the Concurrence of the Pope
to ratify the dissolution of his former Marriage, which was the only Obstacle
of this. To which purpose Hilery is dispatched to Rome, the ablest Man of his
Council, and desiring nothing more than to Oblige both the King and his
Mistress.

A little before this, the King had made her Duchess; in which Dignity and
Place she so well behaved her self, that though she could not be by all
beloved, yet she was hated by none; and growing Big again, demeaned her self
with so much Gravity, Circumspection, and so absolute a Chastity, that she
consorted only with the Vestals, and in both Dress and Actions demonstrated so
perfect a Modesty, that the King remembered with regret that ever he had
suspected her; and was melted down into the most invincible resolution to make
her his Wife.

At this time Bussy Lamet, an old Courtier of no small Account and Esteem with
the King, (both to Oblige the Marchioness, and to Incite the King by his
Example) Marries a Mistress of his by whom he had had several Children; which
was of no small moment to the Marchioness, for we are all not ill pleased
with-parallel Instances, (to render them the less culpable) when our Actions
are otherwise not so justifiable in themselves.

Commands were now given to the Ambassador at Rome, to pursue the Dissolution
of the Marriage, and to solicit the Consent of the Queen, which was rendered
the more Urgent by the Marchioness, because being with Child, and near her
production, she was very unwilling that the Birth she went with should be
Illegitimate; Who to make public profession of her Faith, Celebrates her
Easter at Paris, Lodging in the Cloister of St. Germain L'Auxerrois; On Holy
Wednesday, she was at Service, at a Church in the end of the Town, called the
Tenebris, which they performed very Harmoniously; she went her self in a
Litter, attended by a Captain of the Guards, but the Princesses in Coaches; and
least she might be either too much crowded or observed, her Chapel was likewise
cleared by the Captain of the Guards. Where during the time of the Office, she
entertained her self, and Mademoiselle d'Guise, who was with her, with Letters
from Rome, by which she was satisfied that her Desires should soon be
accomplished, and also from the King himself, intimating him so impatient to
see her Queen, that he had remanded du Frosne, one of his Secretaries of State
(a Person who because related to her in Marriage, must needs be wholly devoted
to her Interest) to Rome; to urge and press his Holiness to a permission of
what he was so much resolved to do; and in such Prayers as these was the time
of Devotion spent, But ended, the Marchioness, (who had gave Mademoiselle
d'Guise to Understand that she was going to Bed, and had desired the diversion
of her Company,) immediately betakes her self to her Litter; and Mademoiselle
d'Guise to her Coach, causing her self to be set down at the Dutchesses.

Whom (arrived) she found not only undressed, but in great affliction with her
Head; and soon after she falls into a strong Convulsion, yet out of which by
strength of Remedies she was recovered; and upon this would have writ to the
King, had she not been reattack'd and prevented by a second Fit, after which
receiving a Letter from the King, she attempted also to read it, and was again
retaken by a third, so that in the end increasing mightily upon her, and
overpowering the unequal strength of her Nature, they put too certain a period
to her Life. On Wednesdey night this Illness first took her, and on Friday,
delivered by the force of Medicine, she Died on Saturday in the Evening, devoid
of all Sense, as far as any body could perceive.

The King who was now at one of his Houses, was early enough advertised of this
Sickness, but imagining it to be only the result and disorder of Breeding, was
not much moved with it at the first. But the Thirdday-Messenger bringing him
News both of its Danger and Continuance, he caused him to make toward Paris;
who coming within six leagues of it. (where he found all the Lords of his
Court) they gave him to understand by the sadness of their Countenances, that
his Mistress was dead; who after he had read the too fatal certainty of it in
their looks and gestures, was mightily Troubled, and required solitude,
dismissing all his Attendance, excepting Bussy Lamet, (the Person before spoken
of) and the Duke of Retz, who had the Character of being extreme good Company;
the last of these (giving him first a little time to vent his Passion) told the
King, almost smiling, that (in his Opinion) he was very happy, and that
weighing of his present Circumstances, must needs induce him to believe it; and
that the Gods had favored him by her death: The Royal concern was too great at
first to be laid by such Expressions, but the King a little reviving, and
calling to mind the Important Business he was about, (which was intimated by
the Duke) he confessed what he had said to be true, and lifting up, his Eyes to
Heaven (not insensible both of this and all his other Mercies) makes suitable
Returns to that Beneficent Hand from which he had received them, and so well
contented himself, that within the space of seven weeks he became Enamored of
Madam Madam d'Antragues, the afterward Marchioness of Verneuil, was Henriette
of Balsac d'Antragues, Sister to Charles of Vallois Earl of Auvergne,
afterward Duke of Angoulesme, Natural Son to Charles the Ninth King of France.
d'Antragues, (the afterward Marchioness of Verneail) both very Young and
Handsome, and of a good House, and if not equalling the other in Beauty, yet
exceeding her in Gayety, and so well supplying her absence, that she (at the
least) struck out all his Melancholy Reflections upon her death.

The Ministers of State now seeing the Ambitious Marchioness thus stopped and
controwl'd by Fate in her pursuit after Majesty and the iminent danger that in
this respect they was delivered from, by her death, was resolved to prevent the
same danger from this new Beauty, (whose height of Spirit they knew not to be
inferior to the others) and therefore expeditiously pushed on the King to
Marriage, and he that was at Rome to mediate for it with the Marchioness of
Beaufort, now mediates for it with the Princess of The Princess of Florence was
Marie d'Medicis Daughter to Francis d'Medicis, great Duke of Tuscany and Jane
Arch Duchess of Austria by her Birth Queen of Hungary and Bohemia.
Florence. To whom the Pope not only gave all his necessary consent, but
likewise the Queen Margaret all that Was desired from her; insomuch that the
business was soon concluded that so it anticipated both the Imagination of the
King, and knowledge of the Marchioness, who was now big, and conveyed in order
to her lying down, to one of the Houses of the King, toward which he conducted
her with very good hopes, but geting some hurt by the way she proved Abortive
and was very ill; though through the assistance of the King, and the
concurrance of all imaginable Remedies, she came again to her health. It was at
this time that she heard that the Match was agreed upon betwixt the King and
the Princess of Florence, upon which she so impetuously taunted at the Amorous
Prince that he had much ado to reduce her to a good humor. And Bellgard (whom
she suspected to be the cause of all this) for her not having given him that
reception which he had formerly had with the Marchioness of Beaufort, (and
would have had with her) she is resolved to be revenged upon by the Prince of
Joinville, (the afterward Duke of Chevreus) a Prince Handsome and Young, and
of a good Grace, and one of her Admirers, whom she causes to attempt his Life
one night at his entrance into the House of one Sebastien Zamet (with whom the
King then Supped) there encountering him with his Sword. Bellgard was wounded,
and his Servants seeing it, pursued the Prince of Joinville, whom they had
certainly killed had it not been for the interposing of Rambouillett, a young
Chevalier of a good House, who was so much wounded in the Encounter, that it
was believed he would have died.

So o'erflow'd the King with Choler at this Action, that he would not only have
punished the Prince, but have permitted the other to dye on his Wounds.
Notwithstanding he was so well looked to by stealth, that he escaped, and the
Duchess of Guise (Mother to the Prince) and his Sister; obteyn'd his
reconciliation with the King, tho both (much offended at this action,)
suspected that the Prince had no other cause to treat Belgard in this fashion
but only for his love to the Marchioness of Vernucil; thus all was soon
appeased, and a motion of War made upon the Duke of Savoy, on the account of
the Marquisate of Salusses; which he had treacherously seized upon and taken
during the diversion of the last King at Blois. For the King who by dint of
Battle had recovered all the rest of his Kingdom, and instated himself in the
hereditary seat of his Royal Ancestors, could not bear that the Duke of Savoy,
in competition with him so petty a Prince, should pretend to exclude him from a
Country that was his own due, and proper inheritance, which he had often
demanded, and which the Duke of Savoy stood possessed of, by no other means but
that of a most unneighbourly and unjust surprise and fraudulent usurpation. And
the Duke of Savoy was now come, in order to some accommodation betwixt the King
and himself, thinking possibly to render his designs more effectual, by being
present in his own person. But indeed his chief dependence was upon the
intelligence he had with the deceased Duchess, in whose lifetime he had
assured the King of his intention to wait upon him, and had so much engaged
himself by both what he writ and what he said, that there was now no room for a
retreat. At his coming there was nothing but feasting and gallantry in the
Court, and such as was argumentative of a general satisfaction, he makes
Presents to all the handsome and principal Ladies of the Court, and it may be a
little more than was for the benefit of some of them; and now the Ladies (as
upon such occasions) contesting for Precedence, and the King not determining
the point, there occurred a most pleasant Diversion both to the King and the
Marchioness.

The Duke of Savoy returned without doing any thing, and the King resolved to
make War upon him; which, as he goes to receive his Queen, the Princess of
Florence Maria d'Medicis, (that Country lying in his way) he performed. Which
(and which was soon) being subdued, the Pope intermediates for an
Accommodation, and the King receives his Queen, whom he had before Espoused by
his deputed Proxy, his Uncle (having before sent to him his Procuration by
Bellgard, which much augmented the hatred of the Marchioness;) And thus his
Majesty obtained his desire.

In the mean time the Married Queen, was come as far as Marseille to meet the
King, thither conducted by his Aunt the Duchess (of the House of the Vrsins,)
and the Duchess of Mantoue her Sister, and Eleonor d'Medicis her Cousin
German, a Person much esteemed in the Court of France, (and who had been much
enamored of this Princess before she was Queen) and there ^^ceiv'd by two
Cardinals, the Constable, Chancellor, and the Duke of Guise that was Governor
of the Province. By the Princesses Dowagers of Nemours and Guise, and many
other Ladies, the Marchioness of Guercheville amongst the rest, whom the King
had loved, and (finding perhaps more Virtuous than he desired) had promised to
make Maid of Honor to his Queen; keeping his Word with her after the end of
ten Years, it being so long since he first loved her.

The Queen was brought on with all sorts of Magnificence to the Town of Lions,
where she was expected by the King; and the Nuptial Ceremonies performed: The
two Daughters of the Constable, the Duchess of Vantadour, and the Countess of
Auvergne, the afterward Duchess of Angoulesme, being here; both very Handsom^
and the first beloved of Eleonor d'Medicis, who (as before said) was under the
Repute of such a Gallant Man; but his Love as volatile as he, stayed no longer
with him than he at the Court.

Though it is otherways with the Duke of Guise, and Espernon, betwixt whom the
quarrel was so great, that it divided the whole Court; though at last
reconciled by the King, and without doubt not without some intention himself
upon the Duchess of Vantadour; yet notwithstanding he relinquisheth not his
Amor with the Marchioness of Verneuile, commanding daily his Messengers to
her; who now ceasetho not to treat the Queen even after her own inventions, and
there wanted not those that made Report of it to the Queen, which made so great
a broil, that it almost embaras'd in it the whole Court; some reporting things
to the Queen; others to the Marchioness; the first, that they might insinuate
themselves into the favor of the Queen; and the latter, that they might engage
the Marchioness; and how many others there might be (He only knows that knows
all things) that only to render the breach so much the more wide and incurable,
might act on both sides.

These Feuds did not presently appear, but during the Queens Voyage to Paris,
there was another Intreague that amused the Court; the King having sent, with
Mademoiselle, to the Queen, the Duchess of Nemours, as Governess of her
Household, the Marchioness of Guercheville, as Maid of Honor, and Madam
d'Ritchelieu as Lady of the Attire; the Queen refused the last, saying, that
she had Leonora already in the Place, who had not only all along served her,
but whom she had now brought Over on purpose for that Place; to which the King
replied, that having given it to Madam d'Ritchelieu, she was desirous of that
Office; in so much that this made an absolute Rupture betwixt the Marchioness
and the Queen, and the whole Retinue that was sent her was remanded back again
to the King. The Sagacious Mademoiselle d'Guise, soon knew what Profit she
might reap from this occasion, and takes part incontinently with the Queen,
gaining by it a particular account and favor with her: The same day she
arrived at Paris, the King Commanded the Duchess of Nemours to fetch the
Marchioness of Verneuil, and present her to the Queen, which the wary Princess
declining, would fain have excused her self from, saying, That by so doing, she
should lose all her Credit with her Mistress; but the King, contrary to his
Custom, (which was always to be Courteous) Commanding her something ruffly to
do it, she Obeyed. But the Queen astonished at such a surprise, received the
Marchioness very coldly, who notwithstanding being of a Nature well assured,
addressed her so familiarly, and with such freedom and talkativeness, that she
compelled her in the end to entertain her. The Duchess in the interim that
introduced her, received little satisfaction upon it from the King, and a very
bad Countenance from the Queen, who was so much irritated by this action, as
never after to forget it; and Leonora perceiving by this, that she was not
secure in her Place, without the Approbation of the King, solicited the
Marchioness to be her Friend, promising her, that if she could acquire the
Royal Approbation, she would put her into a capacity of doing what she pleased
with the Queen. Which the Marchioness undertaking, so well effected, that the
smiles of Majesty attended it, it much mittigating the former displacency of
the Queen, which the King observing, and being weary of his Stages to the
Marchioness two or three times in the day, caused Lodgings to be prepared for
her in the Louvre, and brings her thither, which after some little time
rekind'led again the jealousy of the Queen, she being ever and anon
entertained by several hands, with the discourses of the Marchioness, which
favored of so little respect, that it began to make a breach of that
Intelligence that was betwixt them; Both these was Big together, and it was no
small difficulty for the King so to accommodate himself to them both, that
neither might be disobliged, the Queen he was to treat with all the respect due
to her Quality, and he delighted more in the company of the Marchioness. Every
one also that would not displease the King, resorted to her, which the Queen
took very ill, and indeed, so near were their Lodgings, and so much within each
others inspection, that it proved the cause of perpetual differences betwixt
them. In the mean time Leonora, by Presents; kept her correspondence with the
Marchioness, not questioning but it might consist with a good understanding
with her Mistress, the Charm only of whose favor (it seems) having very few
other Allurements, had procured her a Lover, a certain Gentleman of Florence,
that came along with the Queen, who now made his court, and was so fortunate to
be approved; His Name was Conchini, of good Extraction, and therefore Leonora,
who her self proceeded from the scum of the People, thought him no ill Choice;
but yet there was some difficulty before this Marriage could come to pass, for
the King did not love him, and those of the House of the Queen hated him, and
the Queen her self feared to speak of it, left it should be refused. In fine,
consulting together, they made recourse to her Omnipotency the Marchioness of
Beaufort, and succeeded so well in it, that he obtained the freedom of being
with her as often as he pleased. With which the Marchioness her self was not
ill satisfied, knowing that by this she obliged Leonora, and through her the
Queen, whose favor, though she did not so much respect, yet she valued her
Resent ments.

After Conchini had had this access to Leonora, he makes his Applications, that
he might Marry her. The Duchess makes some difficulty of it at the first,
knowing the Aversion of the King to these two Persons, but in the end, through
the Intercession likewise of Leonora, who engaged that the Queen should speak
of it too, she took up a resolution of causing this Marriage to succeed; the
Queen sends daily to her Lodgings, to know the News, makes her half the
Presents she receives, and treats her better than either of the Princesses. But
before this Match is accomplished, the Queen and Marchioness are to be in the
Straw.

The Queen is first, and presents the World with the most Illustrious and Happy
Prince Louis, Dauphin the Thirteenth; and a Month after the Marchioness brings
to light Prince Henry of Bourbon, (afterward Bishop of Matz) both of which are
welcomed into the World with the greatest Joy, which continued all the Winter;
and Perparations are made by the Queen, for the space of three months, for a
Ball, in which the Marchioness had a part, which so pleased the King, that he
consented to the Marriage of Conchini and Leonora; and that the Queen might not
only bestow her in Marriage, but that she might also give her such fortune, as
might comport with the quality of her place. The good intelligence lasted all
the Winter and part of the next Summer, but the Court is impatient of too long
a Calm, and every one promises himself some advantage from change and
competitions.

The King a little before, had taken notice of Madam d'Villars the Kings
Mistress, after the Decease of her Sister the Duchess of Beaufort is the same
was hinted before the Marchioness of Villars or Cerisay.
Madam d'Villars Sister to the Duchess of Beaufort, who indeed had no other
Beauty but that of her Youth and her Hair. This Lady envied the Marchioness
extremely, in that she had (as she thought) ravished from her the favor of the
King, and as she was malicious, so she began to put her Malice into practice;
revealing to the Queen her intentions, whom she knew to be grown weary of the
audaciousness of the Marchioness, and not unlikely to favor her designs, which
she did, and neither Leonora, nor Conchini, discovered any thing of the
intreague; the first of these being but seldom with the Queen, and the last
sitting down by his present fortune was not inquisitive into the affair. I have
otherwhere said, that the Prince of Joynville, was a long time in Love with the
Marchioness of Vernuielle, and now he becomes enamored of Madam d'Villers, who
was so subtle and knew so well how to persuade him, that she got from him the
Letters the Marchioness had writ to him, during that Amor, in which she had
fawned officiously upon him, and contemptuously treated both the King and the
Queen, who upon the sight of them, (though she beheld them with the disdain
they deserved) could not refrain from letting her know she was pleased, and
persuaded her to show them to the King, At first she could not consent knowing
the great credit of the Marchioness with the King, and fearing her spirit, but
in the end is prevailed upon by the persuasions of the Queen. Whilst
Mademoiselle d'Guise that introduced her to the Queen (not withstanding the
vivacity of her Wit) could not discover at the first what should be the eause
that she should be in so particular a grace with the Queen that carried it so
coldly to all the rest of the World; being a thing (she thought) too intricate
to salve. And indeed they industriously hid the matter from her, because it
tended so much toward the disadvantage of her Brother. After the Train had
been laid for some days, and contrived so well, that the ill, malicious Work,
might be done with some security, and the plotted mischief effectually
accomplished; Fire is to be given, and the Marchioness, if possible, to be
blown up, taking then the King at an advantage, Madam d'Villars shows him,
perhaps, what he was not willing to see, the aforesaid Testimonies of the
Marchionesses Infidelity and Despite, and thus the softmouth'd Siren accosted
him; Royal Sir, The Obligations I am under to Your ^^^nty, and the Affection I
always entertained for so excellent a Personage as your Self, would not suffer
me any longer to conceal the Indignities offered You: You, who are, or ought to
be, the Master of others, and not sure, their Scorn and Contempt, and one of
the most deserving Men in the World.

This good Prince, who easily admitted himself to be flattered, and gave no
unwilling Ear when they insisted, especially, upon his merit, (which I suppose)
the subtle Parasite well enough understood, thanked her for her Intelligence
she had given him, and so unutterably stomachs the unworthy usage he has had,
that he sends immediately one of his Confidents to Reproach the Marchioness
with her unfaithfulness, protesting that she should never see his Face again.

She was not at this time at her Lodgings in the Louvre, but in the Town, where
she was much surprised with this News; but in the midst of this Disorder so
well commanded her self, and conserved so much respect for the Person that sent
it, that she replied after this manner, with much temper. As I have never done
any thing yet, (I am assured) to offend the King, so I cannot divine the
Reasons for which he should thus use me, and I hope the Truth coming to light,
will sufficiently revenge me of those that have made these false Impressions
upon him. And with this retired into her Closser, where she gave that scope to
the excessive trouble upon her Spirits, which she thought was not discreet to
do before them.

In the mean time Bellgard having learned this Intreague, gives notice of it to
Mademoiselle d'Guise, who though she did not love the Prince, yet he foresaw
the displeasure it would give to his Sister, if it should not be remedied, and
therefore contrives a way, which was this.

A Secretary of the Duke of Guise's counterfeiting in perfection all sorts of
Hands, it is resolved that the Prince of Joynville, (amourous of Madam
d'Villars as before) should affirm that the Secretary by his Art having got
some Writings of the Marchionesses, imitated them so well, that the Prince
himself and Madam d'Villars, with whom he was in Love, and who mortally hated
the Marchioness, combined together by his skill, to counterfeit those Letters
on purpose to undermine her, which the Marchioness understanding seconded so
well, that she reingratiated her self with the King, and rendered him such
reasons for the Credibility of this Assertion, that she totally proselited him
to its Belief; and though his Prejudice at the first was not so easy to allay,
yet at last he yielded himself vanquished; as much possibly by his own
inclination to think well her, as by the smooth coercion of her Tongue.

But the Prince of Joinville however (not withstanding the Subtlety of this
evasion) is commanded away into Hungary; where the Turk was making War; Madam
d'Villars to her House, and the Secretary to Prison; see hence the consequence
of intermedling, Madam d'Villars meets the due reward of her Actions, and is
dismissed with shame to her House, and has created to herself a great and
powerful Enemy.

During these bickerings and hurleburlies, the Queen's hatred to the
Marchioness was more conspicuous, for thinking her now to be almost ruined she
does her utmost to ruin her quite, and is daily huing at what she thinks is
already declining, her Fortune, to which the ill offices still daily rendered
her by the Marchioness, do more exasperate her, who is always pecking at the
Favorites of the Queen, and the Queen on the other side detesting those that
are her Creatures; but behold another occurrence.

The King is advised of the Marchionesses keeping a Correspondence with Spain,
and it went so far that she was Arrested for it, and the Earl of Auvergne her
Brother; but since you have a farther relation of these Things amongst the
Historians, I shall say no more but that Madam Villars and her Lover was again
recalled upon it.

It happened now at this time that the King became enamored of a fair Lady whom
he Married quickly after, the Countess of Estanges, and a little after this,
another far more beautiful, whom he also Married to draw her from the place in
which she was, agreeing with her Consort that Married her, that he should
abandon her the same Night after the Cerimony was performed.

In the mean time the Marchioness obtained the Royal Grace, being remitted from
her Prison, to her House at Vernueil, the King was pleased with his new
Mistress, and it was very calm Weather with the Court; the King also at this
time Married Mademoiselle d'Guise to a Prince of the Blood Royal, with whom the
Queen gave, what was neither beneath her own Quality to give or the others to
receive.

The King seeing again the Marchioness of Vernueil, had a great Inclination to
her, yet kept it so secretly, that it was long before it came to the Queens
knowledge, but as soon as she knew it she was strangly troubled, and absolutely
forbid all such Persons any access to her, that should at any time visit the
Marchioness, under the pain of being driven from her presence; which the King
took ill, but yet was forced to bare with it, a little after the King (a never
failing Gallant) becomes Enamored of the Duchess of Nevers, a Princess of
great Virtue, that very much honored his person, but had no great esteem for
his passion. This season happened commodiously for the Kings designs, for the
King intending to Christen the young Prince's his Sons, had invited the
Duchess of Mantoue to be Godmother to the Eldest.

This Princess was Sister to the Queen, and her Husband a near Relation to the
Duke of Neverrs, insomuch that he obliged the Duchess of Nevers to stay longer
than usual at the Court, (to give oppertunity to the King to pursue his Amor)
the King seeking all occasions to speak to her, whilst she on the other hand
avoided it as much as possible, waving it to the very utmost limits of a due
respect; in the end the Ceremonies being performed, the Duke and Duchess of
Nevers without so much as bidding adieu retired themselves from the Court, the
latter resolving never again to return; the Duke, being soon after employed as
Envoy to Rome, went herself along with him thither, and obliged the King to
dispossess himself of a fancy, that not only proved fruitless, but very
troublesome to him; being not accustomed to the difficulties he found in this
Amor. This Voyage endured above a Year; and the Duchess at her return came to
do reverence to the Queen, the King being then with her. Upon which the King
beholding her with a bended brow, let her know aloud that he thought she was
extremely changed; but the Duchess taking no notice at all of it, continued
still to deport herself in the same manner, and to spend the rest of her life,
in all the modesty that could become, or was requisite in an excellent and
virtuous Woman.

The King by this was again reconciled to the Marchioness, d'Vernueil, which
the Queen so impatiently bore, that notwithstanding all the endeavors of the
Council to prevent them, and to show how disagreeable they was to Majesty, it
fomented most extreme differences betwixt them: And now there happened a very
surprising accident, that made much noise, and indeed was very strange, the
King and Queen going to a house of theirs near Paris, on the other side the
River Sein, they was obliged to pass it in the The Ferry spoken of in which the
King and Queen passed the River Sien, overturning, was the cause of a Bridge
being soon after built over that River.
Ferry, the Coach with these two in it, accompanied only with the Princess de
Conty, and the Duke of Montpensier, by some accident or other, was overturned
before it came to the Shore; the King and Duke escaping very well, leaping soon
enough out of the Coach; but the Ladies ran some hazard, and drank a little
more than they desired, or rather the ambitious Element squench'd its thirst a
little too much upon the Ladies. Some few days after the King going to Visit
the Marchioness of Vernueil, she condoles him for the unhappy chance, and tells
him she was in great pain for him, but if she had been present, and had seen
the King leaping safe out of the Coach, she should have had the civility to
have said let the Queen drink, (a saying it seems used upon the Ceremony of
choosing King and Queen, which she wittily made use of upon this occasion)
which when the Queen came to hear, she flew out into so great and implacable a
rage, that she was fifteen days without changing so much as one word with the
King, so that Persons of great Figure and Quality was forced to interpose to
qualify her Resentments; in the end the accord was made, and there must be a
Ball to attest it, wherein the Queen resolved to give her self the pleasure of
having a part. But it is unhappily interrupted, for the King insisting upon the
reception of the Countess of Morett also into it, and the Queen opposing and
refusing it, it made such a rupture betwixt them, that it broke off the Ball;
(This Countess of Morett is the Lady that I before said, was quitted of her
Husband.)

Who was now loved by the Prince d'Joinville, whom she did not ill entertain,
but the unhappiness is, it comes to the Kings ear, who immediately going to
her, upbraids her with Perfidiousness; who having nothing else to say in her
own vindication, tells him that the Prince intended to marry her. The King with
this returns with all the speed that a Jealous Fury could supply, and causes
the Mother of this Prince to come before him, to whom he Complains, and
threatens that the Prince, (who he said was too often guilty of such faults to
be pardoned) should be rigorously punished; Telling her, that he expected on
the pain of his severest displeasure, that he should perform what he had
promised to the Countess, which was to marry her; and that though he could
suffer that his Mistresses should be espoused, yet not that they should other
ways be enjoyed, and that it was for the alone sake of the Mother (her self)
that he Pardoned the Son. The Princess being in a station, she thought, above
such Treatments from the King, answered with so much Indignation, and raised
the King into so high a Paroxisme, that he sent his Guards immediately to seize
him, and all the favor that could be obtained for him by his Friends was that
he should relinquish the Realm never to return to it again, and he was not
recalled again till the death of the King.

The Duke of Montpensier a little before these things was dead, and the King,
whose unfix'd and wandering Apetite induced him still to the persuit of new
Mistresses, and to gratify himself in all Varieties of his Inclination,
resolved to make Love to his Widow, wisely pensitating, that it would more
become his Quality to Love, and be beloved of a Princess, than such that was of
a meaner Extraction, and indeed no better than fair Imposters that did only
banter and deceive him.

And resolved to serve himself upon this occasion, of a Lord of his Court,
equipped with all the possible Accomplishments of his Quality, (his Name was
Count de Craimail, making known this design to him. He judged it a difficult
thing to bring to effect, but however promises the King to tell her the news.

The Neighborhood of his House to that of the Dutchesses, and the excellency
of his Address was the reason of the King's employing of him in this affair,
which he resolved to undertake, if the Duchess would hearken, which yet he
could not believe. He acted so well in the business that he prevailed with the
Duchess to come to the Court, where the King soon discovered the
impregnableness of her Virtue, and resolved no more to attempt it.

The Duke of Guise, was now so much in Love with the Marchioness of Vernueil,
that he promises to Marry her; and the Marchioness willing to make use of his
Passion, either to inflame the King that began to neglect her, to a greater
observance, or to oblige the Duke irrevertibly to his Promise, causes in the
name of some other Persons (reserving that due respect to their Quality, not to
do it in their own) the Bains to be published betwixt them. Which the King
hearing of, was greatly enraged with them both, and especially with the Duke of
Guise; But his Relations knowing him to be innocent, grew so clamorous upon the
Marchioness, as the only Author of this action, on purpose to render him odious
to the King, that it went no farther, the Duke only retiring to his Government
till the rumor was a little ceased.

The Queen having again taken up her design of making the Ball before hinted;
amongst the Ladies that was engaged in it, the incomparable Madam of
Montmorency, was one; a Lady so young, that she had but just as it were left to
be Child, and so Beautiful, that she was miraculous, and in her actions so
agreeable, that she was a Marvail throughout, insomuch that the King seeing her
dance with a Dart in her Hand, representing one of the Nymphs of Diana, found
his Heart so thoroughly pierced with it, that the wound accompanied him to his
Grave.

It would fill a Volume should I recount all the Accidents of this Amor, from
which at last the Royal Lover ravished by Death, left such Subjects behind him,
as could not so properly be said to Love, as Adore him.

FINIS.

