A CONFERENCE Held in the Tower of London, Between two Aldermen of the City,
PRAISE-GOD LEAN-BONE, And the LORD LAMBERT, Upon their occasion of visiting his
Lordship. MONDAY, MARCH the 13th, 1660. Concerning the King of Scots And the
present PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.

A CONFERENCE Held in the Tower of London, between two ALDERMEN of the City,
Praise-God Lean-Bone, and the Lord Lambert.
Monday, March 13, 1660.
Titc. MY Lord, We are come to visit your Lordship, and also to take a view of
your Lodgings, for if the Tide turn not, we are like to come and inhabit with
Col. Morley; for we acted so high for your Lordships and our own Interest, that
we are confident we may be bold to believe that we are mortally hated so far as
we are known.


Lambert. Your visitation is acceptable and seasonable in this juncture of
time: but they were far better days with us when we met in counsel at
Wallingford house. O that wicked Monk, and that unhappy Northern Expedition,
laid all our honors in the dust.


Ir. Truly, my Lord, our good City, and her young fry of Apprentices were very
instrumental in our ruins: but there may come a time wherein we may make them
amends for their courtesy.


Lambert. Truly Gentlemen, I cannot think well of this kind of consinement,
for here are no pleasures wherein a man can delight himself; and though I love
soldiers and men in arms as well as the stoutest Prince or Hero in the world,
yet my delight was to command them, and not to be commanded by them.


Lean-Bone. It was my sad fortune, only for presenting the Rump with one
impudent Petition, to get the ill will both of Monk and his Soldiers, the
Parliament now in being, the City, and the whole Nation.


Ir. It Is true, Mr. Lean-Bone; but had I attained to the Mayrolty for this
year, as the plot was laid, we had altered the Scene, and though perhaps their
Gates might have escaped the mischief, yet their Charter and their Purses
should have made us full satisfaction.


Titc. You say very true, brother I. And I am sure it had been much better for
the Vine that bears my Grapes, had the City been a City of Redcoats, and not a
City of such Cross-grained and stiff-necked Varlets.


Lambert. I am now cooped up in a Prison (a place of no Intelligence) how do
the people relish my confinement?


Titc. With very much seeming joy and satisfaction; and well approve the
violent and high Actions of this Parliament, and delight in our Commitments.
Nay, they have again advanced the Old decayed Covenant, than which the people
believe there is nothing speaks more plainly for the King.


Lambert. It is a long time since I swore it, and having taken diverse Oaths to
the contrary since, have almost forgot the contents thereof: But I think there
is a Clause that highly mentions the safety of the Kings Person, and the
Advancement of his Honor.


Ir. There is so, my Lord; but if his honor be advanced, ours must needs be
laid in the dust, as your Lordship said even now.


Lean-bone. I never tasted what honor was, but whilst I sat a little in a
short Parliament, and promoted the Act for Marriage, and other wise Acts not
now regarded: For my Controllers place I think that would have had more of
Profit then Honor in it, if I could have kept it.


Titc. If things go on at this rate, we must neither look to hold or enjoy
either places of Trust, Honor, or Profit.


Ir. It is a sad thing to live under the Government of a Parliament that seek
to do just things, and such as may best please and best profit the People. If
they bring in the King, he will bring us to a fatal period; But Heavens forbid it!


Lambert. I find then an impossibility for me to escape their fury; for if the
Power be given into His hand, it is not for me to expect mercy: The People
being insenced against me, they must be satisfied with a Sacrifice or two to
their fancied Justice, or they will never sit down in obedience to the
Government.


Titc. It is so long since the King has had any occasion to gratify his
People, that he will not imagine one or two sufficient to abate their fury. I
wish every County in England be not bound to find one State-Martyr, besides
what they will please to Assesse upon the City of London, who as they always
found more money, so in this case, I am afraid, they must find more men.


Ir. Then truly Brother T. I am in doubt you and I, shall hardly be permitted
to cast Dice for our lives, we being both so notoriously known, and so
generally hated.


Lean-Bone. I am too lean for a Sacrifice, and when the King comes to see me,
he will say I am not worth the Hanging, I have a good mind to face about, and
try if I can get a place of employment under Monarchy, to try if it be all one
with that I had in your Lordships reign.


Titc. But my Lord, What defense does your Lordship intend to make to your
impeachment?


Lambert. I Will plead my Commission, and my then present Power.


Titc. True, my Lord a good defense, would they have but the Grace to
acknowledge us a sufficient Power to grant a Commission for these things, which
is the thing I only fear if I be questioned my self.


Lambert. Why am I thus hated? though I miscarried in this business, yet the
People know I have done good service in my time,


Ir. You see, my Lord, they have no respect of persons or services, for there
is Sir A. H. (a man that opposed your Power and Designs with all his might) is
now brought into the same predicament.


Titc. I have seen and helped forward many a Turn in this Nation, but a worse
then this ( for us) I think our times can hardly parallel: For in all the
others, I have kept my Spoke in the Wheel, but in this it is cast clear out.


Lambert. We must all expect to have plentiful portions of affliction; for in
scripture we read, that the Lord will overturn, overturn, overturn; but we have
doubled these overturnings in the Government of these Nations.


Lean-Bone, That overturning that I had a hand in, is hardly worth the taking
notice of; and I hope all the World will think me so too.


Lambert. I, Comptroller, had I no more to answer for then you have, it would
hardly be a minutes contrivance to gain my release, but I acted high, too high
I am afraid!


Ir. Were any of our party either in Power or Favor, then there might be a
possibility of doing good for your Lordstip; but we are so generally laid aside
and hated, that we dare not appear so much as by Petition.


Lean-Bone. Petition! I Will meddle no more with Petitions, were I to be Hanged; I
have enough of that already.


Lambert. There is nothing to be done, but a reliance upon their mercy: If they
take me off, you must impute it to the necessity they are put upon to please
the People. There are noble Presidents gone before me.


All. Heavens release your Lordship, and send you better Fortune.


FINIS.

