Conscience cautioned, and so set at liberty.

Also a further ANSWER TO THE City Remonstrance.

And the Woman of TEKOA was a subtle Woman, and so is, etc. 2 SAMUEL 14. But
David said is not the hand of Joab in this? And the Tekoaire replied; as I live
my Lord and King, it was Joab put all these words in my mouth, etc. And the
S-erpent was more subtle, then all the Beasts of the field, etc. and said so,
and so, to the Woman, etc. Therefore God cursed the S-erpent, and said; On thy
belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life. There
was a little City, and a great King besieged it, and a poor man delivered this
City, etc. At the end there is also a Petition of the Authors; And one of the
Clergies by a Prosopoeia. Mu^ciber in Trojam p^ro Tr^j^st bat Apollo.
The City is besieged; its wisdom must secure it.
Printed, Anno Dom. 1646.

An Answer to the City Remonstrance.
WE sit at distance, yet can see at distance; so near at hand also, and that
nearly: oh the Hushites of these times, I will be for thee as for thy father:
so Joab smiles, and smites under the fifth rib: dyed Abner as a fool? Why, was
he not jealous of Ioab? yet not show it; it showed his folly: Therefore like a
fool he dyed, because not armed with jealousy against the Judas-like treachery
of compliance, etc. O the wily pretenses of Gods honor, Religion, Unity, and
to root out Sects, etc. Yet who is it knows, what makes for Gods honor,
except what dishonours him, so no Sects rootable out, for all so notioned are
not such, so then our own ignorance, and the knavery of others befool us: But
what by this would become of the Rooters out, etc. but to be rooted out for
Sects, they are also to others, as others to them.

But to the point, the City Remonstrance, we have viewed over, and given our
construction in short, as follows:

Remonstr. page 3.
First, we have covenanted to reduce Religion the nearest we can to Gods Word;
so then not to the Scots, if remote; for remote, and nearest are remote, prove
the Scots just answerable, and we comply: if near, its nothing, if we prove a
nearer: now then if we prove not only what is nearest, but what is it? it
admits no distance from its self: and what if we prove the Scots not only
not near, but remote, give us time, etc.]

Were the 40 men bound to kill Paul, or not rather repent of the bond.
Had the Covenant been absolute for the Scots, and no other, if yet remote from
Divine Ordination, we then say none are bound, but bound to the contrary: it
was an error to make it is sin to keep what is knowingly a sin, sins single
are enongh: some sufferings are sufferable by reason; so Psalm 15 but no sins:
therefore we now descend to particulars: [What in page 4. concerns the King and
the Scots, we well know how to answer; but we reserve our selves for a fit
season.

To the 1. Its against Divine Ordination, to punish, or suppress as such, or
as so called, Sects, Conventicles, etc. or for Errors in Religion: read Romans
14. If the said Sects live peaceable, if faithful to the State, so if they
teach not any thing destructive to particular or universal Rights, or the
States safety; so if not exclaim against others under the notion of Sects, of
all which by so exclaiming, they justify others exclaiming against them. But
if contrary to any the aforesaid, rectify so far, but root not out: where does
Scripture take order to enforce against private meetings, and only enjoin the
Public, and that by force; show it, and satisfy. I would all could comply to
publikes, as well as I, and though all things were lawful to Paul, yet to the
scrupulous hardly any thing at all.

And so not only privates, but the public Pulpet also punish, if not
qualified as before; for a rectified Conventicle as before, is better then an
Heretical Pulpet. But the intention of the Clergy under this taking of Gods
honor, unity, rooting out Sects, etc. may be to prelate it over the State and
City too, though they see it not, Conventicles they would have none at all, but
their ends may be that none in private should teach any thing prejudicial to
their greatness, or discover their falsities, but would ingrosse the sole
judgment in points of Religion into their own hands, and have the whole power
of deceiving people without discovery; and yet is my house a Conventicie, I may
teach my own in my own, and I may let in any one to hear me; why any invade my
private Priesthood, What I may do all may do, how then*
wh^^ ^s selfly: the Priest is but a Deputyship, by, from, and for such
self-Priests, not it, for its noteable, as I teach my Children by a
School-ma^^er, whom I may teach my self if I please, but dare not, least it
prove a Conventicle.

To the 2. we reply as before.

To the 3. A fine pretense of the underhand Clergy, etc. But its they would
govern the Governors, and Government too, in being Judges; it must not govern
them, the Government for Religion they would as at 1.2. ought all there to inn
themselves only? For obedience to Civil Government I yield to, else were
uncivil, for Religion, its against Religion and Reason; so Divine Ordination
(the ground being qualified as at first) to enforce, constrain, etc. Its
injustice to enforce or punish where no injustice is done, for Errors in
Religion, says not Paul, Romans 14. what is it to thee, thou suffer not, art
not injured, let him alone to God, its to God, not to thee, he shall answer for
himself: I say further he is charged to hold his Errors till rightly righted;
that is, not by force, but convincement: see Romans 14. read all, Reason says
as well as Religion, where no body is wronged though an error it be, and
deformity to the eye, yet why remedy it by the means of injustice?

Yet one Error there was against a Fundamental, or near it, one would not
observe a Sabbath; and what say you to the Sadduces, that in our Saviors time
held no resurrection? what was Christ and Paul abbe^^ers by silence; out they
must have gone by ours. To the 4. Its against Divine Ordination to defeat of
Rights, if qualified as at 1. or at 3. b. Ought these in Romans 14. which were
all Sects, erroneous, Independent^, etc. in point of Conscience be defeated of
their rights? where does Religion or Justice teach that? sure Religion
establishes civil Rights, as each man's Kinghood, and Priesthood, etc. else is
it no right,

The Clergy by this may be justly defeatable, because underhand they may be
destructive to the S^ates, cunning^y gaining the Militia to their hands, to
conquer all: yea, themselves, and we will not say, they side with, or would
convey it to K. or S. to bear them out, we leave it to the State: But o^ if so,
are they not treacherous, etc. to fight against God and Man, yea their own
Coun^rey, Loo^ to it Citizens, you are besieged by Simon and his trojon Horse.
Look into his belly and no on his back.
I appeal. See to it Citizens, the third Dog will get the bone: suites it to
your greatness and wisdom to be flattered, and deceived, with etc.

To the 5. I know more then I will know in this; and we question not, but the
State knows all knowable, etc. It may argue great poverty of understanding,
but plenty of depravednesse: what if we prove it against Divine Ordination; how
then? Allow us frredome, and we undertake i^, oppose us who dare. To the 6. Its
right, if right ends and ways b^.

The 7, 8, 9. Good all, I conceive; bu^ conclude not.

The 10, 11. I cannot judge of; so judge not of.

The 12. Good also, or nothing is good.

To the 13. I say little too; but that little is much, why? Scotland decline
the Parliament, the whole Kingdom convened, etc. in whom they know lies (the
right and state of the States: Is it not dishonor? implies it not underhand
compliance: we say not it does, but refer it to judgment. Queries are safer
then Resolutions.

Oh thou Stalking Horse, Religion, Gods Honor, Worship, Service, Unity,
rooting out Sects, etc. what villainies are acted of Atheists under this fine
veil, etc, but I forbear, though I can bear no longer, is it not under a
show of devotion to c^^sse one another, and so set together by the ears.

To the 14. This City is abused, or will abuse themselves, Quaere, if this
Clergy and S. and K. underhand would not have it so bestowed, that they might
bestow it, etc. And then P. S. are Kings, but will show us the King to delude
us: and thus the Ci^y and State may be unstated etc.

Oh you Citizens be not befooled by these Nominalls of Religion of one side or
other; for they will outreach you, if you reach them not in season.

Did they not Darius and Dagon, they were too heard for their God, and their
King. Yet oh great is Dagon, and oh King Darius live for ever.

To the 15. Judge justly of Quarterman, and quarter him not, I say not, he
errd, or errd not, for I know nothing, he might err in some circumstances, not
in the maine, his faithfulness to the State, and present necessity may excuse
Forms, Ceremonies, etc. a State for a State are not bound to any thing, else
could they not save it when endangered.

Principles are wanting, Gods House on suspicion; for a State may be turned
topsi turvie, yea unstated, I am a Citizen and stand for its just privileges
but none are just, or pleadable against a Sat for a State, nay I particularize
not, nor by the State against the State, for so might our Sovereign S^lus
populi be unated, and by that, our selves; for individuales makes universales.

Sectarist, a man of errors, is no blemish but unto black understandings, if
otherwise qualified as at first, for who is not so one to another, see Romans 14.

To the 16. And reason too, if suspicion and States necessity allowed not what
was done, yet to find nothing, is no Argument, but not to have ground to Seek,
yet what ground shall a State for a State be stated to.

To the 17. If every way ingenious, its reason, yet who knows inward
ingenuity, it stands the State on to stand on their Guard, of wise jealousy, if
not of the City, yet of Ioab, and Iud^^ Salutes, etc. I would the City were as
wisely zealous of Ioab and Judas, Intentions may be fair, and not to comply
with any parties, but parties may comply with and so overreach by pretenses and
compliance: These must be provided against, because they are against, etc.

And last of all, is this the reward his excellent Excellency the faithful Sir
Thomas Fairfax, and inconquered Crumwell our preservers must expect ^o be
disarmed, and rooted out as Sects etc. Are they not qualified as at 1? have we
not justified them, as there have they not saved us from slavery of Body,
Estate, and Conscience? consider of it: oh ingratitude, inhumanity unheard of,
why offer you not your Lives, Estates, and all you have as an offering to their
Service? I am astonished, etc. Christians, oh, we are Gentiles to the Gentiles,
where is the Cities reward, so each ones? you Independents why do you forget
your selves? we have all Life, Estate, Being, and enjoy W^ves, Children,
Friends by their Manhood and Faithfulness.

Oh sordidnesse, is all forgot, is this Religion, and for Gods Honor, to root
out errors wherein is no Injustice, and its to God not to man, Romans 14. by the
greatest of errors injustice, ingratitude, and make Religion a pretenc^ for
all; If God will bear with errors, will not man? ^h inhumaine man, see Romans
14. and be ashamed of thy shamefulnesse. Note.
Its Athisme in the highest degree, because against Gods own Act and with* etc.
as before Romans 14. Note.
Is it not blasphemy to abuse his name as a^ 13. for to culler injustice as at
before, O^ P^esb^ters, and Independents of the Clergy for your own end* be not
treacherous to the State, it suits not to Religion, Reason nor moralities, it
preaches you irreligious Arthests, yea inhumane: m^^ S^^us your Sovereign be
sacrifized to your pride a (...) and covetousness? Quaeries.
1 May not the Scot keep the King for a Ca^^er and seem to reverence in all
external postures, ^o ^^^^des, and in writings on purpose to keep up his
opinion, and S^^ tha^ so they may instate themselves under its umb^^ge, a^^
mak^ us conceive it real, that we may realize (...) him so their use.

2. May they not for their own ends petition him whom they have power to make
petition them. 3. May they not write what they please in his name, See to its
Citizens you are besie^ed, and besotted too.
yet all their own dictating; to these, or those, ou^ good Cousins, or our
peoples, etc. of London or elsewhere: we say not that these things are thus; we
say otherwise: but no body can let us to say, but they have power in their hand
thus to do; nor can any one let them from doing so, but their own goodness, if
they have so much goodness.

If the Scots stay and keep our Towns and Garrisons, after voted out, is it not
invasion? Is it not the same to enter in hostility, or in confluent numbers,
after voted out. If they deliver not up the King when demanded without
capitulation; for they are our Army, our Servants, and is not the King our
States prisoner: what is it? and what is He if not so? Suffer oh State, suffer
both Independents and Classicks cautioned as at first, and you shall be rid of
a world of troublesome fools, and so be at quiet in that particular, and not
only save, but strengthen the Kingdom, and quit it from all danger; for when
every one has what he would what would be more, it agrees with Divine
Ordination; so God and Christ's will, so policy of State, reason and humane
Justice, Romans 14 it procures peace and quietness amongst us, and rids of
persecutions, crutiations, and exclamations. This being granted, no question
but you shall find such a Troop of sanguine Spirits, as shall retrogade the
Sun, and cast a faint palenesse on the Turkish Moon.

An universal Classick beauty and conformity which is pleasing and delightful
to the eye will be wanting; but its better to dispense with beauty, then burn
for it; better is safety then curiosity, deformity will displease, but safety
will make satisfaction; besides mere Errors may not be remedied with a
greater Error; yea, and sin of injustice to punish where none is wronged.
Judge not of, for I never read it.

I only make bold to tell our Citizens, The State the multitude, in which are
weaker or wicked,
the Woman of Tekoa was crafty; but my Lord the King is as an Angel of Light,
and we like light Angels.

And now we only petition the State, who never yet petitioned, and yet never
cease petitioning in our hearts, but our hands are always bound, and are not
yet loosed: We first give all humble and hearty thanks for all received, which
are of that infinity, that finities cannot conceive; much less express them.
We choose therefore to render ourselves with silence, as best; because least
troublesome, and so desire to be conceived grateful to the uttermost of
Conception, etc.

Next we humbly and heartily implore by all that's justly prevalent with man* in
Justice to hear us, as you are just men, or rather Justice it self, from whom
as a Fountain should run in rivolets and vei^e^ in a diffusive, and
contributive way, the influence of Justice: First, to yours in these: next to
our chief Sovereign Salus populi: next to each individual; Keep we humbly
beseech you our rights of Kinghood, and Priesthood, and overthrow them not for
Rites* etc. Take heed of Templum Domini, so in Nomino Domini, etc. so all at
13. b. c. The Authors have other ends then those pretenses. -- Salus populi is
above them primarily or in competition: the Sabbath for man, not man for it:
sacrifice the same, if thou love not thy brother whom thou see, how then
God whom thou see not, save salus first we beseech you, and endanger it not
under those Notions of Reformation.

The Clergy hearing of this Petition, and fearing to be outed, petitioned and
humbled themselves to the State by Prosopeia as follows:

Right Honorable, etc.

We first give thanks and acknowledgments, according to the tenor of the
Author aforesaid, as most comprehensive, and least troublesome.

Next we acknowledge our weakness, and wickedness, that some of us see not;
and who do, will not see their usu^p^tion and invasion of our Mr. Priests
rights; yea, their K^nghood by endeavoring to be Judges; And as so, what is it
we would not have brought within the C^rcuit ^f Jurisdiction, and give in
verdict on our si^e: We want not will, but power, longer to contest in
Argument, and that we now comp^y is not of ingenuity bu^ n^c^ssity.

We deny not, but it might be our policy to gain the City on our s^de, and
see them against the Indep^nde^t our Brethr^n (could our stomachs stoop to
call them so) under the fine notions of Gods Honor, ^ooting out Se^^s, Templum
D^mini, Religion, etc. things ver^ taking with the religious, and d^vout, yet
ignorant, and unprincipled, and simple, as not armed with Ser^ent no suspicion.
So might it be also ^urponcie, to set the City against the State, by such and
such suggestions, strengthening them further with he pretenses of love; so o^
their honor and privileges, etc things of a taking nature also (...) ^^ese
are nothing to us except as conducing to our ends, which might be to ^^k ^n our
adversaries, by gaining the City on our side; but if yet the Cities help
sufficed not, then the aforesaid sweet notions pret^nces and suggestions, etc.
might ^erve to induce the C^^y to side ^t with ^inon to bring in his Trojan
Horse to subdue our and their adversa^ies, etc. which also might serve, our
turn being served, to subdue the City it ^el^, least they should tu^^ our
a^v^rsaries, when they see our treacheries; f^r what is it to some of us,
whom we can ruinate, so we can raise our ^elves. Yea, we den^ not, bu^ we
might d^ a^ also with Si^on to ^b^er and Ioab; its intercoursively with
b^^^ty under the aforesaid notions suggestions and pret^n^es, w^t the
^^ccessions of all sweet blandishments, salutes, and imbracements, etc a^ how
do my b^other, etc. o^ vv^ich ^he Cit^ not being ^ircumsp^ct, might be
sm^^^nde^ t^^ ^rib, and die lik^ a tool, etc VVe^^^re rely wholy at your
^e^ci^s; ^or vv^ck ^^vv ^ot what to plead^^ ^e do all ^xcuse this Aut^ors
Discovery, confessing it ours by inforcement, And do^n ^a^e if he have any
thing ^he to imp^^^ for ^hen univ^rsall good to which vv^ have bin very
m^^rious that he vvil do it, And we humbly beseech ^ou Honors to commmand him
thereto, i^ he shall be an^ way neglective; and thus with our humbl^
submission, yea with a total subduing our ^^ves v^^^est not only your
Petitioners for favor, which we have much need of considering our guilt, but
we acknowledge our selves your slaves and Prisoner for our great treacheries, in
seeking under such specious Notions, to be Judges of our Judges, and so King it
over the Kingdom.

The Author being circularly ingenious and Zealous of the common good has
complied to their requests, and will with the states leave State Divine
Ordination to the life, as shall not be made head against by any Power
whatsoever, but shall be as clear, as is a Diaphane Mirror, which discovers
clearly the natural Countenance in each vein, limb, etc.

And now oh thou honorable City, of whom I am a Member, it is my Love, care and
zeal has begot these cautions; be zealous, yet show it not, take heed of
those pretenses of Gods Honor, etc. mistake not the highest Principle
(especially in competition) is Humane safety; and God makes it his Honor, the
next is justice, -- pass by some seeming affronts (which may be are none,)
rather then ruin your selves and yours by an uncertain righting of them,
concentrize with the State, and the State with you, -- If you love the State
and Estates, -- Do your best to rectify them, ruin them not, nor your selves;
I expect Love and Protection from you for thus cautioning; -- Silence is
betraying, etc.

And now oh Presbyters and Independents of the Clergy, of that depraved sort,
how answer you it in Religion, Reason, or Morality, for to abuse the Notions at
13. C. to trecherize it to your Country, and one to root out the other, and
King your selves over your Kings? -- Does not this Preach you Athists, and
Hypocrites? You will Athisme the whole Kingdom, who look not to your words,
but your works, not your Pretenses, but intentions; -- Again, know you not,
the State of the State, -- is it not the whole Kingdom, each Individual, etc.
I can prove it is: Are you so Stately, you cannot yield them their State? Your
Postures are not Prime Priests, for that is each Familists due: You are only
the Deputy-Priests to each Individual, who paying you, you are their Servants;
and sits not each of those Individualls self, and Prime Priests in your
S^ate-house by their State-contract? -- Oh Heavens, will you Lo^d it over your
Lords; I profess, if ye make head against your Heads any longer, -- I know
what it is, and you shall know; for I say, You deserve beheading.

For shame recant, and turn not your Native Country into a G^lgotha, an
Aceldama, etc. -- Affront not, nor endeavor not the rooting out one the other,
but as Brethren, (though of different judgments,) love each other: is there
never an Abraham of you? take which hand thou will, the other is mine: But I
think you are both Abrams, which is the reason you do it not, humble your
selves to the State, your Masters, as your Master-Priests, and beseech them to
pardon you, and give way to each of you, -- cautioned as at 1. and pray to God
the very thoughts of your hearts may be forgiven you, for you are in, etc.

If what we have said before, be not of value sufficient, as we conceive it is
for Liberty of Conscience cautioned, as at first, it is yet thus far of
vallew, Thee Sufferance ought to be, till the State be in Safety; enforcing
being not only injust, but indangering also to the State, the said Sects (so
called) being the maine Protectors of it; for who fight for Liberty, fight
resolvedly, -- and Masculinely; and suppose the State settled, yet then
convincement, persuasion, etc. is the only way, and not constraint; the one is
for men, the other for beasts; -- if any man can answer me, I am answered.

Thus last of all, may I have your patience to Pathetick it, and then I have
done.

I am as low as man can be, and be, but might I be raised from thence, and
inthroned in the midst of heaven; and have the Earth for my footstool, and
the burnished rays of the Sun thrown about me for my roabe, my Temples
crowned with wreathes of Stars, my hand Sceptured like Jove, and my self
inpowered with Omnipotency, -- In short, could I be godded, to the height of
Poetical Fixion, yet would I not inhumane my self to arive thereto, nor
decline the Ingenuity, the integrity nor dictates of Nature, nor raze one man's
life, to raise myself, and this of nature, as a Gentile, how then, if Religion
be added; I confess, Prisons and pains beyond Power might enforce, beyond
what all pleasures can do: here I am jealous, in the other, I am knowingly
resolved.

To say how I have been tempted to side it, and how adventerous against all
opposers, I forbear; I will not urge Religion, because of the irreligious I
should be slighted; yet the Religious may assume it, I keep to Principles of
Nature, that man cannot retrograde nor invert except he beastialize.

I would not for Millions, nor for Idiot fantastical honors, or rather
dishonours, (had we honorable understanding, for it only gains the opinions
of fools, such fools are we,) I would not, I say, for such fantasmes and
momentaries beslave and vassalize my Posterity to immence Tyranny, and
unbounded folly; Nor that my own heart should tell me, I am a Knave, or Fool,
etc. bribed by momentary means dishonorable Honors, Preferrments, Offices,
etc. Or that my steward, my Deputy, -- should thus fall out with his Lord.

Nor would I turn Traitor to my trust, and so a Rogue, hateful to God and
man, and the off-scowring of the world.

But Promises, flatteries, insinuations, hopes of great, Titles, and means,
Offices, How do, my Brother etc. have smit the reputations of many under the
Fifth rib, etc. so they are dead, or like to die like fools.

Oh what language shall I use? For I cannot find men to deliver my self to;
Oh, as we would do as we would be done to; how condemn, and exclaim we at
those, for treacherous and base, that fail us in our just Trusts and
engagements, -- Does not our hearts also, as David's, say to us, We also are
the men.

Oh English, Let not the world cry shame on us, nor jeere us for the aforesaids.

Let not after Ages, and our Posterities curse us, and that it may not
Proverbialize, as foolish as base, as treacherous, as roaguish, as evil as an
Englishman.

Let Us stand on true Honor, and aquire Noble Fames, and Names, by quieting our
selves like men, and let after ages, and our Posterities Bless us; let us not
be as before, a byword, a jeere, etc. to all the Nations of the world, and now
I have done, etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
Quere. NOw the Scotts have got the King amongst them, if they may not make use
of his Name, Person, Hand, seal, Letters, Messenges, Proclamations, etc. To
deceive and delude the People; as if his Acts, and all may be their own: Also
they may Summon Towns, Forts, Castles, in his Name, yet for themselves: So may
they hostilely enter the Kingdom, and use his presence and Name to color it:
Under his Name may he pretended the Settling of Religion, a firm Peace, so all
for Gods Honor, and our Service, etc. Maintaining Liberties and Privileges,
and delivery from all Taxes, Payments, etc. And restoring the King to his
Rights; Also the rooting out of Sects; Or if it may take better, the giving
liberty of Conscience; All very pleasing and taking things with simple People,
and fools, to deceive, and conquer them, and then jeere them: These may be
seconded with Protestations, Invocations, Execrations, etc. to gain belief.
This they may do; though this we hope they will not do: and we hope the People
by this, are lessened, not to give ear unto any such flatterers, etc. not
Protestations, should they be; Nor sell their Birthrights for a mess of
Portage: Nor take up Arms, as if for the King, when if i^ came to that, it is
to King the Scotts, under the color of his Name, Kings of England, and to make
the English their slaves: What then will become of our Peers, and Priests, or
any, for all their fine Promises, and hopes, if any be. -- I will be for thee,
as for thy Father, etc. Kym, -- Kam, -- etc -- How do my Brother? -- etc. --
we hope otherwise then as before; yet Wisdom allows to cast the worst, and
provide, for (...) they on their side, etc.

Queries in case that either Law, or Vote of the Lords should not be for the
present safety and we ^e of the Kingdom.

MUst the nicity of the Law, or the ceremony of Votes, endanger or destroy the
People? Is not the Law the Peoples creature, made for the Universal safety of
all, without exception? Must Millions of living men lie at the mercy of a dead
Letter, or because 40. 50. or 100. Lords will not Vote their safety?

2. Are not the People in general Lord of the Law, though the Law does Lord it
over particulars? If neither Law nor Lords will allow the People to be saved,
then may they not be saved any way, and both Laws and Lords fall before their
Sovereign the People, as Dagon did before the Arc, rather then the People
perish.

3. Is it not highest Treason, to Vote whatsoever is either destructive to the
Peoples safety, or not to Vote at all, or not in due season, whatsoever is not
for their public safety and weal?

4. Though the Persian law was unalterable by the King, was it so by the State,
for the State? If so, were they not rathe^ F^^les then S^^tists? For my part,
if it come to Saving, I will not Dispu^e, but save any way, and then dispute
afterward. Did not God himself disepnce with the breach of his own Law,
concerning the Sabbath, even for the safety of a sheep? And how d^rest thou, O
sheepish, (o^ ^ather ^^^^^sh) man, prefer a wicked or corrupt law, (or the
execution of thine own wicked passion) before the precious life of any one,
much less of thousands.

FINIS.

