April the first, 1642.

A Continuation of the Tryumphant and Cou^^gious proceedings of the Protestant
Army in Ireland.

Containing diverse great overthrowes given to the Rebels, w^ the slaying and
taking Prisoners of some of the chief in Rebellion^ whose heads by
Proclamation were rated at 400. li. a piece.

Also the manner how the Rebels Consecrated KILDAR^ CHURCH.

Together, With an Order from the House of COMMONS, unto the Shrieffes of each
County.

soldiers marching

London Printed for John Wright, 1642.

A Continuation of the News from Ireland, dated from thence March 25. 1642.
LOving Brother I received yours of March 8, and am sorry to hear of these
diferences between the King and Parliament, for they do us in Ireland no
small harm. What has happened here sin^e my last is no great matter; on the 6
of March went out 3000 foot and 600 horse, the Lord of Ormond went with them,
and Simon Harcourt commanded in general under the Lord of Ormond, Sir Charles
Cout staid at home, for so it is ever, when Sir Simon goes, Sir Charles keeps
the City, and when Sir Charles goes Sir Simon keeps the City, they went with
this foresaid Army and 6 Pieces, intending to have some thing to do with the
Rebels in the Pale, but they all fled before our men and not one stood, all the
Lords of the Pale fled toward the North, as not daring to show their faces, so
our Army set on pilaging and hanging some scattering Rouges, they pilage all
the Pale as far as to Tredath, till the two Armies at Tredath and Dublin
could see each other, and rejoice for so doing: They burnt all the Lords houses
in the Pale and Gentlemen's, and fired all the whole Pale, for 17 miles in
length, and near 35 miles in breadth, a brave Country; looking now with
nothing but the face of ruin, some six days after they went out, some four
Gentlemen of the Pale submitted themselves, which were sent in as the 13 of
this March, and are prisoners, and upon the 15 day returned the Army safe home
with much spoil of goods and Cattle, some Garrisons they left in strong
places, and the rest of the places burnt, on the 17 day the Sheriff of Antrum
was sent in to us a prisoner, who had been in rebellion, and the same day we
had a servant of the Lord of Dousans one of the Lords of the Pale, who desired
to be rescued to march, and promised he would be at Dublin as the 18, but is
not come yet, on the 10 day we had news the Rebels had made a head in the
North again, and intended to come in to the Pale again, but we hear nothing
of them, but some scattering Roagues that spoil Gentlemen: but a small company
dares to go to Tredath by land, we had also news, that day, the County of
Wexford desired to come in and lay down arms, but how true that is, is not
known, upon the same day, it was ordered at the Council of war, that an
Army of 3000 foot and 500 horse, and 6 Pieces should on the 23 of March, if
weather served, go toward the South part of Ireland, and West part under Sir
Charles Couts command to relieve the Castles in distress, for there are many:
this is that which befell since my last, and in great distress is this place,
for money to pay Soldiers, having had but one 2000 pounds come or little more,
for which cause such taxes are upon our City, which is extreme poor, as to
keep 10000 Soldiers in meat, lodging and money, so here is nothing but
bewayling, and none can live here at this pass, what will become of us God
knows, for we must be sold to beggary, and this comes, in that rich men at
first went away with their estates, leaving none but poor.

LOving Brother, yours of March the 15. I received, with the Declaration and
Diurnall, which all is but fad news to us in Ireland to hear of such things,
in that we have here no money to pay the Soldiers with, and by which reason
taxes are too great for our poor City, and I fear no small matter is behind
due to the Soldiers, which causes strange grumbling among them, and it may
well be, when money is not so much as to buy the Soldiers shoes; that they are
forced many of them to do their duty bare foot, and these things are beside,
no small encouragement to the Papists and Rebels. Since my last dated March the
20. on the 21. of March, at evening came in the Lord of Douseany of his own
will, as before he had promised, and is now prisoner in the Castle, on the 22.
of this month Captain John Barlet, Captain of one of the Kings Frygots:
being at Sea lighted on a Ship coming from France bound for Rose, laden with
Corn, Wine, and Troop-saddles, wherein was five Papist Priests and one
Comander an Irish man: he sent in the Ship to our harbor; the Priests and rest
are committed to the Castle, and their Letters ceased on. The 23. of this month
came in Sir William Elmore of his own accord, and is imprisoned in the Castle:
also upon the same day the Rate being proved to rate on Read a Lieutenant,
Colonel among the Rebels, a Scotchman whom our Army took in their last going
out into the Pale. Also Mac Mahun was rated that was the first prisoner taken,
that should with Lord Mac O Guere, taken our Castle. Sir Charles Cout with two
more, was poynted to take their examination, most part of it was delivered
privately, and some they desired to have the next day, time to deliver it in
writing, this they yielded to all, a little raking all that I could hear they
confessed, in public was Mac Mahon said, this Plot was concluded on by all the
Lords, Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the whole Parliament that were
Papists, at times when they met together, and should have been for better end
but for the delured Protestant, to plot how this mischief should be put in
execution, which they had in their hearts long before.

Read confessed he knew of this Plot ever since the disbanding our Irish Army,
that was raised about the Scotch business in which service this Road was
employed, but I believe you will hear their confessions at large sent by our
Magistrates to England. The 24 of this month we had a message from Tredath,
that Sir Henry Tichborne heard the Rebels were gathering head at a place called
Ardee, some 8 miles from him, he about the 20 of this month marched all night
to come in the morning to them with some 600 foot and some few horse, the enemy
being a great body, but he had the day of them, where he killed 300 of the
Rebels, and among the rest was killed or taken Colonel Plunket and two others,
that a Proclamation was out against them, setting their heads at 400 pounds a
head, also a message that the Lord Moore, while Sir Henry did the former act,
went against a Castle some three miles off Tredath call d Plaren, which stood
out against us, and our Army the last time it was out, the Lord Moore took the
Castle and 100 Muskettieres in it, and Master Darsies eldest son, whose
fathers the Castle was, the father being in rebellion in the North; that day we
had Letters also from Counah, that the Lord Tafft was dead, and one Sir James
Dilon, not the Lord Dilons son but another of the same name, has besieged
Athlon, nd the Rebels helps him, and has brought the Town in great distress,
but Sir Edward Poufy who was in the Town, who commanded a Troop of horse,
issued out to get in some hey and other provisions, the Rebels got between the
Town and him, but the horse made thoroy them all, and killed no less then 150
or 200 of the Rebels, and with little loss got safe in the Town again, also
we heard that some of the Rebels had besieg d Abboyle, and the chief of them
were some of the youngest sons o^ the Lord Tafft, also we heard the same day
some few horse went out from Dublin, and caught one Captain Cadel a Rebel
Captive; also we had a Priest hanged on Higgines that was taken at the Nause:
some six weeks since, when some of our Army went that way, a Franciscan he was
by Order; this morning I hear, that within a few days our Army is to go
toward the Queens County, to relieve the Castle in distress, there they had
gone long since, but the wind blowing East great hopes was of money to pay the
Soldiers, and they went not in that much discontent is among them for want of
it, but this stay was to little purpose, hearing things as they are now with
you.

I had certainly a friend told me this morning, that the Papists have
consecrated Kildare Church, and said Mass in it, which I write you, more for
the manner, which was, that all Protestants bones were dug up, and corpse
buried in the Church cast to the dunghill, and they say it was lawful to say
Mass, and thus they do in all consecration of Churches.

March 29. 1642.
An Order from the House of Commons unto the Shrieffes of each County
respectively, for their true Collection of the four Subsidies, and the other
two Subsidies to be paid accordingly.
Die Veneris 25. Martij. 1642.
It is this day Ordered upon the Question by the House of COMMONS.
THat the Knights and Burgesses of every County, be enjoined to write unto the
Shrieffes of their respective Counties, that they warn all Collectors of the
four Subsidies, who have not yet perfected their accounts, that they come and
perfect their accounts by the beginning of next Term, and that other
Collectors of the two last Subsidies make their accounts also, by the latter
end of the next Term, as they will answer their neglect therein to this House.

Henry Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Lunae 28. Martij 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, that this
be forthwith published i^ Print.

Henry Elsynge.

FINIS.

