A CONSPIRACY OF THE TWELVE BISHOPS IN THE TOWER, AGAINST Mr. Calamie, Mr.
Burton, Mr. Martial, and many other worthy Divines, etc.

^s also how they obscurely made those Articles, wherein Mr. Pym and the other
Parliament men were impeached.

^hewing likewise their treachery, how they would have escaped out of the
Tower. With a Description of the true Cause that the City of London and
Westminster are day and night in Arms.

and of that notable Abuse, which was done last Thursday night, when the City
was called up to rise in Arms in the night, both in Cheapside, Covent Garden,
and St. Georges field in Southwark.

London. Printed for W. Bond, 1641.

C R
central circle flanked by the English lion on the left and the Scottish
unicorn on the right and containing the initials of King Charles, all of these
figures enclosed within a rectangle flanked by angel on the left and right
THE CONSPIRACY OF THE TWELVE BISHOPS IN THE TOWER: Against Mr. Calamie, Mr.
Burton, Mr. Martial, and many other worthy Divines, etc.
THE tyrannical usurpation of the Bishops, and their Ecclesiastical
insultations has been generally acknowledged to be the prime cause of these
Discords, and promiscuous distractions among the people at this time. They have
been kindling the fire of dissension a long time in this kingdom, and now they
have almost brought the spark of their malicious minds to a full flame. But I
hope God will still divert their wicked intents, and as heretofore all their
usurping tyranny, and nefarious machinations in famum evanuerunt, have come to
nothing, so still their conspiracies shall be confounded. They have always
envied the prosperity of good and painful Ministers of the Gospel, and as
they saw them flourish the more in the truth of the holy Scripture, gaining the
affections of the people, so still the more did they always emulate them. But
the Parliament having judiciously perceived their intents, did not think them
fit members of the House, and therefore have placed them in an other house more
meet for them, I mean the Tower, which they have most deserved. Where being
committed, they studied with all diligence, and sedulity to subvert either the
intents of those, who should oppose them, and were the Authors of their
imprisonment. Having thus molded their resolution, they privately made seven
Articles against Mr. Pym, and four other worthy Parliament men, wherein they
were all arraigned of High Treason. And when they had obscurely composed, they
sent it to be presented to the Kings Majesty, and that he would vouchsafe to
give his Assent thereunto, and proclaim them Traitors. Thus we may perceive
their malicious minds, who, when they saw men glorious in the kingdom, and
that stood for the safety, peace and prosperity of the Realm, did study to
supplant those Noble Members, being the next way to supplant the whole Kingdom
besides. Thus we may understand their diligence to set the City, and Kingdom
together by the ears: thus we may see their intents to alienate the Upper House
of Parliament from the Lower house, and the King from both; yet being somewhat
frustrated of their expectation of imprisonment of those Members, whom they
impeached: their malice would not stop there, but intended farther. And now
being crossed in their former stratagem, they proceeded unto a second: wherein
they privately again, and obscurely composed Articles against M. Calamie, M.
Burton, M. Martial, etc. with diverse other famous Divines, striving to
suppress the laborious and painful Ministers of the Word and Gospel; for
because they could not bring the Parliament into dissension and discord among
themselves, laboring to eject the chiefest Members thereof: they strived to
reduce the Church to Heresy, and promiscuous distractions, intending to
suspend the chiefest pillars thereof,

But I hope that their envy and emulation will shortly be dissipated, and
although they expect these men with themselves in the tower, yet J believe they
may stay long enough for them.

If the parliament would be pleased to call these Bishops to their trial, it
would be great honor to themselves, greater safety to the Kingdom, and
especially greatest honor to God and the propagation of his holy Gospel. For
they daily concur together in machinations, either how they may depopulate
the Realm, or else how they themselves might obscurely escape from the Tower:
Once they had concluded to shave themselves, put on perriwigs, and gray
clothes, and so they thought to have escaped from thence, but their treachery
was discovered, and notice given to the Parliament thereof. Who did immediately
thereupon send for some of the Guard, and gave stricter charge of their
fidelity: who very faithfully promised the same.

But the City of London being in such extreme peril, and danger, did induce
many to stand in their own defense; for they knew not what Treachery, the
Bishops and other popish Recusants might conspire against them.

Therefore the Trained ^^nds do both day and night wai^e in London and
Westminster to defend themselves from the wicked Conspiracies of their
treacherous enemies. But one great abuse done unto the City I cannot omit; when
as last Thursday night some Company had bin drinking very late in the night,
and were resolved to do some exploit, that should be heard of in the City: and
one of them immediately replied, that they would cry about the streets, that the
Papists were arising, and every man should presently stand on his own
safeguard. It was concluded on, and crying thus in the City, and calling for
every man to come in his own defense for fear he should be burnt in his
bed, for the Papists were risen. There was immediately many thousand Citizens
came incontinently with their Muskers charged all with bullets, some with
Halberts, others with pikes, some with swords and the like weapons,
Common-garden was immediately filled with soldiers, in Cheap Side there were
many thousands stood in their Guard, and in St. Georges Field in Southwarke
there was an infinite number of men in Arms. But if these roguish disturbers
of the city could be apprehended, I doubt not but that they should receive
condign punishment according to their demerits.

FINIS.

