THE INTEREST OF ENGLAND HOW IT CONSISTS IN Unity of the Protestant RELIGION.

With Expedients moderate and effectual to establish it by the extirpation of
the papacy.

By a Member of the House of Commons.

Modi Entis sunt quinque, Vnum, verum, bonum, aliquid, Res. Magi. Enchir.
Metap. Cap. 2. LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin, for Lawrence Blaicklocke, and are
to be sold at his shop at the Suger-loafe in Fleete-streete next Temple Bar.
1642.

To the Reader.
Zeal to the service of my King and Country throngs these apprehensions to the
public, rough, and unpolisht, that they may be Timous.

The novelty of the matter, and my known dullness, would have prejudged a bare
motion, and buried it in the womb: therefore rather then a subject so
considerable should perish, unballanc'd, J have exposed my sense (yet
Diogetice, not dogmatice, by way of inquisition not Doctrine) to be at leisure
pondered, and by it, my self censured.

Troth it is, ability I pretend to none but this, to know, that J have little; A
sufficiency perhaps not unseasonable: However innocent and fair endeavors are
not discountenanc't, but by ignorance, or humor, which as they traduce
giddily, I despise; to such whose steady judgments, first apprehend, then
deliberate, lastly judge, I submisly veil, and from them J expect either
ripening of what is here, like my self, green; or but a gentle reprehension
thus; it is his error, and that's to be a Man;

I had not thus apologiz'd, but to usher in a modest opportunity to express,
that in this wanton age when the Press riots, this as lawful issue is
acknowledged by,

William Constantine.
E societ. Medii Templi, 8. Augusti 1642.
THE Interest of England, etc.
THat misterious order the society of Jesuits diligence not only their
Priestly office, The design of the society of Jesuits.
but upon emergents the embroylment of a State, To effect which, they are
trained up in exact principles, as of Sophistry to ammuse a disputant, so of
Politics to subvert Interests.

Their supreme design is to reduce the whole Christian Laity under one King
and that of Spain, the Spirituality under one Pope, as they are both under one
God: the Spaniard cherishes this project with special countenance to that
society, to preserve which in constant growth, he charges himself to erect
and supply several St. Omers Va^edo^id, Leig Doway, Brussels, etc.
Colleges, beyond the Seas, to entertain the English, and he stages
instruments where there is the chiefest concourse, to insinuate and decoy
thither our ripest wits: which instruments qualifyed with the quintessence of
slight, have so wrought upon the penury of some, upon the giddiness of
others, upon the ungroundednesse of the rest, upon all with flattery and fair
promises, that they stoop multitudes to their Lure.

Now this bounty of their great Patron, these fugitives are obliged to gratify
with the Ruin or at least distraction of their own country; which (being
assayd to be industrious, and dismissed ^hither) they labor, and negotiate
stoutly, by close and undermining practices, Divide and impera. Match.
whereof it is their principal, to suggest Jelousies and foment
misapprehensions between King and people. In which act, their subtilty it is,
not to be visible, nay they contrive those resolutions which seem most
opposite to be their Engines; for they are possessed that they sin not, nay
that they merit, though they dissemble, slander, feign apparitions, miracles,
etc. any thing to promote the cause; But Delus circuitu non tollitur.

11 Rep. 74.
By these divisions Spain (though it cost deep,) acquires an admirable
purchase, for while England struggles in selfe-plundring, its power is
disunited, and so disabled to apprehend the advantage of the necessities, and
uncompactednes of the Spanish Forces, whereby it is diverted from some exploits
of bravery to relieve confederates, reinstate alliances, partake the Indies,
etc.

The Rebellion in Ireland how, etc. why fomented by the Jesuits.
Even now when this Kingdom more risely began to rowse and chase its own
interest, and was almost instated in condition to propose overtures for the
honor of the King and Nation, its providence and vigor is diverted by a
rebellion in Ireland, blown up (doubtless) by an influence from the aforesaid
principle of the Jesuits, flattering the unstedy people to their own
confusion, by fond promises of supply and countenance; Not that they hoped to
enforce conditions by that more cumbersome then powerful war, but that England
toylling to reduce its own Rebels may exhaust it self, and not press at
this precious instant upon the interests of Spain, that so fensing us off this
busy year, he may provide more firmly in the next to obviate our
atcheivements.

The Spaniard further to secure this principle, imprints and publishes to all
Romanists a reputation of his Fast zeal to the Papacy; whereby he has acquired
that boundless title of King (...), Vniversalis item perpetuus. Philo. de Vita
M. lib. 3.
Catholic; and in pursuance imployd that cruel spy the Inquisition, by which
as he has invincibly intayld the slavery of ignorance upon his own subjects,
so he, worries out all exercise of the reformation in his dominions, which
other Romish states are induced to connive at, some to tolerate; nay in most
treaties he negotiats (as a seeming-prime article) the indemnity of Romanists,
as their indulgent Patron; under which vizard he insinuates into the
affections of some blind zelots (such as fadome not to the depth of interest)
in all states, whose fond devotion hurries them upon all occasions, to second
His as they would Gods cause.

Section. 1.
NOw (doubtless) there is no state wisdom that can more engrandize the royal
Majesty of this Kingdom then to mate and countermine the aforesaid principles
of Spain; The true interest of England, is zeal to the Reformation.
Let England purchase to it self a serious, fixed and constant reputation of
zeal to the reformed Church, such as Spain has to the Papacy, and as it shall
conduce to Gods glory in the purity of his worship, so shall it erect a
puissance selfe-dependant in this Crown, not inferior to that of France or
Spain: For this Kingdom being then unanimous in design will be most
powerful of all protestants, and being admirably opportune for situation,
shall be courted and applied to with confidence by all parties of the
Reformation as there grand protector, by whose trusty correspondency and Unity
of religious interest, it shall attain some glorious influence and power in
all states of Christendom.

That blessed Union of the two Crowns, with that of Jreland, -- Divisos orb
Britannos virg.
has enthroned his royal Majesty in dominions, glorious, independent,
close-ioynted, As free and resolute, as they are populous and rich; and
opportunes him (in the trust and strength of his own subjects) to become as
the envy so the terror of his foreign adversaries; yet if in one bosom we
foster two professions, that brave puissance will spend in selfe-wasting; Eras.
Adag. idem. Penelopes telam texere, to do and undo.
we shall Militare cum Erasinide, exploit nothing, but our own distractions;
for what enterprise soever we undertake it thwarts the interest of one
Religion, which so thwarted will retard, and stumble the expedition with as
much slight, and zeal as the other presses onward; or be it by both Religions
condiscended to, (hardly possible unless against the infidells) difference of
opinion among the undertakers will daily administer occasion of debate, which
begets offense, that reluctance of spirit, and thence foreslowing, if not
dissertion of the whole design.

Section 3.
1. Some means proposed to establish the Reformation, more perfect.
TO prevent such mischief is to pursue our maxim; and to that end it is first
requisite, that his Majesty be pleased to transact his close-counsels, and
great affairs, with the advice of such persons whose relations are truly only
English; such whose tenderness in conscience to the purity of Christ's Gospel,
is most conspicuous and precise; for these as they are most averse to a
reconcilement with the Church of Rome, so will they most diligence confusion to
the designs of Jesuits; who (if it be fecible) will ferret into our
State-counsells, (as to them most dangerous, and suspected) To effect which
they are accommodated, as with that mighty Patron before rehearsed, so with a
frolic purse; against the assaults of which, there can be no engagement of
such security as conscience in Religion, Ex Diametro, oppugnant.

Section 4.
2. Colleges to entertain converts.
NExt let some College in either University be endowed to intertaine such
Priests as shall convert, over which by discreet providence, let such Divines
be elected Governors, as are most zealous, conscientious, and profound; For the
raw Priest being huddled into orders is at the instant manacled by three vows,
of poverty, chastity, and obedience, and this is the buttresse which supports
the Papacy; for by these the silly priest is obliged to blind observance of
what ever his superior shall injoyne, and likewise driven to abandon all other
dependence, but the Pope the publik father; From whose service he may not be
diverted by engagement to wife, or child; He must forsake alliances, desert
promotions, solely he must hackny to support the reputation of his loose
superiors; Being thus deprived of all other relations, if upon the illumination
of Gods Spirit, he shall stagger in opinion, and begins to savor the true
sense of his imposed drudgery; as he shall be pursued with all violence ad
ravim usque by his awful Hierarkist (for that sly-chain without which the
Papacy cannot subsist, is now linked in this Kingdom) so is there none of the
reformed party to whom with confidence he dares apply, for relief or
Counsel; It being so sharply penal by our Laws to have commerse with
Priests; whereby every man endeavors rather to betray then comfort and compose
his distracted fancy: Now were there a College as aforesaid, where
(un-indangered) there hesitations might be settled, their souls consolated,
their bodies cherished, and protected, many like the stray sheep might have
opportunity, to underceive themselves, and encouragment to retire to the true
fold, and prove rare instruments as to unmaske their own seducements so to
preserve others from the like sorceries; urge I need not, how mightily the
repute of such (and I doubt not such) conversions would conduce to the
advantage of the Reformation, and the disabusing many a dark soul, precious
in the sight of God. Summa ratio est qua pro religione facit.

Then it is requisite to fore-lay the number of Recusants, 3 An apt
Church Discipline necessary to produce a Unity.
to win such as are possessed (if possible) to conformity, however to crop the
increase; To work upon the conscience is indeed spiritual, and totally to
unsoule the error, requires an Expedient also that is spiritual, and so
proportionable to the work, that is an exact Church Discipline, a fence
suitable to the Vine; A Discipline as apt, well accommodated, and as natural to
cherish knowledge, the drift of the Gospel, as the Romish discipline is to
conceal and smother it: A Discipline adaequate, sifting, and close-rivited, to
restrain libertinisme in life as well as in opinion, awful to casual
each-hower extravagancies in sin or schism, as well as such as are censurable
and mulctuary; (...), overseeing, not coacte but libenter, 1 Pet. 5.2.
not lucri gratia but prompto animo, not for gain but conscience, not Lording
it over (...) cleris, all Christians, Gods heritage, Revel. 1.7.
but as ensamples to the Flock whereof they are Episcopi overseers. Acts 20.17.
and 28.
That there be not two separate Jurisdictions in one Kingdom Regal and
Papal, which ever clash and bandy, but that all may be equally, in the same
sort subservient to the Crown; such as may beget confidence in foreign
parties, as of our utter abolition of the Papacy, and its dependants, so of our
fast adherence to the reformation.

The Result of this I expect with all patience and humility, from the sage
debate of such learned persons as shall be by authority thereto assigned, to
whose wisdoms and moderation I commend it Mercurio dextro with all good speed.

Suffice it that the subject of this discourse is the inquiry what furtherance
to this Unity may be attained by Laws civil, executed in the ordinary Courts
of Justice.

And it is true; should we trace the Spaniard in his vigorous Inquisition, we
may not be aspersed with cruelty without reflection upon his own practice; but
for that the inhumanity of one justifyes not the same in others, and for that
the tender conscience is rather to be mildly thawed, then enforced or
violenc'd; for that, obedience that is uncordiall, savours not as a pleasing
sacrifice; Lastly for that their error seems neither malice or obstinacy,
Iniquum non est praesumendum 4. Rep 72. Et stabilitur praesumptum donec
probetur in contrarium 5. Rep. 7.6 Rep. 73.
but misapprehension and ignorance, as in charity we may presume; Therefore it
seems reasonable to reject such barbarismes, and to labor unity, by courses
more civil, ingenuous, and gospellary, and in process of time no less
effectual.

That which to this effect, I shall with all humility propose, is the rough
model of a statute, abridg'd, and reasond as it follows.

First, it seems not unworthy a debate whether it were not requisite to be
enacted.

1. Clause.
To repeal all former statutes so far as they concern Recusants for
Recusancie.
THat so much of all and every the Statutes now in force against Recusants, and
all the penalties, forfeitures, disabilities, etc. imposed by them for the
same, may be repealed.


The Statutes in force intricate and many.
1. The Statutes against Recusants as they are 26. H. 8. 3.
many, so they are confused, voluminous, and intricate, for being enacted in
several ages according to the emergency of things and times, some are
supposed, as now not so seasonable so to enterfere with the rest, 2 Ed. 6.20. 1
Eli. 1.2. 23 Eli. 1. 27 Eli. 2. 29 Eli. 6. 35. Eli. 1.2. 1 Ja. 4. 3 Ja. 4.5. 7
Ja. 7. 3 Chapter 2.
which difficulty so scruples the unstudied Majestrate, that he grows tender
in the execution of any, as willing rather to transgress in non-fesance, then
injustice; Therefore to explain the ambiguities, to satisfye the scrupulous,
and to quicken such as are most material to an execution, it will be necessary
to compendiate the now most useful Clauses of all those Statutes into one. 6.
Rep. 42.
Misera est servitus ubijus est vagum.

2. The nature of the Laws in force seem rather to intend the easing them of
their revenew, then us of their religion; for paying 29. Eli. 6. 3 Ja. 4. The
true state and condition of Recusants under the Laws in force.
2 parts of their annual profits or twenty pound per mensem, the practice of
their service is in a manner continued; Or indeed, it seems to expose them to
a necessity of absolute compliance to the loose pleasure of such informers to
whom their forfeitures shall be assigned, for if they shall submit they attain
by Court-slight (notwithstanding his Majesty's best providence, to the
contrary) a dispensation, or slender composition, if they expostulate, they
shall then be with rigor harassed by the Laws; Either they must servire
scaenae contribute to such what ever overtures the projectors shall propose, or
they shall be legally liable to their spoil and rapine; so that should such as
have the Princes Ear at Court incline to policy more then to religion (which
it is possible some future age may evidence) it might seem State wisdom rather
to increase by dispensation, then suppress by execution the number of
Recusants.

Farther it has been the wisdom of all States either totally and impartially
to eradicate such parties as they suppose dangerous, or to allot them such
conditions as they may tollerably undergo; Livy. lib. 5.
The Privernates rebel'd, and being almost re-subdued to the vassalage of Rome,
they address by their Ambassadors for terms of peace; The Senate sternly ask
them, what new peace they could expect, that had so insolently infrindg'd the
old; 'Twas answered stoutly, we must now take such peace as you please to give;
If it be moderate, you shall find it faithful; If too heavy it will be
continued only till an opportunity to avoid it; The bravery and strong sense of
this expression induced that wise Senate to assign them their own demands; I
instance this to insinuate, that if we admit recusants a subsistence, we urdge
them not with such sufferances, as irritate and imbitter, perhaps make
desperate; for Terent. in Phorm.
Cum ad restem res rediit, when persons are exposed to a continance of
vexation, subjected to be plunderd by such inferiors who design their own
profit not their conversions, without peradventure they will Virg. Aeneid. lib.
5.
maria omnia caelo -- miscere, assay all diligences to work themselves into a
more tolerable condition; they will comply with all such malignant parties as
shall foment distractions, and contrive an alteration of the established royal
government; such as are perditi homines, men of lost fortunes, or others that
are exorbitant in their profession and fear to be reduced, such who Cicer. in
Catel. Orat. prima.
Honores quos quieta Republica desperent perturbata se consequi posse
arbitrantur. These and the like, like Crobyli jugum will unite in confusion
their common interest: Though their heads like Judge 15.4.
Sampsons Foxes look several ways, yet they are hampered in the Tails with
firebrands and agree in this like hot incendiaries to set the whole Kingdom in
combustion, that so either they may continue their swollen greatness, shuffle
into better fortunes, enforce a moderation in religion, or elce out of malice
in revenge consume the whole body with themselves: Tacit. Not disadvantageous
to the King to repeal the statutes.
Quid valuit homicida, etc. How little pris'd the murderer, to inflame the
whole World, since he saw his own ruin inevitably destined.

As to that diminution which by repeal of these Statutes will incurdge to the
Kings revenew, it is sencible, that as those receipts are inconsiderable, so were
those forfeitures never to that end designed; or were they; doubtless the King
will condescend to desert such perquisites, as are evidenced prejudicial to
the public; Nor can his Crown be impayr'd thereby, since as it is the duty,
so is it the safety of the people legally to replenish his Exchequer, for if
that be empty, how can his Majesty with a bare counsel Rex ad tutelam legis
corporumet bonorum est erectus. Fortes: de legib. Angl. cap. 13. Stanf. Pl. Ca.
99. Bract. lib. 2.
protect, or provide against emergencies wherewith he is entrusted; Concesso
aliquo id concessu videtur fine quo concessum consistere non potest, Inst.
Inflit. lib. 1. fo. 21. 11. Rep. 52.
A trust to protect, etc. implies accommodations to perform the trust; and
indeed without supplies must the luster of his Court grow dim, which
dishonor reflects not so much upon his person as the Nation, the Majesty of
which is compendiously and gloriously represented in his royalties and State;
suffice it; let the subject be endeard, inspirited, and plentiful, Rex caput
est and salus reipublicae and a capite bona valetudo transit ad omnes. 4. Rep.
124.
and he cannot be so churlish to his own interests, as not to endeavor by all
just means the gratification of his Prince, by whose vigilance he injoyes
solace, by whose magnificence he acquires honor, for as jelousy of oppression
moulds people lumplish, desperate. and stubborn, so indulgency engenders
courage, generosity, and love.

3. Lastly, if Reason of State gives Recusants a subsistence upon some (though
hard) terms, why then (they performing according to those terms) enact we
some other Laws that charge their conscience, The penalty for the first
refusal of the Oath of allegiance is a praemunire and close imprisonment. For
the second Treason. 5. Eli. 1. 3. Jac. 4. Aut deprime aut ne preme. Tac.
under so severe a penalty, etc. to which (if they have Religion such (though
erroneous) as they profess) they cannot cordially submit; or if through
weakness they should submit against conscience, those Laws which overawed
them seem coadjuting instruments of their damnation, for an outward and not
cordial conformity aggravates the crime, as hypocrisy is more sinful then
mere ignorance, perhaps invincible.

Either therefore admit we them no recidence within this Kingdom upon any
terms of penalty (which seems hard at this time to enforce for that equally
with us by the Laws in esse, they are now borne to the freedom of the Nation)
or give such as are so borne and conscientiously possessed, such reasonable
conditions of subsistence, as their conscience be not violenc'd, nor
themselves hurryed in despair and fury to imbroyle the Kindome; which
tenderness as it may insinuate and win into their souls by that Gospellary
way of gentleness and persuasion, Vid. Fol. ult.
so it will conduce to continue the like piety, and pity to the Protestants
beyond the Seas; provided that we sufficiently fore cast to secure their
allegiance to the Crown; (of which see the last Clause) and disable them from
a further growth; To which effect it seems reasonable that we enact.

2 Clause.
To disable all such as are now under the age of ten years, to inherit or
purchase, etc. unless they shall conform at their age of twenty one.
THat all persons now under the age of ten years, who shall not within one
year after they attain to the age of one and twenty, repair and frequent the
Church, and three times in the same year receive the holy Sacrament, and also
take the Oath of Supremacy before the Minister and Church wardens of such
Parish where they shall inhabit openly in the Church, after Evening Prayers in
some Lords Day, which taking the Minister and Churchwardens shall register in
some Book to be kept for the same purpose, or shall after such conformity,
discontinue the Church, or refuse the said Oath being lawfully tendered, shall
be held, reputed and adjudg'd Popish Recusants, and shall be disabled to take
by descent or purchase in Fee, or Tail, etc. to his own use, or in trust for
others, any Lands, Tenements or hereditaments, etc. in England or Wales; But
all such Lands which such Recusant shall be so seized of or any other to his
use or, Vid. a president for forfeitures in this sort, in the Statute of
Mortmaine. 7 Ed. 1.
etc. shall descend and come to such Recusants next heir, that shall be of the
age of one and twenty and conformable as aforesaid; If such next heir shall
not enter Bona fide within six months, after such nonconformity or refusal,
That then his second heir that is of the age of one and twenty and conformable
shall enter, and be thereof seized to his own use, in such estate as such
recusant had, or enjoyed, etc. Jf such second heir shall not enter Bona fide,
within a second six months, then shall it escheat or remain to the Lord of
the fee, or to him in remainder, as if such Recusant were dead; Jf he shall
neglect his entry six months then shall his estate be disposed of by the next
Parliament to the public use.

The like for Leases, Terms, Copyholds or other Interests that he may become
in the same condition as an Alienamee.


It Is evident that some Clause to this sense maturely ripened, A moderate and
effectual expedient to extirpate the Papacy.
being not possible to be evaded or dispensed with will in one age unground all
popish Families: It Is their store of Lands and thence of tenants, that makes
them formidable to the state, of which being deprived, as it will discourage
them to settle here, so will it disable such as are settled to ingrosse
dependants.

Nor is it penal more then ordinary for that the now Laws necessitate
Recusants to breed their children under licenst 23. Eli. 1. 1 Jac. 4.
Schoolmasters, for that none elce ought to teach in private or in public;
If their education be beyond the Seas an 3. Jac. 5.
act in force disables them to inherit or take by gift, conveyance, or devise,
or otherwise, until they shall conform; Now if we shall enliven some quicker
Statute for their education, me seems as it is not altogether natural to rend
and force a child from the vigilance, and nurture of his proper parents, so
will it not probably produce the effect, both by reason that it is obvious to a
multitude of Evasions, and for that stomach which will swell in the issue upon
the Fathers reluction.

Be it therefore at the Fathers peril, that his child be educated in the
Doctrines of our Church, or if his conscience be so scrupulous, as to derive to
his issue his own errors, he has fair leisure during life to dispose of his
Estate, and transplant his offspring into a foreign soil, where the
principles of his profession are not so destructive to that policy of
government. If notwithstanding this reasonable admonition, disherison shall
accrue to his posterity, it may not be traduced injurious, since the private of
all men must submit to the public reason of State, c 39 H. 6. 39. Mirror. cap.
3..
Jura publica ex privatis promiscue decidi non debent.

This Clause is only to be avoided by the defect of an expedient to scrutinye
into the true sense of men; For experience daily justifyes, that such whom we
suspect to be Recusants and lately so professed, glibly swallow those Oaths of
Allegiance and supremacy, resort to Church, nay and communicate, whereby either
that act of 3. Iac. 4.
Discovery becomes fruitless, or really they are what they now profess,
Converts. Truth is, nor dispensation, nor dread, nor hope, nor malice can mould
a conscience though erroneous, that is Religious, to Hypocrisy; but such as
are loose or but formerly conscientious will scruple no assay, they have
volaticum jusjurandum, and to provide a Test for the discovery of such, Non
idem sunt Scriptura and Cricaeus. Eras. Adag.
were to make a garment for the moon; Notwithstanding for more rank
conviction of such dissimulation (if it be such) it may be requisite to insert
into the Oath of Supremacy, the first Clause of the Protestation; viz. To
defend with life, power; and estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion
expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England against all Popery and
Popish innovations, etc. or rather to compose the several Oaths that concern
religion into one, less equivocable, and more searching, as not only to
maintain the Protestant Religion, but to renounce the Romish.

3 Clause.
To raise a present supply of moneys.
THat all such as have not usually frequented Church the first year of this
present Parliament, and have not taken in the same year the Holy Communion, or
shall refuse the Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy and Protestation, being
tendered by the Commissioners, shall forfeit the -- part of their last years
revenew in Lands or goods, to be assest upon their estates as they lie in the
several Counties by the Commissioners nominated in the last Act of 400000.
After the same sort as is expressed in the same Act, and to be returned
accordingly, etc.


This charge will probably be with alacrity disburst by reason of the ease that
Recusants have from the penalty of former Statutes, and the rapine of
Projectors; And this way of levying as it will be most speedy, so most
certain, for that those Commissioners upon experience of the former taxes, are
well acquainted with those which they doubly charged in their several
Counties; Nor can such a supply be unwelcome to the present necessities of the
Kingdom.

4 Clause.
ALl Recusants not conforming as aforesaid shall for ever till they shall
conform, pay -- to all Rates, Taxes, A constant charge to be imposed upon
Recusants.
Charges and Payments, incident to their several Parishes, in proportion with
the recidue of their Parishioners, as Church, Poor, Bridges, Highways,
Composition, Goal-money, etc.


This charge be it double or treble, etc. being assest by the n^ighbour-hood,
and conducing to their easement, will be imposed without possibility of
evasion, as well on goods, as Lands; and will be effectual to incline
especially the inferior sort to conformity, who I suppose are Papists, rather
of custom, then reason; faith being grounded upon knowledge, which they
abandon: Our Laws in force scarce inflict any penalty on them, or such as is
so inconsiderable as never levied; but being physickt with some frequency by
this potion, something proportionable to their several abilities, twill assay
whether the decease be heart-setled, or no deeper then the stomach: if so,
they will soon vomit it.

5. Clause.
THat no Recusant shall come where the Kings Majesty, To forbear the Court.
or any of his Royal issue shall be, unless he be commanded by the Kings
Majesty so to do, his heirs and successors, or by w^rrant in writing under
the hand of six of his Majesty's Privy Counsel; and then and there only so
long to remain, as may suffice to dispatch such present business for which he
is admitted, upon pain of 100. l. whereof the moity to the informer, the other
moity to be disposed of by the next Parliament.


3. Iac. 5.
This Clause seems in force; only doubtful, whether such license inables the
Recusant to make abode at Court, as his habitation; worthy to be explained;
Those other Clauses for their departure from the City, and confinement within
five miles compass, 35. Eli. 2.3. la. 5.
are usually deluded; while we suspect their contrivements, it is prudence to
scatter them what we may, from conventing. The assemblies of such being most
probably in Towns or Cities, twere reasonable to authorize the chief
Majestrates of such places to disperse them; and none to have residence there,
11. Rep. 6.
but such as have a license from them upon assurance of quiet conversation,
Abundans cautela non nocet.

6. Clause.
To be disabled in public functions, and Offices.
THat no Recusants shall give Vote, or proxey in the House of Peers, nor shall
practice the Common Law, as a Counselors Clarke, Atturny, or Solicitor in the
same, nor shall practice the Civil Law, as advocate, Proctor, nor Physic, or
the Trade of an Appothecary, nor shall be Judge, Minister, Clarke, or Steward
of or in any Court, nor keep any Court, nor shall be Register, or Towne-clarke
or other Minister, or Officer in any Court, nor shall bear any Office or
charge, as Captain, Leiutenant, or other Office in Camp, or Company of
Soldiers, nor shall be Captain, Master, Governor, or bear any Office or
charge of or in any Ship, Castle, or Fortress of the Kings Majesty, his
heirs, or successors, but be utterly disabled for the same; Nor that any
Recusant or any having a wife being a Recusant shall exercise any Office or
charge in the Commonwealth, ^. la^. 5.
11. Rep. Chanc. de Oxfords case.
wealth, but shall be utterly disabled to exercise the same by himself, or his
deputy (except such husband shall bring up his children in the true Religion,
etc.) nor shall such Recusants present to a Benefice or Grant an advowson, or
Collate or nominate to any Free-schoole, Hospital, or Donative whatsoever; but
that the Chancellor, and Scholars of either the Universities respectively
present as formerly; Nor be Executor or Administrator, or Guardian in Chivalry,
Socage or Nurture, or to have the wardship or custody of any infant, idiot or
lunatic.


This is the Act express; only that of the Vote of Peores. 3. Ia. 5.
And surely such whose Religion biaces them to an interest diverse from the
public, are prudentially presumed, Recusants to give no proxies in the House
of Peers.
not willing to promote Counsels so destructive to their Interests. And the
same ground seems appliable to exclude their proxies: For all that are
Protestants in form, are not alike zealous in heart; Now since it is one
maxim to manage all counsels by such as are precisest in the reformation, it
suits not wisdom to arm such as are but lukewarm with more accommodations,
which they in all probability shall attain, if Recusants be enabled to dispose
their Proxies; by which engagement beneficial Laws may be obstructed though
His Majesty with His Commons shall diligence to enliven them.

By privilege of Parliament, their blood confers as much right to give Vote,
as bestow proxyes; and that reason of state which disables them in the one, is
of the same strength and not more injurious to disable them in the other; nor
can it be more injury to a Peer, 5. El. 1. 3. Iac. 4.
then it has been to the Commons who must receive, and pronounce the Oaths of
allegiance and Supremacy in testimony of conformity, before they can give vote
in Parliament, or fit as members, though never so sufficiently elected: That
which discharged the Temporal Lords of the Oath in the Act of 5o. was
impliedly the great power which they then held in the House of Peers,
Explicitly because the Queen was otherwise sufficiently assured of their faith
and loyalty, Now faith we have often found is not intayl'd upon succession.

Nor can prejudice ensue unto the public by paucity of votes since His Majesty
may please to enlarge the number by his Patents of persons fitly qualified; No
prejudice by their exclusion.
yet of old that house was not so throngd when only such were Peers as were
called by writ, our Ancestors being unacquainted with other titles then Comites
and Barons.

Created 10. Ed. 3 An. Domi. 1336 Casus princip. 8. Rep.
Edward the black Prince was our first Duke and that of Cornwall; Created 6. Ri
2. An D. 1384.
Robert de vere was our first marquisse and that of Dublin; and Created 23. H.
6 An. D. 1444.
Dominus de Bello monte was by Henry the sixth created our first Vicount: Now
the first Baron we read of to be created by the Kings patents was Created 1.
Ri. 2. An. D. 1387. Some Physicians now in practice to be forborne.
John Beuchamp of Holt, Baron of Kedermister.

Something might be offered to tolerate some physicians now in practice, lest
in disabling them, we smart our selves; whose bodies perhaps are inurd to the
nature of their prescriptions, having succesfully employed their learned
experience; But to continue them in succession appears mischievous, by reason
of those often and fair opportunities which as they have abilities, so
doubtless they have wills to contrive to a by-use upon their patients in
extremis.

7 Clause.
Some Priests that shall have testimonial not to abjure the Realm, and why?
THat it shall not be lawful to and for any Jesuit, Seminary Priest, or other
such Priest, Deacon, Religious or Ecclesiastical person whatsoever being borne
within this Realm or any other His Majesty's Dominions, made, ordained or
professed by any authority or jurisdiction derived, challenged, or pretended
from the Sea of Rome, by or of what name, title or degree soever the same shall
be called or known, to come into, be or remain in any part of this Realm or
any 27. Eli. 1.
other His Majesty's Dominions; without the testimonial license, or
approvement of the Judges or any three of them, whereof the Lord chief Justice
shall be one, before had, and obtained; And if any Priest, etc. having such
license as aforesaid, shall be seen abroad, without such known habit of his
Order whereby he may be distinguished, and avoided, Or if any Jesuit, Priest,
etc. unlicenc'd, shall come, be and remain within the said Dominions, shall be
adjudged a Traitor, and shall suffer, lose and forfeit as in case of
High Treason; And every person, which shall wittingly, and willingly receive,
relieve, comfort, aid, or maintain any such Jesuit, Priest, etc. that is not
licensed as aforesaid, Vid. stat. de 5. El. 1.
being at liberty, and out of hold, shall for such Offense be adjudg'd a felon
without benefit of Clergy and suffer death, lose and forfeit as in case of one
attainted of Felony.


This exception implying admission of some Priests, though it be with
qualifications, by such as are more curious, then deliberate, may be scandal'd;
For vindication I shall apprehend this opportunity to represent my sense of the
Romish Church, and so drive on those reasons that induce the intimation.

A Digression Historically reasoning the degreeing usurpations of the Romish
Prelacies.
I Decry that Church as a grand Impostor, buttre'st by sophistry in Doctrine,
and policy in Discipline, erroneous in the one, and machivillian in the other;
The source whereof were those ministerial Cor. 12.28. 4 Ephesians. 11.
Officers mentioned by the Apostle to be Pastors and Teachers, who by degreeing
insolence have appropr^ated the titles (...) Ex (...) frango sort datus, sort
electus, ut unus sit in orb terrarum clerus i. e. Ecclesia, quod Deus sibi
illum populum veluti portionem quandam a reliquis ^^paratam selegisset. 1. Pet.
5.4. Appellatio Cleri aut ex errore aut prava affectione nata, etc. Calv.
Insti. lib. 4. cap. 4. Sect. 9.
Clergy as if all Gods people were not his lot, and the (...) evocativus coetus
qui veram Christi Religionem profitentur, a (...) voco. 1 Cor. 1.2.
Church as if men not in orders were not of it, or that were not a Church which
was in Romans 16.1. and 5. 2 Cor. 11.28.
Priscillas house: Recommending ignorance to the unclean (so they style it)
laity as the mother of devotion, thereby engrossing knowledge as a Monopolium
dicitur (...), cum unus solus universum emit, precium ad suu^ libitum statuens.
11. Rep. 68.
monopoly to their own profession, By which powerful advantage as they
imposed what sufferance they pleased upon the dull Laity who like the ^^n.
49.14.
Ass of Issachar coucht to every burden, so they usurpt dignities and
revenewes under the mask of piety to support their own pride, pomp, and
avarice: For demonstration.

That charge (which was by Christ committed with a Ma. 18.17. Call. Inst. lib.
4. cap. 4. Tr. Conf. Art. 30
Dic Ecclesiae, to the whole Church (whereof persons not in Orders are a part)
and so executed upon the incestuous person, if we refer the (ye) in the
fifth Chapter in the first to the Corinth. ver. 4. to the (All) in the first
Chapter verse. 2) became by the less diverted diligence of the Ministry
executed, and so in time appropriated to themselves.

Church Assemblies were usually in Acts 15.^6. Act. 20.7.
Cities, as most populous and civil, and to this service choice men were
elected from the vulgar to represent them, and for this use were Elders
ordained by Titus 1.5.
Titus in every City. for though all the ministry were 1 Pet. 5.1.
Elders, yet all that were 1 Timothy 5.17.
Elders were not of the ministry, but helps in government; 1 Cor. 12.28.

In such assemblies were persons most eminently grave elected to precede, to
state questions, collect the sense, declare the sentence, etc. So Acts 1.15.
Peter when 'twas lotted for Matthias; Acts 15.13.
James at Jerusalem, and Gal. 2.7.
Paul the chief Apostle of the Gentiles. Where such person had the primacy of
Order, not dignity or power. Mat. 23.8.
Be not ye called Rabbi for one is your master even Christ, and all ye are
brethren.

Full. Annot. Tit. 1. Sect. 2.
In process of time this president, or primus ordine being reverenced for his
gravity, and especially applied to for his constant presence, and dispatch upon
the negligence of his assistance assumes a Sovereignty in jurisdiction, and
usurps it with the style Episcopus superintendent, by us sometimes Englisht 1 Timothy 3.2. 1 Tit 7.
Bishop, sometimes Acts 20.28. 3. Rep. D. and cha. and Norwich.
overseer, This Bishop for his more repute associates a consistory, by the name
of Chapter, or Prebends quia praeberent auxilium Episcopo, who resenting it as
matter more of toil, then honor or profit, (which soly accrued to the Bishop)
are soon out-diligenc'd, and to this day they retain only (and that pro 25 H.
8. 20 Magdeb. Cent: 11. c. 7. Quum vero luc Evagelii in una civitate accensa etc
forma) his election, and confirmation of his grants.

From these Cities (where was the Cathedra of the Bishop) the Pagi or lesser
Towns adjacent were illightned: and the devotion of pious Christians there
erecting and endowing Churches, those Churches were supplied as Colonyes from
the City, and acknowledged such City whence they had their light, the mother
Church, and consulted with the officers thereof in controversies and causes
Ecclesiastical. This assistance the Bishop with his consistory or counsel
condiscends to at first Ex charitate and aedificandi studio, from a holy desire
to edifye, but continuance of such address^s swells the Bishop with ambition,
and Imperii gratia, he substitutes all those villages which so resorted to him
to be His Dioces, and this about A D. 325.
three hundred years after the Passion, towed into a canon at the Aen. Sil.
Epi. 301.
Nicen council.

The Bishop thus being sot'd above his Presbitery, an emulation springs among
the Bishops. Confirm. in council. Co^stanti. Can. 2.
As the same council the whole Church is divided into four precincts over
which were appointed four patriarchs R^me; Al^xandria, Antioch, and
Jerusalem; But for that Rome was the Council. Calce. Can. 28.
Imperial and chief City, and endowed with amplest privileges, it had
allotted to it the primacy of order.

Rome acquiest with this dignity till the year 606, A. D. 606. Buchol.
when Phocas having slain Mauritius the Emperor, his Master, by the assistance
of Bonif. 3d. Onuph. Beda.
Boniface the Roman Bishop gets the diadem, and gratifyes his confederate with
the style of Universal; which was re-confirmed by King Pipin to Pope Zachary,
who upon complaint that Childerie King of France (solo regis titulo contentus
etiosam vitam degeret) reigned laciviously; deposed him, and contributed to
enthrone the Conspirator, that he might, Plat. Fr. Ann.
Officiis precium rependere, countenance by power his selfe-Incroachments.

These Church-ambitions St. Bas Epist. 10: By. Usher de Eccl. suc and statu
cap. 1. Page 23.
Basil styled (...) occidentale supercilium, the western pride, with an
odifastum illius Ecclesiae, and they occasioned the Gerson part 4. sermon. de
pac. and Unit. Grae. c. 6.
Greek Patriarks to desert C^mmunion with the Roman, inveying thus, Carlton.
Iuris. cap 5.
Magnitudinem tuam scimus* etc. Thy hautinesse we know, thy avarice we cannot
satisfy, thy usurpations we will no longer abide, Tecum vivito. And when
Zozimus in the year 417, urged a Canon in the Nicen Council for his
supremacy, The whole Conc. Afri^. Ca^. 105.
African Council explode him for ambition, and that forgery with an
objurgation, Ne fumesum typhum saeculi in Ecclesiam Christi induceret, etc.
Greg. reg. 166. 4. lib. 8. Ep 38.
Gregory the Great, after Pope, bra^ds the style of Universal as scelestum
nomen, nomen singularitatis, and that he that ownes it is the forerunner of
Antichrist; Nay he prophesies that the King of pride is at hand, and (which is
most grievous) an host of Priests are prepared for him.

Now though this mystery of iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 4.7.
that sits as God in gods Temple, began to work in the age of the Apostles;
yet he that then did let, did withhold till he was taken out of the way;
probably, the power of the Roman Empire, which so awed the insolence of the Cl
rgy, that it dared not so notoriously reveal it self; But about the year
1^00 when Rev. 20.7.8.
Satan as 'twas prophesyed should be loosed, Plat. Bery. Onup.
Hadrian the third first presumes upon some notable advantage to exclude the
imperial authority its prerogative in the Creation and investiture of the
Romish Bishop, and then broaches the donation of Constantine, that had been
tund up about six hundred years without vent, which occ^sioned a deluge of
scisme in that chair of pestilence, by mutual murders, poysonings,
excommunications, etc. Nullum seculum indoctius, aut infaelicius, so Bellar. de
Romans Pont. lib. 4. c. 11.
Bellarmine; scelestum sui asperitate, and boni sterilitate ferreum, etc. So
Tom. 10. A. 900.
Baronius, In the space of 150 years, were fifty Popes, most of which came
violently to their graves; At length by deep sleights, in the fullness of
time, A. D. 1076.
Hildebrand by the name Gregory the seventh mounts the Popedom, when it seems
that Antichrist was full grown, and that was then the Universal sense of men:
he (says Avent. Ann. li. 7.
Aventine) was the first that under the gloss of Religion, Antichristi imperii
fundamentum jecit, laid the groundwork of the Popes Empire; By him says
Onup. in vit. Greg. 7. Col. 27.
Onuphrius their favorite, was that chair endowed with Wealth, Pomp, and
profanaditione, worldly jurisdiction: Res ante ea saecula inaudita. Hoc
nefandum primus auspicatus est quod p^r success^res buc usque c^^i^uatur, etc
A^e^t. An. Be^^. 1^. 7.


Now the instruments extraordinary that this Pope managed beyond his
predecessors, were the establishing certain Head-assertions, of which no
dispute was to be tolerated, probant, and non probantur; These to be the
touchstone, to assay whether a man be for or against them: and he that
without hesitation consents to these may have connivence in any other
disgustment, he that doubts, is anathematis'd as an Heretic; some of those
Decretals I shall release out of Onup. in vit. Greg. 7. Col. 248.
Onuphrius.

That the Bishop of Rome only is de jure Universal.

That he alone may for the necessity establish new Laws.

That he alone may depose Princes.

That he alone may absolve Subjects from their allegiance.

That his sentence may not be retracted by any man, all men's by his.

That the Church of Rome never did err, nor can.

That no Council without him, can be general.

That an appeal lies from all powers to the Apostolic Sea.

That he alone can admit by indulgence, or exclude by excommunication whom he
please from Heaven, etc.

Then he forbids Marriage and commands abstinence from meats, for so it was 1 Timothy 4.1*^.
prophesyed he should.

By these principles that Sea is entitled to a Monarchy jure Divino over the
whole World; nor is it improvident to build upon, and fortify what it has thus
founded; For these principles are become the very rules whereby they square out
the Canons of Faith; Tertul.
Caedem Scripturarum faciunt ad materiam suam; Both Discipline and Doctrine
they so fashion as it may best comply to this Interest; For having reduced men
to a sufficiency of ignorance, commended, as the Mother of Devotion, they
obtrude upon the silly people, what they please to be believed by an implicit
Faith.

1. To this effect must Divine Service be officiated in a tongue unknown, that
the vulgar may the more admire at what he understands not, and apply with
reverence to the Prelate for his information, which tiel quiel he must swallow
as Divine.

2 All that are in orders must live single, and adhere thereby and depend
solely upon the Pope; Had they house, wife, or child their affections might
more reflect upon their Patrons, which indulgence as it would distract them
from a total service, so might it induce them to consent to some prejudices of
the Romish Church, which in the present state they are they endeavor mightily
to advance, since under the Popes protection they secure themselves vast
exemptions, and prerogatives above the temporalty; and by going Friars r^ther
are discharged of the toils, then debarred the solaces of this life, enjoying
the opportunities as of ease so of all sorts of Luxury at the charge of others;
nor is it impossible but that their ripe fortune, or noto^i^u^ diligence may
commend them gradatim, to the highest dignity.

3. Certain meats must be prohibited at set times, to enure people to
obedience, or occasion to purchase dispensations, But the reformation of this
as also the chalice in the Sacrament had been granted in the Trent Council,
at the instance of the Germans, but that it would have opened a gap to demand
an abrogation of all positive constitutions, by which only the Popes
prerogative is preserved, Card. Pio de Carpi dis. con. Trid. page, 460.
for by those which are de jure Divino no profit does arise, but that which is
spiritual.

4. Confession must be enjoined with this inforcement, that if any sin were
pretermitted, the total was ineffectuall; whereby there is a daily discovery
of the very thoughts of men, and present prevention if any thing be projected
that is mischeivous to their cause, and this opportunity they aptly use to
persuade their penitents, to ransom their sins by consecrating their goods
unto the Church, as also to excite the multitude to sedition and tumult, with
annexing such conditions to their absolution, as best conduce to the designs
they aim at.

5. The Doctrine of merits must be enforced, that there may be a treasury in
the Church full of their works who supererrogate, the dispensation whereof is
committed to the Pope, who when he gives indulgences recompenses the debt of
the sinner by assigning so much in value out of the treasury: and lest this
treasure might be deficient, the Merits of Christ are added which are infinite;
A.D. 1100. vib. 2. Hist. Con. Trent. lib. 1.
The grant of these was first practiced by Pope Urban, to all such who made
War to regaine the holy Land, after, to such as maintained a Soldier in
those wars; In progress of time the like indulgence was granted to such as
rebel'd against their own Princes if Excommunicate, or refractory to the
Church of Rome; But by Leo decimus, and so since, it is granted to whosoever
will give money, extending it to the dead; No sooner shall the money be
disburs'd, but the party pro quo is freed from the pains of purgatory; And who
will be sparing of his revenew, to secure himself or friend of Heaven? Deus
bone, quot hoe commentum de purgatorio misere afflixit; silly people are dared,
and squeas'd by this figment as a Lark by a Hobby. So Lavatar. Lavat. Part. 1.
cap. 16. Sir Ed. Sands his spec. Europ. Christionagraphy. U. per. tout.


6. By pretensed power of dispensation, they interpose in Princes marriages,
and legitimate illegal issues* whereby it is as necessary for some princes to
support this nfinite authority of the Pope as to continue the honor of their
birth, or title to their Crowns: They intermeddle also in all treaties, for if
any Prince be involved in hard conditions, and falsely desires a freedom, The
Popes Almighty power can dispense, and justifyes the unholinesse of the act by
the holiness of his authority; Id. Page 43.
By which the princes protestant are irreparably prejudiced, and brought to a
continuance of incertainty in their weightiest resolutions, there being a
warrant dormant for all men to break league, or oath with them; Their Church
having long since declared Nulla fides cum haereticis. That leagues with them
are more holy in their breaking, then their making.

7. When the corruptions of the Clergy like the sons of Ely, made men
abhor the offering of the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.17.
and misdoubt the Doctrines of their Priests, whose practice gave themselves
the lie, and when that which should be Veneranda raritate venerabilis, was
prostitute for Tith, and Testament, (the profitable jurisdiction whereof they
had incroacht, A.D. 1200. Mr. Seld. Hist. Tyths. cap. 14. and. page 488.
and became thereby as Judges of their own titles so sharers with all
executors) then began the natural censure of the Church, excommunication, to
be contemned: Those whose hair bristled, whose flesh trembled at the sentence
which ejects them, Gods providence and the 1 Cor. 5.
company of all good men now disvalued it, apprehending none less holy, then
those that most denounced it, and that in cause^ where their own interest was
engaged; The Clergy then to preserve their unnatural Courts, and credit in
some warmth, sue for saecular fomentations, to force that with the Sword, which
would not open to the Keys: and by such monstrous assistance, as fines,
imprisonments, tortures, nay and death (for they had once power in the writ de
2 H. 4. 15. Fitz. N. B. 269. d Br. Heresy 1. 10. H. 7. so. 17.
Haeretico comburendo) they worry the body to conform to their lavish
pleasures, leaving the soul to fester and repine, to cleanse which was the
drift of Christ by gentle admonition, meekness, etc. in Church Discipline.

8. Now the prime Engine that keeps this politic Fabric in continued motion,
is the unfathomed power of their Hierarchy, whereby the inferior vows
canonical obedience to his superior, and so upwards till it determine in the
sense of one man, who designing any thing of import and interest disperses it
into the several Diocesses, from thence it is diffused into the several
parishes where the Church Chaplain their avowed Creature, Sermons, and by it
poisons his dull auditors, having that mighty advantage to discourse often in
an attentive audience, Dani. in Ed. 2. 2 K. 24.
and that without interruption or reply; such was that at Oxford by the Bishop
of Hereford upon the Text my head aches, my head, by which he most undivinely
concludes that an aching, and sick head of a Kingdom must of necessity be taken
off, and that of Doctor Shaw at Paul's Cross who out of the Text Bastard slips
shall never prosper, Wise. 4.
seconded by Friar Picket upon Woe to the Realm where a child is King, invey'd
against the undoubted right of the fifth Edward; These with some like
confederate preachments so cosend the blind credulity of the people that the
second An. reg. 20. 1327. An. reg 1. 1483.
Edward was suffered to be deposed, and the An. reg. 20. 1327. An. reg 1. 1483.
fifth a tender innocent murdered in the Tower.

The power of this misterious Church-chaine was often checked at by our Princes,
but never mated till our eight 21 H. 8. 13. 1 Ed. 6. 12.
Henry listening to his great counsel, first unscal'd the eyes of his dark
subjects and enabled all to s^arch Scriptures Acts 17 11.
whether the thing were so whereby the Clergy became copies, no farther then
they agreed with the Original, which was so evident (for I suppose the holy
spirit more able then any man or counsel to dictate in expressions most easy
to be apprehended) that the sense of every man convinced those aforesaid
spurious and rebellious inferences. Then he unhatcht the lincks of this
Hierarchy from its dependence on the Pope, and affixt it more immediately to
his Crown with the style of 24 H. 8. 12. 25 H 8. 20 19. 35 H 8. 1.
Supremum caput Ecclesiae anglicanae which was his Ca^^rics case 5. Rep. de.
Iure regis Eccl. Dan 26. H. 8. 1. 11. H. 4. 37.
ancient right. Surely that sage Parliament as it expressed deep prudence to
unward the Kingdom of a foreign servitude* so expressed it mighty confidence in
their Prince to the scale of whose prerogative it added the wait which was
formerly its balance; An additament (being to the person) perhaps no less
cumbersome to prerogative then quarreld at by the prelacy; For shall not the
Prince by wholesome and steady providence, temper and qualify the headiness and
fiery suggestions of his Clergy? they (swollen aloft from an inferior rank) are
soon inflated with ambitions, and under the false gloss of service to their
master design their own interest, and in the end his rifling; for could they
by a higher power check the curb of Law, they would soon degree into their
ancient separation and privileges so mortal to monarchy, which the Hierarchy
being now Perfectum est cujus nihil est extra accipere. Arist. 2. cael. Tex.
23. Et appetitus materiae non estnisi motus ad forma^. 1. Phys. Aris.
imperfect cannot but as naturally Covet as it is to be ambitious; The attempt
of which perhaps may expose even Majesty (quod avertet deus) to much
sufferance, and burry the people, (impatient of Church-pride) to combustions;
certain it is, Variety of preferments tempts men to hanker after their
enjoyment, and distracts from that diligence of superintendency intended by the
Gospel: whereby the people become libertines, and they like Acts 18.17.
Gallio careless of those things. Thus those competencies which our Ancestors
by the name of Tiths dedicated to preserve knowledge in the Laity, are diverted
to erect a greatness in the Clergy, and holy orders are undertaken as a
beneficial office, not of conscience, but to acquire honor and revenew: as if
Religion were as Machiavill designs only Match. de Princip.
fallere civitates, Tacit. 1. Ann.
and regere vulgi animos; Sit alite dextro, blessed be the age when each Church
shall be reindowed with a full competence, that each incumbent may contentedly
acquiesce (...) superintendere to oversee his single charge: that so some
ministers might not be necessitated to hackny out their age in penury and
scorn, while the rest perhaps less worthy, not more Divine, deboyst and
scandal their profession in the riot of superfluity and excess: endevoring in
the interrim to patch up their own deficiencies by ammusing, and entertaining
the gasing senses of their dull parish with perfumes, pictures, chantings,
gorgeous and solemn services, etc. now here, then there, now low, then aloft,
now Priest, then people, then clark, then quire, by which sportive varieties
some weak souls are possessed that Gods Service is more sensual then cordial,
or that their is a deep mystery in the mere form of worship, and industring
to keep conformity with the several changes become disabled to settle and
compose themselves to a steadiness of devotion; stifling indeed the pith of
true religion in the bark, which like a simple Infant is so straightened in the
prison of his garment, that it scarce has liberty to vent breath. Lo all this
is to the high impayring of that which is indeed the miracle of Christianity:
To observe the supposed son of a Mark. 6.3.
Carpenter, Isay 53.3. Mat 9.9. Mal. 4.18.21. John 11.2. Mal. 26.7.
A man of sorrows, to inspire only a few unknowing publicans, men in rags,
silly women, To waive the assistance of Kings and Princes (whom his diety might
have stoopt) to neglect the slights of eloquence Cor. 2.4. 1 Cor. 1.17. etc.
the intising speech of man's wisdom, the enchanting symphonies of Music pomp
or sumptuousnes, only with naked simplicity, innocence, meekness, temperance
and humility, those celestial graces 1 Cor. 2.1. etc. ver. 4.
in plain evidence of the spirit, and of power to assault powers,
principalities, ambitions, lusts, to force men from the riot of their
appetites, level their high thoughts with the Earth, and to reduce the
disobedient only with the spirit of gentleness, and admonition, or at most,
Mal. 10.14. 1 Cor. 5.13. 1 Timothy 1.20.
dissertion, by these low accomodations to disperse his doctrines, argues in
deed a Divinity in the author and a purity in the ordinance; Whereas to have
sown his Religion and preserved it by the aid of power, pomp, violence,
inquisitions, burnings, fines, imprisonments, etc. had evidenced nothing of a
miracle, for by such politic principles Mahomet and the heathen have infused
and fortifyed their Idolatries; It is the badge and Emblem of a Christian (not
Pomp, not Palaces, not Pictures, Altars, Fire, etc.) but humility and d^votion
in the heart, which argument as it alone convinces all controversy in opinion,
so does it orthodox Christianity to be Divine; Then does the Church of Christ
most flourish when people are religious and good, not when the Clergy are
aloft, and proud; perhaps of this Diana to much, Acts 19.28.
By whose craft, etc.

Observe we from the premises, as the novelty of the Romish Church, so the
difficulty to reconcile it to us; Our Doctrines are affirmative and derived
from all authority, such as neither the Romish-Church nor any considerable body
of Christians ever disaffirm'd; Those positions which they add, and we
explode, they either father upon dark tradition, or squease obscurely from the
Text; to what is demonstrated, or evidently employed by the Scripture, we
subscribe; Their superfortations as we cannot pedigree their divine original,
so we justly suspect to be introduced by design: and good cause; for their is
scarce one doctrine wherein we vary, but it contributes (a capite ad calcem) as
the sense of it at lest is now diverted, to uphold some or all the aforesaid
lavish usurpations of their Clergy; Now were their Hierarchy, and those
superiors levelled to their primitive humility (Learn of me, for I am humble
and in heart lowly) and diligence (woe is me if J preach not) those after
births would of themselves moulder off as useless and ungospellary. Mat.
20.26. Mat. 18.4. 1 Cor. 9.16.
But it is so sensual to tyrannise in a separate Dominion, to riot uncontrolably
in excess and sloth, that their selfe-conviction can no more probably be
expected, then that Beelzebub should cast out Divills, Mat. 9. 34. Mar. 3.22.
and their devout lay-votarist is so awed by their authority, and so fifted by
confession, that he dares not unhood his understanding so much as to resent the
mystery; Indeed they have been so provident during their universal sway over
Christendom, as to suffer few Ancient wrightings to be derived unto posterity
to convince their gross incrochments; Some Fathers, they have fathered, others
they have purged, the rest confounded, Books as well as persons, so that to
argue by antiquity seems to be an impar congressus, as to join issue where
the power of one party has purloyn'd the evidence, nay has sat Judge; The
Scripture only we receive as an impartial standerd in its naked purity, which
by its primitive dispersion, and Divine providence, is uncorrupted, though the
Jesuits (being thereby too evidently convinced) begrudth us that and bespatter
it, therein hellishly striking at the root of all Christianity.

2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11.
Now because men will not receive the truth that they may be saved, God sends
them strong delusion that they believe a lie: and certainly the Inferior Priest
by his rash vow of blind obedience is so muffled, that he mostly appehends not
the aforesaid mysteries of the papacy; but simply in some sort of innocence is
precipitated to uncouth enterprises; and the credit of his hot zeal and
boldness bears up the reputation of the Romish cause; In which actions though
I totally explode his presumption in the defiance of our Laws, yet I pity
that the zeal (if it be so) of so much ingenuity should be misguided: and
since he that professes with the truth but formally, loosely, and not of
conscience, is supposed in darker plight, then he that professes
conscientiously opinions that are untrue, Romans 10.1.2.
if not blasphemous, Therefore as Paul of Israel (my hearts desire and prayer
to God is, that they may be saved, for they have the zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge) so it is my charity, as not to force Romanists that are
now possessed from the means of truer knowledge, so not totally to disable them
the practice of Christanity; It can be no attractive to our religion, to
instate them in condition to be of none; either permit we Recusants no
subsistence in this Kingdom, or admit them to be no Atheists.

It Is prophesyed that in the fullness of time Rev. 18.2.
Babylon (that Rev. 17.9.
City seated upon seven hills, drunk with the blood of Rev. 17.6.
saints, that has made Rev. 18.13.
merchandise of the souls of men, and has inebriated all Nations with the cups
of her fornication) must fall; 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
Him God will consume with the spirit of his mouth and destroy with the
brightness of his coming; And certainly where the Gospel is preached in its
true purity, liberty, and power, that black darkness vanishes as a mist
before the Sun; Ponder we in this Land, where it gains settlement, i^ it be
not either where there is but dark instruction, or where the pride, ignorance
or looseness of a Minister scandals his profession; Adapt we our
Church Discipline, that it may engage our Ministry to diligence more then
interest, that people be so superintended, as to become neither sottish nor
libertines, that there be a vigilant and handy-a^e over sin as well as
schism, the Romish Empire which covets darkness will be soon confounded,
mauger the utmost endeavor of her instruments.

In the interim some gentlelesse to such adversaries as are now possessed in
conscience, as it will argue confidence of our own cause, and brotherly longing
for their fellowship, so may it insinuate and court them into a kindly
approbation of our happiness in the liberty of Divine knowledge; which
knowledge will soon unvaile even to such as are ingenuous Priests the project
of their imposed drudgery, To the lay-votarist, of confession and ignorance,
which they cannot but resent with indignation, and improve to undeceave
themselves, apprehending how their estates, strengths, and zeal are employed
implicitly as Dromedaryes to support the insolence, state and riot of their
superior Clergy. Religionis suae abusus, quastus sacrificum est in causa, so
Postellus: Nor can they be deterred by our present fractions, since both ours,
Lib. 1. de orb. Concord. cap. 7.
and the variance which is in most of the reformed Churches is nothing
dangerous because not doctrinall; It Is only in discipline charged to be
overgrowne or introduct for politic designs, or in Ceremonies which by some
are thought indifferent, by others absolutely unlawful, by none essential to
salvation; These doubtless the difference being interest not divinity, and
consisting in the garment not the body, time and ripe providence will temper to
a reconcilement.

But if some Priests according to the proposition may not be admitted upon the
grounds of charity, and confidence; let it be argued upon the grounds of humane
reason.

The profession of a Romanist so necessitates him to the personal employment
of his confessor, that unless we suppose him totally N^mo prae^umitur ^ss^
imme^^or ae^e^^ae* sa^utis.
heathenish and unchristian, we may assure our selves that he commerses with
his Priest; And well may the rigor of our Law enforce Priests to privacy and
disguisement, but never to a total abjuration; for absolutely to dissert their
party, were to infrindge their vow of obedience, to renounce their orders, of
which (some presume) they make conscience, or they would not subject themselves
to so much sufferance: restraint rather quickens their inventions to evade,
then flats their resolutions to adventure, since the difficulty of the action
instiles it as to them, meritorious; Perhaps to that deboistnesse which in
foreign parts among Priests is so notorious upon such relaxation would here
display it self in its proper colors, whereby the seduced people would be no
longer cosend by their gloss of sanctity, and the looseness of our own
ministry, not so much discourage us, as if unparaleld.

Gasp. Contar. De Rep. Ven.
Now the sage Venetians fadoming that dependence which the whole Clergy have
upon the Sea of Rome, forbid all Priests their Counsels with a Fora y Preti by
the voice of common Cryers, but Jesuits they experience to be so slyly
officious in State contrivements, that they banished that order their Dominions
upon pain of death; Nor is it memoris'd that any have violated that Law, for
that neither conscience nor vow obliges them to so desperate a service since
their Priestly office as it relates to God may be dispatched by others; This
ground only is that which will disburthen us of Jesuits, and those superfluous
swarms of Priests which now cloy and pester us: permit we upon good testimony
and security of quiet conversation some few saeculars such as are borne
free-English to enjoy their birthrights; Let their number be so straightened as
they have no leisure from their function to be tampering in the State, let them
be enjoined a difference in habit, whereby they may be distinguished, and
avoided, As conscience would not Egg on the recidue to attempt hither with
such peril (of unavoidable death if apprehended) where they are not necessary
in their calling, so much mischief might chance to be prevented which they now
project under the mask of Gallantry and disguise.

Nor can such a prudentiall act be instil'd a toleration of Idolatry, since we
charge that Religion with so many present disabilities, etc. as are elsewhere
expressed, as also with a drift in time of Vid. Claus. 2.
total extirpation: Not to execute the utmost severity of punishment, is not
an allowance to the crime; Of two evils upon which we are necessarily
enforced, it is wisdom to choose the least; as we rather suffer mischiefs, then
an inconv(...); Therefore prohibit we not mass in the houses of Ambassadors,
nor punish we usury though the 13. Eli, 8.
Statute votes it to be forbidden by the Law of God, a sin, and detestable; 4
Rep. 20.
Multa conceduntur per obliquum, quae non conceduntur de directo.

Thus I have exposed my sense, vindicated I hope sufficiently from favor to
their cause, though perhaps not without pity and some tenderness to misguided
zeal, and persons; All which I submit as ingeniously to better reason as is
expected unto mine.

8. Clause.
THat all persons that shall practice to absolve, Withdrawing from allegiance
or Religion.
persuade or withdraw any of the Subjects of the Kings Majesty, etc from their
natural obedience to His Majesty, his heirs or successors, or to reconcile
them to the Pope or Sea of Rome, or to move them or any of them to promise
obedience to any pretended authority of the Sea of Rome, or to any other
Prince, state, or Potentate, Saying mass in open and known places.
or shall openly say or cause mass or any other idolatrous service to be said
in open and notorious places, whereby any Protestant may have liberty, and be
permitted to enter, by the will and free consent of such person so saying, or
causing it to be said, That then all such persons, their procurers,
counselors, ayders and maintainers, knowing and consenting to the same, shall
be to all intents adjudged, etc. Ut ante.


3 Iac. 4.
The former part of this clause is express in 3. Jac. 4. the latter may
obviate a mischief which is too frequent, scandalous, and temptatious, at the
peril of such as have best opportunity to avoid it.

9 Clause.
Delivery of the arms of a Recusant.
THat if any Popish Recusant shall not before the (...) day of (...) and so from
time to time voluntarily deliver up all his Armor, or Ammunition, etc. or
shall knowingly keep or detain either to his own use, or to the use of any
other, any such Armor, Ammunition, etc. other then such quantity as he shall
be allowed to retain for the necessary defense of himself, his House, and
family, such Recusant being thereof convicted upon reiw of two Justices, or
other testimony, shall abjure the Realm, if he shall return he shall be
adjudg'd a Traitor, etc


1 Iac. 4. 3 Ia. 4.
Formerly such concealements have been practiced, that the Laws injoyning
Justices to search become fruitless, or if upon diligent inquiry Arms,
Ammunition, etc. were discovered, the only penalty was removal, and the
offender becomes instructed how more closely to conceal a new supply; But a
clause to this sense, imposing the delivery and retainer upon the peril of the
poss^ssor, wherein if he proves faulty, he undergoes so deep a censure, will
doubtless be more effectual to disarme them.

10. Clause.
To discharge the estate of a Recusant of encumbrances by Statutes, etc.
THat it shall be lawful for all Recusants seized of estates in Fee, or Tail,
to dispose of them by sale or otherwise according to the due ceremonies of Law,
acquitted of all former forfeitures, and penalties incurd by reason of any
former statute, composition, or agreement merely for Recusancy.


A Recusants Land is so encumbered and charged by several Statutes in duties to
the Crown, that without some clause to this sense, few will adventure to
purchase upon their Titles; And it seems reasonable if we disable their issue
to inherit, to enable them to sell for their best advantage; provided that if
they transplant their families, their money be returned by way of exchange, and
not transported.

11. Clause.
THat all men whatsoever, An Oath of allegiance to the King, and fidelity to
the Kingdom to be taken necessarily by all.
that do or shall inhabit in the Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales,
being of the age of one and twenty years, shall within one year next ensuing
or within one year next after they shall attain to the age of one and twenty,
become of sound mind, out of prison, or r^turned into the Land, etc. take the
Oath hereafter mentioned before the Minister and Churchwardens of every such
Parish where they shall inhabit, openly in the Church after Evening Service in
some Lords Day, which taking, together with the name of the party, the Minister
and Churchwardens shall register in some book to be kept for the same
purpose, and for such their ent^y shall have (...). And if any person shall
neglect or not tender himself to take the same Oath in manner and form
aforesaid, the said Minister and Churchwardens shall certyfye the name of such
person to the next general sessions, and he shall incur being thereof
convicted, the dangers, penalties, and forfeitures ordained and provided by the
Statute of provision and praemunire, made in the sixteenth year of the reign
of King Richard the second, etc. I suppose the Oath to this effect.


3 Iac. 4. An Oath of allegiance to be taken by all persons, etc.
1. I, A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, testifye and declare in my
conscience before God and the world, that our Sovereign Lord King Charles is
lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of other His Majesty's Dominions
and Countries.

3 Ia. 4:
2. And I swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any declaration, or
sentence of Excommunication or deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope or his successors, or by any authority derived, or
pretended to be derived from him or his Sea against the said King, his Heirs
or Successors, or any absolution of the ^ai^ Subjects from their obedience; I
will bear faith and true allegiance to his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors,
and him and them will defend to the utmost of my power, against all
conspiracies and attempts whatsoever which shall be made against his, or their
persons, their Crown and Dignity, by color of any such Sentence and
Declaration, or otherwise.

3. Iac. 4.
3, And I will make known unto His Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, all
treasons, and traiterous conspiracies which I shall know or hear of to be
against him or any of them.

1. Eli. 1.
4. I do also promise, and vow that to my power I shall assist and defend all
jurisdictions, privileges, preheminences and authorities, granted or belonging
to His Majesty, His heirs and successors, or united and annexed to the
imperial Crown of this Realm.

Protestation.
5. I shall also maintain and defend as far as lawfully I may, the power and
privileges of Parliament, the lawful rights and liberties of the Subject, and
every person that takes this Oath in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful
pursuance of the same.

Protestation.
6. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may I will oppose, and by all good
ways and means endeavor to bring to condign punishment all such as shall
either by force practice, coonsels, plots, conspiracies, or otherwise, do any
thing to the contrary of any thing in this present Oath contained.

2. Iac. 4.
7. And these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and sw^are
according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the plain
sense and common understanding of the said words, without any equivocation, or
mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever; and I do, and will renounce
all pardons, dispensations, or absolutions whatsoever to the contrary.

8. And I make this recognition and Oath heartily, 3 Iac. 4.
willingly and truly, upon the true faith of a Christian. So help me God.

He that deliberatly, praecogitate, shall refuse such an Oath, ut videtur, has
designs of Treason to the King, or State; He that maliciously, praecogitate,
shall infrindge it, implies he is no Christian; As Divinity confounds the one,
so Jus gentium, the Law of Nations, explodes the other.

Rerum progressus ostendunt multa quae in initio non povidentur. 6. Rep. 40.
The Drift.
May Glory be to God in the liberty, purity, power of his worship; Honor to my
King, in the might of his dominions; Prosperity to my Country, England, in the
Unity of its Interest; And

May some moderate Overture be here hinted as may contribute to stanch the
gore of Ireland. Faxit Them.

FINIS.
Errata.
FOr reluction p. 15. l. 21. r. reluctance; p. 16. in the margin for Cricaeus
r. Li^c^eus. p. 23. l. 11. for towed, r. towred. p. 24 l. 1. r. that for
Forgery. id. l. 34. for in^ndita. r. inauditae. p. 25. l. 4. for release. r
Rehearse. p. id. l. 30. for (...), r. (...). p 31. l. 20. for superfortation.
r. supersaetations. ib. l. 34. inandita. ^^ead inunditae.


