A Conference Held between the Old Lord Protector And the New Lord General,
Truly Reported by Hugh Peter's.

London, Printed, 1660.

A Profound Discourse between the old Protector and the new Lord General, truly
reported by Hugh Peter's.
Oliver in a disguise, giving a Sop to Cerberus (the Porter of Hell,) gets
loose from thence, and taking a turn or two in St. James 's Park, meets with
Hugh Peter's; to whom he directs himself, as follows. Cromwell. HOh! hoh!
Peter's! Its a brave refreshing by my Conscience! Its a great deal cooler here,
than where I was just now!


Peter's. If I may be so bold to ask you, Sir, where have you been I pray?


What? will thou be a fool too? thou art knave enough in conscience! Do not
thou know where I have been, ever since my thrice auspicious Day of September.
I tell thee, I have been with my Sovereign Lord and Prince Abaddon, Apollyon,
Lucifer, Satan, Beelzebub, Senior Don Diabolo, the Illustrious Emperor of
Plutonia, in his infernal Dominions and Territories; where I am his Substitute
and Grand-Vizier, turmoiling my self with the Cares of his Government; which
have put me into such a fervor, and heat, by incessant motion and quotidian
agitation, that my native bow died Red is changed into this Tartarian sable
complexion. But who would not be in Office, Peter's? Believe me, though the
trouble of my place be great, yet it is a relaxation to me to consider, how I
have out-stripp'd in my Princes favor my fellow-Courtiers, as Cain (the famous
fratricide,) the Babylonian Nimrod, the Grecian Andronicus, the Tyrant's of
Athens, the Roman Nero, the Apostate Julian, the Turkish Mahomet, the renowned
Persecutors, Alexander the sixth, Caesar Borgia, Ravilliac, Guido Faux, my
Cousin Harry the eight, my Parrallel Richard the third, and many more such
eminent Senators in my Sovereign's Court: Not to mention that ambitious
emul^tor of my glory, audacious Bradshaw, and others of the like extraction and
quality; whose memorable Actions and Exploits will be recorded and rewarded to
all eternity, as well as mine. But prithee Peter's, where is my Secretary? Will
he never come at me, to tell me how the Affairs of my sons Richard and Harry
proceed, succeed and prosper? He used to give me devilish Information of all
the passages in Europe. Now, prithee, be thou honest for once, and relate to me
the condition of my Territories since my secession from hence, and promotion to
my present Charge.


Peter's. Sir, Your son Richard is a simple Fool, your son Harry, a stupid
Ass; Fleetwood, a sordid base fellow; Disborow, a perfideous Renegado; the
rest of your Privie-Councill, a company of Woodcocks, Widgeons, Oules and
Buzzards; and your Secretary, such a nimble Mercury, as he rides Post into any
employment for advantage.


Cromw. The Devil he does?


Pet. Nay, Its true enough: I Would thought you had known him well enough, as he
knew you: But sir, since you was here, there has been a damnable Alteration in
the Government: Your Sons are all turned out of Office: Their Protector-ship,
Leivtenant-ship, and General-ship, not worth a --! The little Rump, that you
thought (and all the world too, I dare swear) you had devoured at one
mouth-full, (I know not by what evil digestion) being evacuated again, has
cast such a savor in your Sons Nostrils, as has quite cast them out of all
Power and Authority. That Posterne member has revived it self twice within
these nine months. Once by the treachery of Fleetwood and his accomplices: And
next by the foolery of Lambert, and the crafty Policy of General Monk. And not
only so, but by the Necessity of the Times, and the Interposition of the
City of London, and indeed of most of the Gentry and Commonalty of England,
the very seeluded Members are readmitted into the House of Commons; and its
feared the Lords will shortly have the exercise of their Jurisdiction: And what
will the issue be, I pray, but restoring of the Line of King James to the
Kingly Power, the redintegation of Monarchy and Hierarchy, and the dissolution
of your new Atlantis, and Utopian Commonwealth. And for my part, I am
bethinking my self to go over into Holland, with all speed: For there will be
no secure abiding here for me, if the Prelates or Presbyters get pre-eminence.


Cromw Come to me, you fearful Coward, and I will prefer you to be one of my
Princes Chaplains: But is all this, that thou have told me, true? Me thought,
when I came hither first, I found a very strange alteration in this place: No
Chimney almost smoking at White Hall, and nothing but smoke in all the
Chimneyes at St. James's, Prithee, who quarters there?


Pet Why? General Monck, Sir.


Cromw. How a devil came he thither? What, has he left Scotland now I am gone;
from whence I could never get him when I was here, with all the subtle
pretenses and flatteries, to which I was so well accustomed?


Peter's. It Is true Sir.


Cromw. Hoh! hoh! Prithee go to him, and use thy wonted Craft and Artifice,
deluding and seducing him to come into the Park, and then I Will set upon him in
the Devils name, I Will warrant thee.


Pet. I will sir, --


Peter's goes to St. James 's House; and after a while, returns into the Park
with the Lord General; To whom Cromwell appears, in a grizly black, deformed,
devilish guise, and treates him, as follows. Cromw. Monck! What a Devil
aile you?


Monck. In the Name of God what art thou? By the Powers of Heaven, I conjure
thee to tell me, who thou art?


Cromw. I am the most Serene and Renowned Oliver, late Lord Protector of
England, Scotland and Ireland.


Monck. The Devil thou art! What wind brought you to town again: I had thought
your Ghostly Father had secured you safe enough from coming to trouble the
world any more, if thou be Cromwell!


Cromw. Cromwell I am, and this my reverend Confessor and Absolver can
sufficiently testify.


Peter's. It Is he sir.


Monck. What news from Erebus my Lord?


Cromw. John Bradshaw's well, with my late Attorney General and others of my
familiars. But prithee, George, tell me, what wind drove thee from Edinburgh
to London?


Monck. Sir, a prosperous and auspicious wind, by the Divine Inspiration! to
repair the Breaches you and your Rebellious Family have made; and restore the
ancient liberty of this Commonwealth to its primitive and regular Constitution;
in the bringing in the Son of our late gracious and now glorious Sovereign to
be King, and Parliaments to their lawful freedom and Privileges, without
terror of Interruption or Obstruction; that so both Religion and the civil
Government may flourish again in purity, and prosperity, and faction and
rebellion, be banished to the land of Darkness, and confusion, the proper
receptacle for factious and traiterous rebels, whereof you were the
Captain General.


Cromw. How now, George, are you so saucy? Have thou veiled thy Malignancy all
this while under thy hood; and now do thou bare thy face for Kingship; and
assert the Interest of Charles Stuart?


Monck. It had been well with you, if you had been so conscientious and
Religious, Honorable and Loyal, as to have given Caesar his due. Whereas now I
perceive and really believe, that you are a most miserable Caytiff, reprobate
from heaven, and eternal felicity, and condemned to the portion of the Devil
and his angels in utter destruction.


Cromw. Hold George, I am his Majesty's Vicegerent, and can do what I will in
his Dominions. I have promised Peter's a Benefice. And Bradshaw is one of the
Commissioners of the great Seal, and the Archbishop of York is another by my
promotion. I have Offices for thousands of them, if they have but the luck to
come to me. Dorislaus is a Judge in our Admiralty. And I will be so much in
Charity with Haselrig, Vain, Jack Lambert, Scot, and Tom Harrison, That they
shall all be well provided for. My Son Ireton is my only confident. Fleetwood
was always a coward, and never had a noble daring spirit, and its no matter
for him. But I want Wat Strickland to be Captain of the Guard: And I would do
very well for my Privy Council. My father Rouse is Provost of the College of
Aetna. Tom Pride is head Brewer at Acharon; but we are in great want of a
Cobbler, and therefore I desire thee to send John Hewson to me with all speed. A
Goldsmith might get wealth enough with us, better than by the Spanish silver;
and therefore dismiss Invisible Jack to me, and I will set him and Franck Allen
up together: He might do well to bring his Lievtenant-Colonel along with him,
for the Sultana Proserpina has a Web for him, and is in great distress for a
Weaver. Prideaux is the only favorite of Rhadamanthus. I would very gladly
hear of some of Harry Martyn's Jocaries; for though he was against my
Protector-ship, yet I love him for his Sales; and he shall never loose by
coming hither; for here is Salt enough I Will warrant him. I want my Ape
extremly, and therefore give a Commission to Robin Titchburn to come to me
presently. I cannot stay any longer to insist upon particulars; And therefore
send me all the Committee Men, Excisemen, Informers, etc. who have gotten good
estates to bear their charges hither, and they shall loose nothing by their
coming. It Is strange I can see nothing in Print! surely, Hills and Field are laid
aside, or else I am sure, I should have had somewhat of News by them, or
Nedham, before this time. Prithee George, send those fellows to me; for our
Sovereign is determined to Print his new Translation; with the Confession of
our Infernal Creed, and to have an Apology for his Government, and the Case of
his Dominion stated; and therefore my old servants will be (I know) very
officious and sedulous in this Employment. They shall not need to fear, that
any one will print their Copy: I Will secure them by my Warrant against all the
Stationers in his Majesty's name, and by his Royal Privilege; and more then
this, they shall print all our Acts and Ordinances without rendering any account.


Well! George! Since it is no better: It Is well it is no worse: But I tell thee,
had I been here still, I would have kept my self in the Saddle, and not have
been so Pusillanimous, as my Son: But I cannot blame him, he broke his Thigh by
falling from his hunting-horse, and he might very well fear his Neck, when he
bestrid such an indomitable Beast, as Englands great-horse. Audaces fortuna
juvat, and degeneres animos timor arguit.


Monck. Had you, sir, the filial fear of God before your eyes, and not the
slavish fear of a Tyrant in your heart, you would not have perpetrated so many
prodigious enormities, in subverting the true Religion and Liberty of the
Church and State of England: What cause had you to take away the lives of sir
Henry Slingsby, and the eminent Martyr Dr. Hewet, with others of Noble and
generous blood? besides your lawful Sovereign?


Cromw. Oh George! Reprove me not so bitterly. I Am bad enough already; to hear
thee mention the name of a God and his fear, and his Saints and Martyrs, brings
horror and despair into my Conscience, and wounds me to the very soul
immortally. I can stay no longer with thee: My Charge requires my Attendance:
Come Peter's, follow me; and so farewell, George: Only be careful of
fulfilling my Requests, in sending the several Persons beforementioned after
me with all speed convenient, that they may receive their just Rewards, as well
as my self.


Cromwell vanishes. Peter's, He Is gone, my Lord, And I must follow him; only
give me leave to make a true Narration of this Conference.


Monck. The Devil go with him, and thee too, (as I may say!) Thou art a
dissembling, Hypocritical Knave for drawing me into such an Hellish
Conference. But the Lord deliver me, and all honest men from such Devilish
Principles and Practice. I am resolved to be (by Gods grace) steadfast in the
true Protestant Religion, Loyal to my Prince, and faithful to my Country;
And then I doubt not of a due Reward from the eternal King of Glory: And so be
gone Mr. Peter's! And betake your self to your Infernal Prelation and Benefice,
as soon as you will.


Peter's. I thank you Sir, for your noble dismission, and loving well-wishes.
I Will follow his Highness, as fast as I can.


Exit Luchrymis. Finis, Funis, Funus.

