A TRUE COPY OF A Popish Will Made in the xixth. Year of King Henry the
Eighth, etc.
The Original whereof, with the Probate, may be seen at the Sign of the Bull in
the Mint, Southwark, in the Custody of Mr. Merrial; and published only to set
forth the Ignorance of the Papists.
IN the Name of God Amen.
The xxiijth. day of the month of April, the year of our Lord God M. CCCCC.
xxvij. And the xixth. year of the Reign of King Herry, the viijth. I Thomas
Cony Citizein and Fletcher of Land. beying of good and perfyte memory thanked
be Almighty God, make, ordeyn, and dispose this my present Testament and last
Will in manner and fonrme following, that is, to wite. First, I bequethe and
recommend my Soul to Almighty God my Maker and Savyour, and to the glorious and
blessed Virgyn our Lady Saint Mary, and to all the holy company of Heavyn, and
my Body to be Buried within the Church of Saint Benet Gras-Church of London,
where as I am Parishioner in or ny the place where as the Body of Agnes late my
Wif now lies Buried. Itm, I bequethe to the High Awter of the same Church for
my Tithes and Oblations forgotten or negligently withholden in dischargeing of
my Conscience, ii s. Itm, I bequethe to the Fraternity of our blissed Lady in
the said Church Founded iii s. iiii d. Item, I bequethe, to Margaret my
Daughter to her to be delyvered when she shall come to her lawful Age or
Marriage xx l. Itm, I bequethe to the same Margaret my stonding Cup of Silver
and on' gilt with a Cover and a Got stonding upon the Top thereof. Itm', I
bequeathe to Iohane my Daughter, to her to be delivered when she shall come to
her Lawful Age or Marriage xx l. And oon' Goblet with a Cover gilt with a Rose
on the Top. And if it fortune, as God defend that any of my said Daughters
before she shall come to her Lawful Age or Marriage happen to die; than I will
that the part of her that so disceaseth remain to the other of them, than
being alyve, and so of either of them, except x l. parcel of the said bequeste
of x l. I will that myn' Erecutours underwritten, or the Executours of any of
them, provide and ordein an honest priest of good Name and Fame to sing and say
Mass within the said Church of Saint Benet for my Soul, my Fader and Mother
Souls, my Wifs Souls, my Friends Souls, my Children Souls, and all
Christen Souls by the space of oon year, etc. And than I bequethe to the same
Priest for the said oon year, etc. the said x l. parcel of the said Bequests of
x l. by me to my said ii. Daughters bequeathen. And also I will that the same
Priest shall be resident at all Divine Service to be said and songen within the
said Church during the said Year, etc. Except that mine Executors command hym'
to go to Westm' Savoy or Crossed Freres in London, where he shall say Mass for
my Soul, and the Souls aforesaid, as often as myn' Erecutors shall appoint
hym' thereto, during the said Year, etc. Also I bequethe to Margaret my Wif all
that myn' Interest, Title, Right and Terms of Years which I have of, and and
in all that my Tenement that I now dwell in, which I hold by a Leas of the
grant of James Walsingham and Edmond his Son for certain terms of Years, to
have and to hold all the said interest and terms of Years to the said
Margaret, to her Executors and Assigns during the Years now for to come, of
and in the same. And furthermore, I will that of the Issues and Profits that
shall Yearly come and grow of and in all my said Tenements that I now dwell in
the same, Margaret my Wif shall keep or cause to be kept an Yearly Obite or
Anniversary within the said Church of Saint B^^^^, for my Soul and the Souls
aforesaid, expending every Year Yearly at the said Obite during the space of
vij Years next ensuing my disceas xiij s. and iv d. in manner and form
following, that is to say, to vi. poor Householders of the said Parish of Saint
Bennet, vi s. that is to wite, to every of them xij d. so that the same vi
Householders be at my Dirige and Mass, requiring them to pray for my Soul and
the Souls aforesaid, vij s. and iiij d. residues of the said Sum of xiij s.
iiij d. to be spent and given amongst Preests and Clerks of the said Church
and for Rynging of Bells and other Obsequies to such an Obite accustomed, and
amongst the Parishioners for Bread, Drink and Chese; and when and essoone as
the said vij Years shall be complete and full run, than I will that every
Year Yearly, during and aslong as any interest and terms of Years that shall
be than for to come of and in the same Tenement, after that the said vij Years
be full run, myn' Obite to be kept within the said Church of Saint Bennet,
for my Soul and the Souls aforesaid, expending of the said Issues and Profits
that shall Yearly come of and in the same Tenements, but oonly vi s. iiij d.
Itm' I bequethe to William Cony my Brother the Rom of the Chamber that he now
holdith and occupies within my said dwellyng-hows, To have and to hold, to him
during the Years that I have to come of and in my said Tenement, if he the same
William Cony my Brother, so long lyve, without any Rent or other Duete to be
paid or yolden for the same. Also, I will thai myn' Executours shall every Year
Yearly, during the Space of Six Years next ensuing my disceas provide and by
oon Lode of Coals, accompting xxiiij Quarters for the Lode, at the price of x
s. the Lode, and the same Lode Coals so bought and provided, I will that the
same myn' Executours distribute and give the same to por Householders of the
said Parish of Saint Bennet, and to other next adjoining the same Parish within
the Ward, that is to say, to every Householder oon quarter, desiryng them to
pray specially for my Soul and the Souls aforesaid; and I will that the same
Coals be given at such time of the Year as it shall be thought most
convenyent for the need and comfort of the said por Householders. Also, I will
that my Tenement with th'Appurtenances lying in Ware, in the County of
Hertford, shall be immediately after my Disceas sold by myn' Erecutours to the
most profit and advantage. And the same Tenement so sold, I will that myn'
Executours or the Executours of any of them with the Money coming of the same
sale, shall dispose and give the same for my Soul and the Souls
above-written, in synging of Mass at Scala coeli Savoy, or Crossed Freres,
Marying of por Maidens, releving of por Prisoners and por Householders, amendyng
of high, noyous Weyes, and in other good werks of mercy and pity, as the same
mine Executours or the Erecutours of any of them shall think most best to the
Pleasure of God and health of my Soul and the Souls aforesaid. Furthermore, I
will that all my Lands and Tenements, Medewes, Lesues and Pastures, as well
Free as Copy, lying and being in the Parishes of Charlton or Ashton Combery and
Hampton in the County of Middl. and elsewhere within the same County,
Incontinent after my disceas shall wholly remain to the said Margaret and
Johane my Daughters, and to their Heirs and Assigns for evermore. The residue
of all my Goods, Catalls and Detts whatsoever they be after my Detts paid and
the Costs of my Burying done, and this my present Testament in all things
fulfilled wholly, I give and bequethe to the said Margaret my Wif, therewith to
do, ordeyn' and dispose her free will. And of this my present Testament and
last Will I make and ordeyn myn' Erecutors, the said Margaret my Wif, and
William Cony my Brother: And I bequethe to the same William for his labor in the
Premises, x l. and a Gown Yoven the Day and Year first above-written.

These Witness Sir Gerry Coldwel, Curate of the said Church, John Porter,
Thomas Egerton, William Temple, John Wilshire, William Cole, John Ruttur and
other.


