A CONGRATULATORY POEM On the R^ Honorable Sr. ORLANDO BRIDGMAN. Lord Keeper
of the ^ reat Seal of England.
My Lord,
TO You, as fast as verses feet can move
A Country Muse conveighs the Countries love,
And though her Laureats Courtly sisters bring
From their rich Stones a noble offering,
Yet (since the mind most makes the Sacrifice)
Your goodness will not meaner gifts despise.
She joys the Keeper, but more joys the Seal
Lodged to the advantage of the publiques Weal,
And the disposer too, whose prudent Choice
Is herein echoed by the vulgar voice;
You are the happy Center, that unite
In one the Patriot, and the Favorite.
Rare Harmony! the music of the Spheeres
Too seldom thus accords with vulgar Ears.
It Were easy to reflect, but that such ways,
Are the low Topics of a narrow praise,
Whence let your predecessors rest for me
His Libell here would your detraction be,
True Diamonds are by their own sparks declared,
And they are dull stones which shine not but compared,
Nor do you seek or need it, single Merit
Won you the Honor, Let that mighty wear it.
Mean while, we must our selves twice happy rate
Since peace and you, together blessed the State;
Our fears in the Wane, our joys are in the Increase
Whiles we have such a Keeper to our peace,
And (but that Faction did the Term devise)
We Would add too Keeper, of our Liberties.
Were all your own Rolls searched, scarce should we find,
That noble Seat filled with so fit a mind.
So brave a Mind, as baseness never allayes,
So great a Mind, as greatness cannot raise,
So just a Mind, as interest cannot seduce,
So wise a Mind, as colors cannot abuse
So large a Mind, as largest Trusts do crave.
So calm a Mind, as Equity should have.
High Courtships construed in the present tense
Laws Oracle without perplexed sense.
A sober piety in a Virtuoso
And an Orlando without Furioso.
Whose judgment does with legal measures side
Yet moderate, where men differ, not divide.
That temper now must bless us, we are undone
T'wixt two extremes, all Liberty and none.
You have the happy mean, neither propense
To scalding Zeal, nor cold Indifference.
The Churches patronage, you do inherit,
Both by a Claim of Birthright, and of merit
The Reverend prelate long since gone to rest
In after Annals shall be daily blessed,
As Bishop first, and next as parent too
A Father both unto the Church and you.
Yea twice the Churches Father, whiles his care
Thereof descends on you, though not his Chair.
Rome slander not our married Clergy, none
Of thy Popes Nephews matched a Bishops son:
Muster up all the Tribe, and we'el outvy'em:
Although we have forgot how they came by'em.
Yea those who cried down Prelates branch and root
May now repent each moyetie of their Vote
Since howsoe'er the root displeasd they see
A Bishops branch may make a noble Tree.
And if such blossoms Aarons rod will bare
It Would reconcile the Classis to the Chair.
Nor is the law less honored, whiles it sees
Its Rigours softened, by your decrees:
For whiles no point thereof escapes your Eye
Its Guordian knots you cut not, but untye.
So does the learned Churchman, in perplexed
Scriptures, unravell, not tear up the Text:
Out laws the highest reason, it is confessed,
Si'th now it is lodged in your learned Breast.
Your Court a Cou^^ (...) (...)y now,
You(...) Judge in it, Conscience in you,
Advanced by you to their ancient fame
Chancery suites shall loose their Evil name.
Nor shall the Client drained by Bills and Motions,
With a new (Libera) charge his devotions.
Nor shall the title burth'nd with decrees,
Undo the Heir, and spend his Fee in fees:
Or force him whiles he find's a suit in Tail,
To sell to his Lawyer, to make good his Sale.
But hold! me thinks I hear with what content,
Your learned lips harangue the Parliament,
So that whil's you Caress the learned throng,
Never King spoke, by a more welcome tongue:
Spare us good Sir, with moderation crave,
Or w're undone, it will be but ask and have.
Yea spare your worthyes Sir, lest Sons debate.
They give assent, and votes precipitate.
Whiles stormed by your Rhetoric, they dispense
With their own orders, and Enact the sense:
Enough my muse, pack up now and away,
To wait on's Lordship on next sealing day.
If asked thy business, tell, but e're he know it,
Get him to seal a pardon for his poet.
Then beg a grant, that though his name be Latent,
He may have leave to make his Letters Patent.
Licensed according to Order.

Printed for William Cadman at the Popes -head in the lower Walk in the
New-Exchange near Durham-gate in the Strand.


