26. of August, 1647.

TO ALL THE WORLD TO view, and to all men of common sense Christianity or
humanity, to judge of Thomas Coningsby of Northmynis in the County of HARTFORD
Esquire, now Prisoner in the TOWER OF LONDON.

And of continuance under slavish and most inhumaine Jail tyranny over his
person, the space of four years, eight months, and most illegal proceeding
and oppressive, violence and Villainies, (by indirect carriage) to his total
ruin, presents both the one and other to judge of and shows.

London, Printed in the Year. 1647

26. of August, 1647. TO ALL THE WORLD TO view, and to all men of common
sense, Christianity or humanity to judge of.
THat in November 1642. He being a Gentleman borne in that County, and
inhabitant there all his life time; was by the Kings Majesty made Shriffe of
the said County, and a Commission under his said Majestyes great Seal (the
authority of which was then unquestionable) for executing the said Office, and
a writ directed to administer such oaths as lawfully were usual to the trust
committed to the Shreises, all which were accoordingly by me taken, and in
January following it pleased his Majesty to direct his writ of non omittas with
a certain number of proclamations, commanding me by the said authority under
his great Seal to publish the same in the County, which unavoydable by Office,
and Oath I was bound to perform, and performing the same at the Town of St.
Albons the 13. of the said January in a peaceable manner, not doing any the
least thing in my own interrest or accompanied with any force in doing the
same. I was that day forceably seized upon (without any warrant or authority)
by one Pat^son with a Troop of 80. horse, and so violently carried away, and
brought to Westminster the 15. of Janu. where endeavoring to be brought and
heard in the house of Commons, which could not be obtained, but that night
unexamined sent prisoner to London house, but by what warrant, or for what
cause I know not to this day, continuing in this condition till the 13 of March
1642. I was by a strict warrant signed, Miles Corbet seized on by one that
called himself a Sargeants deputy, and carried before THE said Corbet in the
Court of Wards Chamber, not examined at all concerning the cause of my then
imprisonment, and Corbet leaving me under Guarde going into the house of
Commons, what report Corbet falsely and ungroundedly made of me to the house,
nor upon what cause or reason, more then a mentioned order in this warrant of
my Commitment whereon grounded, I could never since learn, the warrant here
incerted.

By virtue of an Order this day made by the House of Commons now assembled in
Parliament, These are to will and require you or your deputy, forthwith to
receive from the Sarjeant at Arms or his deputy, the body of Mr. Coningsby
high Sheriff of the County of Hertford into his Majesty's Prison of the Tower.
And him there to keep as close prisoner, during the pleasure of the said
Commons; and this shall be your sufficient warant,

Dated this 13 of March 1642, William Lenthall Speaker.

To the Leivetenant of the Tower or his Deputy.

Under this commitment. from the said 13 of March 1642. till ninth of May 1644.
I did continue in the Tower without any charge brought against me, and with
what tyranicall usage till then, and most part since would draw it justly to a
question whether the place stood in any part of Christendom, or the Goalers
bred under any rules of humanity, and THE said Corbet as a Committee for the
Tower pretended to be their authority, for all their extortions and outrages,
now that on the 9. of May, I here divide my time of imprisonment it fall on thus
that my wife paying in the country all 5. and twenteth parts, and pay in all
rates, until the Sequestration of my real estate and totally robing me of my
personal estate (as here follows) I continued unquestioned, till one Sir
William Brereton by ordinance of the Lords and Commons published in print,
dated Die Martis 26. Martii 1644. inter ali^ in that ordinance has these
ensuing words. And be it farther ordained by the Lords and Commons, that the
personal estates of all such Delinquents and Papists within the City of
London and Westminster, and within 20 miles of the same, not Sequestered nor
discovered, and which shall be discovered by the said Sir William Brereton, or
such person or persons, as he shall authorize, under his hand and seal for
that purpose, within two months next after the publishing in print of the
ordinance: shall be allowed unto the said Sir William Brereton, for the farther
advancement of the said service, provided that the said concealed estates
exceed not the sum of 5000 l. And that the said Sir William Brereton or any
person authorized by him as aforesaid nor any of them, shall possess
themselves of the said Papists or Delinquents estates, before he or they
acquaint the Committee of Lords and Commons for Sequestrations therewith, to
the end they may judge of the Delinquencie of the persons, before his or their
estates be taken away.

Here is the limitations of Breretons Ordinance, yet shortly after it appeared
by his proceedings, he procured an order from the House of Commons, only to the
Committee of Examinations, to examine and judge of the Delinquencie; mark here
(right or wrong.) Brereton plays a sure game with me in Corbets Chair-ship.

1. May, A Warrant of that Committee issues out for seizing Ms. Conningsbys
Estate, and Mr. Williams his estate for sending Horse and Arms to Oxford, and
for entertaining and sending Intelligence thither.

3. May, (No Delinquencie examined) the Warrant was executed, both their goods
within door and without, Inventored, several bonds with Sureties, required
for securing them, or else to have Soldiers put upon them, to look to their
goods, and to avoid that, bonds were accordingly given.

6. May. Both were served with order of that Committee of Examination to
appear, the 7. of May, which they accordingly did, being called and having
nothing against Ms. Conningsby, the Soliciter was blamed for troubling her, and
she discharged. But here begins a charge against me by one Prices information,
to the Soliciter, that Mr. Conningsby had set the Commission of Array on foot
in that Country; hereupon it is appointed that I be brought before Corbet, on
Thursday following, my wife acquainted them with the scisure of her goods, her
barnes, locked, her house full of Soldiers moved, she might have necessary
relief for her and her childrens livelihood out of her goods, and not be
accountable for what the Soldiers took, who were unruly, and had continued
there all the winter till then, and the Committee declared accordingly, Mr.
Williams is likewise discharged of the same lying charge.

9 May I am brought before this Committee, no Commssion of Array but charged
for the Proclamations at Saint Albons the date aforesaid in January before the
Ordinance of Sequestration, for that Ordinance was not in being till March
following, and upon one Brown (they said Lawyer) his learned expouding the
words has or shall in the ordinance adjudged by that Committee a Delinquent
though done before the said Ordinance and in the lawful discharge of my said
office, of Sheriff wicke, the tie of oath than lay upon me and justly
punishable by Law, if not executed being the Kings Writs. This judgment of the
Committee thus pact by Brereton, and as I may justly suspect by the practice of
Litton as by the sequel, (who in the beginning of this Parliament before a
Committee in the court of requests, and the contrary testified by two of his
own rank there, and notoriously known to hundreds of people present at the
occasion, did lyingly declare and testify before that Committee (that at the
Election of Burgesses for the Burrow of St. Albons (and my self standing for
an Election to serve this Parliament) he seem brought (...) shoolders from my
lodging to the place where the Kings writ wa^ to be read and before reading the
same. and in his view, as far as the turning into the open market place from
the end of a close street, which is fully the length of West-minster hall, yet
now upon this occasion, my son joining with my wife, applied themselves to
crave his assistance in a Petition of Appeal to the Commons house against the
irregular in the proceedings, and most unjust upon the matter of proceeding of
this Committee, and showed him their Petition, the Lawyer Brown was likewise
acquainted with it, Littons discouragement to them, and advice was to compound
with Brereton for he said the House would not alter the Votes and judgment of
a Committee, and Lawyer Brown, his answer was, that if they went that way, my
son would utterly undo his father, and upon this they desisted and were
discouraged to proceed, and some few days after, Litton pretending friendship,
and they applying themselves to Litton, and in Westminster attending him, and
in discourse of my said ruin and sad conditon upon this Judgment meeting
Brown, asked him why he gave at the Committee that opinion upon has or shall
against Mr. Coningsby answered why were you so earnest to have me there, I
understood it to be in friendship to Sir William Brereton, or words to this
effect.

My wife hereupon, prepared another Petition to the house of Commons wherein
her son joins shows it to Brereton who gives her smoth language, and seems
willing to refer the matter to Sir William Litton, and Mr. Ab^^st to stand to
what they should think good therein, and in the Intrim Brereton caused the
goods to be valued by creatures of his own, contraty to what the ordinance
declares, my wife offers Brereton a composition which he excepts not of, go
suddenly for Chesheire she is threatened of his Agent, all her goods to be
taken away, upon which she Petitions the Committee of examination who referred
the petition to the Committee of the County they appoint a day to hear the
same.

1 July Breretons Agent brings to my house one Hanle and Geering two of the
under Sequestrators, and revewe, and value the goods, but permit not my wife to
be privy to the values now made, nor formerly not to have any coppie thereof,
the Agent pretending have, and missing some things of common use to the house,
in the places first inventored entered the same as wanting, though my wife then
told him they were necessarily used in other rooms, and should against the day
of sale be set in their first places which was accordingly done.

2 July upon debate of my wives Petition referred as aforesaid, Breretons Agent
present the Committee, ordered the bringing in the inventory next morning, and
my wife to have the 5. part of the personal estate set her out.

3 July the inventory is brought in, amounting to 549. pound wherein the timber
felled and the rents were not included but left to farther order, the Committee
with consent of Breretons Agent did farther order that 9 pounds of 149 I should
be stricken out for the goods they marked with a cross, as belonging to the
House. and that 108. be allotted to her for the fifth part of 540. l.

And for equal setting forth five part, Mr. Grob and Mr. Brooks withother
neighbors, or any two of them, were ordered to join with Breretons Agent for
doing thereof out of the Parcells in-ventored.

But the same day the Agent proceeding to sell the goods, the persons ordered
for setting out the 5th. part at my wives request, tendered to the Agent for her
5th. part, the Cowes, the corn in the Barn, the Hogs, as they were serverally
apprised, and the resi^ue of her 5th. part to be set out in sheep, or household
stuff, but the Agent refused the same, and Oduisell the Soliciter of the
County being then brought thither by the Agent, made himself another division
giving her thereby the 5th. part of the Cowes, which were in the whole number
21. Cowes, the 5th. part of the sheep, Hogs, Corn upon the ground, and all the
goods in her own lodging Chamber, the little Parlor, and the Kitchen which my
wife, and persons ordered to make the division opposed, chiefly because those
goods were over valued in comparison of all the other, out of presumption she
would take them, being so necessary for her own use, and some of them her
sons being so marked in the inventory, as likewise that two of the Cowes were
by the Soldiers that quartered there, killed and spent 10. or 12. days after
the seizure, and by Breretons, Soldiers that quartered 8. or 9. days after the
other were gone, and by appointment of his own Agents, and for that half of
the sheep and those of the best were driven away long before by Breretons
Agents, without sail or authority, the Ladies good haswifery at Chaisoe Bury,
not to be otherwise provided, and the good woman much offended, that the Cowes
staid so long, whether the most part of them were to be carried, which
considerations made my wife, and the said persons desired a more equal division
which was denied, then my wife desired (they proceeding to sale) that the
household stuff allotted her might likewise be put to sale, and she have the
taking or refusing them, or the first of the moneys upon the sale of all the
household stuff, for so much of her 5, part which likewise was denied her, then
did she, and the said parsons appointed desired they might choose one of their
4. Cowes for my wife, according to Oduisells division, which was likewise
refused, and 9. of the best of them first chosen out by Breretons Agent, and
driven away without putting them to sale, 4. of those 9. being more ualuable by
much then 6. of those left behind, of all which a certificate was then made by
those persons appointed for the division and returned to the Committee.

And having so informed the Committee of the miscariage, and Oduisells juggling,
finding Oduisells power with the Committee to great for her, she submitted to
his division, so as she might have benefit of that for the future, the
pretense being that Oduisells devision was for the advantage (as they call it)
of the State, and those things would yield most, and readiest money to the
State, that were denied to her by the first devision tendered, and how far it
tended to the benefit of the State, I desire all honest men to judge of, except
you will have it that knaves be countenanced in their villainies, the Committee
Silliciter Brereton, and his Agent being all like to like.

The 9. Cowes of the best driven away as aforesaid, without being put to sale
at all, out of the resedue of them my wife had only 2. for her fifth part, and
those killed by the Soldiers set on her acount by abatement, and the rest Hale
the under Sequestrator took without being put to sale at 2. pound 10. shillings
a Cow, as inventered, which others understanding, desired the Solicitor that
they might be put to sale as other goods and the household-stuffe were by the
candle, and thereupon they were put to sale, and 3. pound 9. shilings a piece
bid for them, and so carried away, yet did Hale so carry the business and
claimed them as his right by the former private sale of them, that he got the
Agent to refer it to Oduisell, who adjudged the first sale to Hale good at 2.
pound 10. shillings a Cow, and depastured then Gratis, in my ground all the
year after for the Benefit of the State, and if Brereton examine his account I
believe the money is not paid yet.

The corn in the Barn was another particular my wise desired, at the rate
inventoried which was 45. pound, and this sold at 41. pound payable by 5. pound
a Week, which was 4. pound loss to the State as they call it, and not sold
for ready money, so that though the public was pretended all was done to their
own private ends, so they robbed me of all, there State pretended was much
cosened by knaves, and my wife of the benefit of the Ordinance of her 5. part
very much, for the household stuff put to sale, they had ready money for
nothing else.

In this strait my wife was in and nothing left to keep her, her children and
family, from starving, (but the dutiful goodness of hers and mine eldest
son Harry Coningsby, upon whom an estate was settled on his Marriage) and she
not being suffered to have any thing out of her own goods propper for
livelyhod, under hand imployes one Cow William who had for diverse years been
Committee over her hogs, to bid for and buy for her the wheat in the barn,
which was to be paid for as aforesaid, which accordingly did at 43. pound, went
the next market day to make sale of what was threshed, and according to his
disposition became very drunk, this discourages my wife in her bargan and her
new baylie, and allows him not to market any more, her old Committeeman sa
aforesaid grows discontent, aplyes himself to the Committee at Saint Albons,
claims from them, to have the bargan to himself, my wife rightly possesses
that Committee how the business stood, of his barganing in her behalf, yet
this righteous Committee in their great wisdoms and equity, order Cow William
to have the bargan to himself, to break open the Barn doors against her, and
put himself in possession, but now see Gods great providence to her in so
deep distress, so to mollify the heart of this one rascal toward her, Cow
William is content to take her to halves in the bargen, to pay for all the
work and carriage, pay Brereton, and so to devide with her, the one half, and
upon his account brought her in above 20. quarters of wheat, now judge all men
by this account how my goods were sold for the beneifit of the State, and how
seasonable a relief in so great a distress as this was, when being robed of
all we had by the greater thieves, thus to be relieved by such a rascal.

The same day the sale was, they discovered in a garret room under a trape
door some goods, 5. feather beds some trunkes of linen, and pewter, two riding
suits of women's furniture for horses, of velver, 12. halberds, 8. muskets with
other goods, some of these goods being my sonns and his wives, and put there
long before sequestration, for securing them from soldiers and plundring, and
some of them my daughter in laws put there in the winter before for safety
upon their going from thence to live at London, and upon discovering of these
goods my sonns man being there, acquainted Oduisells therewith, that such goods
were his Masters and Mistrises, and laid there by him, offered oath for the
same and desired time till next morning, and he would fetch the inventory of
such goods as were his masters, and bring the next day farther proof, this was
denied him, the beds, and pewter, halbeards, and muskets, put to sale; lynnen
and the furniture had away without inventoring any, they sold the 5. beds, for
9. pound, and my wife borrowed money and paid it there presently for one of
them five pounds, for herself to ly upon, so good was such furniture as they
put upon her in her own chamber, and of all these goods she has had no account
of a 5. part, nor my son of what of those goods was taken away of his.

And my wife not suffered to have the devision she desired, so she had not
the benefit of Ondui sells division for all the Cowes, but two were had a way,
as before is showed, and those two she was forced to keep out of their way,
and the sheep likewise that were left were had away, and sold to Halle, and
she left for account to her 5. part of those that were killed and eaten by the
Soldiers, and for the Corn in the ground which was another particular, out of
which she was to have a 5. part by Oduisells division, one Andrews the first
setter on of Brereton upon this business, the new admitted Vicker of the
parish, as busy for his own profit as any other, director in chief of the
whole matter, and in truth as unconscionable a knave as Brereton himself, or
any of his instruments, though he were furnished with some out of Turneball
Street, and Charter-houselaine, and some of the pertious dames of these places
to boot, whether many Cart loads of my goods were brought, this Andrews
without my wives privity, and not according to the ordinance by the candle, did
sell away all the crone, and she desiring to have some share, as most
convenient for livelihood, and having neither money nor means to send to
market was denied it, and yet it was not sold for ready money, but payable at
Christmasse, and upon her complaint hereupon to the Committee, and debate
thereupon pretending the public good, and examining of what my wife had
received of her 5. part, which was about 50. pound, and of that 50. pound 44.
pound was in household stuff not worth half the money, after the rate of their
apprising of those goods they carried away.

30 July the said Andrews, present it was ordered that my wife be paid 58. pound
in money for the resedue of her 5. part, if cause were not showed to the
contrary that day fortnight.

The same day ordered my wife shall receive her 5. part of the Lady days
rents, and of the money the Timber was sold for, the sale of which Timber was
there tendered (in writing of his own hand) by Andrews wherein he afirms in
writing the quantity of the Timber that the same was measured and sold (among
others therein named) by one George Oliver a carpenter, sent by my wife for
that purpose who thought the rate sufficient, by which false and deceitful
cosonage and forgery of that lying Andrews (for he was excellent at that and
after well known to the Co^mittee themselves for his qualities) without
opposition the committee allowed the sale, but afterward upon examination of
the matter, it was found otherwise, for Oliver never measured nor sold any of
it, nor knew of the sale, nor was he sent unto by my wife for that purpose, nor
was the sale made by the candle or otherwise, but in private, nor the Timber
ever measured by any but the carpenter that brought it, and the quantety entered
as he said it was sold for, at 18. shilings p^r load, which others hard by sold
at 1. pound 5. shilings the load, and the ends suffered by Andrews to go with
the timber save aniy account, of great which were value and not mentioned in
his note, and as large as the carpenter pleased to make them, which cheat was
for the benefit of the State and my wife.

Now for a close after my so long durance without any cause or other matter
then as aforesaid, and the indirect proceeding of Breretons, before the
Committee of examination neither warranted by the general ordinance of
Sequest* or his particular Ord that direcs the judgment of cause Sequestration
to Lords and Commons, and not to any other Iudicators; a supsequent order of
Commons only to that Committee shows where this Breretons strength lay to
ruin me, and carried on before a Committee where the doors were kept shut, the
business carried among themselves, where is to be presumed he had a strong
party of the Committee made sure, and council prepared, whereas on the
contrary, (after false pretense to bring his ends about) I am sent for, to be
brought out of a Jail, not knowing upon what ground, or what was to be
objected against me, without counsel or knowledge who were to be my Judges,
but am confident if the Ordinances had been accordingly proceeded in before
the right and open Committee, where cloose dealing carries not causes, and
others are free to here, though they only to Judge, Breretons greedy ends upon
me, nor the malice of others, neither upon the cause it self, nor Brownes has,
or shall, would have so carried on my ruin, this cloose dealing is ever the
contrary to just dealing, and I once heard a Noble Lord coming out of the
Star Chamber, upon a hard sensure of a private Gentleman, we that are a few
give judgment here, but they are many more that judge us.

The order of the Committee on the 30. of July, that allows her 58. pound to
make up her 5. part, is opposed by Andrews who had got the money into his own
hands, who pretends Malignansie, and imbesiling against my wife, spares no
means to suborne proofs, makes his strength to countenance his malice, and
cheating one Bradshaw, and Steel, Lawyers as I hear, by whom she is for a
full year tossed from Co^mittee above and Co^mittee, below and after several
referrences of their procuring here, and certificats from the county Committee,
and nothing to be proved, and Andrews malice perjury and villainies, so
discovered by them that reproved, and as I take it certified to the Committee
here, and causing her to spend in following it above 60. pound for upshot of
all, exspecting a full sertificate to this Committee to have her money, and
being before the Committee, the said Andrews and one Lownes, both special
instruments of Breretons, Bradshaw helping at a dead lift, inform that my wife
had spoken words against the Parliament, Bradshaw makes use of this, and the
words must be received as new matter against her, they are asked if the words
were that the Parliament were Traitors, they answer they were much to that
purpose, the question again put with humming and hawing give the same answer,
it is then put that positively upon their oaths did she say the Parliament
were Traitors, and did you here ^e^ speak the words, they answered she did,
at which their villainy and purjurie she was more astonished to haere, then
troubled at all her losses, and this purjurie was by the wise Sargiant Wild*
adjudged good payment of her moneys, but admitted the words true, I pray judge
whether it is provided or meant in the ordinance, to make a Woman's tongue under
so heavy losses a Delinquent.

To enlarge my self farther of all my sufferings upon this false foundation,
and the villains both countenanced and acted upon me and my famelie these 4
years 8 months, and to tell you that Andrews in his malice, and by his firm
supporters by advantage of these times, when Bradshaw and Steel have laid a
side their old law books, how they have laid at my son to ruin him, and the
proceeding therein would present to an undestanding man that had for 7. year
been absent in far parts, and never heard what and how the affairs of this
Kingdom have been carried, and to hear but as to my particulars, such a
loss of the good old laws in force, at the time he left us a happy Nation,
wonder and hardly be brought to believe such things could be done, a Parliament
sitting in England,

To make an end you have my imprisonment for cause and time, the Committee
proceeding, and by that my unrecoverable ruin of me and my family, my
endeavors used by appeal to the house of Commons obstructed, I shall tell you
but one mote, and that is when laws are of no use to protect honest men, the
commons trustes not to be protective to their trusters, the mixed Committee of
Lords and Commons as to my case, and as you have heard so quick in Judgment,
but slo to come to it, that exspences and attendance will soon undo a better
man then they have left me, to bring a good cause to a hearing, after all and
for the space of a year and two months past since, I did perition the house of
Lords, and appealed with desire to be heard, but no answer for that year, 2.
months since renned my petition* had for answer of one particular Lord they
were tied up tantamount to do no man right or justice, if the complaint
concerned the house of Commons, so no justice to be had in house of Commons,
against a vote of a Committee, no laws to protect, no Lords to relieve, and
opressions thus continuing on me, I have made recoverede to the laws taken
possession of my own, presumed of the laws protection, the^e I find an Army
which banne^ against me, and Club Law Captain Clown and his trained soldiers
full charged against me, a Committes that believes all honesty and laws are to
be clean forgotten, and that to perpetuate their lawless, cheating and
villainies, have by the power and the Trained bands, imprisoned 9 poor
laboring men for working in my work, and in my own ground, and for no other
cause, broken open my barn, and continuing Captain Clown and his lawless,
violence and riot all day, carried away all the corn by night. What can be
sand when a sort of men degenerate in to brute beasts are countenanced in these
lawless, villanes, I may say they are more wolves and bears then those brute
beasts themselves, for they in their kind are peaceable among themselves, and
bite not one another, whereas contrary the malice of these men give them no
content, but in tearing and spoiling of others, Now hear O Heavens and
consider O earth, if the like oppressions were ever heard of in our fore
Fathers times, as I have here truly stated, and all honest men will have a
sense and feeling of my condition, I may justly say a fellow feeling with me,
nor to a few and the good God of Heaven, earth and all honest men look on our
miseries and in thy good tune send us deliverance, ever are the prayers and the
steadfast assureance of Thomas Connigs by.

FINIS

