A CONTINVATION OF The late proceedings of His Majesty's Army at Shrewsbury,
Bridge-North, and MANCHESTER: WITH A Particular relation of the Actions and
strength thereof, and likewise of the Preparations of His Majesty's removal
toward London, York, or elsewere.

Written by a good hand from the Army.

London Printed for M. Batt, October 12. 1642.

Shrewsbury, October. 8. 1642. Sir,
I Received yours of the fourth of October, and thank you for your relation of
the proceedings of the Parliament, which are welcome to all Loyal and
true-hearted Snbjects; There is daily here spread amongst us many lying and
scandalous reports against that high and Honorable Court, to make it odious;
but certainly that cause must needs be bad, which makes use of lies to support
it. I shall give you the best Intelligence I can of the strength of his
Majesty's Army: It is related amongst us, that it does increase daily, and as I
am an eyewitness my self, and have it likewise from others; It does consist
of six thousand Foot, three thousand Horse, and fifteen hundred Dragooneers,
which, if supplies come not speedily in, must in few days muteny: The Country
has been in particular dealt with for lending moneys, and Commissioners
appointed for receiving thereof, and every man of any ability has paid
somewhat, who so refused, or gave not so much as was expected, was threatened
to be plundered: This money is all spent, and what else his Majesty's Plate
could coin, which I can assure you was not much: Now the Gentry and Usurers
are again sent to, to know what they will lend the King upon security, and
great sums are demanded, but whether upon the former conditions we know not;
They have a saying amongst the Soldiers, that all rich men are Roundheads,
and therefore they may be bold with them, and certainly they make good their
words, by their practice, for they have plundered many Gentlemen's houses in
these parts, and those too which were not so well affected to the Parliament,
whereby men see now what is to be expected from them: We fear when his Majesty
goes, which they say he will upon Monday or Tuesday next, we shall be ill dealt
with by the common Soldiers, both in Town and Country; We have had Warrants to
send in Horses and Carts for his removal, which are come toward Salop, but
whither his Majesty intends, is not certainly known, it is given out he
intends for London. I pray God bless him, and send him well thither in peace,
but it is conceived by others, that he will march toward York, and take
Manchester in the way, where the new Earl of Darby has had but ill success,
he has lost above two hundred men. Last Tuesday he was feign to leave it, and
it is given out for the reparation of his Honor, that his Mejesty sent twice
for him. Had there not been some faint-heartednesse in some of the prime Gentry
in Cheshire, who would stand as Neutrals, there had been as great an opposition
there, as in any other County, and those Gentlemen have found but little
favor, for they stand committed at Court, and their Houses have been
plundered, the County is disarmed, and likewise at Wrexam his Majesty sent for
the Inhabitants of Denbighshire, and Flintshire, and has disarmed them: Most
of our Gentry hereabouts are made Captains, and resolve to go with the Army,
some that you know very well, that came to Salop this last night for that
purpose, and in hope of plunder, for his Majesty we hear is in great want of
money, and he is fallen into a barren part of the Kingdom for that, or any
other provision fit for an Army, so that if the Mint at Salop do want supply,
we fear it will go hard with us, a Garrison of 2000. are sent to Bridge-North
to relieve and keep that from the Earl of Essex his Forces, the like, or more,
with some pieces of Ordnance are to be left at Salop for the same purpose:
there are all sorts of Nations (I think) about the Court, and I admire the
Papists do so resort thither, since his Majesty's Proclamation to the
contrary: many of his Majesty's Officers and meniall servants pray for peace,
and it is verily believed his Majesty is graciously inclined to it, but the
Cavaliers will not endure to hear of it, but rather will adventure upon most
desperate things. I conceive it great pity his Majesty should be brought into
any streights* God reward them that have been the occasion of it; but this I am
sure of, he is much abused by his plundering Cavaliers, who daily plunder and
undo men, and say they have Commission for it: They have plundered Master
Nichols House, who is Sheriff of Montgomery, and burned his writings, spoiled
his house, sold his furnace, and the Iron of his Carts, it is much doubted
these passages, and other the like, will withdraw the affections of his
Majesty's Subjects from him, this is the substance of all: Prince Robert and
the Duke are yet in Salop, they lie at Master Jones house the Lawyer, it is
reported here the Term is adjourned, I pray let us hear if it be so. They
tell us likewise that the Parliament Forces have had a great overthrow at
Hereford, and that they are weak and dare not fight, but are returned back
toward London, and that one half thereof are against them utterly. I believe
his Majesty's Army, Horse and Foot, is above ten thousand, but its feared the
Volunteers, not one of ten can give fire, many young boys come in daily, to
what number they may increase we know not; the Horse of our County are gone to
Bridge-North in his Majesty's service, the Arms of several Welsh Counties are
brought to Salop: Your last Letter came safe; I desire to hear from you, which
way my Lord of Essex intends. I suppose you hear more at London. My service.

I rest, Yours.
October. 8. 1642.

