A CONTINUATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS Of the Scots ARMY before Hereford: Together
with a Relation of their pursuing the Enemy: Certified in a Letter dated at
the Leager before Hereford. August 11. 1645.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by M. B. for Robert Bostock at the Kings head in Paul's
Churchyard. 15. Aug. 1645.

From the Leager before Hereford, 11 August 1645. SIR,
I Will not trouble you with a Relation of the manner of our besieging this
Town, the advancing of our Works, casting up running Lines and Redouts, making
Bridges over the River, the enemies sallying out of the Town, whereof some few
have been killed, and others taken prisoners. Only thus far I thought fit
to acquaint you, that we had made better progress, but that our proceedings
hitherto have been much retarded by reason of the want of Materials, and not
coming up of our great Ordnance, and scarcety of our Ammunition; some supply
we have lately had from Gloucester for ready Money, and we are expecting the
return of our party from Northampton with the Ammunition sent from London: the
Walls are much stronger and the Graffs larger and deeper then at first we
supposed; but when we shall be provided with some necessaries that are in
preparation, we are hopeful by Gods assistance to give a good account thereof,
notwithstanding our Soldiers met with all discouragements that can be imagined
to be in an Army. The General has issued forth Warrants (whereof a Copy is
enclosed) inviting the Country to bring in Provisions for money, and straightly
commanding all his Soldiers not to offer them the least injury; but such is
the dis-affection of this Country, that though all possible fair means have
been used, they still look upon us as enemies. The greatest part of the food
of our Infantry is Apples, Pease, and green Wheat that they gather from the
ground, which though it be a means of their subsistence for the present, yet
certainly in the end it will prove destructive to the Army, for the Soldiers
begin already to be sick, whereby you may judge what their condition shall
be for the future, especially in the fall of the leaf.

This day having received intelligence that the King had gathered his Forces
and marched from Brecknoch by Preston and Ludlow toward Leichsield and those
parts, for preventing their Designs and preservation of those Countries, the
General has sent above four thousand Horse and Dragoons to attend their
motions, and with the rest of our Forces we are proceeding in our work for
reducing this Town.

I shall conclude with this, That I perceive we are here strangers and far
from our friends, we came hither for assistance of this Kingdom to venture our
lives upon the enemy, not upon unwholesome food, or to be starved in a
plentiful Country: we never expected so bad entertaiment, especially when the
War should draw nearer to an end, and the Kingdom better enabled to supply
us: We cannot understand the reason why we should be so much neglected while
others are provided with all necessaries, which we envy not, but when
maintenance is due, we cannot but regrate that we are made the objects, of
charity and compassion; the greatest enemy we have yet seen is hunger and want,
and I fear shall in the end kill to us more then the enemy, unless there be
greater care in our friends to prevent it then heretofore we have met with;
howsoever in the midst of all discouragements I trust we shall ever make it
appear by our actions that we have not been wanting in the public service,
the advancing whereof shall always be the constant endeavor of

From the Leager before Hereford, 11. Aug. 1645. Your affectionate friend to
serve you.
I had almost forgot to tell you that the Gentlemen of Monmouthshire,
Glamorganshire, and Montgomerishire have sent some of their number to the
General to give assurance that they will rise in Arms for the Parliament.



By his Excellency the Earl of LEVEN, Lord General of the Scottish Armies.
FOr as much as the Country people, through fear, may possibly forbear to bring
in provisions toward the maintenance of the Army in the Leager about the City
of Hereford, These are to signify to all persons Inhabitants in the several
Parishes and Constabularies adjacent to the foresaid City, and to assure them
for their further satisfaction and encouragement, That no wrong shall be done
to the person or goods of those who shall bring Victuals to be sold in the
Leager for the use of the said Army, but that they shall be duly paid therefore
at the ordinary and accustomed Rates as in other free Markets: We do therefore
hereby desire all and sundry persons, Inhabitants in the respective Parishes
and Constabularies aforesaid, freely to repair to the Leager with Butter,
Bread, Cheese, or any other provisions of Victuals, for the which they shall
receive ready money, and thereafter return to their several houses with their
Horses, Oxen, and Teames, without receiving any harm whatsoever: Certifying
also, that we have to this purpose issued our Edict and Proclamation,
commanding all our Officers and Soldiers not to presume upon pain of death to
offer the least wrong or violence to any persons whatsoever in their passing
and repassing to and from the Leager with their Carriages and Provisions. And
thereof we are confident all persons aforesaid will take notice, as they desire
to avoid the evils that otherwise might ensue upon the necessities of the
Soldiers, if Victuals and entertainment should be denied them for Moneys.

Given under my hand at my Quarters before Hereford 1 August 1645. LEVEN.
THese are to will and require, and strictly to command all Officers and
Soldiers in this Army, not to presume to intermeddle with the Goods of the
Inhabitants and Country people, upon whatsoever pretense; nor offer the least
violence or wrong to any of them, in their Persons, Families, and Estates:
Certifying all those that shall presume to take any of their Horses, Oxen,
Cotls, Kyne, Sheep, Cowes, Cattle, Housholdstuffe, or any thing else belonging
to them, they are to suffer the punishment of death without Pardon, being
inexcusable, if they shall commit any such offense after the publishing of
these Orders: Whereof we require them to take notice, as they desire to avoid
the punishment aforesaid, etc.

Given at my Quarters before Hereford. LEVEN.



FINIS.

