Mris. COOKS MEDITATIONS, Being an humble thanksgiving to her HEAVENLY FATHER,
For granting her a new life, having concluded her self dead, and her grave
made in the bottom of the Sea, in that great storm. Jan. the 5th. 1649.

Composed by her self at her unexpected safe Arrival at CORCKE.

CORK, Printed, And reprinted at London by C. S. and are to be sold by Thomas
Brewster and Gregory Mould, at the three Bibles at the West End of Paul's,

Mris. COOKS MEDITATIONS, BEING An humble thanksgiving to her Heavenly Father,
for granting her a new life, having concluded her self dead, and her grave
made in the bottom of the Sea.
HAving solemnly promised to the most high God in the great storm, that if his
Majesty would be pleased to prolong my days, and deliver me from so great a
danger, I would study to praise and glorify his Name all the days of my
life, and call upon others that were in the storm so to do, if I shall
neglect so to do these broken Meditations may be an evidence against me;
written suddenly after my coming to Cork, Psalm. 118.17. verse. I shall not
dye but live and declare the works of the Lord: 66. Psalm. 16. Come and hear
all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for my soul, 19.
verse, I cried unto him with my mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue Psalm.
56.12. thy vows are upon me oh God! I will render praise unto thee for thou
have made a path in the great waters for thy redeemed to pass through, and
have brought thy ransomed ones safe to land, therefore bless the Lord oh my
soul, and forget not such mercies, who have forgiven all mine iniquities and
saved my life from so great a danger! oh that I could spend this new life
wholly in thy service, and that I might live to the praise and glory of his
grace wherein he has made me accepted in his beloved, Ephesians. 2.6. v.

Landing in Kinsale, I said, am I alive or dead? Does not the ground mov^ under
me? I have been dying all this storm, and I cannot tell whether I am yet
alive; I finding my body much out of frame, and my heart fainting, having been
ten days at sea without eating, but the next day the Lord made me more
sensible of my new life: and when I came to dive into the mighty depth of the
love of God, in granting me deliverance from so great a danger, my heart was
so brim-full with the apprehension of his tender mercies, that I could not
contain my self, but must needs burst forth in tears, for fear I should not
live suitable to so great a mercy, and I said to my friends, that I would gladly
be with my Savior, if it pleased him to take me: for the mercy I received was
so great, that I should never be able to walk answerably in holiness to the
Lord and my care is, that I might not be found a fruitless figtree in the
garden of my God, when Christ said, I am come into my garden my sister, my
spouse, it was but to gather fruit; but when he expected fruit and found none,
he was displeased.

I know it is a great mercy to bless God for mercies, and they which have a
heart to bless God for mercies, ought to have a tongue to praise him for the
same, and a pen to record them we being too prone to let them slip out of our
memories, which if I shall do, I desire my hand may be brought to testify
against me, my heart and tongue shall not only praise him, but with my pen also
will I stir up my self, and entreat all others that were in the same storm
partakers with me of the same deliverance, to magnify the Lord for ever. Oh ye
courageous Seamen that said, you were at your wits end, and knew not what
would become of you, praise ye the Lord; O ye that came into the great Cabin
to dye with us, bless his name for ever. O ye that said you would give all you
had to be landed even in your enemies Quarters, that you might fight for your
lives, praise him that is Lord of the Sea, that now we see the faces of our
friends in peace, and can joyfully meet together to keep days of thanksgiving
to the Lord.

Jesus Christ took special notice of the Lepers, Luke 17.15, 16. verses: but
one of them when he saw that he was healed, turned back, and with a loud voice
glorified God, and fell down on his face at his feet, giving him thanks, but
Jesus said, were there not ten cleansed, but where are the nine? It is all
Christ requires of a Saint to be praised for deliverances; as he says, Psalm.
50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, but thou shall
glorify me.

But no soul can glorify and praise God, but those whose hearts He has wound
up, and tuned to such a spiritual note, because they are birds which fly high
upon the wing of faith, and may have place to sit and sing near the altar of
God: and those that are thus admitted into the holy of holyes to sing
Hallelujab's to the Name of the most high God, and to the Lamb, are the
spirits of just men made perfect already in heaven and those who are kept
through the power of God by faith, 1 Pet. 1.5. while they are in the world
until they come to be made one with the Father, and the Son, when this
mortality shall be swallowed up of life, and we crowned with an incorruptible
crown of glory, and come to be made perfectly glorious through Christ, and
perfectly holy, then shall we be fit to come into the presence of our God and,
behold his glory, and admire him who is the King of Saints, and then shall we
worship and sing everlasting praise to the Lord God Almighty, who is great and
mavelous in all his works, and just and true in all his ways. Thus to
praise God is the work of Angels, which they do, and shall do to all
eternity, who are glorious creatures without sin, which are set apart only
for the work of praising God. Oh the disproportion betwixt Men and Angels!
And yet God requires and looks for praise from men as well as from Angels. But
Lord, who is sufficient for these things? who is worthy to undertake the work
of Angels? whose spirits are thus ascended up on high to make an Evangelicall
harmony in the ears of so holy a God? whose hearts are fitted and tuned to
sing everlasting praises and Hallelujah's to the mighty Lord God of mercies to
our souls, redeeming mercies justifying mercies, temporal deliverances? God
requires praise of every one that he works deliverance for, whether spiritual
or temporal.

He that eats after ten days fasting let him give thanks, ye that have
escaped the rocks remember the Lord. Ye whom God has kept from sinking and
perishing in the deep waters praise him: Ye which are living monuments of his
late mercy, and have been preserved by the immediate wonderful hand of God,
praise him. Ye for whose sakes he rebuked the Sea, and made the proud waves
calm, and has set your feet upon dry ground, declare that God is a present
help in time of trouble, Psalm. 46.1. verse. and tell his goodness to the sons
of men. The Lord would not have his people to forget his mercies, but he puts
them in mind of deliverances. How often does he tell us in Scripture, that he
is our God, and that he brought us out of the Land of Egypt, and that with his
holy Arm he has wrought salvation for his chosen. Ingratitude is a very great
sin, because it is a breach of the Commandments of God; you shall glorify me,
says he, when I deliver you, and I will be praised by them that dwell upon the
earth. The Lord Commands, and requires his people to be thankful for mercies,
and he takes it very unkindly when they will not so much as return thanks. 50.
Ps. 8. The Lord cares not for burnt-offering and sacrifices nor cattle upon a
thousand hills, nor for all the fowls of the mountains nor the beasts of the
fields, but, says he gather my Saints together unto me, 5. v. those that have
made a Covenant with me.

And what does God require of his Saints, when they so assemble together to
remember such mercies, but praise and thanksgiving, and specially to pay their
vows unto the most high verse 14? Yet many of Gods people are very backward in
duty of thanksgiving, and that we see by the Lords often putting them in mind to
pay their vows, and to perform their Covenant which they make with him in the
day of their affliction. The Lord knows very well when his people most
frequent him, as he says Hosea 5.15. verse. In their affliction they will
seek me early, but in the day of their prosperity they forget their maker,
Hosea 8.14. So that the Lord complains, that he knows not what to do with
these people. He finds such ebbings and flowings in their unconstant
affections, that he compares them to the clouds Hosea 6.4. Oh Efraim what shall
I do unto thee? oh Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your righteousness is
as the morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away.

I am confident that there is not one that was in this storm of trial, as I
may so call it, o^ a storm wherein we might sound our hearts and have the
bottom of the inward vitalls discovered to our selves, especially such as
feared the Lord, and have had former acquaintance with him, by way of communion
through his Son, but did solemnly enter into a Covenant with God, and made
vows unto the most high, in the great storm, that if he should come and
ransom them now when they were almost sinking from the power of the grave,
which to all apprehensions was prepared in the seas, and redeem them from the
jaws of death, which then presented it self most dreadful, and save their
lives when they saw no way to escape death.

That they would give up themselves wholly unto the Lord all the days of their
lives, and study how to live answerable to so great a mercy, and that they woul
live as refined ones whom God has plucked out of the fire, and out of the
water, and if they knew any way more pure or holy then other wherein they might
glorify God and advance his praise, they would do it, and that they would not
value the world, nor men of the world, but that they would live like those
whose hearts God has melted down and overcome with loving kindness and
mercyes, preservations and deliverances: a heart that God has melted down
with a sensibleness of his spiritual and temporal deliverances will be
saying, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Lo I come to do thy will oh God; I
am ready not only to be bound, but also to dye for the name of Jesus.

Therefore let me speak a word to them to whom God has given new I ves, and
it may be has added some years to these renewed lives, give me leave to put
you in mind to remember your vows all the days of your lives, and live by
faith and not by sense; Job would not reject the counsel of his servant and
therefore I shall present some Scriptures to your considerations. Jonah 1.16.
we may observe there, that when men are in storms and distresses; then they
make vows unto God, as you may see in the 16. verse: then the men feared the
Lord exceedingly, and offered sacrifice unto the Lord, and made vows. David
said in Psalm. 61.8. verse. I will praise the Name of the Lord forever, that I
may daily perform my vows. Psalm. 116.17. verse: I will offer unto the Lord
the sacrifice of thanksgiving. I will pay my vows unto the Lord in the
presence of all his people. When thou vowest unto the Lord, defer not to pay
it, Eccles. 5.4. v. Job 22.27. verse. Thou shall make thy prayer unto the Lord,
and he shall hear thee and thou shall pay thy vows. Numb. 30.2. verse. If a
man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his soul with a bond,
he shall not break his word, but he shall do according to all that proceeds
out of his mouth. Deuteronomy. 23.21. When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God,
thou shall not slack to pay it, for the Lord thy God will surely require it of
thee, and it would be sin in thee.

God has granted me the thing I prayed for, although he did not evidence to my
heart then, that it should be granted, but he calmed and contented my heart, by
giving me a quiet rest of spirit to submit to my Fathers good will and pleasure;
that living or dying it should go well with me, and that I was not my own but
bought with a price 1 Cor. 6.20. and therefore must glorify God, both in my
body and soul which are his.

The Lord comes to the quick, and puts me to the trial, that I might know what
temper I was made of, and what was in my own heart, whether I had improved my
talent, and what stock of grace I had gained to support at such a time of need,
and if I had a spirit that durst encounter with death, let him appear never so
terrible, and in this trying condition the Lord kept me under water, as I may
say, and expostulated the case with me, and put questions to my soul, and
pleaded with me about life and death.

I mean only this temporal death, for I bless God I know that my Redeemer
lives, all the time of the storm the Lord did sweetly smile upon my soul, and
I found a strong sensiblenesse of his love and favorable presence in
supporting my faith to believe, and in giving me assurance of my eternal
salvation, thorough Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior.

But concerning the being delivered from the power of the waves, the rage of
the sea, and the danger of the rocks, the Lord hid it from me, and I could not
believe that I should be preserved, neither could I tell whether God would put
a period to my life, the Lord revealed it not to me concerning living and
dying: but he fitted me for both, in believing that I was his, and I bless his
Name, the Lord kept me all the time of the storm in a submissive, humble,
believing and quiet frame of spirit, and he spoke to my heart by way of
questioning with me, that suppose the Lord should spare my life now, and at
another time should call for it: would I be contented to suffer for him by way
of being a witness to his truth, and the faith of Jesus Christ, if he should
call me to it? unto which I found my spirit willingly to submit, and I resolved
with all my heart and soul to repay this dying life to my ever living God,
whenever he calls for it, and howsoever he will have me to come to him at sea
or land. And I will not fear the King of terrors, as Job calls death, let him
bring me to my Fathers house which way he will, whether through the fire or
through the water, I hope I shall be willing to suffer any death that might
bring glory to him that has suffered death to bring me to life, believing that
Christ would not bring me into any condition but that he would be with me
therein, and then I know that I can do any thing through him which
strengthens me. 4. Phil. 13. v. For I bless the Lord, I never once repined
all the time, but I patiently lay expecting every hour when I should be
dissolved and be with Christ in his glorious and triumphant Kingdom, and after
the Lord had searched my heart, and had wrought in me a willingness to submit
to him, and had showed me what a solemn action it was to dye, and had made me
sensible that there was a cloud of grief, but faith would pierce thorough
that, and see life in the midst of death, and that in finishing my course, and
in resigning my spirit to God that gave it, I should find my frail nature
sinking, but the Divine Nature supporting, and that there is a little agony to
be gone through about the time dissolution when the soul will be heavy unto
death, notwithstanding a submission to its Fathers will. Matthew. 26.38, 39. v.

After the Lord had given me a taste of death, he gave me life, conditionaly
that I should be willing to dye and suffer death for him at another time if he
called me to it, whereupon I solemnly promised and covenanted with God, and mad
my vows unto the most high, in the hearing of my dearest friend on earth and
others: That if the Lord would deliver me out of this terrible storm and bring
me safe to land again and renew my days, I would give up my self and my new
life wholly to the Lord and that I would walk more closely with him in holy
Communion then ever I had done formerly and that I would no more live to my
self, nor to the world but wholly to the Lord and that I would study to live
more Gospel-like, declaring and holding forth to the world: that the Lord had
overporw+'rd my soul by his free grace and overcome my heart with loving
kindness and many and extraordinary deliverances which call for extraordinary
praises; and if it pleased God to make me partaker of such a singular mercy, I
would not only record it in my heart all the days of my life, but in all
places render thanks unto the Lord while I have any being; and tell all the
world, that I have my life from Christ, and therefore must spend it for him.
And the Lord did suddenly accomplish the thing which I had so earnestly prayed
for, when the sea had done threatening it was merciful ere I was aware of it,
as if God would surprise me with deliverance, and I could scarce believe that I
was come to a harbor when I was told so, the news was so unexpected and
sudden to me, that I was like those men that had prayed long for the return of
the captivity of Babylon, and it was the conclusion of many prayers, and when
they saw that the Lord did accomplish it on a sudden, and the thing was done in
a trice, they were as men in a dream Psalm. 126.1. verse. they could scarce
believe it was so, so the Lord wrought deliverance for Peter suddenly, when he
was fast asleep, and did not so much as think of it; and so the Lord delivered
Joseph out of prison on a sudden, which showed he had heard his prayer;
therefore blessed be his Name for ever. And this the Lord does to overcome the
heart and to draw out the affections unto himself, and that he might be
admired of his Saints, that they finding him giving in Jweet and unexpected
deliverances may return everlasting praises unto him, and glory in the God of
their salvation. Psalm. 40.10, 11. verses. that they may learn always to trust
him for we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in
our selves but in God which raises the dead, who delivered us from so great a
death, and does deliver, in whom we trust that he will yet deliver 2: Cor.
1.9.10. The Lord has his path in the whirlewinde and in the storm Nahum 2.3.
verses.

And the Lord answered Job out of the whirlewind Job 38.2. verse and said verse
4 Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? have thou entered
into the springs of the Sea? or, have thou walked in the search of the deeps?
has the gates of death been opened unto thee? or, have thou seen the doors of
the shadow of death? verse 7.2 King 3.11: And Eliah went up in a whirle wind
into heaven, so that we may see when the Lord descends to the creature, Exodus
1918. or calls for it to ascend up to him, it is in some marvelous and
extraordinary manner, as by storms and whirlewindes, fiery Chariots, and thick
clouds, and he gives us the reason why he does so in Exodus 19:9. that the
people may believe for ever when he speaks to them. God has several ways to
speak, and after several manner he does reveal himself to the sons of men
under the Gospel as well as under the Law, although some will not believe
although one should come from the dead to speak to them: when the morning
stars sing together, and all the the sons of God shout for joy, or who shut
up the Sea, with doors when it brake forth as if it had issued out of the
womb and said, hitherto shall thy proud waves come and no further, and here
shall they be stayed. Where the Lord Jesus is broken forth in spirit, where he
is risen forth from the dead there is a glorious appearance of the presence of
God which fills the soul with joy, when Mary came to Elizabeth, she said, what
am I that the mother of my Lord should come unto me? as soon as the voice of
thy salvation sounded in my ears the Babe leaped in my womb for joy, and she
said, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit does rejoice in God my
Savior, if there be such rejoicing betwixt the Babe and his Mother for hearing
the voice of the Mother of her Lord, what infinite transcendent happiness,
admirable delight and over-comming and ravishments of joy and abundance of
rejoicing will there be when the Lord himself shall apear in his glorious
presence to the soul arrayed with all his excellent and glorious apparel,
traveling in the greatness of his strength and power, having all his
artillery of graces following him who is the bright and glittering Morning Star
that shines in such luster and brightness, and is the perfection of Beauty
that it dazells the beholders; and when the salutations of the Lord Himself are
heard thus to a Soul, saying, my lips Oh my Spouse drop as the Hony-combe,
speaking peace to the Soul, as when Christ appeared unto His Disciples and
said, Peace be unto you, His Voice is sweet, and His Countenance is comely,
and a Soul that Christ has taken into Union with Himself, and says, thou art
comely through the comeliness that I have put upon thee, I have crowned thee
in the day of thy Espousall; so that in the presence of Christ there is
infinite cause of rejoicing, and the Salutations of Christ are but invitations
to come above and live aloft in the highest Regions of light. Revel. 4.1, 2.
And I heard a voice saying unto me, come up hither; and immediately I was in the
Spirit. Christ takes a soul into Communion with Himself, and shows it a
glimpse of His glory that must be hereafter, whereupon the Soul concludes with
the Disciples, when they saw Christ transfigured on the Mount, that it is good
for them to be there, and Stephen being full of the Holy Ghost, said, I see the
Heavens opened, and Jesus standing at the right Hand of God, and John saw
wonders in Heaven above: a Soul which Christ has taken up into his Presence
Chamber, and pleads with it there, showing it the Thrones of God and the glory
of His Fathers Kingdom, will be transformed to the Image of God; when Moses had
been talking with God upon the Mount the People could not behold his Face, this
glory and spiritual joy is for the Children of the Bride-chamber, unto whom
when Christ appears he makes them so amiable and lovely a Spouse that he
admires the beauty and glory of his own Work saying, thou art all fair my
love, thou have no spot in thee, thou have ravished my Heart, my Sister, my
Spouse; thou have ravished my Heart with one of thy Eyes, Cant. 6.5. Tume away
thine Eyes from me for thou have overcome me. Hence Christ is overcome with the
beauty of a flourishing Soul and admires it, and the Spouse, hearing the voice
of her beloved, echoes back again, admiration of her love that he was the
chiefest of ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. He is white and ruddy, His Countenance is
excellent, His Mouth is most sweet, he is altogether lovely, here the Spouse
would, if it were possible outvye Christ by way of admiration: here is the
displaying the colors of each other, as if they would see which could advance
highest in exaltations, and needs must there be joy in such a Soul that is
betrothed unto Christ, and made one with Him, very well may it break forth into
a singing note; my Beloved spoke and said unto me; Rise up my love and fair
one and come away. Cant. 2.10. For lo the Winter is past, the Rain is over
and gone, the Flowers appear on the Earth, and the time of singing of Birds is
come, now will I sing unto my well beloved a song of praises and thanksgiving.
Psalm. 47.6. Sing praise unto God, sing praise, sing praise unto our King, sing
ye praises with understanding. Psalm. 59.17. unto thee Oh my strength will I
sing, for God is my defense and the God of my mercies. Hebr. 2.12. I will
declare thy Name unto my Brethren in the middst of the Church, I will sing
praise unto thee. 1 Chro. 16.8. Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon His Name,
make known his deeds amongst the people, sing unto him, sing Psalms unto him,
talk ye of all his wondrous Works, glory ye in his holy Name, let the heart
of them rejoice that seek the Lord. Job. 29.13. Let the Widows heart sing
for joy when the blessings of him that was ready to perish came upon me saying,
I will give her the valley of Achor for a door of hope, and she shall sing
there as in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she came up out of
the Land of Egypt. That temporal deliverance, God records as remarkable for
praise to be sung unto him, and puts it in the forefront of his ten holy
Commandments; When David's soul lay under sin he heard nothing of joy and
gladness, as we may see in his complant. Psalm. 51.6. Verse; He cried, make me
to hear of joy and gladness, Verse 8. Restore unto me the joy of thy
Salvation, so that we may see the times of restoration, either out of a relapse
from sin, or by deliverance from danger of death are rejoicing times.

The thoughts of God from everlasting, were thoughts of mercy, love and peace,
and when he does show mercies by wonderful deliverances, he does act but in
his own element, for he delights to show mercy unto the sons of Men; I will
have mercy on whom I will have mercy; Gods Will and Mercy is the fountain and
spring of our eternal Salvation and of our temporal deliverances, I remember
very well in the middst of the storm, that I fled for refuge to the anchor of
Faith, and the Will of God, saying to my friend, that the Lord says, I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee, and I will not cast thee off, assuring my
self, that it was the Will of God that I should receive the welcome of my
Father pronounced by the Son. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you before the foundation of the world.

Notwithstanding all the comfort and encouragement that my dear Husband gave
me, saying, that I had no cause to be troubled at all, in respect of any
danger, and bad me sleep and be still, for all was as well as Heart could
wish, and I should land safely, saying he was as sure of safety as if he was on
shore, and said, he would not give a farthing to have his life secured him,
nay, if the Ship brake in pieces yet we and he should be safe he knew,
thereupon I asked him if he knew what he said, surely he was in a Dream, why
would he be so confident of safety when the Captain and all the rest said,
they knew not what would become of them, expecting every minute nothing but
Death, and he replied, that he had Dreamed, that Jesus Christ told him so, and
therefore he would believe it. I find that God had formerly revealed Himself to
His servants by Visitions and Dreams: as in the 1 Kings 3.5. Verse: when the
Lord so lovingly appeared to Solomon, and asked him what he should do for him,
as if he would lay aside all his Will and desires, and condescend to Solomon's
request. Ask what I should give thee, says God, as if he would refer Himself
to Solomon's demands, and say not as I will, but as thou will, which is the
highest expression of love from the Lord to the Creature, as I have found in
all the Book of God, and yet we see that it was in a Dream that the Lord thus
revealed his infinite Love, so that we may here learn there is no time
excluded from GODS manifesting Himself to His People, but that it is all one to
Him to speak in a Dream by Night, as in a Cloud by Day, Verse 5. Yet I
marvelled at His confidence, and could not believe it, as to assure my self of
my life, but my fears were much above my hopes, I confess I had a submissive
hope to have life, but no assurance at all of life, It was enough, as Jacob
said, that my son Joseph is yet alive; it was enough for me that my Soul should
ever live with the Lord, and upon this rock he brought me, and set my feet upon
that rock that was higher then I, which only is my rock and my salvation, Psalm.
62.2. Upon which rock the foundation of my eternal comfort was built, when the
rain descended, and the floods came, and the wind blew and beat upon my soul,
my heart fell not from my God, and when we were like to have been split in
pieces upon the rocks in the Sea called the 3 Stags, I said I would cast my
soul and body into the arms of my sweet Savior, and if I perished I would
perish there. And now seeing it has pleased God to give us new lives, let us
desire one thing more of our good God, which he would not deny, Psalm. 27.4. and
say with Elijah, 2 King. 2.9. I pray thee let a double portion of thy Spirit be
upon me, as my life is doubled: So let it be our souls desire to have a double
portion of the Spirit of God upon this new life, and withal an understanding
heart, 1 King. 3.9. Then opened he their understandings, that they might
understand the Scriptures, Luk, 24.45. And although Elijah said to Elisha, That
he had asked a hard thing, yet God delights that we should ask of him hard
things, for it is for a great God to give great things, as you shall see in 1
King. 3.10. And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked
understanding, and he gave it him, and said, That he had given him also that
which he had not asked for, which was a long life; but it was but conditionally
that God said, Solomon should have it, 1 King. 3.14. And if thou will walk in
my Ways, and keep my Commandments, as thy father David did, then will I
lengthen thy days: and upon this condition the Lord gives Solomon a new life;
Verse. 15. And Solomon awaked, and behold, it was a dream; yet notwithstanding
the thing was accomplished, for in the 28. verse. the people admired him, and
why? because they saw that the wisdom of God was in him to do Judgment; and
they came from all parts of the earth which had heard of Solomon to hear him.

And here do I conclude humbly, spreading before the Lord my earnest desires,
that all we Sea-partners may obtain with Elisha a double portion of the Spirit
of God, and with Solomon understanding hearts, that we may understand the
Scriptures, for which I shall humbly wait at the feet of my sweet Savior for a
more glorious manifestation of his presence, and for a more enlightening
revelation by his blessed Spirit, discovering the hidden Mysteries of the
glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ unto my soul, which is life eternal to know God
and Jesus Christ his Son whom he has sent.

Come my fellow sufferers, we that have had a trial of ten days tribulation in
our Sea Voyage, seeing it has pleased God to redouble our obligations in
miraculous preservations, let us multiply our fervent prayers and praises, and
redouble our thanksgiving unto the Lord of Glory, that seeing these dangerous
storms, and tempests, and sickness, which we have had, were not unto death, but
for the glory of God, and that the Son of God might be glorified thereby, John
11.4. Let us join with one consent to give him praise which is due unto his
Name all the days of our pilgrimage, which are few and evil. Let us exceedingly
rejoice in our God while we are hereupon earth, and cry Hosanna to the highest;
Let us so run, as we may obtain a never fading Diadem of Glory amongst the
Saints of that new Jerusalem which is above: Let us be faithful to the death,
and we shall have a crown of life, Rev. 2.10. For our God will surely come, and
his reward is with him, and he will give to every one according to his works:
Therefore God that is rich in mercy to all that call upon him, and a present
help in time of trouble, fill your Souls with graces of his most holy Spirit,
and accept all our Praises, and help us to perform all our Vows, and grant all
our Petitions, so prays,

Your weak Remembrancer in all Christian Love and Duty, FRANCES COOK.

A Psalm gathered out of the Psalms of David at any landing after the great
storm at sea, in January 5. 1649.
COme forth and barken dearest friends,
all such as love the Lord,
What he for my poor life has done,
to you I will record.
For safety from the raging Seat,
this mouth to him did cry;
And thou my tongue make speed apace,
to praise him by and by.
To render thanks unto the Lord,
how great a cause have I!
My voice and prayer, and my complaint,
that heard so willingly.
Of his good will he has called back
my Soul from Hell to save;
He did revive when help did lack,
and kept me from the grave.
I to the Lord will pay my vows,
that I to him did make,
That if he would deliver me,
and not my Soul forsake:
Then finally while breath did last,
on his grace I would depend,
And in the house of God always
my life for ever spend.
Therefore open to me the gates
of truth and righteousness,
That I may enter into them,
the Lords praise to express.
God is my glory, I will sing,
with praise unto his Name,
That all my vows I may fulfill,
and daily pay the same.
Thy Servant Lord, thy Servant lo,
I do my self confess
One of thy handmaids, thou did hear
my prayer in my distress.
Who with the Lord is equal then,
in these his works of wonder?
That kept me from so many deaths,
and brake the waves in sunder.
I will before the living Lord,
confess his kindness then:
That showed his wonders in the storm,
unto the sons of men.
For with his Word the Lord did make
the sturdy storms to cease:
So that the great waves from their rage,
he brought to rest and peace.
Then was I glad when rest did come,
which I so much did crave:
And was by him to Haven brought,
which I so fain would have.
This was the mighty work of God,
this was the Lords own fact,
And it is mavelous to behold
with eyes that noble act.
I will perform with heart so free,
to God my vows always:
And I O Lord all times to thee
will offer thanks and praise.
My Soul from death thou did defend,
and kepst my heart upright;
That I before thee may ascend,
with such as live in Light.
I will not hide within my breast,
thy goodness as by stealth:
But I Will declare, and will express,
thy truth and saving health.
I Will keep not close thy loving mind,
that no one should it know;
Thy love, which in the deeps I find,
to all the Church I Will show.
Yea, good to me that was at Sea,
his Mercies did exceed;
Lo all thy works do praise the Lord,
and to thy honor spread.
Thy Saints do bless thee, and they do
thy Kingdoms glory show;
And blaze thy praise, to cause the sons
of men their power to know.
God is the Lord, by whom alone
Salvation comes plain;
He is my God, by whom I escaped
all danger, death and pain.
As God has given power to me,
so Lord make firm and sure
The work that thou have wrought on me,
for ever to endure.
Until the day of Judgment comes,
and I am called to rest,
With all thy holy company
of Saints and Angels blessed.
To praise the Lord Omnipotent,
triumphantly each hour;
To him be all dominion,
and praise for evermore.
FINIS.

