A CONTINUATION OF THE ACTS AND Monuments Of our late PARLIAMENT: OR, A
Collection of the Acts, Orders, Votes, and Resolves that has passed in the
HOUSE.

From June 9 to July 7. 1659.

By J. Can Intelligencer General.

LONDON: Printed according to Order, 1659.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
LEast the famous and noble Atcheivments of our late renowned Parliament should
be buried in oblivion, as surely as the Authors of them will be with infamy, it
was thought fit and much conducing to the public benifit to continue this
second part of their Acts and Monuments, that posterity may not be ignorant of
their honesty, and good intentions, to have promoted their own interests, and
confounded that of the Commonwealth; If further opportunity, and true
intelligence shall offer themselves, it is not improbable that their exploits,
till their second crack, may be exposed to public view. In the mean time, give
the Authors leave to do something else, and follow his old calling of scribing
Diurnalls.

A CONTINUATION OF THE ACTS and MONVMENTS of our late Parliament.
Thursday June 9.
THis day the house received a letter from John Bradshaw one of the keepers of
the great seal, wherein he desired that the House would please to dispense
with the weakness of their Brother's body now, whose soul had been at their
service many years since, whereupon it was ordered, that the Petitioner have
the thanks of the House, and be President of the next high Court of Justice,
before which any King whatsoever shall be called. Ordered also that during this
indisposition of his body, Harry Martin attend upon him daily to administer
unto him Ghostly comfort; and in his absence that the other Sir Harry supply
that office.

This day also several of the Officers of the Army received their Commissions
from Mr. Speaker, amongst which was Mr. Moore of Grayes Inn Esquire who
received a Commission to be Comptroller of the house: Sir Henry Martin was
Commissionated Muster-Master General of all the Whores in the Commonwealth,
and the Lord Munson his Corporal.

A Petition from several well-affected persons inhabitants of the Town of
Ailsbury was read, wherein they desired a Statute of Brass to be erected for
Mr. Scot, but one of the house standing up, and swearing a Gibbet would become
him better, the Petitioners were dismissed insatisfied,

June 10.
It was this day resolved that Colonel Barkstead be no longer Lievtennant of
the Tower, because the Parliament hate blood-thirsty men.

The Quallification of persons for places of trust (formerly omitted) was as
follows.

The Parliament does declare that all such as shall be in any place of trust or
power within this Commonwealth be persons of a very fair carriage, thrice
perjured, and the newest Sectaries.

June 11,
After a long debate concerning the interpretation of (the good old Cause) some
of the members calling it, the Saints Watchword, others the Cavalier's
Purgatory, some one thing, some another, it was resolved that the Good Old
Cause is in truth a going on in the great work of making up the
Parliament-men's Estates, where they left off at their last interruption; and
this definition was recorded by the Clerk of the Parliament accordingly.

Monday June 13.
Ordered. That the Gentry of Northumberland who presented a petition this day
to the house, have a Letter of thanks sent them, and that Jack Adams of the
Parish of Clarken-well write the same.

Resolved. That the Bill of Union between England and Scotland be referred to
General Monk to be brought in by him the day immediately before he intend's to
dye.

June 14.
Resolved. That Colonel Hewson be translated from the Government of Dublin to
be a Colonel of a Regiment of Foot.

This afternoon, the house voted Baron Tomlins to keep his place in the
Exchequer till they can find or procure a wiser.

June 15.
Colonel Fitz having this day received his Commission to be Lieutenant of the
Tower, Mr. Speaker told him the sense of the house (as to the performance of
his trust) in this manner.

Colonel Fitz, you have now received a special token of the Parliament's
favor, you are committed to the Tower, pray be diligent and vigilant, and in
requital of of these high obligations, the house desires you that if it happen
at any time that any of their members should (which God forbid) come under your
custody, you will use them with a brotherly fellow-feelingnesse, and not as
Barkstead served Sindercombe, and Mr. Armiger, Sir you have heard what their
pleasure is: be good in your office.

June 16.
The Circuit-judges having this day been voted, Mr. Speaker proposed what
instructions were fitting to be given to them, and it was agreed that it be
referred to praise God Barbone, to direct them in a way that should consist
most with the Parliament's safety.

June 17. 18.
These two days the house having much wast-paper in store, and more then the
Alderman needed, they employed it in writing Commissions, which were delivered
in abundance to sundry offices that made their obeisance for them very mannerly.

Major Overton's petition being read, it was immediately voted, nemine
contradicente, that the late General was a Tyrant, and the petition a
persecuted Saint, whereupon he was referred to the consideration of the
Colchester Commitee.

June 19.
This day (according to former order) praise God Barbone made a speech to the
Judges appointed for this Summer Circuit, there was little in it: but the
chief thing he pressed was to desire them not so much to respect the letter of
the Law, as that of the Gospel, for (said he) one is a killing letter, and you
should be mild, and merciful: the strictness and rigor of the Law (said he)
is like the skin of a Beast, rough, and hairy, but when by mercifulness the
hairs and brisles are shaved off, and when by indulgency the Hide is tanned and
dressed and made smooth, that which before was profitable for nothing, serves
for many uses: the rest of the speech continues yet in Brachygraphy at the
Citty-Remembrancer's house.

June 20.
It was this day resolved by the Council of State that the people should not
be wronged by Lawyers exactions: and presently after the Parliament voted that
all England should be lawless, and free to what they pleased; and that was
voted, the liberty of the subject.

June 21.
The business of Tithes having been long in consideration, it was now resolved
upon, that all the good people of this Common wealth should pay their Tithes to
the house, and some of the officers of the Army, whereupon several receivers
were appointed, Mr. Speaker was appointed to receive all the Poultry for the
enlargement of his household provisions, excepting Cocks, and Sparrowes, which
were received for Henry Martins, and the Lord Munson. The Lord Disbrow was to
receive all the Tithe Corn, etc.

June 22.
This day was wholly spent in receiving and reading several Addresses and
Petitions, one being more remarkable then the rest I have thought fit to
insert; it was entitled.

The humble Petition of diverse Madmen and others inhabitants of Bedlam in the
County of Middlesex,
Mr. Speaker.
Your Petitioners being very sensible of the great perils our Nation is
distracted with; knowing also that from this house come all those taxes, and
sequestrations, and many other things which make men mad, we out of a
tenderness, and sense of our own condition, and your forwardness to be our
benefactors, are here assembled, to desire you that an Act be immediately
dispatched to remove, either the Parliament House to Moor-fields, or our Palace
to your meeting house, your Petitioners (with submission) thinking, that there
is like to be no diffrence betwixt ^s, it being also clear upon our spirits
that Madmen and ^ooles may shake hands without breaking the peace; and truly
Gentlemen when the reckoning comes to be paid, you will find, that which will make
you mad, if you were not so before: Therefore (my Masters) learn to swim for
fear of drowning; learn to swing for fear of hanging; make one another rich;
give the devil his due; live as long as you can; and when you come to dye, go
to heaven and if you can tell how.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray him to prosper you, that set you on work.
At the bottom of the Petition instead of names subscribed, one had sowed a
straw on it; another made 3 or 4 pinholes, a third made a great scrawle, every
of the society according to his fancy.

June 23.
This day were read in the house the letters from. Don Pluto's Court, directed
thus, to our good servants, trusty and well-beloved drudges, promoters of our
interest, the supreme authority siting in Parliament at Westminster, so long as
our self, and the Army pleases. Dated thus, June 20. 1659. Given at our Palace
upon the banks of Acheron.

June 24.
The great work of this day was to indempnify all persons from the guilt of
innocent blood who had an hand in cutting off the late King's head.

After that passed, they resolved on an Oath to be taken by the Judges and
Other officers* the Oath was as follows. You shall swear to be true,
faithful and constant to this Commonwealth (that is) us and our heirs
without a single Person, King-ship, or house of Peers, till such as a single
Person shall Govern again, and no longer.

Which was accordingly minished, and (I believe) will be kept.

June 25.
This day Bradshaw and Sir Henry Mildmay petitioned the House to call in the
King that one might condemn him, and the other have the Crown Jewel.

June 26. 27.
Upon a Petition against Tithes it was resolved that the Judges in their
Circuits tell the Ministers that they shall have their Tithes paid them still
as formerly, till the Parliament shall find it safer to take them away, and the
companyes of Schismatics, and Heretics, augmented to such a considerable
number, as may second such their proceedings against all gainsayers.

June 28. 29.
A letter was this last day read from H. Cromwell late Leivetenant of Ireland,
together with the letter was a packet which being opened was found to be
filled with Irish Birch, bound up in the fashion of rodds, and a paper which
was fastened to one of them, with this inscription You may chastise me, if it
seem good in your eyes.

June 30.
The House being idely disposed, spent the greatest part of this day in giving
Commissions to several Soldiers; and receiving their Complements.

July 1.
This very day the House made two Sergeants at Law, William Steel and Miles
Corbet, and that was work enough for one day.

July 2.
Letters of Credence from Frederick King of Denmark directed Insignissimis
Reipub. Angl. Rebellibus in Parliamento Westmonasterii. Dated in the Tower of
Hafnae 28 May, 1659, were this day read.

July 3.
This day the House took into consideration the City Charter, and finding the
present Major not to correspond with it in regard of his want of a few hairs
on his face; presently ordered the Lord Tichborn and one of the Sheriffs to be
Plenipotentiaries to truck with the King of Spain for as many pair of Whiskers
as shall be requisite for some of the Citizens, and other well affected
Englishmen of the Lord Major's religion who are deficient in that particular.

July 4.
Resolved. That the Excise-men are Publicans, and all but the
Parliament-members, sinners.

Resolved. That the Farmers of the Excise, and customs have deceived the
people, and are unsufferable Extortioners, for which cause, the Parliament does
declare that, they shall be outed, it being found by experience to be true
that, so many of one trade, as the House and they, cannot thrive by one another.

July 5. At the Council of State.
Ordered. That Whitehall be emptied in six days time* and that within two days
after, tagg, ragg and longtaile take possession.

July 6.
An Ambassador extraordinary from the Emperor of the Antipodes arriving this
day at Westminster was conducted from the Court of Wards by Sir Oliver Fleming
Master of the Ceremonies: his business was to bring the house tidings of the
good amity, and league which his Master desires may be continued with England
so long as the house shall sit.

Hampton Court being ordered to be sold, several Chapmen came this day to the
House to bargain for parcells thereof, and the Citizens in the first place
paid 500 lb for the inheritance of the Horne-Gallery, other customers only
ask't the rates, but bought nothing of it besides for that time.

Henry Cromwell being come to the door the house having intelligence of it
sent the Sergeant at Arms with his Mace to attend on him to the Speaker's
Chair, where being come, he kneeled down, and ask't the Speaker blessing;
whereupon the House acquiescing in his good affections dismissed him.

FINIS.

