THE CONVINCED PETITIONER: FROM THE SERIOVS CONSIDERATION OF A LATE Printed
Answer to the Cities Petition FOR PEACE; Presented to His Majesty at Oxford:
With his moderate Reply thereunto.

By a well-minded Petitioner for Peace and Truth.

London printed, Jan. 13. Ann. Dom. 1643.

The Convinced PETITIONER.
IT is a great controversy with many in these times, whether is to be
preferred, an unjust Peace, or a most just War, much may be said on each
side, Policy and Divinity may spin out a long controversy hereabout, sure I
am, that it is divine policy and politic Divinity, though not to prefer an
unjust Peace, yet to compound a most just War; for doubtless, when a just
Peace is to be had, no War, can be just, let the cause be what it will; it is
Solomon's note, of an evil man, to dig up evil, and of a froward man to sow
contention, Proverb. 5. v. 22. and wars proceed from lusts. James 4.1. and
truly he that pretends piety, and delights in cruelty, does little understand
the law of charity, nor his own hypocrisy, for surely, to take pleasure in
fighting, is the property of Curres, and not of Christians, and they little
know the power of godliness (what ever their profession may be) who delight in
blood, for the fruit of the spirit is peace, love, joy, etc. but war and
strife etc. are fruits of the flesh. Gal. 5.21, 22. doubtless these (together
with the sad considerations of the dismal effects of civil wars in our own
Country were the true and real causes, (however manywould not believe it) of
the strong cries, and Petitions for Peace (if it could be attained) and
accommodations between the King and Parliament; what malignity did lie hid in
the hearts of some of the chief movers, in that former Petition (whose
pretense was for Peace, and their intentions to make devision in the City) I
know not, but let me speak for my self, and for many more (whom I have cause to
judge as upright as my self therein) that our hearts did, and do abhor such
desperate dissimulation, and it shall appear so to all the world, by our
dissenting from any such Council (from what hand soever given) to the stopping
of the mouths of any censorious person whatsoever, it did much satissie us to
see the Lord Major, Aldermen; and Common Counsel of this City, in that humble,
loyal, loving, and dutiful manner, to Petition His Majesty for Peace, in the
name of the whole City; and we could not but (taking notice of His Majesty's
Protestations of a desire for Peace) promise to our selves a blessed and happy
answer, to the refreshing the hearts of the whole Kingdom, but now the clouds
are returned after the rain; and we are as full of present despair by this
answer, (if His Majesty's) as we were of former hopes, and for mine own part I
cannot but judge, that those that are now to seek in their resolutions lutions
to join with the Parliament against the common adversaties of the Kingdom,
are either to seek for their wits, or their respects to the Kingdom, and I
shall for ever judge them to be more then sufficiently, acquainted with the art
of hypocrisy and dissimulation in their pretenses for Peace, that will not
give out their assistance injoyning with the Parliament, against the common
adversary (the only way now left) to attain a Peace. An account of this mine
opinion, I offer to all those that were as ingenuous as my self, in
subscribing the late Petition for Peace (so much withstood by many who did
judge more evilly of us, then we did deserve) and that is, the serious taking
notice, First, of the nature of the Petition, Secondly, of the nature of this
Answer.


1 In the Petition we are to consider, 1 Title. 2 Preamble. 3 Prayer.
thereof.

First, In the Title they Petitioned to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, in
whose hands there was power, and we did hope, in whose heart, there had been a
will, to make us happy by a gracious reply, and surely as it had been the high
way to our felicity; so had it been greatly for his glory, and as it had filled
our mouths with joy, so had muzled the mouths of those, who did premise no
better issue of it, then now we see.

Secondly, we are to consider the Petitioners.

The humble Petition of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London.
An Act of the joint body of the whole City; and therefore we did hope most
likely to prevail with His Majesty;

Thus for the Title.

Secondly, for the Preamble, and therein is contained the Petitioners
grievances, as the ground of their prayers, and they are three,

First, the divisions between His Majesty and Parliament.

Secondly, the sad effects thereof, both here and in Ireland.

Thirdly, the mis-apprehension conceived in His Majesty of the Petitioners
love and loyalty.

And from hence they promise His Majesty, and profess, that as they are for
the present, so they will always continue his loyal, obedient, and loving
subjects, promising according to their Protestation and vow made before
Almighty God that they will defend the true Protestant Religion, and their
Allegiance, His Royal Majesty, honor and estate, as well as the power and
privilege of Parliament, and the lawful rights and liberties of the subjects,
and whereas His Majesty has taken offense at tumults from the City, they
engage themselves, their estates, and all they have, to their utmost power, to
defend, and preserve His Maiesity, and both Houses of Parliament, from all
tumults, affronts, and violence, with as much loyalty, love, and duty, as ever
Citizens, expressed toward His Majesty, or any of His Royal Progenitors in
their greatest glory:

This is the preamble of the Petition.

Thirdly, in the prayers we may note,

1. The means of it, and that is the most humble submissive manner as it is
possible for them to do.

The Petitioners therefore upon their bended knees do most humbly beseech your
Majesty, etc.

2. The matter of the Petition, and that is twofold:

First, That his Majesty would be pleased to return to his Parliament, with
his Royal, and not his Martial attendants.

Secondly, That such a peace may be concluded upon, as may be for the glory of
God, the honor and happiness of his Majesty, and his posterity, the safety,
and welfare of all his loyal Subjects.

Thus we see the nature of the Petition, wherein for persons, manner, and
matter, envy it self cannot suggest the very least miscarriage, who could have
otherwise thought, but that we should have had such an Answer, to such a
Petition, so managed, as might at least have caused our peace and happiness,
after our dismal distractions, (as the Spring after Winter) to have budded in
our hearts; but alas, this unexpected answer (if it be the true answer to the
petition) has like a nipping frost, killed our hopes in the very bud, and it
cannot be otherwise, if we consider the nature of this Answer, wherein we are
to observe,

First, the Title. Secondly, the Answer it self.

First, The Title: His Majesty has graciously considered this Petition, and
returns this Answer.

Surely it was no more graciously considered, then graciously answered; and
truly we have no more reason to believe this Answer his Majesty's, then
gracious, for surely his Majesty's personal Protestations of a desire for
peace, did promise an answer, as gracious in the Answer it self, as in the
Title.

Secondly, We are to consider the Answer it self, and there in 3. things.

1. His Majesty's acknowledgement of his respects unto the City in general, by
way of introduction.

2. His Majesty's present implicit recenting the Petition, with the grounds and
reasons thereof.

3. His Majesty's conditional condecention unto the Petition, with his terms
and conditions tendered.

First, in the introduction, there is a fourfold acknowledgement, viz.

1. Of his Majesty's right apprehension of the love and loyalty of the City:
And surely would his Majesty please to look back upon all former experiences,
and could his Majesty look into our present affections, his Majesty should
have little reason to judge otherwise of us.

2. We have an acknowledgement of his love unto the City, and of his desire to
make it his chief place of residence, and to continue and renew many marks of
his favor to it: Surely we hope his Majesty is in as good earnest in the
profession of his love unto us, as we are in the profession of our love and
loyalty unto him, though that wicked Counsel about his Majesty have prevailed
with him to keep him so long from us: and to accompany them in their bloody
attempt, almost to our doors, even so far as Brainford, to murder, and
plunder us: For though his Majesty would not have us believe any such intent in
him toward us (as God forbid we should) yet his Majesty can plead but for
himself, and not for his Army; for truly, if he should, we should scarce
believe the word of a King for it.

3. We have an acknowledge meant of the innocence of the City in those tumults
which forced his Majesty (as he says) to leave the City for his safety: We
hope his Majesty will hereafter remember that he has now acquitted the City of
this charge, his Majesty faith indeed, that they were contrived and encouraged
by some principal members of this City, but we know them not, he says, they
are out of the reach of Justice, a paradox unto us. Well, however he acquits
the Inhabitants of the City, he looks upon his good subjects there, as persons
groaning under the same burden which does oppress his Majesty, by which we
conceive he means the distractions of the Kingdom, but be looks upon us as
awed by the same persons who begat those tumults; and the same Army which gave
battle to his Majesty; but surely his Majesty is much mistaken, if he looks
upon London as awed by any thing but the Laws of the Land, and the lawful
power and exercise thereof which his Majesty has over them, much less by any
promoters and chief causers of unlawful tumults, especially raised against
his Majesty, and if by the Army Which (he says) gave Him Battle, be meant the
Parliaments Army, which gave tho Cavaliers battle, who go about to destroy the
Laws, Liberty, and Religion of the Kingdom: His Majesty cannot but know that
the City is so far from being awed by them, and in fear of them, as that
under God we look upon them as means to defend us from that cruel, popish,
and Atheistical Army, which detaines his Majesty from his Parliament, and
therefore we both have and will to the last penny in our purses, and blood in
our bodies, maintain and assist them in so good and just a cause.

4. We have an acknowledgement of his Majesty's desire to establish the
particular peace and prosperity of the City; truly could we see his Majesty
return to his Parliament, and desert his popish and treacherous Counsel, and
Army, we should believe the reality of affections a thousand times more then we
can his present protestations.

Thus we see the first part of his Majesty's Reply, viz. His Maresties
acknowledgements of his respects in general by way of introduction.

Secondly, The second part is his Majesty's present recenting, or implicit
denial of the Petition, with his grounds and reasons: His general ground is
his fear of security in the City, upon 5. special Reasons.

First, The despising and trampling under foot the Laws of the Land in this
City.

Surely this charge is very criminal, and were London guilty of it, they
should deserve rather strict severity, then his Majesty's lenity; but sure we
are, if London be guilty of this, then is the adverse Army 7. fold more
guilty, and we suppose that all the Cities, Towns, Villages, and Counties
where ever they have been, will attest the same; we shall need to say no more
to that, seeing their own daily actions, and the whole Kingdoms complaints do
ring this in the ears of heaven and earth; but for our selves we know not what
Laws are thus despised and trampled under foot.

2. A second reason of his Majesty's fears of his safety in this City, Is the
submitting the Government of this City to the arbitrary power of a few
desperate persons of no reputation.

It is hard to say whether we are accused more in the former charge, of
wickedhesse, or in this, of weakness: Surely to trample under-foot our Laws,
and Liberties, and to submit our selves to the arbitrary government of a (...)
desperate person of no reputation, is an argument as of sordid impiety, so of
sottish stupidity; but surely, though London has been guilty of this slavish
folly, and foolish slavery in former times (as it is too well known, to its
shame) yet repentance and resolution has (I hope) wiped that guilt of, and
made London now, at least innocent in that charge, and it is to be doubted (if
the truth was known) that it is not London^^ (...) to be made slaves, but
rather the incorrigeablenesse, and stiffenesse of her neck to the yoke of
slavery which has made London so obnoxious unto these present distractions and
displeasures from the higher powers* we know not these pa^^ies (nor hard
taskmasters) as yet, but we shall by and by.

A third ground of his Majesty's fears (as says this answer) of his security
in the City is, that there Arms are taken up, not only without, but against
his consent and express commands, and collections publicly made, and
contributions avowed for the maintenance of the Army that gave him Battle, and
therein used all possible means treason and malice could suggest to them to have
taken his life from him, and to have destroyed his Royal issue.

Surely we utterly deny that here are any Arms taken against his Majesty,
though we confess here are Arms taken up against his consent and express
command and as we will never justify the one, so will live and die in the
justification of the other (as the case of the Kingdom stands) for if so be a
company of known Malignants, and Traitors to the Religion, and peace of the
Kingdom shall gather head, and get his Majesty to join with them, and
countenance them in their proceeding^ and endeavors of destroying the
Kingdom, to make us slaves, and vassals for ever; His Majesty must give us
leave, and that without any impeachment of our loyalty to him, and love to his
royal posterity (especially by an ordinance and power of a Parliament) to
raise up an Army for our defense, to make and avow public collections, and
contributions to the maintenance thereof, though it be not only without his
consent, but against his express command; and surely if his Majesty will not
evidence his love to his people by giving his consent and assistance for the
safety of his Kingdom in such a case, his Majesty must give us leave to
evidence our love to our selves, and whole Kingdom, to endeavor our own
safety; or else we are forced to do it without his consent, and if the Army
raised up in London, gave the Army that is raised up against the Kingdom, a
battle, and his Majesty's life was in danger therein; I know none that are to
be blamed therein, but either himself, in hazarding his royal person, or those
that did advise him to such a desperate design; as for the imputation of
Malice and Treason in the Parliaments Army, and utmost indeavonrs to take away
his own life, and destroy his royal issue, his Majesty may as soon prove
this Treason and malice in the bullets that were shot, as in the parties that
shot them, and if his Majesty will so much forget both himself, and his
Kingdom, as to protect an Army, and go with them in the field that fight
against his Kingdom, with supposition that we will not strike for fear of
hurting him, and so the Army encouraged to destroy us; though his Majesty will
not value his own life, and issue, but expose all to hazard, yet we ought to
value the life of our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and whole Kingdom at a higher
rate, then to sacrifice all to such a dangerous and unadvised action, and
surely his person would be in more security, and less danger in his royal
Throne, with his Parliament, then in the midst of such an Army at Keinton
Battle.

A fourth ground of his Majesty's fear of security (as says the Contriver) in
the City is the revilings, injuries, and murders that are committed, and that
even by the Magistrates of this City upon his Majesty's subjects, who out of
duty and affection to his Majesty, and compassion of their bleeding country
have labored for Peace.

Surely if these revilings, injuries, and murders were committed, and that by
the Magistrates of this City, upon the Kings foresaid subjects, or any other,
they were committed in their closets, and we wonder his Majesty should here
thereof at Oxford, before we could here of any such thing in London; but if so
be these be his dutiful and affectionate subjects, who labored for Peace (as
the Author calls it) by endeavoring to make insurrections and mutenies in the
City, giving out many expressures of their resolutions of malignity against
both the City, and Parliament it self, the like affronts scarce ever known
given against public authority, if those be the persons his Majesty means,
and if (upon the legal and just proof of these men's malignity, and breach of
the known Laws of the Land) the committing of these persons to safe custody
to prevent their intended malicious designs against the City and Kingdom, be
to revile, iujure, and murder his good subjects, then are the Magistrates of
London guilty of this charge; and if so, what then is the guilt, and where
shall the blood of that poor fellow that was hanged and quartered for a
pretended treason in Southwarke be required? And where shall the blood of that
innocent, plain hearted man, Mr. Boise that was hanged at Redding, (a most
bloody act) for no man knows what be required? As for any revilings of them
(though we have heard of calling men of good rank Parliament Dogs, and
Parliament Rogues, at Oxford) yet we know no such revilings of any of the other
party here in London.

Fifthly, and lastly, The Contriver demands what hope of safety he can have,
whilst Alderman Pennington their pretended Lord Mayor, the principal Author of
those calamities Which so nearly threaten the ruin of that famous City, Ven,
Foulke, and Manwairing ( all persons notoriously guilty of Schism and high
Treason) commit such outrages in oppressing, and imprisoning according to their
discretion all such his Majesty's good subjects, whom they are pleased to
suspect, but for wishing well to his Majesty.

Truly if so be a free and fair election of Alderman Pennington by the chief
Citizens of London is sufficient to make him our lawful Lord Mayor, then is
he no pretended Lord Mayor; and if so be no man must be Lord Mayor, but whom
his Majesty's evil Counsel will please to suggest (for we know no other
exception) then do not we know our Charter, and we have not the liberty, which
the meanest Incorporation in the Kingdom have; well, howsoever this Contriver
will please to call him our Pretended Lord Mayor, we know him to be our true,
proper, and lawful Lord Mayor, and will honor and obey him accordingly; well,
what is affirmed of him? why, that he is the principal Author of those
calamities which so nearly threaten the ruin of this famous City; surely my
Lord Mayor is better known to the City of London, then unto this Contriver,
otherwise the City would never have chosen hi^ twice to be one of their
Burgesses in Parliament, and twice Lord Mayor we can hear of no treason
committed by him, and we have so good an opinion of his loyalty and love to
King and Kingdom, that we could wish that all his Majesty's subjects were such
traitors; surely, for this twelve months space those that have been called
the worst Traitors, have been His best subjects; and indeed the whole Kingdom
(excepting such as have taken part with Traitors against the Kingdom) are
proclaimed Traitors and the rest His loving subjects; and for my part let me
rather live and die such a Tratior, then such a loving subject; I desire that
men may take heed how they make use of such an expression of His Majesty, in
calling my Lord Mayor our pretended Lord Mayor, because His Majesty has not
confirmed him, for surely if men cease to be Officers in a Commonwealth, when
all things do not concur according to the original and constitution of that
Office (although we know no such thing here) it is to be questioned, whether
men will not make use of such a conclusion to the extirpation of the highest
and chiefest Officer in the Kingdom; well, my Lord Mayor is a real Traitor,
but a pretended Lord Mayor, (I should say a real Lord Mayor, but a pretended
Traitor) but he is not alone, he has Foulk, Ven, and Mainwairing to bear him
company, all notoriously guilty of Schism and high Treason, says the
Contriver, but all notoriously known to be honest, loyal, orthodox,
conformable men, say all that ever truly knew them, and by these we may
guess at the Separatists, Sectaries, Brownists, and Aanabaptists, so often
mentioned in His Majesty's expressures, for these are well known, not only to
be honest men, but also conformable unto the Church of England, and as yet at
this time we know nothing wherein they are of another mind, except it be in
reformation of Discipline, confessed on all hands to be corrupted. Well, what do
these do to offend His Majesty? why these are the men intimated before by Whom
the Whole City is awed and misled. Surely the City is awed by these men as the
Parliament is by four or five factious spirits, a thread bare and worn
stratagem to raise contention in the City.

Well, what else is objected against these persons? Why they commit great
outrages in oppressing, robbing and imprisoning (according to their discretion)
all His Majesty's loving subjects, whom they are pleased to suspect, but for
wishing well to His Majesty, what His Majesty means here can hardly be
understood, but we looknot upon it as His Majesty's expressions, and therefore
we are bold to say, that surely the Composers Pen did run faster then his
judgment, for we know nothing at all that three of these men have done, viz.
Alderman Foulk, Colonel Ven, and Col. Maiuwairing, except it has been by
special order from the Parliament, and I hope they give no order to rob men,
and as for my Lord Major we know not the least act of this nature wherein he is
guilty, except there be that of London seen in Oxford, which was never seen
in Londen.

These are His Majesty's reasons wherefore he suspects His security in the
City, and His Majesty having dispatched them, comes to appeal to the common
judgment and knowledge of all men to give their answers to several Queries.

1. Query. Whether the Petitioners believe that the reviling and suppressing
the Book of Common Prayer (established in this Church, ever since the
reformation) the discountenancing and imprisoning godly, learned, and painful
Preachers, and the cherishing and countenancing Brownists, Anabaptists, and all
manner of Sectaries, be the way to mantaine and defend the reformed Protestant
religion.

Answ. First, though we will honor the very form of godliness, and therefore
will not plead for reviling: yet we conceive that the true Protestant reformed
Religion may very well consist with the suppressing of the Book of Common
prayer, for,

First, our Protestant religion had not its first rise from protesting to
maintain the Book of Common Prayer, but to maintain the Protestant Doctrine
of the Gospel of Christ in opposition to Popery.

Secondly, I hope it will not be denied, but that the reformed Churches beyond
Seas, are Protestant, and yet they have not our Book of Common Prayer there.

Thirdly, we question not but that His Majesty has confirmed the Protestant
Religion in Scotland, and yet we know not that either Bishops, of our Book of
Common Prayer, if settled there, nor that they are tied to any Book.

Whereas it is said that,

Fourthly, the Book of Common Prayer has been settled in this Church since the
reformation, yet,

First, it will be hard to prove that that book which was settled, be that book
which we have, and if it prove otherways, then to revile this Book, is no
more to revile the Book of Common Prayer settled and established in this Church
ever since the reformation; then to revile the Popish Mass book, is to revile
the Book of Common Prayer settled since the Reformation.

Secondly, Suppose this should be the Book settled since the Reformation; yet
they which first settled it, did not establish it in seculo seculorum, it was
for themselves; we cannot think they had so high thoughts of themselves, as to
think that they were then so pure a Church, as that they never could be
capable of more light, and knowledge, and reformation, then what they had; No,
questionless that pious Prince whose memory is and shall be for ever blessed,
for his willingness and endeavors to honor God in a reformation according to
the light of those times, had not the least such thought.

Thirdly, the Book of Common Prayer was not at first settled for the true
Protestant Religion, but for a form of Common Prayer; the holy Scriptures are
the ground of the Protestant Religion, and not the Book of Common Prayer, and
therefore the true Protestant Religion may be maintained, though the Book of
Common Prayer be suppressed.

Fourthly, the Book of Common Prayer was established in opposition, and not in
favor to Popery; but now its very observable, that Popery is secretly
nourished; and keeps footing in this Kingdom by the Book of Common Prayer;
and therefore, the most Popish Priests in the Kingdom are so hot and zealous
for the Book of Common Prayer.

But the truth is, that this has been the design of the Prelaticall faction,
to stifle the light of the Gospel, the Preaching of the Word, and to put up in
the room of it the Book of Common Prayer, that so the poor common people may
know no Protestant Religion but the Book of Common Prayer, otherwise the
people would have been ashamed of this question, Can the Protestant Religion
consist with the subpressing the Book of Common Prayer?

Well, that is the first part of his Majesty's first Query; the second part is,
Whether the discountenancing and imprisoning godly, learned, and painful
Preachers be to maintain and defend the true reformed Protestant Religion?

Surely to discountenance godly, learned, and painful Preachers, is not to
maintain the true reformed Protestant Religion, and therefore the Prelates
(let their pretenses be what they will) (whose constant practices have been to
discountenance and imprison, godly, learned, and painful Preachers) have not
defended the true reformed Protestant Religion; but malice it self cannot
produce one instance one godly, learned, and painful Preacher,
discountenanced and imprisoned for his godliness, learning, or painful
Orthodoxe Preaching, by the Magistrates of London; though this charge and sin
shall lie heavy one day upon all such as are guilty thereof, but blessed be
God, London has been more passive than active in that sin, it has been our
sorrow, but not our sin.

A third part of his Majesty's first Querie is whether The cherishing and
countenancing Brownists, Anabaptists, and all manner of Sectaries be the way to
maintain and defend the true reformed Protestant Religion?

Answ. Surely to cherish and to countenance Brownists, Anabaptists, and all
manner of Sectaries, is not the way to maintain and defend the true reformed
Protestant Religion; but if by Brownists, Anabaptists, and all manner of
Sectaries be meant such as are not truly so called; if by those be meant such
as my Lord Mayor, Alderman Foulke, Collonell Ven, and Collonell Mainwaring, who
are taxed for such in this Reply: if by these be meant all such as are not
Episcopal in their Judgments, formal in their Devotions, ceremonial and
superstitious in this worshipping God; if by these be meant such as will not
swear and lie and profane the Lords day: if (in a word) by these be meant all
such as desire to be Protestants in life and conversation, as well as in mere
profession, then to countenance and cherish such Brownists, Anabaptists, and
all manner of such Sectaries is the way to maintain the true reformed reformed
Protestant Religion, and we know no others countenanced and cherished, but such
as these.

2. Query. A second querie is, whether to comply with, and assist persons who
have actually attempted to kill his Majesty, and to allow and favor Libelss
Pasquils, and seditious Sermons against his Majesty, be to defend his Royal
person and honor according to their duty and allegiance.

Ans. Surely no, but to comply with, and assist persons that fight against
those who have actually attempted to destroy the Laws of the Land, the Liberty
of the Subject, the life of the Parliament, Religion, and Kingdom, is to
defend his royal person and honor according to our duty and allegiance, but
surely to allow and favor Libels, Pasquils, and seditious Sermons against his
Majesty, or his Parliament, is not to defend his royal person and honor
according to their duty and allegiance; and therefore such Preachers as these,
that sow sedition between his Majesty and Parliament, are no godly, learned,
and painful preachers, and I know none but such as these that are
discountenanced by any Magistrates in this City.

3. A third Quaery is, whether to imprison men's persons, and to plunder their
houses, because they will not rebel against his Majesty, nor assist those that
do, whether to destroy their property, by taking away the twentieth part of
their Estates from them, and by the same arbitrary power to refer to four
standers by of their own faction to judge what that twentieth part is, be to
defend the lawful rights and liberties of the subjects?

Ans. Surely no, This is not to defend the lawful rights and liberties of the
subjects; And therefore we hope His Majesty will be very willing to let
Justice have its free course upon my Lord of Newcastle, and others, which do
assesse men to pay not the twentieth part of their estates, but what he
pleases, and to compel them to pay it by an Army on foot in the North, and
elsewhere, That he will at last ioyn with his Parliament, to bring all those
Robbers, Plunderers, and Spoylers of His Kingdom, and good People, (whereof,
there are so many Complaints of poor Carriers and People in all the Villages,
Towns, and Cities, where the Army raised up against the Parliament has been)
to just and condign punishment; and this will be to defend the lawful Right
and Liberties of the Subjects: But for the Parliament (into whose hands we have
committed our Estates, and trust of the whole Kingdom) to demand the twentieth
part of our Estates for the defense of the Kingdom, against a Malignant Army of
Papists, Delinquents, and Traitors, raised up to destroy the Religion, and Laws
of the Kingdom, and to compel them to pay it by an Ordinance of Parliament, to
save our Laws, Religion, Liberties, and Lives; and to appoint four honest,
sufficient, indifferent well affected men to judge what that twentieth part is,
(the best course that can be taken in such a case, and far better then the
course taken by my Lord of Newcastle, and others, in their wicked and
traiterous tyranny) is to defend the lawful Rights and Liberties of the
Subjects.

4. Query, A fourth Query is, If we think these Actions to be instances of
either, Whether we do not know these Persons before named to be guilty of them
all?

Answ. We suppose these Actions are not instances of either; and we do not know
those Persons before named, guilty of any one of them.

5. Query. A fifth Query is, Whether we can think it possible, that Abuighty
God can bless this City, and preserve it from destruction, whilst Persons of
such known guilt, are defended and justified among them, against the power of
that Law by which they can only subsist?

Answ. Were this City guilty of the aforesaid Crimes, Doubtless we could not
think that Almighty God could bless this City, and preserve it from
destruction; But for as much as we know the Cities innocence in them all,
especially the innocence of the Governors of this City, where chiefly the
charge is laid, we think it not only possible; But certain that Almighty God
will bless this City, and preserve it from destruction; notwithstanding, the
malice, power, policy, plots, and proiects of all the enemies thereof, as
(blessed be his holy Name) he has hitherto done; And surely, We cannot think
that God can bless (leaving to himself the liberty of his free, and rich
grace) that party of Papists, Atheists, and profane Wretches, That under
prerences of fighting for the true Protestant Reformed Religion, Law of the
Land, and Liberty of Subject, Shall go about to undermine, kill, and destroy
the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom. And although such may prosper
sometimes in judgment, and not in mercy; yet God will find a time for an
account hereof, to their terror. For, if men will most Hypocritically make God
justify their wickedness, by pretending his cause, and approbation; God will
most seasonably justify himself, and his righteousness by their ruin and
destruction. But the good God give repentance unto conversion, and not
judgment unto confusion, And this is the greatest mischief that we wish them.

We shall say no more to the second part of His Majesty's reply: Viz. His
recenting the Petition for the present, with His Majesty's Reasons thereof, and
the several Queries hereabout.

The last part of His Majesty's reply, Is His conditional condescension unto
the Petition, with the terms thereof, tendered and propounded.

Wherein we may observe,

First, His conditional condiscention with terms propounded.

Secondly, A threatening of those that will not yield to the same.

First, His conditional condiscention, Here we must remember the Prayer of the
Petition; that is, twofold, For His Majesty's return unto His Parliament, with
His Royal, and not His Martial Guard, etc.

Secondly, That a Peace may be concluded upon, as may be for the glory of God,
the honor and happiness of His Majesty, and posterity, and the safety and
welfare of all His loving Subjects.

This His Majesty does promise upon these conditions, as says this Author, His
Majesty (having professed His good opinion of the greater, and better part of
this City; and that He does not lay the former charge (in that measure at
least) upon them, Though they are not altogether without some blame, to suffer
those foresaid ill men, so far, to prevail with them, as that He has had
little use of their Affections;) Yet notwithstanding, He professes, His desire
is to be with (...), and to protect think that the Trade, Wealth, and glory
thereof, may again be the envy of all foreign Nations, etc. And He does offer
a general pardon to all the Inhabit^^^^ of that His City of London, the
Suburbs, and City of Westminster, (excepting the Persons formerly excepted by
His Majesty) but upon these conditions.

1. Condition. First, If we shall return to our Duty, Loyalty, and Obedience.
We never yet departed from our Duty, Loyalty, and Obedience, and we hope never
shall, therefore we yield.

Secondly, If His good Subjects shall solemnly declare, That they will defend
the known Laws of the Land, and will submit to, and be governed by no other
Rule. We have already in our solemn Protestation declared that, and will
maintain it to the utmost of our Lives, Liberties and Estates, against all the
Cavaliers in the World. That we will maintain the known Laws, and submit to be
governed by no other Rule, but by the known Laws, until they be lawfully
reversed, or others made by those that are lawfully called hereunto, according
to the constitution of the Kingdom; and in this Resolution (by Gods grace, we
will live and dye, therefore hitherto we yield.)

Thirdly, The third condition is, If they shall first manifest, by defending
themselves, and maintaining their own Rights, Liberties, and Interests, and
suppressing any force and violence, raised, against those and His Majesty, to
their power, to defend and preserve Him from all tumults, affronts, and
violence. Surely, If God please to bless us, we will maintain our own Rights,
Liberties, and Interests, otherwise we would never be at such cost and charges
to maintain War, against those that are risen to take them away; and cursed
be he that will not promise to the utmost of his power, to suppress any
tumults, fronts, violence, raised up against His Majesty, we are hitherto
agreed.

Fourthly, If they shall apprehend and commit to safe custody the Persons of
those four men, who enrich themselves with the spoil and oppression of His
loving Subjects, and the ruin of the City, That His Maiessty may proceed
against them by the course of Law, as guilty of high Treason, His Majesty will
speedily return with His Royal, and not His Martial Guard, etc. How? If we
shall apprehend and commit to safe custody the Persons of these four men; By
what means, here is no legal way propounded, How must this be done? What? By
an Insurrection? What? Rise up tumultuously against the Kings chief Officers?
Surely, Now it appears, His Majesty has little hand in this Answer; Does not
His Majesty complain of those tumults that came to the Parliament, and cried
out, No Bishops, no Bishops? And shall we think, that He would have us rise up
in tumults, and cry, No Lord Mayor, no Lord Mayor? Do we seek to His Majesty
for peace, and shall we think, that He does answer us, by putting us, upon a
design, to cut one another Throats? Shall we think that His Majesty will teach
His Subjects to rebel against Himself, in His Ministers of Justice? Do we seek
for peace abroad, and shall we suppose His Majesty does answer as by advising a
course; for the spilling of one another blood at home? Surely no, Such a
remedy is by far worse then the disease. If His Majesty shall legally accuse
them to the Parliament, and they send in a regal manner for them, We will
venture our lives to take them, if need should be; but in the mean while they
are not flying away: And we suppose they have (...) cause; and that we are
spoiled, and oppressed by them, and they inriche by (...), was never our
complaint unto His Majesty, We could heartily wish there were no greater
spoylers, and oppressors of the Kings Subjects in the Kingdom, then they are,
we would be very unwilling to have the Cavaliers to come to relieve us from
these spoylers. Therefore I hope London will be as wary in delivering up such
active and well affected Members to be sacrificed to the malice of wicked men
that have incensed His Majesty against them? as the Parliament (a leading
example) have been in the very self same case: And yet if His Majesty has any
crime against any, or all of them, there is no question, but the City of
London, will as willingly surrender them up to the Justice of the Law in a
lawful proceeding against them, as the Parliament was. Well, in short, we see
the terms, upon which His Majesty will grant our Petitions for peace; and
truly, If this be the way for peace, viz. To intimate unto us in general,
without any legal, and orderly directions, to seize upon the Persons of our
chief Members of the City, which cannot be done but tumultuoully, and (it is
like) without shedding of blood; we had rather be without it, then have it; we
had rather wait for a better peace some other way: As for His Majesty's
promises upon this course taken, Viz. That He will come with His Royal, and
not His Martial guard, and use His utmost endeavor, that we may hereafter
enjoy all the blessings of peace and plenty, etc. We believe then there will be
no great need of His Martial guard, and His endeavors for our peace and
plenty, and the success thereof, we may read in those Countries, where His
Majesty has been with His Forces, and made promises of this nature, which will
amount to a great deal of less peace and plenty then now we have.

And therefore for the last part of the Authors reply, Viz. His Majesty's
threatening, If we take not this course, If we continue to contribute our
maintenance of the Army, under the Earl of Essex, etc. We reply only thus,
(being in a great strait) That we must, and by Gods help, will do the utmost
that we can, while we have life and breath to maintain the Army raised up for
the defense of our Religion, and Kingdom, under the command of the Earl of
Essex; But we had rather (if God would please, that no more English blood may
be spilt in this Cause; but we see how the case stands with us, we must either
ioyn with the Cavaliers in fighting against the Kingdom, the Gospel,
Parliament, Law, and Liberties, or expect the utmost issue to our peril; and
surely; we will rather st^^d to the issue of the lesser evil, of sorrow,
rather then sin, and fight for, and not against the Kingdom.

The Author says, His Majesty hopes, His good Subjects of London, will call
to mind the Acts of their Predecessors, their Duty, Affection, Loyalty, and
merit toward their Princes, the renown they have had with all posterity for,
and the blessings of Heaven which always accompanies those virtues, and well
consider the scorn and infamy which unavoidably will follow them, and their
children; if infinitely the meaner part in quality, and much the lesser part
in number, shall be able to alter the Government so admirably established;
Destroy the trade so excellently settled, and to waste the wealth so
industriously gotten, of that flourishing City; and then they will easily
gather up the courage and resolution, to ioyn with His Majesty, in defense of
that Religion, Law, and Liberty, which hitherto has, and only can make
themselves, His Majesty, and the whole Kingdom happy.

Surely this City does call to mind (and for ever will) the acts of our
Predecessors, their duty, affection, loyalty, and merit toward their Princes,
the renown they have had with all posterity for, and the blessings of heaven
which has always accompanied these virtues; and will, and do consider the
scorn, and infamy, which unavoidably will follow us, and our children, if
infinitely the meaner part in quality, and the lesser part in number shall
(notwithstanding the assistance of all the Cavaliers in the Army, raised up
against the Parliament, and all the Papists, and Atheists in the City, or
Kingdom to help them) be able to alter the Government so admirably established;
Destroy the trade so excellently settled, and to waste the wealth so
industriously gotten of this flourishing City; as the Cavaliers have in many
flourishing Cities, and Towues, where they have been; And therefore we will
gather courage and resolution to join with His Majesty and Parliament, in the
defense of that Religion, Law, and Liberty, which stands in opposition to
popery and slavery, and can only make our selves, His Majesty, and His Kingdom
happy.

And notwithstanding, with reference to the Commonwealth, his Majesty may have
concurrence with his Parliament at this distance as well as at White Hall, yet
we should think our selves infinitely engaged unto his Majesty, if he will be
pleased to come to his Parliament, and we think the whole Kingdom will rejoice
at it, and ( though his Majesty has concurred with their advise beyond the
example of his Predecessors in passing of such Bills, by which he willingly
parted with many of his known Rights for the benefit of his subjects, which the
fundamental constitutions of this Kingdom did not oblige him unto, for which
we are heartily thankful, yet would his Majesty be pleased to leave that
wicked Counsel about him, who advises him to join with them against his
Parliament beyond the example of his Predecessors, and to take such courses
whereby

These Acts of Grace in passing Bills for the good of the Subjects, shall be
void and of no use, but even the Parliament it self and all our Laws,
Religion and Liberty are in danger to be utterly lost and destroyed we should
surely then be easily persuaded of his Majesty's cordial love and respects
unto us, and we know not what to do, but still to apply our selves unto his
Majesty, as we have done unto his Parliament, that such just peaceable, and
Honorable Propositions, may be mutually tendered, that may beget a sweet and
happy concurrence between his Majesty and Parliament.

We have seen the Petition; who would not subscribe it, we have seen the
supposed answer, if true who could have expected it? shall we be any longer
deceived? then let us be for ever undon: it is no Religion but Popery; no
Liberty but slavery; which shall be our portion: do not think that were it
not for a few Brownists and Anabaptists etc. all would be well, that these are
the disturbers of our Peace; I am no friend to such as these; but let me live
and die such an one as those that are falsely so called no, no, such Brownists
and Anabaptists, as were the causes of the Irish Rebellion (as all men may see)
are the incendiaries of our troubles: Popery and slavery, has a long time
threatened this Nation: When absolute prerogative gets upon the Throne, and the
Pope upon the Church what Subjects then but slaves? what Christians, but
Papists? shall we be cozened of our Religion and Liberty by lies, and
hypocrisi^? no peace is to be had, but either we must fight for it in hope of
victory; or purchase it by perpetual slavery; War is bitter God give us
peace, Hell is hot; God give us truth, if we love our souls, let us fight for
our Religion, if we love our posterity let us fight for their Liberty; amongst
others these motives does captivate my resolutions: of the consider^^ion of the
cause, it is for God it is for the Kingdom, if I fight for God, I shall have
God though I loose all, and that will make up all; if I decline God, though I
enjoy all, I shall loose God and then all will make up nothing it is for Jesus
Christ; who would not help him to his glory? He has fought with divine
justice* with the curse of the Law: with the Devil, with sin, with death for
us shall we not fight with man for him? we were his enemies when he did thus
for us; he is our Redeemer; what is now to dear for him? he left Heaven to
fetch us from Hell; what can we do in requital therefore? he is our General,
mighty in battle; who would not fight under his Standard, if ever, now is
Christ's cause on foot to affirm the contrary, is shameless impudency, which
to believe, is sottish credulity, if Popery be piety then are we deceived in
this controversy; can English ingenuity be deceived with such Romish falacy?
It is for the Gospel; who is so blind as once to doubt it? Life by it has bin
brought to light; shall we now lose it; its a door to glory; shall we let it be
shut? Its a vision of Heaven; shall we let it pass, pity pity, your poor
posterity no Gospel; no Christ, no Christ no Glory: if so; woe woe, that ever
they were borne, believe it; It is not Queen Elizabeth's reformation, but
Queen Mary's Religion that will give content, put it to question, does the
Rebels in Ireland, the Papists in England; the Catholic Army in the North;
the popish in the South aim at and fight for Queen Elizabeth's Reformation? It
cannot but vex an ingenious man to think that men should be such fools, as
to be thus cheated. Secondly, It is the Kingdoms cause, the peace, the plenty;
the security of the Kingdom lies a bleeding, England hitherto the envy, is
like to be made the pity of Nations: we may read our dismal quality in
Irelands misery; instead of beauty we shall have baldness, and of garments a
rent; farewell the bleating of sheep the lowing of Oxen, the Calves of our
stall; and the herds of our flocks; instead of our music shall ring in our
ears the pitiful cries of dearest wives, with wringing hands and running
eyes; dearest husbands, bread bread, can pitiful mothers endure the cries of
tender babes, with blubbered cheeks, and bl^ared eyes, mother, mother, br^ad,
bread, what a harsh and unusual discourse will this be amongst our delicate
women; Let us eat your child to day; and you shall have mine to morrow: how
will all faces gather blackness and all hearts sadness, when death climes up
at our windows, and there is nothing but lamentations in the houses, and cri^s
in the street; when our young men shall fall, and our old m^n ^aint, and no man
knows how long? do we not see many from Ireland whose clothing was lately
rich and food delicious now clothd in rags, glad of your crusts, and thankful
for your old shoes? does not the same blood of the Irish Rebellion run in the
veins of distracted England, and has it not wrought the same bloody effects
up and down throughout the Kingdom? what dismal groanings of murdered men
screiching women and crying children will fill our ears in every house? in a
word; did we know the effects of War we would study Peace pray for peace,
petition for peace; and if we could not prevail, we would give out our selves
to all that we have to fight for our peace against thereof, that some sudden
end might be put to the War.

Thirdly consider the example of our Adversaries how do they join together as
one man against us: who would have thought such a war so expensive should be
carried on in Ireland and now in England by voluntary contributions amongst the
Papists as we see it is shall the Pope have greater interest in Papists, ^han
Christ in Christians? shall he call for the assistance of Papists and they
run, and ride, travel beyond Seas* fly into Holland, France G^r^an* Denmark,
every where for help? and shall we do nothing? do Papists forget all their
interests in wives children Countries dwellings Estates gather into Armies,
venture their lives for the Pop^? and shall Christ call for help, and shall we
sit still? has the Pope done more for Papists than Christ for Christians? has
the Pope shed his blood for them? suffered wrath for them? adopted them unto
God plucked them out of the snares of death? has not Christ don all this for
us? has the power of the Masse-Booke prevailed more with Papists in the cause
of their Lord God the Pope; then the Bible with Christians to do for their
Lord Jesus Christ? can the Pope protect in Battles, succeed Battles, prosper
battles like unto Christ? can the Pope, reward our labors, make up breaches
repay, losses, look to widows and fatherthelesse, crown with Glory like
Jesus Christ? let us be ashamed of our pretended Christianity, if Christ's cause
has in us no greater efficacy: In short, let us take what speedy course we can
to redeem all or we loose all; pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and the ruin
of Babylon; study the peace of Jerusalem and the ruin of Babylon, fight for
the peace of Jerusalem and the ruin of Babylon, Christ and his Gospel,
Religion, Laws, Liberties, Estates, Trades, Wives, Children, all
accommodations of soul and body, calls and cries, begs and entreats, if we
have any bowels of love and compassion, we would not give back but now give out
our help, and think upon some sudden, certain, continued course by some
general asistant, that the burden being put upon many shoulders, every man
might bear with ease and delight; whereby we may both prosecute and purchase
our peace peace is our quarrel peace is our prayer, let peace be our study
and endeavors, and Peace shall be our reward.

FJNJS.

