A CONGRATULATOYR POEM, ON Prince Rupert.
MOunted on Fancies towering Plums I fly,
Up to the Middle Region of the Sky;
Where hovering long, the Cause I fought to know,
Of sundry Meteors, fluttering then below.
I saw Vapors ascend like gentle Dews,
And down again in poudrous Clouds diffuse;
(...) too, that did with mortals play,
And laugh to see sum led by Light astray;
When suddenly a Thunder piere'd my Ear,
That made me Natures Gasping Hour to fear,
With rising Mountains of black Sulphrous Smoke
That dimmed the Stars, and Sol himself might choke.
Straight round about I cast my troubled Eye,
And though near Heaven, from thence thought fit to fly,
So dismal still the Terror did appear,
I knew not where 'twas safe, nor what to fear;
Sometimes I thought the Giants that of old,
Attacked the ^^as, breaking their Prison hold,
Were flinging Mountains at the Head of Jove;
Whilst he as fast threw Thunderbolts above.
Nor was I much deceived, the Fable bate,
And truly we this Prodigy shall state,
The Ungrateful Dutch. by England's milder Prince,
Preserved from the Jaws of Ruin long since;
And from the Poor Destressea Slaves of Fate,
Still Pa^per'd up to High and Mighty State,
Their generous Patrons kindnesses requite,
With insolent usurping of his Right.
Right of the Narrow Seas, A precious Gem,
Fixed ever in the British Diadem,
To quell those Sons of Mud, our Jove had sent
RVPERT, in whom Nature all Wonders meant,
And that at's Birth she might her self out do,
Has drawn in one vast Soul the Powers of two.
On this Debate, the Squaarons of each Fleet
Prancing on Neptunes curled Billows meet,
English and Dutch their mutual Fates to dare,
Those led by Honor, these backed with Despair.
No Ceremonies now -- First Complement,
From Brazen Mouths with murtkering Breath is sent,
The Day they banish, but to uphold the Fight,
Their quick Broad sides do furnish them with Light.
Here drop a Mast, and there the Tattered Sails,
Become the sports of the Infranchiz'd Gales;
In breaks a Shot, and then they must take pain,
To Pump whole Seas into the Sea again.
Arms, Bowels, Legs. and gaftly Heads are spread
Throughout the Decks, all covered with the dead,
Till hurried Overboard at last they have
Some Ravenous Fish^s Belly for a Grave;
Whilst still great Guns for others loudly Roar,
And turn the Frothy Ocean into Gore;
Whose Liquorish taste a straggling whale had drew,
So near, that he the Smoking Ships could view,
Heard their fierce Bellowings, beheld the Fire,
Which from their Throats in flashes did aspire,
When Jealous grown, and frighted much to see
Leviatkan's more dreadful far than he;
He Ducks under a Wave, speeds to his Shoale,
And warns them all to keep near the North Pole.
Mean time the PRINCE, that durst all dangers meet,
By his Examples, banished Fear the Fleet;
At his bright Beams they all their Tapers Light,
And by His D^al set their Motions right,
Admiring still the Grandour of his mind,
Where matchless Valor with like Conduct's joined.
The Gallant SPRAGE in a resistless Rage,
The Fiercest Foes does for long time Engage,
And stood their Shots, when thickest they did fly,
Till Fate, conspiring with the Enemy,
Decrees his Doom amongst the trecherons Waves,
Whom he so often had trampled ore as Slaves.
But in what lofty-straines shall we admire,
That Worthy Son of a most Noble Sire,
Heroic OSSERY! Our Pen's too weak;
Pluck out thy golden Trumpet Fame and speak,
Speak his bright Name as far as Light can fly,
And make it lasting as Eternity.
Nor shall the Waves of black Oblivion Drown
Brave Monday's worth, but time his merits crown.
The Prizes took, that from the Indies came,
Shall yield us Spices to Embalm his Name.
The conquering Genious of our British Isles,
Comes generous-Souls! to welcome you with smiles.
Your own Deeds are your best Heralds, to tell
Th'admiring World, how much you do Excel;
Whilst we Lisp out your praise, or dully wonder.
Your Cannons speak it better far in Thunder.
PINIS.

