Congratulatory POEM TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir WILLIAM PRITCHARD, Lord Mayor
of the City of London.
IN that great Train which loudly does rehearse
Your just Encomiums in Lofty Verse;
Whose every Line the Lauriat does shake,
And of a Faculty a trade would make:
Amongst these my Lord, that for such treasures hope
Give your poor Scribler leave to Interlope:
Admit that Humble Muse, that never knew
To couple Verse, till now Inspired by you.
To say, my Lord, that you, if Fate should frown
Must be the Genius to Preserve this Town;
And none so fit to Bless the City Throne,
Except brave Loyal Moor, might still Reign on.
Had then, thou City Monarch! may thy Reign
With Peace and Plenty, all the Land maintain.
Observe how all along the Streets the Crowd
With Joyful Sounds, does Welcome in their Lord;
When o^ the Thames, how all along the Shore,
'Twas hard to say, who did express it more,
Or whether Men or Cannons that did Roar.
Caesar Himself and Royal York are come,
And all the Court, to bid you Welcome Home:
Your Pageants, Whisslers, and Oxilaries,
They come on Course, and your Artillery,
But Caesar came to Grace your Loyalty.
The Giddy Rabble that Illeterate Beast,
Who Factious Traitors had with fear possessed;
Convincing Time in spite of Whining Zeal,
Has shown the Blessing of a Commonweal;
That they are designs though never so Meekly dressed,
Was only Mutiny for Interest;
That Long-ear'd Rout, and their Achittophel,
That think it Sin to Live and not Rebel:
Those Pious Elders, that Jenaeva Rabble,
That hope, once more, to make old Paul's a Stable;
Or rather see her in her Ashes lie,
Then hear in Her the true Episcopie:
Besides, she is too Great, the Charge Profuse,
They could Convert her into better Use.
These, my good Lord, your Predecessor found,
To be the Incects Barren'd all the Ground;
And with that Sword which now is in your Hand,
He strove to Weed out from our Fertile Land:
But Old Achittophel, that Reverend Bard,
Whom Heaven intended Man and Nature Marred
With Treats, and something else, I dare not say,
I think 'twas Treason; bore a part away.
But he has set his House in Order now,
And is gone down in Order thereunto --
Assist you Powers, and tie the Damons up,
For should they find him they would cut the Rope:
He Is for their work on Earth, they understand,
And what can signify one Firebrand?
My Lord, I Blush at my Impertinence,
Yet thus far I dare plead my own Defense;
That did you know, the Man that Fate has spent
In Tragic Scenes, that little Fortune lent;
You would not have him praise the Instrument.
I wish your Lordship many Years of Bliss,
A Jubilee of Days, and all like this;
That each Propitious Star may be your Guide,
That Fair-ey'd Truth may never be denied;
That when you quit your trust, you will find a Brother,
To King, to Church, and State, just such another.
FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, near the Hospital-gate, in
West-Smithfield. 168^.


