CONOVVAY Taken by Storm, By Major General MITTON, With the assistauce of the
Archbishop of York.

with the Copies of several letters and papers sent up about the same.

and a list of those that are killed and taken prisoners, and of the Ordnance,
Arms, and Ammnnition taken in Conoway.

as also how all the Irish were bound back to back and thrown into the Sea.

These papers are examined, and Commanded to be printed and are published
according to Order of PARLIAMENT.

London printed by I. C. 1646.

A true Relation of the stormiug and taking the Town of Conoway in Northwales,
by Major General Mitton.
General Mitton, whose industry and ear to reduce the Northern countries to
their due obedience to King and Parliament, and to ease them of thofe present
burdens under which they lie, will admit no delay or remissness in a work of so
great and present concernment, being newly returned from his civil employment
in Shropshire in the discharge of the office of high Sheriff there, falls to
his military service with his wonted (...)erity and resolution, as one that had
long intermitted exercise, acts with more strengt hand celerity; so he to
redeem the time he had lost from the main employment, improves his work an
advantage of so short a espi^e by undertaking, and by the blessing and
assistance of that God who has crowned his foregoing endeavors with victory
and success, by completing a work of the greatest difficulcy and hazard, the
storming of Conoway, a Port Town, for its situation convenient for
transportation into Ireland, and therefore dangerous; and for its fortification
in the eye of man and repute of the enemy, invincible; did not God infatuate
the spirit, and cease upon the strength of the defendants, yet that God that
that will honor them that honor him, and who is a worker of good to his
servants, was pleased to cast in this to the heap of his former blessings of
victory and deliverance.

On Saturday being the 8. of this instant, General Mitton returning to his
military imploiment, at Conoway Castle, a Council of War to which was joined
the grand advice of Docter Williams sometimes Archbishop of York, where he
represents unto them his intentions concerning the surpisall of the Town of
Conoway, together with the former order for the managing of that service; it
was concluded by all to be feasible though full of doubt and hazard, and not to
be affected without much loss, yet they resolved to use their best skill and
endeavor to command the success and blessing so good, resolute, and approved
men of his own Horse and Foot were employed preparations of Grenades and
Ladders made ready, and after Provisions for the service and thus prosecuted
and affected.

Captain Simkis was appointed (...) give and continue an Alarm to the Town on
the North side, that while the enemy that were upon the Guard advancing
themselves to defend and secure that part of the Town, Major Eliot on the
South side, and Captain Camburs and Captain Gethin in too other places with
three select Companies of resolute men, might as they were ordered make their
advantage of that oppertunity, and to stop me in the places to which they were
directed on the Southside the Gun, himself to animate and encourage the
Soldiers more and to the walls where he was with the rest entertained with
watch, Grenades, Stones, and Bullet interchangeably mix, yet such was the
resolution and gallantry of the Sonldiers, that though some were knocked down
and crushed with Horses, others cast of the Ladders (which were 10. yards high,
and yet proved a yard and a half to short) that they renewed the action
drawing up over the author by the Army till a considerable Company were got
over, which being done, they fell into the Town surprised, the maine Guard
killed a Corpotall and a Gentleman there, wounded many, taken a Major, one
Captain Wine an old Cowdriver, 4. Lieutenants, 4. Ensigns, 22. Soldiers of
fortune, 50. Townsmen in army many perish who were commanded to be tied back
to back, Rich to be cast over board and sent by water to theit own Country,
there was one great Gun taken, 200. Arms, Ammunition, answerable, wine, Corn,
and victuals good store, and considerable good booty for the Soldiers, the
Guards being s(...) his Town sucured, and all things quiet, the General sent
this summons for the surrender of the Castle, viz.

SIR,
I Cannot but be sensible of the misery you have brought upon your Country, by
holding this Town and Castle from the obedience of the King and Parliament.

Now it has pleased God to give this town into our hands, I can do no less
then put you in mind, that your holding of the Castle can produce no other
probable effect then the effusion of Christian blood, and the ruin of your
Country, and by what authority you do it, I am ignorant, the King being come
into our quarters, and known made unto you, that he is not able to relieve you.
I cannot omit to tell you what a desperate condition you will bring your self
and estate if you persist in your way but few days, I do therefore summon you
to deliver the Castle into my hands for the fervice of the Pa^liament, and
expect your answer withtwo hours.

Conoway Aug. 9. 1646. Your servant, Tho, Mitton.


SIR,
I Received yours yesterday, and this day I send you mine: I wonder you should
tax me with bringing misery upon this Country, which my conscience tells me I
am free of, especially in doing my endeavor in holding it in obedience to his
Majesty.

Now you have gotten the Town, I expect no other Title from you then of the
Castle, which Title I will maintain with my life. For the effusion of Christian
blood, far be it from my heart, only I must seek to defend my self and
those that are with me. As for the ru^^e of the Country, let the blood of
those that lost it fall upon them that were the contriivers of it. I free you
and yours. And if you would know by what authority I hold this place, I have
formerly given you an answer. You writ that the King was in the Parliaments
quarters, I believe he was never further from them; and withal you believe he
has made it known unto me he is not able to relieve me: this point I doubt
very much. You after tell me I am in a desperate condition, I will bring my
self and estate in persisting in not veelding to your desires. I can be
nothing bettered unless you have an absolute power from the Parliament. As for
your summons, I shall hold this Castle as long as it pleases God, for his
Majesty; yet if you shall accept of such conditions as I shall propound, which
shall be honorable for us both, I will be content to treat with you only, and
rest,

Sir, Your servant, J. Owen.


SIR,
I Received yours, even now to omit your answers to all the perticulars of my
Summons which in time you shall find to be true, I come to your conclusion
which is you will treat with me only, if I will axcept of such
considerations, if you shall propound conditions you know are to come from me;
but if you have Propositions ready I shall receive them and return an answer
unto them, if they be not ready, if you please to come out I will speak with
you before I go, my time being very short, and this shall be a sure pass for
your safe return.

Your Servant, THOMAS MYTTON.


Sir John Owen replied he had no propositions ready but desired 3. days time
to consider and find them out, which was accordingly granted, and they were
expected on Wednesday the 12. of this instant, there is no doubt but they will
come to a sudden conclusion and agreement, and a good account will be given by
Genesis Mytton of the Castle.

FINIS.

