A REMONSTRANCE OF The sincere and zealous PROTESTATION OF ABIEZER COPPE,
Against the Blasphemous and Execrable OPINIONS recited in the ACT of Aug. 10.
1650.

The breach whereof, the Author has (through Mistake) been mis-suspected of,
when he has not been in the least guilty thereof, etc.

Or, Innocence (clouded with the name of Transgression) wrapped up in silence;
But now (a little) peeping forth from under the thick and black clouds of
Obloquie, Arising out of the sea of Malice in some, and out of Weakness,
Ignorance, and Mistake in others; who are by the Author much pitied, and dearly
beloved. And for their sakes primely, as also for the satisfaction of many, and
information of all, This ensuing Remonstrance, Vindication, and Attestation is
published,

Per me, ABIEZER COPPE, -- de Newgate. Jan. 3d 1650

Which is as a Preamble to a farther future Declaration of what he has been,
and now is; who has been so clothed with a cloud, that few have known him.

London, Printed by JAMES COTTREL. 1651.

Some said He is a good man; others said, Nay but he is mad, and has a devil.

He is a wine-bibber a glutton and a drunkard; a friend of publicans and
harlots.

But wisdom is justified of her children.


I Having patiently, cheerfully, and silently sustained ( All fl shly
interests, carnal Gospellers, and pretenders to Religion, with some secret
enemies (though seeming friends) to the State, combining together to incense
them against me, because I have faithfully and boldly declaimed against their
hypocrisy, pride, covetousness, self-seeking, and villainy, covered under the
cloak of fleshly holiness and Religion, etc.
through the malice, ignorance mistake, and blind zeal of Informers) a tedious
twelve-months imprisonment in the common Goals of Warwick, Coventry, and that
most infamous Goal of Newgate, Have been within these few days informed by my
dearest friend, That

The two Which were put out ^^lf a y^er after mine imprisonment.
Acts of May 10. and Aug. 9. 1650 were put out because of me; thereby secretly
intimating that I was guilty of the breach of them. Whereupon, (after my long,
and by many admired patience and silence) I thought good, not so much for mine
own sake, (for my pure innocence supports me, and lifts up my head above all
these things) but for the sakes of others,

To present

Resolving, by the help of the Omnipotent, Omnipresent JEHOVAH (whom I purely
worship in the spirit, having no confidence in the flesh) to enlarge my self
(when I enjoy my liberty) upon these things; and to all unprejudiced spirits
(and perhap^ to the silencing of them also) to give an account of my self, in
reference to those Various Dispensations past and present, that I have been and
am led into and through: as also, the removing of all stumbling blocks, the
clearing up of those mistakes, and the wiping away those aspersions, which
(through malice, weakness, ignorance, and mistake) have been cast upon me; who
have been so covered with a cloud, that not one amongst a thousand know me.

But for the present, I shall address my self to the Acts; and begin with that
of Aug. 9.

In the Preamble of this Act, the Parliament express their desires (by all GOOD
MEANS) to propagate the Gospel, etc. Which is the desire of my soul. And it is
always my fervent prayer to Him whose it is, That He the Prince of peace,
(whose burden is easy, and whose yoke is light; who rules in righteousness;
who judges not according to outward appearance, but judges righteous
judgment) that he would, by his own outstretched Arm, set it up. And I
resolve never to give mine eyes any rest, till I see it flourish: for it is my
Life.

They farther express [Prophaness and Wickedness, Superstition and Formality,
etc.]

The two former, my soul abhors, and I hate them with a perfect hatred; and
have, by Life and Conversation, by Doctrine and Example (for many years)
decried them; yea, even since I have been by all men (except those that knew
me) cried up (as my forerunner before me was by all sorts even of the most
religious and righteous men, except a handful that knew him) for the worst of
sinners, the vilest of persons; for a Blasphemer, a Devil, etc.

And as for Idolatry, Superstition, and Idolatrous Formality; Have any been
Boanerges upon this account? (I speak as a fool.) I have thundered more against
them then they all. And for my zeal herein, and against finer and subtiller
pieces of Formality, the coals were first kindled against me. And now the fire
is at the highest: whereat I laugh; having sweet union and communion with the
Father and the Son; living in that Kingdom wherein dwells righteouness and
peace; triumphing in joy unspeakable, and full of glory: sweet Peace and pure
Content being my continual repast. Neither do I repent,

That the Almighty (whose I am, and who will do with his own what he pleases)
Has set me (as formerly he has most of his holy Prophets and Servants) as
Isa. 8.18, 14, 15. Zech. 3.3, 8. [Men wondered at.] Their words wondered at,
their carriage wondered at, their actions wondered at, etc. * As was Hosea,
Hos. 1.2.
A SIGN and a WONDER. -- And -- as a stumbling stone, and ROCK of OFFENSE to
both the houses of Israel, etc.

But to proceed. etc. As (first) [The denial of the necessity of Civil and
Moral righteousness amongst men.]

If there are such a generation of men, they stand or fall to their own master.
As for me, I say concerning them, O my soul! come not thou into their secrets:
unto their assemblies, mine honor, be not thou united, Genesis 49.6.

This Opinion (in the presence of the All-seeing God, in whose presence I am,
and whom I serve) I utterly protest against. And in the same presence, I most
joyfully (to his praise) affirm, That that Golden Law, which is the Basis of
all Civil and Moral righteousness among men; (Viz. Whatsoever ye would that men
should do unto you, even so do you to them, etc.) is by the finger of God (in
indelible letters) written as a Law of Life in my heart.

And here I can boldly (as in reference to the grace of God) though in all
humility (as in reference to my self) challenge the whole world, and say, Whose
ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or to whom have I done any wrong?
Whom have I dealt unjustly with? where is ever a drop of blood that I have
shed? whom have I defrauded of a shoo-latchet or a thread? etc.

Herein do I make my boast of God all the day long, and in him do I triumph and
rejoice, though I am (to my joy also) numbered amongst Transgressors, and the
chiefest of them preferred before me; many of them being released, and At which
I envy not, etc. but take notice of, as do some hundreds also besides me.
set at liberty; and I (patiently and silently) lie by the walls, as having a
visage more marred then any man's, etc.

But I proceed, of God) protest against all those blasphemous Opinions or
Tenants recited in page 980, from the thirteenth line thereof, to the seven and
twentieth line of page 981.

And many, or most of them, I will particularly hint at;

As primely this. vainly, ignorantly, and blasphemously affirm my self, or any
other mere creature, to be very God: neither was this Tenent (or any of the
rest that follow) ever mine.

But this I have and do affirm, and shall still upon the house tops affirm, and
shall expire with this wholesome sound, and orthodoxal opinion That God Christ
is in the creature.

[ -- CHRIST IN YOU except you are reprobates, 1 Cor.] The contrary assertion,
is the Blaspemie of Blasphemies, etc.

Again, I disavow, disown, detest, and protest against that Opinion which
holds, That [ God dwells in the creature, and nowhere else, etc.] I live in
that sound and orthodox opinion of Omnipresencie; of which I can speak
feelingly knowingly powerfully: whereof I formerly (in the time of mine own
righteousness, which was Isai.
as menstruous rags; and in the time of my fleshly wisdom, which was 1 Cor.
enmity to God) spoke of formally, ignorantly, notionally (only) like a Parot
in a Cage.

And as for the Righteousness, Holiness of GOD, etc. I had rather be cut to
pieces then speak against it: for it is my Life. And whatever I have spoken
against Righteousness and Holiness, it has been against that righteousness of
Man, which is Isai.
as menstruous rags etc. and against that carnal mock-holiness: pseud-holiness
of man which is a cloak for all manner of Villainy; upon which the vengeance of
God is and has been poured forth etc.

And as for Uncleanness, profane Swearing, Drunkenness, Filthiness,
Brutishness, etc. I declaim against them, as unholy* etc.

As also, for Lying, Stealing, Cozening, and defrauding others, my soul abhors.

Further, I hold, declare, and maintain, that Murder, Adultery, Incest,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Sodomie, etc. are things sinful, shameful, wicked,
impious, and abominable, in any person, etc.

Or that Heaven and Happiness consists in the acting of these or such things;
and the rest, as they follow in page 981, are things that I disown, disavow,
and protest against.

I shall conclude with this Affirmation and Asseveration:

That there is Heaven, and Hell; Salvation, and Damnation. Heaven for all those
that repent of their sins, that cease to do evil, and learn to do well. Heaven,
for all them that are washed, purged, and cleansed, by the Spirit of our God.
Heaven, for all them that have Christ, the King of Glory, Eternal Majesty, in
them. And Hell, and Damnation, to all that touch the apple of his eye, that
oppose the Lords Anointed, and that do his Prophets any harm.

It was in my thoughts to have said something concerning the Act of May 10;
but, upon reading thereof, I see nothing in it but what is contained in that of
August; and therefore my labor is saved.

And I shall only add a word or two concerning Liberty and Community.

As for Liberty, I own none but the glorious liberty of the sons of God which I
and the whole creation groans after. And I do from my heart detest and protest
against all Sinful liberty, or that is destructive to soul or body.

And as for Community, I own none but that Apostolical, Saint-like Community
spoken of in the Scriptures. So far I either do or should own Community, that
if flesh of my flesh be ready to perish, I either will or should call nothing
that I have mine own: if I have bread, it shall or should be his; else all my
Religion is vain. I am for dealing bread to the hungry, for clothing the
naked, for the breaking of every yoke, for the letting of the oppressed go
free. I am or should be as my heavenly Father, who is kind to all, loving to
all, even to the ungodly, etc. Mat. 6. I can (through grace) pity those that
are objects of compassion, and out of my poverty and penury relieve those that
are in want. And if this be to be vile, -- etc.

Yet,

Ita testor, ABIEZER COPPE.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have only one word more, and for the present I have done.

There are several Pamphlets extant against a People called RANTERS; two
whereof bear this Inscription in their brazen foreheads, [Published by
Authority] else the malice and simplicity of the Pamphleter should have been
still laughed at only, and yet (upon another account) pitied by me.

For the present, I will only give -- to understand, That the Pamphlets are
scandalous, and bespattered with Lies and Forgeries, in setting me in the front
of such actions which I never did, which my soul abhors; such things which mine
eyes never beheld, such words which my tongue never spoke, and mine ears never
heard.

All like that false aspersion, -- Viz. that I was accompanied to Coventry with
two she-disciples, and that I lay with two women there at once. Which two
she-disciples were Captain Beak, and other Soldiers, who have hurried me from
Goal to Goal where I sing Hallelujahs to the righteous Judge, and lie in his
bosom, who is everlasting loving kindness. Amen.

HALLELUJAH.
FINIS.
printer's device (?)


