THE COPIES OF TWO PETITIONS From the Officers and Soldiers of Col. CHARLES
FLEETWOODS Regiment, concerning their several Grievances, One of them
presented to his Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax. The other to the Right
Honorable the Commons of England in Parliament assembled. Signed by the Chief
Officers present with the said Regiment.

William Coleman Major. Richard Sankie Captain. Steven White Captain: Robert
Stanard Lieutenant. William Ducke Cornet. William Williams Cornet.
With the Parliaments Answer touching their sending down Commissioners upon
Tuesday 24. of October. to consult with his Excellency for redressing the said
Grievances

LONDON Printed by JOHN CLOWES, 1648.

To his Excellency the Lord FAIRFAX.
The humble Petition of the Officers and Soldiers of Colonel Fleetwoods
Regiment.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners taking into their serious thoughts, the intolerable
burden which the Kingdom lies under by reason of free Quarter, the many sad
complaints which our ears are daily witnesses off, and the odium which hereby
reflects on your Excellency and the Army, something we are duly paid, because
the Country pays all that's demanded of them, and that we are neglective of our
duties in not discharging our quarters, as likewise considering the great
inconveniences that may ensue; both the Kingdom and the Soldiery being
impatient under this unsupportable expression. We could not longer delay to use
our endeavors for redress.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Excellency will be pleased to
cast your eye on this annexed petition, and after perusuall thereof, to
represent it for us to the Parliament in such manner as your Excellency shall
judge meet.

William Coleman Richard Sankie Steven White Will: Williams Will: Bucke To:
Stanard:


To the Right Honorable the Commons of England in Parliament Assembled.
The humble Petition of the Officers and Soldiers of Colonel Charles
Fleetwoods Regiment.
SHOWS,
THat your petitioners have even from the beginning of your sitting stood by
you, using their utmost abllity for you in the Kingdoms preservation, and when
they saw you could no longer subsist without Jeapording your lives, they did
thereto show much willingness, not making their own terms, but with all their
strength did endeavor the pulling down of your and the Kingdoms enemies, which
when they had through the goodness of God crowning their endeavors) done,
they did then expect some satisfaction for their services and former losses,
and a settlement of the Kingdom in their Birthrights and privileges, as the
purchase of so much Blood and Treasure, which, while they looked for contrary
to their expectation, they found a second Enemy let loose, not only on them,
but on you, seeking to involve the Nation in slavery and ruin, and then again
did your Petitioners (though formerly much discouraged and neglected) freely
adventuring, their lives in your defense, refusing no danger nor labor, nor in
your low Condition troubled you with clamorous Petitions, or requests though
they saw others game by running that uncivil course, but wholly betook
themselves to the work in hand, which they suddenly through Gods owning of
them, brought to an hopeful Issue, forsing those that rose up against you to
lie at their feet, though it was not gained without the loss of much blood,
and the lives of our dear and faithful friends, yet to their unspeakable
grief, even in this time they found themselves neglected, and not paid, having
received but one months pay since the 12. of May last, so that they are
constrained to lie upon free quarter, although much money has been collected
for them, which has begotten in the Kingdom an evil opinion of them, though
undescorned, your Petitioners therefore for pervention of this insupportable
burden of free quarter humbly pray,

1. That you will please to assign each Regiment of the Army, the particular
County out of which they are immediately to receive their pay, whereby not only
the great Fees to Treasurers at War, amounting to near Ten thousand pounds,
per Annum, besides what Committees, Clerks, and other attendants belonging to
them may be cut off, and your Petitioners freed from tedious attending, and
great expenses, as usually they are exposed to. But the Country by the
Soldiers receiving of constant pay, eased of this intolerable oppression of
free quarter.

2. That you will under the pay of our Arrears from the 5. of Jan. last,
according to your engagements to us out of the money already paid in for that
purpose, that so we may be enabled to cloth our selves, as the season of the
year requires, and repair our losses in the late troubles.

3. That some course may be taken for recruiting the Regiment with Horses,
having had none almost of three years, which we leave to your consideration,
And pray, etc.

Robert Stanard Will. Williams William Bucke Will: Coleman Rich: Sankie Steven
White.


Answer was returned by Mr. Scowen, Esquire and Chairman of the Committee of
the Army to this effect, viz. That the House had taken their Petition into
serious consideration. And for that purpose had thought upon a way to send down
Commissioners of their own to consult with his Excellency the Lord Genesis
Fairfax, whereby to take some speedy course for full satisfaction of their
desires in their said Petition.

FINIS

