THE VINDICATION OF The Law: So far forth as Scripture and right Reason may be
Judge, and speedy Justice (which exalts a Nation) may be advanced.

Wherein is declared what manner of persons Christian Magistrates, Judges, and
Lawyers ought to be.

By John Cook of Graies Inn, now chief Justice of the Province of Munster,
1652.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke, and are to be sold at his shop at
Graies Inn Gate, 1652.

The Vindication of the professors and profession of the Law, so far forth as
Scripture and right reason may be Judge and speedy Justice, (which exalts a
Nation) may be advanced.
EVery Anonimous impression though nothing but truth should be published
(specially in a divided Kingdom, where truth usually gets as many Enemies as
Friends) is in my opinion a breach of the Peace, as tending directly to make
divisions, and breed quarrels by exposing every man to unjust censures; for
that Child which has no legal Father, is every man's Child in vulgar
reputation, Qui non habet patrem populus est illi p^tor.
then differences in Judgment unhappily through the pride of man's nature
generate disaffections: my self having been brow-beaten as conceived to have
a hand in some impressions whereas I had not a finger in any print, since these
(commonly called) unhappy times, and I confess in many respects so they are,
though for my own particular, I look upon them as the most glorious times
that ever were since the Apostles, because I doubt not but Antichrist, and all
the Enemies of Jesus Christ shall be utterly destroyed, and He set upon the
Throne which God grant.

He that thinks he writes a truth, why should he be ashamed to own it? let
him in the name of God stand boldly to it, for great is the truth both divine
and moral, and it shall prevail every Christian is bound to free that which
makes him Free, And when the issue is legitimate, no man denies to be called
Father, but every nameles Pamphlet (...).
condemns it self, and makes both the Author and Printer guilty of a
conspiracy against the Kingdom, for which I conceive they may be indicted, and
bound to their good behavior, which if it be cross grained to his opinion who
is author of a treatise concerning the liberty of the Press, who is certainly
a most ingenious and rational Gent. at least we agree in the root as Brethren.

The motive inducing me hereunto is, that I find a general aspersion, cast
upon our profession, which we ought in honor to vindicate, for the difference
will stand thus: when a particular person is abused, many times it may be the
most Christian prudence to neglect a Calumny and let it die, as the rule is
Multa non ^onfirmantur tacendo, Sed despiciuntur non ^efellendo.
many things are rather despised then confirmed by Silence. But when Courts,
profess^ons, or trades are traduced, then in such a case an Answer must be
given, as obliquely concerning the whole Kingdom, it reflecting upon the
wisdom of the Supreme power to suffer general abuses, and Silence may be
interpreted to be a consent according to the common rule Qui tacet con^entire
vid^tur.
Silence gives consent, which how ever learned Dodridg qualifies with this
restriction when it is for the benefit of him that is silent, Q^ando loquitur
pro ejus Commado tacens habetur pro ^onsentiente in materia honorabili ^no
vitupe rabili.
As that of the Jews to our Savior, ohn 8.48.
Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, and have a Devil, Jesus Answered
and said, I have no D^vill, implying himself to be the good Samaritan
mentioned by St. Luke 10.33
Luke. Yet upon the reason of our Law, if a man shall be called Rogue or
Thief to his face and hold his peace this may be some evidence against him, if
he be afterward questioned and affronted in the same kind, therefore this
being sold it Westminster Hall so as notice must needs be taken of it; And
considering that many of my worthy Brethren are in the Country, and many
otherwise employed, And when many are concerned in a matter, it is usually put
off from one to another, and nothing don in it, I resolved therefore to say
something against it, something for it, something about it, something besides
it.

The Advertiser begines with a Roman spirit, and I must embrace truth
wheresoever I meet it, The Roman Barons indeed being ambitious of the Senate
and chiefest Offices which were conferred by popular election, knowing it to
be the only way to ingratiate themselves with the people to get many
suffrages studied the Law and Physic and pleaded causes without Fee,
studying, as the Cardinal did with a Net till he had caught the Fish, or as it
were fishing with a Gudgin to catch a Pike, and so they had Which occasioned
that mistake in some Historians that there were no Physicians in Room for 500
years.
Physicians without Fee. As poor men with us are in all Courts admitted both
to sue and defend, Gratis in forma pauperis, which might be a sufficient
answer to that Roman instance, But why should the taking of Fees be counted
dishonorable, which is not a Non mercenarium sed honorarium
mercenary wages, but an honorary requital, which may be taken but not
required, though I believe many pay a very va^uable and meritorious
consideration for what they receave, so many Per ambulatione facienda.
walks taken to Westminster, and such attendances there that a Porter would
scarce take the pains for 5 s. that if some have too much, others have too
little, I confess it were a glorious thing rather to be Optandum non
expectandum.
wished then as yet to be hoped for, that Ministers, Co^nsellors and
Physicians being of such noble professions, would exact nothing if they had
otherwise sufficient, Ne videantur id vendere quod estimari nequeat.
least they should seem to sell that which is invaluable, every man ought to
give his Clyent Bonum and fidele Consilium.
good and faithful Council which is inestimable for though the pains may,
yet the fidelity cannot be required, I have known a word put in by an eminent
practiser advantage his Client 1000 l. in the way of truth, yet in that case he
must be content with a moderate Fee, and the further requital must be in other
Coin by a thankful recognition, or by helping him to other Clients, He that
lends me a Horse which proves so swift of foot that I escape from the enemy,
though I pay the horse hire, I am still engaged to the owner, if by Gods
blessing upon the Physicians means a man recover of a dangerous sickness,
health is a Jewel and invaluable, and if not the gift of the Holy Ghost, much
less can the spirit it self be purchased; But yet some encouragement there
must be as a spur to Learning, and what disparagment is it that a Horse will
not go without a spur? And in such ^ase the Protestants beyond Sea; and the
best Politicians have allowed certainties as much as may be, as being the
mother of quietness, and that which prevents adulation and emulation.

It is conceived by many, that it is maintenance, and consequently punishable
to speak unassigned without a Fee, and that a Lawyer may not speak in his
own cause, which are certainly errors, for it may be I may know the Client to
be poor, and it is Charity to assist him which cannot help himself, Quilibet
potest renunciare juri pro se intr^ducto.
besides it is a rule in Law, that every man may renounce his own benef t, And
that a man should not speak for himself is against the Law of nature, Speech
and Reason being given to man to glorify God and vindicate his own
innocence, therefore what ever politic considerations may be Counterpleaded
(as indeed our Law in many things is rather Politic then moral) as that if
one may speak then all, and so confusion at the Bar, and that men will speak
too passionately in their own cases, yet these being the indispensable Laws of
Nature and Charity, over which there is no humane power, if the Law be so it
ought to be altered, as it is resolved in the Earl of Leicesters Case,
^lowd^ns ^oument.
that an Act of Parliament against the Law of God and nature is void, but this
must be cautiously understood, that I speak not of secondary and less
principal Laws of nature; which are not obvious to vulgar understandings, I
confess the Law is a great enemy to maintenance and imbraceary as being
incendiaries giving fuel to all suites like that Pirracorax a Cornish Chough
which carries firestickes from ground (where fire is made to make it fruitful)
to thatcht houses and indangers all men.

But to give council without a Fee must rather be a means to end Contentions,
and I know no reason why I may not assist an english man as well as a stranger
in Case of the Alien of Burgundy but to sell debts and maintain one another In
all cases promiscuously, 15 H, 7. 2.
is a different case, and insufferable. In the next Declamation against Lawyers
there is an error at first, which like a thread misplaced runs awry through the
whole piece, for though every g^neration of men be subject to corruption, yet
to speak properly, the Council cannot be corrupted, or bribed, possibly the
judge may, therefore to say that Lawyers were never in that height of corruption
as now they are, this clause rather savoring of ignorance then malice; in
strictnes requires no other answer; But because custom is the Mistress that
makes words significant rather as they are commonly taken, then by the
Etimologie, (though herein the ingenious Candor of the Law be very observable,
that in ambiguous expression which admit of a double interpretation, the Law
rather strives to heal then to hurt, as when one says of another he has
stolen his Apples, because it is indifferent whether they were growing and so
part of his Freehold which cannot be stolen, or gathered the words are not
Actionable) therefore I take the charge as it is intended, or as the words
import in common parlance I hold that to seek for Clients is as preposterous
as for a woman to go a woing, or a Physician to seek for Patients, indeed one
of our Historians says that Sergeants had their stations in Paul's, certain
afternoones in Term time, and every one kept his Pillar, which is either a
Cripticall and dark authority, or for ought I know to the contrary might be
meant by Searjeants of the Mace, peeping after debtors, but however it were
that was time immemoriall, above the memory of any man lately living, And I
cannot believe that Lawyers, for the generality had need to make such diligent
scrutiny to find out Clients, for since Edw. the 3d time (who much honored the
profession as the Merchants grew rich so suites multiplied, for ill humors will
breed in a replete body) the Law has ever since in times of peace much
flourished; but that pride should be objected against us, I marvel more and
must needs say that a proud Lawyer is an unseemly thing, but then that which is
pride, in such a one as my self who lie at Anchor, and bear no sale is
peradventure but keeping distance in a great practiser.

Truly Courtesy and Humility in all, specially in a Lawyer, Minister, and
Physician is like a rich Chain about the neck of a Nobleman, the best ornament
in his Chamber, though many rigid harsh men have gotten by the Law abundantly.
I have thought sometimes that for such a man to hope for Clients, is as if a
man should go to catch birds with a Drum, so caption, in receaving
instructions, and unaccostable, certainly courtesy is the most precious Pearl
that any man in authority can wear, for it buyeth men's hearts, and the
greatest man in being courteous to his inferior looses no more then the sun
does in comparting his glorious beams, I have often thought that a stiff
starched proud carriage is not only a sign of an adulterate Gentry, but a
breach of the sixth Commandment, our good Joseph's will not forget their poor
brethren in their highest prosperity, much more reason has a Lawer to be
courteous who receives a Fee from his Client.

Concerning the largnesse of Fees, I think it a misprision, or else such a
rarity, that there is little danger it should be drawn into example, Fees
being reduced to a convenient certainty, yet if any man will give 10 l. for a
watch that may have one as serviceable for 50 s. who shall blame him? when I
receave my Fee, I reckon that until I have done that which the Client expects,
I am but his pursbearer, for there is a tacit Contract between the Council and
Client, that such business shall be done as a consideration for the Fee,
which in equity alters the property of the money, for when a Client brings 10
s. of his, it cannot become, not his, but by his consent or forfeiture;
therefore if the Lawyer do not his endeavor to satisfy his Clients expectation
(though in personal things, Quod meum est sine consensu aut defectu meo
alienari non potest.
the Legal property follows the possession) yet the Evangelicall right is in
the Client, for though we say give him his Fee, yet neither does the Lawyer
take it as a gift, nor the Client so bestow it, But he which makes his Clients
cause his own, and lays it to heart as if it were really his own case, And
the matter succeeds well; may comfortably take what the Client will freely
give, but with this proviso (for so is my opinion for the present which I
submit to my worthy masters, waiting for more light if it be an error in
politiques) that I would not have any man take a Fee from him that cannot spare
it, I do not say that a man should not take his Fee unless he were in more
need of it then the Client, for then rich Lawyers should have very few
Clients,) but whereas none are admitted as paupers if worth 5 l. I could wish
it might rather be unless they were worth 500 l. for can he that has a
family to maintain and not worth 100 l. afford to give Fees as they are
generally taken, if 20 l. be due from a contentious rich man to a poor man
that is not worth 20. Anglia familia plernmque ex Septem Gallica, ex Se^
consistit.
l. besides, and has six or seven in family, for this man to Commence a suit
against his potent adversary. Is for a Lamb to contend with a Lion, And if it
be feared that Men would be too Clamorous and never in quiet, it is easily
Answered, that unless there be probable Cause of Suit, let him be punished
for a false Clamor. I know several persons that have just debts owing them,
some by Statutes, judgments, and other security, which are not able to pay
Officers Fees to recover them, yet in great want, though peradventure worth in
Householdstuffe above five pounds, yet never the nearer; for an extant upon a
Bond of 200. li. will cost 7. li. 10. s. to the Sheriff to serve it, truly it
is greatly to be wished that there might for the present be some new mixed
Court erected for the out Parishes and Suburbs that poor men might recover
their just debts, and have justice for the expense of five shillings at the
most, for what a sad thing is it that a poor man cannot sue for his wages, for
a matter of 20. Ne alter alteri Cedat.
s. but it will cost him forty in the getting of it. But if wealthy men list
to be litigious, and will contend least one should yield to the other, no man
of competent understanding will blame us for taking our Fees, but with this
caution (for truly I must add one grain of Salt for weight and relish,) The
Client I look upon as a sick man, distempered, passionate, wilful, and
extremely in love with his own cause what ever it be, and many times the best
advice to a resolute Client, is but as a good lesson set to a lute out of tune
for affections praeingaged draw away the judgment. Now the Councellor in the
least measure ought not to feed the Corrupt, and Peccant humor, for that is
not to act the honest Lawyer, but the flattering Courtier, who steeres his
advise by the Star of his Princes inclination, as our adversary Satan works
upon our fancies, and the wind makes the waters rage, nor is it enough to tell
the Client faintly, that he doubts his Cause, but will do the best he can, As
the German Host in Erasmus, aliud quaeras diversorium.
but to deal freely with him, Sir; thus I would do if it were my own case,
if you will not follow my advice, go to another, you are in a Fever, and must
not eat and drink after your own appetite I assure you thereis great
difference between one Councellor and another therefore the precious ought to
be distinguished from others, the Shepherd and the Butcher look upon the
Mutton with a different eye, the one to do him good, the other to eat him, the
Client retains too Council, the one cares not for the cause further then he may
gain by it, how ever it succeeds he deserves little in Conscience; the other
desires the Client may have his right, and what is given him freely he accepts
contentedly, but to speak truth, many times the Clients deserve the blame, and
not we, for they conceal the worst of their cause, and so for want of a true
confession as the Priest says, the absolution is worth nothing, for proof
being the Chariot which carries the Judge to give sentence, how can the
Council tell what the success of a difference will be; which Answers a
common Cavil, that Lawyers will be of any side, and there is but one side
true, the truth lies many times in such a deep well, Vix est contenta doceri.
that every Lawyer has not a Bucket to draw, Titles of Law are very difficult
perplexed, knotty cases which will hardly be made plain, the Judge has one
ear for the plaintiff, another for the Defendant, but the Council has both
ears for his Client, yet so as if he can discover the injustice of his Clients
Cause, (and many times light may be seen at a little hole) I am persuaded many
of our great practisers will not maintain him in it, Deceptio visus.
for truly to speak well in a bad cause is but to go to Hell with a little
better grace without repentance, it is but a kind of juggling by an over
curious flourish to make a shadow seem a substance, if any of my profession
think they may for their Fee maintain a side which they think is dishonest
(because in dark times of Popery such opinions have been held and
distinctions invented, that if a man have right to Lands and mistake his Action
in such case a man may with a good conscience be of Counsel with the
Defendant, though he know his Client have no right to the estate, (such popish
evasions are abominable amongst Christians,) I would fain but ask them some
such questions; whether the least evil may be done to procure the greatest
good? and whether every particular calling must not yield to the General of
Christianity? and whether a Christian may do any thing against the truth or
must do every thing for the truth? and whether to be willingly isntrumental
to condemn the innocent, and to justify the wicked, be not both an abomination
to the Lord? and whether he can Answer it at the Bar of Heaven, Cadere in
causa.
that many a poor man should be undone and want food and raiment, because he
found out some formality of Law or defect in the proceedings, yet persuaded in
his Conscience that the poor man had right to the thing in question; If any
man practice upon such principalls, I had rather be tongue tied or not know how
to write my name. Rather be the Hall sweeper and should die with more comfort,
but enough, I doubt not but good men will hear reason from their inferiors,
Labor intu^ erit.
now the Client must be admonished who will bring himself into a laborinth do
we what we can.

Many have left their writings with me, and upon the perusal I have advised
them not to imbarque in suits, how discontentedly have they gone away with
Gouty hands as if I had been their professed Enemy? but speak pleasing words,
tell them their cause is good, have honey in your mouth, and then money in the
hand, another great fault in the Client is, Placentia.
that he will seldom take advice in the beginning, but the Bill, Articles, and
Indentures, are drawn by some illiterate pretender to the Law, who has one
formilarie for all bargains, one Saddle for all Horses, Expectata di^ seges
all^sit avenis:
so many impertinent words that they engender strife, some Covenants so Prolix
that a man can scatcely see the fruit for the leaves, and the error being
discovered, the Client posts to Council, with an oh Sir, if you, can but cure
such a mistake, how thankful shall I be unto you but the foundation being
sandy, all falls to the ground, and hope deferred makes the heart sad, I speak
not against learned Presidents.
that I have often thought that for every contract put in writing concerning
the value of 10. l. (and truly I would not have any man question another for
above 10. l. unless he have something to show for it in writing, Melior est
justitia perveniens quam puniens.
which would prevent much perjury and subornation) if the parties contracting
would advice with Council, to express their intentions according to Law, this
would prevent numerous litigation^, and preventing Justice is better then
punishing, because there is no offense committed so that I profess the Client
might purchase his quiet at a far easier rate, then he does, were it not
many times for his own perverseness, but in all professions and relations
there must be some grains of allowance. Now I come to Answer that hearing a
Charge, that it is not an unusual thing (therefore argumentatinely a usual
thing) for a Lawyer to prevaricate, and Confederate with the adverse party,
this is a pure libell without mixture or blemish, I dare say that all of us do
as much in our Judgments and practices, abhor all manner of Treachery as our
bodies do in nature loath and detest poison, the purest fountain is not more
free from mud, then the generality of our profession from perfidiousnes. It is
in Accusations many times as it is in griefs, L^^vs dolores etc. Sene^^.
great griefs are silent, when less are eloquent, this is a strange
Giant-like report, so far above the measure and stature of truth, that I want
words to give it any other answer, H. the 6. being once struck, admiring how
any man durst offer to strike him, said, you wrong your self to strike the
Lords anointed, but I believe you did it not out of any ill will to me, but to
gain applause, It shall be a Royal spirit to Condonate Anonimous, whom for my
particular I look upon as some Malecontented Client that lost his wool in the
Briars, through the injustice of his Cause or having bin abused by some silly
fellow whom he too much trusted, railes upon the Lawyers, it being natural to
the Conquered to appeal to the people, Victi ^est provocare ad populum.
and therefore as Lewis the 11. that great tax-Master said we must give
loosers leave to speak, so say I: but I hope there are few (if any) practisers
now that prolong Causes to enrich themselves, for that is to ad affliction to
the afflicted, He that does so, builds upon the ruins and miseries of his
Brother, that Physician or Chyrurgion which shall keep the wound raw, and
torture the Patient to multiply his Fees, feeds upon raw flesh, And that
Soldier which shall prolong the Wars to continue his pay lives upon the
blood of poor Souls all which are hard meat, and must be vomited up again by
faith in the blood of Jesus Christ, Pro. 20, 17
or else it is no hard matter to determine how sad the issue will undoubtedly
be, for sweet is the bread of deceit, but his mouth is filled with gravel, but
I must hedge my way least strange questions should enter, we are called
necessary evils, truly to speak properly no evil is necessary, because in
respect of us it might have otherwise been, not having a necessary Cause but
defective, but it seems he means that there is no more necessity of Lawyers
in a Kingdom, then there is of Women who have been called necessary evils,
for my own part; I love not to fish in troubled waters, much less Nero like
to inflame others to warm my self, I heartily wish that therewere no need of
us, further then to settle Estates, and advise in difficult Law matters, for
which there will be use of Lawyers so long as the world continues, for any
thing I can as yet rationally imagine to the contrary: but that many Lawyers
should be an evident demonstration of a decrepit Common wealth, is an ignorance
in Politiques, for it is rather an argument of a flourishing Kingdom, for
wealth increasing, suites will arise; though I confess it is rather a
dishonor to any state to have multiplicity of causeless contentions, and it
is much to be wished that there were neither need of Lawyer, Physician, or
Soldier, in the Kingdom, for if the King would discharge his trust, and every
man deal honestly and no sickness, nor distempers, what Halcion days should
we enjoy: But when will there be a perpetual spring? for as our bodies by
reason of the continual expense of spirits have need of the Physician who is
therefore to be honored, so offenses will be given, and differences be daily
emergent, because right reason does not always manage the will, and
consequently Lawyers as necessary in a Kingdom. But Anonimous is angry because
Lawyers grow Grandees in state, De legibus Anglia
as if it were a fault for him that wins the race to wear the garland,
Fortescue observes it as a special benediction, upon Judges and great
practisers, that their Children prosper in the world, for the Generations of
the righteous shall be blessed,, and Sir Edward Coke (the Phoebus and Lipsius
of our age whom I the rather mention, because we are all beholding unto him,
for having dispelled many mists of error, otherwise a Cloud in many Cases had
dimmed out eye sights) observes that Lawyers have bin the founders of many of
our eminent families. And is it not as honorable to get an estate honestly as
to keep it? neither virtue nor vice is properly hereditary, what disparagment
was it to Abraham that his Father was an Idolater in Vrre of the Culdees? and
as little honor to cursed Cham to be the Son of noble Noah, but they who have
bin an honor to the Law, why should they not be honored by the Law? this I
observe as an argument of humility of the reverend Judges and Masters of the
robe, which have no title of honor as Judges or Sergeants, no more then an
Alderman has as he is a Citizen, whereas the Civilians beyond Sea, give
themselves what titles they please, and if they say the Law is so, who can
gainsay it? It had bin an easy matter for the Judges of our Law to have
adjudged themselves honorable, Additionall Titles and degrees being matters
within the verge of their own Commission and jurisdiction, and not matter of
heraldry, but if the King who has ever been accounted the supreme fountain
of honor, shall confer honor upon them, why should this be said an
honoring of the whore? I look upon humility as an Usher of honor, and hope
that every Judge shall at the least hold by Barony, the place and office being
full of state and Majesty, for if the habit of a Judge be vocal and strikes a
terror into the wicked, and incourages the welldoers (as the Seargeants party
colored Robes Argue their abundance and variety of learning,) how much more a
title of Lordship and why should not this be virgin honor? I dare say no
profession has more hated the whore then this of the Law, have they not in
Aegiptian times made a head and opposed Antichristian Courts; did not Mr.
Green of Lincolnes-Inne suffer Martiredome for it, in Queen Mary's days. And
with what Christian Courage did our worthy and learned Brethren Mr. Sherfield,
and Mr. Pryn oppose the superstitious and Court vanities and the pride of the
Bishops, the latter resisting unto blood never to be forgotten, and standing
valiantly for our Laws by which we enjoy all that we have, But Anonimous is
angry that many have got such great estates 10. or 12000. li. per Annum, the
matter of fact I shall not dispute it, Faelix est cujus prosperitas est calcar
pietati argentum bonum est non unde sis bonus sed facias bonum.
great estates lawfully acquired do not exclude any man from happiness, only
make the way more craggy, for riches in our Saviors time were like Thorns,
and I think they are much of the same nature, I confess I doubt our great
practisers find one maine inconvenience, that they have scarce time enough to
keep grace alive in the Soul by prayer, meditation and holy Conference,
Spiritual Zeal (which is the seal of the Spirit) being often quenched (if
not lost) in the throng and Crowd of overmuch temporal employments, which made
them heretofore give advise upon the Lords day, a bad Custom, for shall we take
Fees on that day when Manna was not to be gathered upon the Sabbath? Every
student of the Law has great need to be a practiser of Divinity, much wisdom
being required to walk in high places, As heavenly Doctor Sibb^ would often
say unto me, study the Law, but practice Divinity, he that advises or studies
before himself has been a Client at the Throne of Grace, It is not study but
a studious vanity; Botero and Paruta two Italian Politicians to abate the edge
of Avarice, Non est studium sed studiosa vanitas. Optima lex vetat peccatum,
finding how infinitely and immeasurably the Advocates and Merchants were
addicted, to filthy lucre, propounded a Law, That no man should get above
20000. l. by his profession or occupation, which being acquired, he should
either desist and give way to others or continue it for the public good,
whereby no man should ever be guilty of Coveting more, because he might not
keep it, I confess it is a very sad consideration to see how most men abuse
their Callings, the end wh^reof is to serve God by serving men, he that
imployes his talent only to get honors profits and pleasures, profanes his
calling, living to another end then God has appointed him, It Is true every man
must labor in his calling to maintain his Family, but that is not the maine
scope and end of our lives the true end of life is to do service to God in
serving men in our several stations, And for a recompense of this service God
blesses men's honest travailes, and allows them to take moderately for their
labors according to the judgment of godly men, but I see it is a very hard
thing to find a man that labors in his call ing in love to Gods glory and his
brethrens good; Therefore a Writ which we have in Law will lie against many men
another day, Contra formam ^^llationis. N. B. Accipe dum delet.
but I know no calling makes more for the happy state of the kingdom then the
Law, and I am confident no profession so generous as ours in matter of
recompense, the Minister wilb^ at a certainty for his Tithes, and the Physician
will take whilst it aches, (though I would entreat our honest Doctors to
consider that for a poor sick man to give 10. s. for a Visit may be more
grievous to him then the disease it self, I honor many of them for their
worth and sweetness.
) you cannot take what and where you list upon credit, only you come into our
studies, put your Case, leave your writings, come as often as you please and if
you leave nothing we scorn to ask you, whereas beyond Sea you cannot peep
into an Advocates study but he cries give, give, and if the Cause go for his
Client then he has his Palmary Fee, Feodum Parl^^^rium.
in token of Victory, which I could wish were in use with us, for he that
gains the cause may better afford to give 40. s. then the looser 10. s.

Concerning our pleadings, This I say, that truth is the virtue of pleading,
and certainety is the beauty and grace of p^eading, and I know no difference
between putting a Case and pleading it, but as Logic and Rhetoric the
samething mere largely expressed, yet I must agree that our pleadings are
something difficult and hazardous, Palma pro pugn^.
and therefore may it be called a Case at Common Law, for the casualty of the
success, Casus a Casu.
but a cause in Chancery, for the cleerenesse of the matter, Civilians
challenge us for not admitting doub^e pleas, saying we force a man to fight,
and tie one hand behind him, as if an Infant Seal an obligation by dures, he
cannot take advantage both of Infancy and dutes, by reason of duplicity, least
the Jury should be too much encumbered, which if the most intelligent
Freeholders were always impanelled might peradventure satisfy that scruple
when Knights and Esquiors and the most Intelligent Gentlemen were Jurors the
Kingdom was happy in this manner of trial, I wish it were reduced to the
primitive practice, or that every County might elect substantial Jurors who in
reason ought to have a competent allowance for their pains to serve annually
for all matters, As in Alderman Langham and Collonell Waltons cases
for though our Reverend Judges do their best (leading the Jury by the eye,
and not by the Noses, giving them all possible light in doubtful matters,) yet
it is commonly reported that very strong Verdicts have past: And for our
Colors in Writts of Assize and trespass and plurality of Essoines in real
actions which are well remedied by trials in Ejectments yet remain difficult
for the Client, where entryes are not congeable. And some complain that our
proceedings are not in our Mother tongue, a politic Law left to the wisdom
of Parliament, as the Laws of France were in Latin until the time of Francis
the first, who for a sum of money cons^nted to have them written pleaded, and
all the proceedings in their own language; and that the subject should choose
his own Counsel, till which none had Advocates but by the Kings leave, Per
conge du Roy. Iurisconsultus potius respicit scripta, patronis verba ad barram,
jurisprudens rem. Aucupes syllabarum and togatos vultures qui canina facundia
callide exercent causas qui carebat sillaba perdid t patrimonium As one man
cannot have his right because the judgment is entered concessum and consideratum
est, another because consideratum or some other word is not rightly spelled
Isay 29, 21. Obvnum punctum perdit Martinus asellum.
There were in Rome, Some Jurisconsulti inferior to the Patron, Advocates,
which only studied a Cabalasticall unknown formulary of words, in notes, and
Cifers, which would pick a quarrel in every pleading brought unto them.
Cicero called them hunters for sillables, worse than those that will make a man
an Offender for a word, that would make a man loose his inheritance for want of
a So, or a, thereof as Martin that laid his Ass was white lost the wager
because his Advocate found one black hair in it, which being found brambes
and enemies to State policy were stubd up and removed, yet not long since
Amedens the good Duke of Savoy, hearing complaints made against an Advocate,
that was a great rub in the Alley of Justice, sent for him and told him that
he owed his Baker 1000. Crowns, but was not willing to pay him till needs
must, asking him how long he could delay it before Execution should issue
against the Dukes estate, the Advocate told him that he could certainly delay
him, at the least three years, And if his Council were not extraordinary
subtle, he should get nothing at the last, what says the Duke is this
sufferable? do not I acknowledge the debt to be just? whereupon he caused him
(how justly I determine not) to be executed and excoriated, but the stream of
our Law runs in a purer Channel.

It has been the great wisdom of several Parliaments, to remedy defects in
pleadings, and I doubt not but in its due time it will be taken into mature
consideration, to ripen causes for speedy trial, it being quick Justice cures
the lingering comsumption of a State.

I doubt not but England shall flourish with Religion, and Justice; these two
noble Virgins, shall be set upon the Throne hand in hand in perpetual
Concord, I cannot but observe the neerenesse between Westminster Hall and the
Abbey, and this godly exercise every morning (a Sermon calculated directly for
Lawyers and Clients) speaks out that Piety and Justice (Maugre all
Antichristan opposition shall be married together with an indissoluble
conjunction, but precipitions and rash justice must carefully be avoided as a
dangerous pest* as that of Pison, Sen: de ira lib. 1. cap: 16.
who condemned one for a supposed murder of I. G. and his neck being on the
block, the Conspirator that had plotted it being there disguised, said, hold,
I am the man who was supposed to be killed the Centurion returned his prisoner
with great joy, to Pison who said Justice must speedily be done, and the case
was difficult, therefore sentenced them all three to be executed, the first
because he was condemned, and fiat Justitia, I. G. because he was dead in
reputation, and the Officer because he did not execute his office instantly; I
am not of some Turks minds, that so the difference be ended, it matters not
much whether right be done or wrong, because a peace is made without expense of
time or Coin, but all differences between men ought to be ended with as much
expedition as conveniently may be according to Law, so as no more have be made
then good speed, but what if legal proceedings be too circular, and tedious? I
desire leave to speak to this question, whereof neither Clients nor Council
are properly competent Judges the duty of the one being like good wax, to
receive and retain the impression of faithful advise; of the other, to be like
a good Pilot, to make what haste he can, to bring his Client to the desired
Haven, and surely the shortest cut to the Harbor is ever best; for as the end
of War, so the end of the Law is peace; now the end of the profession and the
professors, shou d be the same. He that delights in suits, loves to be in a
storm at Sea, but truly I speak it knowingly, and to the honor of our great
practisers, that they do for their 10 s. give good and faithful advice,
casting about which way the Client may speedily receive justice. And the
reverend Judges, when a certain thing is ripened for their judgments, they
speedily pass a definitive sentence; and when they sit pronouncing judgment,
me thinks I see a rich Cabinet of precious jewels opened, and admirable reasons
expressed, for the full satisfaction of Counsel and Clients, which I cannot
but mention for their honor, because beyond sea, the Judge will give no reason
of his judgment, and the Sentence is past in private, that so Judges may not
incur the dangerous displeasure of the Client; whereas justice with us is
publicly pronounced in the gates of our City. But do not Writs of Error
immortalize suits? One says, that those wooden Angels which support
Westminster Hall, are made of Irish oak, that no Spider of error should hang
upon them. Another says, that in reason the error should be assigned before
the Record be removed, because for the most part, the common error is only
assigned, but this string must be touched very tenderly. A stone that is ill
placed in a building, must not violently be removed; it is requisite there
should be some breathing time to make satisfaction after the Recovery. The
Civillians allow days of grace to provide the money; whereas our proceedings
are so speedy, that the party may be taken in Execution the same day the
judgment is entered, and that Execution which is the life of the Law, proves
many times (through miserable indurance) the death of the party. To explicate
my self, I must premise two things as undeniable verities; First, that no
politic Law ought to contradict the Law of God, because only those may mar
that can make, and Princes having no hand in the making of Gods Laws, therefore
may not dispense with them. Secondly, No humane Law ought to live any longer
then the reason of it continues (for reason is the sou^e of all humane Laws
without exception,) and therefore in ancient Kingdoms and States, many
politic Laws wlll be fubject to alteration. Our Ancestors certainly were
great husbands to make it death to steal a sheep, or a Pig worth above 12 d.
though it be to satisfy hunger; for which by the strict rule of Law, he ought
to dye: And so it is, if any ready to starve, shall take a loaf of bread from
a Baker, Lex moralis est vivens judicialis mortua solumin equitate ceremonialis
mortifera.
which certainly is against the Law of God; for though the judicialls of Moses
are not obligatory to us, yet there is so much equity in them, and so many
direct precepts for mercy, that no cruelty should be used amongst professed
Christians, though it were in new Plantations, where there is more reason to
make sharper Laws in the beginning. Lex dura at regni novitas me talia cogit,
Did in V^rg.
At Geneva, and in New-E^gland. Adultery is capital, with us it has bin
standing in a cold sheet (a very difproportionable punishment for the flame of
lust;) surely either their punishment is too heavy, or ours too light; but the
constitu^ion of Kingdoms and States is wisely to be considered; Matthew. 19.9.
as also that place in Matthew, if the Adulterer were to dye, what need any
liberty to marry another? for then the civil Magistrate should by death
dissolve the obligation: The Law is likewise defective, that after such a
divorce the parties are not free nor the innocent party to make a new election,
Ad alia con^^landa vota.
but must be necessitated to live in sin which no condition of life should
bring a man into, being grounded upon a popish distinction, Separatio a th^roet
mensa ^on a vinculo matrimonii.
between a separation from bed and board, and an absolute divorce from the bond
of Matrimony. And truly that man of sin. Antichrist, wresting the Scriptures,
to advance his insatiable Luxury, Avarice, and Luciferian pride, Ejus avaritiae
totus non sufficit orbis ejus luxuriae meritrix non sufficit omnis.
prevailed with the most politic States of his religion, to make several
Laws that might be as flowers for his garland, (Ecclesiastical and Civil
Laws being so twisted together and interweaved as Web and Woofe,) that the
destruction of Antichrists Kingdom must of necessity cause a review of many
Cases and opinions in our books, I speak not of principles and pillars or of
the frame and constitution of our Law, but of secundary conclusions and
superstructures which may by the wisdom of Parliament be changed or removed
without in dangering the ground work, but with wonderful circumspection and
serious deliberation, because reason is malleable and has diverse faces and
many times its contrary reason, and is not equally evident to every man's
Capacity, As the poor Widow said to a dear friend, if my husband had been
justly put to death, it would not have so much grieved me, what says he had
thou rather thy husband should dye, nocently then innocently? So the
Philosopher of his Wife if hansome pleasing, if deformed, honest, it was
retored, if hansome in danger to be dishonest, if deformed loathsome; therefore
that which we call the reason of Law is not every natural man's reason but a
practical and studied experience acquired by much industry and long
observation.

In that case which I put of the divorce it is very necessary to settle some
Law concerning marriages, for as I conceave many of the Popes Cannons are yet in
force amongst us, Tedi^ vitae.
concerning that particular, that after a divorce, there may be liberty to
marry again in the Lord, By the Law, if the Father through the tediousness of
life kill himself (which is cause of grief sufficient to the poor Children)
yet all the personal estate is forfeited to the Kings Almoner a Popish
Constitution, Dame Hales. Case Com. Stamford.
upon this ground that the King is supreme Ordinary, and will dispose of his
estate for the good of his soul, and the poor Orfans left to beg, this is
to add more weight to the oppressed, Nay if the Wife kill the Husband the
pepsonall estate is forf^ited from the Children; So in Leonard Sonir Case, 11.
Rep. 83. Grauatis addere gravamina.
the heir shall be in ward though he has no estate left him, and the book
Corfesses that affliction is added to the afflicted; for the preventing whereof
and for the enfranchising of our Noble Gentry (for truly it is but a gentile
Villenage) I hope that COURT will be abolished before any further mischiefs
happen, Villenagium gentile and fervile.
which has been an eminent badge, and specia^l livery of the Norman Conquest,
the Conqueror to mix the English and Normans, manacled and constrained the
will and consent in point of marriage which as the apple of Contention between
man and wife has tended to the destruction of many families, Durissimum est ut
matrimonium non fit liberum unde nascantur liberi.
it being the hardest thing in the world, That marriage should not be free
amongst free people, truly that I may speak my mind freely, as it is free of
its own nature, I conceive there are many defects in our Law, both in matters
Criminal on the Crown side, and Civil, As that witnesses should not be
examined upon oath for the prisoner as well as for the King, that Counsel is
not allowed as well for matter of life, as for estate, that so many men slayers
escape upon the Law of man slaughter, I know by reason of the valor and heat
of English spirits it has been an ancient Law: but upon serious consideration,
I fear that the Land has been defiled with much blood by that means, not as
yet washed off, indeed in case of an assault, the Law makes every man a
Magistrate to defend himself, but to kill a man for a Box of the ear, or any
man that I may save without manifest danger of my own life is death by all
other Laws in Christendom, As murdedrum for murderum, seloniter for selinice,
etc. Rep. 121.
but the Statute of stobbing is a most excellent Law, That a Murder or other
grievous offender should escape for an error in the indictment, in a word or
Letter is horrible, for Justice should be speedily executed upon Delinquents,
the want whereof is many times an occasion of terrible enormities, So that if
the Clerk or prosecutor will but insert one insensible word into the Indictment,
A Ravillat or a Vaux may peradventure escape for the present, and then men are
apt to say he was tried once and acquitted, and the prosecutors being
discouraged seldom is any man further questioned, as in Lambs Case who being
indicted for Witchcraft for exercising certain divilish Arts, Arts veneficas
non diabolicas.
exception was taken to the Indictment that it should have been veneficall
Arts, the word Diabolical being too general, and many others that have been
by the Jury found guilty of Murder and Capital offenses, yet have escaped
death by reason of some error in the Indictment, which how disagreeable to the
sacred Scripture, I submit to better Judgments, As for the Common Objection,
that if the curiosity and exactness of pleadings should be neglected,
ignorance and barbarism would soon be introduced, This puts me in mind of
Savage Boners Argument, that if the Scripture should be in English, and Lay men
have liberty to read and expound, the Husbandman would give over his calling,
for fear he should look back, because it is written he that puts his hand
to the Plough, and looks back, is not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven, And the
Baker would use no Leaven, because a little Leven leavens the whole lump,
Tantum no^ bonus in Episcopatu.
whereunto Reverend Latimer answered, let us have it so until men be so grossly
ignorant, and no longer, if it should please the wisdom of Parliament to
ordain, that if a case be pleaded sufficiently for mat^er and substance that
the right is most conspicious and evident, to the judgment of the Court, though
there be some Clericall error or misprision, yet the party shall have the
fruit and benefit of his suit, or if there should be a law made that every
defendant in all actions may plead the general issu^ and give the special
matter in evidence, it would be a great ease and benefit for the Subject and
why should not every man have as much ease in pleading his Cause, as Officers
doing any thing concerning their Office? and as the Subject in informations of
intrusion who have that liberty by Statutes, for since Justice is impartial,
21. Iac. 12. and 14.
(it being the honor of our Law, that Justice is to be had against the King)
why should not every man have as much freedom, in the means and way tending to
Justice, as a any man whatsoever this I must say concerning defective
pleadings, qui decrevis finem dec^ media.
that in all reason the innocent Client ought not to suffer, the loss should
rather lie upon the mistaker, be it Council, Atorney, or Clerk, who makes an
implicte contract with the Kingdom, to have skill in his profession, and the
Fee is a consideration of the Assumpsit, as the Law in Sicilye is, where there
are poisonous wells, if the Cattle drink there, the Shepherds that are hired
to look to them must pay for them, because they die through their negligence,
but if any error happen by the Clients misinformation, Bergieri.
he must bear his own burden, I know it will be said in the Case of theft,
that Clergy is allowed for the the first offense, (which I think deserves
consideration, whether it be not some kind of encouragement for men to
transgress in that kind) but certainly the matter of Clergy is purely
popish, Why not some other severe punishment though not mortal.
for in reason it is a greater offense for a Scholar that knows his duty, and
the danger of the Law to offend, then an illiterate man that knows nothing in
comparison, as in the Leviticall Law, a Bullock was required to make
satisfaction for the Priests sin, which a Kid or a pair of Pigeons would
expiate for an ignorant man's transgression.

^evit. 4.3.
All cruelty whatsoever amongst professed Christians, is diametrically opposite
to the Gospel of grace, such as domineering and ruling over the bodies of our
Brethren, as we say proverbially make dice of his bones, the meaning whereof
is, that if a Prisoner die in Execution after the Crowner has viewed his body,
the Creditor has Dice delivered him at the Crown Office as being all that he
is likely to have, it cannot be presumed that the Keeper desires the death of
the prisoner, for he gains by his life, does not therefore the Law presume
malice in the creditor? or else why is the crowner more troubled then for the
death of any other man? And yet if any in whose custody they are, be so
merciful and tenderhearted, as to connive a little at their going abroad, the
Creditor complains against him, such Enemies are men, not only to their
spiritual but temporal estates, to which purpose I doubt not but the humble
Petition and printed Remonstrance of the many distressed prisoners for debt
will be taken into consideration by our ever to be honored worthies and sages
in Parliament; who either have estates to satisfy (which is hard to imagine,
that any man should be so desperate and shameless to suffer such a lingering
death by perpetual indurance, if possibly he could help it, nor would the
Creditor irrevocably by electing the body discharge the estate if he knew of
any, though it is to be wished that creditors were enabled to fell the estate,
and strictly to examine the debtor, and all suspected trustees upon Oath: for
the discovery thereof, who in Case of forswearing ought to be severely
punished, which course might cure that panique fear of concealing estates; or
else they are not able to pay; and so enforced to an impossibility, the party
punished, yet the debt still increasing, like that mountain of Brimstone near
Naples, ever burning, never consuming, a very emblem of Gehenna; Suefaterra
which I the rather presume to mention: because I know it is the foulest blot
in the tables of our Law, and of all objections which English Gentlemen (who
travail to enrich their minds) meet with. the hardest to be answered.

One thing I shall humbly propound to juditious considerations, whether it be
not as an image in the bed of David to enter an action in the inferior Court,
and when the party expects a trial, 1. Sam. 19.13.
then to have it removed and drawn into another Court, why should not the
party as well swear the cause of action to arise within the liberty as well as
the defendant were his discharge? in an Action of debt brought upon a Bond in
London, Ad aliud examen.
the defendant may not have the liberty to plead a release or payment in
Yorkshire according to? H. the 4. and the statute of foreign vouchers
extending not to it being a personal Action, I see no reason, but whatsoever
suit is legally Commenced in London or else where that it should be removed for
no cause but merely for delay: As in a Court of Pipowders the plaintiff must
swear that the contract was made in the time and jurisdiction of the fare.
is such a practice that I am confident admits no parallel; I know writs of
error and appeals from one Court to another upon allegations of error and
precipitance in judgment are usual, but whether appeals to the Judges
delegates in ordinary matter; testamentary when a difinitive sentence has bin
pronounced by a most learned experienced Judge, are not more common then
commendable I make a quere of it, and wish that the malice of Clients might be
more obviated then it has bin, but that a man should enter his Action and
proceed in it, and be made believe that he shall have speedy justice, and when
the Jury is summoned, Council Feed, and all charges disbursed, but for entering
the Judgment; then to draw this business away at the pleasure of him that
owes the money, cannot hold the weight of one grain in the balance of reason;
if inferior Judges are not fit to be trusted with matters above five pounds,
or such inconsiderable sums let the business never be brought before them, and
this calls to my remembrance how a Gentleman was Arrested for 1500. l. the day
that he was to be married without any coulorable cause of Action spitefully to
hinder the match, and was not able to put in bail, but the party being
nonsuit the Gentleman had as I remember but 7 s. 2 d. cost, lost his monyes
and indeed himself by it, for I know it was the occasion of his utter undoing,
Answerable to this abuse is the Bill of Middlesex. A man that is Canibally
given, may devour the credit of five hundred men, arresting them for five
thousand a piece, never declare and yet pay no costs, though the party
Arrested had better have paid 500. l. that its commonly said, I Will bestow a Bill
of Mid. upon such a man to stay him in Town, that I may have his company into
the Country when I go down, and when costs are paid I see they are so small
that he that sues for a debt of 10. l. gains but little by the bargain
besides his will whereas it stands with more proportion of reason that he that
spends 10. l. in a just cause should have 20. l. allowed him, for he that has
but any ordinary employment shall hinder himself at least 10. l. in neglecting
his trade or profession, but should full Costs be paid, peradventure there
should not be so many suits Commenced may some say, though truly I think rather
more, and I am persuaded that if Causes were sooner ended that both Lawyers,
Atturneys and Solicitors might get more money then they do, for many have
been loath to begin suits because they were spun out to such a length, and
others would make a shift for money if there might be a speedy hearing upon
the merrits of the Cause which are not able to maintain a circular proceeding,
these Sollicitors are strangers and unknown to the Records of our Law, but
though it pleased a Lord Keeper to compare them to the Grasshoppers of Egypt
that devoured the whole Land, many of them being grown rich: yet truly in
right reason if they be honest men, (as all of them are for any thing I know
to the contrary) I know nothing in right reason that can be said against their
profession, I believe they are very useful to the Client, and assisting to the
Council, who many times in long businesses sees much by their spectacles, not
having time to peruse depositions.

I conceive that in this time of Reformation the Scripture being the Touchstone
of all humane actions, It is an honor for gold to come to the touchstone
Scriptura est Lapis lidius omnium humanarum actionum. Bracton Britton, Glanvill
etc. being rather ornaments, then Authorities. Lex est rerum divinarum and
humanarum scientia.
it would be an excellent service to the Kingdom for some grave judicious man
who is Learned in our Laws, and well read in the holy Scriptures, to set down
all the Law Cases in our books, which are either properly and directly, or
collaterally and obliquely contrary or repugnant to the Law of God; which must
be done by reading all our legal authorities, beginning at 1. Edward 3. And
ending at the jurisdiction of Courts lately published, and comparing humane
reason, (whereof our Law is in most things the quintessence) with the Divine
reason of Law and Gospel, for Law is the science of things humane and Divine,
wherein my meaning is that for every judgment in Law, that a Divine can object
nothing against it, from any express text nor by necessary conclusions and
deductions, That is a good Law and may justly be called the Law of God, put in
execution by men, for it is not to be expected that there should be an express
Text in Scripture for every maxim or Canon of Law, but it is sufficient that
there is nothing in Scripture that does contradict it, there being general
rules in Scripture applyable to every Kingdom and Society of men, for their
happy government, direction and perpetual guidance in the way to heaven, which
being done the difference observed to be humbly presented to the most High
Court of Parliament, to do therein what they in their sublime wisdom shall
think to be most conducible to the public good, which is the white and Butt
whereat they have levelled all the shafts of their indefatigable endeavors.
Which expressions I could not omit without manifest injustice toward our
Parliament Worthies, our most Noble Lords, and the Honorable Commons, who like
the heavenly bodies have had little rest now for these 5. years, therefore
deserve much veneration.

This work requires an entire man without other diversions, Totum hominem and
mixtum hominem.
and a mixed man both a Divine and a Lawyer, which though in an eminent and
intense degree are peradventure hardly concurrent, yet in a competent measure
and more remiss degree, there are of our profession that are learned in the
Law of God as amongst the Jews, 2 Chro. 19.8.
the Levites were Common Lawyers; though the reason of that was because the
Scriptures were the positive Laws of the Jews, not that callings ought in a
popular Kingdom to be combined, but that Religion is a n^cessary study for a
Lawyer, because the Law of God is one principle ground of the Law of England;
Dr. and student fro. Seeds misericordiae best beseeming christians.
As for the High and Honorable Court of Chancell which is like a grain of
Powder, in the Eye of Anonineus it is of such singular advantage to the
Kingdom, that I hold it superfluous to say much about it, it is the chief
seat of mercy, therefore to be advanced before all Courts of ordinary Justice.

I conceive equity is pure Civil Law, either suppletive where Law is
defective, or Corrective where the Law is too rigid the constant practice being
that where there is any remedy at Law, the Bill is dismissed; but what Causes
are within the jurisdiction and cognizance of this Court, is no easy matter to
determine, it is in its original institution a magazine of right and Justice,
like the good Emperors Court, from whose presence no man should depart sad:
we read of many Chancellors before the Norman invasion, but I do not find that
ever the Kings Bench did reverse errors of Chancery; but for that part which is
not of record but to be releived in equity, Anonimus mistakes like a Nonitiat^
that knows not our Law Antiquities, it is very true that until Common Lawyers
were made Chancellors about Hen. 8. time, this Court was not so full of
business, and afterward Equity began to be spun with such a fine thread, that
none but the eye of a Chancellor could discern it, as Bacon (the Chrysostom
of our Law in his time) was wont to say; Conscionable equity being converted
into politic equity, for I have heard that when Clergy men were Chancellours
they decreed matters according to that Evangelicall rule, of doing to others as
we would be don unto our selves, that if any man had over reached another in
barganing by getting that for 50. l. which was worth 100. l. it being against
the rule of Charity, or if a man had lost any considerable part of his estate
at play, there being no meritorious consideration for it, or if a man had
contracted for a year to give 20. l. Rent for a House, Major est bestilitas
Dei quam hominis.
wherein he could not inhabit by reason of the Pestilence, which is a divine
hostility, like to a time of War, or if I.S. take a Lease for a year at 20.
l. Rent, and the ground prove barren, so that he cannot by all his labor make
10. l. of it, in many such like Cases the Chancery afforded Convenable relief
according to the words of the Statute, no man is to depart from the Chancery
without remedy: for the Chancellors, juditial power is absolute the special
foundation and erection whereof is by Statute which Cases compared with the
present, Nemo reted a Cantellaria et sine remedio.
I humbly conceive (with submission to better judgments) that the weight of the
objection ratherlies in the other balance of defect, that for politic
considerations many matters are dismissed without relief, 9. E. 4. 15.
which should in conscience have bin relieved, as in the former instances, if a
soole sell Land worth 1000. l. to I. S. for 300. l. if the Chancery should
redress this; would not this distroy Contracts? I conceive not, for though it
is not possible to set an exact mathematical price upon every thing yet no man
ought to buy any thing for less then half the worth of it, has not I. S. an
erroneous Conscience in that particular, why then should it not be rectified,
to make him give above 500. l. or to Relinquish, the bargain, I confess I
cannot see any reason why foolish contracts specially when an Idiot shall sell
a great estate for a song, should not be rectified in equity, though the
contract cannot be nullified in Law, by reason of a maxim that no man shall
stultifie himself, for all men that are 21. are not able to contract with old
Usurers; but how senseles is it that a youth at 14. It were to be wished that
men were not of age with us till 25 many men being undone between 21. and 25.
by suretiship and foolish bargains as the Law is in all other places save
Normandy.
and a girl at 12. without their Parents consent, shall have power to dispose
of themselves in marriage, (which of all the turnings and windings of this life
is the most important) and yet cannot before 21. give away a point or a row of
pinns; it would be an excellent politic Law, that none should dispose of
themselves in that kind till their full age without consent and approbation of
their nearest friends, the Civilian gives no man power to alienate his estate
until he be 25. and then if it be not sold for half the worth, the bargain
is nullified, so in the other case of play it is objected that there was a
hazard and the winner might as well have lost, I Answer, that's but a Vtopian
consideration a possibility which never comes into Act but the Law of
Conscience requires a real and valuable consideration, Va^a potentia.
In the other case it will be said, that Contracts must be inviolably observed,
I answer that in these civil matters men must be constrained to deal like
Christians, and if Anonimus mean that in Case a man be drawn into a judgment
of 100. In the late case of Neriah the Jew. Nobilis vir Iohanes Seldenius inter
Scholasticos quos audi^i per t^tam Europam Anglorum celeberimus. Premiare ultra
condignum punire citra.
l. where 10. is not due, that he would not have the Chancery to releife him,
and to rectify the Plaintiffes erroneous conscience, it argues that he has
no Conscience, or a Cauterized one, and He must be redargued for a little
sauciness that calls that boldness, which deserves the name of the goodness
of Chancery; abundantly manifested in doing execution upon a Judgment of 7. or
800. l. given for Tobacco not worth 30. l. I know the Chancery is to supply the
Law and not to subvert it, and as that worthy Esquier one of the fairest
flowers in the Garland of our profession for excellent learning in his learned
manuscript concerning the Chancery, writes that in this court conscience ought
so to be regarded that the law ought not to be neglected yet as in Criminal
Causes every Justice when the matter is doubtful, is then most honorably
seated when he gives mercy the upper hand, so in equitable matters when the
Cause is ambiguous, that Law and Equity cannot meet in some third in a
moderation of extremity, let Conscience take place as most worthy.

As for that instance of the Amicable case, it is a mistake, Casus pro amic^.
for if the demandant or plaintiff have not clear cause of suite, the libell
and proceedings are dismissed, for in the beginning of the suit the Law favors
the plaintifes (not with personal but legal favors) as being presumed that
the man has wrong, done him, or else he would not begin a suit; 9. H. 7.
in the middle of the suite the Law favors the defendant, giving him time to
make his legal defense, Non liquet. Casus pinguis like our worthy Sergeants
Case.

Bertoldus suspendatur quacunque a^bore placuerit, nulla arbor mihi placet.

Lego totum statum meum Jesuistis and filio meo quicquid eis placuerit. In
dubijs quod minimum est sequimur at ^ix.

Fiat expositio in favorem legatarij at Tholose, Judicio dei relinquitur at
Paris.

Secundum scientiam secundum conscientiam secundum justitiam.


In the end it favors neither: but in things doubt full possessions are never
disturbed as presuming every man honest till the contrary he proved.

But this puts me in mind of a recreation which they have upon some
festivities or after some solemn arguments to recreate the spirits of the
Judges and Advocates, which they call a Fat Case, as that of Bertoldus the
French Kings Jester, that being sentenced to dye obtained favor to be hanged
on what Tree he pleased, and then said, no tree pleases me, And that of the
Duke of Ossuna Vice Roy of Naples, the cunning Jesuits had inveigled a rich
man to leave his estate of 10000 l. to them and his son to their tuition, the
words were, I bequeath my whole estate to the Jesuits, and to my son what
they please, the Duke asked them what they would allow the son, they
answered, 1000. l. then says the Duke the son shall have 9000 l. because so
much pleases you and you 1000 l. and that Parisiens and to my sons. I give
achascun deux cens livers this was first resolved to be but 100. linres because
in doubtful things the least is taken, next it was resolved 200. Thirdly, it
was left doubtful to the judgment of Heaven, for the poor French men
complain of the multiplicity of appeals that one Court will Judge according
to science, another according to Conscience, and a third according to Justice,
and that ambiguous case of the three Rings, A man settle his Land upon that
Child, which shall have a certain gold Ring, which was for many years enjoyed
accordingly, at last one discreet Father bearing an equal affection to his
three Sons, caused a skillful Artificer to make two other Rings, for weight,
matter, and form, so exactly alike, that the true Ring could not be
distinguished and gave unto each son a Ring, who after his death went to Law
for the estate, but the right to this day cannot be determined, with many other
ingenious Cases wherein the Civilians abound but in this sense too much honey
is not good.

I know the swelling of any Court above the banks, is like a deluge or an
inundation of waters prodigious to a Kingdom, the other Courts must needs
suffer, as when the spleen is in the Tide, the other parts are in the Ebb: but
blessed be God, there is a musical concordance and sweet harmoney between our
Courts of Law and equity, Sicut manus manum juvat.
our Courts of Justice are all Sisters as the Muses were that do not incroach
upon, but are helpful to one another, as one hand helps another.

Concerning Delatory proceedings if Anonimus knew what tedious protractions the
Subjects in F^ance, and other Kingdoms suffer under, he would not be so
impatient: King James in that Speech of his in Starchamber, 1614. promised to
expunge all unnecessarie delays, and Ceremonial formalities which were
adversaries to the procuring of a speedy and well grounded Justice, and truly
it is much to be wished that right might be had at a cheaper rate, that
Justice in all Courts might pass at an easier charge, that those weeds of
needless charge, and brambles of expense that grow about the vine of Justice
might be plucked up and rooted out, as far as possible might be, that the
Client might have that for 6. d. for which he paies 12. d. and blessed be God
for hopeful beginnings, since these right honorable and right worthy
Commissioners for the Great Seal have come in justice has run in a more
fluent stream, and purer channel, not dropped as formerly, in two or three
Terms the matter is ended unless the course of the Court be interrupted by
circular motions, which many times makes such a diversion, that it is hard to
reduce it to a regular proceeding, for at the Bar too much is manytimes
spoken, but not enough whatsoever tends to the victory in way of verity is to
be spoken for the Client, and no more when men come to fight they brave it not
but strike at the heart, let not an impertinent word be used in a Court of
Justice, if no motion might be heard unless the otherside had notice of the
intention to move, it might advantage both parties certainly, but the most
ancient and honorable Courts are not without gray hairs, As the German
inventor of Guns told^ Apollo it was that none should dare to make Wars
I wish all Copies might contain 20. lines in every sheet to be written
orderly and unwastfully, I have often thought that the wideness of the lines
was, that the parties might meet and agree finding copies so chargable and I
conceive no answer ought to be referred as insufficient without showing some
particular point of the defect, and why should not Bills be dismissed of course
without motion; some other practices fall under consideration, as common
Recoveries, what necessity there is of them, why a Fine may not as well serve
to cut off reversions? next whether in conscience the will of the donor ought
to be violated? then for collateral Warranties, why should not the strongest
presumptions give place to the weakest proofs? we read of those that have
sworn themselves to be Whores to disinherit their own issue. And for Out
lawries why should the personal Estate be forfeited, more reason to seize upon
it for the debt; the profits of the Land forfeited til a Feofment be made and
the Kings hand amoved and yet the Outlawry remains, and how easily are
Outlawries reversed? and what fruit has the party of all his labor. A man
borrowes one thousand pound and purchases Land, and dies, the heir before his
Father be cold makes a Conveyance? now the land is discharged from payment of
debts. Why is the heir bound unless the Land be chargeable after an
alienation? other things are yet amiss in matters testimentary and
matrimonial: in charity a man meddles with the goods of an intestate to see
him buried upon pleading that he was never Exector, I know not how far a man
may suffer in that case, why should not our common Law Judges determine
legacies for goods, as well as for lands? Why may not a Legatee bring an Action
of Debt against the Executor, as well as a Creditor? why may not our Judges
determine what is a Contract of Marriage, as well as other Contracts; but let
no man despise the day of small things: for my own part when I consider the
noble propensitie in our right Honorable Commissioners, and the Honorable the
Master of the Rolls (whose names for their unwearied pains, and extraordinary
diligence, in the judicious and faithful discharge of those great places of
trust committed unto them, so much conducing to public security, will be
honored and renowned to all posterity) to expedite matters in difference,
asking the counsel many times, will your Client refer the matter, telling us
that they cannot endure trifling, and nicities. I rejoice at that spirit of
Reformation which I see orient in that court, and much marvel that causes
should depend half so long as they do, so true is it that negotiations are
easily dispatched by many, and it is no small security to the Kingdom, that the
seal is entrusted into so many safe hands, for if the mole of Chancery, lay
upon the shoulder of one ATLAS, he would find it weight enough to support,
and I have often thought that if it were possible a Chancellor or Lord Keeper
should not have only infallibility (because his assertion is of Pythagorical
authority, and that for the greatest estate in the Kingdom upon suggestion of
a Trust, but likewise impeccability, least he should do any thing against
conscience, yet notwithstanding if the wisdom of Parliament (in whom the
public Judgment of state is lodged) should confer that honorable charge
upon one as formerly, no doubt whom God calls to any place he gives ability to
discharge it, for when God places any man in the Chair of Justice, he never
puts himself besides the Cushion, specially when Gods favorites are made
Judges he is with them in the Judgment, but of that more hereafter.

Concerning Bills of Chancery, true it is that many times more is demanded then
is due, that so the just debt may be confessed, but in reason why should not
the Plaintiff put in his Bill upon oath? had not custom incorporated many
formalities and solemnities into our Courts of Justice, many of them would
scarce hold weight in the balance of the Sanctuary, but far be it from any
honest man to maintain an old error against a new discovery of truth. Truly I
think it was to be wished, Civilians call it less property, Juramentum
calumniae.
that the oath of integrity might betaken by every Councellor, and Attorney,
never to set a hand to any Bill or writing, not to speak any thing for the
Client, but what they verily believe in their Conscience to be just and true,
this is practiced in most parts of Christendom, and some states make the
advocates to discover any thing that they know, which may advance Justice
though it be against their own Clients but of that I make a Quere, but our Law
seems to comply with the former, for by Statute it is enacted, that if any
pleader shall deceive the Court, West. 1. c, 29.
by informing that to be true which he conceives to be false, he is to be
imprisoned a year and a day, and to practice no more. The learned Sergeants,
are sworn not to maintain or defend any tort or falsitie sciently, See the
Sergeants oath in Magna Chorta, f. 213. Numero confiderato.
but shall guerpe and abandon the Cause so soon as he perceives the injustice
of it, and truly if Sergeants be sworn, why should not the Barristers? It
cannot be denied, but there are as many worthy honest men (and as few others)
of our profession as of any other calling whatsoever, and many honest Aturneys
and Sollicitors that look at the merits and justice of the Cause, and desire
rather verity then victory in their undertakings, For my part, when any body
comes to advise with me, about Commencing a Suit in Law, I begin to tremble,
and bid him first examine his own Conscience seriously, whether he have bin
wronged, and that in a considerable matter? for I would not have Christians go
to Law for trifles, Totus in serment^.
my meaning is unles the thing recovered will quit the Cost, to provide a
Conserve of Westminster Hall Wormwood, and to be of a leavened Spirit for
every trespass, was an error which Saint Paul blamed amongst the Corinthians,
he examines not who has the best cause but chides contentious natures, But in
materia gravi and necessaria.
that go to Law for small matters did Jesus Christ write our sins in the
Dust, and shall we write every unkindnesse in Marble? Secondly, whether he
would not have done so to others as is done to him, then I advise him to use
all means of peace, and all urbanity, before he do address himself to a wager
of Law, as knowing that going to Law is like a laborinth, the ingresse very
easy, but the egresse very difficult; or like two encountering Rams, he that
escapes best, is sure of a blow.

I have heard a Debtor in Naples, offer a Creditor 50 l. to whom he owed 100 l.
telling him, unless he will accept it, he will make him spend another
hundred, and hold him in suit with his own money, and then it may be he may
get 120 in conclusion. And thirdly, I ask my Client whether he can go to Law
in love, which I find to be a very difficult thing, which being premised, no
doubt God calls a man to go to Law to recover his right, as well as a kingdom to
defend their Laws and Liberties: but I shall not censure any Client, for I
know the case may many times be such, that both parties may have an invincible
ignorance of one another right. It was so in the case of the Israelites and
the Cananites, Joshua having a command from God, did justly invade their
possessions, they not knowing of that command, justly defended the same. I
proceed with my Adversary, who is so far in the right, that the maine or many
streams of our Law issued and flowed from the Normans, some veins from the
Saxons, and many maxims and rules from Sicily, as might appear in a manuscript
which one Master Pettit employed by the Earl of Arundell to purchase
Antiquities in foreign parts acquainted me with. In the lesser customary of
Normandy, you may read in substance the two first Books of Littleton, and to
speak truth, what ever is excellent in our Laws, we have taken the cream of
it from them, and thereof composed ours; and as our language is most accurate
and refined, so is our Law a most complete body of humane reason. And now I
must say something concerning the Law and justice, and the reverend Judges, the
Fathers thereof. For the first, the Law of England is a holy Sanction,
commanding things honest, and forbidding the contrary; A Chief Justice to Hen:
6. and after Cha^cellour, when Hen: 6. was driven into Scotland.
it excludes all vice, and teaches all virtue, who would not fight to defend
such a Law? Fortescue gives a high commendation of it, and says all mankind
should have been governed by the Laws of England if Adam had not sinned in
Paradise, and herein our Laws must needs exceed the Imperial Roman Laws
which were made by the Emperors Counselors, Actu vel potentia ut Evani Adamo
antequam plasmaretur.
because ours are made by general consent in Parliament; that I may most truly
say that the Laws of England are either actually, or potentially, the best in
the world, because if any thing be amiss, the Parliament may reform it.

There are but six Kings (properly so called) in Christendom, the French and
the Spaniard who have too much power, Sweden and Poland, who have as some
politicians say, too little power for their Titles; and England and Denmark,
who have just power enough by Law, for by the salutary advice and consent of
Parliament, they may enact such Laws as may make a people happy. Oh happy
England, if we knew our own happiness; In many places beyond sea, the people pay
the fourth part of all the Wine, besides a fourth penny of all the Wine that is
sold, so that where the Wine grows, the people drink water; and is it not an
admirable thing, that we should buy a quart of wine for less then the Natives
whence it comes; a quantity of every bushel of their corn, every housekeeper
forced to take such a quantity of Salt at five times more then the worth of it.
The land far richer then ours, yet the people five times poorer then with us,
the Soldiers constantly take what they please; the Countrymen and yeomen upon
the matter go almost naked upon the work days, in a hempen doublet on holy
days: if any man have got a supposed stock of money, he is deeply taxed and
impleaded, and then that Advocate cannot want a reason that argues for the
King; if the man refuse to pay, then they adjudge him peremptory, and he is
imprisoned, and counted an adversary to the favorites of the Prince, and then
its observed that they have the happiness that seldom any of their adversaries
are long lived. And if the proofs be not clear against a rich man, the Prince
will hear the matter in his Chamber, and condemn him, and he is privately in
the night time cast into some River, or burnt, and the poor soul says, he is
glad he has a life to lose for his Princes pleasure.

But what means this murmuring, that Taxes are multiplied? Vain and miserable
men, truly miserable both in soul and in body, that indeed have no money,
because the money has them; he is the truly miserable man, that loves his money
better then his soul, for the servant of God is master of his estate: when a
Kingdom lies a bleeding, who would not willingly lose a year or two profits
to save the inheritance? Tell a Usurer that hugs his yellow earth of Land at
ten years purchase, and he willingly parts with his beloved darling; we
willingly suffer the amputation of an arm or a leg to save the body natural;
shall any man be unwilling to part with a little wool to preserve the body
Politic? It may be one reason why so many have taken up Arms to destroy the
Law, and to poison the very fountain of all lawful liberties, is, because men
do not know what an excellent thing the common Law of England is: It is called
the common Law of England, as I conceive not by way of distinction in
opposition to the Canon or Civil Law; for that would be absurd, as to say the
Catholic Church of Rome, besides every Kingdom has a municipicall common Law,
but by way of excellency, as David was called the King superlatively and the
Book of books, the Bible, and the four Courts of Record at Westminster are
called the Kings Courts by way of eminency.

Less then this a Lawyer cannot say for himself, because no man must exercise
any profession, Hone^^um and utile. Ineptio instrumenti fastidit artificem.
Debilitas mucronis reddit ignavum militem.
but what is honest and profitable for the Commonweal, the unhansomnesse of
the instrument is grievous to the Artificer; it makes a soldier sluggish, and
shames him to have a blunt sword, and as I heard a worthy Divine lately say, if
believing be so precious, how precious are believers? So say I, if the Law be
honorable, surely the Lawyers must be highly esteemed.

Me thinks Lawyers may be called representative Warriors, for the lives and
Patrimonies of our Clients are by us defended at the Bar, by reason man's
chief excelencie: and though the Soldiers profession be very noble and
honorable, because most dangerous; yet the profession of the Law herein
challenges precedence (...) because the sword is but a servant to justice
consecrated by God to maintain and defend the Law; for if men were just, the
sword might be sheathed: now that for whose sake any thing is made, is more
worthy then the thing so made, whence it is, that the weakest body is more
worthy then the most costly raiment; for which reason the presidentiall Nobles
(unless there be a duplicity of honor, By 31 Hen. 8. the Chancellor placed
before the Constable and Marshall.
where the originary and accidental honors meet together) precede the
military Nobles. So in Physic, though the subject about which Physicians are
conversant is more noble then the Lawyers subject (health being to be preferred
before all pecuniary respects) yet Lawyers are reckoned to precede them. Nay
Divinity which I look upon as the grace and glory of all other Sciences (all
being but ciphers without the salvation of a man's soul) in the way of honor
and precedence must give way to the profession of the Law; the reason whereof
is, because Justice which is the Lawyers subject, is more necessary then either
Divinity or Physic, Ingenious sir John Davies in his eloquent Epistle to the
Irish reports.
as without which no Kingdom can subsist one day: We see Heathen kingdoms
subsist without Religion, and you may imagine a Kingdom to subsist without
Physicians, as Rome did for some time; but all men, at all times, and in all
places, stand in need of Justice and Law, Conciliarii sunt organa justitia in
corpore politic^.
which is the commensurate rule of Justice, and consequently Lawyers which are
the Ministers, Servants, and Secretaries of justice the Queen and Empress of
all other moral virtues, which is as absolutely necessary as the Sun; for
should the Law be suspended but one night, nay, should justice (which is the
soul of the Kingdom) depart but one minute, the Kingdom would be destroyed,
all humane society dissolved; for then every man might do as he list, and
scarce a man but hat^ some enemy or other that would presently kill him; and
that is the reason that the Sagest politicians always look first at a Being,
before a well-being. First whether a people shall live; next, for their
comfortable subsistence, and this brings me to the noble Theme of justice
whereof before I treat: I entreat leave to speak of one Remora and great
Hinderance which is multiplicity of business in a Court, A great Practiser may
better afford to make a Motion for 5 s. then one of us for 10 s.
that every man cannot be heard what he has to say, and then the Client
murmures that the business is not done and the Counsel for several
attendances (specially having no other business there) peradventure expects
new Fees; therefore it were greatly to be wished, that every man if it were
possible might be heard every day what he has to say for his Client, at least,
that no man having been heard once, should move again, till every one has had
his Motion; otherwise, a young Practiser may peradventure scarce make a Motion
till the last day of a Term: but if the Court would please where they leave
hearing, there to begin the next day, the Client might know when his business
should be dispatched.

I would feign propound a question to all rational men of public spirits,
whether a Writ of conscionable division does not lie among Lawyers? that at
least every one may live by his profession or whether there be any reason that
one man should get a 1000 l. per annum, and another of the same profession not
get half a hundred? I am sure it has ever been condemned; for as great an
error in politiques, as pluralities which were abhorred, even by that Trentine,
or rather Tridentine Counsel as being a great discouragement to the
professors, and dishonor to the profession; sure it is, that as all Clients
have an equal interest in the Court, one as much as any other justice knowing
neither father nor mother; so all practisers are equally invited to the Bar,
the Courts of justice, being like a great Prince that keeps open house for all,
and makes a general invitation.

Observing in Italy how careful the Potestates and Judges were to hear every
Advocate according to their Seniorities successively; I thought there was much
beauty and a sweet order in it: and one of them understanding that in our
Courts of justice one man is retained five or six times for another once; he
answered, that is all one, as if one man at a Feast should devour five or six
dishes, and not let the other guests to taste of them. I have often marvelled
why the Law that made such a respective privity and subordinate relation
between the Ordinary, and the Clerk, should make none between the Judge and
the Counsel, the Bishop called the Clerk brother, upon this presumption; that
their office for substance was the same, serving both one Master, and aiming at
the same thing, the welfar^ of the peoples souls. Now certainly the reverend
Judges and the Practisers ought to mind the same thing, and aim at the same
mark which is the White of Justice; The Judge in executing justice the
Counsel in requiring justice, for the Law is declared and executed upon the
request of the Lawyer; if any be otherwise minded that cares not for justice
further then he may get applause and practice, he deserves not the name of a
Counselor, But as the Profession is no honor to him, so let not him be any
dishonor to the Profession.
a concealer, or a worse name if you please better bef^ts him. But why then may
not the reverend Judges be said as it were to be Fathers of the Counselors?
who may not bestow all their favors upon one child, though never so virtues;
but rather like the Sun, dart the beams of audience as much as may be, upon all
indifferently, even upon barren heaths, which otherwise become unprofitable. A
wife loving Father, will not let any child be long without victuals, but if
we be not worthy to be counted sons, yet let us be reckoned of the Family, that
some provision may be made for us. It were a happy thing that there were no
contentious Pleadings in Westminster Hall, and the less work for Lawyers, the
sounder is the Body-politique: yet for the present, some having no other
subsistence but their bare practice, which have continued faithful; certainly,
it would tend much to the honor of the reverend Judges and Justices, to deal
their favors as equally amongst us all as possibly may be. I cannot but smile
many times, to see a company of hypocrites as we are, stirring up and down in
our Gowns, making men believe that we are full of employment; and so we are
indeed in a perpetual motion, measuring the length of the Hall, but not a
Motion perhaps from the first day of the Term to the last.

But would you have no favorites; yes, the worthy Parliament they are the
Kingdoms favorites, very fit they be first heard, and every way encouraged,
that so public business may not be hindered: and truly, their ingenuous Candor
is much to be praised in this particular, which bespeaks them not only
excellent Lawyers but excellent humanists

Secondly, The Laws favorites, as life, liberty, and Dower, it is very fit
that all such necessary and important matters by reason of their dignity,
should be heard in priority, whatsoever Counsel be retained to move them,
before matters of property. I allow also Judges favorites, for favor many
times gives a quickening spirit to the Law. There was a Prerogative of
primogeniture, a double portion belonging to the eldest son, by the Law of
God; by the equity whereof a Judge may a low a double portion of time to whom
he pleases: the best men that ever lived, have had their favorites, for
affection flows uncompelled. Bacon observes, that a man shall seldom see
three at play, but he shall wish better success to one of them, then the
other, though all strangers to him; and I believe scarce a father or mother
that have a numerous progeny, but love some one child better then any of the
rest, yet the child that is least beloved is not neglected, but has his portion
provided in due season. I do not drive at it, that all Lawyers should have
equal practice, I esteem parts and abilities wheresoever I find them, let the
stronger practiser get three, four, or five times as much as the weaker: but
this I aim at, that one should not f^ast, and two fast, according to that most
excellent saying, When poor men enjoy necessaries, then let the rich enjoy
superfluities; for in every Christian society, one man's superfluities must give
way to another conveniences, his conveniences to another necessities, his
lesser necessities to another extreme necessities.

But it is alleged for the great Monopolists, Impropriatours of practice,
Funditus exterpra monopolus and nomopolas, 3. instit. 183.
that they best understand the course of the Court, which makes the Law, we say
in our books, that a common error makes a Law: Truly in this I willingly
acknowledge my ignorance, I do not conceive how the course of a Court can make
Law or equity, it can only declare how the judgment of the Court has been in
that particular; but Law is reason adjudged in a Court of Record, where reason
is the kind, and judgment the difference that distinguishes it from legal
reason spoken extrajudicially; he that has served the space of two Prentiships
(let young Barristers grow up like Vines by the support of others) and has a
competent stock of Law and reason; it is very strange if he should not be able
to tell his Clients cause in plain expressions, Justice is an intemerate
Virgin that does not love to be too much courted, it may be a question whether
artificial and forced objections, do not many times hinder and obscure the
glory of noble Lady Justice, Ignorantia legis non excusat.
as blew bottles many times hide and hurt the precious Corn, or why should the
Law and equity be so obscure since every ignorant man is bound to take notice
of it? but how came they to understand the course of the Court but by their
great practice? he that will first learn to be a good Pilot must go to Sea
upon calm waters but shall not every man choose his own Lawyer? what else?
but who are retained but they that can soonest be heard? who has bin observed
to get most money when Queen Justice goes her progress, what Counsel does
the Client enquire after, S^ctam ad nolendinum.
to whom do the Attorneys and Solicitors make suit, I say but this as it would
be the honor of the Court to have the business pass through many hands,
that every man might labor in the Vineyard, so it is no hard matter to
disperse and distribute the practice with more equality as before is hinted;
This I affirm confidently that a Judge is obliged in point of honor at the
least (if not in point of Justice) to give all encouragement, and to hear him
first that has the fewest motions, nothing more just then to leave the Client
at liberty, but if the Master of a feast shall observe one guest fasting when
all the rest are full, even exhilerated, whom do you think he had rather
should eat the next bit? I know some that move not above 3. or 4. times in a
year, which a man would think should please the Court for their variety like
Summer fruits, if such a one crowd the last day of a term, how unequal is it
that he should not be so heard that he may not endanger the loss of a motion
at another Bar if he can get it, oh says the loving Father your Brother is
fasting, you have had a double portion; mark what I say, my worthy Masters and
good Brethren of the Gown, the excessive gain of some Lawyers, and others
gaining nothing in comparison, if not timely remedied will be the destruction
of our profession; for men will give over studying the Law when they see the
practice is engrossed, for no wise man will venture his money at a Lottery,
because there are such few gainers.

But are all Barristers able to practice?

I hope the objector will be well advised before he question the judgment of
the learned Benchers of every house who call and approve them, formerly the
Judges nominated the Sergeants (as Fortescue observes,) by the same proportion
of reason, the Tres^erudite Seniors will not in their Magistrall determinations
call any to the Bar, but such as have competent (though not eminent)
abilities, I am sure in our House they are for the most part very exact in the
exploration of men's abilities and performance of their exercises, but the poor
Client waits, and prays, and is exhausted, the Officers and attendants of
some Courts, naturally desire to keep their proceedings in a mystery and in a
becance, that if a stranger come to make a motion upon the right and merits of
the Cause, they say, oh Sir you mistake the course of the Court, you are out,
you must begin again, something did issue irregularly, the Corn is not ripe
for the Sickle, that as it was said in the Court of Wards (before these noble
and religious Masters and the learned Attorneys time) when Counsel pressed
that the Law was for their Client, it was answered, but equity was against him,
or if not equity then the prerogative must help it, or if not that, then the
course of the Court makes a Law, and yet I have heard at the same Bar that if
the Law, and the course of the Court come in competition, the Law must be
preferred as most worthy. Are not the sinews Leviathan perplexed? whereas if
right reason, I mean legal reason, such as we find in our Books, might be
Judge in all matters, then every man that had read the Law, and studied equity,
might in some competent measure be able to advise his Client to take the safest
way to speedy Justice, how many demurres do we daily meet withal? certainly
it were to be wished that every Court were enabled to do right and justice,
and not to constrain a man to begin again when he has run hard and got to the
end of one mark and goal to enter new lists, and begin a new combat, I
speak it to my great grief, that as the Civilians in Causes Matrimonial,
spend much time if there be an oath, and in Wills if I die or when I die, I may
take or I will take an eloquent discourse to little purpose, so many times we
have much heaving and shoving about removing a Feather, whether such a thing
duly issued, or was rightly entered or such a punctuality observed, or the
course was so in such a man's time, now it is otherwise, truly much course
stuff nothing but chafe wherein the pure Corn of Justice is many times
smothered, or to delay a poor man that has not money to follow his Cause, what
is it but to deny him? if I have but 4. l. 19. s. 11. d. to give for a Horse
whose price is 5. l. what am I the nearer, if the Plaintiff have right upon
the merrits of the cause to the thing in demand why is he not made Master of
it? if not, why is not his clamorous mouth stopped? I confess the Spiders Web is
an artificial curiosity and wit is a beautiful creature the use whereof is to
make doubtful cases plain not plain cases doubtful to flourish over a bad
matter, is as dangerous as to violate a Virgin vicious, the Ant is wise for it
self, but ill for the Garden.

I could be content to hear ingenious exceptions taken to pleadings and
subtle distinctions insisted in upon in Writs, The Civilians have their Libell
Answer duplication, triplication, quadruplication.
Courts, Declarations, Pleas in Bar, Relpications, Rejoynders, Surrejoynders,
Rebutters, Surrebutters, and so to the day of Judgment, if this trial of wit
might not be chargable to the Client, but when a poor man must pay the
reconing for every man to call for more Wine to inflame the shot, I confess my
heart rises against it, and wish from my soul that 10000. formalities were
rather dispensed with, then that a poor man should be kept from his right one
minute, for shall we not prefer the substance before the shadow, the Corn
before the Chafe, the Kernel before the shell, the Jewel to the Box, such
and no other are the most exact formalities and ornaments of Law in respect of
right and Justice, tell not me what is the course of the Common Law, or Civil
Law, or such a Court, but what does right reason require, this is the Case, a
poor man has 100. l. owing him he sues in Chancery is dismissed to Law recovers
in the Common Pleas, Error is brought in the Kings Bench, a fault is
discovered, it may be some sillabicall mistake in the entering of the judgment,
whether this poor soul ought not to have his money without further suit? and
so in all cases, when the right shall juditially appear to the Court, let
every rational man determine, away with all bugbeare objections of ignorance
or confusion, and carnal reasonings, lets have Scripture Laws, and summary
quick proceedings and after Naseby fight, Quasi 2d. Angliae nativitas.
lets never distrust God for any thing.

And truly if hereafter the Kingdom may enjoy so great a benefit, I assure
them it is a sufficient and valuable recompense for all their disbursments, and
poor souls if they desire no more, they deserve no less. But then comes in a
Hierculean objection, that it is better suffer a mischeife then an
inconvenience, and what that is in plain English, I shall spend my thoughts
upon it: when I complain many times that many honest Causes are lost for want
of some formality in pleading or other miscariage I am answered that old forms
must be observed, and better one be undone then many, now truly if the meaning
be that it is better one Offender suffer then a unity be endangered.

I am clearly of the same opinion, or if the meaning be as the Philosophers
was, who first said it was better to be once soundly wet with a great shower
then to be subject to a continual dropping, I close with that likewise, but I
beseech you what need is there that any man should be undone for want of a
ceremony or nicety in the proceedings, I am sure the least evil must not be
done for the greatest good, and why any mischeivous case should be suffered
amongst Christians.

I am yet to learn, it will be said Politicians could never prevent all
mischeifes, I say Christian Magistrates may and ought to make Laws for every
man's safety and property, a noble Gentleman for the good of a young Ward his
Kinsman, has Compounded for 3. or 4000. l. paid part, secured the rest, and
the Ward before any profits received dead, the Gentleman desires releife
against his Bonds, the Answer is made better suffer a mischief then an
inconvenience, what inconvenience can happen in giving conscience the upper
hand? It is better to suffer one Fox in a Vineyard then twenty, but what then?
must not that Fox be hunted out that he may not destroy the tender Vines? I say
it again and submit it, that it is a shame that any man should suffer in point
of right in a Christian Kingdom, it being a principal difference between
Christian and Heathen Magistrates, that the latter make laws that concern the
most, but care not for private men's sufferings.

And now concerning Justice between man and man. Oh what a glorious thing
speedy Justice is it is the glory of the Ruler, and the happiness of the people,
what the air is to the elementary world, the sun to the celestial, and the
soul in the intelligible, the same is Just ce to the civil world, it is the
healthful air that all oppressed Clients desire to breath, the sun which
dissipates and dispells all the Clouds and mists of oppression, injuries, and
deceits, it is the soul which animates and gives life to all things, what an
excellent justicer was Job, who would not delay the Cause of the Widow, why
may not ordinary causes arising within 100. miles of Westminster be ended in a
months space, and all other private differences in the Kingdom, the most
arduous and difficult in the space of three Months, until it shall please the
Parliament for the ease of the subject to enact several judicatories in remote
Countries, with liberty of appeal hither in doubtful and weighty matters. Oh
when will there be a determinate time to end all differences, why is it called
a Term, but to determine all controversies: what! the Term ended and the suit
not ended? is not reasonable, Solomon says there is an appointed time for
every thing; save only for a Law suit, how long it may last, the wisest man
cannot foresee. Among the Protestants beyond Sea, if a man cannot bring his
business to an end in 3. Months, he must pay good costs and be nonsuit, The
appointed time for the performance of any single combat is from Sun rising to
Sun set, if in that time the Chalenger cannot procure his Challenge upon the
body, the Defendant is acquitted, ah speedy Justice is the Cape of good hope,
by which we pass to the fortunat Islands, and this is the distinguishing virtue
of it, that whereas all other virtues do good to themselves (even Charity it
self beginning at home) regarding more the good of the possessor, then others;
Justice does good to others as being the principal Pillar and foundation of
the Kingdoms happiness.

Now promise being a debt, I am to perform it, and must speak a word
concerning the reverend sages of the Law, I am persuaded that the ambition of
the Clergy, and the pusillanimity (to give it no other name) of the Judges were
the grand occasions of these intestine calamities, who being entrusted by the
Kingdom as guardians and sentinells for the peoples liberties, spiritual and
temporal, to make themselves grandees at Court, made the Laws to speak what
they never intended, by straining to advance the prerogative above its proper
altitude, and certainly that judgment of ship money (not to say any thing what
is printed, where the same is most learnedly refuted) was the most divillish
plot that ever was invented since the Qu^ warranto in Ed. the 1. time when,
knowing men's charters were lost, in the Civil Wars they were forced to
produce them, forceably ravishing a Virgin, Parrium dici a te perpetrari
potesta me excusari non potest.
and then putting her to death, for the loss of her Virginity; for if the King
may take what he please in case of necessity, and be judge of that necessity
(as Lewis the 11. said of France, was a meadow he might move as often as he
judged it necessary) England must needs be a necessitous people, when they
were solicited to deliver their opinions against those worthy Patriots, whose
names ought to be famous to all posterity, they should have answered as
Papinian did [who said, being Chancellor to Caracalla the Emperor who had
murdered his Brother Geta] you may perpetrate, I may not excuse fratricid, for
which he was presently put to death, the end of the Judge is, to do justice,
and the end of a Lawyer, but to persuade the truth, a man must not for to save
his life, Non propter vitam vinendi perdere causam.
loose the end of his living, the only necessity is for every one to be honest,
but it is no unusual question why so many Judges and learned Lawyers deserted
the Parliament, and inclined to the other party.

It was a question at Trent, why more great Scholars held that the Pope was
above a Council, then the Council above the Pope, honest Vergeus made answer
that the reason was plain, because the Pope had more Cardinals Caps
Crosiers-staffes, sat Bishoprics, and Larded benefices at his disposal to
recompense such opinions then the Council had; as one being asked what the
Arminians held? answered merrily, most of the fat livings in the Kingdom.

But now since by Gods gracious providence, the wisdom of state have the
power to replenish and fill the Courts of Justice, what qualifications are
required in the reverend Justices? fall under consideration?

First Science for the ignorance of the Judge is the calamity of the innocent,
Ignorantia judicis est calamitas innocentis.
an ignorant Judge being worse then a corrupt Judge, for the one may sell
Justice as well as injustice, but he that understands not what right is cannot
be said to do justice to any, be learned ye that are Judges of the earth.

2ly. sapience, not wise to do evil, but that wisdom, that he which the
evangelicall Prophet calls Counselors advises; 2. Ps. 10.
that a Christian should be innocent as a Dove, never to hurt any body, and as
wise as a Serpent, that no body should hurt him, there is much wisdom required
in a Judge to discover fallacies, which sometimes may be presented as
verities; for many times by artificial deceit (which is of all other the
worst) the matter is so tricked, shadowed and heightened by color of painted
Art, that the Judges themselves may be abused and beguiled if they be not very
wise; The Civilians say that if a Judge be wise, no advocate can hurt a good
Cause, for if the Lawyer can by his wit disguise and varnish over a rotten
cause, and speak well in a bad matter, which is not eloquence but loquacity,
certainly the Judge is able to speak much better in a good cause, and to set a
far clearer gloss upon the truth if need require.

3ly. Prudence which acts in every individual circumstance, Law cases being as
men's faces, seldom 2. cases so like, but there is some difference, now in such
multiplicity of business, a Judge had need be very prudent, not to embrace a
cloud for Juno, I am persuaded if one observation might but take place,
Imbeculum pr^ Junone.
it would be a means to retrench and cut off all unnecessary delays and
tedious protractions of Law suits which are so grievous to the subject, and
that is, that every man's Grant, and all bargains, Contracts, and words, should
be taken and construed according to the parties meaning that, the Judge and
Jury should have nothing to do but by the manuduction of reason to investigate
and find out the parties real intentions and plain meaning, and so find and
declare the Law accordingly, It is a rule that men's grants and intentions must
be regulated and construed according to the Law, and not the Law according to
their intentions, I agree, that the Law must be the rule of all justice, and
that Law which is most certain and leaves least to the Judges arbitrary
discretion is ever the best, but undoubtedly this rule would be the mother of
the greatest certainty that can be imagined, for every man's meaning will easily
be found out and made evident, and this would beget a sweet harmony and
friendship in all Civil affairs, for no man should be suffered to defraud or
go beyond his Brother in barganing, whereas some crafty Fox that has observed
the strict formalities and niseties of Law, He was a most excellent man for
natural science and discourse Cecil most famous for prudence and direction
practical.
will easily surprise a credulous nature which suspects no hurt, many times to
his utter undoing, I know what my Lord Bacon says in his third rule against
this, but I submit it to juditious consideration, And this is practiced in
matters testamentary, All agree that matters of Parliament, Arbitrament,
Testament, and other words that end in meant, must be construed according to
intention, why not as well in all contracts? the reason is given, that when men
lie sick, they have no opportunity to get Council, pray, why can you not
as well send for a Lawyer as a Physicians, Iacentes in extremis.
if sick men have that favor, why should not the Law be as kind to men in
health?

4ly. Purity of hands and chaste eyes for a bribe will make the most eloquent
man mute as a Fish, I know our reverend Judges who take their delight in the
Law of the Lord, study the 1. Kings 8. where I note that it was the avarice of
the Judges that made the people of Israel revolt from Samuel, and desire a
King, and in Deuteronomy. and Isaiah, no Kite, Deuteronomy. 27.19. Esa. 5.20.23.
Eagle, or griping Bird, was to be admitted into the Temple of justice, and I
hold it a dangerous thing for Judges to take any presents from any man, though
in things commestible and corruptible in 2. or 3. days which the Romans
allowed, for there is a kind of hope in the giver to receive favor from him,
if any cause come before him, and a generous propensitie in English spirits to
requite the least courtesy; I remember an host in Languedoc told us that he had
a Turkey cost 40. s. English, and marveling at it, he told us that it was first
presented to a Judge whose servant sold it for 5 s. to a Client which presented
it to another Judge, and his servant sold it for 4. s. to one who sold it to
another Client for more, who presented it to another, and so in a circular
motion till 8. or 10 Judges had been presented with it, till about the end of
three days the host bought it, Integer vita saclerisque purus quam sum fieri
potest in humana natura.
and truly few ingenious men could scarce bridle their cheeks from laughing at
stories about presents made heretofore (though now blessed be God, we hear of
no such matter) that have served for table talk, a time which Christians
should improve for spiritual advantages.

Integritas justitiariorum est selus subditarum.
Fifthly, Integrity of Conversation; He that is to judge the Lives, Honors,
Estates, and fortunes of others, had need himself be exempt from blame, He
that is established to reprove others, ought himself to be irreprehensible as
much as may be in humane nature, the integrity of the Judges is the health of
the Subjects, therefore as Calvin said at Geneva, Gentlemen, superstition has
formerly kept her Throne and Court in this place therefore we must be more
zealous then others for the purity of Gods holy ordinances, so say I, what
heavy oppressions and iniquities were perpetrated and groaned under in our
Courts of Justice before this happy Parliament, every man knows it too well,
let it not be told in Gath, nor published to the dishonor of our English
Israel but as a stumble may prevent a fall by taking the better heed, 2. Sam.
1.20.
so I do not doubt but for the future we shall have such worthies preferred to
places of judicature, that shall make it their meat and drink, to execute
justice, to witness their love to Jesus Christ.

The former qualifications are necessary in all states as well heathenish as
Christian, therefore there must be some other distinstuishing Characters, I
would gladly speak my thoughts about two things, I look upon this Covenant as
the most admirable human writing that ever was in the world.
Malignancy commonly so called, certainly a Malignant Iusticer is the worst of
all Malignants, or if any be a neuter the difference is but graduall, we have
solemnly covenanted neither directly nor indirectly to give our selves to a
detestable indifferency or neutrality in this glorious cause which has never
offended, and which indeed is rather Gods then man's.

Therefore if any man should sit upon the bench that is disaffected, it must
needs be of dangerous consequence, because by common intendment, he conserves
and carries the Law in his breast, and if a Judge should come into any County
and there declare any thing done by the Parliament to be illegal, and twenty
worthy Commoners should make speeches to the contrary, it is no hard matter to
determine which would take the deeper impression, in vulgar breasts, nay
certainly if a man be but suspected by the generality of Cordial men, he is
no Idoneous person for so high a place, nay what if I should say, unless he
be active and zealous? for a Judge should be courageous in executing his Office
and in Gods cause.

I would feign ask another question (for thanks be to God and our good
Parliament, these are times of Christian liberty, the Lord grant that no man
abuse it by turning liberty into licentiousness, for a man to beat himself
and strike every man that he meets, and speak irreverently against authority,
this is no Christian liberty, but a furious Bedlam meriting madness) whether
he that is not a good man can be a good Judge? To fear God and honor
authority are inseparable the image of God shining in the face of a Parliament
obliges to all reverence and obedience.
the reason of the doubt is, because Justice is a moral virtue, and not
religious, for no doubt there are many good Justices amongst infidells, and
some that do justice even for the love of it, for a Philosopher may go so
far, but in a Kingdom, professing Christianity as in the preamble of the
Covenant (which is as the key to open the meaning of it) the words are, having
before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement of the Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, etc.

I conceive no man ought to be set upon so high a pinnacle of honor, as to be
entrusted with the lives, reputaions, Zelo vindictae pro fama, virtutis amore
non pro honor Dei.

Vltra sphaeram activitatis, si manducat peccat (minus lamen) si non est
homicidd. Exodus 18.21. 2. Sam. 22.3. Se the Annotations of the learned Divines
upon 2 Samuel 23.3. a work very praise worthy.


and estates of the Kingdom, unless he can have that before his eyes which no
unregenerate man can have, a natural man may do justice between party and
party for a private revenge, or to gain popular applause, or for the love to
justice, (a virtue in it self so sweet and amiable) but for Gods enemy (as
every unconverted man is) to aim at his glory, and to set Jesus Christ upon
his throne, that is above the sphere of his activity, the natural man cannot
act supernaturally; if he eats he sins, if not he is a murderer, as not
acting from right principles nor to a right end.

Moses was commanded to appoint Judges which had 4. excellent qualities.

First, able men no doubt, he meant sanctified abilities for learning without
Religion, is lame, and Religion without Learning is blind.

Secondly, fearing God, he that rules over men must be just, ruling in the
fear of God, he that commands others to deal justly must be just himse^fe,
otherwise you think to straighten a stick by a crooked rule, which must be
from an inward principle, the fear of God in whose right and place he rules;
a Judge must so fear God, as to be altogether just, not in part only, but
entirely just in measure and degree, not to be just to some, but to all, and to
all alike, and at all times and seasons.

3. Men of truth, every man is naturally a true man, every honest man is
morally and legally a true man, but a Judge must be a man altogether composed
of sanctified truth and Justice.

4. Hating Covetousness, its one thing not to be a covetous, man and another
thing to hate Covetousness, as it is one thing not to swear, another thing to
fear an oath, for any man that is notoriously known to be a Griper and a
covetous person to be made a justicer, is to place Avarice upon the Bench, and
not Justice, But who shall be Judge in this matter? Truly, who shall judge
whether it be day or no? how do I know that I am a man? In doubtful matters
the supreme and ultimate judgment (from which there can be no appeal to any
earthly Tribunal) is the high Court of Parliament, An Ordinanc of man is an
Ordinance of God, not to be disputed but obeyed in all cases actively, or
passively, faciendo aut patiend^.
when that has made or declared a Law, then every man's mouth is stopped, it is an
anointed truth, and may not be questioned by any murmuring or contradiction, I
know a reason why every man should be reckoned irreligious, unless the
contrary appear, because every man is borne so, to judge him religious, I must
see some fruits of it, which in a Judge should always be green, visible and
conspicuous to the eye and judgment of every godly professor; But all is not
gold that glisters, true, yet there is no Gold but does glister, certainly men
that in these times are preferred to fit at the Stern ought to be eminent, for
Grace and Piety, others that are but at the Oars, honest, civil, sober men
may do much good in their stations.

But the question truly stated will be this; what if the best Lawyers be not
the best men? or what if he that is as it were heir apparent to a Judge, be
not in the appearance of good men an heir of heaven, would you have Lawyers
leap into the Chair, and not by degree take their turns? Per saltum and non
per gradum
but before I answer, I ask further, Is he fit to be a prime Courtier on
earth to execute the Laws of God that is not a daily Courtier at the Thron of
grace? and such a just man that lives by his faith in Jesus Christ? what may
the full scope of the Apostle be to the Corinthians concerning this matter? See
the learned Annotations upon the first Cor. 6.
this is a clear truth that as all lawful external callings are from men, so
the internal is from God; I shall presume to insert a pleasant story, By the
constitution of the Popedom, upon the death of a Pope, so soon as the
Cardinals can conveniently meet together, they are all put into the conclave
and have nothing but bread and water, till they be agreed, and the Election
must be by two parts of the suffrages as it there be 30. Cardinals, he that
is chosen Pope must have twenty voices, now a Pope being to be chosen, fifty
Cardinals met 30. Divine Beza called him Cardinal, Quadrato, He was so good a
trencher man, Qui habebat nasum cherubinum and quia non potuit esse cardo
ecclesia apostatia per caput vult esse per ^asum mentioned by Horace Nunc est
bi^endum, etc.
were for one and twenty for another which being no Election, and they having
continued 3. or four days, and no hopes of agreement, one fat Cardinal that
stomackt the business for want of his Capons and Pigeons, and unguentary
Greek and Albauwines fell a sleep, and waking told them that now the
difference would be ended, for neither of the two must be the man, for he had
received a revelation in his dream that it was the will of Jesus Christ, that
one Clement should be Pope, and he asked them whether he was not without
exception the fittest man whom Jesus Christ would choose if he were personally
present, this put them to a stand, but they said they were not assured that it
was the mind of Jesus Christ, Grasso slumbers again and starting up as if
there had been some apparition, told them that it was now out of question for
Saint Peter had appeared to him and told him that it was the will of Jesus
Christ, that they should make choice of that man without any further
contestation; thereupon, concluding that none knew the mind of Jesus Christ
better than Peter they chose him Pope and dismissed the Conclave, I shall make no
application but this I say, that when a good man is advanced the Kingdom
indeed rather than he is preferred, for a good Judge is an epidemicall
blessing, yet I must further enquire what learning is principally required in a
Judge.

First for matter of Oratory, to read Cicero, Demosthenes, Orator est adulator
nisi sit vir bonus dicendi peritus.
Isocrates, Quintilien and politic Authors which have entreated of the Roman
policies, as Plutarque, Pliny, Seneca, Cassiodore, for Philosophy; certainly
all good humane Laws had their source and original from reason, well
regulated and conducted from the precepts of good moral Philosophy best
handled and made forth by Socrates and his Disciple Plato called the Divine and
prime of the Philosophers, Plato Gratis vult sibi credi existimans homines ut
pueros scepteo ferulae regi posse. Veris nugis verbis nudis non considerata
qualitate humanarum literarum.
but they were rather contemplative and speculative in occult inventions then
useful and practical for government. Aristotle's learning for a Judge is
rather to be desired, but yet I do not hold any of these absolutely necessary
for a Judge, for I consider that life is but short and that the Law is a thorny
study.

And here I would crave leave (out of a sensible apprehension of my own wants,
and a visible experience how many Gentlemen are gravelled) to propound my
serious thoughts to the honored and learned Benchers of the several
Societies, heartily wishing for the Students good, that there might be in
every respective house two at the least appointed as professors of the Law to
direct young Students in the Method and course of their Studies, Studemus potius
subtilia quam utilia. Lucifera non fructifera.
that they may rather apply themselves to cases profitable then subtle, for
the difficulty of the study discourages many. I have often thought that for an
ingenuous spirit that has tasted of those pleasing liquors of Ethiques,
Rhetoriques and Philosophy to betake himself to Justice Littletons Tenures is
to have a jumpe of Beef after a grand dinner; M. Britkenden to whom I am much
obliged.
I remember that having read Littleton three times over, I told my worthy
Master (who honored me with a lodging in his Chamber) that I thought Litileton
was no Scholar, and had nothing worth the reading, but his Latin sentences,
he advised me to make it my meat and drink, and to read Doctor and Student for
a recreation, which the more I read, the more I might, for I thought my self
in Paradise, worthy Master Shurland who read at twenty two years standing told
us in his Speech that he had lost three or four years study for want of
direction, because he specially minded moot points and speculative conceits,
neglecting cases useful and practical: and truly whereas we allow seven
years study under the Bar, I would have 3. of them spent upon the body of
Divinity, (it being as the Sun among the Luminaries) and 4. in the study of
the moral and rational part of the Common Law which is the rule of speedy
justice to give every man his due with expedition, for to what purpose now
should young Gentlemen gravel themselves in the quick sands of villenage
Frankalmoigne, Quare impedits, and such unnecessary contestations, I would
entreat the Gentle students forthwith to address themselves to the Readers to
have such a thing established.

And now after this discontinuance of readings if the Learned Readers would be
pleased instead of reading upon Statutes (which when the reading begins are
plain and easy, and whereupon peradventure scarce one case shall hapen in a
man's life time) would acquaint the society with the most useful knowledge and
daily occurrences in actions of debt, upon the case, of trespasses and
ejectments, the present Law of the times, which is worth our best studies, one
juditious Reader, might in a fortnights space argue most of the controversall
points which are now agitated, propounding 5. or 6. points a day, either about
conveiances assumpsits or words actionable which are the daily subjects and
disputes in Westminster Hall, and what matter is it, whether every point go to
the conclusion of the case, indeed what matter is it whether it be made a case
or only put by way of single questions, and then I would have every man to be
at liberty, to speak as he conceives the Law to be, for truly I do not like
it that any man for Argument sake should argue against his Opinion; pray thee
good Reader do not object, that old forms must be observed, I tell thee, one
ounce of reason is worth a pound of formality, as one acre of performance is
worth a whole land of promise; and he that shall prefer the shadows before
substances, and restingly delights so much to sit upon the form, let him never
come to the Bench by my consent; Time only can demonstrate the utility of the
praemised design, which cannot be chargeable to the Students, for he that
instructs others teaches himself, and it will occasionally increase his
Practice; besides, every one of the House might repair to the Professors for
private advice, for what a shame is it that one should take Fees of any
Gentleman of the same Society, though to the praise of some be it spoken, they
have given faithful and able advice, and refused their Fees to my knowledge,
and I know a Brother Barrester that has refused five hundred Fees, but what is
lost in the Hundred will be gained in the Shire.

If any man in his youth in the Schools of Humanity, shall attain to a
summary general knowledge in Grammar, Rhetorique, Phisiques, and
Meta-phisiques, the Ethiques and Politiques of Aristotle, they are useful as
scaffolds and praiseworthy, but not necessary; and for the Greek Tongue in
regard that the Authors are so faithfully translated into Latin, though in
many Cases it holds, that the water is never so pure as in the Fountain, yet
all things considered, it is better to rely upon the Translation being so
exact, then take such infinite pains to search the Original, as Rasis; Avicen
and other Arabian Physicians are made use of only in the Latin, and Greek
Translations, and as Travelers know that its better to come into a French
History, where all things are in a readiness upon the Table, then to an Inn in
Spain, where in stead of reposing your self, you must fetch Bread here, and
Wine there, and Flesh in another place, and stay two or three hours till it be
made ready; and this makes me wish not only that all good Books whatsoever
were Translated into ou^ own Language (which would advantage Children three or
four years schooling, who are cracking the shell to understand Latin,
whereas they would easily get the kirnell, and learn Logic, Rhetorique,
Philosophy, and other Sciences, as they do to know the names of Creatures,
Beasts, Fowls, ^ishes, Corn, and Household Stuff and other necessaries; if all
Books and Authors were in English, which might easily be done by our learned
Scholars now in town, a work that would more advance and dignifie the
Kingdom then Prima faci^ can be imagined: For hence it is that Scholars in
Fran^e know more at seventeen then with us at twenty; the Gentry, even the
women generally, excellently principled in moral Philosophy and all humane
literature) but also that our Law Cases were all Printed, and all our Writs
Processes, and proceedings in English, for that Statute in 36. Edw. 3. 36. Edw.
3.
recites, that great mischiefs happen to the Realm, because the Laws are
showed in the French Tongue, which the Clyents do not understand, but does not
fully cure the malady; The Freneh Laws were in Latin until Francis the 1.
which being altered they said, now is the Kingdom out of ward.
for truly I am ashamed that a Sub-paena should be served upon a Countryman in
Latin, when peradventure scarce any one within five miles understands it;
believe it, it is a badge of the Norman Conquest, which by degrees I doubt not
but will wear out. I am no enemy to Learning, but this I affirm confidently,
that were all Authors, Divine and Humane, faithfully and exactly translated (as
I know no reason why they may not) there would be little use in comparison, or
rather trouble of any Language but our own, unless it be for Statists in
point of correspondency with other Nations. Indeed History is in some sort
necessary for our reverend Judge, We should study the (...) as well as the
(...).
especially our English Histories, without which a Statesman is as one that
has a crick and cannot look back, and I conceive that to be the greatest
defect in our Profession, that not being versed in our Histories we content our
selves, that the Law is so, not looking into the reason why it is so; but for
other Arts and Sciences let him that is to go to Rome, Abstine inutil: labori
ut profituro sufficias.
not trouble himself to learn all the ways thither, but that which may be
the safest and nearest way for him; for if any matter concerning the Civil
Law, or Physic, or Mayhem, or the quantity of Land, or any other foreign
scientificall matter be brought in question before our reverend Judges, they
send for other Artists, Cuilibet in art sua perito credendum est, potius
vilissimo sutori de calceis disputanti quam gravissimo Catoni.
skillful in those matters, and advise with them; according to our rule in Law,
every man must be credited in his own Art, the Shoo-makers Judgment about
making Shoes, before a grave Cato Disputing about the same matter, and so far
I think all understanding men will agree with me; but now here it sticks,
whether the knowledge of God in Jesus Christ be not a very expedient
perquisite, if not a necessary requisite to make up a complete Judge, and truly
I hold it is in a Christian Kingdom; the reason is, because without this no
man can come to be a good Politician, for Policy is but a branch of Divine
Wisdom, there being no Policy against God, for all saving spiritual wisdom
comes from God as the fountain, through Jesus Christ as the Cisterne,
effectually drawn out by the Pipe of Faith, and all reason of State must do
homage, and render obeisance to Divine reason, which has its Authority more
elevated. But put case then that one Lawyer has a large stock of Law, five
talents for the purpose and not one spark of Grace visible, another is a
visible holy man and has but two talents of Law, which of these two is fittest
to be a Judge? I think the latter, but put it thus; that one has four talents
of Law, and two of Grace, and the other has ^wo talents of Law, and four of
Grace, and then what is to be answered? I shall not determine it, but this I
say; that Grace and Gifts meeting together make a sweet harmony, and when Grace
is preferred then the figure stands before the ciphers, our English Proverb is
very significant, Set not the Cart before the Horse; that is, prefer not dead
things before living, to place a religious man in the Chair, to make a good man
a great man, what is it but to set Jesus Christ upon the Bench, it being an
invincible Argument, that he that loves the Child for his fathers sake, bears
the greater love to the father. Aristotle says, that Religion is absolutely
necessary for a King, for no man will think that he will do right to men that
performs not his duty to God; neither dare men offend him that fears God. How
happy was Constantine for putting his trust in the Cross, as Papists vainly
imagine; but that Kingdom that trusts only in God what can be done against
it? Oh make much of, and honor religious men for his sake whose true pictures
they are, for the house of Obed Edom was blessed for the Arc sake; indeed it
was the Court-caveat, Take heed of Puritan Judges, were but our Christian
Magistrates, Ministers, and Justices, rightly zealous for the glory of God (as
blessed be God many of them are) I mean such as do not only make profession
of Religion, but take it into their protection, what glorious times should we
live to see, all terrestrial Deities (as sacred Scripture calls Judges) are
Images of the ever-living God; Now is it not most reasonable that the
Portracture should resemble the Original. A Picture that resembles us, we make
much of it, if it deforme us, and carry our name unjustly, being nothing like
us, we burn it; the Draughts of Gods Visage are Piety, Justice, and Clemency;
good Kings and Judges are kept in the bosom of the Eternal as his beloved
resemblances, but a counterfeit shilling we nail it to a Post, and if any man
think any way to advance himself by exceeding those bounds which God has
prescribed, the Almighty Judge does but fatten such a man for the slaughter, to
make the strok of his Judgment more signal. The^ reverend Fathers so adorned
and qualified should therefore be made honorable and rich the first day of
their Charge, or have an honorable support for three Reasons.

1 To anticipate not only the inconveniences of want, and temptations of
presents, but to prevent dejection of spirits, for when a Judge sees that he
shall get nothing by the Cause, he will be studious for his own ease to do
speedy Justice, for why then should it cumber the Court longer then needs must;
and that is the reason that many States maintain Lawyers at the public
Charge, that so expecting nothing from the Clyent they may steer their advise
the speediest way to the haven of Justice. But whatever complaint may be made
of us, truly for the generality we do but taste of the broth of commodity,
the Clerks and great Officers of Courts put their ladles to the bottom of the
Pot, and are even drowned in the sweet liquor of potable gold.

2 This honorable Calling and maintenance is in the nature of bail, Acutos
honoris stimulos. Ingenius malvezzi.
as a cautionary assurance to the Kingdom to answer for their judicial
administrations; and I conceive Honor obliges, and engages more then profit,
yet not so as to superabound in wealth and power, least they should command as
Lords, and not as fathers.

3 Judges should therefore be great that they may dare to do Justice, as
Gascoigne committed Hen. the 5. Hollinshed.
upon a Bishops complaint, Hen. 4. rejoiced that he had a Judge durst do
Justice upon the Prince, and a Son that would be so obedient; I shall tell you
of a gallant piece of Justice to recompense that of Piso; In the great Wars
between Charles the fifth, and Francis the first, one Raynucio was imprisoned
at Millan for betraying a Fort to the French, his wife (who for beauty was
called the Nose-gay of the Parish) petitioned the Governor for her Husbands
enlargement; the Governor our being so enamoured that there was little hopes
of liberty (had there been no more in it but that he might behold the Lady, who
daily attended with Petitions,) being able to conceal the fire no longer told
her that his life was in her hands, and he was as much her Prisoner as her
Husband was his, and that she must yield to his desire or be an undone widow;
the virtuous soul covered her cheeks with the color of Roses, and desired to
speak with her Husband, whom she made acquainted with it, telling him that if
her life would save his, she would gladly lose it, but my honor being required
you must prepare for death; he commended her magnanimity, and how sad their
parting was you may easier conceive then I can express; the hour being
appointed for his execution, he considered that life was sweet, and skin after
skin, one thing after another, what would not he do to preserve a little
momentary breath! sends for his dear Consort, Communis error non facit jus.
True honor consists in a Christian sufferance of the greatest misery, rather
then to commit the least sin.
and cries to her as if he had been her child, to yield to the Governor, and
to win her consent says; First, that honor consists but in the opinion of the
world, and that a sin wholly concealed is half pardoned, as the Priests use
to say. Secondly, That Spaniards are most faithful in keeping promise, and no
doubt he would swear never to reveal it. Thirdly, That he would be the death
of him, as by the Law of Spain he might (for any man may kill him that lies
with his wife, the provocation being so great. In Italy he must kill his wife
as well as the Adulterer, or else he dies for it, as being presumed that he did
it not in the way of Justice, but revenge) the poor soul yields, for as Job
says, if this be the condition of our temporal being, The least fall from
grace is a fall from Paul's.
that we never continue in the same condition, much more are our spirits
mutable as they are more subtle, (not that I speak this in the least title to
justify her, for should I go about to excuse it, it might be a greater sin
in me then the offense was in her; as for a Lawyer wittingly to Patronize an
unjust Cause, is worse in him then in the Clyent;) Garcias had her in his power
as a bird ensnared, and being weary dismisses her, with a promise to set her
Husband at liberty; but the Spaniard considering that a man or woman's honor is
like a great Fort, take that and you command all the rest, tells the Prisoner
that he must pay ten thousand Crowns redemption, she with much difficulty
satisfies that demand likewise, and was promised that her Husband should be
sent home to her house the next day, but the persidious Governor bethinking
himself what danger he might incur from the Emperor, and fearing that the man
might be revenged on him (for dead men do not bite, therefore in some places
of Italy you may have a man killed for five shillings, but not cudgelled under
twenty) sent a Priest to him to prepare himself for death, and caused his body
divided from his head to be sent home the next day in performance of his
promise; now for the poor soul to see her self deprived of Husband, Honor,
and goods altogether, her grief was above expression, and the torment the
greater that if it were discovered she would be abhorred; and if concealed, it
could not be cured; at last with extreme shame she made it known to a friend
both able and faithful. Hercules Estius.
Now the Duke of Ferrara being General for the Emperor, Aemelia presents her
requests for Justice against Garcias who was convented at Ferrara, and thinking
that as the Adultery of Mars and Venus served only for sport in the Court of
the Heathen Gods, thought that the General would but laugh at the conceit, or
at the worst would remand him to his Command at Milan, persuading himself that
in such a case his Soldiers would not let him suffer, he confessed the fact,
said it was so pleasing a sin, that it was impossible he should ever repent
of it, and upon the matter told the General that the Traitor was deservedly
executed, and therefore he was not troubled at what might be the event of it.
Says the Duke, Why am I made great but that I should do Justice upon the
greatest offender? Garcias said the Duke, you must restore to this Lady her
ravished honor. Sir, says he, That is impossible, and what is past help, shall
be past grief. But you may Marry her, says the Duke, for you loved her once,
and you must love her for ever, or lose your life, and that you shall do this
day. I loved her indeed, says Garcias, as Herod loved Mariamma, or as the
Hunter loves the Venison to make sport or to feed upon it, but I am not
prepared for death, therefore I choose rather to Marry her. Aemilia upon her
knees intreates that she may rather dye then Marry him whom she so much
abhorred. but the Duke having whispered with her, she submitted to his good
pleasure. The same Priest joined them together, (by virtue whereof she was
entitled to his Estate) and of a forced bargain Garcias hoped to make the best
of it, but that which was as lushious as Locusts, proves as bitter as
Coloquintida, for the Duke adjudged him to lose his head instantly, and the
same Priest appointed to prepare him for that fatal blow.

And blessed be God for any good beginnings in this kind, which the eyes of
good men behold with comfort, both at Westminster, and this new election of
Council in this renowned City, the Jerusalem of England. Of which famous City
our Profession being so much indebted to it, I must in duty say thus much of
it, it is the Jerusalem of our England, and now the receptacle of the Saints;
the Lord has had in all ages, some hiding place for his people until his
indignation be appeased, and where but here? A strong argument to me in all
these Commotions, that the enemy should never set his dirty foot upon this
Virgin City, it is an Epitome of the whole Land, the heart of the Kingdom, the
Chamber of the great and most Honorable Council, and the nerves and sinews
of our just defensive Wars; and next under God, and our Worthies in
Parliament, the chief preserver of the whole Kingdom, and now in true esteem
the most glorious City in all the world, Fateor naevos in vultu veneris
but I spy a mole in the face of Venus; Beggars are suffered in our English
Israel; Oh the fearful noise that the poor Prisoners make for bread, for
bread; the hydious noise that was made at the Sacrifice to Molech that the
childrens skrikes might be drowned, is nothing to it, Audio vocem esurientis.
because we are Christians; what English heart but must cleave if it were a
Rock, melt if it were Ice, soften if it were Iron, dissolve if it were a
Diamond? to hear a poor soul in such anguish of spirit bitterly cry out; Oh
Bread, Bread for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, Bread; we are a great company of
poor Prisoners, almost starved and pined, (as if their Souls were ready to
take their flight for such unkind usage) did not custom take away the
scandal of it, and inure us to it, as those that can sleep quietly near the
Catadupes and great falls of the water of Nilus; shall we deny bread to those,
or to any for whom Jesus Christ shed his precious blood, having such plenty as
blessed be God we still enjoy to admiration, and professing our selves
brethren of the same faith? Indeed for Prisons, the Banquet is a most
excellent composition of Charity, but I fear many are in extreme want, it may
be such as are ashamed to beg; truly since by our Law (which is contrary to
the practice of other places) the Creditor is not bound to maintain the
Debtor, whom he has disabled from geting his living; it lies much upon the
Governors that no man want Bread and necessaries, one man is thrust down into
the Hole not having two pence to pay for his Lodging, Is not this against the
Commandment.
another stands at the Gate blowing his fingers, because the Creditor will not
let him get his living by the sweat of his brows, a third lives upon the
Basket, that had he his liberty might releeve others, as formerly Merchants
have done; now truly if it shall appear that any man shall fraudulently, or
subdolously get into his hands another man's estate, I think he ought to be
severely punished, as in Roan, a Father and two Sons were executed as
decoctors and melters of other men's Estates, Decoctores bonorum al^orum
suspendantur.
that had borrowed ten thousand pounds not being worth a Groat, nor any
probable possibility to be ever able to satisfy; but for a Merchant that has
lost his Estate by the immediate hand of God, through shipwreck, or other
casualty, to be persecuted upon the Statute of Banckrupts, and the Wife to be
examined against the Husband, and if twenty pound be concealed to preserve a
numerous family from starving, to be set upon the Pillory, and lose an Ear
(whereas if right reason might take place, the Banckrupts Wife should be
provided for in the first place, according to the Portion she brought, it being
the most ancient and primitive Debt, a man being more straightly bound to his
Wife and Children then he can be to any Creditor) and after all this to lie in
Prison perpetually. Scripture prisons were for custody, not punishment.
Oh that we had the tender bowels of our Father, and would seriously study,
Mat. 18.23. that famous Parable or similitude. But some object, that little
Money will be lent upon such security, truly I am confident there would be more
honest Bargains, and less fraud, and how was it amongst the Jews when there
was a year of Jubilee, that all Debts were released the seventh year? now the
word fraud puts me in mind of a good remedy to prevent it, which is, that
there might be an Office in every County, to Register all Leases made for any
Land in that County, and indeed all conveyances whatsoever, and all charges
upon the Lands, and all Bonds and Contracts of any great value (for it is a hard
matter to find out Recognisances, Judgments, Extents, and other Charges, and
too chargeable for the Subject) that so for twelve pence or some such small
matter, every man might know in whom the interest of Land remains, and what
encumbrances lie upon it, and every Estate or Charge not entered there to be
void in Law; but then says a miserable hunkes, My Estate will be discovered,
and what will become of trusts? truly till about those unquiet times of R. 2.
and H. 4. we read of few trusts or uses, and if it please God to settle a
well-grounded Peace, (as I hope comparing what has been done with what is to be
done, two parts of the difficulties are surmounted) I know little use of any
private trusts, the square dealer cares not who sees his Commodity. No doubt it
were a happy thing if every man's Estate in the Kingdom were generally known,
then he that is not worth a Groat would not go in a garb of five hundred a
year, and incur Debts irrecoverably; another hugs himself that he can
cosen men's expectations, making men believe by his old shoes that he is not
worth five pound, when he has thousands in his Coffers; As the Gebeonites. Ios.
9.
of which dissimulations the latter is the worse, it being better for a woman
to paint then to blurre her countenance. It is to be wished that the poor
souls of Prisoners were better fed, Elemosina cordis manori est quam corporis.
that so the loss of their Temporal liberties might be recompensed by
spiritual advantages, though to the praise of this place be it spoken, that
here are Ministers appointed for most Prisons, but in Country Goales it is sad
to consider their deplorable condition, a small matter yearly laid upon every
Town in the County would maintain a Minister for the Goal, Five shillings a
Town.
who by love might gain much upon their spitits (for truly when all is done
the way of love is the best, and a more winning way, and if any thing about,
yet the fairest) when the poor wretch shall see that the Magistrate loves his
soul, and is sorry for his misery, and would not punish him but that the
necessity of Justice exacts it; now till this be effected, why may not the
Prisoners where there is no danger of running away, go out with their Keepers
to the public Preaching? or if not all, why not so many as can be conveniently
attended upon? It will be said that this might be construed to be an escape in
Law; What? if a poor Prisoner should go out in the morning on the Lords Day,
to serve God, and return at night, will any Creditor be so divellish to Count
that an escape? As if like one that had the Pestilence, he should envy the
salvation, and wish the destruction of his Christian Brother, whom surely he
reckoned so at first, or else he would have had no dealing with him.

There is some question about Arrests on the Lords Day, but I think the
question should rather be, whether any but Accomptants ought to be imprisoned
for Debts; there is I confess a difference taken in our Books, 67^25. on 27.
E. 3. 9 Rep. 66. Mackallyes case
that no judicial act may be done upon the Lords Day, but that ministerial
acts, such as to Arrest men may be done; the reason is rendered, because it is a
good thing to do well upon the Sabbath; certainly there is more dexterity of
wit, then solidity of Christian Judgment in this difference; I am sorry the
reverend Author should put a Bristolstone amongst so many diamond Reasons as
are in that case, what manner of reasoning is this? A poor man in debt would
feign serve God upon the Christian Sabbath if he might go free from Arrest;
The Law privileges men going to Faires cundo morando redeundo.
no, says that Book, if you go to the Market for your Soul you must be
arrested, and so the poor man it may be drinks away the day, and splits his
Soul even upon the rock of despair, and whether this be not a breach of the
fourth Commandment, judge you; for this is an everlasting rule for all
Christian Magistrates, that whatever any man's offense be, they must take care
for that man's soul.

I am persuaded that that which was formerly spent in Pageantlike vanities upon
a Lord Mayors day, would have fed all the mendicant poor about the City; I
profess, considering what fopperies are beyond Seas, a man might well have
asked whether the Lord Mayor was a Christian, or did honor to some Heathen
Deity? but blessed be God the moderation of this City is known, and beloved of
all good men; me thinks a crown a house within the Line, advanced by the
Landlord, should make a comfortable provision for all the Beggars; I know the
streets in that populous City of Paris were so covered with Beggars, that as
you walked along upon their Holy Days you might have imagined your self in a
continued Hospital; one Gedouen, famous Gedouen Provost of the City, a
compassionate man prevailed to lay a Leavy of five shillings a house throughout
the City, wherewith the Beggars were clothed, those that could work employed,
the impotent provided for, that in a months space a Beggar was as hard to be
found as a Wolf now in England, or as I hope ere long it will be to find an
Enemy to the Kingdom in the bowels of it; we have many excellent Statutes to
this purpose, 42 Eliz.
which are in substance the Law of God, and can never be repealed; and were
there once no Beggars in London, I should have some probability to nourish my
faith that it would be Universal, for this City is an excellent Copy for the
whole Kingdom to write after. I hear others complaining of numerous
Privileges, but I hope the Noble Peers, and worthy Patriots will not renounce
their legal rights to gratify a company of old Usurers, or cozoning
oppressors, (for I observe, that those which are conscionable in lending are
courteous in forbearing) and at that word Usurer my heart rises, and is so brim
full that it must needs a little run over; poor Souls, they lost a fifth part
of their comforts when Money was reduced from Ten to Eight, cruelty is their
Genius, but I hope that Trade is not long lived, Luther thunders against it;
indeed, sincere Calvin upon occasion of many English men's flying for Religion
to Franckford and Geneva, taking some Money with them entreated the Bankers to
allow them three or four in the Hundred, because they knew not how to employ
it; but he delivered his Opinion with many cautions, so as the lender gain by
it, and be well able to pay it, and so as none be offended by it.

It it the honor of our Nation that the Practice of Usury is not by any Law
allowed, 13 Eliz. 8. 39 El. 18. 21 Jac. 17.
in point of Religion or Conscience, and the words of the Statute are, That all
Usury being forbidden by the Law of God is sin, and detestable, and therefore
enacts, that he that takes less then ten shall forfeit the interest though it
be under eight, which is in force to this day, and might be of singular use, if
the proceedings by way of information or action were quick (but in truth they
move like ponderous bodies, it is rolling a Stone upon a Hill, and if there be
the least mistake down it tumbles upon the Plaintiff) to compel men to deal
like Christians, who worse then Jews cry out for Interest in these straight
times, from their Christian Brethren, who have been plundered of all in the
Country, driven from their habitation, scarce having food and raiment, and
where to hide their heads, and yet the Usurer cries I have nothing to live upon
but my Use, not considering that the Debtor has neither Use nor Principal;
and this is true in case of Sureties contrary to the true intent of the ancient
Law, that the Surety should not be questioned but in default of the Principal,
Si defeceris principalis.
until the witty Archbishop Keeper being angry with a Surety said, That he
that was first in intention should be first in execution, and for his conceit
sake sent him to the Fleet, though the principal was able to have made
satisfaction; besides there are too many evasions out of good Statutes; if a
man give Bond of an hundred pound for a Horse not worth ten pound, this, they
say, is no usurious Contract. An old Usurer delivers twenty pound to a young
Heir, and an old Bond of eighty pound not worth six pence, Morsura non usura.
who gives Bond to pay one hundred pound, this is divellish biting, but it must
not be called Usury within the Statute, though I conceive it clearly within the
intent of the Lawmakers. When we object stews against the Papists, they say
they will suppress them, when Protestants forbid Usury: but I do not say any
thing against a tolleration of it, in case of Orphans; neither do I make any
question but that in great and weighty matters a Kingdom may allow eight or
ten in the Hundred, to get Money to preserve it self; fot in case of necessity
it was lawful to eat the Shewbread, and for Adams Sons to Marry with Adams
Daughters, besides what the wisdom of a State shall conclude upon in such
cases cannot be thought prejudicial, but that which I drive at is, that rich
men in these days make it an Instrument of oppression, he that would be fully
satisfied, let him read a Book which I find written by R. F. of Graies Inn,
1611. I believe the most judicious that ever was concerning this Subject; now
to resume the matter of Privileges, which are private Laws to be maintained
and defended as well as the Public, some Noble Peers deserve much Honor in
maintaining their ancient and undoubted Privileges, and placing their legal
favors upon fit Objects; if any of their followers be any way engaged, they
satisfy as they are able, and the Creditors have returned their Lordships
humble thanks for some Hundreds of pounds paid by the Creditors, who had never
paid a penny had they been imprisoned; others may thank that Noble Knight for
their Debts, who for his clemency and commiseration intended to poor
Prisoners, deserves to be styled, The Humanist of England.

And here I would humbly beseech those Honorable Personages who are moved to
grant Habeas Corpusses for poor Prisoners in Execution, to go abroad in
vacations, (either like Bees to fetch in a little Honey to the Hive, gathered
from the flowers of their friends charity, or to get in their estates which is
a hard matter; for every man concludes that nothing can be due to a Prisoner)
Christianly to consider whether they can so cheerfully answer the denial
thereof, as the granting of them at the day of Judgment; when it will be
easier to answer an error of Indulgence and mercy, then severity and
strictness: The Reverend Judges fitting for Lord Keepers granted many, and
Creditors found the benefit of it, Hutton, Harvy, Crook, Vernon, etc. and when
presidents are various it is presumed for liberty, in Mitiorem partem, much may
be said in favorem libertatis.
for no man will return to a Dungeon if he can satisfy; the Bird will not
come into the Cage unless ensnared. But Habeas Corpusses have been abused,
says the Creditor, truly if he may be Judge it is in vain for the Prisoner to
plead not guilty; But what has not been abused? have not the Sun, Moon,
Stars, nay Women, Wine, and all things sublunary been abused? me thinks
these necessitous times should be as a golden Key to open the door of hope for
poor Prisoners, it being almost a Proverb beyond Sea, or rather a progidie,
that an English Usurer may have as many slaves as he please, though a Lord
could not imprison his Villain; and it was resolved that a slave brought from
Russia by an English Merchant was instantly a Freeman, coming upon English
ground, and breathing our pure air.

And now concerning the necessary and laudable recrute of the Honorable House
of Commons, 11 Eliz. Cartwrights Case, Camb.
who may justly say, The Motto of a Commoner like a glorious Torch, Aliis
inserviendo consumor.
We consume our selves in giving light to the Kingdom. Anonimus brings in a
flood of words, but not one drop of reason to make good his assertion, that
Lawyers are not fit in this comjuncture of time to be chosen Members, the
weakness whereof will easily be discovered by the strength of reason and
authority, which are the two instruments to confirm all truths; in reason we
see with our own eyes, Sapientis est propriis oculis videre.
in matters of Authority by other men's; the Divine begins with reason, proceeds
to experience, and ends in Authority; the Physician begins with Authority,
proceeds by reason, and concludes in experience; the Lawyer begins with
Authority, proceeds to experience, and ends in reason; therefore for the
discussion of this point, I shall begin with the Authority in the last
institutes, the words are these: At a Parliament holden at Coventry, 6 Hen. 4.
by color of an Ordinance made in the Lords House, in 46 Edw. 3. it was
forbidden that no Lawyer should be chosen Knight, Citizen, or Burgess, by
reason whereof the Parliament was fruitless, and Lawyers ever since for the
great and good Service of the Commonwealth have been eligible; Corpus
causidicorum est seminarium Magistratus.
now let right reason be Judge in all things, the Innes of Court are the
Academy of the Law, and the body of the Lawyers is the seminary of all
Magistracy.

Does not the Supreme Power govern the Kingdom by Law, and are any so fit to
be Lawmakers as those that must be the Executors and Dispencers of them; King
James (who certainly was the Phaenix of Princes for substantial learning)
admires the wisdom of our Laws, that the Judges have no Vote in Parliament,
and the Pen of famous Bacon is of that Judgment, the excellency of that
observation in my weak apprehension lies very deep, I want a Bucket to draw,
can any man declare the meaning of an Act of Parliament so well as the makers?
who knows the spirit of another man so well as himself? the reverend Judges
are bound to expound Statutes according to the minds of the Legislators,
otherwise they that are at the oars, row contrary to him that sits at the
helm, and then the Ship of State would quickly be in danger of drowning. That
the knowledge of out Municipall Laws is not a necessary ingredient to the
constitution of a Statesman, is a fundamental error in Politiques; I do not
hold that Reason is circumscribed within the limits of our profession and
perscrutation, but I am confident that the common Lawyers of England are as
understanding rational men as any Practisers of any Profession whatsoever be
in the world, and I dare say that there are more Godly Religious Lawyers,
Attourneys and Solicitors in England, then in all that habitable part of the
World, called Christendom;

But my Adversary would feign make his Ignorance seem Iugdement, I know not
why he mentions Calice, I confess I do not love the least gall in ink (the
rather for that any thing I know to the contrary he may be an honest man and a
good Christian, though in some things erroneous) I should tell him that he
mistakes our Laws As the Priest when we lost Calice, took our English brawn
for sturgeon, and eat it lustily in Lent, and sent for more English Sturgeon;
I can by that little knowledge I have in the Common Law tell the Civillians
that our trials by Jury are more excellent then theirs by Witnesses only: for
how easy a thing is it, It is a merri^ Story in Hollinsheds reign of Queen
Mary.
in a sinful populous State to get two men to swear an affirmative? and
indeed by the strength of our Common Law-reason I can discover many weaknesses
and errors in the Laws of other Kingdoms; but what a silly allegation is it,
that we are not useful in other Kingdoms, Lex est determinatio legis naturae
integrae non corruptae. learned Mr. Seldom. Every Kingdom has it is Common Law
Tanquam inter viburna Cupressi.
for all Laws are but determinations of the Law of Nature incorrupted, though
every State has its distinct municipall Laws; and herein we exceed, that many
of us understand their Civil and Common Laws beyond sea, but not a man of
them that so well understands our Common Law: which for certainty,
perspicuity and many other respects far advances it self above any other
humane policy, but to keep to the point whether an honest Lawyer be not a
necessary and useful member in the public service, to hold the contrary is
to maintain so weak an error, that I think never yet deceived any man; If
thou intend Anonimous, that those which have knowledge in the Laws are not fit
to be Commoners, thou then art so silly that I should be sorry for this
encounter: but if thy meaning be (as I believe it is) that you would not have
Parliament men to practice, then there are these two things considerable.

quere, whether it be fitting a Lawyer should have two places till his Brethren
be employed, I hold it negative upon reasons irrefragable it being destructive
to all State-policie.
1 Whether it be fit that a Judge of a superior Court should give attendance
upon an inferior Bar: because we know what excellent service the Lawyers of
the house of Commons have performed concerning the Judges who have been
deservedly judged.

2ly. Whether to be of the Honorable house of Commons do not require a whole
man? To the first it may be answered, that sitting, the Parliament, all other
Courts must do homage to that in any competible point of power; But when they
are out of the house of Commons, they are in particular resolved into their
private capacities, and he that is an Esquire and a Commoner will not take
place of a Knight that is not of the Honorable house, though truly I could
wish that every Knight of the Shire especially during Parliament time (and so
long as they live considering their hard serivce) might precede all the Knights
of his shire, The Knight of the Shire. p^r excellentiam. who for breaking the
Ice in that particular deserves much commend^tions.
and so the Burgesses proportionably for never did mortals act in so glorious
a Cause as this is, as that excellent ingenious moderator clearly proves that
the King is greater then all particulars, but less then the universe, as the
Chapter capitularly congregated are superior to the Deane, but apart,
subordinate to him.

To the second, I answer that when ten men are obliged to pay 20 li. if one man
pays it, it is in Law the payment of all the rest: so all men and women being
equally obliged to marry for the public good, when the Kingdom is populous
and no want of posterity they are discharged as to that politic
Consideration; So if twenty Commoners are practicing in other Courts, if the
business of the House go on as effectually as if they were present then that
scruple is removed, but indeed I would have it with this caution, that if ever
it should come to a vote in the House of Commons about the regulation of Fees,
or redressing of delatory proceeding, or any matter whatsoever that is to be
reformed in Courts of justice, concerning the profit of Gown-men; I would have
them desired to be absent at such votes; for truly if the question were put to
me whether any thing should be enacted against my particular profit, I should
suspect my own judgment; nor ought any man to be judge in his own cause, when
it concerns his private advantage, for as Gold is tried by the touchstone so
are men by gold; it is too heavy a temptation to be laid upon any man's
shoulders: for the best Man is but a Man at the best, and the spawn and root of
all sin will have a being in the most sanctified man: so long as he has any
being here below, and the highest point of policy is so to settle matters that
no man may hope to gain by prolonging suites, or muliplicitie of business,
Machiavill says, R^pente ex ^^timo, fit turpessimus. As that Honorable
Gentleman said at the C. P. for the encouragement of the Reverend Judges.
Procurator Cesaris. At Brides, by Mr. Peter's a man of a pure Evangelicall
spirit, who goes about doing good, and may be a looking glass for others. qui
optime meritus est de Regno,
do but tell a good Prince that he may do what he list, and presently he
becomes a Tiger. I am sure experience shows and it shall be acknowledged to
all posterity, the excellent service that has bin done by men learned in the
Laws since this Parliament; their names shall be had in everlasting
remembrance; Faithfulness to the State and uprightness has bin their
brightness and glory: and which has bin more set off with a greater luster by
reason of the reciduation and unfaithfulness of others, of whom I will say but
this, the Lord pardon them their great transgression: for they knew the Law
yet contemned it; I am sure they have been a dishonor to our noble profession:
but I leave them to the wisdom of Parliament, only I confess I was much
affected with an expression I lately heard in a Sermon, that should our enemies
prevail over us, should they whom the Parliament have judged rightfully, have
been Judges of the Parliament wrongfully, they would not leave one of a
thousand, but every man's private judgment is concluded in Parliament: whom not
to believe in all State matters is moral infidelity; Only I may not forget
the recognition of all humble gratitude to our most honorable Parliament for
imprinting a distinguishing character upon us that have been London
Residentiares and faithful Adherents to the public Cause and the Oxford
Absentees, The shorter the better as more healthful to the body Politic.
or Malignant Lawyers, that they are not suffered like Pharohs lean Kine to
eat up (I cannot say the fat pastures but) our short commons, for my own part
I love their persons, and will be so charitable as to think it their error in
judgment: but their ill examples have been of such dangerous consequence that
what may be construed nugatory in others is piaculary in Gown-men; As Adultery
is held the greatest offense that can be committed against the husband: being
so directly against the conjugall contract and alliance; so for a Lawyer to be
active for the destruction of the Law, is a most transcendent enormitie; For
as the difference between Caesar and Pompey was not who should reign, but who
should live; So the Oxford party threatens to destroy the Parliament, and so to
dry up the fountain of all our lawful Libertyes; the Parliament desires not
to diminish his Majesty's just grandor, but to defend themselves and the
Kingdom from violence and oppression; For what aim can a House of Commons have
but the Common good?

But I leave that and bless God for what I see of some new elections of honest
and religious Lawyers of our society; my life upon it Anonimous, they will have
no design but the Kingdoms happiness: I tell thee none so fit as such
Laweyers to be elected; I do not one whit disparage Gold when I say a Diamond
is more valluable, but I will make no such difference, this I know I may say
without offense, that an honest Lawyer is as a 22 s. piece: and an honest
Gentleman as a 20 s. the reason is because he is both a good man and a Lawyer;
now a double sufficiency and abillity must always be preferred before a fing^e.

I would not so much advise as entreat my dear Countrymen that they would
seriosly consider that the happiness of this Kingdom is principally wrapped up in
good elections it being of as great public concernement for Countyes and
Buroughs to choose worthy Patriots for Knights and Burgesses as the choice of
a wife is for any man's private happiness, wherein once to err is to be undone
perpetually. And therefore to be exceeding careful to choose men well
principled, for truly if there be not the Anchor of sincerity a principle of
grace above pure naturalls it is a great marvel if such men be not carried
away with the wind and tide of private advantages: looking too much after the
cock-boat of particular pecuniarie or amicable interests and so neglecting the
ship of Sat.

Men of public spirits that have been active and faithful in times of
greatest danger; It is all the justice in the world that those which have
suffered most for the Kingdom should be honored by the Kingdom: not to
choose lookers on much less It was a most gallant speech of My much honored
Lord the Noble Earl of Deubigh, that if his Lordship knew of one drop of
Malignant blood tunuing in his veins he would let it out himself.
Malignants or Neutrals, which wise Solon could never endure, as judging them
rotten-hearted to the State that lay only upon advantages to join with the
stronger Party. Then Faith Spiritus Regenerationis et Regiminis faciunt felix
Maritaginum.
and Faithfulness being premised the more humane learning, the greater parts,
abillities and indowments in all other respects both mental and corporal, the
better it must needs be without exception: because humane learning is
consecrated and appointed by God for public government; and certainly, he
that undertakes so weighty a business with fear and trembling, and a Godly
jealousy over his own heart and abillities, continually imploring Caelestiall
assistance is the likeliest man to be isntrumental for all our happiness; for
As ingenious Mr. Withers observes who has prevented me in this subject in many
juditious Observations and directions. Had it not been for our Renowned
H^mdens, Pyms, Goodwin^, non^e actum fuiss^^ de Libertatibus?
truly to be a Parliament man requires a piercing judgment, and a deep
foresight into public administrations, this I would only beg of my dear
Country men that in doubtful cases when many may justly be elected, that they
would always prefer him who in the constant course and tenor of his life
has given largest testimony of his love and affection to God and goodness;
for truly Jesus Christ has saved the Kingdom.

But if all Electors should not walk by that rule, it does not any way reflect
upon the non elected, no more then when two noble Gentlmen court a worthy Lady
where one must needs have a denial He that in the sincerity and integrity of
his heart desires to serve God by serving the Kingdom in a publ^ck way if he
be lawfully called thereunto internaly by God, and externally by man, he may l
ve with content, and shall dye with comfort; as the wise Venetian that was not
called to the Senate said, I rejoice that there are 500. abler men in the City
then my self.

It is a most happy condition to be ever doing good, and to be just and
serviceable to our generation in sincerity without hipocrisy; but what pains
soever any man takes for his Country it is but cracking an hard shell, the
kernel is his own, sweet content here, and perpetual mansions hereafter;
Vendidit hic auro Patriam.
As on the contrary Traitors to their Country, Subverters of Laws and
Libertyes will be placed in the worst chambers in Hell before selfe-Murderers.

As for Reformation in Courts of Justice where any thing is amiss, I protest
it is my highest ambition, I aim it in my profession, there is an envious
opinion which I would fain remove; that Lawyers are enemies to Reformation in
matters of Justice. I am sure every honest Lawyer heartily desires the good of
his Country, and whatsoever the Parliament shall conclude most conducible to
public justice. I hope we shall embrace with all alacrity knowing that we
are a considerable part of the Kingdom, and what is good for the whole body
must needs be good for every part of it; Indeed if there be any malignant or
newtrall Gown-men or Swordmen that have public employments, and high Places.

^erdate v^i ^^iori. ^^ista loqui^ qui est om^ homo. ^t conspira^ta Daemonia.
Take heed Gentlemen says the Italian, when a Jesuit comes to ask any
question: for where great parts and little honesty concur, then Caveto be your
Councellor.

And truly that word Sword men puts me in mind of our precious Armies, which
no doubt are dear to the remembrance of every good man, as the most virtuous
Lady to an inamored Suitor. It would be a very unrighteous thing, and me thinks
blame worthy to forget their extraordinary labors of love, and to conclude a
Law treatise, or indeed to write any book without an Honorable remembrance
of them that have been so isntrumental to maintain our Laws and happy
Government; For I know no greater Argument to perseverance, next to an inward
Principle of goodness, then that honest men are fully persuaded that a man is
just and gracious; for a great engagement lies upon him to answer expectation.
Greater love did never any Nation show, then the most honored Brethren of the
Kingdom of Scotland to come in so freely to help the Lord against the mighty;
the Lord recompense it, and all the good that they have done for us unto them,
with all Spiritual and Temporal Benedictions.

What Laurels of honorable Praises are due to the most Noble late Lord
General Illustrious Essex and to numerous gallant Commanders under his
Excellencies command, Oh that we had an Homer to sing the praises of every good
and great Achilles.

The King of Sweden was wont to say upon the death or change of any great
Commander, that when God rides post for the good of his Church: he uses many
times to change horses that one may not have all the honor; many of our
Centurions have done so gallantly that many Volumes cannot contain their just
praises: therefore I entreat their pardon that I do not name any in particular
least I should not pay them half their due, and so be thought to exclude the
rest, dear Souls, they have marched many a mile to engage for us, therefore if
I make a little digression to testify my honorable respect to them, it cannot
be thought unreasonable.

Concerning our Noble General, whom I trust shall shortly have the Olive for
his just Guerdion (for I hope we shall not long continue under the Malignant
constellation of Mars and Saturn, as Crows amongst Carcasses but every honest
man shall live peaceably under the gracious influence of Jupiter and Venus) for
matters of millitary prowes and gallant valor; I need not say any more but
that he is the son of the Right Honorable the Lord Fairfax, and of the noble
Daughter of the truly Noble Earl of Mulgrave.

And here Duty and Gratitude must make a parenthesis, I cannot mention this
good Earl without an honorable remembrance in whom Greatness and Goodness
keep their cohabitation: for having had the honor to advise his Lordship
concerning his estate, I find a mine of wisdom in his noble mind; our late
Sovereign King James rejoiced at his magnanimous comporting the loss of his
three noble Sons: The Relation whereof deserves a whole volume, one saying
was most remarkable: that Jesus Christ my Savior dyed without issue; Salvato
meus mortuus est fine exitu.
how zealously affected his Lordship has been for God and his Country since
88. I am sure all good men love and honor him for it; Indeed the Piety
Humillity and chain of Graces in the noble Countess and the virtuous Ladies
(wherein all their ambition is to excel one another) far exceed the most
invaluable Diamons and Jewels, and to say much in little So much as a man
brings of Christ with him thither; so much welcome there.

Now that I may be true to my first principles, I shall say nothing of his
Excellence but in relation to Jesus Christ. This fully discovers the excellency
of our Noble Generals spirit, that deserving so much he will not take the
least honor to himself, but all must be ascribed to God and those numerous
victoryes looked upon as love tokens from Heaven handed over by the Lord
Christ, as forerunners of that absolute Victory which He will have over all
his enemies, and rejoices so far form as God makes him isntrumental for the
good of the Kingdom.

What an honor is it to command them who command themselves, Omnis denominatio
sumiter a digniori vel a Majori.
and those whom the Angels rejoice to serve, and for an Army of Lions to be
commanded by a Lion, who is commanded by the Lion of the Trybe of Judah what
Antichristian Power can make resistance, when it pleases God to lead them by
the hand, who has promised to stand at the right hand of his servants, and
will honor them that so unfainedly out of right principles by true means and
for glorious ends honor him.

I cannot but take notice that our Noble General is of Graies Inn, nor can I
forbear a general remembrance of many precious gentlemen in the Army of the
same society in whom the seeds of virtue have bin sown even from their years
of discretion.

I wish many Arms were taken down from our Hall windows, and these noble
Gentlemen placed in their room, for as he that fights for the Law, Ex part
Dei et ex part rei. Annot. 2. Tim. 4.7. Lachrymae sunt sudores cordis.
wins an honorable esteem, of all good men, so they that oppose the Law ought
by the Law of Arms to have their Coats removed, and just as I was writing,
there comes news to me that there is one heavenly light more in Heaven, sweet
Colonel Pickering having fought a good fight and kept the faith, and professed
a good profession before many witnesses has finished his Course, and received
his garland even a Crown of righteousness, Sir Gilbert Pickering one of the
noble Knights for Northamptonshire.
and were it manly the sweat of my heart would blot my paper, and were it not
that pure love cannot consist with much grief when the party beloved is made a
Saint, and that his noble Brother carries all the graces and virtues by
survivorship, they being joint tenants of them all, his loss should ever be
green in my rememberance.

What actings of faith do we hear of for the taking of strong holds from the
Enemies; that gallant Gentleman second in command (who fears nothing but to
offend God) at the storm of Basing, being acted with the same spirit that the
prophetical Psalmist was confident that God would enfeeble the hands and legs
of Popery, Psalm. 115.^.
and that their Idols were but vanity, and not only then, but many other times
the Lord has graciously said unto them according to your faith, so be it unto
you.

The General question is still, what is the mind of Jesus Christ in this
particular, was there ever such glorious things done by faith since the 11th.
of the Hebrews.

Oh what heavenly breathings of the spirit and religious Conference is there in
the Army! when will Sion be established in perfect beauty says one, when shall
Jesus Christ be set gloriously upon his throne says another, God can save by
one as by many says a third, lets do our work and trust Jesus Christ for our
wages, shall we think much to loose our blood for him, who has shed his
precious blood for us? Jesus Christ took Bristoll; no Iron bars can keep
out Jesus Christ, if we die, we live, and our Indentures are but given us in a
little before their ordinary time, with many such sweet divine expressions
that they are in heaven upon earth, abounding in that excellent grace of
spiritual resignation in all the dispensations of divine providence, the hand
of God is always good, and his time is ever the best; that I am even ravished
at the apprehension of them, never having heard the like, unless it were in
that most comfortable speech of that dear servant of Christ, Mr. Burton at his
suffering the like glorious manifestation of the spirit in my oppinion is not
legible, in Mr. Foxes worthy labors, besides a most admirable spirit of love
Commands as in chief throughout the Army, that I heard a gallant man say it
were worth riding 5000. miles to behold it, but I shall turn my praises of
them into prayers for them that not a hair of their heads may perish, though
truly I do not so much praise them as the gifts and graces of God in them,
wheresoever we meet Jesus Christ and see but the least dawnings and breathings
of his sweet spirit, we are to love him, and exalt him with our most studious
praises, and truly I hope the time is coming that good men shall be great men,
and that grace and honesty shall be of more authority then stamps in Gold, and
every man principally valued according to the impresse of Jesus Christ upon his
soul.

If any man should vainly object that by reason of the novelty of some
expressions, I seem to give a blow to the Laws. I answer that it is the
ceremonial Law that I strike at and I can demonstrate to any intelligent man,
that there are Ceremonies and formalities in Law which are as impedient, and
inexpedient in Courts of justice, as ever the Ceremonies, or any Popish
traditions were burdensome to Gods people in matter of worship.

This which I contend for, would be no alteration of the Law, but additionall
to it, for is it any alteration of the rule to lay it to the timber, must not
the Phisique be applied to the diseases, why then ought not the Law which is
the rule of Justice be always constrained to make good men honest and plain
intentions, why not as well as in the Kings case I complain not of the Law,
but of the encroachments made upon the Subjects previledge by Ministers of
Justice, and that so universally, that in going to Law, he that speeds best
buys Gold too dear. The reason of some proceedings being as obscure as
Trades-mans mark past all discovery.

I admire and honor the wisdom of the Common Law, and I would have no man to
judge it, or be wiser then it, but that must be understood of fundamental
Laws, the alteration whereof as Sir Ed. Cook observes, introduces manifold
inconveniences, as in that Statute of imprisoning men's bodies for debt, and
devise of Lands, as if he that lay on his death bed, could be wiser then the
Law if it were a just and perfect law, but much of a Banbury Cheese may be
pared away without any destruction of the substance.

I would not have Law Books to be dealt withal, like the Common Prayer Book,
which as happily lain aside like an old Caske, for its ill savor, but refined
purged, and conformed to right reason speedy Justice, and consconable equity,
let this expurgation be at the first dash of all matters Ecclesiastical and
Bishops appurtenances, for what fear is there to expel the brats having
banished the Father.

Another scruple I would humbly crave leave to speak unto, I hear it often
objected that a Court must not make new Presidents, I marvel by what rule the
first Chancellor made orders and decrees, or were there understandings so
clearly illuminated in the dark times of Popery and profaneness, that it is
impossible any further light should be discovered; besides, are not causes so
various by reason of the continual multiplicity and vicissitude of humane
affairs, that as no man goes twice into the same water; or seldom are two
causes without some different circumstances, have there not bin more lamentable
cases happened within these few years, matters of transcendent equity, and
conscience then in many ages before, and must we always keep the same pace
in foul way and weather as in fair?

Our Books tell us that the Rule of Chancery is equal and good, and if there
have bin 10000. decrees unless the present Judge, see the equity and
goodness of them, certainly they ought not to be any rule for his conscience,
can any man give right Judgment by another man's conscience, certainly that
will be as dangerous to the body politic as the Popish implicit faith was to
Christ's body mystical.

I confess former Judgments and decrees are good grounds of deliberation and
serious consideration; but not of resolution to Judge accordingly, because it
was so held formerly, unless I see evident reason concurring with that
authority.

If men had good Judgments they need not read Histories nor search for
Presidents, for put case that new Courts should be created (as the happy
demolition of some will necessitate the erection of others) by what compass
should the Judges steer the course of their proceedings, but by right reason,
the force whereof is great, That an exact Rider governing with the bridle,
which is universal Justice, all the world over, Reason being like the highest
and lowest Honors, Universal where Tyranny makes no obstruction, as King James
in his Starchamber speech tells the Judges that if they cannot make forth the
reason of a Judgment or decree to an intelligent Scholar it was much to be
suspected.

Besides Christian, Majestrates stand upon the vantage ground, having the
great-summinary of sacred writ to sublinate the less luminary of Humane
prudence, for Divinity perfects and refines all mental endowments.

But then it will be said that by this means all things will be uncertain if
one Judge or Chancellor shall cross their predecessors.

I answer, nothing less, for it is the greatest certainty and security
imaginable to judge all things by right reason, when no Justicer will proceed
further then he sees reason for it, enlightened by former presidents, but if
otherwise, that Justicers shall be tied to proceed according to former
presidents, without understanding the clear reason and conscience of them,
then if the first president was erroneous (as who dare swear that it was not)
we must be undone for ever.

It is further Objected that in such cases the Parliament must be attended, and
much I have heard spoken concerning Judges Oaths, I presume to answer it thus;
That I am confident it was never the intent of the Parliament, nor of any oath
that ever was administered by Protestants, that any Judge, or Justicer should
deliver his judgment, or make any blind decree until he see reason for it,
though there be millions of judgments in the very point for as the intent of
every statute is principally to be regarded, so is the reason of every
judgment; if there be most excellent reason for it, yet if I understand it not,
it is not my reason and consequently an unreasonable judgment, I say it again,
for fear of mistake, that every Judge must proceed according to his own
judgment and conscience (for when I see the reason of a former judgment, then
it becomes my reason) and there is nothing can be objected against this, but I
can improve the argument to the Popes advantage, for no wit of man can find
out a medium between an implicit faith, and that for which I see a reason.

I had all most forgotten one observation concerning actions, upon the case for
slanderous words, King James told the Learned Lord Hobart, that the wisdom of
our Law was admirable in this, that a man may not strike though never so much
injured by words because between words and blows, there is no proportion, but
I am doubtful whether in Conscience, a man ought to recover damages for
scandalous words, when in truth, he is not damnified, but the thing I aim at
is, that we want a Court Marshall or some Court of Honor to determine such
difference, for many men care not what they say, if the words be not
actionable, and a Gentleman may be called Devil, Knave, Rogue, Rascal, base
paltry fellow, Jackstraw, and a Ventum sadi, Jade, Witch, Whore, and many other
barbarous provoking speeches, (which for the present are not fit to be known,
therefore I forbear to mention them,) which being not actionable, the parties
provoked fall to striking, to rescue their ravished honor, and so take the
sword out of the hands of Justice, to the great dishonor of Government and
many cunning fellows will purposely give such Curtish language to engage men
to strike, and so to bring an action, and then the Law is defective in this,
that he that is stricken may beat the striker outragiously, and yet may
justify in his own defense, whereas between one blow and twenty there is no
equality of reason.

But when a man is dishonored by words, Actionable, the Law is so tedious,
men's spirits being inflamed and enraged during the suite, and hazardous, that a
quiet spirit has little mind to sue, besides the judgment of reparation is
left to i. e. men that understand common honesty, but are not sensible of
honor and reputation with us, the very life and blood of a Gentleman and the
sweetest flower in every man's Garden, therefore it is requisite that Justice in
these cases might be don in a more summary way, that having seriously
considered.

1. The occasion (if just or unjust.)

2. The persons (if inferior or superior.)

3. The times. And

Fourthly The places, whosoever has scandelized or disparaged any man that the
wronger be adjudged to ask him forgiveness to unsay it publicly, and if he
be damnified in his estate, to repair it, and his estate seized for the money,
and himself imprisoned during his contempt, and to be esteemed of all honest
men, a barbarous rude and uncivil person, unfit for civil company, and humane
society, for men that will not submit their action to be tried by Law (which
is the Level that all good men desire to walk by) and by Justice which is the
chief of all the virtues (it being but just and reasonable that every man that
wrongs another in any kind should make him satisfaction to his ability) are
fitter to live amongst Bears and Tigers, then in a well governed Kingdom, and
if this be not according to the mind of Jesus Christ, I shall retract it upon
conviction.

Kind Reader;
There is a late Treatise set forth by William Ball of Barkham Gentleman,
entitled The Sphere of Government; wherein, there is one dangerous opinion,
(Like a Fly in a Box of Ointment) he puts a Case by way of supposition, that
suppose the King and Parliament should make an Act, that they would and might
dispose of all Subjects estates in Engl. and that they might take from whom
they please and what they please, in such an impossible possibility, as he
ingeniously calls it, he answers, that the Counties might and ought first to
Petition (and so far I agree with him in it, being an humble trial and
commendable way but adds further that if it be not remedied, then they may
declare and protest against it, if violated, then they may defend themselves by
Arms.

I would not willingly construe any man's words beyond his meaning, but this I
must say, that it is an expression of more dangerous consequence, and more
derogatory to the just power of that supreme Court then any thing that I have
seen or heard this Parliament; for do but imagine any refuge or shelter from
that which the supreme Court shall declare to be just in civil affairs, and
you instantly erect a higher tribunal, which must be as prodigious as many
Suns in one Firmament (as Jupiter said if the Sun should marry and beget
another Sun, there would instantly follow a general condagration and burning
up of all things) for if the people should but once drink in that error, that
the Parliament is not the supreme Judicature in all cases, but that they may
in some cases araign the greatest Court no man shall wear a new Garment, then
sad distraction would be but a flea-biting to what would follow.

And whether it be in a matter indisputable or disputable, it will not make any
difference, for if the supreme Court be not supreme to all intents, it is
not supreme to any intent, Magis and Mi^^^.
because there is a higher above it; There is in the Kingdom so many thousand
Acres of land, either the Parliament may settle and determine the right of all
their Acres, or not of any one of them, for there is no medium, and more and
less make no essential difference in reason, the latter whereof is such a
Parodox, that he that is half sound in his Intellectualls, will be ashamed to
own it, but many a man mary's a Widow that would gladly be rid of her
Children.

The high and honorable Kings Bench is a superintendent Court, and deals in
matters Capital, which the Parliament rarely does; yet cannot be called the
supreme Court, because accountable for administrators irregular and illegal.
The deciding point of power must rest in some Court determinatly, Apex
potestatis.
for there is and must be in every Kingdom, one supreme Tribunal from which
there can be no appeal, otherwise the stronger will destroy the weaker, and
Civil War must follow unevitably. True it is that the Law is a rule to the
Parliament, so long as it is in force, but any Law may be suspended or
abrogated and a new one introduced and surrogated, as to the public judgment
of State shall be adjudged most conducible for general safety and
tranquillity, according to several exigencie and State emergencie, otherwise
the Kingdom would be in a sad condition, for the Law which is for its
preservation would occasionally be its ruin and destruction. But I shall tell
him in love, where I find his feet sliding he mistakes the nature of
democracy, where the power resides in the people (as all lawful power
originally is) they may nominate what Governors they please, and may prescribe
in what form they will be governed, but when they have settled a form and
elected Governors, they may not displace and change that Government. As for
the purpose, Geneva is a pure democracy, every inhabitant has a voice in the
election of 200. which are the grand Counsel, and they elect, 25. who elect 4.
annually, this must endure to the day of Judgment, unless changed by mutual
consent, the people in reverend Mr. Calvin's time having cast out their Bishop,
would have changed their government, Mr. Calvin told them it was a direct
breach of the 5. Commandment that he would be a pastor of sheep and not of
Wolves and left them till they were convinced of that error, His instances of
Arbitrators and Feoffees in trust are lame, if they abuse their trust the Law
provides a remedy, because their power is limited, but it is impossible that
the supreme Court in any Kindome should be limited nor can it limit its own
power, no more th^n a man can continue alive, and cease from breathing and
exercising other natural functions, true it is that the body represented is
stronger then the representative but the legal authority is in the parliament
where it has bin planted and settled, for many hundred years, and let that
hand wither that shall seek to Rob them of it for a government, there must be,
and no human policy could ever find out a better.

Loving Reader I pray the likewise take notice of a 3. leaved Pamphlet
entitled news from Hell, Rome and the Inns of Court, and believe it that,
Hell and Rome are the two Elders, and the Innes of Court the chaste Susana, when
our Clients give us a Fee, we take it in love, as a Chaste virgin does a pair
of Gloves, sent unto her for a love token, if the giver expect any brutish
thing, we abominate the first risings of dishonesty, the Author like one of
Machiavells Scholars thinks by his over confident calumniation to make some
thing stick upon our noble and Gospel profession but it is but shooting a
headless Arrow against Armor of proffe, for our profession is pure Marble, 1
Tit. 3.13.14
and no dishonor can be imprinted upon it, but upon a second perusal of it, I
find that in a Charitab e construction what he said may be intended, only of
such Lawyers that are of the Oxford party, therefore I pass by it.

And now Courteous Reader to draw to a conclusion, because I will not trouble
those that need not know so much nor weary the intelligent Reader I have but
one word to speak to my adversary which is to entreat him as a brother to
retract this fond and weak oppinion as being (though I am persuaded not
intentionally yet consequentially) destructive of all state policy, or else
truly Anonimus, Though it be such an error that thou may carry to Heaven.
I shall not be friends with thee that is with thy oppinion, for I will ever
be a friend to thy person for I praise God J am not so wedded to my own
opinion as to love no man, but he that shall concur with me, he that loves
another man, only because he is of his Judgment loves himself in that man as
he that mournes for the death of a friend, mournes perhaps rather for his own
loss.

If there were some lines of Communication, and rules of association, or such
principles of union that all honest peaceable men though of different
judgments might walk with indeared affections to one another, Duraeus
inclitus Scotus peregrinavit multos ann^s pro Concordia inter Lutheranos and
Calvinistas, Beati pacifici Jllus^rior est vnio, quae nascitur ex charitate
quam vnio cujus precium oritur ex raritate.
till every man's spiritual eye sight be equally alike, provided that no
oppinion be any way destructive of State policy, as tending naturally to
inflammations, certainly it would exceedingly conduce to a most hapy
reformation, I blush to read such extreme bitter passages and railing
invectives as daily come forh to gratify and make music for our Enemies, for
shame forbear or cease to be Englishmen.

I would presume for the reconciling of various oppinions and preventing all
disaffections as much as may be to propound to our most noble Senators that
learned Godly and sweet spirited men might be appointed, so soon as they
hear of any erroneous opinion (so generally conceaved) mildly to answer every
printed error to repair to the Authors, or maintainers of it loveingly to show
them their error and to admonish them convictingly whereby thousands by Gods
blessing may be convinced (for spiritual maladies require spiritual remedies)
and the Governors not so much as acquainted with it, unless it be a moot
point, and very disputable, and then further light must discover the nakedness
of it, We Lawyers know what is a breach of the peace, and for prevention let
men be bound to keep it if there be a just fear.
for no rational doubt can disturb the peace of the Kingdom as that Noble
Peer who went to Heaven as in a fiery Chariot in an active Martyredome for the
public good clearly demonstrates in his divine treatise concerning Bishops,
reason being the perfection of every Kingdom.

What a stir there was in the Bishops times about private meetings as if poor
souls that meet in Corners to pray (and that for the happiness of the
Kingdom whose prayers no doubt were heard as being favorites of heaven) would
thereby disturb or endanger the peace of the Kingdom, oh that ever rational
men should give such a Bill of divorse to common sense and understanding

This is practiced amongst the Pontificians with great success answerable to
the Venetian policy, where when any man is injured by another the patrons of
Justice, find out the party wronged, Quadruplat^res.
and follow the cause for him to take of all vindictive prosecutoins, that
every thing may be done for the love of Justice, and 3. or 4. in every County,
authorized as arbitrators general to take up and compose all private quarrels
and differences in a Christian way of love would prevent numerous suits, and
vast expenses, and truly every man that professes to be a Christian should
study hard to be a Son of Truth and Peace.

One thing I must insert that may answer all objections, that whenever any
man in humility, propounds any thing tending to a politic reformation of
something that he conceives to be amiss in a Kingdom, that he must
cheerfully submit unto the present practice, until the wisdom of State shall
otherwise determine, according to that excellent saying, we tolerate or rather
submit to many things which we do not love.

Multa toleramus quae non amamus.
Farewell Anonimus that I may speak freely.

I think thou art an honest man and of a public spirit, two excellent
qualities for which I esteem thee, but in this thy zeal is not managed by
right reason.

If any man toward the Law be unconcionable in his practice, the Lord work
repentance in him, so as to make restitution, as in the case of Zacheus, No
period better then prayer, Therefore here I cast Anchor, and bind up these
spreading lines.

Additionalls omitted in my absence, P. 17. L. 31. add
I hear many complaints that writs of Error are not determined, truly, if any
man will not pay his debts that is able, but takes advantage of the Benches
Vacancy, I wish he were in excecution to morrow: but if poor men bring writs
of Error merely to preserve their Liberties, it is far better for the Kingdom
that they should hang in suspense and abeiance till domesday: As in the Jews
divorces^ Difficillimum est homines amplissima fortuna ditatos legibus
^ntinere. Plato.
then that any man by Indurance should be disabled from serving God and his
Country in their lawful callings and this is not repugnant to Gods command of
not pitying the poor in Judgment, because it is after Judgment: and in the
nature of an equitable clemency to mitigate the severity of an introductive
Law made and continued at the best for the hardness of men's hearts for by the
Common Law it is not so; Indeed the malignity of writs of Error consisted in
this, that rich men will scarce ever obey the Law when Judges have ordered
reason.

P. 39. l 31. If there be any such Counselors that sell their silence as well
as their words, and take money not to be against them as the Indians are said
to present the d^vil least he should hurt them, Ne no^^at.
that promise to be at 3 Bars at the same time, ubiquitary Practisers (as I
hope there be none that purposely do so) let them think of the day of
Judgment, quando Iudicia erunt reversa post Iudicium: Luther.
which will be a righteous Declaration without the least Error, and tremble for
fear least another day they should run about to the Courts of Radamanthus Eacus
and Minos, I cannot omit a story told us going to see the finest prison in the
World at Pavia; at the crossing of the Po, Padus.
every man's horse leapt boldly into the Bark but one that would not by any
means enter, till at length a passenger whispered in the horses ears and in
he came with courage: the Ferry-man thinking it might stand him in great stead
to know the words, prevailed with the passenger to tell him, which were these,
Sicome lanima de Cattivo Avocato va al casa del diavolo cosi va tu sopra questa
barca. As the Soul of a wicked Lawyer that cozens his Clients goes to the
house of the devil, so leap thou into this Boat.

P. 43. l. 26. Yet I confess there may be sometimes good use made of
Law-subtilties and niceties to find out a starting hole for the poor and
oppressed, as the Phisicians make good use of poison, or sometimes to pay an
old oppressor in his own coin; I confess I do not hold a it Christian proverb
to deceive the deceiver, because we must ever in bargaining do good against
evil: yet peradventure a man that has bin cozened without legal remedy may
by some after subtilty make himself a saver and that justly: the Spaniard
says to cuckold the Adulterer is but to get a Fox or wolf into a trap,
however that be not righteous, yet many times I observe the finger of God in
the mistake of a word or syllable to help the oppressed.

P. 48. l. 27. For truly, to be no more dextrous in administrations of justice
now then formerly; is for a man to be no wiser at 60. then at 30. for it is not
in Courts as in our bodies that men are at their strength at 30. and then a
stay and after a declination, but a fountain continually sending forth fresh
and sweet waters of justice,

P. 54. l. 1. Would you have finer cloth then is made of English wool? no,
blessed be God there are enough that are Infra causam meriti. But is there any
way always to be sure to have good Judges? I know one, and that's infallible,
that the Lawyers be all of them good men, for they are heirs to judicial
places,

P. 55. l. 29. For truly to put a young Gentleman to study the Law without
direction, is to send a Bark without a steeres-man, sail, or anchor into an
angry Sea, Mr. Littleton being undoubtedly the most crabbed Author to begin
with of any Science in the world: plain ground is ever best for young
excercisers.

P. 50. l. 4. Truly, It did me good to hear in a Kentish Case the last Term,
where the question was upon a trial about passing an inheritance without the
word heirs, now the reverend Judges declared the Law according to the intent
of the parties in purusance of the consideration which is the meritorious cause
of every Contract.

Page 69. Tacitus said of usury, quod in Civitate nostra semper vetabitur,
semper retinebitur, obduritiem cordis.

Page 75. l. 20. After Tyrant read but I am utterly against their practicing
before the right honorable Lords for though the Judicatories and privileges
be distinct to many purposes yet as to the Grand Concernments of state it is
rightly styled the High Court (not Courts) of Parliaments which being the two
eyes of the Body politic, can no more look several ways then a man can with
one eye look up and down with the other; and then if any matter which has
bin dijudicaced in one of the honourab^e Houses should humbly be ^resented to
the other, how can it be avoided but that the same person would be both Judge
and Counsel, which I conceive to be a stronger case then my Lo. Dyers that a
man cannot be Judge of the Kings Bench and Common pleas, for so he might
reverse his own Judgments, and that was the reason that if a Parson had bin
made a Bishop it had bin an avoydance by reason of subordination, certainly for
a man to be Judge in one Court, and a practiser in another, is a great Error
in politiques, and I am sure not permitted in any other Christian Kingdom.

Page 77. l. 12. Good Countrymen be for ever exceeding careful in all your
Elections let no subtle crafty Malignant for fear or favor procure himself
to be Elected to disturb our blessed Counsels, If a pure Virgin should cry
out and crave your help, would you not sly to her assistance, truly Justice is
an immaculate Virgin and craves your help to send Religious just and sweet
spirited men to keep the fountain pure, or else no marvel if the streams
of Justice be polluted.

Page 38. For he makes more motions in a Term then another in a year as the
famous Florentin Sculptor Donatello being desired by the Consuls to make a
statue, asked 50. l. for it they thinking it too much employed, an ordinary
artificer who asked 100. l. for it, they being angry, referred the price to
Donatello who awarded him 80. l. saying I could have made it in a Month, but
the other was three Months about it.

Page 6. And so I have seen a Petion in the behalf of the poor Cloth-workers
full of sad complaints. If those many poor souls might have Justice at a
cheap rate and speedily against the transgressors of many excellent statuts
how could it revive their drooping spirits? but let all honest hearts chere up,
I doubt not but we shall have speedy Justice, the wages of the servant
recovered before morning, Liberty written upon every Man's door. Christian
Laws in all points establishd, free trade for the glory of the Nations, and
all Monopolies banished for ever.

Lastly, But the ancient Maxims of the Common Law, are in many cases
manifestly deluded for contrary to the Statute of 4. H. 4. after Judgments in
Ejectments new actions are brought verdit against verdit, Judgment against
Judgment, without Attaint or Error, as in the case of the Kentish custom of
devising to use the word of the Lord Chancellor ELLESMEre, suits for one and
the same cause, are carried from Court to Court as power and might of the
parties, or favor and affection of the Judge o^ corruption of the Officers, or
subordination, and perjurie of witnesses or such like shi^ts and tricks as can
best accommodate the business, but blessed be God never such worthy Judges,
as now; the Lord be with them in all their Jugdements, and increase the numb^r
of Religious and faithful Judges, for this Kingdoms happiness.

Because there is some oppinion printed that the Equity, or Iniquity of a
Jugdement ought not to be questioned in Chancery, I think fit to subjoyne the
Lord Egertons words, some that take pleasure, ludere in verbis dormitare in
sensibus, and so dispute, de apicibus juris aequi and boni ratione
praetermissa, and profess learning, pueritia literali non Intelligentia
spirituali, have pressed and strained the statute of 4. H. 4.23. not on^y against
the Popes usurped Authority, but the Chancery thereby opposing the King against
himself, who is equally present in all his Courts and what need had the Lords
and Commons to engage themselves to stand with ^he Crown against the Chancery,
(oh that his Majesty would yet at the length forsaking a^l destructive ways
engage himself with his Noble Lords and Commons against all Antichristian
power, sin, and profaneness) grounding their conceit upon the words or else
where, which was at Anignon where the Pope resided as well as at Rome, and so I
hope, I have fully satisfied my Antagonist, Antinomist, to whom I wish well in
Christ Jesus.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge, 10. line 5. for hea^ing a, read heavy p. 15. l. 30. for his r. the
others, p 16. r. precipitous, p. 19. r. Lovies case, 20. r. murderer, p. 23. l.
23. r. swear his discharge Sulfa terra, p. 26. r. Chancery. p. 43. l. 8. r. in
abeiance p. 44. l. 17. r. Counts, p. 45. r. secunda, 48. Vergerus. falls, p.
49. r. nubeculam, p. 57. r Hosterie, 83. of land is happily, l. 29. r. this, 3
r. r. the p. 84. l. 3. r. so ls 27. r. that should be l^ke, 35. r. luminary,
36. r. sublimate the lesser, p. 87. for trial r. legal p. 88. l. 4. r. these
sad distractions, l. 12. r. these, p. 71. for creditors, r. debtors, and read
11. Eliz. Cartwrights case Camb.


