A SPEEDY POST WITH MORE NEWS FROM HVLL, YORK, AND BEVERLEY.

Truly relating how Sir John Hotham sent five hundred men out of Hull, under
the Command of Sir John Meldron to a Town called Anlaby, two miles from Hull,
where some of the Kings forces lay.

Also of his taking the Magazine there, his fiering of it, and by killing of
some Sentinells, all the Regement ran away except some 15. which was taken
prisoners and brought into Hull.

With diverse other occurrences from York and several places adjoining, since
the 25. of July to the first of August. 1642.

London, Printed for JOHN THOMAS 1642.

A SPEEDY POST with more news from Hull, York, and Beverley, from the 25. of
July, to the first of August 1642.
AFter the Tender of my respects unto you, wishing your good health, I have in
these times of distraction, given a brief relation of some passages at Hull,
upon wednesday night last, being the 28. of July, which was thus, Sir John
Hotham gave a Command for 500 Musketies to sallie out of Hull at nine of the
clock at might, toward a little village lying upon Humber called Anlaby,
being about two miles of Hull, and a mile of this side a Town called Hazell,
which lves over against B^rton, these Muskiteres were conducted by Sir John
Meldron and Captain Lowing^r there hundred of them m^r^^ed by land, and two
hundred of them was convered by water, in this Village Sir Robert Strickelands
Company was billetted, but he at this present was absent, and had left Sergeant
Mayor Duncombe in his place until his return, who is lately made his
Leivetenant Colonel, who had no^ a boue 100. men in the Town then, whom Sir
John Meldren suddenly surprising in the night, put them into such an amazement
and fear, that most of them are run away, leaveing all their arms behind
them, in a great Baine, near the Town, where their powder and Magazine lay,
which Sir John seized on, and set the House on Fire, in this combustion two was
slain of Colonel Duncombes soldiers, but some report there, he also took
15. of his men prisoners, and brought them to Hull the next morning; This night
came the King to Beverley, who was much incensed, at the news thereof, diverse
Soldiers in the Kings Army about Beverley is since run away, for there is no
bear to be got amongst them, but at an exc^ssive rate, and there is no
lodgings to be had, which makes them weary of the Kings Service already, and it
is reported in York, the King found not that Reception and Entertainment at
Leicester as he had at Lincoln; his Majesty is expected at York this night,
and that he will return to Beverley again on Monday, every man here daily
expects to here what Answer the Parliament will send to the King, touching his
last Answer or propositions concerning Hull, and the Militia, wishing a happy
Peace and Union amongst us.

Here is great Preparations for war within this County, both of Horse and
Foot, for all the great Horse that is within the North parts, are bought up for
the Kings service, who daily repair to Beverley, to augment his Majesty's
forces there; and any man that profers himself to be a Trooper is entertained.

The 29 of July the Lord Howard, the Earl of Barkshires son brought to York
a Troop of Horse, with their Riders, who are a company of dissolute fellows
their number were forty four, who are this day sent to Beverley, likewise the
said Lord Howard has been at Pocklington 10. miles of York, (at a fair
there) where he bought 23 horses more for his Majesty's service, and brought
them to York this night to get Riders for them: Yesterday diverse Soldiers
came from Notingham to be volunteers for the King.

We hear Sir John Hotham is releived with some three or four Hundred fresh
men, that came from LONDON and the Country thereabouts; This City of YORK is
generally against the proceedings of Parliament, giveing out many invective
Speeches, not fit to be related, and if Peace be not concluded on suddenly
betwixt the KING and Parliament: It is thought by many hear, and given out by
diverse of His Captains and other Officers, that His Majesty will Fire Hvll if
it be not speedily delivered up to him: For here in York is an Engin^ere, a
Cornish man that lived lately in Baldwins Gardens nere Grayes Inn lane in
London, whose name is Master Lanayon, that now is casting of mortar piece to
shoot Grenades in, to Fire a town or City, and is intended for Hull, from
which calamite deliver them and us all; here is diverse Engines making here of
Wood, for the Firing of Hvll, which are also invented by this Engineere, the
Country hereabouts is put in a great fear, if civil Wars begin amongst us,
that ruin and destruction will befall this Kidgdome, which God of his mercy
prevent. Colonel Lun^ford, is a Commander for the King at Beverley, who was
lately Accused of Treason in Parliament.

The Lord Leivetenant of Ireland, Yesterday came with a great train into
York. Sir William Pen^yman lately a Parliament man, has given the King a
Troop of Horse, so has most of the Gentry of this County.

This night His Majesty came to York from Beverley, who was m^^ by diverse
Colonel^s and Captains; and with several troops of Horse, and so conducted
into the City, it is reported he returns again to Beverl^y on Monday night.

This night, after His Majesty was come into the City, a Command came from His
Majesty (by the beating of Drums) to the trained bands of York, to meet in
Trenity Churchyard, there to receive Order from Captain Slingsby what His
Majesty's pleasure is therein.

These are all the particulars, and matters of any moment, which at this
present I can inform you of, S^w^shing a happy agreement betwixt the KING and
Parliament I leave you, until the next oppotunity invites me, Farewell.

York July 30. 1642. Yours to command Andrew Cooper.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the Sheriffs of the
County, of York and Lincoln, and likewise the Lords Lievetenants of the said
Counties, and in their absence, their Deputies allowed by Parliament, and the
Justices of Peace, and all others his Majesty's Officers shall suppress all
forces that shall be raised, or gathered together in those Counti^s, either to
force the Town of Hull, to stop the passages, to, and from the same; or in any
other way to disturb the peace of the Kingdom.

ORdered by the Lord and Commons in Parliament, that thi^ shall be printed and
published forthwith.

Io. Brown Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

