THE COPY Of a LETTER Sent out of Wiltshire, to a Gentleman in London; wherein
is laid open the dangerous Designs of the CLERGY, In reference to the
approaching PARLIAMENT.

By a true Friend to the Public Interest, and to all Peaceable Men.

LONDON: Printed for Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1654.

The Copy of a Letter sent out of Wiltshire, to a Gentleman in London; Wherein
is laid open the dangerous Designs of the CLERGY, in reference to the
approaching Parliament.
WORTHY SIR;
YOU will expect that I should give you a true account, of passages relating to
the choosing of Members to sit in Parliament for this County of Wilts; The
truth is, the matter was most confusedly and unworthily carried without any
order or discretion; As for the Clergy they exceedingly bestirred themselves,
making their party as strong as ever they could, that so they might promote and
carry on their Scottish Interest.

The Ringleaders of this faction were Dr. Chambers, Mr. Byfield, Strickland,
these with the rest of their Brethren of the Association (and it is more then
probable that the same design is carried on by the Clergy in other Counties)
gathered together a great number of people, and taught them their lesson before
hand to cry up only those ten men named in their List, and to brand others, as
namely Lievt. Genesis Ludlow, Col. Air, etc. (who were nominated by approved
faithful men in the County) with the names of Anabaptists, Levellers, to
render them odious to the generality of the injudicious people, by these false
and malicious imputations. Thus honest Public spirited men are most
unworthily dealt withal, and trampled upon by a Time serving Generation.

Sir, I am very confident that some hundreds gave their Voices who were either
Cavileers, or else of inconsiderable Estates, not worth 100. l. and therefore
incapable of choosing, by the Model of the Established Government.

It was agreed on at length, that the several Lists should be called one by
one, and so put to the Yea's and Noe's, without naming any other in competition
with the former. But this order was violated by the Clergies party, by which
means through the instigation of this Scottish faction, Lievt. Genesis Ludlow was
put by, to the great disparagement of this Country, where he has been more
serviceable to the true interest of the State, then all the men that are
chosen, put them all together, and the Parsons too: nay they were so far from
giving their Voices for this faithful valiant self-denying man, that the
leading man among them, and their chief Counselor, whom I shall forbear to
name, refused to appear for the Lievt. Genesis intimating that he was not fit to
sit in the next Parl.

Ye are so considerate Sir, I doubt it not, as to observe that there is a
design generally carried on by the Clergy of this Nation, to bring us again
into Egyptian bondage, to keep up and maintain the oppression of Tithes, and to
set up themselves and their Classical Diana by Civil Sanction; in order
whereunto they have endeavored to procure a considerable number of Members
that may Vote in the next Parl. for an Assembly or Convention of Ministers, to
make Cannons for inthralling the consciences of good men, where Adoniram may be
one of the Scribes, who indeed was an exceeding busy man, and acted like a
Pharisee at the Election, his carriage not becoming a Minister of Christ. But
why should we wonder at him and others, their busy intermedling, and more then
ordinary diligence and activity? alas poor men, they are afraid they shall
loose their fat Parsonages, worth 3 or 400. l. per ann. a piece. These
Politic State Parsons, neglected the Preaching of their Lecture at Sarum,
that they might bawle and cry with open mouth, No Ludlow, no Ludlow, till they
were even hoarse again; they chose rather to spend their breath in decrying
honest men, then in preaching the Gospel of the Lord Jesus. Nor is it
sufficient for these men that they have present encouragement, equal with or
above other men more deserving, unles they may also impose upon, and domineer
over their brethren, they will not be contented. I do plainly see they will
rather join with the vilest men, then with such as cross their carnal
interest, and dissent from them, though never so godly.

What shall I say of the impudency of these men? one Stone a Factor for them,
and Vassal to them, went up and down at the Election like a madd man, crying
out, Now friends appear for the Church of God, or never; poor man, can he put
no difference between appearing for the lusts of men, and the Church of Christ?
between the Classical Usurpations of the self-seeking Parsons, and the truth
and Gospel of Christ?

Sir, By this days work ye may judge of the issue and fruit of the Ministers
Association in this County, which may rather be called a subtle Combination,
then a Christian spiritual Communion as they manage it; you will hear of the
like proceedings in other Counties, especially where this Association is
carried on, the same being devised as a shelter upon a politic account,
against an approaching storm.

The Lord direct his Highness in this Juncture of Affairs, and make him truly
sensible of the dangerous plots of these men that would thus rigidly impose
upon their Brethren.

There will be I am confident a necessity of taking a strict review of these
Elections, having been carried on in such a turbulent confused manner, by the
violent motions of the corrupt Clergy, all joining together to uphold their
Diana.

But as it was with the Prelates, in entering their Protestation in the former
Parliament, they prepared a Rodd to whipp themselves with, and dug a pit
wherein they themselves did fall: so will these men do, that which they have
designed for upholding their corrupt Interest, will be the ruin thereof. His
Highness and his Army cannot but call to mind the late broils both in this
Nation, and Scotland, caused by this sort of men, who will not cease plotting
and combining till they imbroyle the Nations again in blood, if the Lord in
mercy prevent not.

Sir, I had the sight of a Letter writ by one Burgess a Parson of the
Confedracy, sent to one of his Brethren in this County: his words are as
follows. Sir, I hope you will be active to engage all that ever you can to
appear with us for such men as will be valiant for the truth, and be ready to
meet Dr. Chambers, Mr. Byfield, Strickland, Ince, etc. And that we may not be
divided, there shall then be a List of the ten to be chosen, given to every one
that appears for the best interest. Let us not be accessory to our own
ruin, and give occasion to the succeeding Generation to curse us, by not
putting forth our interest to the utmost, for choosing right men. If we
remember the last men that met at Westminst: what they were Voting for, and
withal how the Monster of their malice was even brought to the birth, it will
make us active for a better Choice.

Besides what this Parson writ in his Letter, he told the party before one Mr.
Dyer, that there was a Commission coming out for ejecting Ministers, and that
he would be in danger of being outed his Living, that should not appear with
the Ministers at the Election.

Thus you see Sir, they make lies their refuge, and have recourse to Carnal
weapons, the Instruments of a foolish Shepherd, as his Highness expresses it
in one of his Letters to the Clergy of Scotland.

Well, though these rigid foolish men will not see the hand of God which is
gone out against them, but go on in their vain ways of opposition,
notwithstanding they have been so often disappointed yet the work of the Lord
shall prosper, and God will ere long separate his faithful Ministers and
Servants, from this corrupt self seeking Generation of men, who will not cease
from busy intermeddling in state matters and raising Factions, till the
Maintenance for the Ministry be brought into one Treasury, and equally divided.
In Holland (you know) where the Magistrate takes a stricter course, the
Ministers dare not busy themselves thus in State affairs. God forgive these
men, for they cause the Ministry of Christ to be evil spoken of, and to stink
in the nostrills of people, who do but deride them as a company of vain
busibodys.

Sir, It cannot but grieve and afflict the Spirits of honest men, to see a
company of time-serving Cavaleers, and corrupt Parsons carry on things as they
do, without control; and in the mean while such men as are most faithful to
the Public Interest, for which so much Blood has been spilt, and Treasure
spent, such as have been valiant in the field, and ventured their lives in the
high places for the liberties of the people, such as have all along in the
greatest Revolutions and dangers (when this Generation of men durst not show
their faces unles it was at Oxon, where some of them sat and acted) appeared
in their purses and persons for the true interest of the Nation, such as have
poured out floods of Tears and Prayers for the cause of Christ, that these
honest men should be thus slighted, undermined, scorned, discountenanced, and a
company of unworthy Time-serving men preferred and advanced, such as never did
the State any faithful service, such as do unworthily and vain-gloriously in
them own persons, hunt after worldly honor, and popular applause, and do even
hate and abhor the poor despised Saints. Certainly though good men should be
silent and sit still, yet the Lord himself will shortly avenge the cause of his
people, and bring deliverance in a way which we think not of, which will make the
ears of some to tingle, and their hearts to ache; we have yet the Christian
weapons of Faith, Hope, Patience, Prayers and tears remaining with us, which
will in due time prevail against this corrupt party, and the less there is of
man the more will God be seen. Let us sit still and see the Salvation of the
Lord.

July 13. 1654.
FINIS.

