A LEARNED AND FULL ANSWER TO A TREATISE INTITVLED; THE VANITY OF CHILDISH
BAPTISM. Wherein the several Arguments brought to overthrow the lawfulness
of Infants Baptism, together with the Answers to those Arguments maintaining
its lawfulness, are duly examined. As also The question concerning the
necessity of dipping in Baptism is fully discussed: By William Cook Minister
of the Word of God at Wroxall in Warwickeshire.

Printed and entered according to Order.



Matthew. 19.14. But Jesus said, Suffer little children and forbid them not to
come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of heaven.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Christopher Meredith, at the sign of the Crane in
Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL AND MVCH honored Sr. JOHN BURGOYNE Knight and
Baronet.
Sir,
THe reason prevailing with my dear friend, this Author, to desire me in his
absence, to direct this Treatise to your patronage, was partly to testify his
gratitude; as for many other favors, so especially that you were the chief
mean in opening a door to him for the exercise of his Ministry: partly
because he could find in your self and faimily a great instance of that truth
in this book asserted; I mean a gracious covenant made, and made good in your
family, from parents to children, to several generations. And could any
dedication fall out more happily then this, when you are not more a Patron to,
then a Pattern of the truth herein published? As concerning the book it self,
I shall say no more to you of it then this; when your leisure shall respite you
so as to read it, you will not repent that you help the Author of it into the
work of the Ministry. To others, who am I that I should take upon me to add
any thing to its value? nay it self will be its own abundant commendation; I
doubt not but it will find acceptance with all that love this truth, from some
great Patrons whereof, it had, when a Manuscript, an ample and full testimony:
and for others, however it do not find them such, yet if they will read it
impartially, I doubt not, but by Gods blessing, it will make them such. Sir,
all I have to do in this business is in the absence of, and at the desire of
my dear friend to offer these his first labors to your favor, and patronage,
being not a little glad I have this opportunity to acknowledge the many great
favors you have sometime heaped upon my self, as also because of them to
testify I am

Your faithful honourer and servant, FRA: WOOD COCK.

TO THE READER.
WE should not be ignorant of the wiles and methods of Satan, 2 Cor. 2.11.
who being a liar and murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8.44.
has made it his perpetual practice by lies to seek the destruction of
souls. His lies are of two sorts; one sort whereby he indevours to persuade
men to embrace falsehood as truth, to call evil good, and swallow down deadly
poison as wholesome food. The other, whereby he labors to persuade men to
reject truth as falsehood, and call good evil, that so men's souls may be
famished for want of necessary nourishment. This he does in matters of estate,
practice, faith, and worship; and the more error he can entangle us in, the
stronger hold he has of us. His principal endeavor therefore is to keep us
in dislike and detestation of all good, and love and delight in all evil. If
he cannot prevail so far, he labors at least to entangle the soul in one
or two dangerous errors, that will bring certain perdition. Many he detaineth
in sottish ignorance, gross profaneness, and heathenish impiety; persuading
them that their estate, practice, faith, and worship is good enough, so that
they can say, God is merciful; Christ died for sinners; they profess the true
religion, and plead that all forwardness in religion, which exceeds their
lazy strain, is but curious preciseness, and needless now fangled
singularity. Thus he prevailed with many, (to the grievous scandal of
religion, and danger of their own souls) even in the Apostles times, as may
appear by the lamentable profannesse, error, and ignorance in some Churches,
See 1 Cor. Chap. 5. and 6.8. and 10. and 15. and 2 Ep. etc. ^.
especially that of the Corinthians. If he cannot thus prevail with some who
leave their sinful courses, and desire in all things to please God, and to
make their calling and election sure; and in matters of faith, worship, and
practice, to be guided by the truth; he will raise in them scruples that they
may ever be questioning Gods love unto them, the truth of their grace, and the
soundness of their religion: so far as to hold them down with desperate
discouragements, and deep perplexities, and cause them to deny Gods gracious
work in them. How many does Satan in our days abuse, by leading them to
mis-iudge of their estates? One party sitting securely without questioning the
condition of their souls in respect of God; as if all things were so well with
them that they need nothing more. Another party on whom God has showed much
mercy, yet ever doubting and questioning. So for matters of faith, practice,
and worship; a great part is held in such carelessness that any religion will
content them, that suites with their carnal ends, and they take up their
religion without examining the grounds thereof. Others as much be abused on the
other hand, who because they see some things questioned and proved unsound that
havs gone for current: therefore will make bold not only to question, but also
in their manner to declaime and dispute against many lawful, warrantable, well
grounded, yea, and necessary truths, and practices, taught, enjoined, or
approved in the Scripture. As for example, the morality of the Sabbath, yea
the use of the whole Moral Law, subjection to the civil Magistrate; the
lawfulness of an oath, presence and communion in Gods worship, where all
things are not performed punctually according to their humor; yea humane
learning (and what not?) have been cried down as Antichristian. Amongst the
rest the baptizing of infants of Christian parents is condemned. Concerning
which they do not make sober inquisition, as desirous to try all things, and
hold fast that which is good; but earnestly dispute, use vehement
asseverations, and carry on the matter with so great confidence and boldness,
together with citation of many Scriptures, and pretense of sincere love and
zeal to the truth; that possibly the hearts of simple and upright Christians
may be troubled, if not ensnared; which has been the ancient practice of Satan
by his instruments, (whether they were ignorant of what they did, or knowing, I
say not) Act. 15. See the magisteriall peremptorinesse of those false teachers.
And how apt Gods people are to be troubled with words, or writings of this kind
appears. In the same place, Act. 15. verse. 2. and 2.4. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. Our
dark minds and corrupt wills being far more prone to error and vice, then
to truth and virtue. And how Satan will bestirre himself by his instruments,
and make use of the ignorance, pragmaticalnesse, pride and malice of some men
this way, we may see, Gal. 3.1, 2, 3. Which things I having had some experience
of, and meeting with a Pamphlet entitled, The vanity of Childish Baptism,
etc. by A. R. and hearing that some are drawn away to admire and embrace the
opinions therein maintained, and that others were unsatisfied concerning some
things that are therein delivered: I was troubled to see that such stumbling
blocks should be laid before Gods people; but not seeing a speedy remedy
procured, by that so much wished and prayed for way of a Synod of Gods
faithful Ministers, to consider of those things that trouble the Church
according to that example, Act. 15. Neither having seen any thing purposely
written upon this subject; (Though of many the unfittest, in regard of want of
ability, helps, and time, wherewith others abound) I inclined my thoughts to
answer the maine Arguments that the Author brings against the baptism of
infants, and to vindicate our Arguments against the Objections here made.
Though I confess, considering the gross and manifest errors, the
fantastical conceits, the taunts, scoffs, and raylings, and evident
absurdities, wherewith the Book is stuffed, (which show with what a spirit the
Author was led) it may seem unworthy an answer: yet because there are some
truths scattered therein, many Scriptures alleged, (though impudently
perverted) and much zeal and confidence pretended; many iniudicious people may
conceive there is some matter of weight and moment in it. Therefore until God
shall be pleased to stir up some fitter more fully to handle this subject (if
this controversy be not rather to be buried in silence for the absurdnesse of
the Adversaries opinions) I have undertaken by the assistance of God and rule
of the Scripture to examine this Author. In which examination I will not
follow him in his extravagancies, and impertinencies; neither shall I (I hope)
imitate him in his bold and confident, yet groundless assertions; much less
in bitter taunts and reproachful speeches which he uses toward our Ministers
and Church: (If I sometime set forth the ridiculousnesse and weakness of his
reasoning; or retort on him his own language, to show how much fitlier it
agrees to himself then those on whom he bestows it; I conceive I have warrant
in Gods word, Prove. 26.5. 1 King. 18.27.) But in the fear and as in the
presence of God, I will make trial of his principal reasons and grounds, so
far as God shall enable me by the light of his holy word; not intending to
defend all the Arguments which he undertakes to answer; nor to reply to all his
Answers of Objections, whereof some (whether invented of himself, or objected
by others) I own not, seeing sometime the truth may be pleaded for upon
unsound grounds. The truth I stand for; not the weak grounds. But I hope that
whatsoever he obiecteth with any show of reason or weight I shall sufficiently
answer; and lay down grounds for the defending of the truth that may satisfy
any intelligent Reader that seeks the truth: So I come to his Preface to the
Reader.

THE ANSWER TO SOME THINGS IN HIS Preface to the READR.
YOu say, A. R.
that In your serious thoughts you minded diverse places of Scripture, which
evidently set out Baptism to be an undoubted pledge from God to all the right
subjects to whom it is applied, of the free pardon of sins, Mark 1.4. and
16.16. Act. 2.38. and 22.16. 1 Pet. 3.31.

Ans. If in your serious thoughts you had compared what is said of
circumcision, which is answerable to baptism, you might have found that it was
to the Jews, Gods Covenant, Genesis 17.10, 11.
(which comprehends all the blessings of the covenant) Genesis 17.10. A token of
the covenant, verse. 11. A sign or seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4
10. Romans 4.10.
And so doubtless a pledge of the free pardon and remission of sins, which
is comprehended in Gods covenant, and in the righteousness of faith. And yet
circumcision was administered unto infants as the right subjects thereof.

Secondly, A. R.
Baptism is designed to believers only upon their making profession of faith
and willing submission thereunto: this you say, you find, Matt. 18.19. Ioh.
3.22. compared with 4.1. Act. 2.41. and 18.12.37.38. and 18.8.

Ans. Neither you nor any one else has found in those Scriptures, that only
actual believers, and professors of their faith ought to be baptized and none
else. Where is I pray you the particle only, or any thing equivalent thereto?
None of those precepts or examples limite Baptism for all times only to such:
Though such as believed and professed the faith be there spoken of; will it
follow that none else have right to baptism? The Disciples are neither
forbidden to baptize others but professors of the faith; nor limited to those
only, for ought that can be gathered from those places. Abraham which first
received the seal of circumcision, Genesis 15.6. with Genesis 17.1, 2, 3, etc.
and in his own person actually entered into Covenant with God, was endued with
the righteousness of faith, having not as a mere patient, but as an agent
accepted the Covenant. Will you thence infer that only such ought to be
circumcised under the old Covenant, as had in their own persons as agents
accepted of Gods Covenant, and were endued with the righteousness of faith,
Genesis 17.10, 11.
whereof they were to make profession? the Text will confute that inference.
Yet your collection is no better from some examples of persons of ripe years
which were out of the new Covenant before, and were now to be brought under it.
Who because they must believe, and profess their faith before they were
baptized; therefore their children though borne of parents within covenant, may
not be baptized until they actually believe and profess their faith. For as
upon Abraham's believing and receiving the Covenant, and seal of circumcision,
his family was received into covenant, and all his males circumcised: so we
have plain examples in the New Testament of Governors of families, who
believing and being baptized, had their whole families baptized also; where yet
there is no word of the faith and profession of any besides the Governors, as
Act. 16.15. and 31.32, 33. 1 Cor. 1.16. as shall be showed more fully
hereafter, God willing, in due place.

A. R.
Thirdly, you say, that The right subjects of Baptism are not to be merely
passive, Mat. 3.2.6. Mar. 1.5. Act. 22.16. Gal. 3.27. Col. 2.12. with 3.1.
but to perform such duties as are incompatible to infants, and persons
destitute of understanding.

Ans. This holds true of those that were to enter first into Covenant; as
Abraham must not be circumcised before he could in his own person accept Gods
Covenant and actually believe; but this was not necessary to his posterity
that were borne in Covenant. The like was showed of Baptism in the examples
foregoing.

A. R.
Whereas you say, Upon these considerations you could not without
unfaithfulness to God and your own conscience, but suspect your own baptism,
etc.



A. R.
Whereas you say, You remain unsatisfied by our strongest Arguments, and are
more confirmed thereby in your persuasion of the unwarrantableness of the
baptizing of infants.

Ans. This does no more make against a truth, that you are exasperated to
oppose by so much more, by how much more it is confirmed with Arguments; then
the rebellion of our corrupt hearts (by so much more resisting the Law of God,
Romans 7.8.
by how much more powerfully it is pressed upon us) proves the Law to be evil.

Whereas you talk so much of The invaliditie and insufficiency of our
Arguments, your faithfulness to God and your conscience: I hope it shall
appear what fidelity and conscientiousnesse you show in abusing the
Scriptures, and what sufficiency and validity there is in your arguments and
objections in the following examination. As for your peremptory, rash and
arrogant censuring the baptism of children to be a mere device of man,
introduced and maintained for politic ends by man's subtlety: It is not much
to be regarded, so long as we know that we must not stand to your sentence at
the last Day.

So much for the Preface. Now to the book it self.
AN ANSWER TO A TREATISE entitled, The vanity of Childish BAPTISM.
WE will come to your five considerations whereby you would prove that, That
which is administered in the Church of England under the name of Baptism, is
not the Baptism of the New Testament: and those are, First, the End. Secondly,
the Manner. Thirdly, the Power. Fourthly, the Ground. Fifthly, the Subject.

The first Consideration or Argument taken from the End of childrens Baptism:
Answered.
FOr the End you lay down for granted: First, A. R.
that the end of childrens baptism in our Church is regeneration. Secondly,
that this appears by diverse passages in the Liturgy, Thirdly, you add the
Doctrine or judgment of diverse Authors which justify the same, as you say.
Fourthly, you reason from this and some other principles against us. This is
the sum of your first Argument, which at large to set down were tedious and
endless.

Ans. Though I will not go about to defend every expression in the Liturgy, or
the Authors brought by you: yet I may well deny, first, your proposition as
you express it: secondly, I deny also that the reasons brought by you from the
Liturgy, and Authors prove that in our Church the end of baptizing is
regeneration, so that the act of baptizing should regenerate the child.

But to come to your proposition. If your meaning be that the end of our
baptizing is properly to regenerate; as if our Church used baptism that they
may ( ex opero operato, as the Papists say) confer grace and regeneration, it
is a slander to say it. If you mean that they use it for this end that it may
be a pledge, sign, seal, or confirmation of regeneration; or to speak
brieflier, that we use it sacramentally to regenerate, or mystically to wash
away sin, we avouch it; and this we believe is the right end of baptism, as
you grant, viz. A pledge of the pardon of sin, which implies regeneration, so
Romans 6.3, 4. Mar. 1.4. Act. 22. etc. And in this sense those expressions in the
Liturgy, and Authors may be warranted (if they intended any more let them
answer for themselves) as being agreeable unto the Scripture phrase in
sacramental matters. Exodus 12.1.12.13. Genesis 17.11, 12. Matt. 26.26.28. 1 Pet.
3.21.
As the Paschall Lamb was called the Passover, though but a sign, pledge, or
memorial of the Angels passing over and sparing the Israelites. Circumcision
is called the Covenant, though but the sign or token of the Covenant. Bread
and Wine in the Supper, the Body and Blood of Christ, though but signs and
seals thereof. Baptism saves us, though it be but a pledge, sign, or seal
of our salvation. And why may not the same be said to regenerate us, as well as
to save us? Is not regeneration the beginning and also part of our salvation?
Does not the whole comprehend the part? And therefore we may and ought to pray
for the regeneration of infants to be baptized, (that if begun, it may be
continued, increased, sealed, and perfected: if not, that it may be wrought in
Gods due time; so that baptism may have its efficacy.) And give thanks that
God has given the seal of regeneration, and solemnly admitted them into that
Covenant wherein he has promised, the blessing it self.

Let us see now what use you will make of this, that we hold infants baptized
to be regenerated, viz. sacramentally, as we have interpreted our meaning:
whence you gather

That all infants baptized must be necessarily saved; A. R.
which is acknowledged an absurdity even by our Ministers which call upon
baptized persons to repent, and preach regeneration unto them: Or else (say
you) we shall be forced to leave our other principle, which we hold against the
Pelagians, Papists, and Arminians. Namely, that True saving grace can never
totally, or finally be lost: And that they which have been regenerate can
never utterly fall away. This is the sum of your reasoning wherein you are
very large, as having gotten us at an advantage, in your conceit.

Ans. Will any man say, that all that were baptized by Peter, or to whom
baptism was applied in his time (of which he says, 1 Pet. 3.21.
that it saves) were certainly saved? Or that it was an absurd thing to preach
regeneration or salvation after baptism? Or that this doctrine, that baptism
saves or burieth with Christ, etc. is inconsistent with that other doctrine
concerning the perseverance of the Saints, seeing some of those that were
baptized in the Apostles time fell away and perished? Or in your baptism (if
you use any) which you profess is a pledge of the remission of sins; are all
certainly pardoned? Or need you never to preach repentance and regeneration to
them? If so, belike you are happier masters to your disciples, then Christ was
to his.

And seeing now you think you have got our learned Divines (as you scoffingly
call them) at an advantage, and follow them so eagerly with your horned
argument, as if your blow were unavoidable, comparing your self to Christ, and
them to the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 21.23. Let us try whether you would
not by this Argument, baffle and nonplus the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ
himself. For this your Argument holds as strongly against them as against us,
who teach no other thing in saying that baptism regenerateth, and true grace
can never be lost (though some baptized perish) then what we have received from
Christ, the Prophets, and Apostles. Might you not as well have taken up Nathan
for preaching unto David, 2 Samuel 12.
to bring him unto repentance and conversion. Why, what needs this Nathan?
David received circumcision the seal of the righteousness of faith, and of
circumcision of his heart in his infancy, Romans 4.11.
and had the spiritual grace bestowed on him effectually; and must he now be
regenerate and borne again? And why should David himself upon Nathans
exhortation and reproof, Psalm. 51.10.
pray that God would create in him a clean heart, and renew a right spirit
within him? (which, what else is it but the renewing of the work of
regeneration? Ezekiel. 18.21. Jer. 4.4.
) Why should the Prophets exhort the Jews to make them new hearts, and
circumcise their hearts, though they had received circumcision? What would
Nathan, David, and the Prophets have answered this subtle disputant if he had
examined them thus?

Or if you had been living in Paul's time, when he called upon the Romans, Romans
12.2. 2 Cor. 5.17. Ephesians. 4.23. and 24. Gal. 4.19. Romans 6.3. Gal. 3.27.
Corinthians, Ephesians and others, to repentance and renovation; to put off
the old man, to put on the new man, to become new creatures, to be renewed in
the spirit of their mind; professing that he traveled to form Christ in them
again. Belike this learned Divine (to use your phrase) Paul would soon have
been dashed, if you had but risen against him. Why, what is the matter Paul? Did
not you teach that so many as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ, are buried with him in baptism? What? have they put off Christ? risen
again to sin? Romans 8.38, 39. Phil. 1 6. Romans 11.29.
fallen away from grace, etc. This will not stand with your doctrine; that
nothing shall separate from Gods love; that God will perfect the good work
which he has begun; that the gifts and callings of God are without repentance.
Therefore you were deceived in saying that Christ is put on in baptism; or in
teaching that men cannot fall away from grace.

Or if you had had Peter in hand when he called Simon Magus to repentance, Act.
8, 22. though he had been baptized; you would belike have lessoned Peter
better. Why, what needs this Peter? Did not thou teach that baptism saves,
and is he that was saved even now damned again? 1 Pet. 3.21.
sure thou wast mistaken when thou said baptism saves; or when thou said
that the faithful are preserved by the power of God through faith unto
salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.
since Simon that awhile ago believed and was baptized, has need now to
repent, as being in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity.

Thus if you had disputed, learned Peter and Paul belike had been in great
straits what to have answered. It was well for them that none of these acute
Anabaptists (as they are called) were sprung up in those days. One more
instance I will bring. Our blessed Savior preaches unto his Disciples
necessity of conversion, and becoming as little children, Matthew. 18.3.
as they would enter into the kingdom of heaven. Yet elsewhere he says, Joh.
3.35.
Except a a man be borne again of water and the holy Ghost, he shall in no
wise enter into the kingdom of God. Thereby (as you gather) assuring us that
if a man be regenerate and borne again, he shall see the kingdom of God. But
I conceive you will not deny but the Discipcles had already been borne again
by water and the holy Ghost. Sure in this case had you been in his time you
would have more troubled him with your Dilemma, then an hundred of the Scribes
and Pharisees with all their Sophistry. What? To teach that being borne again
by water and the holy Ghost, Joh. 10.28.
they shall certainly enter into the kingdom of God: And that none shall pluck
them out of his hands being given him of the Father: And yet now threaten them
with the loss of the kingdom of heaven, unless they shall be converted,
become as little children? (which, what else is it but to be regenerate?)

Do you think that this your arguing would have persuaded the world that
Christ was a false witness of God? When your reasoning thus against the
Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself, shall be found unanswerable, we shall
be forced to yield unto you; but until then we (who in this point have their
doctrine for our warrant; That though Baptism save and regenerate, yet
baptized persons have need to be called upon to repentance and regeneration)
need not to regard your bold, and confident asseverations.

I have the largelier set forth the manner of your reasoning, only changing the
persons, (if it may be) to make you see your weakness; if not, to make others
ashamed of their simplicity which admire such disputers. You would not have
reasoned so, if you had considered: First, that notwithstanding some abuse
baptism, yet that hinders not but in regard of Gods institution, baptism may
be said to regenerate or save. And so secondly, that they which have received
baptism according to Gods appointment, as far as we can discern, may be
said to be regenerated and saved, viz. sacramentally. Thirdly, that baptism is
administered to the members of the Church; not only as a pledge of remission of
sins past, upon supposition of repentance and faith; but also of sins to
come; being both an obligation to us daily to renew our faith and repentance,
and an assurance unto us, that upon the performance of that condition God will
pardon; in so much that our regeneration, viz. sacramental in baptism is a
main ground, why Ministers should call upon us being baptized to manifest our
regeneration in our lives, seeing God has given us the seal of regeneration
to assure us of the grace it self, if the fault be not in our selves; and to
bind us to repentance that we may be partakers of the remission of sins; and
hence the Apostle urges conversion or sanctification from baptism before
received. Romans 6.
So that if in Christ's and the Apostles time the baptized had need to be called
to repentance or regeneration, though baptism saved and buried with Christ:
what absurdity is it if our Ministers call to repentance, and regeneration,
those that were regenerated in baptism in the forenamed sense? For even in the
best times some that had professed, and been baptized, had done it unsoundly
and hypocritically, and so had need to be called unto sincerity: whereunto
when they were brought, their baptism though received in time of hypocrisy,
should be a pledge of the remission of sins; Act. 8.
as in Simon Magus whom Peter bids to repent, but not to be baptized again.
Secondly, others might have the truth of grace and regeneration, and yet not
give so clear testimony thereof to themselves and others as was to be
desired. Thirdly, those that had truly repented and believed, might have
fallen and need to be restored. Fourthly, the best by such exhortations are
kept watchful. None in this life are so fully regenerated or converted, but
they need additions and increase. So that your consequences that you draw
against us from our principles are frivolous.

A. R.
Now let us come to your answer to our Objections as you pretend: You say, that
To sophisticate by some distinction, lest all our gain by this trade should be
taken from us; and as all the people gave care to Philip; so all the people
should give care to us, and so our kingdom should be at an end: we use this
distinction, that they are only holy in the judgment of charity, of the
Church esteemed regenerate; neither are any required to believe them to be
regenerate as an Article of faith, but in the judgment of charity: and then
you ask, What is the ground of this our charity?

1 Pet. 3.
for Peter says, it saved; Paul says, it buried with Christ. If yea, Romans 6.
whether you believe that all that are baptized of you, are certainly
regenerate and saved, or no; and then tell us, what is the ground of your
belief.

Secondly, Whereas you dislike this distinction, you should have demanded of
Peter and other the Apostles and Evangelists (that baptized some hypocrites no
doubt, witness Simon Magus, Ananias, Saphira, etc. and yet held that Baptism
saves and burieth with Christ) whether they held that these who received
Baptism were saved and buried with Christ in the judgment of certainty or
charity, and then you might have demanded a ground of that their judgment:
And seeing you arrogate to your self such skill in Scripture, tell us what was
Peter's ground in saying Baptism saves, when yet many that were baptized were
damned; and what answer you shall make to this question, happily may serve to
answer your own question to us.

Thirdly, We answer directly. Our ground on which we build this charitable
opinion, ( viz. that Baptism regenerateth sacramentally; or that infants of
Christian parents baptized are regenerate) is Gods word. For does not the
Scripture tell us, that God is the God of the faithful and of their seed, that
he has taken them into Covenant? Genesis 17.7.10.
Thus God promised unto Abraham the father of the faithful, not as any
privilege peculiar unto him; but as the common privilege of all in covenant,
and therefore proselytes of what nation soever upon their entering into covenant
had their children taken into covenant likewise. Again, Exodus 12.48. Act. 2.36.
1 Cor. 7.17.
the promise is made not only to the faithful, but also to their children.
Hence it is, that the children of believing parents are holy. Which places of
Scripture shall in due place (God willing) be vindicated from your groundless
exceptions. Now whosoever is in covenant with God, has God for his God, has
the promises belonging to him, and is holy, must needs be regenerate, as he is
in covenant, has God for his God, etc. And therefore seeing that children are
in the same condition with their parents (or those that are in stead of their
parents) in respect of outward covenant (which is all the ground we have for
judging others;) So that if the parent be in covenant, the child remains so
until by his own personal infidelity and apostasy he discovenant himself:
if the parent be out of covenant, the child remains so, until by his own
personal faith, he accept and enter into covenant. Hence it follows, if we
have so much ground for our judgment of charity, to hold that the parents are
regenerate, as the Apostles had for those whom they baptized, which was no more
then their profession of faith and repentance; we have the same ground for our
judgment concerning the regeneration of their children. viz profession of
faith and repentance made by their parents; though we may often be deceived in
parents and children, and no marvel, even the Apostles themselves were
deceived: for they doubtless baptized many hypocrites.

As for your other objections, whether fained by your self and fathered on us,
or found in any writings on our side; they are not worthy defending, nor your
answer unto them worthy a reply. Who say, that The mere election of infants,
whether all or some, is the ground of our baptizing them, or believing them to
be regenerate. If any say so, let him answer for himself. But our ground, as
has been showed, is the external being in covenant; whereby they have right
to the seal of initiation; which is not without its efficacy unto al; though
some (whether they receive it in infancy or ripeness) by their own fault may
render it unprofitable to themselves. Therefore your frivolous inferences have
no place here, as that, Al men and women in the world are to be baptized: for
all are not outwardly in covenant. And as for your confident assertion, that
Faith manifested by the confession of the mouth, is the only ground of Baptism
to the elect, (if you mean it of the profession of faith of the person to be
baptized) it is not proved by those Scriptures you allege, Act. 8.37. Romans
14.23.
(as has been partly showed already, and God willing shall be showed more
fully hereafter) unless you will make the Eunuchs Baptism with all its
circumstances, a necessary rule to be followed by all to be baptized. So much
may suffice to be answered to your first consideration.

An answer to the second consideration or argument, taken from the manner of
Baptizing.
LEt us come to your second consideration, taken from the manner of the
administration of Baptism. A. R.
You say; The manner in which Baptism is administered in our Church is by
sprinkling or casting a little water on the head or face. And your position
that you oppose against us is this. Christ's institution requires that the whole
man be dipped all over in the water. Hence your argument is this; The manner of
the use of water must be either by infusion or dipping. But John the Baptist or
Dipper, used the water by putting the party into the water, not by infusing or
sprinkling water upon the party, as is proved, Matthew. 3.7. (...).
I indeed baptize you in water, Mark 1.8. I indeed have baptized you in water,
Ioh. 1.26. Act. 11.16.

Answ. We will try how substantial this reason is. Whereas you say; The use of
water must be either by infusion or dipping: In some sense this is true,
namely, if it be taken by way of enumeration, not of opposition; for Baptism
which signifies washing, is done by applying the water to the party baptized or
washed; But water is ordinarily applied the one of these two ways. viz. either
by dipping or sprinkling. In this sense we grant your proposition is true: viz.
that Baptism must be either by dipping or infusion, and so that it be either
way it is sufficient. But you take it not in this sense, as may appear by the
manner of your reasoning; for by the affirmation of the one, you infer the
denial of the other; and if you should take it in this sense, it would make
against your self, and overthrow your own argument. Therefore it appears you
take it by way of opposition, and so we utterly deny it as false. Your
reasoning is like this, We come to the knowledge of Christ by reading the
Scriptures, or hearing the word preached. Joh. 5.39.
But Christ bids the Jews to search the Scripture, viz. by reading, that they
might come to the knowledge of him. Therefore not by hearing the word preached.
Or like this, The Minister must preach either sitting or standing. But Christ
preached sitting. Matthew. 5.1. etc.
Therefore Ministers may not preach standing. Or this, We must pray either
standing, or kneeling, or sitting, or lying, etc. But Christ says, when you
stand praying. Mark. 11.25.
Therefore it is not lawful to pray with any other gesture but standing. Who
sees not the weakness of this reasoning? yours is no better.

But to come to your assumption. But John the Baptist or Dipper (as you say,
according to the Dutch) did use the water: By putting the party into the
water, not by insusing or sprinkling, Mat. 3.11. Mar. 1.8. Ioh. 1.26. Act.
11.16.

Answ. First, None of these places prove that John put the party into the
water, much less that the whole man was dipped all over in the water, which
you undertook to prove; But here is not the least intimation of any such
matter.

Secondly, Whereas you gather from the Original: that John baptized in the
water, and dipped the whole man all over in the water, and put the party into
the water, you might as well say, that Christ baptized in the holy Ghost, and
fire, and that he dipped the whole man all over in the holy Ghost and in the
fire, Act. 11.6. Matthew. 3.11. (...).
or put the party into the holy Ghost and fire; (which were a strange
interpretation) for the particle is the same.

Thirdly, Whereas you gather hence [A Baptism in water] not [a Baptism with
water] I would have you tell me what were they baptized or washed with if not
with water? as if there were an irreconcilable repugnancy between baptizing in
water, and baptizing with water.

But that (...) does not necessarily signify [in,] you grant in our objection,
(...).
which you propound thus, (...) does signify [with] sometime as in Revel.
19.21. And the rest were slain with the sword. Whereunto I might add that not
only in this place, but frequently in the New Testament, the particle (...)
(by an Hebraisme) answering the prefixe signifies as well with as in. Matthew.
5.13. (...).
with (not in) what shall it be salted, Matthew. 7.2. with (not in) what
judgment. Act. 26.18. with (not in) the sanctified. You answer this objection
thus.

"(...) is never taken for [with] after baptizo.

Mat. 3.11. Act. 11.19.
speaking of Christ's baptizing with the holy Ghost and with fire, cannot be
otherwise Englished with any sense.

Your peremptory denial of (...) to signify [with] after (...), you would
confirm thus. Either the word Baptizo must signify to sprinkle, or the word
(...) must not signify [with.] But the word baptizo does signify to dip.
Ergo, the word (...) must signify [In] and not [with,] as is proved very
clearly, and denied of none who are not ignorant of the language.

Answ. As for this your Syllogism, it shows your Clarklinesse wherewith you
scoffingly taunt our Ministers. It is notoriously fond, it wants form, has
four terms: In the assumption you put [to dip] in stead of [not to sprinkle,]
as if one word might not signify to dip and sprinkle both. There is no
necessity in the proposition. Your assumption wherein you say (But baptizo
signifies to dip) if it be taken exclusively, as to debar all other
significations (which it must, or else it is brought to no purpose) is false.
Whereas in your conclusion, you say (...) must signify [in] and not [with]
which you say is denied by none, who are not ignorant of the language.

Answ. What fond arrogance this is, I shall make appear by and by. But let us
hear this critical Linguist prove what he says from the signification of the
Greek word.

You say that Greek Authors account Bapto and Baptizo, to signify that for
which the Latins use Mergo, Immergo and Tingere immergendo; that is to dip or
plunge, to douse over head, or under water. Answ. Bapto indeed signifies Mergo
or Tingo. (...).
Baptizo is a derivative that comes thence, which sometimes may signify the
same with its primitive. But if we look into the use of it in the New
Testament, we shall find it rendered, To wash; where the Original word to
Baptize is not kept. as Mark. 7.4. And when they come from the market they eat
not except they wash. -- The washing of cups and of pots, and of brazen
vessels, and of beds or tables. Again, verse. 8. The washing of pots and cups.
Here you have the verb Baptizo to wash, and the noune Baptismos, washing. And
that this is the proper signification of the word may appear ( Bez Lotiones
Arias Mon. lotiones. vul. Baptismata.
beside the consent of Translatours) in that it is used as signifying the same
thing with the other words, that always signifies Bez Lotiones Arias Mon.
lotiones. vul. Baptismata.
washing, as verse. 2. (...).
With unwashen hands, and verse. 3. (...).
Wash their hands. By which it appears, that (...) and (...) signify the
same thing. So Hebr. 9.10. And diverse washings, where the Apostle speaks of
the legal washings. So Luke 11.38. The Pharisee marvelled that Christ had not
washed before dinner. So that the word signifies properly to wash, whether by
infusion or immersion it matters not.

But should we grant Baptizo and Bapto, to be altogether of the same
signification (though the contrary have been sufficiently proved,) what will
you gain thereby? (...) signifies, either mergo or tingo. Mergo signifies
properly, to drown, overwhelm, swallow up, etc. If you will have your converts
(according to this interpretation) so baptized as to drown them; you will make
sure work to prevent their sinning any more. And so your Baptism will have a
privilege above the Baptism of Christ, John or the Apostles; for their
converts and baptized ones sinned after Baptism. But if you will have Baptism
taken and used in this sense, I know none that will be your disciples, unless
they be weary of their lives. The other word Tingo signifies to dip or Dan.
4.12. etc Interpreters render the word (...) which in sound has great
affinity with (...), some letters being transposed, by Intingitur. Iun. and
Trem. Ar. Mon. Buxtorf. our Translatours render it, to be wet. Where Intingo,
cannot signify to douse over head, or to dip, but to besprinkle or bedew, for
it follows -- with the dew of heaven.
besprinkle, to embrue, stain, wet, or wash, etc. Now what reason is there, why
it should be restrained only to the first signification? Nay if we compare
Scriptures, we shall find that what is rendered by sprinkling in the Old
Testament is expressed by this word (...) in the New. As if we confer these
two places, Rev 19.13. and Esa. 63.3. In Rev. 10.13. And (...)(...) sparsus,
aspersus, inspersus fuit. vel active, aspersit. (...) conspersus, tinctus,
madefactus. Bez. vest tincta sanguine. Ari. vestimention tinctum. Vulg. vest
aspersa.
he was clothed with a vesture (dipped) in blood, So our Translatours, (or
rather sprinkled, so we,) Esa. 63.3. Their blood shall be (sprinkled) on my
garments; To which place of Esaias it is certain that the holy Ghost in the
Revelation alludes (that I say not that it may be a repetition of the same
prophesis, pointing at the same time and thing) as it may appear by the same
similitude of treading the wine press of Gods wrath, largely prosecuted in
both places. See Esa. 63.1 With dyed garments, verse. 2. Red in his apparel,
etc. verse. 3. I have trod the wine press, and compare Rev. 19. v. 15. etc. So
that it is evident, that (...) does express the same that was meant by (...)
and (...). Though our Translatours render it dipped, because the word in the
Original signifies either dipped or sprinkled equally; Yea, Beza uses a word
that equally signifies dipped or sprinkled. So Arias Montanus. But the vulgar
translation has a word that only signifies besprinkled, not dipped.

But you say. That Baptizo signifies, to dip, plunge, douse over head, etc. is
proved by Christ's own Baptism. And (...).
he was baptized into the Jordan. Mark 1.9. But it is not, the water was put
upon him, as in sprinkling the water is put on the party.

Answ. 1. Neither is it, he was dipped, plunged, doused over head, or under the
water, etc.

2. The force of your argument lies in this particle (...), which you will
needs have translated [Into] not [In.] But can you, who censure others for
their ignorance of the language, be ignorant that [(...)] signifies very
frequently In or by, not Into? as Matthew. 2.23. (...).
He dwelt in [not into] a city called Nazareth. Matthew. 4.13. He dwelt in [not
into] Capernaum. Matthew. 5, 45. Neither by the earth, neither by Jerusalem,
(...) and (...), are put in the same signification there. Matthew. 10.9. Neither
possess money in [not into] your purses. and 41. (...).
In [not into] the name of a Prophet. Matthew. 13.33. She hid it in [not into]
three measures of flower, etc. Thus you see (...) signifying in, so that it
were absurd to render it into, and so you have proved nothing for your purpose
from the particle.

"You add the testimony of our Translatours themselves. For which I answer.
Matthew. 26.23. and Mar. 14.20. (...) and (...), have the preposition set before
them, which alters the signification and restrains it to signify Dipping, in
which signification the simple Verb that we are about is not restrained unto.
From Luke 16.24. Ioh. 13.26. (...).
you prove nothing but what we willingly grant without this labor; namely,
that bapto sometimes signifies to Dippe. But thence it follows not that it
signifies so always, or only. Of (...), Revel. 19.13. and the difference
between Bapto, and Baptizo, I have spoken before. And here you confirm what I
said, and contradict your self. For saying that in no Greek Author, nor
Scripture written by the Apostles in that Language, can be found that they
differ: Mark. 7.4.
Immediately you bring a place where Baptizo is taken in a sense different from
Bapto, which you never showed, not have I read to signify, to Wash. So that
you pull down with your own hands, what you have been building all this
while. See before what has been said to that place, where mention is made of
such a washing, as is so far from necessarily implying dowsing into the water
only, that it will scarcely admit it as washing themselves when they come from
the market, and the washing of Beds or Tables. What you add, That washing of
cups, is putting cups into the water: is as true as washing hands or face is
putting them into the water. May not cups be as well washed by infusion of
water in and upon them; as by putting them into the water?

Your conjecture from Ioh. 3.23. is as frivolous. As if there could be no
reason why John should choose a place where were many waters, but this, that he
might dip the whole man into the water, plunge and douse them over head, or
under water, (as your expressions are) But no such reason is here expressed,
nor so much as intimated. Rather the cause seems this. Because in those hot
countries waters were rare, Genesis 21.15.19. Genesis 26.18. Judge. 1.15.
and in some places could not be had in a great distance: therefore John chose
places where were continual running waters and streams: especially, seeing
there came such huge multitudes unto him to be baptized, Mat. 3.5, 6, 7.
and it is more then probable that not only John, but also his disciples
baptized, as Ioh. 4.1, 2. Christ is said to baptize those whom his disciples
baptized: So John may be said to baptize those whom he and his disciples
baptized together, a long the river at several places of the river, that they
might make more speedy dispatch, with so great multitudes. Act. 2.41. Act.
16.15.33.
Neither is it true that you say; A little font will suffice to besprinkle a
whole world with handfuls. Moreover, we read of great multitudes baptized,
even three thousand in Jerusalem, without mention of going to the rivers; and
of whole families, without mention of going out to the waters, or fetching
great store of waters. It is like the waters they had within doors at midnight
sufficed.

Act. 8.38, 39.
Your Collection from Philips going down to the water with the Eunuch, that
therefore they used dipping; is as vain. Must not they go to the water where it
was, if they would use it? would the water have come up unto them in the
chariot any sooner for sprinkling then for dipping? Of the same stamp is your
inference, from Matthew. 3.16. Mark. 1.10. from Christ's ascending from the water.
For as Christ was pleased to be baptized with water: so he was pleased to go
where the water was. viz. in the channel, to which there was a descent, and
from which there was an ascent; so that he must go down to and come up from the
water. But here is not the least hint that John doused Christ over head or
under the water. Nay, rather that conceit of yours is here confuted; for if our
Blessed Savior had been plunged of John into the water, then it would rather
have been said; That John cast or plunged Christ into the water, (...).
and took him out of the water. But it is only employed, that Christ went down
unto the water and came up again from it.

From your other Scriptures, Col. 2.12. Romans 6.4.5. 1 Cor. 15.29. what you go
about to gather I know not, unless this, that as Christ was buried, abode in
the grave three days, and then rose again: so the party baptized must be put
under the water, abide there some considerable time, and then come up again
(for if you press a similitude of Christ's burial in going down into the
water, and of his resurrection in coming up out of the water; why not also of
his abode in the grave three days, by abiding three days, or some answerable
time under the water?) which will make bad work; neither can any such thing be
gathered from those Scriptures. Now to use your own words: Let any man that is
not quite fallen out with his reason judge, whether in all these Scriptures be
any syllable that speaks more for dipping then for sprinkling or washing with
water? Men may well be at agreement with their reason, and yet perceive no such
thing as you infer hence. Col. 2.12. Romans 6.4, 5. 1 Cor. 15.29.
But I would demand here two Questions: First, How can you gather from these
places, a dipping of the whole man over head and under water? and that a
similitude of Christ's death, burial, and rising again, to be represented by
dipping into the water is signified here? These Scriptures show indeed that the
end of our baptism is to seal our communion with Christ, in his death and
resurrection, by which we are dead to sin, and raised again to holiness.
But if you will press hence a necessity of resemblance of Christ's death,
burial, and resurrection by our descending into, abiding in, and coming up out
of the water; Pro. 30.6. Revel. 22.18.
take heed lest you be one of those which add to Gods word, lest he reprove
you as a liar: and add unto you the plagues written in his Book. For I know
not any word of God wherein this representation is necessarily implied, much
less expressed. Besides, if you urge death and resurrection to be resembled by
descension into, and ascension out of the water: you must urge also burial
(which is principally there expressed) by the biding of the whole man, head and
all under for a time answerable to Christ's three days burial, which cannot be
without danger (yea certainty) of drowning.

Secondly, If it should be granted that a representation and resemblance of
Christ's death, burial, and resurrection is set before us in baptism; and so
of our death to sin, and rising again to holiness: Yet I would demand, why
may not this be represented as well by infusion of water, as by dipping? Can
you give me an example of so many killed and buried by immersion or dipping
into the water; as I can give of them that have been put to death and buried,
by the infusion of water? I am sure a whole world of men and other earthly
creatures (those few that were in the Arc excepted) were buried in the
universal Deluge at once, by infusion, not by dipping. So that infusion or
sprinkling, Genesis 6.27. and 7.11, 12.
may well as clearly signify death and burial, as dipping. And to the
preservation of Noah and those that were with him, by the Arc, (on which
waters were poured) from drowning: the Apostle compares baptism, as its
antitype. Wherefore you might do well to be henceforth a little more modest,
and not talk as if all men were fallen out with their reason which will not
jumpe with you in your weak conceits.

Now we come to your inference or conclusion, which being built on the crazie
and rotten foundation of such vain and fond premises, falls to the ground of
it self. And whereas you say, that, The Greek wanted not words to express any
other act as well as dipping. I answer. Neither did the Greek want words to
express only dipping of the whole man all over into the water; or dowsing and
plunging over head and under the water (which you would have Baptizo to
signify, but neither have nor can prove that it does) if the holy Ghost had
meant any such act. Neither does the Spirit of God need your help to find out
fit words. It seemed fit to that wise Spirit to use Baptizo, which signifies to
wash, whether by dipping or sprinkling; washing only being intended to be
significant, and not either dipping or sprinkling. Whereas you say, that It
cannot be proved that baptism was administered any other way then by dipping,
for at least a thousand years after Christ.

Ans. I leave the proof and trialls of that to Historians and Antiquaries, as
being unfurnished with the Records of Antiquity: though I conceive your
Assertion is as bold and groundless as your others are proved to be. Secondly,
Why do you not prove that dowsing over head, and under water, was used for at
least a thousand years after Christ? Thirdly, How can you tell it cannot be
proved that sprinkling was used of all that time? Will you persuade people that
you have read over all the writings of the Ancients; or that you are so honest,
faithful, and unerring, that your word must be taken for an Oracle without
proof?

As for your clear resulting consequence, as I said, It is built on too weak
grounds to stand, and therefore may be safely denied as a plain untruth. And
whereas you apply the words of Peter and Ananias unto us, Act. 2.38. Act.
22.16. 1 Samuel 15.23.
as to unbaptized persons, persuading us to arise and be baptized: Intimating,
that for us to refuse this your Charge, is rebellion and stubbornness, as
witchcraft, iniquity and idolatry. I would advise you take heed of, and
repent for abusing Scripture, as in these and a great part of your quotations
you do most grossly. God will not hold them guiltless that take his name in
vain. When you come to us with the same spirit and authority, as Peter,
Ananias, and Samuel had; we will hearken to you.

Now though what has been said in answer to this disputers Arguments against
baptizing by sprinkling, or infusion; and for only dipping or plunging might
suffice; yet I will add something more to what has been written, endeavoring
to make it appear, that washing, whether it be by dipping, or sprinkling, is
the external act required in this Sacrament, to be used; and that sprinkling,
or infusion, is as (if not more) agreeable to the nature and institution of
this Sacrament, as dipping, or immersion.

Argument 1. As the word used signifies washing, (as has been showed) so the
thing represented, signified, and sealed in this Sacrament, is set forth in the
Scripture by the phrase of washing, or cleansing, as 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye are
washed, (...).
but ye are sanctified, but yea are justified, etc. Now who questions but our
justification, and sanctification, or remission of sins, together with
mortification, and vivification are sealed, and signified by baptism, etc. But
these are here called washing. So Tit 3.5. (...).
According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the holy Ghost. In the former of which expressions (washing) if
here be not meant baptism it self, (which to deny I see no reason) yet
certainly here is meant the thing signified by baptism, which is sufficient
for our purpose which way so ever it is taken. Heb. 10.22. (...).
Having our bodies washed with clean water. 1 Ioh. 1.7. And the blood of Jesus
Christ his Son shall cleanse us from all our sins. Heb. 9.14. The blood of
Christ shall purge your conscience. Now we know washing, purging, or cleansing,
may be, and commonly is, as well by infusion, or pouring on the thing to be
washed, as by dipping. Common experience testifies so much, and Scripture is
not silent herein. Luke 7.44. She has washed my feet with tears, viz. (...).
by pouring or distilling, as the word signifies. And though it were granted
that in those hot Countries they commonly washed, by going down into the
water, and being dipped therein; whether in ordinary, or ceremonial, or
sacramental washing; that will no more enforce on us a necessity of observing
the same in baptism now, then the example of Christ and his Apostles Matthew.
26.2. (...). Mar. 14.18. (...). Luke 22.14. (...). Matthew. 14.19. (...).
gesture in the Sacrament of the Supper ties us to the same, (which was
leaning, and partly lying, which was their usual table gesture then.) Now the
ordinary table gesture which is usual among us is most fit; so the usual
manner of washing amongst us is most fit to be observed in baptism; and that
is by pouring, as well as by dipping.

But it may be objected, That sprinkling a little water, does not so fitly
represent the perfect washing away of all our sins, as dipping or plunging,
since here the whole body is washed, there only the face or head only. Answ.
First, the Scripture no where requires the washing of the whole body in
baptism. Secondly, with as good reason one might plead thus. It is most
convenient that at the Lords Supper every communicant should receive his belly
full of bread and wine; and take as long as stomach and head will hold, to
signify the full refreshment of the soul with the body and blood of Christ.
But who would endure such reasoning? These outward elements of Water, Bread and
Wine, are for spiritual use, and to signify spiritual things; so that if
there be the truth of things, the quantity is not to be respected further then
is sufficient for its end; namely, to represent the spiritual grace: and that
it be neither so little, as not clearly to represent it; 2. Pet. 3.21.
nor so much, as to take off the heart from the spiritual to the corporal
thing. Not the washing away of the filth of the body in baptism; nor the
glutting or satisfying of the natural appetite in the Lord Supper is to be
looked after, but the washing and refreshing of the soul; which may well be
represented by the sprinkling of a little water; eating, and drinking of a
little bread and wine. In Circumcision a little skin was cut off.

(...) of (...) fudit. Infudit, affudit, profudit, perfudit. (...)
or to be administered. I mean the blood of Christ, and the Spirit of God,
(which are the invisible grace of Baptism) are said to be powered or sprinkled
on Gods people. Esa. 44.3. For I will power water on him that is thirsty, and
floods on the dry ground: I will power my Spirit on thy seed, and my blessing
upon thine offspring. Here the Spirit is said to be powered, and this benefit
is signified by the type of pouring water. Joel 2.28. I will power out my
spirit on all flesh. Which promise Peter citing, calls upon the people to
repent, and receive baptism, as being the sign and seal which God had
appointed to represent, and exhibit this promised blessing by. Ezekiel. 36.26.
(...)
And I will sprinkle upon you clean water, and you shall be clean. This
clean water questionless, is the blood and spirit of Jesus Christ,
represented by the water in baptism. Thus we see three several phrases
signifying, to sprinkle, besprinkle, power. If we look into the New Testament
we shall find the like phrases, Act. 2.17. (...) (...).
I will power forth my Spirit upon all flesh. Heb. 10.22. Having your hearts
besprinkled from an evil conscience. 1 Pet. 1.2. By the sanctification of the
spirit, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. See Heb. 9. 13. and 14.
verses compared together; and Heb. 12.24. Now let any one without prejudice
consider these Scriptures, whether at least some of them speak not in allusion
to baptism, and whether they all hold not forth the thing signified in
baptism; and whether baptism be not a lively resemblance and representation
of the things here spoken off. And then withal let him consider, whether the
thing exhibited in this Sacrament be ever so fully set forth by dipping, and
then I leave him to judge whether sprinkling be not as (that I say not more)
agreeable to the nature of this Sacrament, as dipping.

A. R. pleads for, as essential to baptism, seems directly against the sixth
Commandment, and exposes the person baptized to the danger of death. For
first, suppose the party be fit for baptism (as they account) in the sharp
Winter as now believing, professing, etc. He must immediately be taken to the
river (as his tenet seems to hold) and there plunged in over head and ears,
though he come forth covered with ice. But if he escape perishing with cold;
how can he escape being choked, and stifled with the water: if he must be
plunged over head to signify his death to sin: secondly, be kept under
water, to signify his burial: and thirdly, be taken up, as this Disputer
seems to reason? But whatsoever be the danger of freezing, or suffocation; it
seems this he holds the only baptism, and therefore must not be swerved from.

part of the body, and then they are not rightly baptized; for the whole man,
say they, must be dipped. Again, I would ask what warrant they have for
dipping, or baptizing garments, more then the Papists have for baptizing Bells.
Therefore belike the parties must be naked, and multitudes present as at John's
baptism, and the parties men and women of ripe years, as being able to make
confession of their faith and repentance: yet though they both sin against
the sixth Commandment, indangering life, and against all common honesty and
civilitie, and Christian modesty required in the seventh Commandment, they
must have this way observed, because they fancy it the only baptism. Shall
we think this was the baptism of John, Christ, and his Apostles? But enough
of this second Consideration; we come to the third Consideration.

The third Argument, or Consideration against our Baptism, taken from the
Ministers (by whom administered) examined.
YOur third Consideration against baptizing of infants amongst us, is taken
from the Calling, Office, Power, and Authority of the Ministers, by whom they
are baptized. Which subject because it has been largely handled by others,
shall be lightly passed over. Yet we will try what you say to it with show of
truth, or weight.

A. R.
Whereas you say, That our Ministers power and authority was received from
Bishops, who received their power from the Antichristian State of Rome, as they
confess; so that the baptism is from Antichrist, not from Christ.



the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament have been in the custody of the
Papists, as the Old Testament in the custody of the Jews; so that we have no
Bibles now, but what came successively from the Jews and Papists: Must we
therefore reject the Scripture as Antichristian, or Jewish, and look for
immediate revelations? Or if the Bishops had a hand in the Translation of our
Bibles; must they therefore be cast away as Antichristian: so that neither you
nor your disciples may meddle with them, because they have passed through the
hands of the Bishops? If any of you have heard any Sacred truths from Ministers
(which have been ordained by Bishops) which you seemed to believe for a time:
must you of necessity cast them away as falsehoods, and Antichristian Tenants,
false doctrines or nullities? as you will make their baptism Antichristian
baptism, the reason is the same. Take heed lest in so doing you cast away your
souls.

2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
which he would never have been suffered to do, had he not professed and
practiced some things that for their substance were of God. And as for the
faithful over whom he did tyrannize, while he sat in the Temple of God:
though they were abused and cheated by him, with many superstitions and
errors, that he imposed upon them: yet there were some saving truths that they
professed, and holy and acceptable worship, and practice which they did
perform, which in Christ God was pleased to accept; so that it is fond to
reason; Baptism, Ordination and the Scriptures were received from Antichrist,
therefore Antichristian.

and sincerity of the parties undertaking that office; al which are requisite,
if they will, to their own comfort, and with Gods approbation exercise their
ministry; although the want of some of these hinder not, but that he which by
Gods providence is called to the ministry, may have power and authority
sufficient from God to be an instrument of God, for the good of others, though
he were weak and unfound himself; Mat. 10.4. and 40.
as we may see in Judas: (who was one of those to whom Christ says, He that
receives you, receives me, etc.) the Scribes and Pharisees, (concerning whom
Christ gave a charge that they should be heard and obeyed in those things which
they taught sitting in Moses chair: Matthew. 23.2, 3. Phil. 1.15, 16.18. Act.
6.5. Rev. 2.6. vide Brightman, in locum.
though their lives were not exemplary) the envious, contentious, and unsincere
Preachers of Christ (in whose preaching yet Paul rejoiced;) in Demas, and
Nicolas the Deacon, who as Interpreters hold, proved afterward the ringleader
of the Nicolaitanes.) This (I say) Christ's inward call either of approbation,
as in the first; or of providence, as in the later, is the principal thing,
whereon the power and the authority of the Minister does depend. And then the
less principal are the ordination and choice of them, by such as are the
Ministers and people of God, by profession (though something Antichristian, or
otherwise sinful may cleave unto them, in regard of their qualities or
stations.) And lastly, the expression of the end for which they were ordained,
viz. to administer the holy things of God. By which two latter, viz. the
outward calling, and the manifestation of the end, the hearts of Gods people
may be assured of Christ's inward calling, so far as that they may be
confident, that whiles they discharge the duties of Ministers, it shall not be
without efficacy for their good, if they be not wanting to themselves.

Paul proves his Apostleship (when it was questioned amongst the Corinthians
by occasion of the whisperings of the false apostles, who could not otherwise
insinuate themselves into the favor of the Corinthians, but by traducing Paul
and bringing him out of favor with them, as no Apostle of Christ, which has
been ever the guise of false Teachers (which practice is too rife now adays)
As I say, Paul proves his Apostleship amongst other arguments from Gods
blessing upon his ministry (Are not you my work in the Lord? 2 Cor. 9.1, 2.
If I be not an Apostle unto others; yet doubtless I am unto you: for the
seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord;) Which must needs be a good
argument, both because the Apostle used it, who would not bring a weak and
non-concluding argument; and also because as God will not bless any Ordinances
but his own, to work repentance, faith, and holiness; so neither will he
bless any Ministry but his own Ministry: so through the mercy of God our
Ministers have a sufficient answer for all that shall examine them concerning
their ministry. The Conversion, Humiliation, Reformation, Faith, Consolation,
heavenly Joy, and Holiness, which God thereby has wrought in thousands of
souls (to his everlasting glory be it spoken) evince them to be the Ministers
of Christ, whose work and seal so many faithful souls are, and prove that
all those which go about to persuade the people that they are Antichristian
ministers are slanderers: 2 Cor. 9.13, 14, 15.
Like those false Apostles of which Paul speaks, deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ; and no marvel, for Satan
himself is transformed into an Angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing
if his ministers also be transformed into the Ministers of righteousness,
whose end shall be according to their works. Or like those deceivers which had
so bewitched the Galatians, Gal. 4.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
that whereas they had received the Apostle as an Angel of God, even as Christ
Jesus, etc. yet after a while accounted him their enemy, because he told them
the truth, whom they zealously affected but not well, desiring to separate
those Galatians from the Apostles, that they might have all their affection.
But I will leave such deceivers and those which are deceived by them (if they
do not truly repent) to the judgment of him on whose Ministers they rail;
knowing that he who has so far honored their faithful labors, will
vindicate them in his due time, from all those contumelious aspersions,
wherewith on all sides they are laden: if they continue faithfully and
resolutely doing his work, notwithstanding all oppositions.

Your reasoning that you falsely say, the Non-conformists have taught you, is
idle. Did the Non-conformists ever call midwives Antichristian ministers?
midwives were never capable of ministerial functions, nor called to the
ministry by the ordination of Ministers, nor choice or acceptance of the
people; neither have they any ministerial power from Christ. But our Ministers
have, although there have been some disorder or defect, in the external
exhibition of this power, through the fault of men, which yet probably was
nothing so great, as was the disorder among the Jews in calling the Scribes
and Pharisees, whose ministry notwithstanding our Savior enjoynes the people
to use.

To an Objection which you bring in of our Ministers: That they received their
office of Bishops as Elders: not as Lord Bishops. You answer: That if our
Bishops be lawful Elders, they must be Elders chosen by a true Church, which
is a Congregation constituted of believers and Saints by calling, Act. 2.41. 1
Cor. 1.2. Phil. 1.7. Romans 1.7, 8. To which your Answer, I reply. First, If you
speak of Bishops being lawful Elders, so as to be right Ministers in all
circumstances, and particulars of their station and calling, so that there
needs no reformation: we do not plead for them as lawful Elders in that
sense; as knowing that some evil adhereth unto their Ministry, which being
removed, they become lawful Ministers. But so far we hold them lawful
Elders, as that their calling of Ministers, Preaching, administering of
Sacraments, (when done for the substance according to the rule of Gods word)
are not mere nullities, nor prophanations of Gods Ordinances to Gods people or
Ministers that make use of them; but may be, and often are, effectual for their
good; so that if these Bishops will cast away that which being Antichristian
adhereth unto them; Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2.
and faithfully discharge the office of Elders and Ministers of Jesus Christ,
faithfully feeding the flock of God, they are to be embraced as Christ's
Ministers, and that without any new Ordination; Rev. 2.3.
as may appear, Revel. 2. and 3. Chapters: where the Angels or Ministers which
had left their first love, Rev. 2.13, 14.
had them which held the doctrine of Balaam, which taught Balak to cast a
stumbling block before the children of Israel, Rev. 2.20.
to eat things offered to idols, and to commit fornication, and had them which
held the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which Christ hated; yea which suffered
the woman Iezabel, which called her self a Prophetess, to teach and deceive
Christ's servants, etc. Rev. 3.15.
Those which had a name to live, and yet were dead, whose works were not
perfect, such as were neither hot, nor cold, but lukewarm. Such, I say, are
still called Angels, bidden repent and do their first works; with a promise
at last implied, that they shall keep their stations of Angels. And this is
sufficient to warrant unto us, Matthew. 23.1, 2, 3, etc. per totum.
the acts which they do as Ministers. The Scribes and Pharisees had many
corruptions (in Christ's time, and so had the Priests both before, and in
Christ's time) adhering to their function, and those very gross; yet was not
their ministry vain to those which according to Christ's appointment made use
of it.

Now to your position; That, they must be Elders chosen by a true Church, which
is a congregation of believers. That I may know your meaning: I would demand of
you,



Cor. 1.2. if you compare that verse with Chap. 3. v. 3. and Chap. 5. and 6.
throughout. Chap. 8. and 10. and 11. and 15. and 2 Cor. 12.20, 21. and almost
throughout both Epistles. By comparing which places you shall see, that these
believers and Saints by calling, did not so walk, either in regard of
soundness of judgment, purity of worship, or holiness of life, as to give
clear evidence of their effectual calling or sound sanctification. So
compare, Phil. 1.7. with Chap. 3.18, 19. and Romans 1.7, 8. with Chap. 16. v. 17,
18. and then speak your conscience, whether you can judge all these down right
believers effectually called, really Saints. But if by believers, or Saints by
calling, you mean such as are called to faith and holiness, and withal make
a profession by externally giving their names up to Christ, and accepting
outwardly the covenant, promising faith and obedience unto Gods word; though
there may be hypocrites and wicked livers: we concur with you, as knowing
that they must be Christians by profession, and partakers of the heavenly
calling (not Jews, Pagans or other Infidels) that go to the making up of a
visible Church; and such are our Churches, whereby the Elders of whom we speak
have been chosen or accepted.

Acts 14.23. with other places, Act. 6.3.6. 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5.22. where it
appears, that Ministers had the chief hand in making Ministers.

Now these things propounded: I answer to your position, that we can easily
show, that our people in England, in regard of their general and unanimous
consent to (and profession of faith in) the same truth, contained in the book
of God, acceptance of the covenant, and giving up of their names unto Christ,
are a Church or Congregation of faithful people or Saints by calling, though
many do not walk answerably to their calling (the greater is their sin, and
shame, and shall be their condemnation unless they repent.) And in regard of
the many several companies of the faithful, by whom Gods worship is performed
apart one from another; there are many Churches or Congregations of Saints by
calling in our Land. We can show also, that although our Elders of whom we
speak, have not been chosen by the whole Congregations, in respect of every
particular member; yet by some special persons (in behalf of the whole
Congregation) to whom that charge was committed by them, (or (which was their
sin) usurped from them) and that the people at least by accepting them so
chosen, did make choice of them in their own persons. And that whatsoever
disorders or defects have been in the choice, do not nullify their ministry.
As for such as have acknowledged the unlawfulness of their ministry, or plead
mere qualifications (of whom you speak) let them answer for themselves, how
they can, we are not bound to stand to their principles, or maintain their
opinions.

As for the seven next Objections, into the Answer whereof you digress (most
of them being belike fained of your self, that you may find somewhat to say)
beside extravagant impertinencies, malicious and master-like censures, and some
unquestioned truths, which are yielded by us, but do nothing profit your cause,
nor hurt ours: I see nothing that it is worth while to answer, but what may be
sufficiently answered unto, by what has been said before. Neither do I intend
to follow you in your idle roving. Only it is to be observed, that this A. R.
cannot endure to hear of a Synod, though a special and maine ordinance of
God, to compose differences, and quiet the hearts of Gods people, which have
been disquieted by trouble-Churches. See Acts 15. the whole Chapter.

Because (says he) a Synod cannot make a Last to suit every ones foot, which
in plain English is this, they will not suffer Jesuits, Papists, Arminians,
idle Ministers, Anabaptists, Antinomians, and Familists to have their own way
in practice, worship, opinion, etc. Neither will they suffer every man to abuse
the Scripture after his own fancy, and vent abroad his poisonous conceits
among the simple, to draw disciples after them. As if it were better to let
every man follow his own devises, and labor to draw others into his opinions
(so that whosoever is most cunning, pragmaticall and able to conform his
doctrine to the humors of men, shall go away with most disciples, to the
overthrow of thousands of souls,) than that there should be a consultation of
godly, learned, and conscientious Ministers, about the establishment of
religion. And here it is further to be noted, that the children of darkness,
though in some particulars they be opposite one to another, as Papists,
Arminians, ignorant, lazy and malignant Ministers and licentious Atheists on
the one side, and Anabaptists with Antinomians and Familists on the other side,
do differ from, yea directly oppose one another in some particulars; yet they
agree together, as in opposing Gods faithful Ministers and people, so in
hating the light, and refusing to be brought unto the trial of Gods word, and
to be tied unto the Rules thereof, as they shall be found out and applied by an
Assembly of faithful Ministers.

Again, it is to be observed, That these men take it in high indignation, that
any should go about to restrain them from abusing the Scripture, and carrying
about the simple people with every wind of doctrine, by whom they may be had in
admiration, while they are suffered to go on in their bold presumption, and
confident venting of their ignorant conceits, and malicious railing against
authority; which may appear by this Authors abuse of Scripture, for a color
of accusation of those that would restrain them, and by his tale of a Minister
in the West. But I come to the fourth Consideration.

The fourth Argument Answered.
YOur fourth Consideration then is taken from the ground of baptizing children;
which as you are short in urging, I will be short in answering. A. R.
Whereas therefore you say, The faith and repentance of the Sureties, is the
ground of our baptizing, as you would prove from the questions propounded at
the baptizing, and out of the Catechism. Whence you conclude, that it is not
true Baptism; because in true Baptism, the faith and repentance of the party
baptized is the ground.

the truth of Childrens Baptism. But concerning this matter, viz. the ground
of Childrens Baptism more hereafter.

The fifth Argument against the Baptism of Infants, taken from the subjects to
whom it is administered, Answered.
THe fifth Consideration, A. R.
which yields an Argument against our Baptism, is taken from the subjects, on
whom Baptism is administered, and those are Infants, whereas (say you) the
Scripture holds forth the Disciples, or believers only are to be baptized,
which you prove thus. For the Commission of Christ was only to baptize
disciples, as appears, Matthew. 28.19. the words being these. (...), etc.
Going therefore disciple all nations, baptizing them, etc. Now the question
(say you) is to what this word ((...) them) has relation, whether to (...),
nations, or no. But (say you) it is clear out of the words, that it has not
relation to nations, but to disciples: for the word which is put for them in
that place, is autous not auta, which it should be, if it had relation to
nations.

Answ. 1. But I pray you, who (but your self) ever saw in this Text, the word
Disciples, to which (...), them, may have relation? There is no such word,
either in any usual translation, or in the Original. 2. What necessity or
likelihood is there, that your supposed (...), disciples, should be antecedent
to (...) them? Because forsooth, it is (...), not (...). Know you not, that
(...), Nations, though in voice it be Neuter, yet in signification it is
Masculine: Signifying men in the Nations or Heathens ((...), or (...), or
(...), Homines in Gentibus, or Gentium, or Gentiles. You sure would never have
been so confident, that (...) must needs be referred to (...), disciples, if
you had but consulted with Lylies Rules, who tells you of a figure called
Synthesis, when a sentence is congruous in sense, Synthesis est ocatio congrua
sensu, non voce. Gens armati. (...).
though not in voice; and brings an example like to this; The Armed nation:
which figure is very frequent in the Greek language; to instance only in this
same word (...). Act. 15.17. And all the nations upon whom my name is called
upon them, where you have (...), whom and them, answering to the antecedent
(...) gentes. And I believe where you find a Relative in Scripture, answering
to (...), nations, (...).
most frequently (if not always) it is the Masculine gender, as Act. 28.28. to
the Gentiles is sent this salvation and they shall hear. (...), etc. (...).
Act 13.48. The Gentiles hearing glorified the word of the Lord, and they
believed, so many as were ordained unto eternal life. Romans 2.14, 15. When the
Gentiles not having the law, do by nature the things of the law, these having
not the law, are a law to themselves, which show the work, etc. Insomuch, that
your Criticisme has greatly failed you here; and so your foundation which you
have laid to prove, That all who are baptized according to Christ's Commission,
proving but a mere conceit, or self-deceit, your building that you rear
thereupon will vanish away.



viz. That none are to be baptized, but those which have been first taught or
made disciples.

Abraham's giving up himself unto God in Covenant, not only he, but also his
children, and those that were as his children, were received into Covenant, and
had the seal thereof administered to them; by virtue of the unchangeable tenor
of the Covenant of grace, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed: Genesis 17.7.
as has been said, and God willing shall more fully be showed. Therefore the
Commission which was given to the Disciples, makes nothing against baptizing
the children of the faithful: which are already in covenant with God, though
they have not heard the word preached.

Abraham was bound unto by virtue of the Covenant; that as God would be the God
of his seed, so he should command and teach his children and household after
him, that they should keep the way of the Lord, etc. Genesis 18.19. So all the
Israelites, Exodus 12.26.26, 27. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. And the like obligation lies upon
Christian parents, Ephesians. 6.4. so that now they are the disciples of Christ, in
respect of Gods obligation, and the parents promise, purpose, and prayer.

Secondly, they may be said to be Christ's disciples, in that they are now under
the teaching of God and Christ, who has promised to teach all that are in
covenant, all the children of the Church, or faithful (at least some of all
sorts) from the least to the greatest. Esa. 54.13. (...) Edoctia Iehova, or
Edocti Ievovae. (...)
And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, etc. All, is an universal
note, implying all sorts, sexes, ages, and conditions of those which were
children of the Church, or posterity of the faithful. Ier. 31.34. And they
shall teach no more every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord. For they
shall all know me, from the least to the greatest of them. And so that those
which are so little, that they are incapable of the teaching of men, are
capable, and under the promise of Gods teaching. To which promises our Savior
having, as it seems, respect, says, Ioh. 6.44. It is written in the Prophets,
And they shall be all taught of God. Every one that has heard of the Father,
and learneth, comes unto me: So that as there may be outward teaching without
inward: so there may be inward teaching without the outward. Christ says,
Whosoever has heard of the Father, not whosoever has heard of the Preacher;
for many may hear of the Preacher, and yet not come to God; and some may be
taught of God, that are incapable of the Preachers instruction: though the
inward and outward both be ordinary, to those who being of ripe years are
effectually called. So that since God promises, that in the time of the Gospel,
All even from the least unto the greatest shall become his disciples, why
should the infants of believers be excluded, seeing they are capable of divine
instruction, and the operation of the holy Ghost, even from their mothers
womb? Luke 1.15. I have stood the longer on the answering of this Scripture
objected, Because these answers may serve for all the other reasons, and
Scriptures you bring, to confirm your last Argument against baptizing of
children. Where having heaped up many Scriptures needlessly, you talk your
pleasure, and triumph as if the cause were your own; as if your grounds were
unmovable, and your conclusion unquestionable. But though you plead against
Childrens Baptism, you should remember that you dispute not with children.
Neither have we need or will, By wit and sophistry to go about to elude any
truth, and justify any error, though never so gross and absurd, as you say;
Which imputation of yours, it may seem, is you last shift; to answer those
that will not be carried about with every wind of your vain doctrine, and
subscribe to your dictates.

Now for what follows, I will not proceed in maintaining those further
objections; which either you devise of your own head, or raise out of others
words, to whose principles we are not bound; your answers whereunto either do
not concern us, or if any thing therein seem to bear show of truth and
weight, it may be sufficiently answered from what has been already laid
down. Therefore I will not trouble my self with the repetition of the same
things. So forbearing any further to meddle with your confident conclusions,
Apology for your expressions, or other impertinent digressions, wherewith you
fill up paper; I come to give our reasons for the lawfulness, and
requisitenesse of baptizing the infants of Christian parents; intending to
consider all along your answers you have made to them.

Act. 2.38, 39.

But to the children or infants of parents believing, or within Covenant,
belongs by virtue of Gods promise, the spiritual grace represented, sealed,
and signified in baptism; to wit, the teaching of God, and the Spirit of God,
which does include all the spiritual blessings signified by baptism; as
sanctification, or regeneration, wherein is comprehended virtuall faith, and
therein, being besprinkled with the blood of Christ, and pardon of sins, Esa.
54.13. Ier. 31.34. Joel 2.28. Es. 59.21. Act. 2.39.

Therefore Baptism belongs to infants of Christian parents.

Both the premises me thinks should be undeniable with Christians, as being
built on the word; and so the conclusion certain. But because I would clear
this Argument, against the cavils of the captious, and doubts of the ignorant,
or scrupulous; I will add some what by way of explanation, and confirmation.

The proposition, for ought I know, it is not doubted of by any. It is taken as
an unquestionable principle by A. R. and many of his arguments against
baptizing infants, are built upon this ground: because they have not
regeneration, faith, remission of sins. And it may further appear by these
Scriptures, Act. 8.38. Nothing now could hinder the Eunuch from being baptized,
for now the spiritual blessing appertained to him, and therefore the external
sign: Act. 10.47, 48. Can any forbid water, that these should not be baptized,
which have received the holy Ghost as well as we? And he commanded them to be
baptized, etc. And Chap. 11.17. The Apostle implies, that it had been a
withstanding of God, not to have baptized them on whom the gift of the holy
Ghost had been powered. And so still upon the profession of faith, and
repentance, when in the judgment of charity, the Preachers apprehended the
parties to have interest, and right to the spiritual grace, they administered
the outward sign, though questionless they were deceived in many: as Ananias,
Sapphira, Simon Magus, etc. Yet it was a sufficient warrant to the Ministers to
baptize them: because so far as they could judge, they were under the
promise. For if amongst Christ's few Disciples, there was one traitor, son of
perdition, devil: doubtless amongst those many thousands that were baptized,
upon their profession of faith and repentance at the preaching of John, and the
Apostles, many were hypocrites; as may appear by the great evils that brake
out in the Primitive Churches. This I add to show that there is no infallible
certainty of the inward grace required of, or possible to the Minister.

And that to whom the inward grace belongs, to them the outward sign belongs;
appears in Peter's exhortation in that place quoted in the proposition, Act.
2.38, 39. And Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you,
in the name of Jesus Christ, to the remission of your sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the holy Ghost: For the promise is to you, and to your
children, and to all that are afar off, even so many as the Lord our God
shall call. Wherein he shows them that if they will repent, they have right
unto baptism, as having right unto the thing signified in baptism, viz. the
remission of sins, by the blood of Christ powered on their souls; and the
gift of the holy Ghost being the Spirit of Christ, powered on them; of which he
had spoken before, ver. 17. both clearly represented and signified by the
infusion, or pouring of water in baptism. And the rather to persuade them to
repent, and be baptized, that they might receive remission of sins, and the
gift of the holy Ghost: Peter tells them, that the promise is to them and their
children, and so many as God should call, though afar off: even among the
Gentiles. So that if by faith and repentance they and the Gentiles should
accept the promise, they and their children should have interest in the
remission of sins, and the gift of the holy Ghost; and so consequently in
baptism; so that not only the parents repenting, but also their children had
title to the promise of the holy Gohst; and so to the seal thereof.

A. R.
First, against this you object: It is not said, your infants, but your children.

Ans. Infants are not excluded I hope; for infants are children, though not
only infants: neither do we hold that the promise was made to infants only.
(...).
Peter uses a general word that signifies posterity, of what age soever,
whether of ripe or tender years.

Secondly, you object: It is not said promises, but promise; and that it is not
promises, but promise; not infants, but children: You promise us satisfaction
by looking back to what went before in the Chapter, after a long repetition
whereof, you tell us what we may gather; to wit, that the gift of the holy
Ghost, mentioned ver. 17. to be prophesied of by Joel; and to be received of
the Father, and shed forth by Christ, ver. 33. is repeated ver. 38.

Answ. All this makes nothing against us; but for us.

Thirdly, you add: You may see who are meant by children, viz. the same that
were mentioned, ver. 17. under the terms of sons and daughters that should
prophecy.

Answ. As if the Spirit mentioned here, were only a Spirit of prophecy. The
Spirit has diverse operations; some ordinary, and some extraordinary, 1 Cor.
12.4.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Neither is it said, that all shall prophecy and dream
dreams.

Fourthly, you say: Therefore no infants are meant here who cannot prophecy,
etc.

Answ. Why may not infants be of the number of that all flesh, on which God
would power his Spirit, though none of those that prophecy, see visions,
dream, etc. For these effects of the Spirit are not related as common to all,
on whom God would power his Spirit; but peculiar to some, which had
extraordinary gifts. Secondly, What hinders but they may receive the Spirit in
their infancy, by which they may prophecy in ripe years? as we see in John
the Baptist, Luke 1.15. and 41. Thirdly, I answer; That this promise is not
only made concerning the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit which were
bestowed in the times of the Apostle, by which men did prophecy, dream
dreams, see visions, speak with tongues, etc. but also of the sanctifying
Spirit which is common to all ages of the Church, even where such miraculous
and extraordinary gifts are not bestowed: may appear, verse. 30. The promise,
says the Apostle, was to all afar off, whomsoever the Lord should call: that
is, all the Gentiles whom God should call by the Gospel to faith. Now no man I
hope will say, that all whom over God called, dreamed dreams, saw visions,
prophesied, spoke with strange tongues, etc.

Fifthly, you add: There is not so much as any color, for baptizing of
infants from hence. For the Text is not, Be baptized. For the promise is to
you, and your children; as many in Print do falsely allege. But repent and be
baptized, etc. and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy ghost. For the promise
is to you and your children.

Answ. If we should take the words in your sense, viz. that those words For the
promise is made, etc. are brought as a reason only of the words going
immediately before; it makes nothing against me, for so the 38. verse. contains
a pregnant proof of my proposition, and verse. 39. of mine assumption.

Secondly, I answer. There is no necessity can appear, no nor probable reason
(I believe) can be rendered, why the reason (For the promise, etc. verse. 39.)
should be referred only to the words immediately preceding (you shall receive
the gift of the holy Ghost; and not unto the exhortation, Repent, and be
baptized, etc.) which until you could have given some proof of, you might
well have spared your immodest language, and heinous accusation of false
alleging Scripture. For the context may either be analyzed thus. First, Peter
exhorts to repent, and be baptized; then he spurs them on by a reason taken
from the effect, viz. remission and the gift of the Spirit: secondly, from the
promise that God had made concerning the thing signified, viz. pouring his
Spirit; which promise belonged to them and their children: therefore they
should receive the sign which God had instituted to signify it, which may
seem the most genuine resolution of the Text. Or secondly; This reason may be
understood as brought both to the exhortation, (Repent, and be baptized) and
the promise, (And you shall receive remission of sins, and the gift of the
holy Ghost:) for considering that baptism, and the gift of the holy Ghost are
correlatives, as the sign and thing signified, the reason well may (that I say
not necessarily must) be referred to both. Or thirdly, if we grant that it is
immediately referred to the foregoing promise, yet it must necessarily be taken
as a reason of the exhortation at least mediately: for seeing the promise of
remission of sins, and the holy Ghost, is brought as a reason to persuade
them to be baptized; and these words, For the promise is to you, etc. is
brought as a confirmation of the promise; Causa causae est causa causati.
and considering that the cause of the cause is the cause of the caused, and
the reason of the reason, is the reason of the thing proved by that reason,
this (For the promise, etc.) must needs be brought as a reason why they should
be baptized; and so those who bring this as a reason that the Apostle gives,
why they should be baptized, joining the thing argued, and the Argument
together, and omitting that which was interposed, as not pertinent to the
purpose; are quit from your slander of false alleging Scripture; and you
convinced to be a false accuser of the brethren.

The next Objection that you frame I own not. Assenting that it is true, that
neither these Jews, nor the Gentiles were in Covenant, until they had entered
into the same by repentance and faith, seeing that the old Covenant was now
abrogated, and the Gentiles had been hitherto foreiners: so that you will
acknowledge that whenever Jews or Gentiles should receive the promise by
faith and repentance, it did not only belong unto them, but also to their
children. For though it be expressed to the Jews, (That the promise was to them
and their children) it is to be understood, to hold of the Gentiles also. For
now the partition wall was removed, and the Jews had no privilege for their
childrens having right unto the promise, any more then the children of
believing Gentiles.

Thus far I have digressed in answer to some objections made against the
Scripture which was brought for the proof of my proposition, though it might
be handled as well in the assumption; yet because I have more to say on the
assumption, I brought these objections under the proposition. The sum of the
proposition must be remembered to be this. Where is right to the spiritual
blessing promised in the word, and sealed in baptism, there is right to
baptism: which stands firm against whatsoever has been objected. I come to
the assumption.

The places of Scripture quoted to confirm the assumption have been spoken of
before. Only we may consider now, First, what things are promised in those
Scriptures expressly. Secondly, what is implied. Thirdly, to whom these promises
are made.

For the first, God promises to be their teacher, yea though they be incapable
of humane discipline (They shall not teach one another, but they shall all be
taught of God) Esa. 54.13. Ier. 31.34. Again, that he will give, yea power his
Spirit, and that his Spirit shall be upon them, Joel 2.28. Es. 59.21.

Secondly, under these two expressions, yea each of them severally, are
comprehended all those things that are requisite for our being in Covenant with
God; and all those spiritual graces that give us right to the seal of
entrance: as first Regeneration, which is the proper and certain work of the
spirit of sanctification, Ioh. 3.5. which spirit of regeneration to be
signified by the water of baptism may appear by that Scripture, Ioh. 3.5. and
Tit. 3.5. Again, this implies communion with Christ, which must needs be by
faith, actual or virtuall, Ioh. 6.45. Heb. 11.6. For whosoever is taught of
God, and has the Spirit of Christ, must needs have Christ, and so it follows
that such have right unto remission of sins.

Thirdly, these promises belong unto the children of the Church, the sons and
daughters of the faithful, all of them from the least to the greatest; the
seed of the faithful, and their seeds seed, as may appear in the Scriptures
quoted; and here must be comprehended, infants as well as others, who have
right unto the promise by virtue of their parents entering into Covenant with
God, as Act. 2.39. The Apostle bids them repent and be baptized; (and so enter
into Covenant) for the promise, says he, is unto you and your children; so
that there can no reason be given why infants should be excluded from these
promises: unless any one shall say that infants are incapable of these gifts,
which this A. R. seems to hold, in many places of his book; which opinion is
more worthy detestation then confutation. Are not infants capable of sin?
Psalm. 51.5 and therefore of sanctification: shall the first Adams disobedience
be available to bring guilt and defilement? and not Christ's obedience to
procure remission, and sanctification? Or is there no remedy for the poor
infants of believing parents; but if they die before they come to the use of
reason they must necessarily perish, as being born the children of wrath, and
being incapable of remedy? Or does this man hold, that they are brutes without
soul in that he compares baptizing of infants to circumcising of Camels or
Asses? 2 Part, page 21.
Are not these profane Atheistical conceits, contrary to the promises of God,
clear testimony of Scripture, and example, as of John the Baptist, who was
sanctified and moved by the Spirit even in his mothers womb?

Quest. But what must we then believe: that all the children of Christians are
already endued with the holy Ghost, taught of God, and sanctified, etc. so
soon as borne, or in their infancy?

Answ. It is enough to prove their right to baptism, that they are under the
promise and interessed therein, by virtue of their parents being (at least
externally) in Covenant: so that whether they have already received the Spirit,
or have a promise thereof, it suffices to give them a right to the Sacrament.
As these are bid repent, and so come under promise (themselves with their
children) and then be baptized; and afterward they shall receive the holy Ghost.

Quest. But must we think that all children of Christian parents that are
baptized, either have or shall receive the Spirit, and so be saved?

Answ. John the Baptist, and the Apostles, though they were not to believe that
amongst those multitudes whom they baptized, there were none but truly had or
should receive the Spirit, for it was after proved by the event, that many were
hypocrites, yet they turned away none, because by their external confession of
sin, and profession of faith and repentance, they showed themselves to be
externally in Covenant, and so to have right to the outward seal, which they
therefore administered to one as well as to another. So though we are not bound
to think that all the children borne of parents in covenant are, or shall be
sanctified: yet because they are outwardly in covenant and under the promise,
(which promise God makes good as seems good in his eyes;) therefore the
Minister, that is not to judge of the inward work of sanctification on the
heart, whether present or future, but of the outward estate, (neither if he
could discern the inward estate might he withhold the outward privilege from
any (though wanting inward grace) that has right thereunto by being under
covenant outwardly) may and ought to administer baptism to the children of all
Christian parents under his charge that requires it, so long as by wilful
Apostasy from the faith, or just excommunication wherein they obstinately
continue, they with their children are not discovenanted.

viz. those that are borne again in the womb of the Church.

Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of
thy seed, to love the Lord thy God. Now this they were to understand, not only
or principally of Proselytes that should be converted to the Church, nor only
of their posterity, when they came to the use of reason; but even of Infants,
as may appear in that God appointed them to circumcise their Infants. For
circumcision of the flesh, was a sign of circumcision of the heart; which if
infants had not been capable of, God would not have commanded the outward sign
to have been administered unto them. And so these promises made to the Christian
Church, to their seed, to their seeds seed, to their children, from the least
to the greatest, appertain to infants in the Christian Church as well as
others. The universal note being understood, De generibus singulorum, not de
singulis generum, as they say; of all sorts, sexes, ages, and condition some:
though every individual of all sorts be not comprehended therein. And
therefore Baptism sealing such promises, belongs to Infants in the Christian
Church, as well as circumcision did in the Jewish.

Secondly, I answer. It is absurd to understand these promises only of the
spiritual seed, as if they belonged only to the regenerate; For what is it to
be taught of God and have the Spirit powered, but to be converted or
regenerated, and drawn to Christ; so that by this interpretation, the meaning
of these promises should be this much. I will power my Spirit on whom I have or
shall power my Spirit, and they shall be taught of God, that are or shall be
taught of God. It is true, God may here well promise a greater measure of the
Spirit and illumination, where he has given some measure. But withal it is
certain, here is promised the Spirit and illumination also, to those that are
quite destitute, and so to such as are not yet the spiritual seed of the
Church.

Thirdly, I answer. What matter of consolation can this be to believing
parents, if not withstanding their prayer for, and religious education of their
children, none of these or the like promises belong to them; but only to the
spiritual seed of the Church, that is, such as are already converted, and
declare their conversion by actual faith? What ground of prayer for, or hope
of the salvation of their children have they, more then of the Heathens, if
this be admitted?

2. Argument. If Governors of families upon their believing and tendering up
themselves, and theirs to God and Christ, were not only themselves baptized;
but all the persons in their household, and which were under their government,
of what age soever, were baptized also; so that where there is no mention of
preaching to, or the belief of any but the Governors themselves; yet their
whole households were dedicated unto God in Baptism: Then it is lawful (yea a
duty) to Christian parents to tender their children (being part of their
family) unto God in Baptism, and Ministers have good ground, yea, engagement
for baptizing such.

But Governors of Families upon their believing and tendering up themselves
and theirs unto God and Christ, were not only themselves baptized; but all the
persons in their household, or which were under their government: so that where
there is no mention of preaching to, or the belief of any but the Governors
themselves; yet their whole households were dedicated unto God in Baptism. Act.
16.14, 15 and 31, 32, 33. 1 Cor. 1.6.

Therefore it is lawful (yea the duty) for Christian parents or governors of
families, to tender their infants, which are part of their household, unto God
in Baptism, and Ministers ought to baptize such being tendered of their parents.

The Major needs no confirmation, it being granted by all, yea, by the
Adversaries themselves (as I conceive) taken for an undeniable principle, that
the Apostles example in baptizing is a sufficient warrant for us, and that such
are to be admitted to Baptism now, as were admitted by the Apostles: For most
of their reasoning is grounded hereupon, and they hence condemn our baptizing
of Infants; because (say they) it is not agreeable to the practice of the
Apostles; so that that Baptism which is agreeable to the Baptism of the
Apostles, is warantable by their own grants: and so the sequel stands firm
and good. If in the Apostles times, whole families of believing governors were
baptized, they ought so now, and so consequently the infants of those families,
which are parts thereof, if there be any such: For as Abraham and his Family,
was a pattern unto all such as should enter into the Covenant of grace during
the time of circumcision; that as he and his Family were circumcised, so should
all, whether of his posterity, or proselytes, circumcise all their Males, even
the babes: So those primitive Converts, that were the first fruits of the
Gentiles, and when they believed were baptized with their whole families; are
examples for the believers of all Ages to follow, in consecrating themselves
and theirs to God in Baptism.

As for the Minor; those places of Scripture cited prove it. Act. 16.31, 32,
33. To the Iaylour demanding, what he should do that he might be saved; Paul
and Sylas answer, bidding him believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, promising that
he should be saved and his household. Teaching that the belief of a father, or
governor of a family, is sufficient to bring a whole family that is at his
disposing and to be ruled by him, into a state of salvation, so far, as that
now they are within the Covenant, and so consequently have right unto the seal
of initiation. It is said indeed, that they spoke the word of the Lord unto
him, and all that were in the house. viz. so many as were capable of
instruction; But there is no word of the actual belief or repentance by
expression, word, or action, of any in the family, except only of the Iaylour
himself, whose repentance and faith (at least initiall) is expressed by the
effects thereof. viz. his humiliation, and desire of salvation, verse. 29. and
30. and more fully by the fruits of them, declared verse. 33. in taking them the
same hour of the night, and washing their stripes, (...).
and then it is said, that he and all his were baptized straightway. Which
evidently shows, that the governors faith and repentance, or being within
the Covenant, does sufficiently interesse their inferiors, that are at their
dispose, to the Covenant of Grace, and so to the Seal of entrance, at least if
they be not refractary, wilfully and stubbornly refusing to be given up to God
by their superiors. The like may be said of Stephanus his family, 1 Cor. 1.16.
But most clear, and express, is the example of Lydia, Act. 16.14, 15. When
the Lord had opened her heart, to attend to those things that were spoken of
Paul, she was baptized and her household; Not a word spoken of preaching to, or
actual faith, and repentance of the rest. So that it is apparent, that as upon
Abraham's faith and repentance, and interest in God, his whole Family, whether
those that were born in the house, or those that were bought with money, yea,
even his infants of eight days old, had so far interest in God, that (upon
his tendering them up unto God according to his gracious appointment) now they
had right unto the Seal of Circumcision after God had once instituted it: so
Christian governors of families, or parents by their faith and repentance, are
means of bringing salvation to their families, and interessing those that are
under them to God and Christ, so far as that they have right unto Baptism;
at least except they stubbornly refuse the Seal, and reject the Covenant.

A. R.
To this Argument, especially the Scriptures brought to confirm the assumption,
you answer. There might be no Infants there (viz. in those families which were
baptized:) and my negative (say you) is as good as your affirmative.



But you say your Negative is as good as our Affirmative, without proof, and
that you bring Scripture for your negative, as Act. 18.8. which Scripture
makes nothing against us. For first, if Crispus believed in the Lord with all
his Family, it does not follow, that these families which we mentioned, had
none but actual believers in them, before they were baptized. Secondly,
Crispus may be said to believe he and his household, and so to be baptized,
though they were not all endued with actual faith, as Abraham's Family was a
Family of believers, even the whole Family, when the Seal of the
righteousness by faith had been set upon all the Males therein, although they
did not all actually believe.

"You add the example of the Iaylour, Act. 16.31, 32, etc. Answer. We have
already sufficiently considered, what is contained in verse. 31, 32, 33. viz.
though Paul and Silas preached the word unto all in the family ( viz, that were
capable of instruction) yet the faith and repentance of none but of the Iaylour
himself is manifested.

But you say: He and all his household believed in God, as it is verse. 34.

Answ. If you look into the Original, you shall find that that verse makes
nothing for your purpose. It is word for word. (...).
And he rejoiced (with all his house) having believed in God, or when he had
believed in God. But because the English cannot so fully and clearly give the
sense of the place, it may be noted (...), (having believed) being the
Masculine gender, and singular number (as the Grammarians speak, cannot be
referred to that (...) alone, or taken with (...), the keeper; So that the
sense should be, the whole house believed, or the Iaylour, and the whole house
believed. I say the words cannot bear this sense, as the skillful in the
language may easily see, and therefore in the translation, believing (or rather
having believed) in God, is to be read within a parenthesis, so that those
words with his whole family, is to be referred only to the word rejoiced;
Thus: And rejoiced (believing or having believed) in God) with all his house:
So that though our Translatours did well render the words, yet the want of
observing the parenthesis, causes the words at the first sight, otherwise to
sound then indeed they do, to those that look on the Original. Laetatus est
cum omni domo credens Deo.
So Arias Montanus. But under correction, and with submission to better
judgments if I might be so bold: I conceive it might be rendered, more
agreeably to the signification of the words, the scope of the place, and for
the avoiding of ambiguitie. And having believed in God, he rejoiced (exulted or
testified his joy openly by outward actions) in all his family, (or through his
house, or all his house over). For ((...)) believing, and ((...)) rejoiced, are
both the singular number, and so have reference to one alone. viz. (...), the
Iaylour. (...) (rendered, with all his house) is an adverbe, and so according to
the ordinary use of that part of speech, is referred to the verb, to show how
the thing was done, not by whom. Beside, the scope of the place, seems to
favor this Interpretation; for it is said in the words before, that he brought
them into the house, and set meat before them, or made them a feast, so that he
expressed his rejoicing in his whole house, by making a solemn feast in all the
family, as it were celebrating that night, as his spiritual birth-dayes
solemnity.

Now you come to compare that Scripture mentioned, which you apprehend to
speak of whole families believing before they were baptized, with these that
speak of baptizing families, where yet none are said to believe, save the
heads, and thence you gather, That it cannot be reasonably imagined, but that
the Apostle did baptize these families according to commission, etc. and those
other places which are more silent, must be expounded by this which is more
plain, and not this by those.

Answ. First, No question, the Apostle baptized according to commission: but
that their commission bound them to baptize none, but those which were brought
to actual faith, you have not proved, as may appear by the foregoing
examination of what you produced.

Secondly, Why should not we interpret their commission, by their practice,
rather then draw their practice to that sense which your fancy is pleased to
put on the commission? Their practice as a commentary on their commission,
shows in what sense it was understood by them.

Thirdly, Why may not those places, that speak of the believing of the family
before they were baptized (if you can produce any such) be expounded by these
that show the heads of that the families believing and being baptized, and
giving up themselves and theirs unto God; the whole families were accounted
believing families, and so baptized; especially, seeing it so agrees with Gods
proceeding with Abraham the father of the faithful?

Fourthly, Or what necessity is there, that either those Scriptures should be
expounded by these, or these by those; when they are both equally plain and
clear? They may be both true according to the proper sense of the letter and
history. In some families, all might well be of ripe years and actual
believers, in others not, and yet both sorts might be baptized without
absurdity.

Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. 1 Cor. 1.2.

But the children of Christian parents are Saints or holy ones, Ephesians. 5.25,
26, 27. 1 Cor. 7.14.

Therefore they are meet members of the Church, and so have right to baptism,
being the Sacrament that seals admission into the Christian Church.

The Proposition, namely, that Saints or holy ones are members of the Church,
and so to be admitted to the Sacrament of entrance thereinto; I know not to be
questioned or denied by any; and (if it should) may be confirmed by those
Scriptures, wherein the Churches have the title of Saints given to them, or
Saints by calling; implying that a Saint, and a member of the Church, are
terms convertible, considering that in some Epistles the faithful are all
called by the name of Church, the name of Saints or holy ones, not being used:
and contrariwise, so that sometime the Apostle calls them to whom he writes,
Saints, not Church: sometime Church, not Saints: sometime both Church and
Saints, Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Cor. 1.2. Ephesians. 1.1. Phil. 1.1. Col. 1.2. Gal.
1.2. 1 These. 1.1. 2 These. 1.1.
as may appear in the places quoted in the margin: so that all the members of
the Church are Saints, all Saints are members of the Church. Yet it is to be
noted by the way, they were Saints by calling, or called to be Saints. Not so,
that every member of these Churches were truly sanctified, but such as had
been called to holiness; and made (at least) an external profession of
obeying this heavenly call. For some among those sanctified ones, or Saints by
calling, were notorious offenders, and such as were stained with gross
errors; as 1 Cor. 3.3. and 5.1, 2. and 6.1.8.13. so Chap. 8.11. and 15. 2 Cor.
12.21. Gal. 3. Phil. 3.15. Yet it was sufficient to make them Saints by
calling, and members of the visible Church, that they were partakers of the
heavenly calling, Heb. 3.1. and so they had external right to the Sacrament,
although if they did not walk worthy their calling, they brought upon
themselves the greater condemnation.

Secondly, it is confirmed hence. In that holiness comprehends all the
conditions, or qualifications that are requisite to baptism. Holiness cannot
be without communion with Christ, regeneration, and remission by the Spirit and
Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 6.11. 1 Ioh. 1.7. So that as much as a man is holy, so
much he has communion with Christ, regeneration and remission. If indeed and
truth, he be holy, then is he inwardly and really united unto Christ,
regenerated, and justified: If outwardly and in profession only he be holy,
then has he communion with Christ, regeneration, and remission only
outwardly, and in profession, as Heb. 10.29. Those Apostates are said to
account the blood of the Covenant wherewith they were sanctified profane, and
to do despite to the Spirit of Grace. These were not truly and inwardly
sanctified (for then should they have never fallen away) but only outwardly,
faederally, and in respect of external profession. Yet this external
holiness is as much as the Minister can discern, or require as necessary, for
receiving into the outward covenant and admitting to the seal of entrance.

Thirdly, this is confirmed by that Scripture cited in the Proposition, Ephesians.
5.25, 26, 27. where it is showed that the Church is sanctified and purged by
Christ in the washing of water in the word, that he might make it to himself,
a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it
should be holy and unblameable. Wherein these two propositions (making for the
confirmation of my Proposition) are plainly contained. First, that the Church
is sanctified by Christ, and that it is an holy society; which holiness is
such a proper adjunct or unseparable property of the Church, that whosoever is
holy must needs be a member of the Church. Secondly, that this Church which
Christ so loved, for which he gave himself, which he has made holy, he has
cleansed with the washing of water in the word; which whether it be meant of
the outward sign or thing signified in baptism, or rather both; does
apparently show that the whole Church and all the members thereof being holy,
have right to the outward washing of water in baptism.

To the Minor or Assumption; That the children of Christian parents are holy.
First, it might be proved from the same place, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. For
otherwise unless it be granted that all the children of Christian parents are
so faederally holy, that at least some of them are sanctified in deed and
truth, it will follow that they are not loved of Christ, none of those for whom
Christ gave himself, nor part of the Church at least in their infancy, and
consequently those children of Christian parents that die before the years of
discretion, and actual faith, must unavoidably and remedilesly perish; and
that the parents of such can have no hope at all of their escaping eternal
damnation; not withstanding all the promises that God has made to his people
and their posterity: which opinion, what Christian heart does not abhor?

Secondly, but for the fuller proof of the point, that children of parents
whereof the one at least is a believer, are holy, that place, 1 Cor. 7.14. is
most direct and clear, where the Apostle says, For the unbeleeving husband is
sanctified by the wife; (...).
and the unbeleeving wife is sanctified by the husband; else were your children
unclean, but now they are holy; whence we may note,

First, that the word holy, is the same that is used elsewhere, for Saints, as
the proper title of the members of the Church, (...).
Romans 1.7. 1 Cor. 1.2, etc.

Secondly, that the reason why these children are said to be holy, is the faith
of the parents, or one parent at least, to whom the other parent is sanctified,
by virtue of the believing parents faith, (according to those general rules, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. Tit. 1.15.) Whence it was that the believing yoke fellow had the
lawful and sanctified use of the unbeleeving yoke fellow. For though it be
unlawful for a believer to marry an infidel, 2 Cor. 6.14. Yet when of
unbeleevers, who were married together in the time of infidelity, one is
called, the other is not; the calling of the one to grace does not dissolve or
annihilate their marriage (which is Gods ordinance, and therefore good) if the
unbeleever be content to live in marriage fellowship with the believing mate.
So that Gods Covenant with the believing parent, or parents, is the ground of
the childs holiness; for (as has been touched before) in regard of
external covenant with God, the state of the parents, or better parent, and of
the child is the same. If the parent be in Covenant, the child (though by
nature the child of wrath, yet by Gods grace) is borne in Covenant, and so he
and his posterity continues until any of them cast themselves and their
posterity out of Covenant by Apostasy. The child that is borne of parents out
of Covenant, remains out of Covenant, unless either the parents, or some that
are in stead of parents, being called of God, give up themselves and the child
unto God, or the child coming to years of discretion be called into the
Covenant in his own person.

Thirdly, Hence it follows that the holiness of the children of believing
parents, is not necessarily internal and real holiness; so that it be
external and faederall, it suffices to make them members of the visible
Church. For as of those Corinthians and others that are called Saints, we
cannot infallibly gather that all were internally sanctified, it was sufficient
to make them external members, that they were both Saints by calling: so it is
sufficient to make the children so far holy as to be members of the Church
and outwardly in Covenant, if their parents were outwardly in Covenant. What is
inwardly wrought, it is not for man to judge.

Now let us see what A. R. objecteth to this place of Scripture.

A. R.
For answer, you lay down some grounds: as, First, There is but one Covenant now
on foot, which is the Covenant of grace and salvation, Heb. 7.22. and 8.13. and
10.9.

Answ. We grant you this, and more too. Namely, that never since Adams fall was
there any Covenant, properly so called, made with mankind by God, but the
Covenant of grace and salvation: Where read you of any Covenant of works and
damnation?

Secondly, You say: That there is but one manner of entering and being in the
Covenant, Ioh. 3.3.5.6. Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22.

Answ. True, If you mean being in that Covenant inwardly, spiritually, and
savingly, and the same ever was the manner of being and entering into Covenant
since Adams fall, viz. by Jesus Christ, or regeneration.

Thirdly, You say: There is but one holiness now acceptable unto God; which is
inward, spiritual, and in truth, without which no outward obedience, or
conformity to any worship is warrantable or acceptable, Ioh. 4.23, 24. Heb.
11.6.

Answ. If you understand it of such warrantablenesse, as finds acceptance with
God in the party performing it, as your latter seems to express the former:
This is not questioned nor denied by any that I know. But why do you limit
your propositions by the particle [Now,] as if though now outward obedience and
conformity to any ordinance, be not acceptable without inward holiness; yet
it sometimes had been? which is utterly untrue, as may appear, Genesis 4. Psalm.
50. and 51. Esa. 1. Ier. 6. and almost every where.

Now you come directly to answer. Hence (say you) it follows, that if
believers children be in Covenant, and have true holiness, then they are all
saved old and young. But all believers children are not saved, no not of
faithful Abraham himself, Esa. 10.21. with Romans 9.27. Therefore the children
of believers are not in the Covenant now on foot, nor ought to be baptized.

Answ. You might as well reason thus. If Simon Magus, Ananias, and Sapphira,
with many other hypocrites, in the Primitive Churches, whom yet the Apostles
baptized, and called Saints, and faithful, were in the Covenant, and had this
true holiness, or were truly Saints; then they must needs be all saved. But
they were not all saved. Therefore they were no believers or Saints, nor in the
Covenant now on foot; and therefore should not have been baptized. The
Apostles belike, wanted you to direct and control them, and show whom they
should have baptized, and whom not.

Secondly, I answer directly. Though true holiness be necessary for
spiritual and internal being in Covenant, and for eternal salvation; yet the
outward holiness of the party consisting in external being in Covenant, is
sufficient to warrant a Minister to baptize; otherwise he should never have
warrant to baptize: for none knows the heart, (so as to judge of inward
holiness infallibly) but God.

You add that we object notwithstanding all this that you have said, Why may
not infants be in the Covenant outwardly, having faederall holiness, and in
that sense be holy; and so to be admitted to the outward ordinance of baptism,
as infants were unto circumcision in time of the Law; and in the State of the
Jews? To this you answer. That the State or the Church of the Jews were under
the old Covenant and Law, and stood not by faith or circumcision of the heart;
as this of the Gospel does; but stood merely upon nature, and the circumcision
of the flesh, and accordingly had their outward and faederall holiness and
outward cleansings; all which were abolished with their State, and no such
holiness or distinction is now between any persons in the world. Answ.
Secondly, though they were under the old Covenant legally dispensed, wherein
grace was more obscurely and sparingly communicated to Gods people then it is
under the Gospel: yet the old Covenant was a Covenant of grace, which all must
needs grant, unless they think that the Patriarks, Prophets, and that holy
nation of the Jews were a graceless people out of favor with God, either not
at all saved, or saved by works. (For there is no way to be saved, but by
grace or works; and no salvation by grace, but in a Covenant of grace) But I
hope you will not be so blasphemous as to say this.

Secondly, If the old Covenant stood not by faith (to use your phrase) and
circumcision of the heart, how is it that God promises circumcision of the
heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6. and living by faith, Hab. 2.4. and the Prophets call upon
the people for circumcision of the heart, Ier. 4.4. and for faith, Psalm. 37.
Esa. 7. 2 Chronicles. 20. and that the Apostle shows, Heb. 11. that under the old
Covenant the godly were famous for their faith? Were those promises of God,
exhortations of the Prophets, and practice of those Worthies spoken of
concerning faith and circumcision of the heart, more then was comprehended in
the Covenant under which Gods people at that time were?

Thirdly, whereas you say the Church of the Gospel does stand on faith and
circumcision of the heart: Is your meaning that there is no Church of the
Gospel, but all that are therein, and professed and acknowledged members
thereof, are endued with faith and circumcision of heart? If so; experience of
the Scripture, and all Christian Churches, will confute you; since still chafe
is mingled with grain, tares with wheat; the children of the wicked one, with
the children of the kingdom. Or is your meaning that faith and circumcised
hearts, is required of all in the Church of the Gospel; and is truly in those
that are internal and living members of the same? This is granted, and may be
said as truly of the Church of the Jews; and therefore this can make no
difference being common to both.

Fourthly, Can you tell what you mean when you say, That the old Covenant
stood only by nature, and circumcision of the flesh? I cannot tell how you are
to be interpreted but one of these three ways: Either, first, that this
Covenant was grounded on nature. Or secondly, that it promised only natural
or temporal blessings. Or thirdly, that it was made with all and only the
natural seed of Abraham: all which are gross and notorious errors, openly
crossing the Scriptures. For if you mean that this Covenant was grounded in
nature, this is false: for God chose Abraham and Israel of free grace and love
above all other people, Josh. 4. Deuteronomy. 7.7, etc. neither did they differ in
nature from others. Or secondly, if you mean that God only required of them
outward circumcision and cutting off the natural foreskin, and promised only
natural and temporal blessings; this opinion is fitter to be abhorred, then
confuted. Or thirdly, if you mean, that to be of the natural seed of Abraham,
and to be circumcised in the flesh, was sufficient and necessary for being in
that Covenant, so that their being in Covenant consisted in being the natural
seed of Abraham; this is as false: for first, Were not many Proselytes joined
with the Israelites in the same Covenant? so that to be of Abraham's seed was
not necessary. Secondly, Did not they want circumcision in the wilderness
forty years, and yet remain in Covenant. Thirdly, Did not Ishmael and Esau
grow out of Covenant, though the seed of Abraham; and so ten Tribes ceased from
being Gods people long before the old Covenant was antiquated; and did not the
Prophets show that Legal observations were nothing worth without sincerity?

Fifthly, though the outward cleansings and ceremonies of the Law have ceased,
and so that outward and faederall holiness be at an end: yet there is an
outward and faederall holiness of the new Covenant, whereby Christians are
distinguished from other people. They have their outward Baptism and the Lords
Supper, prayer in the Name of Christ alone, the Word, and profession of the
Gospel, by which they are distinguished from unbeleevers. Act. 2.41.42. There
are reckoned up: first, Baptism: secondly, the Apostles Doctrine: thirdly,
Fellowship, or Communion with the faithful: fourthly, breaking Bread: and
fifthly, Prayers: as distinctive marks of the Church, by which it then was,
and to this day is distinguished from all other societies whatsoever. 1 Cor.
5.12. There is a distinction expressed of those that were within the Church, or
Covenant, and members of the Courch, and those that were without; whereof these
were not subject to the judgment or censure of the Church, those were. But how
are these distinguished? (that the Church may neither go beyond, nor neglect
her office within, her bounds) By inward holiness? that none sees but God, and
each man's own conscience; and therefore cannot be a note of distinction unto
men that cannot discern the heart. By outward holiness of life? Not so; for
some of those that were within, were guilty of more gross profaneness then
those that were without, as in the same Chap. 1 Cor. 5.1. and 11. Therefore
there must be some note of distinction, or faederall holiness, by which those
that were wicked in heart, and life, and yet Saints by calling, and members of
the Church, and so under the Churches jurisdiction, might be discerned (from
them that were without) and so subjected to the Churches censure, 1 Cor. 5.11,
12, 13.

Yet you say further. There is now only the new Covenant, which is a covenant
of grace and salvation, and brings certain salvation to all those that rightly
enter into it; which is only by faith. Hence it is said, Act. 2.47. That the
Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved.

Answ. It is as true that the old Covenant made with the Jews, was a covenant
of grace and salvation, which brought certain salvation to all those that
rightly entered into it, and that it was only by faith. Heb. 11.
And as for the Scripture you cite, it is said indeed, That the Lord added to
the Church such as should be saved. But it is not said, only such as should be
saved were added to the Church; or that all those who were added to the Church
were saved.

You proceed: And that the holiness of children is not meant of any holiness
in relation to any Church Covenant will appear further by these reasons.
First, that which is an effect of regeneration is not brought to pass by
generation (though the parents be holy.) But to be of the covenant or kingdom,
is the proper effect of regeneration, Ioh. 3.3. without which none can see it,
(much less be of it) or enter into it. Therefore it cannot be brought to pass
by generation, though the parents be holy.

Answ. We say not (neither can it follow from our grounds) that the children of
Christian parents are in covenant with God by generation, but by virtue of Gods
gracious promise, and from the nature of the covenant of grace; wherein God is
pleased to accept parents together with their children for his. Secondly, to be
of, or in the covenant outwardly (of which being in covenant we speak, and
which is sufficient to make an external member of the Church, and give right
unto the outward seals) you can never prove to be the proper effect of
regeneration, until you have proved that all those who were baptized by John
the Baptist, and the Apostles, and so admitted into the covenant as members of
the Church, were truly regenerate; which to hold, were to contradict the
Scripture.

Your second reason is this: Secondly, contradictions cannot be the effect of
one and the same covenant, in one and the selfsame respect. But for one parent
to be a believer, that is of the Church, when the other parent is not, to
produce an holy seed that is in covenant, 1 Cor. 7.14. and for the other
parents to be one a Jew, the other a Babylonian; the one a member of the
Church, the other not; to produce an unholy seed that is out of covenant, and
to be put away both wise and all borne by her, as Ezr. 10.3. is a contradiction
in one and the selfsame respect; and therefore cannot be the effect of one and
the selfsame covenant.

Answ. Not to examine the form of this Argument, nor to stand upon the
strangeness of your expressions: I conceive I apprehend what you would say,
and answer. It is no contradiction for the same covenant to require that the
Jews should cast away their Babylonish wives, and the children which they had
by them as unholy, and out of covenant: and yet allow the Primitive Christians,
their retaining of their yoke-fellowes; (though unbeleevers; in hope that they
might be brought within the covenant, and won unto Christ) and the retaining
of their children, as being already in covenant and holy. I say here is no
contradiction, for here is not the same respect, which is necessary in
contradictions. First, the Jews were forbidden to take wives of any, but of
Abraham's, seed and their own Tribe. Christians are not tied to any Tribe for
their yoke-fellowes; which hinders not but the covenant was the same with us
and them, though some circumstances varied. Secondly, the Jews took Babylonish
women; (for I will not contend about the name Babylonian, but give you leave to
call these strange wives Babylonians) after they themselves were in covenant
with God; which made their marriage with them altogether unlawful, and their
seed an unholy, offspring. But those Corinthians to whom Paul writes, were
married before their calling into covenant with God, as your self write. 2.
Part. page 10. And after marriage the one was called to the faith, the other
remained unconverted, as may appear, verse. 20.21.24.27. so that their former
marriage being lawful in it self, and not forbidden of God: (but rather
approved, for marriage even among infidels, as well as eating and drinking is
Gods ordinance, necessary for the due conservation of the world) and it not
being the unbeleeving yoke-fellows fault that his yokefellow is an unbeleever;
the unbeleevers sin shall not prejudice the believer, to hinder their
posterity from the privilege of faederall holiness.

Thirdly, you gather from Exodus 12.48. that considering the Jews Church State
from whence this successive holiness and being in Covenant, is concluded to
come, does not admit in any consideration of any lawful being of parents, the
one a member of the Church, the other not, to produce a lawful seed within the
old Covenant; that then such a thing in the new Covenant cannot be lawfully
concluded from that rule. Answ. That scripture Exodus 14.48. does not
necessarily require, that both parents whose male children should be
circumcised, should become Proselytes, and submit themselves to Gods Covenant.
It was sufficient that the man who had principal Authority and power to
dispose of his children, should circumcise his male children, though his wife
should refuse to become a Proselyte; (for ought that can be gathered from that
or any other scripture) or the Proselyte wife (if either she should be forsaken
of her husband, or become a widow, or be permitted of her husband to dispose
of her children, though he were never converted) might have given up her self
and her family to the God of Israel by circumcising her males, for it is said
the stranger (not his yokefellow, or both the parents) shall circumcise his
males. So that your reasons (being disproved) prove nothing.

You bring us in objecting They are termed holy, and so to be esteemed: to
which you answer, So were the unbeleeving Jews, when they were broken off,
Romans 11.16. and so is the unbeleeving wife, and yet neither of them to be
baptized, for their being termed holy: and therefore neither children for their
being termed holy.

Answ. Neither are the unbeleeving Jews called holy as unbeleiving, for the
Apostles calls those Jews an holy lump and holy branches (not that were
rejected through unbeleefe, but) that had been, and were to be converted to the
faith and saved, as is apparent by the coherence: for whom he calls holy here,
Romans 11.16. he speaks of their fullness (or full and general conversion) verse.
12. and v. 15. he speaks of their conversion which shall be life from the dead,
and says that they shall be saved, v 26. So that it is evident that he calls the
Jews holy, not in respect of the unbeleevers which were broken off and
discovenanted; but of their holy ancestors, and those whose fullness should be
a glorious enriching of the Gentiles, whose receiving should be life from the
dead, and who should be saved and obtain mercy. And so they are called holy,
as a people considered for the future to be taken again into Covenant, and to
have right to the seal of the Covenant.

Secondly, Neither is the unbeleeving wife called holy in this place, indeed
she is said to be sanctified to the husband, so that he has an holy and
comfortable use of her as of other temporal blessings: But to be sanctified
for such an use or to such a person, differs far from being holy.

You bring us in here demanding, what holiness then is meant to be in
children; and answer, not that holiness which accompanies faith, and that only
is availeable, to the admittance unto the state of the gospel, and to have
right to baptism. Ans. Because you have a good faculty, in repeating the same
things again and again, and denying without proof whatsoever makes against
you; I will be content to cast away some more time in answering you, though the
same for substance that has been said; and reply: If you mean that holiness
which accompany faith, vertuall or actual, is only available to internal
admittance into the state of the Gospel, so as to be made living and real
members of the Church: we assent to this assertion. But the question is not
now; who is a true and spiritual Member of the Church, and infalliblely
admitted to the spiritual and saving benefits that Christ has purchased for
his Church? But who is an external Member and may be admitted to the outward
seal? No question, John the Baptist and Christ's Disciples, admitted many to
baptism, of whose saving faith yet they were not undoubtedly assured.

Whereas you go about largly to show, That in the state of the Jews, and old
Covenant some were faederally and outwardly holy, and some unclean: But now
that all such distinctions are taken away, and that the Apostle now meant not
any such holiness, for believers children to have, neither is there now any
such kind of holiness in the world; neither is there any other kind of
holiness, save only that true holiness which accompanies the new creature
available to baptism: this is the sum of your speech, whereunto I Answer. It
has sufficiently been showed before, that there is a federall holiness in the
new Covenant or Christian Church, as well as there was in the Church of the
Jews. Neither does your long discourse or many abused scriptures prove any
thing to the contrary. To repeat what was said before. Whence was the Church of
the Corinthians holy, or a Congreation of saints, (since there were so many
really profane and carnal amongst them) but from federall holiness, by which
they were distinguished from them that were without; though some in the Church
were more notorious for vice, then those that were without? whence were the
Hebrews called holy brethren, but because they were partakers of the heavenly
calling; though some were so fastened to the Ceremonies, Heb 3.2.
and inclined to backsliding, that the Apostle uses sharp and severe language
toward them chapter 6.10. and 12? How is it said that they had been sanctified by
the blood of the Covenant, that afterward trampled on the Son of God by
apostasy, accounting the blood of the Covenant profane, and doing despite to
the spirit of grace: if men may not in the state of the Gospel, have a
federall holiness, without inward holiness that accompanies the new creature
and saving faith? So 1 Pet. 2.9.10. the Apostle calls the Christians to whom he
wrote, a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar
people, a people of God, that had obtained mercy. Must we think that all these
(to whom Peter wrote) were undoubtedly endued with true faith, and holiness
that accompanies the new creature; so that there was no hypocrite amongst them?
that we have no ground for. How then are these glorious titles bestowed upon
them all? By virtue (doubtless) of Gods calling and their outward accepting of
Gods Covenant; though there was but a part only amongst those Churches, to whom
these clogies properly belonged, for there were tares among the wheat.

You go on and say. If it be objected that in respect of justification it (
viz, federall holiness) avails nothing but to baptism it may; to which you
answer. That which availes to justification and salvation, does according to
the rule only avail to baptism. For if thou beleevest with all thy heart,
thou art justified, Romans 10.10. shall be saved, Acts 16.31. and may be
baptized upon the same and no other grounds. Act, 8.37. Answ. If the same be
the rule or ground for justification and salvation, and for baptism: then must
Ministers have no rule for baptism, unless they can know the heart, as God
who justifies and saves; and so consequently the baptizer must either be
((...)) the knower of the heart, that is God alone; Act 1.24.
or baptize beside or without rule, that is unlawfully; for the true holiness
that accompanies the new creature and saving faith, is known to none but God
and the spirit of man which is in him. 1. Cor. 2.11.


You proceed bringing us in objecting and saying, that all that were baptized
by the Apostles themselves were not saved, therefore what you answered to our
objection, viz. that [that availes to baptism, which availes to justification
and salvation] is not so. To this you answer by distinguishing between the rule
which is infallible, and the judgments of men which are fallible, and may be
deceived in applying the rule; yet it follows not but that the rule being of
God, is still as infallible as God himself. For all that believe shall be
saved, which is true as God himself is true: but all who are judged by
believers to be believers, do not believe; and therefore are not saved. This
failing therefore is not in the rule, but in their judgments that are but men.
Answ. To what purpose is it, to say, this is an infallible and eternal rule,
Whosoever believes shall be saved: unless you prove the other, that is in
question. viz. that saving faith is the only rule of Baptism, and that none
might be baptized, but they that did actually believe, with the faith that
accompanies the new creature, and that this rule is true as God is true? which
yet I conceive you will not be so bold as to say (which unless you say, you
say nothing to purpose.) For hence it would follow, that all whom John and the
Disciples, etc. regularly baptized, had true faith, and consequently were
saved, that they failed, yea were rash and presumptuous and sinned grievously
(as going beyond commission) when they baptized any hypocrite; that such an one
after he came to repentance, must necessarily be baptized again; for his
former baptism was applied beside the rule, and so was a false baptism. Yea
if faith be the rule both of baptism and justification alike, it will follow
that as all and only believers were justified, and all and only the justified
were believers: So all and only the faithful must be baptized, and all and
only the baptized are faithful, and consequently whosoever is baptized is a
believer and a justified person, and whosoever is not baptized is neither
believer nor justified. But to leave these absurd consequences that necessarily
follow upon your absurd opinion; It is evident that God never appointed saving
faith to be the rule of baptism, by which his Ministers should be directed in
administering baptism. For it is impossible for a Minister to know infallibly
whether another savingly believes, and so whether he may baptize him according
to the rule (if faith be the rule.) That cannot be a rule to us to work by,
which we must necessarily be ignorant of. God never ordained such an
uncertain, yea incomprehensible rule for his servants to work by.

You proceed. But in baptizing of Infants the case is far otherwise, yea
quite contrary, who will or can fail in judging an Infant to be an Infant.
Answ. There is no more danger of failing in judging an Infant to be an Infant,
then in judging a man to be a man. But there may be failing in judging an
Infant to be truly and really holy and in Covenant, though all the children of
Christian parents are called holy: as well as there might be failing in judging
this or that man in the Corinthian Church to be a saint indeed; though the
whole Church were called saints. For as the Apostles did according to the rule
of charity, judge men to be believers, and so baptized them, when they made a
profession of faith, and did not manifestly discover the contrary; though
afterward many proved otherwise: So we are to judge Infants of Christian
parents to be holy, and so within Covenant, and to be baptized, because Gods
word testifies that they are holy, (and neither your shifts and sophistical
evasions, nor all the policy of Satan can disprove it) though afterward some
of them are proved to have been only outwardly, not inwardly in Covenant.

Here you bring in some authors testifying, that baptism of children is but a
tradition, a custom of the Church, invented by the Pope etc. Which testimonies
I cannot for the present examine, as not being furnished with the books of the
authors. Though if one should cast away so much time as to follow you, in
examining these testimonies: in probability you would be found no honester in
citing them, then you have been in citing many scriptures. For he that will be
so bold as to pervert, and abuse Gods word, will not spare man's. But because we
are not bound to stand to the testimony of humane authors, neither will you as
I conceive. I will answer no more at this time to your humane authorities, but
these two things: First, that if you would stand to the verdict of authors; I
make no question but more and more approved authors might easily be brought
against you, then those you have brought for your self. Secondly, what credit
is to be given to your authors, who manifestly contradict one another? In a
word to give a touch, Origin the prime and ancientest of those whom you cite,
which lived about 200. years after Christ, overthrowes what you bring out of
him, or other authors for your purpose. For whereas you say he calls it a
ceremony or tradition of the Church, (which yet it may be well called, and
withal be of divine institution, as being delivered to, and used by the
Church, in which sense Baptism in general, and the Lords Supper may be called
Ceremonies and traditions of the Church which is the keeper and user of them,
not the author or institutor of them) elsewhere he speaks of it, as an
unquestionable practice of the Church in his time, thus, in his second tome and
14. homily on Luke, cited by Parvuli baptizantur in remissionem peccatorem.
Quorum peccatorum? aut quo tempore peccaverunt? aut quomodo potest ulla lavacri
in parvulis ratio subsistere, nisi juxta illum sensum de quo paulo ante
diximus? Nullus mundus a sorde, nec si unius dici quidem fuerit vita ejus super
terram. Et quia per baptismi sacramentum nativitatis sordes deponuntur,
propterca baptizantur and parvuli, Orig. Tom. 2. Hom. 14. in Luc. citat. Polan.
Synt. Tom. secundo lib. 6. cap. 55.
Polanus in his Syntagme, Little ones are Baptized for the remission of sins.
Of what sins? Or at what times have they sinned? Or how can there be any
reason of washing in little ones, but according to that sense of which we spoke
a little before? There is none clean from filthiness, no though he has lived
but one day on earth. And because by the Sacrament of Baptism, the filthiness
of birth is put away; therefore little ones are also Baptized. Wherein this
Author seems (for I have not his Book) from the Baptizing of Infants, as from
an unquestionable practice of the Church in those Primitive times, to
demonstrate as from a clear principle, that Infants even of one day old were
polluted with sin: And yet you say Luther says that for one thousand years
since Christ and the Apostles it came to be in use in the Church, and was
established by Pope Innocentius. Surely your Authors are honestly cited by
you, or worthy credit with us, when you bring them speaking such flat and
irreconciliable contradictions.

But you return now to the question. What is meant by holiness which children
are said to have 1. Cor. 7.14. In answer to which question (you say) I shall
only show you what I conceive it to be, and then leave it to the judgment of
the wise. Answ. It is well yet that you give leave to wise men to use their
own judgment, and do not tie them upon necessity of salvation to subscribe
to your fancies.

You go on, I say then it is such an holiness as is opposite to some kind of
uncleanness, which holiness I take to be this; as if when they are said to be
holy, it is no more then to say they are not unclean, (to wit) no bastards.

Answ. Who ever before (but Note reader that this is Bellarmines interpretation
of this place. Liberi tales dicuntur, non inmundi, i. e. infames and spurij,
sed sancti, i. e. legitimi and liberi a civili ignominia. Whether A.R. borrowed
this answer of Bellarmine, or invented it of himself (as it is the happiness
of the good wits and holy affections of Jesuitical and Anabaptisticall heads
and hearts to jumpe in the same thing) let others judge.
Bellarmine or such Jesuitical perverters of Scriptures) took it so, putting
unclean for bastards, or holy for legitimate?

But you come to show your ground from opening of the text, and therein spend
many lines. Answ. But let any man that is not given over to strong delusions to
believe lies, judge whether there be any syllable favoring this
interpretation, or proving that by holy must be meant only No-bastards, or
whether you can with all your cunning, wrack the Apostles speeches to speak any
thing for you, yet now we must take your word for it, because you say it
clearly appears to be so.

Further; This (you say) may likewise appear, Mal. 2.14, 15, etc. In which
words it plainly appears, that the scope of the place is, that those children
which are generated by one man and one woman lawfully married, are a godly or
an holy feed, and those that are generated otherwise, are not so, but bastards.
And the reason of this holiness, arises not here from any relation they had
to the Jewish State, not from any Church covenant; but merely from Gods first
institution of marriage in the creation, and his then providing one woman for
one man; and which therefore is of universal concernment to all mankind, by
the law of creation.

Answ. No such thing plainly appears, as you would bear men in hand. For the
scope of the Prophet in that of Malachi, seems to be this, which in the 16.
verse. he concludes; viz. that God hates putting away, that is, divorcement;
whereby the Israelites alienated their own wives that were Israelites, that
they might marry strangers: and this he proves by diverse reasons, to be odious
before God. First, because by this means they profaned the holiness of the
Lord, in breaking his covenant, by putting away their own wives, that were
Israelites; and marrying the daughters of strange gods; viz. heathenish wives,
which God in his covenant had forbidden: by which means they would soon grow
out of covenant, and cease to be an holy people, verse. 11. Secondly, because by
this means they caused the Altar of the Lord to be covered with tears so that
no sacrifices were acceptable, (which should have been offered in joy) because
the poor sorrowful wives that had been put away, could not but testify
before the Altar the sorrow for the wrong that had been done unto them, verse.
13. Thirdly, because in so doing they dealt treacherously against the wife of
their youth, which was the husbands companion, and the wife of his covenant,
verse. 14. Fourthly, because God had made them one, verse. 15. In the first
institution of marriage appointing that two only should be made one flesh by
marriage, appointing also that they should be of one stock, viz. of the Tribe
of Israel of one Religion, viz. worshippers of the true God of Abraham,
inclining by his special providence these couples to make choice of one
another. So that now for them to divorce their wives, is to cast away part of
themselves. In all these respects it may be said that God made them one, viz.
in regard of the first institution of marriage, in regard of lineage, Religion,
their mutual choice one of another, whereby they became one; and in regard of
the nature of marriage, which is to make one man, and one woman no more two,
but one flesh. And though God had the rest of the spirit, that is, the
disposition of all persons, and the inclination of their hearts, in his power;
yet as to Adam he gave but one wife, so to these that are here reproved he gave
to each of them but one wife, with whom their several husbands should become
one; inclining their spirits at their first choice, to mutual and conjugall
affection one to another: though it was in his power, to have given them other
yoke-fellows, if it had seemed fit to him. Therefore they are bidden to take
heed to their spirits, verse. 15. and 16. that is, look to their hearts that
they should not wander after adulterous lusts. Fifthly, the fifth Reason or
Argument, to show that this putting away was odious to God, which the Prophet
brings is: Because God therefore made them one, as in other forenamed respects,
so principally in Religion, (for that he speaks principally, if not only, of
this, appears in that he complains of marrying the daughter of a strange god)
to the end that he might seek a godly seed, or seed of God: that is, (...)
that there might successively proceed from them, a seed in covenant with God:
whereas otherwise the holy seed would be stained, and God provoked, to
discovenant them, and their posterity, so many as should marry idolatresses.
This seems to be the meaning and sum of this Scripture, whereon I have stood
the longer, because it is somewhat obscure. But howsoever A. R. will gather
that the godly seed here, or holy seed, as he will metaphrase it, must needs
signify a seed only legitimate, or borne in lawful matrimony; and so
conclude that no more is meant by holy, 1 Cor. 7. His ground I can see to be
none other, but because God is said to make one seeking an holy seed. But I
answer: First, that this place is too far fetched to gather clearly therefrom,
that all children begotten in lawful matrimony are an holy seed; and that
unholy seed is so called in respect of the first institution only of marriage,
which is the ground of the marriage of Heathens and Infidels. Secondly, I have
showed that in diverse other respects, God may be as truly said to have made
them one; as in respect of the first institution of marriage, which may as
pertinently to this place, and agreeably to the scope of the H. G. and to the
truth it self have place here. Thirdly, I showed that the scope of this
Scripture imports that oneness in Religion must needs here be meant (whether
with or without the other significations, I say not) which quite overthrowes
his ground; for if unity in the true Religion must needs concur in parents,
(at least as the case stood with them) to make an holy seed, then they that are
of a false religion cannot produce an holy seed, let their marriage be never so
lawful. Fourthly, though I should grant (which yet you can never prove, nor
will I yield) that this making one to seek a godly seed, were to be referred
only to Gods first institution of marriage: yet will not your conclusion at
all follow, Therefore all children borne in lawful matrimony of what Religion
so even, are an holy seed. For if God at first intending to have a holy seed
from Adam and Eve, and so successively, that should be in covenant with him,
appointed that one man should have but one woman; and set down this as a law of
nature to be observed by their posterity; to the end that they should not
pollute themselves with promiscuous copulation, and should be discerned from
other people; as by other pious conversation, so by their chastity in
marriage, and avoiding of polygamy and wicked divorces: will it hence follow
that what parents soever avoid polygamy and live chastely in marriage, generate
a godly feed? in no wise: For that a people may be Gods people, and their seed
a godly seed, or seed of God, many things are required, as that they be
worshippers of the true God, that they be no idolaters, no witches,
blasphemers, murderers, etc. and diverse things more both affirmative and
negative, are required in the covenant. Whereof if a man perform one or two,
he is not forthwith in covenant, nor his seed a godly seed. Besides, what an
absurd collection is it which you make hence, that all legitimates or not
bastards, are a holy or godly seed? for now you that pleaded against the
holiness of Christians children, will have all children, though of Turks,
Indians, and most gross Idolaters to be holy, so that they be borne in lawful
matrimony, which you grant may be (and it is plain commonly is) among the
heathen. You say, This that is here spoken of a godly seed is of universal
concernment to all mankind by the law of creation. But I answer. It is plain
that the Israelites only in regard of the covenant with God, were called the
holy seed, Ezr. 9.2. (...) Semen sanctitatis, or semen sanctum, i. e. vocatum
ad sanctitatem and Dei gratia ab aliis separatum. Trem. and Jun.
For they have taken of their daughters for themselves and for their sons; so
that the holy seed have mingled themselves with the people of the Lands; yea,
the hand of the Princes and Rulers have been chief in this trespass. So Ezekiel.
16.20, 21. The little ones which the Jews had offered to idols, and caused to
pass through the fire, were borne unto God and were Gods children; so that
these places speaking of a godly seed, an holy seed, children born to God, Gods
children; to wit, (...)
those that were borne of a people in covenant, make directly against you, as
setting forth the sin of the Israelites, who being a godly seed by covenant,
would mingle themselves with the heathen that were out of covenant, and so
profane and discovenant their seed, and offer those children to idols, which by
virtue of the covenant were dedicated to God: which places show clearly how
that in Malachi is to be understood.

You add. In the same sense is that to be taken, Heb. 13.4. Marriage is
honorable in all, but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge. And gather
hence, if marriage be honorable, and the bed undefiled; then the issue of the
bed must needs be undefiled, that is, clean and holy: on the other side, the
issue of unlawful conjunctions are unclean, illegitimate, and bastards. Now
this holiness or unholinesse of children, proceeds not from the holiness or
unholinesse of parents: but from the lawful or unlawful conjunction of
parents, in the begetting of children; for the Apostle in this place speaks of
all men universally.

Answ. Let any indifferent man judge, whether this be not an unclean,
illegitimate, and spurious interpretation of, and drawing conclusions from the
Scripture. For first; What comfort or resolution had this been in the
scrupulous parent, to tell him that his children were holy, that is, legitimate
and no bastards, but legitimates because they were begotten in lawful
matrimony that had been contracted before conversion; whereas by your
interpretation of these Scriptures, if they had continued still unconverted
both of them, their children had been as holy, that is, legitimate and no
bastards? Secondly, how can this place [Marriage is honorable in all, etc. and
the bed undefiled] be understood of all men universally (as you say) viz.
unbeleevers as well as believers? Tit. 1.15.
When the Apostle says: Unto the pure, all things are pure; but unto them that
are defiled and unbeleeving, is nothing pure, but even their mind and
conscience is defiled; how can the marriage bed then be undefiled to such? It
is evident therefore, (that we make not the Spirit of God contradict it self)
that the universal note (all men) is to be restrained to the subject matter,
viz. all sorts of believers, (for to such he wrote) of what quality, condition
or calling soever.

Thirdly, But I pray you see (and if you will not, let others consider) how all
this while in interpreting this Scripture, 1 Cor. 7.14. and wresting,
wiredrawing, and pulling in (as it were, obtorto collo) other Scriptures which
you would force to favor your interpretation, you have directly and manifestly
contradicted the Apostle, and corrupted the Text. The Apostle tells the
believing yoke-fellows, that their children are holy, though their yoke-fellows
were unbeleevers: because they are sanctified to them; ( viz. by their faith)
you say, therefore the children are holy, because their matrimony was lawful:
If the Apostles meaning were that which you would have it, he should have said,
You were lawfully married, therefore are your children holy. But he says, The
unbeleever is sanctified by (or to) the believer, else were your children
unclean, let their marriage be never so lawful. Paul gathers the holiness of
children from grounds peculiar to the faithful: viz. the faith and being in
covenant at least of one of the parents, showing plainly that were it not for
this, the children must needs be unclean. You would draw it from grounds
common to Infidels, viz. lawful matrimony; affirming that whosoever is borne
of parents (though infidels) lawfully married, is holy in the Apostles sense.
Thus when men set themselves to maintain errors, they are not afraid nor
ashamed plainly to contradict the Spirit of God.

You have somewhat further which you call an objection: It seems then that the
holiness here of the children arises not from the holiness or faith of the
parents; but merely from the lawful marriage and conjunction of the parents;
and then you answer: It is even so, and go on to repeat what you have said,
and add such like stuff not worth reading. Answ. It is even false (though you
dictate it as e cathedra, or e tripode) and a manifest contradicting of plain
Scripture, as has been before demonstrated. Your two next objections do not
concern us; and therefore I pass them by.

Yet one more objection you bring us in making: Have the children of believers
no more privilege then the children of Heathens, Turks, and Infidels? you
answer. In respect of the Covenant of grace and salvation, none at all; and
bring those Scriptures, Ioh. 3.7, 8. Act. 10.34, 35. to show that the Covenant
of grace comes not by any natural birth, but by a new birth. Only their
privilege (you say) is in respect of the means of salvation; for believing
parents may be a means to bring their children to the knowledge and faith of
Christ.

Answ. What Christian heart does not abhor this assertion as being directly
contrary to the tenor of Gods Covenant, Genesis 17. (of which more hereafter) and
repugnant to Gods gracious promises frequently inculcated in Scripture, Exodus
20.5, 6. Act. 2.39. Esa. 59.21? Does not this strike at a maine pillar of a
Christians comfort grounded on those precious promises? so that by this tenet,
if the children of Christian parents die before they be capable of the outward
means of salvation, or their parents be taken from them before they come to
years of discretion; they must be parted with as the children of Turks or
Infidels, as being out of the state of salvation, as being in a lost and
hopeless condition, as having no right to the Covenant, notwithstanding all
the gracious promises that God has made to the faithful to be their God, and
the God of their seed, to show mercy to their posterity, even to thousands,
that the promises do belong unto them and their children, that his word and
Spirit shall abide on their seed, and their seeds seed. Let men judge whether
the father of lies can speak more contradictorily to Scripture, for the
extenuating of Gods rich grace, and dashing the comfort of Gods people.

Thus have I vindicated the ground of my third argument. Yet notwithstanding
all shifts we see this truth remains firm, that the children of Christian
parents are faederally holy, and members of the Church, and so have right to
the seal of admission into the Church.

4. Arg. 4. Arg.
To those that are in Covenant with God, the Sacrament or seal which God has
instituted to represent and seal admission into Covenant, is to be
administered, Genesis 17.10, 11. Exodus 12.48.

But children of believing parents are in Covenant with God, Genesis 17.7. Exodus
12.48. Esa. 59.21. Therefore children of believing parents are to be admitted
to the seal of entrance into the Covenant, which now is baptism in the time
of the Gospel.

For the confirmation, and explication of the former proposition, I conceive it
is hardly questioned but that when God has made a Covenant with his people,
and appointed a seal to signify and represent admission into the same; then
the seal or sign belongs to those which have entered into Covenant under what
kind of administration soever the Covenant be dispensed. So Philip reasons, If
thou believe with all thine heart, thou may be baptized. So Peter, Can any
one forbid water that these should not be baptized, etc. For actual faith, at
least in profession, was necessary to those that at first entered into the new
covenant, and received the sign or seal thereof; to wit, baptism: as well as
it was necessary to Abraham who entered first into the old Covenant which was
sealed by Circumcision, though actual faith was not required of his posterity
as necessary to their being in Covenant. Neither for ought that I see does the
Adversary deny this proposition. Yet if it be questioned, it is fully proved
in Abraham, Genesis 17.10, 11. with whom we read that God first made an express
and formal Covenant, and instituted a sign or seal to signify entrance
into that Covenant, and distinguish the Church from other Societies. And this
was not required of Abraham alone and his family: but of all foreiners also,
that so soon as they should enter into covenant, they should have this sign
and seal of admittance,, Exodus 12.48. And still in the New Testament as soon
as men had given evidence of their entrance into the new Covenant, they were
baptized.

Now here is to be noted, that the Covenant of grace was ever one and the same
for substance; though for the manner it have been variously dispensed, Heb.
11. through the whole Chapter, and Heb. 13.8. Ephesians. 4.5. as shall be showed
(God willing) more fully hereafter.

Secondly, before Abraham's time we read not of any distinct and full
manifestation of the Covenant of grace expressly in the terms of a Covenant,
nor of any gathering of a Church out of the world, as a distinct body whereunto
the faithful were to join themselves; nor of any visible seal or sacred sign
of admission into Covenant with God; though God had a people in covenant from
the beginning, yet the covenant was more sparingly, obscurely, and implicitly
revealed, and no distinctive outward note of entrance into covenant (that we
read of) appointed.

Thirdly, since the Covenant was made with Abraham, and the sign of
circumcision instituted, in the old and new Covenant, there has still been a
solemn sign or Sacrament of admission, to which all that were in Covenant had
right; so that Abraham that was the first express Covenanter is called, the
father of the faithful, or of those that were in covenant with God; and is to
be imitated by the faithful in all those things that are essential to the
covenant.

For the Assumption. The words of the Text are clear. First, that God made the
Covenant with Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17.7. Secondly, that we should not
think that that external covenant belonged only to those that imitated his
faith, it is made with his natural seed, all that should be begotten of him,
Genesis 17.10. Even all that seed wherein God promised to make Abraham fruitful,
should so far be in Covenant, as to have right to the onward sign, until
they should fall away from the outward covenant by wilful Apostasy, verse. 6,
7, 10. Thirdly, that you may see this was not peculiar to Abraham and his
posterity alone that proceeded from his loins; the same is commanded
concerning his servants borne in his house, or bought with his money, that the
males who only were capable, should receive the seal of the Covenant, verse.
12, 13. Fourthly, that you may know that this did not belong only to Abraham's
family, but was a thing common to all that should enter into covenant, viz.
that their children should be acknowledged to be in Covenant also, by having
the seal of entrance administered to them; see Exodus 12.48. Lastly, that we may
understand that this was not proper to the old covenant in the Legal
dispensation, but common to the Covenant of grace under whatsoever
dispensation, as well Evangelicall as Legal; a promise of the same privilege
is made to believing parents, even from the time of the Gospel, Esa. 50.20, 21.
compared with Romans 11.26, 27.

A. R.
Now I come to your answers, which is: That neither Abraham nor his seed was
circumcised, because the Covenant was made with him.

Answ. Who denies this? or what is this to the purpose? we know that God might
have made a Covenant without a seal, if it had pleased him. They were
circumcised, because God did institute circumcision for a seal, and appointed
it to those that were admitted into Covenant. The faithful we know were in
covenant before Abraham's time; though there be no formal or full expression of
the covenant, nor of any sign or Sacrament of entering thereinto.

You add a reason of your assertion. For the covenant was made with Abraham
above twenty years before circumcision was instituted, as may appear by
comparing Genesis 12.2. and 3. with Genesis 16.3. and 17.25. Answ. No such thing
appears in the places cited. It appears indeed that God had made a promise
to Abraham long before of making him a great Nation, and blessing him; but
there is no word of the Covenant, or that God would be a God to him and his
seed, in those places before, Genesis 17.2. (though we know that Abraham from his
first call was in covenant with God; as were Abel, Enoch, Noah, and all the
faithful before Abraham, as the covenant is generally taken. But here we
speak of the Covenant in regard of its express manifestation and special
administration, with Abraham, and afterward, since the institution of a seal
thereunto.) And it appears that in Genesis 17. verse. 2. is the first expression of
Gods making a covenant with Abraham, at which time also circumcision was
instituted. And if God had made a covenant never so long before with Abraham,
neither he not his seed must have used circumcision until God had instituted
it. But after God had appointed it, all that were in covenant were to be
circumcised, that were capable, even all males of eight days old and upward.

You say, The covenant was not made with Abraham for his being a faithful man;
but for his being such a faithful man whom the Lord was pleased to choose and
set out as a pattern to all believers, Romans 4.23, 24. and to be a father of
many Nations, Romans 4.17, 18. and in whose seed all the Nations of the world
should be blessed, Act. 5.25. and 13.23. to wit, in Christ, who was to come of
his flesh. Answ. We know that the Covenant was not made with Abraham for his
being a faithful man; neither yet for his being such a faithful man, etc. as
you would have it. But Abraham was made by God a faithful man, and taken into
covenant of Gods free grace, that he might be a pattern to future believers,
and a father of many Nations, etc. Abraham's faithfulness so qualified, was not
the cause why God took him into covenant. But Abraham's faithfulness,
acceptance into covenant, and being a pattern of believers, a father of many
Nations; in whose seed all Nations are blessed, were effects of Gods good
pleasure, and free grace. Secondly, neither do those places of Scripture
produced by you yield the least show of proof, that Abraham was taken into
covenant and his seed for being such a faithful man as God was pleased to
choose and set out a pattern to all believers, etc. Thirdly, seeing Abraham
was taken into covenant, that he might be, or at the most, as being (I dare not
say (with you) for being) such a faithful man, whom the Lord was pleased to
choose, and set out a pattern to all believers, and to be a father of many
Nations; and in whose seed all the Nations of the world should be blessed: then
it is the duty of all that are believers, children of Abraham, and will be
blessed in Abraham's seed, that is, Christ, to imitate Abraham's example, in
laying hold on the covenant for themselves and their children; and giving them
up to God even in their infancy, by requiring the seal of the Covenant to be
administered unto them, and not to loose any part of that inheritance that God
entayled upon Abraham and his children: seeing as it has been proved, it is no
peculiar privilege of Abraham to have his seed in covenant; nor his peculiar
duty to lay hold on the covenant for his children: but the common privilege
and duty of all the faithful.

You proceed. Therefore though the promises were made to Abraham and his seed;
yet the consequence will not follow, that the covenant is likewise made with
all believers and their seed; for believers only are the seed, and the seed
only; and none of them a father in the Gospel sense, nor any other; save only
Abraham, to whom and his seed the covenant and promises were made. Answ. First,
If the consequence will not follow, Because God is the God of Abraham and his
seed; Therefore he is, to all the faithful, and their seed: how is Abraham a
father of the faithful and pattern of believers? Or how will it follow that
Abraham performed any duty, or received any privilege; Therefore all
believers ought to do those duties, may receive those privileges? Secondly,
your reason that you bring for your denial of our consequence, is a bold
assertion manifestly repugnant to plain Scripture: as Exodus 20.5.6. Where God
having laid down the sum of the covenant, verse. 2. binds his people to his
true worship, and to avoid Idolatry, with a promise of mercy unto thousands of
those that should love him, and keep his commandments. Now these thousands
are meant of the godly man's posterity, as appears by the Antithesis of verse.
5. visiting the sins of the fathers on their children, unto the third and
fourth generation, etc. Does not this promise belong to all that are in
covenant with God, and are bound to the obedience of the moral Law, and to the
pure worship of God, and abstinence from idolatry? so Esa. 59. last verse. Act.
2.37. What is meant by Gods showing mercy to a thousand generations, making a
covenant that his Spirit, and word shall be continued to their seed, and seeds
seed, that the promise is made to them whom the Lord does call and their
children; but the same that God promises unto Abraham, that he will make a
covenant with him and his seed; be a God to him and his seed? So that this
answer to your boldly-affirmed, but never-proved assertion, (that to Abraham
and his seed only the promise was made) may suffice to overthrow the
inferences you bring thereupon, and your absurdities that you would father upon
us mingled with diverse untruths (as may appear to any intelligent Reader) not
worth answering. Only that which you lay down in the beginning: For believers
only are the seed; and in the conclusion, Abraham has not two sorts of seeds
in the sense and acceptance of the Gospel. Upon which as upon a groundwork of
all, your reasoning is built; that the rottenness of the foundation being
discovered, it may appear how easily the superstruction will come down of it
self. I answer therefore:

Answ. We read in the Gospel or new Testament, of three sorts of Abraham's
seed: First, Christ is called his seed, Gal. 3.16. Secondly, the faithful of
what Nation soever are called his seed, Gal. 3.29. Thirdly, those who naturally
desended from his loins, John. 8.37. 2. Cor. 11.22. And in this last kind to
be Abraham's seed, was sufficient to intresse men to the outward Covenant, and
the seal thereof; and the promise was made to Abraham, Genesis 17. literally and
properly in this last sense, not in the first or second, as is apparent by the
text. For with that seed God made the Covenant in Abraham; and to that seed God
became a God, which was to be circumcised at eight days old, in respect of the
males, and (as you say) the females in the males. But the natural issue of
Abraham was to be circumcised at 8 days old, in respect of the males, and in
them the females: See Genesis 17.7.10.11.12. for proof of both propositions.
Therefore the natural issue of Abraham, is the seed to which according to the
litteral and proper meaning of the Scripture, God promises to be a God in
Covenant. And so it appears to be false which you say; that believers only
were the seed of Abraham, since many naturally descending from Abraham, and
circumcised, and so outwardly in Covenant, were unbeleevers.

You add that we say, Infants were then members of the Church, and demand when
they were cast out: to which you answer, that they were cast out when the Jews
Church State, and old Covenant was abrogate by the coming of Christ, and
preaching of the Gospel, and planting of other Churches far different from
that of the Jews in many respects. Answ. But I hope Gods people are not so
simple as to believe your bare words, against Gods express truth, (though you
were an Angel from heaven or an Apostle, Gal. 1.^.
much less being as you are discovered) and to think that in former times
indeed Infants were in Covenant with God, but now are excluded, that now all
Infants of christian parents dying without actual faith, and under years of
discretion, must certainly perish as aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
and out of Covenant with God; that grace is so far straightened under the
Gospel in comparison of what it was under the law, that whereas God was then a
God to parents and to children even to many generations, yea to the children of
Proselytes, Exodus 12.48. of what Nation soever; now the holiest Christian
parents can apprehend no benefit from the Covenant for their children, at least
till they come to years of discretion and actual faith; and till then must
account them infidells and wholly under the power of the devil. Is this to
advance Gods Grace, to extol the Gospel and glorify Jesus Christ? Or rather
is it not a trick of the devil greatly to obscure, and endeavor the utter
extinguishing of the glory of Gods grace, the virtue of Christ's death, the
luster of the Gospel, and the comfort of a Christian all at once? They that
will hearken to such deceits as these, let them make account at the last to be
cheated of all grounds of comfort in Gods word. Act. 2.39.
Does not the Apostle say, the promise is to you and your children, and to them
that are afar off, etc. when the Jews Church State and old Covenant were
abrogated.

But let us come to consider the many respects wherein you say that the Church
of the Gospel differs from the Jewish state or old Covenant, whence you would
prove that Infants are now cast out of Covenant: wherein because you repeat for
substance some toys and fancies of your own brain, that you have vented
before, I will not think it burdensome to answer you, though in some things the
same for substance that has been said before.

That (you say) viz. the Jewish Church State and old Covenant, being
constituted upon nature and the natural seed of Abraham. Answ. I pray you, can
you tell what you mean when you say that the Jews Church State was
constituted upon nature and the natural seed of Abraham? I am sure you speak
not according to Scripture (that I say not, nor according to sense or reason.)
As far as I can apprehend, when you say it was built upon nature (If you have
any meaning in these words, and do not let them fall from you at random) it
must be understood either, first, that nature was the ground and cause of this
covenant; or secondly, that natural blessings were only bestowed in this
covenant; or thirdly, that this covenant was made only with the natural
children of Abraham: all which are manifestly false. For first, if your meaning
be that this covenant was grounded on nature, so that nature was the cause of
it; you must either mean the nature of God as contradistinguish't to his will
and good pleasure: or the nature of Abraham. The nature of God was not the
cause of it, for what God does by nature (his nature being the cause) he does
eternally, necessarily, unchangeably, so as he cannot but do it; as to know
himself and all things knowable, to love himself. Or if you mean that the
nature of Abraham was the ground of this covenant, it is as false; for there
was nothing in Abraham by nature, that put difference between him and others,
Deuteronomy. 7. Josh. 24. Romans 4. Or if you mean God only bestowed temporal
blessings in this covenant, that is palpably and execrably false also. God was
their God in the old covenant, circumcised their heart to love him, fear him,
and obey him, and trust in him; he gave remission of sins and sanctification
under that Covenant, which were not natural blessings. Or thirdly, if you
mean that that Covenant was made with Abraham's natural posterity, there is
no appearance of truth in it; for bondmen and those that were bought with
money, and Proselytes of any nation or stock whatsoever, were admitted into
this Covenant, Genesis 17. Exodus 12.

You add. This (to wit, the Christian Church State) upon grace and the
spiritual seed of Abraham. Answ. So was the old Covenant (to use your phrase)
constituted on grace, Gods free favor was the cause of it, and the graces of
the Spirit bestowed as truly under it (though not so plentifully, and clearly
as now) as these phrases express: Genesis 17. Deuteronomy. 30. Mal. 2.5.
I am God all-sufficient. I will be thy God. I will circumcise thy heart, and
the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God, etc. My Covenant was with him
of life and peace. Secondly, if you mean by the spiritual seed of Abraham,
Jesus Christ the seed of the woman that was to break the Serpents head, Genesis
3. Joh. 8. Rev. 13. 1 Timothy 2.
in whom the Covevant was made with our first parents fallen; at the seeing of
whose day Abraham rejoiced, in whom God promises, that all the Nations of the
earth should be blessed: the old Covenant was made with Abraham in him; who is
the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world; who is the only Mediator
between God and man, and by whom alone, Abraham and all the faithful have had
communion with God.

You add. That therefore termed Israel according to the flesh, and of the
circumcision of the flesh, this Israel according to the spirit and of the
circumcision of the heart, Romans 2.28, 29. and 4 6, 7, 8. Col. 2.11. Answ. No
such thing appears in those Scriptures. Take heed how you falsify Gods word,
would you persuade men, that God gave not circumcision of heart under the old
Covenant? that because all were not right Israelites that were Abraham's seed,
therefore none were? that because he is not a Jew that is one outwardly:
therefore none under the old covenant were inwardly Jews? because true
Christians are circumcised with a circumcision without hands; therefore the
Jews were not circumcised but only with hands, not spiritually. Let any man
examine those Scriptures, and see whether from the^ it can be gathered, that
all under the old covenant had only circumcision of the flesh, and that all
under the new covenant have circumcision of the spirit. It will appear to any
judicious Reader, that here are two or three notorious falsehoods, with a
gross perverting of Scripture in this short sentence. The first: That the
Jewish Church State, or old covenant is called Israel, according to the flesh,
or circumcision of the flesh; but the Gospel-state Israel, according to the
spirit, or the circumcision of the heart, (wherein are infolded more untruths
then one.) Secondly, that therefore they are so called, because that was
constituted on the natural seed of Abraham, etc. The abuse of Scripture
appears, that these Scriptures neither prove the antecedent, nor sequel, nor
consequent, neither make any thing for his purpose; as if it would not be
overtedious to stand upon, and needless to any men of judgment, might be
showed. But such uttering of falsehoods, and then propping them with Scriptures
to abuse the simple, is ordinary almost in every page, and sometimes frequent
in one page, as may appear by the answer, though I have not said so much in
express words before; neither should have said so now, but that I consider
such is the weakness of some Readers, that what they read, if Scripture be
brought for proof thereof, though never so impertinently, abusively, and
perversely, they think it must go for current.

Thirdly, that (you say) a state of bondmen or servants, so as in that state;
an heir or believer differed nothing from a servant, though he were lord of
all, etc. Gal. 4.7. Answ. That under the Old Testament the Church of the Jews
was an heir, yea lord of all: (though in regard of its infancy and
immaturitie, nothing differing from a servant, as being held under the
tutourship of the Law) this I say, is sufficient to prove that the Church of
the Jews, and the Christian Church, is one and the same, for substance, and
under the same Covenant in all essentialls. For all know that a son and heir
is the same for substance and in person, at three years old, and at thirty;
though altered in some accidental privileges at riper years. And hence your
fancy of the Jewish Church being constituted on nature, is quite overthrown.
For if the Jewish Church was heir and lord of all, believers were then
children, though in minority and under tutourship. How were they children? not
by nature; for Christ only is the Son of God by nature; therefore by grace,
and so they were under a Covenant of Grace. Thus powerful is the word of truth
to overthrow those errors that ignorant men would abuse, and force it to
maintain, and yet you are not afraid nor ashamed to father this error upon
Christ himself, and would force his words to the Jews to sound this way, Ioh.
8.31. And among other your toys, that you would fasten on him, (which are not
worth the examining, unless a man had more time then he knew how well to
bestow) you bring him in speaking thus in the conclusion of your paraphrase
that you make on his words to the Jews. You see then how that Covenant of
Circumcision made with Abraham and you his natural seed, was to be an
everlasting Covenant in your flesh; to wit, in me that was to come of your
flesh, Genesis 17.13.

Answ. First, is not this notorious presumption to father such a fancy as this
on Christ? to call the flesh of the Jews fore-skinne, Christ himself? for that
by the flesh in which Gods covenant was, is meant the foreskin, wherein God
set the sign and seal of his covenant, is apparent by comparing the 10, 11,
and 12. verses of Genesis 17. together. Secondly, If that were an everlasting
Covenant which God made with Abraham, and the Israelites; and made with them in
Christ (though Christ was not that flesh in which circumcision was made) both
which you grant here, and the Scripture plentifully proves; then certainly was
the covenant made with the Jews, and with us, all one for substance: seeing
they and we have one Mediator, and seeing the old dispensation of the covenant
is abrogated; how was that an everlasting covenant; but as the same covenant is
perpetuated now in the Evangelicall dispensation of it?

But you will have Christ give this reason; that by the flesh (wherein the
covenant of circumcision was to be) is meant Christ, because Christ was to come
of their flesh. Answ. Was he so? Was Christ to come of the flesh of strangers,
and Proselytes, or of all the posterity of Abraham, which had the covenant in
the flesh? Did Christ come of the flesh of all that were circumcised? (which
must needs follow on this conceit) What prodigious opinions does this man's
brain conceive and father on Christ?

After you come, as you say, to shut up all thus: That it is apparent that
infants of Christian parents cannot warrantably be baptized, until they
manifest and declare their faith by profession: as is apparent, first, from the
doctrine, and practice of John, Matthew. 3.6.8, 9. Mar. 1.4. Secondly, of Christ
and his Apostles, Ioh. 3, 22. compared with 4.1, 2. Act. 2.38.41. and 8.12.36,
37. Thirdly, by the tenor of the commission, Mat. 28.29. Mar. 16.15, 16. Answ.
No su h thing is apparent from these Scriptures; as is, first, sufficiently
showed by the foregoing reasons. Secondly, by the fore examination of those
Scriptures and grounds you build upon. Thirdly, in none of those places do you
find baptism so restrained to those that profess the faith, that it should
be lawful for none else to have it. Fourthly, I add, if abusing the
Scriptures and inventing and avouching new and monstrous errors, may make your
opinion for which you plead to be apparent truth, then indeed you have made
appparent what you say, otherwise not. Fifthly, though in mine answer to that
Scripture, Matthew. 28.29. I hope sufficient has been said to answer all other
Scriptures of that kind; yet because some put great confidence in that Mar.
16.15.16. for this opinion, though it be the same for substance with the other,
Mar. 16.15, 16.
I will add a little in this place, though happily the same for substance that
has been said. The words of Christ are these: Go ye into all the world, and
preach the Gospel unto every creature. He that believes and is baptized, shall
be saved, he that believes not shall be damned To make it appear that nothing
can be gathered to confirm the adversaries opinion, note these four things.

First, Here our Savior does not forbid his Disciples to baptize any that want
actual faith, or confine baptism to believers; or expressly show who should
be baptized, and who not; only he shows who should by saved, viz. those that
believe and were baptized; and who should be damned, viz. those that believed
not: so that it is strange that men should promise to themselves any patronage
for Anabaptisme from this place. Secondly, If any should say, that though here
it be not expressed that believers only are to be baptized; yet it may be
hence gathered, and is implied from the order and connection of the words, (He
that believes and is baptized) so that men must believe before they be
baptized. I add, secondly: That no such thing can be necessarily implied by
the series of the words, which I prove by this very Text. First, it would by as
good consequence follow, that none ought or can preach the Gospel, be means of
working faith, baptize, or help toward salvation; but those who have received
Apostolical authority, and gifts to go into all the world, and preach unto
every creature, for the connection and order is alike; but no man will yield
this consequence. Secondly, by as good and better consequence you might gather,
that none shall be saved but those that believe and are baptized, which is
false; for whatsoever you hold, I conceive that none but those that are given
over to strong delusions will hold that all the children of Christian parents
that die before they come to actual faith, must remedilesly perish: and as for
the absolute necessity of baptism to salvation, if with the Papists you hold
it, will easily be confuted from this Scripture, showing that not want of
baptism (where it cannot be had, and is not wilfully contemned) but unbeleefe
condemns. Yet there is as good reason for these inferences from this place as
for that you would imply hence. Or thirdly, that nothing but unbelief can be
the ground of damnation might as well be concluded hence, as that nothing but
faith can be the ground of baptism; whereas not only unbeleife, but every
sin is damnable, and without repentance will bring damnation.

Thirdly, I answer to this Scripture, that though it were granted that the
Apostles, who were to gather a Church out the unbeleeving world, and take them
into Covenant that were out of Covenant, might not baptize any but those who by
professing faith took hold of the covenant, from which before they were
aliens, and their families, who were now received into covenant with them: yet
it does not follow, that the children of parents in covenant (and so in
Covenant themselves) should be denied baptism; though they want actual faith:
for there is not the same reason of a Church gathered, and to be gathered: as
that latter part, He that believes not shall be damned; if it be understood of
actual faith, must be restrained to the present time and matter: for to those
that were out of Covenant, actual faith was necessary to bring them and theirs
within covenant. So that the Gentiles to whom the Apostles were to preach, must
of necessity actually believe, else they could not be saved. But this must not
be extended to all persons and times: for then it should follow that no child
of Christian parents dying before years of discretion and actual faith, could
be saved; which is directly contrary to those Scriptures that show, that God
will be a God to the faithful and their seed; will show mercy to thousands of
their posterity, to the childrens children of those that keep covenant, Psalm.
10^.1^, 18. that the promise is to the faithful and their children, that their
children are holy, and such places before cited, which will not suffer any one
that believes Gods word to hold that the children of the faithful dying in
their minority, must unavoidably be damned all of them.

Fourthly, I add for answer to this Scripture, that infants of Christian
parents, as they are within the covenant, and are holy, so they may be said to
have a virtuall faith, or that which is analogicall thereto, that gives them
right to baptism, as much as the converted heathens profession; for being in
covenant with God, and being holy, cannot be conceived to be without answerable
faith, or somewhat equivalent.

At last you having triumphantly concluded your dispute, come to show your
disciples what they may see by what you have taught them. I will examine a few
of your words.

Say you, By this we may partly see the gross mistake of all such great clarks
of our times, which confound those two Covenants of Law and Gospel, and make
them both as one in substance, and different only in circumstance, as in
administration only or degrees, the one more dark, the other more light,
whereas indeed they are no less different then old and new, works and faith,
the administration of condemnation, and the administration of righteousness,
or then the letter killing, and the spirit giving life, 2. Cor. 3.6.7.8.9. or
then a state of bondage, and a state of sons, Gal. 4.21. Answ. Yes, we may
see what you infer, as we may see false shapes by false glasses, or one
falsehood by another. Secondly, may not ignorant phantasticks possiblely fall
into gross errors as soon as great clarks? Thirdly, as for the differences
that you put between the Covenant of the Law, and of the Gospel (as you call
them) First, we grant that the Covenant which God made with the Jewish, and
that which he made with the Christian Church, differ as old and new. But this
is too narrow a difference to make them diverse in substance: as he that was of
old a child is a new become a man, yet differs not in substance from what he
was, but is the same person. God gave that old commandment to the Jews: Thou
shall love thy neighbor as thy self, Lev. 19.18. Christ says to his
Disciples, A new commandment I give unto you, that you love one another, Ioh.
13.34. Must these commandments needs differ in substance? or must they be
accused of gross mistake that hold that these commandments agree in substance
as being the same? The Apostle John, 1. Ioh. 2.7. says he writes no new
commandment, but the old, yet verse. 8. he says he writes a new commandment.
Will you say, That great clark John was grossly mistaken in saying that he
wrote no new commandment, but an old: and yet presently saying he wrote an old
commandment? Because in your conceit old and new so far differ, that the
same thing cannot be said to be old and new, though in different respects, and
in regard of some circumstances.

Secondly, In your second and third difference you (how great a Clark soever)
are grossly mistaken in calling the old Covenant made with the Jews a
Covenant of works, and a Covenant of nature. Where find you the Scripture
calling it so? Will you persuade men that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses,
David, and the faithful before Christ, where without faith and grace? That
either they were saved by works and nature (for you will allow them to be under
no covenant, but works and nature you, exclude them from faith and grace) or
else to have perished remedilesly? The one whereof must needs follow upon your
tenet. But of this we have heard before, and this your opinion is so absurd and
unchristian, that it deserves rather to be abhorred then confuted.

Thirdly, whereas you call the old Covenant the administration of condemnation,
and a killing letter, wherein you would have it contrary to the Gospel as
being the administration of righteousness, and spirit giving life, and bring
that Scripture, 2. Cor. 3.6.7.8 9. I Answer: First, there is no such thing
proved by that Scripture, that the old covenant was the administration of
condemnation, and a killing letter. Secondly, neither can any such thing be
conceived; unless we shall say that all which were under the old Covenant were
condemned, and killed, destitute of righteousness and life, and that God made
a Covenant with his people to kill and condemn them (which will necessarily
follow upon that tenet) which were blasphemy.

Thirdly, the Apostle indeed calls the law, which was an addition to the
covenant of promise, a killing letter, and the administration of condemnation,
not as it was given and intended by God primarily, who gave it primarily and
properly, to humble that stubborn people, drive them to the promise, and
exercise them in obedience, and to be taken along with, (not apart from) the
promise, and to train them up for, draw them to, and direct them how to walk
in, Christ, which is the end of the Law, not to drive them from Christ. But as
it was in it self considered without the promise and without Christ, so it was
a killing letter, and the ministry of condemnation; and as it was
misunderstood and abused by false-teachers, hypocrites and Iusticiaries: who
before the coming of Christ forsaking the promise, and since his coming,
forsaking the Gospel; (both which held forth Christ, in whom alone
righteousness is to be sought) or at least mingling the Law and Gospel
together in point of justification, sought righteousness by the works of the
Law either alone, or with the Gospel; to them it became a killing letter. And
the addition of the Law to the promise, was a testimony, and an occasion of
greater condemnation to such as they who abused it, sought righteousness in
it, Romans 7.12.14. Gal. 3.21 24.
and made their boast of it, but were not humbled, nor driven to Christ
thereby, though in it self the Law was spiritual, holy, and good, not
contrary but subordinate to the promise. As the Gospel is an occasion of
greater condemnation even to those that are externally under the Covenant of
the Gospel, who abuse it 2. Cor. 2.16. Heb. 10.29. Iud. 1.4. Yet will it not
hence follow that the Covenant of the Gospel or new Covenant is the ministry
of condemnation, though it turn to the greater condemnation of some for their
abuse of it.

Fourthly, As for your last difference; that a state of bondage, this a state
of sons. Answ. It Is true, the Law given on mount Sinai (for of that the
Apostle speaks) as it was taken without the promise, and that Covenant which
God made with Abraham, and as men sought justification by it, whether without
the promise before Christ, or without the Gospel since Christ, or whether they
sought justification by the Law together with the promise or the Gospel, which
was not Gods end in giving the Law to his people, but man's abuse of it: so it
brought men into a state of bondage, and so the obstinate Jews, that thus abuse
the Law, are cast out as Ishmael, and Hagar. And as the faithful were under
the discipline and padagogie of the Law, they were in a servile condition, in
comparison of that great freedom (from those intolerable burdens of
ceremonies, and great discomfort and fear accompanying the same) which the
faithful have under the Gospel. But notwithstanding their bondage, they were
sons and heirs and lords of all, Gal. 4.1. and so they were under a Covenant
of grace, though legally administered.

As for your following discourse, wherein you talk your pleasure against
Magistrates and Ministers, and cry out of the Baptism of Infants, as the
greatest delusion, and a thing of as dangerous consequence, as ever the man of
sin brought into the world, and that the greatest maintainers thereof are the
greatest deluders; and that it is time for you to awake out of your drunken
slumber, and seek by whom and by what means you are so miserablely
intosticated (as you call it, whether by an error of the Printer, or because
you are so intoxicated with your drunken slumber, that you cannot speak
English,) with much other like raving talk; wherein you abuse the Scriptures,
and show what manner of spirit you are of. Answ. I account this wild talk,
being the evaporations of a giddy brain, intoxicated with a drunken slumber
whereof you complain, worthy no other answer but this. Of every idle word you
must give an account at the day of judgment, Matt. 12.36. much more of speaking
evil of those things you know not, railling upon dignities, and authorities,
despising dominions, 2, Pet. 2.9.10.11.12. Iud. 4. and 8 9. etc. and of calling
evil good, and good evil, putting darkness for light, and light for
darkness, Es. 5.20. Which places of Scripture I would entreat you, when you
shall awake out of your drunken slumber to consider, and seriously ponder.

So much for the fourth argument, and clearing it from exceptions: Now I come
to the fifth, which is of affinity with the former (and confounded with it by
A. R. and therefore his answers to it, mingled with his answers to the former)
but not the same, and therefore we will consider it apart, and set down his
answers of any weight, and reply to them (God willing,) and this is taken from
circumcision.

5. Argument, If Infants of believing parents (or parents in Covenant) under
the old Covenant, might and ought to be consecrated unto God, and initiated
into Covenant by circumcision: then Infants of believing parents under the new
Covenant, ought to be consecrated to God, and solemnly entered into Covenant by
Baptism.

But Infants of believing parents, under the old Covenant, might and ought to
be consecrated to God, and initiated into Covenant by circumcision, Genesis
17.10.11. Exodus 12.48.

Therefore Infants of believing parents under the new Covenant, ought to be
consecrated unto God, and solemnly entered into Covenant by Baptism.

For the clearing and confirming of the sequel of the proposition (for of the
assumption, there is no question) I will lay down two or three considerations.

First, that the old and new covenant were one and the same for substance;
Abraham, Moses, David, and all the faithful before Christ were under the same
Covenant, that all the faithful since Christ are under. For since Adams fall,
there has been but one way of salvation, common to all that have been saved;
which way is revealed, and exhibited only in the Covenant of grace, as has
been partly showed before, see Rev. 13.8. and 14.6. Heb. 11. through the
Chapter, and 13.8. Has been demonstrated by the godly learned: and must be
needs acknowledged by all that will without prejudice consider that, Exodus
34.6.7.
first, God considered as a mercifu l Father, a gracious and long-suffering
God, abundant in goodness and truth, Ezeh. 16.
is the Author of the old Covenant, as well as the new: secondly, Josh. 24.
Exodus 33.19.
That man considered as a miserable sinner, yet weary of sin, desiring mercy,
professing and promising, repentance, faith, and obedience, Ephesians. 1.12.
upon his being received into this Covenant, is the other Covenantier or
confederate in the old as well as in the new. Thirdly, 1. Cor. 10.4.
that Christ is the Mediator in both, being the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world, Genesis 3.15. Ioh. 8. Ps. 110. Exodus 34.7.
the promised seed, who brake the serpents head, whose day Abraham seeing
rejoiced. A priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek. Fourthly, that the
principal good things promised in both, were pardon of sins, Ps. 32.1.2.
adoption, sanctification, perseverance, and eternal salvation. Fifthly, Genesis
15.6.
that the condition required is repentance, faith and obedience in the old
Covenant, as well as the new. Sixthly, that the end in both is the same, Act.
15.10.11.
to wit, the glory of Gods rich mercy; in pouring spiritual, temporal, and
eternal blessings upon his people. And seventhly, that the sum of the
Covenant is the same, viz, Romans 4. Exodus 19.5, 6. Deuteronomy. 4.29, 30. and 10.16.19
and 11.22.
I will be thy God, and thou shall be my people. All which are undenyably the
same in the old Covenant and new. So that considering they agree in Author,
Object, Mediator, Good things promised, Duties required, End, Effects, in a
word, in Matter, Form, and Definition, there can be no essential difference.
Only they differ in some Accidents. As there the Covenant was made in Christ to
come: Here in Christ already come. There with a few people, and after Abraham's
(or at least Moses his) time, only with the house of Israel, and those that
should join therewith: Here with more, even with all nations. Then dispensed
by darker prophesies, and more obscure sacraments, sacrifices, and ceremonies
or types; now by clear revelation, and plain or open ordinances, without the
veil of shadows, types, and dark ceremonies. Then grace was more dimly,
scantly, and with mixture of legal slavery, ordinarily bestowed; now more
plainly, plentifully, comfortably and freely; all which are but
circumstantiall, or graduall differences.

Secondly, when the new Covenant succeeded the old, then Baptism succeeded in
the place of circumcision; as the Lords Supper in stead of the Passover. Exodus
12 48. Romans 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.13. Act. 22.16. Col. 2.11, 12.
I say Baptism succeeded in the room of circumcision, and is to us of the
same use that circumcision was to the Jews, to wit, a sign of entrance into
the Church, a seal of the righteousness of faith, which comprehends remission
of sins, Baptism of the spirit, and circumcision of the heart; which are the
things signified in Baptism. Insomuch that the Apostle puts circumcision
without hands, in putting off the body of sins etc. and burial with Christ in
Baptism, etc. for one and the same thing, implying that though we now want
outward circumcision with hands, yet we have inward circumcision without hands,
signified and sealed in Baptism to so many as have Christ. And so though the
believing Jews before Christ, wanted the outward sacrament of Baptism; yet
they were inwardly partakers of Baptism without hands, in remission of sins
and mortification (sealed by circumcision) as well as we. So then if by being
buried with Christ in Baptism, we are partakers of circumcision without hands;
It appears that Baptism is of the same use to us, that circumcision was to
the Jews, whereof one particular among the rest, was to be a sign of entering
into the Church or Covenant, as may be seen in the general use of both the
Sacraments, and which our Savior (it may seem) would in special teach us by
his example, in that at the eight day he was circumcised, as a professed Member
of the Jewish Church; but after when he would set up the new Covenant or
Christian Church, he was initiated thereinto by Baptism. So that though in
some things circumcision and baptism differ: as, first, in the ourward
ceremonies. Secondly, in regard of the sexes to which applied, (for
circumcision was applied only to males, the females being uncapale, and so
being received into Covenant, in or with the males, whereas Baptism is applied
to both sexes, being both alike capable of it.) Thirdly, in the exact
determinate time, required in the one, viz, circumcision, tied to the eight
day; but left free and undetermined in the other, so that it be done as
speedily as conveniently may be, after the party is apprehended and
acknowledged to be within the Covenant, and so to have right to the sacrament.
And fourthly, in the adjuncts or effects. Circumcision with spilling of blood,
Baptism without blood, because the true blood of the Covenant is shed, and
therefore no more to be shadowed by bloody sacrifices or sacraments as
aforetime. Yet they agree in the maine end and use. Circumcision and Baptism
being signs of entrance into the Church, as the Passover and the Supper,
signs of continuance; and so consequently circumcision and Baptism to be
applied to those that were but newly in Covenant, as to Infants of believers,
and infidels newly converted; the other to be used by them that had attained to
some growth. Those to be applied but once to one person, as signifying our
spiritual birth, which is but once; but these often to be used, as signifying
spiritual nourishment and growth, which must be often and continual until we
come to perfection, though we be not bound to the distinct times, in using
Baptism and the Lords Supper, that were appointed for circumcision and the
Passover, viz. the eight day from the birth for the one, or the foureteenth
day of the first month yearly for the other.

Thirdly, consider that Gods bounty and grace on the one side; or man's duty,
and obligation on the other side, is nothing diminished or straightened in the
time of the New Testament, in comparison of what was under the Old: but rather
much increased and enlarged, in respect of manifestation, more abundantly to
Christians then Jews; as the whole course of the Scripture shows. So that if
God was pleased graciously to accept into covenant, parents together with their
children then; and to become the God of the little infants, as well as of the
parents; and to set the seal of the covenant upon the infants, for the
confirmation of faith, and comfort of the parents for the time present, and of
the children for the future, when they should come to understanding: And if he
were then pleased to bind parents to offer and dedicate their children unto
him by the seal of entrance into covenant: much more he vouchsafes the
former, and requires the latter, now under the Gospel.

To this you answer, A. R.
God commanded Abraham to circumcise all the males in his house; and every male
child at eight days old, as well he that was borne in the house, as he that
was bought with money of any stranger that was not of his seed. Now it was both
right and equal that Abraham should do herein as God commanded him, and it
had been sinful in him to have done otherwise more or less. And so likewise
it is meet for us to do as God has commanded us to do; and no otherwise. And
afterward (to omit repetitions of the same things, and some objections and
answers which you make, that either concern us not, or have been sufficiently
answered already) you say: we must baptize infants, when we are commanded to
do it, and not before; notwithstanding their being capable of baptism with
all its significations. Ans. It was showed before that the restraining of
circumcision to males, and tying of it to the eighth day, were accidental, and
peculiar to circumcision: as being the seal and sacrament of entrance into the
old covenant, whereas some things are essential and common to the seals of
entrance in both covenants. And therefore though the argument hold not from one
Sacrament to another in those things that are accidental and proper to the
one: yet it holds from one to another, in those things that are common and
essential, as we justly maintain against our adversaries the Papists; that
every Sacrament is a seal of the covenant of grace, or of the righteousness
of faith: because circumcision was so, to which you seem to assent, calling
Baptism a pledge of remission of sins; though the name of pledge or seal be
not expressly given to other sacraments in scripture. Now we learn, by the
Israelites frequent using of the Passover, that the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper is often (not once only, as Baptism) to be received by Christians;
(though otherwise we have no express clear command for the often receiving of
it) howbeit we be not restrained to one in the year only, nor to the time of
Passover, nor to the use of unleavened bread, and such things as were proper
to the Passover: so though we do not in baptism observe the same ceremony,
nor precise time, nor sex that was peculiar to circumcision; yet we justly
gather, that baptism belongs to such persons for age, viz. Infants (though
there were no express command in Scripture for it) and that upon the grounds
aforementioned.

Secondly, Gods command to Abraham as he was the father of the faithful, is
sufficient warrant for our actions, though we have no special command for the
same, set down in the New Testament, much less brought to us by any special
revelation as to Abraham; even when in regard of some special acts, and many
circumstances we may not do as Abraham did: yet by virtue of Gods commandment
to Abraham, we are bound to do that which is analogicall thereunto. Genesis 17.1.
Genesis 17.23. Genesis 22. Genesis 18.19.
For example, God commanded Abraham to walk before him and be perfect. This
binds us as well as Abraham, though Abraham's circumcision of himself and his
family, his purpose and endeavor to offer up his son Isaac; his commanding
and teaching his children and household not only in moral duties, but also
ceremonial, in respect of circumcision and sacrifices, were parts of his
walking before God, and being upright: yet we may not imitate him in those very
particulars. But in those duties required in the New Testament, which are
analogicall and proportionable to these; as giving up our selves and ours unto
God, in the use of those Ordinances which he for the present has appointed, in
denying our selves in our dearest comforts, and bringing up our children in
fear and information of the Lord. And so whereas God promises to Abraham to
be his shield, and exceeding great reward, and his All-sufficient God: we may
apply these promises to our selves, though our condition be not the same in all
things with Abraham's, though we be not in danger of having the nations to rise
up against us for rescuing Lot, etc. So God promises to be God to Abraham and
his seed, and requires that he should lay hold on the promise by faith, not
only for himself, but also for his children, and so give up his children unto
God in circumcision; which is a ground sufficient for Christian parents to lay
hold on the promise of God for themselves and their children, and give them up
to God God in baptism, notwithstanding some circumstances, wherein the promise
and command made to Abraham differ from them, as they are applied unto us So
God gave a command and a promise unto Joshua: I will be with thee, Josh. 1.5.6.
to the 9.
I will not fail thee nor forsake thee. Be strong and of a good courage, etc.
This promise and command we may, and ought to apply to our selves in any work
that God calls us unto, as if it had been made unto us in particular, Heb.
13.5. Though we be never made Captains of hosts; to go against Canaanites, or
take possession of a promised land; or be types of Christ, the true and real
Joshua, or Jesus, all which were peculiar to that Worthy: yet the command and
promise concern us as well as him, as the Apostle in that place shows. Else
if you will not grant, that we are bound to believe promises, and obey
commands, made to Abraham or some other special persons; unless we observe
all circumstances and particular actions, in obeying the command; and jumpe
with their estate in every particular qualification, in receiving the promises:
you will deny that we have any thing to do with any command or promise of God,
and so go about to overturne all the consolation of the faithful, and
discharge them of all their duty. But seeing none, I hope, is so foolish as to
follow such absurdities, we may safely hold, (notwithstanding what you object)
that Abraham's promise for his children, and command to circumcise them; is a
good ground for Christian parents, to lay hold on the covenant for their
children, and to present them to God in baptism.

Thirdly, whereas you say, As Abraham did what God commanded him, so must we
do as he commands us; and again, we must baptize infants when we are
commanded, and not before. Answ. I hope your meaning is not, that we must have
immediate revelation from God, as Abraham had; for if until then we sit still,
we shall never obey nor believe. Otherwise so many as are the children of
Abraham acknowledge themselves bound by Gods command to him, to give up
himself and his children unto God, to do the like; though they have no new
revelation from God, neither are bound to observe all circumstances that
Abraham was.

You bring us in objecting: God gave to infants circumcision, which was a sign
or seal of the righteousness of faith, and regeneration, Genesis 17.11. Romans
4.11. and we know God gave no lying sign, nor seals a covenant to any
persons that are not therein: Therefore infants are in the covenant, have
faith, and regeneration, and so ought to be baptized now, as well as
circumcised then. To which you answer. It is true, God gives no lying sign, nor
seals to any persons that they are in covenant when they are not; and
therefore seeing that Ishmael was circumcised after that God had declared, and
made it known, that he was not in covenant, Genesis 17.18, 19, 20, 21. it must
follow that circumcision was not by God ordained, nor by Abraham understood, to
be to the persons circumcised a seal of their being in covenant; and much
less of their being in the faith and regeneration. Wherefore, Genesis 17.11. Romans
14.11. which this objection is grounded upon, of necessity must be understood,
as it is applied by the Apostle, to wit, that circumcision received both upon
himself and his seed, was to him and to them a sign and seal, that
righteousness should be by faith, Romans 4. verse. 3.11, 12. to 24. Answ. God
does not declare there, Genesis 17.18, 19. and cited by you, nor any where else
that Ishmael was not in covenant; for though the covenant was established with
Isaac, so that he and his posterity should continue in covenant until the
promised seed should come of his posterity: yet Ishmael was outwardly in
covenant, Genesis 17.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.23.25. until he discovenanted himself.

Secondly, whether is it fit that we should believe you, or God himself
speaking, Genesis 17. and Paul (interpreting that place, Romans 4.) who had the mind
of Christ, and the Spirit of God? you say, that circumcision was not ordained
by God, nor understood by Abraham to be to the person circumcised, a seal of
their being in covenant, much less of their being in the faith, and
regeneration, (though we say not that it was so:) God says, Genesis 17.10, 11.
This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy seed after
thee: every manchilde among you shall be circumcised, and you shall circumcise
the fore-skinne of your flesh, and it shall be a token of the Covenant betwixt
me and you. And Paul says, that Abraham received the sign of circumcision, a
seal of the righteousness of faith, etc. Let men judge whether of these two
parties testimonies is more worthy credit.

Thirdly, It is not to be questioned but those Scriptures, Genesis 17.7. Romans
14.11. must be understood as the Apostle applies them. But so far is the
Apostles application there, from excluding or denying our interpretation of
those Scriptures, viz. that God ordained, and Abraham understood circumcision
to be a seal of their being in Covenant, and so a seal of faith and
regeneration to those that worthily used it; that the Apostles application
presupposes this, and therefore gathers, because circumcision was a sign of
the Covenant, and a seal of the righteousness of faith, that righteousness
comes by faith, not by works.

Fourthly, If the same was not the use of circumcision to Abraham and his
posterity for the substance, to wit, to be a sign of their being in covenant,
and seal of the righteousness of faith, in your opinion; why do you not show
the difference of Abraham's circumcision and theirs? If you say, it was to
Abraham a seal of his faith, righteousness, and regeneration, that he had
already, to them of that which they were to have: I answer, this is but a
circumstantiall difference, and gives what we desire, and maintain. If you
say, that many who were circumcised were never justified by faith, or
regenerated; this was man's abuse, and fault, who being received into such a
Covenant, wherein God promised to be his God, and was ready to perform his
promise, yet would not perform the conditions required in the covenant. For if
some that received circumcision, were never internally in Covenant, nor endued
with the righteousness of faith, that hinders not but that circumcision was a
sign of their being outwardly received into that covenant wherein God was
ready to bestow faith and regeneration, if through their own default they did
not deprive themselves thereof. Besides, if there was not the same use of
circumcision to Abraham, and his children circumcised by Gods appointment: How
do you say, in your Preface to the Reader, That baptism is an undoubted
pledge from God of the free pardon and remission of sins to the right
subjects thereof: since it may with as good reason be said, though it were so in
our Saviors time, yet it is not so now; as you seem to bear men in hand:
Though circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of faith, and a sign of
the covenant between God and him to Abraham; yet it was not so to his
posterity, though they were the right subjects thereof, whom God had appointed
to be circumcised. But if you rightly gather that Baptism is an undoubted
pledge of the pardon of sin to the right subjects thereof now because it was
so to those which were first baptized; we may as well gather, that circumcision
was a sign of the Covenant, and seal of the righteousness of faith, to those
infants which by Gods appointment received it, as it was to Abraham.

Hitherto of those Arguments of ours, whereunto this Disputant answers. As for
the other Arguments and Objections which he brings and answers, I shall leave
them to defend them that own them. I will add briefly one or two Arguments
more.

4. Arg.
Arg. 6. If the baptizing of Infants born of Christian parents (or parents
within the new covenant) be not according to the rule of Gods word, then there
is no rule or warrant in the Scripture for baptizing the posterity of
believers, under the New covenant at all, and so consequently the children of
believers must not be baptized at all, neither young nor old; for we must do
nothing without Scripture warrant.

But that the posterity of Christian parents ought not to be baptized at all;
is most absurd and false, as I think will be acknowledged of all that bear the
names of Christians. For how can it be supposed, that the faith and
Christianity of the parents, should be so prejudicial to the children, as to
deprive them of the pledge of the remission of sins, though they repent and
believe; when yet the posterity of Infidels may be baptized, upon their faith
and repentance? Therefore the Antecedent must needs be false, ( viz. that the
baptizing of infants of Christian parents is not according to the rule of the
word) and consequently the contradictory thereto true. viz. that the baptizing
of infants borne of parents in covenant is according to the rule. The
Assumption I conceive needs no proof seeing Christ has appointed, that the
Sacraments of the New Testament should be perpetual to the end of the world,
Matthew. 28.19.20. 1 Cor. 11.26. to those that should be in Covenant.

For the confirmation then of the proposition, and making clear its
consequence: Consider, first, there is no command, example or other testimony
in Scripture, can be given to show that the children of testimony in Scripture,
can be given to show that the children of believing parents should be kept from
baptism, until they could in their own persons actually repent, believe, and
make confession of their faith. But still when parents were converted to the
faith and baptized, their whole families were baptized with them. Neither is
there any word concerning the posterity of Christian parents, (who were borne
of them, being in covenant) to have been baptized in riper years.

Secondly, those commands and examples of baptizing them that repented,
believed, and professed the faith, are all of such as had before been out of
the New covenant, and were come of parents that had never been under the
covenant of the Gospel; and therefore with less reason can be applied to the
posterity of Christian parents, when they come to years of discretion, then
when they were infants. For those examples and commands show that so soon as
one is in covenant with God in the time of the Gospel, he has right unto
baptism. Neither can it without sin to God and injury to the person be
denied to him, but ought to be administered so soon as it may conveniently be
had. And therefore as they that had been out of covenant before, so soon as
they had repented and believed, (at least professed so much, which was
necessary to their being taken into covenant) ought to be baptized, as soon as
might be conveniently, Act. 8.36, 37, 38. Act. 10.47. Act. 22.16.
and might not without injury be hindered by others, or sin in themselves
neglect it: So the children of Christian parents being in covenant, as has
been proved, and cannot be denied with any show of truth, (that I say not,
without blasphemy) cannot without injury be denied baptism so soon as it may
expediently be administered to them.

This Argument for more evidence and clearenesse may be propounded thus.

The posterity of believers either must be baptized in their infancy, or when
they are able to make a profession of faith, and do it really, or they must not
be baptized at all.

But to hold that they should not be baptized at all; but that all the children
of believers should be debarred baptism though they prove never so godly, is
absurd and wicked; that they should be baptized only when they come to years
of discretion, and make profession of faith and repentance, there is no warrant
in Scripture, neither by command, practice, or otherwise, as has been showed.

Therefore they are to be baptized in infancy.

Arg. 7. If Christian women that are under the new covenant, have right to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and may and ought to be admitted thereunto
(neither can without great injury be detained therefrom) notwithstanding their
sex; though there be no clear, express, direct and immediate command or
example in the Scripture for the same: then may and ought infants of Christian
parents being in covenant, to be admitted to the Sacrament of Baptism; neither
can without great injury be debarred there from, notwithstanding their age;
though there were not any clear, express, direct and immediate command for the
same.

But Christian women have right to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and may
and ought to be admitted thereunto; neither can without great injury be
detained therefrom, notwithstanding their sex; though there be no clear,
express, direct and immediate command in Scripture, for women's being received
to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Therefore may and ought infants of Christian parents being in covenant, to be
admitted to the sacrament of baptism; neither can without great injury be
debarred therefrom, notwithstanding their age: though there were not any clear,
express, direct and immediate command or example in the scripture for the same.

For confirmation of the sequel in the major or first proposition note: First,
there is as much cause to question women's title to the Lords Supper, in regard
of their female sex, as there is cause of questioning childrens baptism,
because of their infant age; especially, considering the female was deprived of
one Sacrament in the old covenant; and there is no more (if so much) spoken in
Scripture for women's being admitted to that, then for infants being admitted to
this. Secondly, whatsoever can be said or gathered by good consequence from
Scripture for Christian women receiving the Lords Supper: the same, as much, or
more, may as truly, and by as clear consequence be said for the baptizing of
infants of Christian parents. Are Christian women of some standing, and
continuance in the covenant of grace, and so have title to the seal and
Sacrament that signifies growth in grace, and continuance in Christ? No less
are infants of Christian parents entered into the covenant of grace, by virtue
of the covenant made with their parents, as has been proved (and will not be
denied I think by any that cares and knows what he says) and so have title to
the seal of admission, or entrance into covenant. Have they (at least in
judgment of charity) right to the thing signified in the Lords Supper, viz.
Christ his body and blood, with all the benefits of his death and passion? No
less have these (in the like judgment of charity) right to the thing
signified in baptism, viz. the Blood and Spirit of Christ, pardon of sin and
regeneration. Were they being the inferior sex comprehended under the
superior sex of men in the command? Why might not these as well being
inferiors in age, and wholly at their parents dispose, be comprehended under
the command of baptizing the parents? Were they never forbidden nor excepted,
or exempted from the Lords Supper, though not expressly commanded to receive
it? The same may be said concerning childrens baptizing. Have women need of the
Eucharist to strengthen faith, and quicken them to obedience as well as men? so
have infants need of baptism to confirm faith in Gods gracious covenant, and
incite to obedience, their parents for the present, and themselves for the
future. Is it more then probable that (although at the first institution of the
Lords Supper, there were no women, because Christ had none present, but only
his own family, and peculiar flock of his Disciples who were all men; yet)
Act. 2.42. (if breaking bread unquestionably signify the use of the Sacrament
there) and Act. 20.7. and 1 Cor. 11. when mention is made of the Lords Supper,
there were women, though it is not expressed? No less probably may it be
gathered, that in those families that were baptized, there were some children.
In a word, were women admitted to eat of the sacrifices and sacrament of
Passover in the time of the old covenant among the Jews? It is known that
infants were received to the Sacrment of circumcision in the old Covenant
likewise. So that I see no reason why the one should be questionable when the
other is not called into question.

For the Assumption or minor proposition, it has two things in it to be
confirmed: first, that there is no direct, express, immediate command, or
example in the Scripture, for women receiving the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, more then for childrens being baptized. This is easily proved by
turning over to all those places of Scripture that speak of the Lords Supper,
which are not many, Mat. 26.26, 27, 28. Mar. 14.22, etc. Luke 22.19, etc. Act.
2.22. and 20.7. 1 Cor. 10. and 11. neither do I remember any other places that
speak expressly of this Sacrament, in all which places is no mention of women.

The second part of the assumption is, that notwithstanding this is not
expressed in so many words in Scripture, that believing women should receive the
sacrament of the Lords Supper; yet that they may and ought to be admitted,
neither can without injury be debarred: which is so universally (for ought I
know) acknowledged, that I never heard it questioned: And he that should
question it, might seem worthy of detestation or contempt, rather then answer,
or disputation. It may be confirmed by such grounds, as were intimated in my
confirmation of the proposition, And my reason why I say this is an
unquestionable truth, Believing women have right to the Lords Supper as well as
men, and that by Scripture warrant, is the received maxim in Divinity, that
what is contained in Scripture in express words, or may be gathered from the
Scripture by just consequence, has sufficient warrant from Gods word, and is a
matter of faith. Or, as it is expressed by some, thus. A scripture commands,
promises or threatens, whatsoever is contained in it, though not expressed;
and that is contained in it, which may justly, and truly be gathered from it,
though by never so many consequences or inferences. Now I hope none questions,
but that it may by just and undeniable consequences be proved, that believing
women as well as men, ought to receive the Supper, and so it has been proved,
that children ought to be baptized; otherwise if we will not admit that we have
sufficient scripture warrant, not only for that which is expressly set down in
scripture; but also for whatsoever by just consequence is or may be deduced
therefrom: we shall deprive our selves of all or most Scripture-promises or
privileges, and exempt our selves of all or most commands. Seeing what is set
down in the Scripture, is not spoken immediately and expressly to us in
particular, but only by just consequence or inference is derivable and
appliable unto us. And therefore let those that either out of ignorance and
scruple, or wilfulness and profaneness, think that there is warrant or
obligation for nothing to be done, as an act of faith and obedience, but what
is set down or they are commanded expressly and clearly in the scripture, in
so many words, take heed they do not at once, deny to God all obedience, and
to their souls all comfort in the promises. This last argument may be summed
up briefly thus.

If it be not warrantable for children to be baptized, then it is not lawful
for women to receive the Lords Supper; for as much may be said for that, as for
this, and against this as that. But the consequent is absurd; therefore the
antecedent is false. And this I would wish those women to consider, which by
reason of the weakness of their judgment, are aptest to be deceived, by those
that creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led
away with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge
of the truth. For if they should yield to this persuasion, their children must
not be baptized in their infancy, because the Scripture does not expressly
command it; On the same ground, they must yield that they themselves have
nothing to do with the Supper; and so by degrees they may be cheated of all
Gods Ordinances and their comforts, privileges, and obedience, on the same
grounds. As also I would wish that the foregoing argument may be considered by
them, who have refused to have their children baptized in infancy, and show
what ground they have in Scripture for baptizing them when they come to years
of discretion. I cannot see but they have as great cause to question, whether
ever their children may be baptized as whether they may baptize them in
infancy. Let them give an example or command in scripture, express or by just
consequence, of a believing Father which kept his child unbaptized, until he
actually believed, and then brought him to baptism. And then let them bethink
themselves whether the issue will not be, either their posterity must not be
baptized at all, (though they believe and repent never so much) and so they
cast themselves and their children out of Covenant; or they must be baptized
without warrant, or command (for all those examples and commands that are in
scripture of faith required in those that should be baptized, speak of them
who themselves and their parents till that time had not been under the new
Covenant.) Or lastly, if they will have those commands and examples for their
warrant and applyable to them; they and their children must become infidels,
and persons out of Covenant, and deny that ever they were in Covenant before,
or had received any spiritual and Evangelicall favor, that so now at last
entering newly into the Covenant of grace by faith and repentance, whereunto
they profess that they have been hitherto strangers, they may receive the
Sacrament or pledge of admission into Covenant. Which how injurious it would be
to Gods grace, and their own souls and posterity, if ever they tasted of Gods
mercy, or were but externally in Covenant, let all men judge.

It is usual in controversies of this kind, after Scripture proofs and
reasons deduced therefrom and grounded thereon, to produce the consent and
testimony of the Godly and learned, whether Ancient or Modern; especially, the
former, that were most near the Primitive purest times; And I doubt not if a
man had helps and leisure for searching Antiquity, it might be easily showed,
that the baptizing of Infants was long in use before Antichrist got to his
throne, (contrary to the opinion of this disputant) yea in the Primitive times
(unless Authors be silent in this point, (because no controvesie then rose
above this matter) or corrupted:) But as I have said, neither having the books
of the Ancients, that speak of this subject, nor time well to turn over those
volumes, if I had them, I must forbear. Only let the Reader again take notice
of these two first-mentioned and Prime Authors whom A. R. cites for his
purpose. For as touching Origens giving testimony, that baptizing children was
a ceremony or tradition of the Church, (not to examine how truly these words
are cited out of the Author, which I cannot for the reason aforementioned, but
to take the words on his trust) This testimony shows that in his time, who
lived but 200. years after Christ, it was a thing ordinarily practiced, and
(as I showed before in vindicating my third Argument) an unquestioned practice,
from which as an undeniable principle, that holy man seems to prove that
Infants of a day old are not free from sin. And let none be offended that it
is called a ceremony, though that name, as it is used for humane traditions
beside or contrary to Gods word, is odious, yet the word may in its proper
signification be used for any rite, either humane or divine, and both Baptism
and the Lords Supper may fitly be called ceremonies now; as well as Passover,
Circumcision, and other Divine Ordinances, instituted by God among the Jews.
Neither let any be troubled at the word Tradition, for that is used not only
to note things taken up by men, but also for the Doctrine of God, (...).
and Institutions of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 11.2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. And whereas it
is said, a ceremony or tradition of the Church, there is no necessity that it
should be understood that the Church was the Author thereof, but the subject
(in which it was used, and by which it was delivered to posterity) may well be
meant, by that phrase. So Augustine (who lived in the fourth Century after
Christ) calls it a custom (as he says) of the Church. Which yet he might
well do, and yet it be a divine ordinance, for all Gods ordinances are or
should be in custom in the Church. But if it were a custom of the Church in
Augustines time, (and a ceremony or tradition of the Church in Origens) sure it
is strange that it should be brought into use a thousand years after Christ,
as one of his Authors says, and be a devise of Antichrist, as he holds. For
customs are things that have been of long use and ancient standing. And
whereas some Authors speak of such as were Catechized and instructed by the
Church, before they were baptized, and must give a reason of their faith before
they were admitted to Baptism, and that they used to Baptize such at two times
of the year only. I believe it will be apparent to those who look into these
Authors, that they speak not of the children of believing parents: but that
those Catechumeni, who were first Catechized and then baptized, were Pagans
(who lived in those parts where the Church was) which were quite out of
Covenant, and therefore, because God did not so miraculously and suddenly bring
such to the faith, as in the times of the Apostles, some space was required to
instruct them in the principles of Religion, before they could be judged fit
for Baptism. But as I said, I may not meddle with the examination of his
authorities, nor produce any humane authority for this; seeing it has been
sufficiently confirmed by Arguments drawn from Scripture grounds; though it
were an easy thing, I suppose, to beat this Adversary with his own weapon. And
it might be an useful work if some Antiquary would take the pains to turn
over the ancient Writers, and show what they have left on record concerning
this subject.

I will come to make some practical use and improvement of this dispute, and
so end. Seeing all those Arguments that have been brought against the baptizing
of Infants, have been answered, and our Arguments for it defended (through the
help of God and in his fear, how sufficiently let others judge) so that the
weakness of the Adversaries Arguments has been detected, and the truth
vindicated against cavils, and it has been proved from Scripture grounds, that
children of parents within Covenant have right to Baptism; this discourse may
serve.

First, To admonish such as the Author of this pamphlet answered that are so
pragmaticall in broaching their new conceits, that they would impartially, and
without prejudice, weigh and examine their own tenants and grounds by the
Scripture, before they proceed with such confidence, and heat, to commend
them to, and urge them upon others, deride, rail upon and condemn, as
Antichristian and Deceivers, all that will not receive their doctrines as
infallible. I would wish them to consider whether this be the truth of God that
they plead for, and maintain, with such gross perverting, abuse, and
falsifying of Scripture, as has been showed throughout the book; whether
has the cause of God need to be upholden with manifest errors, and those of
very dangerous consequence, bordering on blasphemy, such as have been
discovered in this Author; as calling the Covenant under which the faithful
were before Christ, a Covenant of works, of Nature, and of condemnation: And
casting out all infants of the holiest Christian parents from the Covenant of
Grace, and making them equal with the Children of Turks, at least whiles
infants, and many errors of like sort, and that against plain Scriptures. Does
God need men's lies to maintain his truth? It may be, these errors, abuses of
Scriptures, and bold assertions of untruths, and those not one or two but many,
proceeded from ignorance, and zeal without knowledge. (For such is our
weakness of judgment, that we are apt to take up, embrace, and maintain
error for truth.) If so, I hope such persons upon conviction may be humbled and
give glory to God in confessing the power of his truth, in overcomming them.
But if otherwise they proceed out of pride, vaineglory, and they be thus
active out of a desire to gather Disciples after them, that they may be
followed and admired of the simple, creeping into houses and leading captive,
Act. 20.30.
silly women laden with iniquity, ever learning but never coming to the
knowledge of the truth; ^ Tim 3.6, 7.
pretending to serve the Lord Jesus, when indeed they serve their own bellies,
and by good words, Romans 16.17.
and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple; professing zealously to
affect Gods people, Gal. 4.17.
that they may exclude and withdraw them from Christ's Ministers: I would wish
them to consider, that though Satan's Ministers may be suffered for a time to
transform themselves into the Ministers of righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.13. and
14.15.
yet their end shall be according to their works. And though there may be false
Teachers amongst Gods people, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.
who may privily bring in damnable heresies, denying the Lord that bought them,
they shall bring upon themselves swift destruction. Yea, though they so far
insinuate themselves into people, that many shall follow their pernicious
ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of, etc. yet
their judgment lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not. Neither will
God suffer such abuse and perverting of his Scriptures, venting of errors,
railing against authority, speaking evil of his Ministers, seeking to seduce
his people, and impoysoning many unstable souls, with fond opinions, go
unpunished; 1 Cor. 11.19. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.
Though for a time he may (for the correction and trial of his own people, the
discovering of the sound, and punishing of the unsound, by giving them over to
strong delusions to believe lies) suffer such persons to escape; yet surely men
at last shall know what it is with a great show of Scripture, and under
pretense of zeal, to oppose the truth and draw people from the ways of
holiness. I know the best of Gods servants may err in judgment, as well as
fail in practice; But such will bless God for discovering their error, and
be thankful to the instrument which he uses for that end, and to such
doubtless God is ready to show mercy in forgiving their errors. But as for
them who for their credit sake (as they think) when their errors are
discovered, and opposed, shall be more bold in asserting them, fly out in
railing and bitterness against those that would have given an helping hand to
the reducing of them to the truth, set their wits a work, to invent new
Arguments to maintain falsehood against their own conscience, and so to uphold
one error by another, (for no truth will patronize an error) and consequently
run from one fond opinion into another; such we are commanded after once or
twice admonition to reject, Tit. 3.10, 11.
as knowing that they are subverted and sin being condemned of themselves.

Secondly, It may serve for a warning to those who have been too apt to listen
to the persuasion of such busy pragmaticall persons; that they should not be
so simple, as to think the greatest confidence, and boldest peremptorinesse,
and fairest show of zeal, is an infallible sign of the best cause maintained,
or best heart in the maintainer. Hypocrisy often is attended with appearance of
zeal, and ignorance is ordinarily accompanied with peremptorinesse. For none
usually are more pragmaticall, busy, and bold, then they that are most
ignorant; 1 Timothy 1.13.
none more desirous to teach others, there they that understand not what they
say, nor whereof they affirm; none so unruly and hard to have their mouths
stopped, perverting whole houses, by teaching those things which they ought
not, as those that are but vain talkers, and mere deceivers, when they come
to be tried. Christians should try the Spirits, whether they be of God or no,
not believing a tenent forthwith, because men come with it to us, 1 John 4.1.
under a pretense of love, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15.
zeal, humility, etc. Seeing Satan can change himself into the liknesse of an
Angel of light, and his Ministers are taught his art. God has given us his
word as a touchstone, that we may try all things and hold fast that which is
good. He has appointed the Ministers and Ministry of his word to this end,
that we may not be henceforth such children, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 14.
as to be carried about with every wind of vain doctrine, by the sleight of
men and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive; and seldom
do we see any ensnared in these, and such like errors, till they leave the
Ministry of the word; the special means which God has appointed to prevent
them. It is true all Christians ought to make trial of their tenets, practice
and worship, and not take them up merely of custom, because they are
generally received. But it is not safe for people to leave the Ministry of the
word, and hearken to none but those that will humor them in their opinions and
say as they say. It is an argument that peoples opinions and practices are
works of darkness, when they refuse to come to the light to have them tried.
How miserably may Satan and his instruments abuse silly souls, if they can
persuade them to come into no company, but such where they may be confirmed in
their errors? I would entreat such to take heed lest being drawn to renounce
their Baptism received in infancy (which is the drift of these men, by
persuading them that it is no Baptism) and keeping their Children unbaptized,
they cast themselves and their posterity out of Covenant, reject God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, to whom they were consecrated in Baptism by
their parents, and so cast away their Christianity, their souls and salvation
all at once; and not only their own, but their posterities too. It cannot but
be very offensive to God, whereas he has offered himself to be our God from
our infancy, and taken us into his family, having made the promise and covenant
to our parents and us their children, and sealed the same Covenant to us, and
really bestowed on us (at least some of us, and is ready to bestow on us all if
we be not wanting to our selves) what was in Baptism sealed, namely remission
of sins, regeneration, and the spirit of adoptions; if all this
notwithstanding we shall hearken to the enemy of Gods glorious grace and our
souls greatest comfort, persuading us that neither we were in Covenant with
God, in our infancy, by virtue of the Covenant made with our parents; neither
our children in any better condition then the children of Turks and Pagans,
until the time of actual faith. If we set so little by Gods ancient mercies
conveyed to our parents and us successively, for many generations, according to
his merciful promise and covenant; let us take heed, lest we provoke him to
cast us off, and give us over to strong delusions, because we have followed
lying vanities, and forsaken our own mercies.

Secondly, seeing the children of the faithful have right to the promises of
those blessings which are sealed in Baptism, and not only the believing
Governors of families themselves, but also the whole families were baptized,
the children of the faithful are holy, within covenant and have right to
Baptism, as well as infants in the Jewish Church had right to Circumcision;
upon which and the like grounds it has been proved that they ought to be
baptized: This should call upon Christian parents that have or shall dedicate
their children to God in Baptism, and all the posterity of the faithful that
have been consecrated to God in their infancy by Baptism, both highly to
esteem this privilege and ancient faederall mercy of God; so that they do
not suffer themselves to be cheated of it by impostors: And so thankfully,
holily and fruitfully to use it, that it may be a means to strengthen their
faith, and confirm them in the assurance of Gods love, and a special spur
to holiness, and curb to restrain from profaneness; and by all means take
heed of so abusing it, that it should be an occasion of Gods dishonor (by
causing this holy ordinance to be blasphemed,) the offense and stumbling of
others, and their own greater condemnation. And this they should the rather
look unto:

First, because so many Christians by profession bring their children to
baptism merely of custom; neither regarding the grounds on which, nor the end
for which, nor the manner how, they ought to do this; neither considering the
mercies which God offers to them, and their children, in this sacred ordinance,
nor yet the duties whereunto they and their children are herein obliged; as if
Gods ordinances whereunto he calls us, the privileges which he bestows on us,
and the duties whereunto he binds us were but matters of fashion or sport. And
in like manner, many when they come to years of discretion, no more regard
their baptism then a trifle, hardly so much as inquiring, why they were
baptized.

Secondly, because as the Apostle said of circumcision, Romans 2.25.
that it became no circumcision, if men kept not the Law: so may I say,
Baptism becomes no baptism to those which walk not according to the Gospel.
Let us not think that the mere work done makes us sufficient Christians. If
men persuade themselves they may live ignorantly, profanely, and carnally; and
yet hope to be saved, because they have been baptized; let them read 1 Cor. 10.
verse. 1. to the 12. for confutation of their error, and discovery of the
dangerousnesse and damnablenesse of that opinion.

Thirdly, as the name of God was blasphemed by the Gentiles, through the
vicious lives of the Jews, Romans 2.24.
who were by circumcision consecrated to God, and made his people by
profession: so is God, and Christ blasphemed, and this holy Ordinance of
Baptism spoken evil of, by occasion of the wickedness of many that have
been baptized. For not to speak of the blasphemy of Turks, Pagans, and
Papists, cast upon the Christian Religion, for the profaneness of Protestants;
do not we hear that some hence make bold to speak evil of the Baptism of
Children, as if it were the cause of all profaneness and impiety that is in
the Church? which though it be a most false calumny, (and I know not how it
can be excused from blasphemy;) For are not many of those that were baptized in
infancy, pious, wise, and garcious Chrstians? How can baptism then in
infancy be the cause of profaneness; seeing where the cause is, it produces
the effect? Were not there among the Jews as many profane, ignorant, and
disordered persons, as among us? shall men say, that circumcising their
children in infancy was the cause of it? that were plain blasphemy. Was
there not notorious profaneness in the Primitive Church, as among the
Corinthians, etc. Was baptism, whether of infants, (which yet I think they
will not say) or of professors of faith and repentance, the cause of it? This
imputation a Christian ear will abhor. Is not the word of God a savor of
death and occasion of hardening to some? the Sacrament of the Lords Supper an
occasion to some of temporal and spiritual judgments? Yet what Christian
dare say, that these are the causes of sins in the Church? Yet I say, though
this be a false and wicked imputation, that the baptizing of infants, is the
cause of evils in the Church: let them look to it that give occasion of such
blasphemy.

Fourthly, all Christians should be stirred up the rather to make a good
improvement of this privilege of Christian parents, in having God not only
for their God, but also for the God of their children; and so of the baptizing
of their children, because we see Satan so busy to rob them of this most
comfortable doctrine, and precious privilege, concerning childrens being in
covenant, by virtue of the covenant made with their parents; and so to drive
Christians to renounce their baptism received in infancy, and dissuade them
from tendering their children to God in baptism, and so to overthrow a maine
ground of our comfort in Gods ancient love to us, and a special motive to
obedience.

Fifthly, in a word; If we do not prize, and profit by this ancient love of
God to us, which he has showed us from our birth, in taking us into external
covenant, wherein he is ready to bestow the internal blessings: If we do not
take God for our God, repent of sin, and believe in Christ, according to the
obligation of the covenant of grace, that was sealed to us in baptism: If the
baptized do not give up themselves to God actually in their own persons when
they come to years of discretion: And if parents be not careful to bring up
their children, whom they have presented to God in baptism; we must know that
all these mercies of God offered unto us; all the professions of faith and
obedience we have made, will rise up in judgment against us and increase our
condemnation, above the condemnation of those that never were in outward
covenant. Other men are not so fast tied unto God as we that are baptized, who
are now, no more our own, but Gods tied unto him by covenant, which if we
break, it will be to our greatest peril.

If it be demanded wherein this duty of highly prizing, and holily improving
this privilege of baptism in infancy consists? I answer.

First, we should labor to be well instructed and settled in the grounds of
this action, viz. baptizing infants, which are Gods gracious covenant and
promise, etc. as has been showed before; that we may give a reason of our
being baptized in infancy. That seeing our privilege bestowed by God, we may
not suffer our selves to be sophisticated out of it by any; so as to be driven
from our hold in the covenant of mercy, which God has made to us and ours. To
this end we should solidly study the doctrine of Grace and of Baptism, and
those Arguments that have been before handled. The reason why we so easily be
driven by temptations from faith, and obedience, duties, and privileges; is
because we do not well meditate on, and thoroughly digest the grounds thereof.
But when we are well and thoroughly persuaded on Scripture grounds, that this is
a duty enjoined, and a privilege bestowed by God, we shall see there is cause
to contend for the faith delivered to the Saints, Iud. 3.

Secondly, let parents look that they offer up their children to God in
baptism, with faith, prayer, and unfeigned purpose of heart to consecrate them
wholly unto God. And that they may make it appear that they do so indeed, let
them look that they give up themselves unto God in holy obedience, repentance
and faith, praying earnestly for their children; and when they be capable of
instruction, let them give them good example, bring them up in the fear and
instruction of the Lord, putting them in mind of the covenant whereinto God
has taken them, and use all holy means to bring them to actual faith, and
holiness; and let them know that this is a necessary duty required at their
hand, whereunto (at least implicitly) they obliged themselves, when they
tendered their children to baptism, wherein they may not be negligent without
grievous sin of disobedience to, and mocking of God, and most heinous
injury, and dangerous hazard to their own and their childrens souls, Deuteronomy.
6.7. Prove. 4.4. Ephesians 6.4.

Thirdly, all those that have been baptized, remembering that now they are not
their own, but given up to God in the covenant of grace, and solemnly tendered
to his Majesty in this sacred Ordinance of Baptism in the presence of the
Angels, and the congregation of the faithful, (which act of their parents was
not arbitrary, but necessary; and that whereunto they were absolutely bound by
Covenant, viz. to take God for their God, and the God of their children; and
give up themselves and their children to God) All Christians, I say,
considering this that they were given up unto God in baptism, and that God
graciously took them into covenant, and admitted them into his family, before
they knew the right hand from the left, must (so soon as they are able to do
a moral act) give up themselves unto God in their own persons, voluntarily,
and gladly assenting unto, and ratifying that covenant which their parents
entered into in their behalf; seeing it is not now in their own choice to be
of what Religion or conversation they will. They are bound to be Christians and
Saints, and that not only by virtue of the creation, preservation, and
redemption which God has wrought for men: but also, by solemn promise, vow,
and covenant. Insomuch as those who having been baptized, live in wilful
ignorance, superstition, unbelief, profaneness, covetousness, following the
lusts of the flesh, continue all that while in most treacherous breach of
covenant, and rebellion against God, whose servants they have bound themselves
to be, and yet serve his sworn enemies; namely, the devil and their own
lusts. So that they have not only forfeited their bonds, and deserved for ever
to be deprived of all those glorious and incomprehensible benefits contained in
the covenant of grace: but also have deserved to be dealt with as perfidious
Apostates, and traitorous revolters from their Lord and King. Which breach of
Covenant, though the Lord will not impute to those which seasonably, heartily,
and sincerely repent, when they come to see what they have done (for they are
in a covenant of grace which admits repentance:) yet when people come to
consider how they have sinned against God in this kind, must be the more
humbled by this consideration, that so many years after they were consecrated
unto God, they dealt traitorously and rebelliously against him; and for the
future be the more careful to redeem the time, and by so much more diligently
and zealously to honor him for ever after, by how much careless and loose
they have been before. But they that do not thus repent, and take care to
keep touch with God, shall know to their woe, Gal. 6.7.
that God will not be mocked; and that it had been better many ways never to
have been baptized, or heard of the covenant of grace, Eccles. 5.4, 5. 2 Pet.
2.21.
then to live wickedly and impenitently in a profession of Christianity. Let
Christian parents whet these and such like considerations on their children;
yea let all Christians from the youngest that are capable to the oldest, whet
them on themselves, and one on another, that they may be stirred up to give up
themselves wholly and really to God.

Fourthly, whenever Christians find themselves tempted to sin, or drawn
from holiness, inclined to looseness, or backward to good duties: let them
look backward unto their baptism, and their consecration unto God, and their
abrenunciation of the world, and the devil, transacted therein: and remember
that they were buried with Christ in baptism, and professed a death unto
sin, and a resurrection to holiness, so that now it were a monstrous and
absurd thing to live in sin, as for a dead man to rise, or a living man to
lie in the grave. Remember you are not your own, but Christ's, who is your Lord
and Master, and so resolve to continue still doing his work, and resisting his
and your souls enemies. Thus the Apostle teaches us from baptism to fetch
arguments of sanctification, both for the mortifying of our corruption, and for
the quickening of us to holiness, Romans 6.1, 2, 3, 4, etc.

Fifthly, In times of doubt, desertion, temptation to distrust, etc. Christians
should have recourse to the consideration of their baptism, and remember the
ancient love of God to them in their infancy, in taking them into his family,
and undertaking to be their God in baptism, wherein the whole Trinity,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, became ours, giving us under seal assurance of
pardon, and peace, direction and support, perseverance and salvation. So that
let our temptations, miseries, and discomforts, be what they will; if we can
but cast our eye back on baptism, and the covenant of grace sealed therein, we
may gather strong consolation therefrom. And if we can in these and such like
particulars testify our prizing and improvement of our baptism, we shall not
easily be cheated of it, or drawn to question whether we were ever truly
baptized, seeing we daily find the comfortable fruits and effects thereof: not
shall we give occasion to others to queston whether our Infant baptism were
true baptism, when we give a real demonstration to them that by virtue of the
covenant of grace sealed therein unto us, we walk as Christians in all holy
conversation.

Sixthly, this may serve to stir up the Ministers of Christ, (among whom I
profess my self the meanest and unworthiest of any) that seeing there are so
many pragmaticall deceivers abroad to seduce Gods people, not afraid to call in
question well-grounded truths, buzzing into the ears of the simple, such
things as tend to the overthrow of Christian consolation and cheerful
obedience; speaking perverse things, by which they overturne whole houses:
This, I say, should stir us up if there be any conscience of our own
weighty duty, and dreadful charge, any spark of compassion to men's souls,
love to the truth, or zeal for Gods glory, to endeavor to prevent the
inundation of errors, rents, distractions, licentiousness and profaneness
that will unavoidably follow, upon the plucking up of these floodgates, to the
overflowing of the Church, if some speedy remedy be not applied, which belongs
to the Ministers of Christ principally: should it not grieve us to hear this
holy function of the Ministry, spoke of so disdainfully (as it is in this
Pamphlet answered) as if our Ministers were but a company of ignorant,
covetous, and ambitious men. And oh would, too great occasion of this
imputation were not given, by too many of our Ministers! Woe to the world,
(says Christ) because of offenses; Luke 17.1, 2.
but woo to them by whom offenses come. They that run into these errors of
Anabaptisme by occasion of the badnesse of some Ministers, shall not thereby be
excused, nor escape the woe, unless they repent: But it had been better for
those men, never to have meddled with the Ministry; yea to have been thrown
into the bottom of the sea, with a millstone about their necks, when they
undertook the charge of souls, who by their ignorance, laziness,
covetousness, pride, and superstition, have given occasion unto some to rail
on our Ministry, as Antichristian. And it is apparent that these errors are
grown so rife and over-spreading through the silencing of good Ministers and
setting up and maintaining of such as have been careless and scandalous.
Therefore it greatly concerns all good Ministers to seek a remedy to this
evil, 1 Timothy 4.15. 2 Timothy 2.15. 2 Timothy 4.2.
by giving attendance to reading, exhortation, and doctrine. To study to show
themselves approved workmen of God, that need not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of truth; yea to preach the word in season, and out of
season; rebuking and reproving, and exhorting with all long-suffering and
doctrine, seeing the time is come when people will not endure sound doctrine,
but after their own lusts, heap to themselves Teachers having itching ears.
If ever they had need, (it is now) to hold fast the faithful word, that they may
be able by sound doctrine, both to exhort, Tit. 1.9, 10, 11.
and convince the gainsayers. Because there are many unruly vaine-talkers, and
deceivers, whose mouths must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching
things which they ought not. There is great need that Ministers should take
heed to themselves, Act. 20.28, 29, 30.
and to the flock over which the holy Ghost has made them Overseers, to feed
the Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood; seeing grievous
wolves are entered among us, not sparing the flock; and from among our selves
are men risen which speak perverse things to draw disciples after them. These
exhortations of the holy Ghost, and many more in Scripture to call us to our
duty, were never more seasonable and necessary. In obedience to which charges
of God, let us therefore by painful study, constant preaching, fervent
prayer, and holy conversation, fit our selves for, employ our selves in, and
procure authority to, the work of the Ministry, that we may be free from the
blood of all men, and that the people may be no more as children carried about
with every wind of doctrine; nor for want of plenty of pure streams, be
forced to drink up the puddle waters of errors and delusions.

Lastly, The consideration of the pragmaticalnesse of many in these days, to
impoyson the minds, and trouble the hearts of Gods people, with strange
doctrines and dangerous errors; who do not only creep into houses to
pervert the simple, but also are so bold as to divulge their opinions to the
danger of many souls, as it appears by this Pamphlet answered, and the
effects it has wrought: The consideration, I say, of the boldness of such
persons, and of the distractions and unsettlednesse of the hearts of Gods
people by occasion thereof, should stir us up every one in his place, to do
what we can for applying a remedy to this miserable distraction and spreading
sore. Let us receive the truth in the love thereof, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. 1 John
4.1.
lest God be provoked to give us over to strong delusions to believe lies. Let
us not be so fond as to believe every spirit, but try the spirits whether they
be of God. Let us labor for soundness of judgment, that we may discern
between things that differ. But especially, that we may procure a general
remedy not only for our selves, but for our whole kingdom also. Let us by our
repentance, and prayers, and all pious endeavors, religious and civil, help
our Religious, Honorable, (and with all praise and thankfulness to God ever to
be mentioned) Parliament, into whose gracious hearts the Lord has put a
sincere desire, and stirred up to express an holy resolution of endeavoring
to find out a remedy to this evil, that their holy endeavors may be blessed.

and error unmasked and suppressed, Gods peoples hearts may be quieted. That
this means is likely by the blessing of God to prove effectual, if our sins
do not hinder and deprive us of it and its expected blessing, may appear by
Christ's promises Matt. 18.18, 19, 20. and the Apostles practice together with
the Primitive Church, Act. 15.1, 2, 3. to 32.



1 Timothy 1.4. Rev. 2.2.
and the Discipline of Jesus Christ amongst us. That an Authoritative charge
may be laid on them that bring in strange doctrine, that they proceed not to
disturb the Church. And those which say they are Apostles but are not, may be
found liars. That by it all truth, piety, and sincerity, may be established,
approved, and maintained, with all means furthering the same. And that all
things that tend to the maintaining of superstition, profaneness, and
ignorance, and occasioning of divisions, jarres, and separations, may be
removed. That these things have been, and still are intended and labored for,
by that Honorable and Gracious Council, and that Religious and Learned
Assembly, we have had large testimonies. It remains, that we find out and
remove (as much as lies in us) what hinders such a mercy, most humbly and
earnestly entreating our gracious God, on whose blessings depends the success
of all holy endeavors, and in whose hands are the hearts of all men: That he
will still prosper the labors of his servants, and stir up the hearts of
those whose concurrence in this most Christian design is of great concernment,
to join with them, and further them therein: and remove out of the way
whatsoever are the impediments thereof. 1 Cor. 1.10.
That so occasions of divisions being removed, we may be perfectly joined
together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, Ephesians. 4.3. and 12, 13,
14, 15.
in the truth. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace. That so the body of Christ may be edified; till we come in the unity of
the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. That we henceforth be no
more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine,
by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive. But speaking the truth in love, may grow up in him in all things,
which is the head, even Christ: to whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost,
three Persons, but one only wise God our Savior, be all Glory, and Majesty,
Dominion and Power, now and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

