THE COPPIE OF A LETTER From Sir Thomas Fairfax his Quarters to the Parliament,
concerning the great Battle between Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX and Goring at Langport
on Thursday the 10. of July 1645.

Where were slain,

300. Dead upon the place.

Many carried to Bridgewater.

Taken prisoners. 6. Colors. 14. Lieutenant Colonels and Majors. 100.
Captains and Officers of Note. 2000. Prisoners.


Taken besides. 1200. Horse. 40. Colors of Horse and Foot. 4000. Arms for
horse and foot. 2. Pieces of Ordnance. 6. Cartloades of Ammunition. All their
Bag and Baggage that was in the field.


L. Genesis Cromwells speech in the head of the Army.

2. Garrisons taken from them.

A list of the Chiefest Commanders on our side, that were killed: or wounded.

And in what manner the Enemies are dispersed into their several quarters.

Also how Mayor General Massey the day before took Lieutenant General
Porter, Lieutenant General of Gorings Horse 2 Segeant Majors. 9. Colors. 6.
Captains. 250. Horse. Many inferior Officers. 200. Prisoners and diverse
slain.


And the Enemy pursued to Bridgewater, and all the passages blockt up both by
land and water.

Appointed to be Printed, and pubished according to Order.

Printed By Barnard Alsop, and Jane Coe.

THE COPY OF A LETTER FROM Sir THOMAS FAIRFAXES Quarters, read in the House of
Commons on Saturday July 12. 1645.
AN account I gave you in my last, of our Affairs till yesterday, I left Goring
with his whole Army, at Langport; since they be pleased to take a short account
of our Actions, yeasterday we advanced to Sutton, drawing out that part of our
Army which we had into Sutton Field, the rest being four thousand five hundred
Horse and Dragoones (at the least) under the command of Major Genesis Massy, were
on the other side of the river, and those 8 regiments of Foot which we had at
Nasby field, were also quartered at Martock to M^ssey advanced with his hor^se,
and Dragoones, having foot to back them to North-ca^ry (being ordered to
streighten the enemies quarters, and to hinder them from any plundering
exercise; It seems 500 of them being upon a design out, and having no
intelligence of his being in motion, was surprised being in a careless
posture; fell on them: being (as I take it) 9 Colors, 200 prisoners, and about
250 horse* slew about 30* we in the mean time were drawn up within a mile of
Lang-port, with those horse and foot the General had with him, not knowing of
his engagement. And there being 3 Rivers between him, and us, and the way
almost twelve miles march, the last might we quartered at Sutton, and this
morning by three of the clock, drew out into Sutton field, having with us but
seven Regiments of horse; viZ. The Generals (formerly called Lieutenant
General Crumwels) Whalleyes Varmodeus, Grac^soes, Rich, Fleetwoods, and
Butlers, which were not in all 2000 horse, of foot we had all, but the
Musketeers of three Regiments, having sent for them the last night from
Matlock, early in the morning the enemies appeared in the field, and about 7 a
clock they had made themselves masters of a p^sse which lay in the midst
between our body and theirs, had lined the hedges between us and them, with at
least 2000 musketeers; so that the passage to them was extreme dangerous,
being so straight, that four horse could hardly pass abrest, and that up to
the belly in water; they lying so in flanks and fronts to receive us. In that
posture they stood till nigh eleven of the clock, having in the interim sent
away most of their Train, and Baggage, led horse and other lumber, to
Bridgwater; being resolved to make good their retreat thither, which they
conceived they could, having such an advantageous pass thither; we
understanding their intentions by some Scouts, and other countrymen, resolved
to charge them; and accordingly drew down a commanded party of musketeers to
beat them from the hedges, which was done with gallant resolution; advancing
the same time with two Regiments of horse into the lane, all that we could draw
up in the front was but a single troop, and that comm^nded by Bethell, the
enemy standing ready with 3 bodies of horse, of about 1000 to charge him, he
with a single troop charged and broke two of their divisions, of about 400
received the charge of the third division both in front and flank, was somewhat
overborne at last, and forced to retire to the Generals Reg meant, which was
about 100 yards behind D borrough, with the Generals troop sheltred him by his
flank to rally, and charge up himself with about 200 horse of the Generals
Regiment, disposest the enemy and set them all a running, gained freedom by it
for all our horse and foot, to draw into bodies, sent the enemy running, not
being able to endure another charge, the General, Lieutenant General, and
some other officers upon the hill, beholding the gallant charges commended it,
for the most excellent piece of service that ever was in England, we had them
in chase almost to Bridg-water, having put them to the clean rout, that ever
any enemy were put to; what the number of the slain be I cannot tell you, being
searse come from the chase. The prisoners come in already are 900. and I
conceive there will come in as many as will make 2000. and 12000 horse at the
least; for Colors I am uncertain, I dare say at least 40. the Arms at least
4000. 2 piece of Ordnance I saw, and diverse carriages of Ammunition, and to
make it a complete victory, he pursued the enemy through Langport, having
gained the Garrison, and though they fired the town just at the Bridge, to
hinder the chase, yet we followed the victory through the fire, the success of
this victory must be ascribed next unto God) to the good conduct of the
General, and Crumwels following the chase through Langpord, where he himself
passed through the fire flaming on both sides of him. The enemy cried out, they
are now utterly undone, and that the King must now go into Ireland. This
victory was opportune, In regard, had they stayed but three days longer,
Goring would have had a reinforcement of six thousand horse and foot from
Greenffeld and the King, they being transporting their forces as fast as can be
to Mainhead, Watchhead, and Uphill, there being 1500 that landed at Uphill,
came to Bridgewater yesterday. Sir, this is all at present from your
affectionate and humble servant.

Langport July 10. 7 at night.

The report of the Scout that brought the aforesaid letter, which is here
placed by way of postscript for further satisfaction*
On wednesday the ninth of July 1645. there were 1500 of the enemies commanded
by Liutenant general Porter, who lay at Abersile, on whom Major general Massy
fell before the Enemy were aware of it; with Colonel Massy were Lieutenant
Bull, Mayor Sanderson, Colonel Web, and some other officers, who with the
common soldiers behaved themselves gallantly, the enemy about 3 of the clock
grazing their horses, and having made works about Abersile Church, and in
exceeding good quarters, little thinking Massy so near, had set a small guard
of foot at the towns end, Major general Massy drew his men into two divisions,
for each end of the town one, himself commanded one, and Capt. Gutredge the
other, which was but asmall party: for C. Massy commanded the main body
himself, Massies men marched with green boughs in their hats, C. Gutridge
coming to the towns end, found the hedges lined with Musketeers at the
southwest end of the town, Cap. Fransway, a Dutch Captain, commanded a party to
fall on the one side of the ambuscadors, and Capt. Gutredge on the other. The
Dutch Captain when he was charged by the enemy, began to face about, which
impeded Capt. Gutredges prosecution of the business, yet the rest of the
officers and soldiers, with the wisdom of Capt. Gutredge, ended the business
so well, that they beat up their ambuscadors for all that, and drove them quite
away: in the mean time Mayor Gere all Massy marched up to the other side of the
Town, Colonel Cook having the command of the forlorn hope, who in like manner
had lined the hedges at that end of the town, and Col: Massy with Co: Cook and
the rest, raised them, and those with the rest at the other end of town,
followed so hard upon the enemy, that they drove them all from the town,
pursuing them within two miles of Langport, and took many Arms in Abersoile.
Mayor General Massys word was Wales, the enemy staid not give any word at
all. On Thursday the tenth of July Sir Tho: Fairfax marched toward the enemy,
discovered them when he was with his body by the windmils, between Lamport and
Summerton, the enemy were then on the Hills in Lamport field about two mile and
a half off, the water being between them. About eleven of the clock they drew
out, and about one of the clock Mayor Bethel charged the enemy: the fight was
very hot, and lasted about two hours, about 3 of the clock Goring was got
himself into Bridgewater, Prince Charles bein gone from thence before, and the
Lord Hopton with him to Barnstable with three Troops of Horse, to raise what
forces they could in those parts, to join wi^h those which were to come from
Greenvill. Rupert was gone to the King before also to send what strength he
could to ioyn with them, and Greenvils horse, as appeared afterward, were then
upon their march toward Goring, and also Sir John Barkley was before drawn off,
upon some discontent or other toward Exceter, but, is believed, returning with
Greenvill. Sir Thomas Aston was then with Goring, who has a regiment in which
are good store of Papistr, but he ran away like a base Coward. and the
greatest part of his Regiment are taken, of which the poor county men are not
a little glad, for they have been extreme cruel in plundering. Sir Lewis Dives
was then in Sherburn, it seems he loves a garrison better then the field, and
holds it more secure. The Cavaliers seem to be very sorrowful for their losses,
we perceive by them, that they have lost some considerable men, but will not be
known who they are.

Sir Thomas Fairfax quartered that night at Oller, sour miles from Bridgwater,
Mayor General Massy is joined with him, where he blocked up that side of their
garrison, Lieutenant General Crowell making a speech in the head of the Army,
declaring how the enemies passage by water might be stopped up, whereupon a
party of 1500 horse and Dragoons were sent to block up the west side for the
same purpose

A list of Major general Masseys victory at North-Carry on Wednesday the 9.
of ^uly. 16^5.
1500. Routed which were surprised by Colonel MASSEY. 9. Colors taken from
the said party of 1500. Levetenant General Porter Lieuetenant General of
Gorings horse taken prisoner. 2500. Horse and arms taken from them at the same
time. 2. Serjant Majors taken prisoners, and 6 Captains. 200. of their
inferior officers and common men taken prisoners.
A list of the particulars what was taken, and how many flaine at the Routing
of Goring by Sir Thomas Fairfax, at Langport on Thursday the 10. of July, 1645.
300. Slain, and left dead upon the place. Diverse officers Carried dead and
some wounded into Bridgewater. 6. Collonells, some of which are notorious
incendiaries 14. Leivenant Collonells and Sejeant Majors. 100. Captains, and
Reformadoes, and other officers of note. 2000. Prisoners: whereof diverse
inferior officers.
Taken besides
1200. horse. 40. Colors of horse, and foot, 4000. Arms pistols Carbines,
firelocks, muskets pikes etc. 2. Pieces of ordnance. 6. Cart load of
Ammunition, powder match, etc. All their bagg, and baggage which they had left
in the field
The loss on our side.
2. Reformado Captains: one of them a dutch man both slain. Collonell Butlers
Captain Leivetenant slain, and his Cornet let fall his Colors, but they were
honorably regained. Colonel Butler, a slight cut on the arm. Colonel Edward
Cook shot on the mouth, only on the upper lip, the hurt not much.
FINIS.

