PSEUCHOGRAPHIA ANTHROPOMAGICA: OR, A Magical Description OF THE SOUL: Wherein
is set forth The Nature, Genesis and Exodus of it.

By Agricola Carpenter,

Vivitur ingenio. LONDON, Printed for John Brown, at the Sign of the gilded
Acorn in Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

depiction of Apollo and the labor of the author Apollo

Redit Agricolae labor actus in Orbem. Spes alit Agricolam. Non est e Terris
Mollis ad astra Via

The Authors EPISTLE to his Honored Friend TEM. Hermophrod.
THis imperfect brat and Embryo of my brain was dedicated thine in its first
conception; it has not been the labor of many days, or the product of
serious hours, but the repose of my minutiall vacancies; therefore as its
travail has been but short, and its birth basty, so it cannot evade the
greatest monstrosity without the largest candor, which as it cannot hope for
from the world, whose eyes behold with prejudice, so this is not intended for
it, but thee, who knows to entertain a Truth though it cannot plead
prescription, and embrace a verity without a Panceroll. Superstitious
credulity will condemn me as a heretic, and by the world (whose native dialect
is reproach) I stand excommunicated; I walk secure while Truth is my passport,
and as long as I enjoy her for my gantlet, my station is above the reach of
envy. If I have failed in my relation, I hope that Ingenuitie will extenuate
the lapses of my minority, and I promise my more mature judgment shall
correct what my flexible infancy has unwarily imbibed. I cannot contest with
Calumnies, nor know I for the style of heretic, to return my adversaries the
name of Antichrist: that devotion I owe to knowledge, engages me upon
conviction to repeal by Writ of Error what they accuse as heresy: till then
my zeal must crave its liberty (the end being knowledge) cannot be suppressed;
it has many heads, which if it lose its current in one place, it will break
forth into some other; thus Truth can triumph in its martyrdom, and being naked
can best defend it self.

Since the depravitie of the protoplast distraction has been imposed upon the
weal of knowledge, and the obstinacy of posterity has increased it to a
paroxysme of madness beyond the power of Hellebore, unless the discretion and
policy of future ages coerce credulity, and commit to flames what our
stubborn parents have obtruded upon the tender infancy of their successors:
Lame knowledge that expects no Cure
Till books confess a Calenture.
Every man's soul is his living library, whose activity must needs flagg in the
channels of an other body, and whose wings are clipped whilst its nature is
confined to a Ne plus ultra, and thus to expire in the arms of our fathers, is
a slavery equalizing the torment of Mezentius.

Dear Friend, that ingenuity I always found in thee whilst we were Chamber
fellows, does promise to me thy connivance at those errors that shall occur,
and a minoration of grosser crimes to venial peccadilloes, and likewise an
entertainment of the cradle-service of this disguised brat, whose little
desert, though it cannot expect thy perusal, yet its diligence to kiss thy
hands, may merit thy acceptance, whereby he shall be encouraged to higher
designs, whose highest ambition is to be.

thy Friend to serve thee AG. CARPENTER.

An Antidote Rideo. Fortiter contemno.
To Mr A. C.
My much to be admired Friend,
I Sufficiently know that these dropps of mine cannot add to that stream of
Eloquence which has such a current through the veins of that little Book of
thine; I pronounce to the world that I am none of the least Travelers, neither
have I so much delighted in the smoke of my own chimney, as not to seek out the
society of the most learned men: to find thy second I despair; Epictetus
Lanthorn is superannuate: to rob the world of thy invention, were to degenerate
and anticipate the end of thy creation, which after-service to a diety is to
gratify thy friend. It is not the first favor I have begged, nor the greatest
courtesy which I have received, if you honor the Press, and inform the World
with your Soul, it will be enough for your Apology to insert this unworthy
paper, which will be sufficient testimony that it was the importunate entreaty
of

Your Friend and servant HOGLANDUS de BOYS.
Paris, May 3. 1652.
To Mr A. C.
FEar not to let thy active spirit fly,
It Is not thy own but others destiny;
If Carpers carp, or rusticks keep a coile,
The fairest face seems fairer for a foil.
H. B.

In Pseuchographiam Anthropomagicam, (...).
ABdit a mellipluis funduntur dicta labellis,
O qui Paeoniaem demereare chelyn!
Nil pareas populo reserans penetralia rerum,
Ne fias rabidi praeda lupina chori?
Siccine vecordis fugias suffragia plausus,
Dum cupis acclivem doctus inire viam?
Non tibi polliceor fundos, viridaria, gemmas,
Praemia nec rutuli fulgida vota Tagi.
Hoc speres lectura tuos Philomuse, labores,
Te decus Aurorae secula sera putent.
Seria graendaevus tractet, juvenilia quisquis
Se delirantem non cupit esse senem.
Lusit sub trino annis eo. T.M.

To His much admired Friend, A. C. Upon the Publishing of that Ingenuous Piece,
PSEVCHOGRAPHIA ANTHROPOMAGICA.
OThers on stilts may curvet out thy praise,
My hiccop Muse can only belch out Lays:
Her Sacrifice (brave Aesculape) I pray,
Accept as Cocks to usher in thy day.
Whilst others Volumes write, thou picklest here,
Like Archimedes the Heavens in a Sphere:
Their Elephantine Books will now want joints
To go, since thou have cramped all their points:
Such Iliads in a Nut-shell we may pent,
So little kernel have they being all Lent:
Here every word's Elixar, and our sense,
In every phrase perceives a Quintessence:
Giants no wonders are, thy Book's a Flag,
Whose Pygmie stature will all others gag:
Geryon's so admired, Triumvirate
Is made by thee to be a common State.
The Soul that I Will of man shown us by thee,
Enlarges Learnings Maps, the arts Heptarchee:
A second Drake whose searches have at last,
Put Girdles to the lesser worlds wide waste;
Here Is no Coranting, no Strapado phrase,
Thy bays preserved thee from those thundering lays:
But words are weighed, and decently annexed,
Things as their natures are so well expressed:
That this Topic an argument does give,
Thou truly have a soul intuitive:
Thou scorn'st those cripple Scholars which do rest
In others words, swear Aristotle's Text;
Their steps do not thee fit, the childrens threes,
Make no Cothurnus for a Sophocles:
Charleton's translated Paradoxes three,
Give way to thy man's Compound Ternaree;
And though some think him worthy to be hist,
Yet from these three we count thee Trismegist.
G. Scot.

To the no less Honored then Ingennuous Author, A. C.
WHat stupefactive Opium did infect
The Protoplasts intuitive Intellect?
Sure the Apple was Narcotick, or some charm,
Whose Magic did so powerfully transform
The Microcosme, that it has seemed a dark
And indigested Hylas, till this spark
Of thy Impregnate spirit drives away
That mist obscured the Tria omnia,
Thou make us know our selves, who until now,
Thought only we were men, not knowing how:
Go on, (brave youth) let thy sublimed strains
Inform the Mercuriall moisture of those brains,
Whose ruder apprehensions nere could fix yet,
'Bove Entelecheie's or an Ipse dixit:
Sure, thy mere Divine Spirit was created,
Whereas that others are but propagated;
Which blessing that it may extend to thee,
(Whereby Cognition might ebetter'd be)
We could wish thee to some Heroic Madam,
Unless thou art designed to be the Adam.
J. M.

PSEVCHOGRAPHIA ANTHROPOMAGICA.
THat the nature of several species had their existence by creation is
undeniable, and the humble concession of all ages, yet how inconsistent with
their definition will easily be evidenced upon indifferent arbitration; for if
the latitude of creation as they suppose consist in the production of a thing
whose term from which is nothing, then they must ampliate their vocabularie,
and coin some exotic name for man's production, whose principle was an entity,
and his materials a subject consentaneous, of its own nature capable of that
composure; for if the body of man be reducible to those originals by natural
chemistry, the law of contraries knows no natural incapacity to its return, or
inhability reopposing its regression: else our hopes of reviving a plant out of
its ashes, would be as frivolous as our endeavors fruitless: and therefore
Paracelsus opinion of composing man in his Alembeck (though his insuccedable
undertaking anticipated by the destinies, and determined by the strength of
Saturn, did not conclude directly,) yet his attempts herein were not
unwarrantable, nor his conceit ridiculous: for the possibility of production
not transcending the manual contrivance of art, the effect had been no
artificial imposture, we rather suppose creation to be terminated to the
production of a new species, which before in nature had no existence and
generation: to challenge the successive continuation of those beings, each
private species were the real effect of creation, but their succession knows
no other means but generation; for since the protoplast, the manner of our
fouls production cannot be christened creation without a catachreese, neither
have we an alledgment of reason for their exile from increase and multiply, or
a confinement of the blessing to a limitation of the body.

The essence of the soul as it fell not within the cognition of the Graecians,
so it exceeded the nicest Mathematics of the Arabians, and antidated the
demonstration of later age, whose Optics not reaching beyond its operations,
pitching upon its praecincts and bordering on the confines, do peremptorily
determine its nature beyond dispute, so that those honest endeavors at any
time in the scrutiny of its nature, as they cannot evade the sentence of
singularity, so they must expect the censure of curiosity, and their ingenuous
employments stand condemned by whole Councels as not reaching beyond
punctillioes. Surely posterity cannot but condemn the poverty of our
conceptions, and admire the barrenness of our inventions, whose satisfied
reasons as far below the sublimed thoughts of antiquity, as coming short of the
verity of its nature, sit down in an ignorant acquiescence and an implicit
faith of obtruded opinion, and though the positions of heathens run not
parallel with the nature of their souls, yet their advanced thoughts therein
(which hitherto have degenerated into a sensible imparement) have been so far
from detracting from its dignity, that some thereto have not stuck to level
their devotions, who knew no other diety. And therefore the Caballists have
defined it to be Lumen dei and ad imaginem verbi, Causa causarum primi
exemplaris creata substantia, Dei sigilloque figurata, cujus character est
verbum aeternum: this has had patrons of later times but surreptitiously
fathered upon Predecessors: As Trismegist, (whose Antiquity is pretended, and
the number of whose years is far exceeded by the usurped date of his Book)
who derives its Pedigree from the highest Principle, Cap. 12. Poemand.
conceives the Soul a drop of Gods Essence and an invisible Ray of the first
Luminarie.

Aristotle confuted no less then a whole Jurie of Philosophers with an (...),
and his Dixit, being evidence sufficient to prevail upon Posterity; whereto the
Schools having prostituted their Reason by slavish Adherence, and engaged their
Faith beyond Belief, introduce his (...), to confute Experience, and control
Verity in her best Apparel.

I am a Freeborn Subject; and the Law of Nature which is indispensible knows
no slaverie: and therefore I shall now think it a breach of Devotion in
suspecting the truth of our Parents naked Positions, being not backed with the
infallible Testimony of Reason or Experience, and dissenting from them by
adherence to more rational probations, and more undeniable principles; for
none (I think) since the Magic of the Apple, could challenge to themselves the
Popes Chair: as knowledge is not by Propagation, so infallibility (which
requires the industry of many Ages) is not by a Natural Succession or
Inheritance. I could never resolve my Reason into the Opinion of Antiquity, or
surrender my Experience upon a different determination; the bare assertions of
the most Authentic have never been embraced by me as Oracles: therefore I
shall assume the liberty a little to unmask the Nature of the soul; an ample
discovery whereof would deride the insufficiency of Galilaeus perspective.

The Spirit Soul and Body are the Tria omnia, the three Ingredients in the
Composition of man: (had the Philosophers been sensible of the diversity of
Soul and Spirit confounded by the Doctrine of Aristotle) and considered an
alteriety of Nature in those two principles, their friendly society had not
been impossible, nor their Opposition excluding reconcilement.

The Spirit is the breath of God, which being at first the effect of Creation,
has been observant of the blessing, and successively continued by Propagation,
and participating of the nature of its principle knows not Mortality beyond a
Metaphor: therefore the Primitive Transgression did not induce a real death,
but a deperdition of happiness, and a degeneration of the Spirit from a State
as desirable, as the present is deplorable.

The Rational Soul being a Corporeal Extract and disliged from its grosser
materials by the Chymistrie of Nature, derives its Original from the Seminal
Emission of both Individuals; and by its essential heat does Ferment the
Coagulum, which receiving its vitality from the irradiating Archaeus, cannot
dissemble that impresse whereby its suppositum is determined, which being the
fertile effect of both Genitors will easily admit an united society with the
soul of bruit, whose natures knowing no incompossibility, do not exclude a
Composition; and therefore will perform the consequent effects of both Natures,
which falls within the experience of those (...). In particular, of one
Drinking Cats Blood, a prescription for the Epilepsie, the Patient had his
Paroxysmes; that as he imitated their cries, so would catch at their preyes:
and pursue the fortuitous evasion of the frisking Mouse: these Miscellaneous
principles engrossing the radicality of different forms, and meeting with
Convenient promotion, their natural Consequences cannot be prevented, without
an induction of Cadmus Conflict, and an Hostile Subversion of both principles.

Now to oppose the soul of our Savior wanting a Coadjuvancy of both Sexes, is
too weak to baffle solid Reason, whose whole life as it was miraculous, so the
Manner of his Production supernatural.

The Rational soul is the Mercurial moisture that marries the two extremes of
Spirit and Body; Whose Affections are as Contrary as their natures are
different; which after is remunerated with Vitality. For souls in their own
Essence are insensible, till they be rowzed by the energie of the Spirit. And
therefore the souls of Bruits being the same in Nature with that of man, but
actuated with that more ignoble Spirit that moved upon the face of the waters,
they come short of man's perfections, and cannot deliver their Conceptions in
verbal Expressions.

There are no Essential differences in the souls of Creatures, being but
attenuated bodies by effectual Calidity. Which according to the Efficacy of
heat may move in a higher Orb of Perfection, and by virtue of the impregnating
Spirit may be raised an Animal; which without this subtiliating heat had rested
in a lower Degree of Vegetation: and therefore the souls of Plants may
challenge fraternity with that of Bruits; and Verity will admit no other
difference but what is gradual, corresponding the intensnesse of luminous
Rays. For Vegetables peeping out of the pores of the earth the third day, when
the Universe was equally sensible of the dispersed Rays, which after being
Contracted to a Solary body, with greater Energie ferments the fuliginous
Hylas: Which being separated from those grosser Adherents, whose Entertainments
impede the reception of Vitality, by this Mundane Spirit have their Materials
advanced to an animation: and therefore a more noble existence, as first of
Fishes, did issue the confinement of these wandering Rays.

This Mercurial Moisture being but an Analogicall Spirit, cannot claim
immortality without encroachment on higher Privileges, and usurping the
property of higher Natures; and therefore being only sublimed by the
Chymistrie of irregular intellectuals, whose truth knows no Foundation in
nature, may enter the grave with the more unrefined Mass, and admit of a
Resurrection, which being the immediate Recipient of life, is termed life it
self. We cannot define that Resurrection to whose existence immortality is
appendant: as to the Spirit I am a Saducy, which being incapable of a lapse,
cannot be restaurable by a Rise, and never dying cannot be said to live again;
yet to believe the Resurrection of the Body, and the life, is part of my Creed;
and thus as the souls Mortality is no impiety in sober Theology; so it is no
riddle in judicious Philosophy: for he that shall but taste the strongest
Spirits acquirable by natural Chymistrie, may easily be convinced of the
performance of noble operations by material principles, and its permeating each
particular of the body in a time so imperceptible, as might easily impose that
fallacy upon our sense, to determine its motion instantaneous.

The Rational soul is determined to the visible Mass, commonly so called the
body: whose too contracted nature cannot confine the Spirit; (hence was it that
the Platonists conceded to it a kind of Ubiquity) for reason will not admit of
any operation, where we deny the Essential presence of the Agent: and that
there are extrinsecal effects, appears in the formation of the Embryo; and in
fascination performed beyond the visible body, and Organical circumscription;
which cannot be executed by Mediation of qualities; for nature knows no such
Deputy; it is ignorance that first gave the name of Accident.

That there are Effluviums steeming from every visible Body, must be conceded,
as falling under the demonstration of Experience, and prostituted by later
invention of Perspectives.

These Effluviums being the Badgers of heat, (desert the cumbersome society of
Reason) which flying in the Air, may occur their Assimilables; and by the
pregnancy of the Spirit may attain a visibility issuing from the union of hose
dis-joynted pieces, as appear at the instance of death; for those Spectrums and
Wafts are but the Effect of the Spirits fertility cooperating with the heat and
Relics of moisture; the Emission of particles at that time being most
copious. For Death (being to decide the Controversy, and to determine the
Combat of the disease and nature) increases the heat, and agitating those
corporeal Particles into Atomical Interstitiums, accompanyeth them into the
Air; where meeting with a proportionable number, salute each other; the
Particles in this confused medley being not unmindful of their Office and
Nature, seek out their proper situation, mould themselves into such a Method as
not to dissemble their former shape; but meeting with something dismembring its
imperfect reunition, or wanting Cement to retain them in this position, are
presently shattered into invisible Existencies. Yet the Spirit as before Death,
so after associates these divided Emissions till their heat confess a period:
so after bodies are interred, the Relics of heat (which as it is well nigh
insensible, so the operations are more feeble) does excite a continued
succession of these Atoms: which being as formerly fermented, and united by a
Mummial Balsome, are those Noctambuloes that hover about the Cenotaphes, and
haunt the Dormitures of the dead: but the Spirit sensible of a perpetuated
impairment of heat in those Particles, and their invitation being too weak to
obtain a grant of continuance from the Spirit, they dislodge their society; and
the Spirit returns to him that gave it; where the sentence of their future
condion, as it is infallible, so their hopes confirmed in the Center of
happiness knows no stagger to the circumference, or their wavering fears
confined unto despair, are freed from that possibility, which is attendant on
its adlidgements. Thus our Savior as he envies not the happiness of Saints, so
he is not injurious to the Justice of his Father, to gratify the Conceit of
Origin, and sue for a release from hell, or obtain a Parole from the second
Death: and therefore the raising of Lazarus, probably, was but the determining
of his Spirit to the visible Mass; which otherwise was levaltoing in the
scattered pieces. So the Spirits of wicked men (accompanying the steeming
Emissions, being wanderers in the Aerie Region, and their continuance there
being determined by the duration of heat in those Particles. Which truth,
excluding Concealment from Satan's Optics, knows not retirement from his
Cognition, is waiting the Confinement of their Pilgrimage to a condition as
immutable as their punishment inconceiveable; and hence he receives the Baptism
of the Prince of the air.

Reason and Memory are not essential to the Soul but the purchase of man, and
the deplorable effect of his own invention, which after that Theomachy and
contest with Heaven was obtruded upon posterity, and must be embraced as a
penalty; and though we concede to Adam this continuating Mercuriall moisture,
yet as he was the proper product of his Creator, his perfection was as ignorant
of reason, as his innocence should have known no punishment, and therefore
whilst he retained his primitive station, his knowledge (as being little
beholden to this torturing reason which after obscured those clearer
apprehensions of his intellect) was intuitive, whereby inferior beings
received their names not different from their natures, where if he had remained
he had not stood in need of Logic, or bin beholden to a Syllogism; his
essence being the rule of proportion to determine, conclusions are the effect
of sin, whose truth have their foundation in the spirit, which being there
simply apprehended as they are in themselves, have the same verity as in divine
essence, and therefore the things themselves owe their errors and
misconceptions to the extravagant exorbitancies of reason.

So Memory an attendant of Reason, which being a superinduction of the same
cause imposed upon the soul, and arresting inferior brutality, could not reach
the spirit without impeachment of its privileges, and subverting the nature of
its essence, which being framed according to the first Idaea, must needs
exclude the impossible society of imperfection: fo in a sleep the rational soul
involving matter, requires this refreshment, and then being insensible of the
spirits operations, acts in the organs, as with independency of reason so of
memory, often delivers in vocal expressions which exceeds the record of the
actor, and is recited by some different auditor: Thus Amorists are their own
betrayers, and malefactors expose themselves beyond suspicion, and in such
extaticall conditions we approximate primitive integrity, and seem to
anticipate the malice of the Serpent; for thus the spirit being sequestered
from the obscurements of reason, is presently rapt into a third Heaven: whose
essence being as immateriall as its nature is indefatigable, needs no such
refreshment, nor can it sleep without a miracle, and some opium from its
Creator: therefore we do not read that Adam slept, but that God cast him into a
deep sleep, that he might be insensible of his helpers production; So Adams
sleep was not true sleep, as not proceeding from nature for his proper
conservation, but from an external Narcotick, for the production of a second,
the ruin of his posterity.

After this divorce betwixt the Spirit and its adherents, there is no immediate
possession of Beatificall Vision, nor actual enjoyment of happiness beyond a
sentence, but are detained in a middle Mansion, till the Resurrection, which
then shall be completed when our Savior's intercession shall terminate in
that heavenly (...), Come you blessed of my Father. So the damned in this
Condition fore-sees the futurity of his punishment, from which there is no
reprieve or release till Eternity be contracted, and Ubiquity confess a
Circumscription: and therefore from the Moment of Separation, (the unalterable
Decree being ushered in with final Despair) their being is a torment, and the
time of Death their Critical day: which at the Resurrection ends in a
Paroxysm, when hopes of Declination shall be as fruitless as its period is
impossible.

For I do not conceive the infliction of a positive torment, either on the
damned Spirits, or the Devils themselves, till the day of judgment; and that
the Devil knew the designation of time for punishment, appears upon his
Expostulation with our Savior: Why art thou come to torment us before the
time? They have only now restraining shackles, which Eternity will advance to
bonds of punishment.

I do not mean any Purgatory by this middle Mansion, where there is a
possibility of Repentance or Redemption; but a higher Court of Gods Justice and
mercy; where the unalterable Decree of the Synod of Trinity is Declared; where
the Spirits in this Condition wait till the Resurrection, when as the Blessed
shall possess their Jubilee; so the damned shall enjoy their Vulture.

Thus being not tied to the wheel of Authority, I am not sworn to maintain
their motion: but being hurried by the Primum Mobile of my private reason, I
become irregular, yet shall not repine at the Name of Heretic: I am not
married to any opinion, whereby I often make rubs in the levelled axioms of
Predecessors, and disturb the tranquillity of those unlimitted Oracles of
Antiquity. Intellectual Slaveries have too much anticipated Geniall
Dispositions; and an Implicit faith of obtruded opinion have debarred them the
ambition of Discoverers.

Much Faith makes Truth despair, Salvation, see,
Comes ushered in with Infidelity.
An Infidel is the best Proficient in the School of Nature, whose Inquisition
is not measured by the Endeavors of his Fathers, nor can his Freeborn soul
brook those Manacles whereby its power is restrained, and its devotion limited.
Me think it is an ingenuous cruelty whereby we may bring our Mother Nature to a
Confession of her Secrets, though she run the hazard of embowelling, or the
most bloody exenteration, and an act of Charity be a more direct line or clew
of improved Reason to free our Ancestors treading in this Tract; but lost (by a
weary pursuit of the cold sent of truth) in her labyrinths: I honor the Ashes
of our Predecessors, yet cannot dispense with that Superstition of Devotion or
Adherence: where truth looks two ways, to pin our credulous souls upon their
sleeves, would deprive us of our Infranchisement we obtained by the right of
our Creation; the very end whereof does entitle us to knowledge: and therefore
a soul that is not tied to intellectual slaveries, in the Geography of
knowledge will confute that conceit of Hercules Pillars, and a Ne plus ultra is
but fantastical Dream to his more nice and subtle scrutinies; therefore I could
extenuate that imputed crime of Nero's Matricide, the improvement of of his
knowledge being the end of his ingenuous cruelty, to determine the Cabinet of
his Conception. Truth is not engrossed by aged Parents; there is an America of
knowledge yet unfound out, discoverable by the endeavors of some wiser
Columbus, and the promised fertility of succeeding Ages. Those unsuccedable
attempts of our incultivated Intellectuals, must needs stand condemned by the
more sublimed Reason and acute Philosophy of Posterity: Whereby our Primitive
imparement by additional Degrees of a betterment may obtain a parole from
ignorance, and procure a Reverse to the first perfection. For if this be true,
that the order and course of Nature is Circular, and that souls in Revolution
of time receive a sensible improvement in their Cognition. Then surely
succession in Nature must needs carry Degrees of Perfection, and the last man
must be an Adam.

FINIS.

