The Copy of a Letter sent by the last Post from a knowing Gentleman (ex
ordine Observantium) now scouting amongst the Scots, to a Friend of his in
LONDON. Briefly intimating that Omne malum ab Aquilone still, and that the
present rising of the winds in that Country, is like to revive future Storms
in our own.
Kind Sir,
I Thank you for yours of the 5th. of April, though I am troubled to find by
it the distempers of England, which indeed (with grief I speak it) are
paralleled here. The Parliament has deserted the Clergy, refuses all
conference with them, have this day resolved breaches upon ever branch of the
Covenant, and immediately are to put themselves into a posture of defense (but
it is thought) on purpose to enter England with 40000 men to redeem the King
(as they call it) and re-establish the Covenant. But what most troubles, is,
they receive the first and great Adversaries of Peace and Religion, the
Cavaliers converse and communicate Counsels with them, desire their assistance,
and doubtless will raise great bodies of men in the North of England, the
whole Northern quarter being nothing else but a mass of Malignancy. Our
Commissioners are and have been active to suppress this rising monster, both
by reason and reward, but now almost despair the effect; Pray God they may not
be prejudiced in their return, for they meet not with respect due to their
qualities. Nothing remains to confirm this bad work, but choice of Officers,
which to morrow will be done (they say.) Good David Lesley is almost mad to see
his Army desert him and his Petition, to follow the Idol of a King. Argile and
his Confederates stand stiff to Gods cause, our Religion and Countries good,
but are all overswayed by the Power and Faction of Hamilton. Balmerinoth this
day voted a War to redeem the King, to the great wonder of others, he having
till now been a faithful labourer in Gods Vineyard; The effect of all this
will doubtless appear in England, and suddenly. God strengthen you and all
good men to oppose such Invasions, which is the Prayer of your most
affectionate friend and servant.

Edinburgh, April 11. 1648.
Concordat cum Originali.

