A Copy of a LETTER SENT From the Agitators of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax's Army, TO All the honest Seamen of England: Heartily and cordially
declaring their real intentions to the peace and prosperity of the Kingdom,
and the firm settling and establishing of all the just Interests thereof, into
the hands and possessions the right Owners of them.

Dated at S. Albans 21. June 1647.

Published by the Order and special desire of the said Agitators.

London: Printed for R. A. 1647.

A Letter from the Army to all the honest Seamen of England.
Honored and dear Friends,
THe great design of our Enemies being to divide, (and so to destroy) we
conceive it the maine business of friends to unite, and so to spoil that
design: Now the ways that are at this day, taken to divide, are
misrepresentations of persons and actions (especially of us and ours) to the
Kingdom, which that we may prevent, we shall endeavor to inform you (our
noble and faithful friends) of the state of things as follows: Some five
years since we by Land and you by Sea, upon the apprehension of apparent
danger to the Kingdom, were invited to put our selves into a posture of
defense, for the preventing and suppressing of that power then rising, which
threatened the Kingdoms ruin, for the avoiding of which (at present) and
settling an establishment (for the future) of all the freeborn people of
England, in the enjoyment of their just Rights and Privileges, (which was one
of the ends of our taking up of Arms) we went with cheerfulness to the work,
and after many a sore encounter that you and we have had by Sea and Land, at
last (by the blessing of God) came to the end of our work, hoping now (after
such a long and weary journey) to have taken up our rest, and have set down
quietly under our vines, and with the rest of the Kingdom to have enjoyed the
fruit of our sore travells, but contrary to our expectation and to the
amazement and saddening of our spirits, we find our selves in as bad or worse
condition now, then formerly, being denied and deprived of that undoubted right
and privilege which the Subjects of England, in the worst of times, hardly
ever were (viz.) petitioning, nay, not only denied of, but declared against as
enemies, for making use of those means we were directed to in case of
grievances, and so we are now made completely miserable. When we see this, we
knew whose hand was in it, namely, that here was the same persons and
principles working our ruin as formerly, only in another form, before by
power and open hostility, and now by craft, and policy; which caused us to draw
up a Vindication of the aforesaid intended Petition, yet notwithstanding our
Vindication we still lie under a sentence of condemnation as enemies to the
State. Then we drew up a Letter to the General, the Lievtenant-Generall, and
the Major-Generall, in which was laid open the sad condition how near ruin
and destruction we were, and the causes of it, as we apprehended, and this we
did to incite them to improve all the interest they had in or with any, for us,
to prevent the ensuing destruction, especially since we could not be heard in
our Petition, but this Letter was conceived to be of dangerous consequence, and
so presented to the House, where (after some debates) the results were to send
down Commissioners to the Army, to take a view of the distempers reported to
be in it, and to receive their grievances, and present them to the House.

This a little revived us, hoping we should have them heard and redressed, but
suddenly after the receiving of them (without the full redressing of any one of
them) we were voted to be disbanded piece-meale, apart, one Regiment from
another, so as never any faithful Army was, being marked out for destruction,
wanting nothing but disbanding to hasten execution. Hearing of this we drew up
a Petition to our General to have a Rendezvous, at which we might advise what
was best to be done (for our own and the Kingdoms safety) in this case, and
there entered into a Contract, a copy of which we have here sent you.

A solemn engagement of the Army, under the Command of his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, read, assented unto, and subscribed by all Officers, and
Soldiers of the several Regiments, at the general Rendezvous near
Newmarket, on the fifth of June, 1647.
WHereas upon the Petition intended and agreed upon in the Army, in March last,
to have been presented to the General, for the obtaining of our due and
necessary concernments as Soldiers; the Honorable House of Commons being
unseasonably prepossessed with a Copy thereof, and (as by the sequel we
suppose) with some strange misrepresentations of the carriage and intentions of
the same, was induced to send down an Order for surpressing the Petition, and
within two or three days after, upon further misinformation, and scandalous
suggestions, of the like or worse nature, and by the indirect practice of some
malicious and mischievous persons (as we suppose) surprising or other wise
abusing the Parliament. A Declaration was published in the name of both Houses,
highly censuring the said Petition, and declaring the Petitioners, if they
should proceed thereupon, no less then enemies to the State, and disturbers of
the public peace. And whereas at the same time and since, diverse eminent
Officers of the Army have been brought into question and trouble about the said
Petition, whereby both they and the rest of the Officers were disabled, or
discouraged for the time, from further acting or appearing therein on the
soldiers behalf; And whereas by the aforesaid proceedings and the effects
thereof, the soldiers of this Army (finding themselves so stopped in their due,
and regular way of making known their just greivances, and desires to, and by
their Officers) were enforced to an unusual (but in that case necessary) way
of correspondence and agreement amongst themselves, to choose out of the
several Troops and Companies several men, and those out of their whole
number, to choose two or more for each Regiment, to act in the name and behalf
of the whole soldiery of the respective Regiments Troops and Companies, in the
prosecution of their rights and desires in the said Petition, as also of their
just vindication and writing in reference to the aforesaid proceedings upon and
against the same, who have accordingly acted and done many things, to those
ends, all which the soldiers did then approve as their own acts.

And whereas afterward (upon the sudden sending down of Field-Marshall
Skippon, and those other Officers of the Army that were Members of the House of
Commons, to quiet distempers in the Army, fresh hopes being conceived of having
our desires again admitted to be made known, and considered in a regular way,
and without such misrepresentations as formerly, the Officers and Soldiers of
the Army (except some few dissenting Officers) did again join in a
representation of their common grievances, and the Officers (except as before)
did agree upon a narrative Account of the grounds, rise and growth of the
discontents in the Army, and their proceedings in relation thereunto, with an
overture of the best expedients, to remove or satisfy the same; both which
were presented to the same Members of the House, and by them reported to the
House. And whereas the Parliament having thereupon voted, and ordered some
particulars, only toward satisfaction of our grievances, has since proceeded
to certain resolutions of sudden disbanding the Army by pieces; which
resolutions being taken, and to be executed, before full or equal satisfaction
given to the whole Army in any of the grievances, before effectual performance
of that satisfaction in part, which the preceding Votes seemed to promise, as
to some of the grievances, and before any consideration at all of some others
most material, (as by the result of a general Council of War on Saturday
May 29. was in general declared, and is now more fully demonstrated in
particular, by a representation thereupon, agreed unto by us: we all cannot but
look upon the same resolutions of disbanding us in such manner, as proceeding
from the same malicious and mischievous principles and intentions, and from the
like indirect practices of the same persons abusing the Parliament, and is as
the former proceedings against us before mentioned did, and not without carnal
and bloody purposes (for some of them have not stuck to declare or intimate)
after the body of the Army should be disbanded, or the Soldiers divided from
their Officers, then to question, proceed against, and execute their malicious
intentions upon all such particular Officers and Soldiers in the Army, as had
appeared to act in the Premises in the behalf of the Army: And whereas upon a
late Petition to the General from the Agitants, in behalf of the Soldiers
(grounded upon the preceding considerations, relating to the same resolutions
of disbanding, the same general Council of War to prevent the danger and
inconveniences of those disturbings, or tumultuous actings or confluences which
the dis-satisfaction and jealousy thereupon also grounded, were like suddenly
to have produced in the Army, to advise the General first to contract the
Quarters of the Army, and then to draw the same to an orderly Rendezvous for
the satisfaction of all, and that his Excellency would immediately send up to
move and desire the Parliament to suspend any present proceeding upon the said
resolution of disbanding, to resume the consideration of the grievances, and
desire, sent up from the Army, and not to disband it in pieces before just and
equal satisfaction given to the whole; And whereas some of the Regiments
appointed for disbanding, upon notice thereof withdrawing themselves from the
Quarters adjacent to the appointed Rendezvous, and drawing toward the Head
Quarters; and the contracting their Quarters, according to the said advice of
the Council of War.

We the Officers and Soldiers of several Regiments here after-named, are now
met at a general Rendezvous, and the Regiments appointed as aforesaid to be
disbanded, have not appeared, nor can appear; but are resolved not to appear
at the several and respective Rendezvous, appointed as aforesaid for their
disbanding; and diverse other things have been done by several other parties or
members of the Army, necessarily relating to the good and concernment of the
whole in those affairs: Now for as much as we know not how far the malice,
Injustice, and Tiranicall Principles of our enemies, that have already
prevailed so far to abuse the Parliament and the Army (as is before mentionid)
in the past proceedings against the Army may further prevail to the danger and
prejudice of our selves, or any Officers, or Soldiers of the Army, or other
persons that have appeared to act any thing in behalf of the Army, or how far
the same may further prevail to the danger or prejudice of the Kingdom in
raising a new war, or otherwise: Therefore for the better prevention of all
such dangers, prejudices, or other inconveniences that may ensue; and withal
for better satisfaction to the Parliament and Kingdom, concerning our desires
of conforming to the authority of the one, and providing the good and quiet of
the other, in the present affairs of disbanding, and for a more assured way
whereby, that affairs may come to a certain issue, (to which purpose we
herein humbly implore the present and continued assistance of God, the
Righteous Judge of all) we the Officers and Soldiers of the Army subscribing
hereunto; do hereby declare, agree, and promise, to and with each other, and
to, and with the Parliament and Kingdom as follows.

1. That we shall cheerfully and readily disband when thereunto required by
the Parliament, or else shall many of us be willing (if desired) to engage in
further Services either in England or Ireland, having first such satisfaction
to the Army in relation to our grievances and desires heretofore presented, and
such security, That we of our selves, when disbanded, and in the condition of
private men, or other the freeborn people of England, to whom the consequence
of our case does equally extend, shall not remain subject to the like
oppression, injury, or abuse, as in the premises has been attempted and put
upon us, while an Army by the same men's continuance, in the same credit and
power, especially if as our Judges, who have in these past proceedings against
the Army so far prevailed to abuse the Parliament and us, and to endanger the
Kingdom; and also such security that we our selves, or any member of this Army
or others, who have appeared to act any thing in behalf of the Army, in
relation to the premises before recited, shall not after disbanding be any way
questioned, prosecuted, troubled, or prejudiced for any thing so acted, or for
the entering into, or necessary prosecution of this necessary agreement: (we
say) having first such satisfaction and security in these things as shall be
agreed unto by a Council to consist of those general Officers of the Army
(who have concurred with the Army in the premises) with two Commission
Officers and two Soldiers to be chosen for each Regiment, who have concurred
and shall concur with us in the premises and in this agreement. And by the
major part of such of them who shall meet in Council for that purpose when they
shall be thereunto called by the General.

2. That without such satisfaction and security, as aforesaid, we shall not
willingly disband, nor divide, nor suffer our selves to be disbanded or divided.

And whereas we find many strange things suggested or suspected to our great
prejudice concerning dangerous principles, interests and designs in this Army
(as to the overthrow of Magistracy, the suppression or hindering of Presbytery,
the establishment of Independent government, or upholding of a general
licentiousness in Religion under pretense of Liberty of Conscience, and many
such things; we shall very shortly tender to the Parliament a Vindication of the
Army from all such scandals to clear our Principles in relation thereunto, and
in the mean time we do disavow and disclaim all purposes or designs in our late
or present proceedings to advance o^ insist upon any such interest, neither
would we (if we might and could) advance or set up any other particular party
or interest in the Kingdom (though imagined never so much our own) but shall
much rather (as far as may be within our sphere or power) study to promote such
an establishment of common and equal right and freedom to the whole, as all
might equally partake of but those that do by denying the same to others, or
otherwise render themselves incapable thereof. FINIS

After this we were commanded to a Rendezvous by the Parliament and
Commissioners sent down with some Votes tending to satisfaction in part,
wherein did remain dissatisfaction at present (even to those particular
grievances there related) and not security for the future by any thing yet
done, especially knowing those were remaining with power in their hands, who
could undo all they had done for us, or do as much more against us it
d^sbanded, as may appear in our late D^claration 14. June 1647. To which we
refer you. And therefore the Cry of the whole Army and diverse Counties also (by
their addresses to his Excellency) was not so much for the taking of the
present sad effects from us, as for the removal of that Cause which had (at
present) and would (for the future) produce the like (if not worse) mischief^s
as appeared by the unanimous voice of the whole Army, crying out, Justice,
Justice; Justice against those persons who have falsely aspersed us, against
those who have abused the trust reposed in them; and Justice upon those from
whom we can expect no security, but rather destruction; which main desire (once
granted) would beget satisfaction, and then, and not till then, can we lay down
Arms with safety: Thus we have presented you with our condition for your
information. Now we desire you and all rational men to judge, and the God of
Heaven and Earth be Judge (between u^ and those persons who have acted against
us) whether ever we have deserved such things at their hands, who have not
thought any thing too dear to part with or lay down for their sakes, looking
upon them as persons entrusted by and acting for the Weal (not the Woe) of this
Kingdom, and though we have suffered much from, and been deprived much by our
open Enemies, yet did still expect our professed friends would have dealt
better with us, and little thought to have had such a portion from them as to
be declared Enemies to the State, even while we were an Army having power in
our hands, and they having further occasions to use us: To have this done
against us, what will be done if all those considerations were removed?
Therefore consider what it is we seek, even that which all creatures of the
world do (and Man, the chiefest of all creatures, cannot but do;) viz.
self-preservation, in avo^ding that destruction which is like (if not
prevented) to fall on us and the whole Kingdom with us, as it must needs do, if
(when lying under many pressures and grievances as we question no but you (as
well as we) and thousands others in the Kingdom do) we may not peti^ion for
redress, but must be voted Enemies; judge you what this wants of the perfection
of slavery, which, we hope, is the real desires of us all to prevent. And we
assure you upon the faith of honest Men and Soldiers, that (what ever may be
suggested to you by any) we have no other aims, but that Justice might act in
all its parts and to all its ends, as elating to all estates and persons in the
Kingdom that the yokes of Oppression might be taken off the nec^s of all and
Justice equally distributed to all, and the rights of any (though now detained
from them) restored, and settled upon them, that so they might not be taken
from them unless they disabled themselves of the enjoyment of them and so doing
we trust we shall have the concurrent assistance of (at I all wise not any
opposition from any) rational Men who love Justice and hate Tyranny, especially
from you (deer friends) who together with us, have been imbarqued in the same
ship, and have passed through man a desperate encounter by Sea as we have by
Land, all to free this poor Kingdom from Tyrannical Oppression, (which
notwithstanding, you and we feel too much of at this day) who we trust with us,
do hate and scorn to be kept any longer under bondage, having purchased our
freedom at so dear a race, (though free born) We shall say no more, bu^ desire
you to take heed of all false suggestions, and vain delusion; and know this is
our genuine meaning that is here before you, which [being rightly apprehended
by you] we hope will make all the attempts of men, [to divide you from us either
by frowns, Favors, or Gra^^ities, which assure your selves they will not be
writting in to accomplish their ends] useless, and all the foods of malice [by
them sown] fruitless, unless to bring about to ^^ceive that reward for their
work which may be suitable to it, and so in stead of dividing, we hope may
prove such an uniting that maybe as a threefold Cord that shall not easily be
broken, which if it shall thus unite us, we shall rejoice in it, and shall be
enabled by it to go on in the pros^cution of so good a work til we see
Oppression, and Oppressers from us, and the Kingdom removed, a firm and happy
peace settled, a poor Kingdom from ruin and destruction delivered, which we hope
is and ever shall be your and our joint desires and endevors of all opposition,
and in so doing assure your selves against we are and will be yours while you are
the Kingdoms and ours, resolving to be either happy or miserable together.

Yours and the Kingdoms Servants. Jews Audley. John Clerk. John Carter. Edm.
Rolphe. Alex. Brafield. Azariah Husbands.
Genesis Foot Regiment. Joh. Nuson. Edm. Vaughan.
Lieutenant Generals Regiment. William Allin
Colonel Hammons Regiment. Nath. Foxgill. Will. Bridgeman.
Colonel Wallers Regiment. Henry Anderton Robert Mason.
Colonel Lamberts Regiment. John Millar. Richard Colbrand.
Colonel Lilburns Regiment. Will. Swallow. Herbert Field
Colonel Thomlinsons Regiment. Barth. Willocke Richard Clarke
Colonel Hewsons Regiment. Edmund Garne Daniel Hincksman
Colonel Reads Regiment. Nico. Andrews Ralph. R^entis


S. ALBANS, June 21. 1647.
FINIS.

