CARMINA COLLOQVIA: OR, A Demonaicall and Damnable Dialogue, BETWEEN THE DEVIL
and AN INDEPENDENT.

Written in the last year of our Freedom: and first of our Bondage, by the
permission of God, and Commission of the Devil.

By Fardinando Fallall, at Edinburgh.

And Dedicated to all our friends about Whinfield-knot.

Flectere si nequeo, superos Acheronta movebo.
Printed in the Year, 1649.

CARMINA GOLLOQVIA: OR, A Demonaical and Damnable Dialogue, between the Devil
and the Independent, etc.
Devil. MY Dear adopted heir, mine only son,
Thou that have fought, and all my battails won
Enlarged my kingdom, and with thousand souls
Filled up the Catalogue of my sulphury rowles;
Did not Religion (son) disguise thee right
To exercise both policy and might,
It Is like a ship-mans hose, which as you please
Will any way wrest to give the owner ease:
It Is like a shooing-horne that will draw
Any thing one, and make it seem a law,
A stalking-horse, where under we may lurk
Till we have accomplished our intended work,
It Is a brave gilded mask that blears the eye,
And makes a lie seem true, and truth a lie.

Independent. I do confess (dear father) you have don
As much for me, as e're you did for son;
For which I vow hereafter for to sac're
Those dues to you I owe unto my maker,
And more and more endeavor art and powers,
T'assure your hopes that I Am obliged yours;
Yet am I but a passive instrument
In your wise hands, to prefect the intent,
The conquest that I won, belong to you,
And I hold it just to give the Devil his due,
The Saints of God, although I cannot ill them,
Yet I by thousands, Rob and Spoil, and Kill them.

Dev. And must persist my son, for until they!
Be beaten down, my Scepter cannot sway.

In. I Have taken away their darling and protector,
And (heartlesse) left them, headless sons director.

Dev. But I Am afraid his passion hurt us more
Then all his actions in his life before:
It rent our mask, and like to have laid open
All our Ambushments, and sinister scope,
So that we now must preach, and prate, and strain
Both art and arms, t'invest our shape again.

In. Fear not (my Sire) our sale tongued brother Lenthall,
Is a brave tool, I Will warrant he will invent all;
Direct but his tongue, (dear patron of our lies)
And he will patch up the rent of our disguise.

Dev. I doubt it (son) whether the name of King,
(The peoples I doll) does a terror bring;
That a Plebeian rabble should depose,
Him whom the Almighty, for Lieutenant chose:
Or rather (as I guess) cause we pretended
We fought to have abuses but amended,
For Englands glory, and for Charles His good,
Not for His Scepter much less for His blood,
Have seized the peoples judgment, as they dare,
Their grumbling shows they discontented are;
Our King beheaded! what harmless Angel smile,
Could our mis-grounded zeal thus far beguile,
To think our Church and State could be amended
By killing Him, who should have both defended:
O horrid folly! where were our wits? our faith
To credit him who lies, what e're he says;
A Godly zeal, before which we thought right,
Proves now the Devil, turned to an Angel bright,
But now enlightened, and advised well
We him defy that taught us to Rebel;
Satan no more, nor all his smooth tongued tools,
At once shall make us traitors, thieves and fools,
Thus cries the people, and what e're they cry,
Concludes a hellish act, that Charles should die.

In. Tush let them twat, assure but you your promise,
Unto your famous Deputy Sir Thomas,
And your dear minion Cromwell, who can speak
And fight, and preach, by virtue of his beak;
Keep these your friends (as there is no other doubt,
And we shall yet bring matters brave about.

Dev. Fear not (my child) and that thou better may
Discern thy friends, and those who me obey,
In honor of that Nose of Noses, each
Man's Nose shall be a conduit for his speech,
And those who keep my laws, and Cromwels duly,
Shall dwindle their lies, which a sniv'ling truly, truly.

In. But father you were saying we must preach,
Tell us what doctrine is most fit to teach;
We are unlearned, know not what to say,

Dev. But I Will inspire you when you preach or pray;
Thou se'st already, I have stopped the mouth
That did oppose me; look from North to South,
And there is not any orthodoxall tongue
Allowed to tell my vassals they are in the wrong.
The way is clear, and that thou may do well
Take from before their thoughts the fear of Hell,
This lesson taught it quickly will appear
Who loves God for love, and loves him but for fear;
And I believe a small Arithmetic
Will tell the number that to God will stick,
For from the guilt, take punishment of sin
And love of God will not restrain 'em in:
This to do better take a way the Law
Give them the Reins, force not but slily draw,
The Law being taken away, sin is not known
And so the game is up, the days our own;
Tell them that Christ has died there needs no more
But a bare belief, the rest may pass of the score,
That heavens their own by letters pattent granted,
And there is no sin can damn the Covenanted:
Style grossest sins, slips of infirmity
And Christian duties false Idolatry.
And have thou not read how I at first did fan
My powerful breath into the new made man,
Who with soft glozes of my palliation,
Of his estate desired an allienation,
Because (forfooth) 'twould make free and brave,
A Leveller with God (before a slave)
This bait of freedom (by experience tried)
Has won me more then all the shifts beside:
This is, so sweet a morsel that the best
Shall scarce resist but yield down with the rest,
And their affections better for to steal,
Tell them his God your Doctrine does reveal
Enthusiasmes, and soul sweating sense,
And couch't in fair, yet sniv'ling eloquence,
And let the actions (for a season) read
As you were Gods Ambassadors indeed;
For (I by Gods permission) can appear
Like God himself to those we do not fear,
This is enough (my son) this will intice'em
And gold, and glory, to ambition hoize 'em;
That cast them headlong to my horrid vault
Where I remain just for the self same fault.

In. What are the Presbyterians, their opinion,
Belong not they wholly to your dominion?

Dev. Yet, they are mine own, yet I have more ado
To compass one of them then two of you,
They play with bait as though they would be gone,
But thou can swallow ought (mine only son)
He is the bastard, thou the lawful heir,
He may be reft but you are entailed here;
I Am father to you both, but this in worst
Thou with my self, but he abroad was nursed;

In. Now I Am resolved yet I had like forgot
Last summers opposition to the Scot,
For as two brethren living both together,
May fall at variance even about a feather,
Yet when a stranger comes to injure either
They then unite fraternally together;
So when the Royal party came against us
We differed not, but jointly both advanced us
In opposition to the right, (truly)
Enstiling them the common enemy:
But brotherhood is strong, and I surmis'd
We still were so, but with false names disguised,
But father tell me, there is a rumor flying,
Which be it true our comforts are a dying,
How Charles the Second wi^h his Royal band
Prepared are, for to invade the Land,
To assume His lawful Crown, and Regal rod,
To beat down thee, and thine, and set up God,
To give the Laws both Civil and Divine
Their proper vigor, and to cancel thine;
This's the result of neighbor Nations all,
This must thou quash, or take a beastly fall.

Dev. Fear not my child, I seldom yet did fail thee,
When the true Royalists came for to assail thee,
Yet thou must know my son (to both our grief)
I Am but a servant, not a Lord in chief,
Our maker dread in the Almighties chains,
At his free will, my purposes restraines,
But I Will endeavor if he give me way
To act my part within their second play,
Where God has sown his wheat, I Will sow my tares,
Pride and ambition, and a thousand cares,
But yet (alas) I woefully presage
They will retort against me all my rage.
To London they in triumph great will come,
And place King Charles upon His Fathers Throne.

In. Why truly this is sad, yet I desire
Your diligence might quench this kindling fire:
We all are yours you know, what do you doubt
That any of us may chance to face about?
That you so short a period have set
Unto our reign? what do you fear your net
's not strong enough to hold your hampered slaves?
Must all our trophies turn into our grave?

Dev. Remember (son) that thou have reigned long,
And vengeance only unto God belong;
The cries of the poor, Widows and Orphans tears,
Have scaled the heavens, and pierced the Almighties cares,
Fight dog, fight bear, I weigh it not a chip,
What Is that to me, I have thee now o'tho' hip;
Thou like a Tyrant, long enough have swayed,
The Feast is pleasant till the Reckoning's paid:
But I Will away, and to their Councels hye,
And I Will assure thee live until thou dye:

Dev. Fare ill, fare well, adieu,


In. Nay father stay
Set me on work before you go away,
I Am dutiful enough;

Dev. Then see my son
Thy actions in their wonted channel run;
Plunder, sequester, pole, pill, fleece and flay them,
Use them as Spunges (dried) dispatch and slay them
With sudda in death, the lives of Nobles stop,
But poorer sneakes bleed a way drop by drop,
And more and more, still as our foes increases,
So let our rage; as Lizards cut in pieces,
Threats with more malice, though with lesser might,
And even in dying, show their living spite,
And so adieu, until we meet in Hell,

In. Both to depart (they say) bids often farewell.


Similes Similibus gaudent.
I To Westminster do direct this book,
To Butcher Bradshaw, and his turn-spit Cook;
Here may they see their Parent, and the root
Whence all their Treason first was set on foot:
For why, the Devil is Synechdochicall,
Speaking to one what he intends to all.
And though I know their Patron's always nigh'em,
(Because they sit and hold their Charter by him)
Yet here they may perceive their service past
Shall be rewarded, either first or last.
These are the Devils two hands to bring about
The trophies, of Tom fool and Copper snout;
And I suppose, so loath they are to despise it,
They Will guild my fist with Greeks, and patronize it,
For Gods sake they will do nothing, 'cause they owe
All to their father Nick, save outward show.
But if these Tyburne Twins do rage and fret,
And threat my throat with tying from my meat
To usher them, then shall they know that I,
As I have lived, am well resolved to dye.
Thou that art honest, read; you are welcome hither,
To hear the Devil and's Child confer together;
And I Am persuaded, all thou here wilt read
Shall be agniz'd an Article of thy Creed.
FINIS.

