A COPY OF A LETTER WHICH Master Speaker is ordered by the Commons house of
Parliament, to send to the Members of that House, that are now Residing in
their several Counties, to further the Advancement of the Adventure for
IRELAND.
SIR,
BY the appointment of the House of Commons, I am to let you know, that they
have sent unto the Sheriff of your County, both the Acts concerning the speedy
reducing the Rebels in Ireland, and likewise the Names of such Members of this
House, as have subscribed here in London to this Adventure, and the sums they
have Adventured; requiring him together with the Justices of Peace of the same
County, to communicate the same with the best advantage in the several
divisions, and that no encouragement might be wanting to a work so Pious in it
self, so necessary to the Peace of both Kingdoms and to the establishing and
assuring the true Protestant Religion therein, and so beneficial to such
well-affected Persons as shall adventure. They have commanded me to require you
to repair to the Sheriff, and to assist him the best ways you can, to
encourage and advance this work, and not doubting of your Public affections,
they assure themselves, that you apprehend the necessity and consequence of
the work so nearly, that you will with such alacrity, as becomes a business
of this Nature; Propound your own Example to the Gentry, and other
well-affected persons of your County, and subscribe to the Adventure in such a
Proportion, as may best stand with your own Occasions; not having more to say,
but that the House will expect an account from you herein, I rest.

I. April, 1642.
A COPY OF A LETTER WHICH Master Speaker is ordered by the Commons House of
Parliament, to send to the several Sheriffs of this Kingdom.
SIR,
BY order of the House of Commons, I am directed to give you notice that diverse
well affected persons to the publque good have underwritten great sums of
money for the speedy reducing of the Irish Rebels to their obedience to his
Majesty, and the Crown of England, and for the advancing of a business of so
general concernment, and tending not only to the common good of both
Kingdoms, and the settling of the true Protestant Religion there, but to the
particular advantage of the Adventurers; The House does hold fit to leave no
way omitted, that may advance and further so good a work. And for that purpose
have commanded me herewith to send you two Articles of Parliament made for the
stating of the Rebels Lands upon the Adventurers according to the proportion of
their respective adventures. And likewise the names of such Members of the
House who have already subscribed to this Adventure, and the Sums they have
adventured, which they have done to the intent you should communicate the same
for the better encouragement of others for following their pious examples, and
therefore they have commanded me to recommend it unto your best care, that you
together with the Justices of Peace (to whom you are to give notice of this
Letter) may in your several Devisions communicate the same to men of the best
quality of your County, and use your best diligence to persuade them to
contribute to so necessary a work, which (with Gods assistance) is not only a
most ready and likely way to reduce the Rebels, and secure the peace and
safety of this Kingdom, but to retribute an ample benefit to the Adventurers.
And you are likewise to signify unto them that who shall subscribe and
interest themselves in this Adventure, they are conceived by the House of
Commons to be persons heartily affected to the public Weal. Sir, your
careful endavours in this service will be very acceptable to the House, and
so I rest.

Printed at London by T. P. for T. B.


