A Copy of a Letter of the taking of LEICESTER On Wednesday the 18.th of June,
1645.

With the Copy of the Articles, and the manner of Storming it the day before:
A List of what was taken in LEICESTER, 14 Pieces of Ordnance, 30 Colors, 200
Arms, 500 Horse, 50 Barrels of Gunpowder.


And all their Ammunition and Provisions, of Bag and Baggage.

The Lord of Loughborough to go to Ashby de la Zouch, and the rest of the
Officers and Soldiers to Lichfield.

The several marches* of the King since he was Routed, and his numbers, and
how pursued by Sir JOHN GELL, and 200 Horse by him taken from the King.

Brought from the Army, and commanded to be forthwith Printed and Published.

June ee 20th LONDON, Printed by THO: FORCET, 1645.

An exact and perfect Relation of the manner of taking of LEICESTER, with the
Treity and all the particulers concerning the same, certified by a Letter from
an eminent person (there) of the Army.
Honored SIR;
Upon the routing of the Kings Army, Sir John Gell gathered together all the
forces of Derbishire, Notinghamshire, and the adjacent parts that he could,
and on Monday the 16. th of June, 1646. They met with some of the Kings horse
and took 200. And another party met with some of the Newarkers, and fell upon
them, and routed them, took 60 Horses, 42 Prisoners, and 80 Arms. The Scots
we hear are at Chesterfield, and Sir William Brereton at Stafford marching
this way.

On the said Monday June the 16. Sir Thomas Fairfax lay before Leicester and
sent in a Summons to the Town, to require the Governor to surrender it to him
for the use of the Parliament; and putting it to them to consider how the King
was routed, and showing them what use they might make of that Clemency, with
diverse other very gallant expressions to the summons, to advertise them how
much better it was for them to surrender then to force him to take it by
storming.

To this summons the Enemy sent a negative Answer, positively this, that they
would not surrender it; whereupon Sir Thomas Fairfax called a Council of War
to consult about the Storming of it, which was soon concluded on; that they
should prepare all things in readiness to round it the next day: which was
done with all expedition not loosing any time.

So they fell presently to raising of Batteries, and doing all things that were
necessary for the storming thereof according as they had appointed, and
continued providing every thing that had appointed, and continued providing
every thing that was requisite for the doing thereof, to be in a readiness to
batter it the next day, and sent into the Country thereabouts for such helps
as were necessary for the work, which went on with great speed both night and
day; so desirous we are to have a speedy end of the work that there may be an
end of these wars if possible.

On Tuesday the 17. th of June, we drew down our Ordnance and played with our
Pieces against the Town, we stormed it playing with our Ordnance very hot on
the Newarke side, which we conceived was their greatest strength? And in short
time we made a breach in their works, which struck such a terror into the
hearts of the Enemy, that the Governor sent to us to destre a Parley, and
offered to surrender upon very fair terms; as upon capitulation should be
agreed upon.

To this request (Sir Thomas Fairfax being willing to save the spilling of
innocent blood as much as may be) he assented: and promised speedily to send in
Commissioners for the treaty, and called a Council of war and it was agreed
that Colonel Pickering, and Colonel Reinsoorough should go into Leicester to
treat with the Governor about the surrendering the said Garrison to Sir Thomas
Fairfax. And accordingly a safe conduct was desired for them, which being sent
they went to Capitulate with the Governor about the surrender thereof.

In the mean time Sit Thomas Farfax was not idle, nor did he loose any time;
but went on providing and furnishing himself with Pittars, Carts, Hay,
Grenades, Ladders, and all other things necessary for storming; resolving to
fall on at their return, in case that they should not agree, not knowing how
things might fall out, during which time there was both great pains and care
taken by all in their places for the going on in the said work.

In the mean time we had Intelligence that the King was on Monday the 16 of
June at Sheffield; that he came from Ash by de la zouch thither with about 2000
horse, or more, the day before, viz. Sunday night, and matched that morning (
viz. Monday morning) to a Randez vouse near Dudley Castle, where with the
Lichfield, and Dudley horse, and others that come in to their Randez-vouses,
the King had above 3000 horse as is conjectured by the Country people which saw
them.

About 11 of the clock on Monday morning, they marched from thence to
Sturbridge, where he had some more Horse came in, so that in all it is
conceived that he is nigh 4000. Diverse of which he has been feign to
rectuite with fresh Arms from Lichfield, Dudley, and other Garrisons the
reabouts.

The King it is believed will for Worcester, and there join with what Forces
Gerhard can releeve him with, and some more Forces that he looks for out of
the West; but Colonel Gerhard has met with a rout also in Shropshire, where
he lost almost 400 men, by fighting with the Country forces, and the Governor
of Worcester was killed, and diverse other Officers of note were sl^ine, and
taken.

All the rest of that day, viz. Monday the 16 of June, our Commissioners were
in Capitulation with the Enemy in Leicester, and the Army went on preparing for
a Storm, having no Answer that night, and looking for their return the next
Morning very early, were resolved to fall on if they had not agreed with the
Enemy.

On Wed^esday June the 18. about two of the clock, the Commissioners, viz.
Colonel Reinsborough, and Colonel Pi^kering, returned with a Conclusion of
the delivery of it up upon these Articles following.

The Articles for the surrender of the Town and Garrison of Leicester to Sir
THOMAS FAIRFAX, for the use and service of the Parliament, agreed on June the
18. th, 1646. Between Colonel PICKERING, and Colonel REINSDOROVGH.
1. THat the Lord Loughborough shall have quarter granted him, and have
protection for his Person to be safely conveyed to the Garrison of Ashby de la
Zouch. 2 That all field Officers, Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Sergeants,
Majors, and Captains, and Lieutenants of Horse, (but not of Foot) shall march
away with their own particular single horse and arms, with protections for
their own persons. 3 That all the rest of the Officers shall be conveyed
safely to the Garrison of Lichfield with Staves only, and no other weapons in
their hand. 4 That all common Soldiers have quarter only for their lives, and
be conveyed to Lichfield without any other weapons, save only staves in their
hands. 5 That before 10 of the clock the said morning June the 18. the
Governor of the Town, and the Lord Loughborough and all the rest of the
Officers, and Soldiers march out of the Garrison according to the agreement
aforesaid. 6 That Sir Thomas Fairfax be permitted to enter in at 10 of the
clock the said Wednesday morning aforesaid, with his Forces, and take
possession of the Garrison. 7 That all the Pieces of Canon, great and small now
in the Garrison of Leicester, be l^ft to Sir Thomas Fairfax. 8 That all the
Arms, and Ammunition now in Leicester be left to Sir Thomas Faitfax, save
only what is agreed to for the Officers of Horse aforesaid. 9 That all the
Provisions, Colors, Bag and Baggage be also left to Sir Thomas Fairfax. 10
That all the Horse (save only those excepted for the Officers aforesaid) that
are in the Garrison of Leicester be delivered up to Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the
service of the Parliament. 11 That all the Officers and Soldiers have quarter
for their lives. 12 That all the Prisoners of War that are in Leicester at
the same time, be released and set free to serve the Parliament.
With these Articles the Commissioners returned to Sir Thomas Fairfax,
certifying further how joyful that poor Town of Leicester was at the hearing
of the said agreement, and that they should be rid of the C^valiers.

Thus you see the Lord does wonderfully for us, above the reach of m^ns
wisdom. Truly we cannot but much admire the goodness of Almighty God to us,
in doing so great things for us, we cannot ascribe it to any but to the hand of
God Almighty, who is the Lord of Hosts.

And it is to be admired to see the carriage of our General, and indeed all the
Officers, how lovingly we agree, how full of Courage all men are, both
Officers and Soldiers when we are in array, what heavenly expressions, there
is from all; and our General does carry himself in so excellent a manner that
it rowsed up the Courage of all that see him; and the like also did Mayor
Skippon, who by reason of his wound could not be here in the taking of
Leicester, but we hope that he will recover; for in all Designs, by his
wisdom and Valor, his very name is a terror to the Enemy.

A List of what was taken at Leicester.
14 Pieces of Ordnance. 30 Colors. 2000 Arms. 500 Horse. 50 Barrels of Gun-
powder.


And all their Ammunition and Provisions, with bag and baggage.

FINIS.

