Supplementum Chirurgiae OR THE SUPPLEMENT To the MARROW OF CHYRVRGERIE.

Wherein Is contained Fevers, Simple and Compound, Pestilential, and not,
Rickets, Small Pox and Measles, with their Definitions, Causes, Signs,
Prognostics, and Cures, both general, and particular.

As also The Military Chest, containing all necessary Medicaments, fit for Sea,
or Land-service, whether Simples, or Compounds, such as purge, and those that
do not; with their several virtues, doses, note of goodness, etc. as also
Instruments.

Amongst which are many Approved Receipts for several diseases.

By JAMES COOK, Practitioner in Physic, and Surgery.

LONDON, Printed for John Sherley, at the Golden Pelican, in Little-Britain.
1655.

COOK's SUPPLEMENT to the MARROW of Chyrurgery.

TO THE ACCEPTING READERS.
FRIENDS,
ALl rhat I have to acquaint you with, as to this part of the Supplement is,
that considering, few having writ fully of Chyrurgery, methodically; whether
more Prolixely, or Concisely, but they either intermixed Fevers with Tumors,
etc. or put them a part by themselves; as may appear in Pareus and Calmeteus. I
resolving to steer the same course, rather choose to follow the latter, that
so you might at a single view know the cure, as well of those Fevers essential,
as accidental. There Is added the Small Pox and Rickets; the latter with the
rest had come in public view before any other printed in this Nation, if it
had been admitted; may be the cause was its insufficiency; however it has
received advantage thereby. You have annexed a Military Chest. The method as to
Names and Order is Hildanus's, the virtues, doses, etc. of all I picked from
various Authors, a Catalogue of which you have in the Marrow only, some others
since have fallen into my hands de novo. I have this only to say further, That
there are several things in all, which have been successefully experimented by

Your worthless friend, JAMES COOK.
Warwick, the 26. of the first month vulg. March.
A TABLE general of things contained in the BOOK.
Sect. 1.
Chap. I. DIary Fever. Page 3 Chap. II. Simple Synochus. Page 7 Chap. III.
Hectic Fever. Page 11 Chap. IV. Interm. Quotidian. Page 102 Chap. V. Quartan.
Page 106 Chap. VI. Compound Fevers. Page 128
Sect. 2.
Chap. I. Putrid Fevers. Page 25 Chap. II. Symptoms of Fevers. Page 71 Chap.
III. Intermitting Tertian. Page 88
Sect. 3.
Chap. I. Pestilential Fevers. Page 135 Chap. II. Rickets. Page 209 Chap. III.
Small Pox, and Measles. Page 260
MILITARY Chest. Page 280
In which is contained, Simple Purgers. Page 281 Compound Purgers. Page 293
Cordial Electuaries, and Powders. Page 301 Aromaticks. Page 315 Waters, and
Juices. Page 319 Syrups. Page 325 Roots. Page 331 Herbs. Page 344 Flowers.
Page 359 Seeds. Page 363 Fruits. Page 367 Oils. Page 373 Ointments. Page 385
Fats. Page 392 Plasters. Page 395 Gums. Page 401 Metals. Page 408 Meals.
Page 415 Instruments. Page 417


BOOKS to be sold by John Sherley, at the Pelican in Little Britain.
The Life and Reign of Sultan Orchan, Second King of the Turks, translated out
of an eminent Tu^kish Historian by W. Seaman, the like not heretofore extant in
any language.

Dr. John Ponet, his short Treatise of Politic power.

The vanity of the lives and passions of men, by D. Papillon Gent.

The Diocesans trial by Paul Bayne.

A brief Compendium of the vain hopes of the Jews Messiah.

Col. Hayes, one of the members for Scotland, his speech to the last
Parliament, upon the debate concerning Toleration.

King James his Judgment of a King and a Tyrant. Henry Earl of Surrey, his
Translation of Virgil into English Meter.

Bristolls Military Garden, a Sermon by Tho. Palmer.

The Pastors Charge and Cure, a Sermon by Nathaniel White.

A plain fault in plain English.

The Impiety of Impunity.

Hugh Broughtons Epistle to the Nobility.

The Kernel or Extract of the Historical part of S. Augustines Confessions.

Ephraim Pagitts Christianographie, or a Description of the multitude and
sundry sorts of Christians in the world.

Dr. Mayes Relation of the Serpent foun^ in the heart of Jo. Pennant, in which
many curious questions concerning occult diseases are discussed.

Potters Interpretation of the number 666.

Mr. John Milton of Prelatical Epiicopacy.

Baro. Herbert de Veritate, de Causis Errorum, Religio Laici, etc.

Disputationum Academicarum formulae.

Tho. Gatakeri dissert. de Tetragammato sua vindicatio.

Good Reader, by reason of the Authors distance from the Press some faults have
escaped, the most material he prays you thus to correct. ERRATA's.
PAge 27. line 13. read yet for ye. p. 27. l. 16 r, turgid, p. 40. l, 7. dele
out. p. 75. l. 14. r. bole p, 114, l. 23. r, s. p, 122, l, 27, after partem put
M j, p. 17 2, l. 10 r, crass. p, 173 l, 3, after those put in p. 175, l, 5, r,
yea, p, 177, l, 13, r, those, p, 182, l, 22, r, ill, p, 194, l, 2, after to put
be putting out that after used, l, 4, r, Mij. p, 206, l, 10, for and r, A, p,
236, l, 9, put a comma after wal-rue, l, 27, for five r, take, p, 240 l, 1, r,
diabalzemer, p. 265, l, 4, f. secondly, r, twofold, l, 11, r, whit, p, 174, l,
22, r, ij. p, 275, l, 10, r, plantain water. p, 286, l, 22, for these r, this,
l, 23, r, sp. 334, l, 10, r. iv. p. 337, l, 21, r, scrophula's p, 340, l, 12,
r, ij. p, 344, l, 10, after kills put worms p, 349, l, 19, r, cleanscth, p,
400, l, 5, for s. r. j. p, 404, l, 2, r, and, p, 406. l, 8, r, if, p, 421, l, 9
r, be, p, 423, l, 18, r, there is after till, p, 424, l, 1, r, Arcei, p, 430,
l, 9, r, ost cocolla.

De Febribus. SECT. I.
PREFACE.
DIseases of the body are either outward, or inward. The latter are either
universal, afflicting the whole body; or particular, affecting some parts. The
first of these are Fevers, which may be divided into simple putrid, and
pestilential; the simple, are diary, intermitting, synochus, and hectic.
Before particulars premise these generals. First, it is a hot distemper of the
whole body arising from preternatural heat kindled in the heart, and diffused
with the spirits and blood through the veins and arteries into the whole body.
Secondly, it is caused by any thing that kindles heat in the body, as motion,
putrefaction, touching and vicinity of hot things, constriction of the pores,
etc. Thirdly it is absolved; First, by altering, wherein so proceed, that the
cause be not nourished. Secondly, by mitigating the Symptoms which are
especially, thirst his cough, vomiting, flux of the belly, dryness,
blackness, and roughness of the tongue, etc. as after.

CHAP. I. De Febre Ephemera.
THis arises from the infla^mation of the vital spirits in the heart,
continuing the space of a day, therefore called Diary. Signs. The cure is
easy, unless it pass into synochus sine putredine in a body young and
plethorick, or into a putrid the fourth, or fifth day in cacochymicks, or in
hecticks, or bodies hot, hydrosacchar. etc. or outwardly applied to the region
of the heart, pulse, and forehead, as oxyrrhodon, etc. Secondly, evacuate,
either by opening a vein, if there be fullness, or by gentle purging, if there
be ill habit. Baths of warm water used by the ancients, are suspected.
Thirdly, strengthen the stomach. sine horrore, urin, and pulse are little
changed, the heat in statu is moderate: here sweating is to be provoked at the
end of the fit. II. Constriction of the pores, known by the hardness and
compactness of the skin, this arises from abundance of blood, cold, binding,
or dryness. It Is cured, cum vino oligophor. valde diluto; which is also
excellent, if from cold, for it helps to open the passages and provokes sweat.
Thirdly, by loosing with hot, and moist temperate bathes, moderate frictions,
quick washings, if it proceed from cold. III. Crudities, and that numerous,
known by the present signs of the affected stomach. Here, First vomit, if
there be loathing, and easiness to vomit. Secondly, purge, if vomiting be
hard. Here glisters may be used, by which part of the crudities may be drawn
away Thirdly, corroborate by medicines, opposing the quality of the offending
humors. IV. Buboes, known by the presence of the bubo, by the swiftness and
greatness of the pulse, much heat, and redness of the face. In this, draw
blood sufficently, the bubo moderately appearing; for so it vanishes, by
applying either repellers or relaxers, otherwise it is to be suppurated. V.
Heat, to this use cooling diet. VI. Labor, here command rest, and a more
liberal diet. VII. Weariness, then use frictions. VIII. Anger, here command
quietness, rejoicing; bridle choler, and use cool meats, and drinks. IX.
Sadness, use the same recreations of mind, and thin wine. X. Watching, here
sleep XI. Hunger, use a cooling and strengthening diet. XII. Obstructions. If
from fullness, bleed; if from ill habit, purge; if these remove not the Fever,
it degenerates into other Fever, the cures whereof shall be set down in their
proper places.

CHAP. II. De Synocho Simplici.
It Is a Fever without putrefaction, or a Diary of many days, arising from the
inflammation of the spirits, and thinner blood, continuing without
intermission, 3, 4, or more days, and is called Inflativa, because where the
blood is heated, the vessels are distended, and there is felt the lassitude of
the body. Signs: i. e. Epacmastica, which increases continually,
Paracmastica, which so decreaseth; and Homoronos, or Acmastica, which keeps the
order or form. Progn. to be cured, because it oftest assaults bodies more
strong, temperate, or more hot, or moist, of a middle, age, and fleshy, unless
it pass to another. Sometimes it vanishes, the fourth day, or seventh, with
plentiful bleeding of the nose, or sweat, unless some notable error has been
committed by the sick, physician, or attendants, and then it may pass to a
putrid, or some other very grievous disease. Causes be not open, or the
intestines be filled with crudity; it is to be mollifying, and loosening.
Secondly, evacuate the first region, lest serous and bilious excrements
increasing, a putrid Fever be produced. These are good, Tamarinds, Rhubarb,
cream of Tartar, and syrup of Roses solutive, etc. for they neither heat, nor
move too much. Thirdly, alter by appointing cooling potions: plentiful drinking
of cold water is now disliked as dangerous, opening Emulsions, and Julips being
more safe; the Julips are made of the waters of Succory, Endive, Sorrel,
Lettice, etc. with the syrupes of Succory, Limons, Pomegranate, etc. adding
spirit of Vitriol, or Sulphur, or spirit of Salt, a few drops. If the waters be
thought too crude, boil them gently with a little Spec. Triasantal, or
Diamargar. frigidu^. An emulsion prepare thus; Take of sweet Almonds pill'd,
and steept in rose water, j. of the four greater cold-seeds, and of white
Poppy, of each 2 dragms; beat them all in a marble mortar, by degrees, pouring
upon them barly-water a pound and a half; after strain it, and dissolve
therein sugar of roses iii. and make an emulsion for to be taken thrice, twice
a day; this is also excellent in watching. To the heart apply this,. of the
waters of roses, buglosse, and lettice, of each three ounces; vinegar of roses
one ounce, diamarg: frigid. js. camphire, vj grains, and make an Epithem,
which apply to the region of the heart, aq. endiv. cichor. acetos. anaiiij.
acet. ros. js. trium santal. ijs. f. Epith. admovend. regioni hepatis, also to
the liver and loins use cooling ointments. Ex oxyrrhod. unguent. refrig. Gal.
vel cerat. santal. oxycrato abluto; forget not glisters. Fourthly; strengthen
cum manu Christi perlat. diamarg. frigid. conser. ros. vitriolat. acetosella,
etc. Fifthly, use a cool, thin, and moistening diet of brothes prepared with
cooling herbs, stewed Prunes, baked or roast Apples; cremor hordei and panadoes,
let the drink be barly-water, or spring water boiled, with Sir. of
Maiden-haire, Limons, etc. adding Sp. Vitrioli.

CHAP. III. De Febre Hectica.
THis possesses the solid parts, which constitute the habit of the body.
Signs sine Tabe, begins, it is difficultly known; in the progress there are
signs of a diary, the heat increases the third day, after meat, others, cum
Tabe, and that is double; one called Marasmodes, when the dewy moisture is
wasted, and the fleshy substance vanishes, then the body waxes lean, the
temples-fall, the palms of the hands, and soales of the feet are hot; the
excrements of the belly, and urin fatty. If there be as bran in the urin, the
bladder not affected, tumor of the legs, flux of the belly, death is
threatened. The other is, when the fibrous and membranous substance is
violated: hence follows Marasmus, which sometimes falls out preternaturally in
young and old, sometimes arising from defect of aliment, extinction of the
heat, either because of age, or a schyrrhous tumor: II. Some are simple, others
are complicate, either cum putrida intermittente, and then the greater part of
the heat remains in fieri, less, passes in factum, and then in the end of
the fit, the place of the arteries are hot, the rest of the parts temperate,
pulse quick, meat strengthens not, or cum putrida continua, and then it is
difficultly known; there remains a dry hotnesse, after the end of the
declination, or whole fever, the body is more extenuated, the urin is fatty;
and oily. Of these, and their degrees, vide Medul. Chirurg. Causes putrid
fever, the putrid is to be removed by bleeding and purging, as also
medicaments opening, and hindering putrefaction, in the interim the hectic is
not to be neglected. If it be simple, then first use coolers, and moistners,
inwardly; as Flor. violur. borrug. buglossae, sem. quatuor frig. lac perlarum,
corallorum, and others very gentle, lest the weak heat be overthrown; as. aq.
endiv. lactucae, acetos. ana iiij. sir. viol. nymph. pomor. ana. j. Misc. f.
julep. pro tribus dos. bis in die sumendis, and per plures dies continuandis;
or. hord. integr. p. j. f. endiv. cichor. lactuc. pimpinel ana Mj. flor.
borrag. buglos. viol. and nymphaeae ana p. j. prunor. Damasc. par. iiij. coq.
ad lb js. in colat. dissol. sir. de cichor. simpl. and de nymph. an. ij. f.
Julep. pro quatuor dosibus; of the same Simples make broth thus. rad. Chinae j
s. hord. integr. P. ij. quatuor sem. frigid. major s. contunde, iisque
impleatur venture capi aut pulli junioris, fiat juscul. cui add. sacch. ros: s.
cap. per longum tempus, it strengthens and feeds.. Amygdal. excortic. and in
aq. frigid. infus. j. sem. quatuor frig. maj. and papav. alb. a. j. contund. in
mortar. marmor. sensim affund. aq. hord. lb j. in colat. dissol. manus Christi
perlat. iiij. f. emuls. pro tribus dosibus; if you would cool more, add to
every dose of Julep and Emulsion, Sal. prunel. ij. vel j. observe, it is more
profitable to cure by degrees, then too suddenly; and moisteners are always
more safe then coolers, because they exercise their power more gently and
slowly. Secondly, purging, if necessary, are Cassia, Manna, vel sir. ros. these
only cast out; yet if crudities stuff the first region, which may be produced
from the weakness of the stomach, then use an infus. ex Rhabarb. cum decoct.
Prunor. Tamarind. Myrob. Bugloss. and Viol. if there be not great weakness: if
putrefaction be joined, those purgers that draw may be used. Thirdly, diet, and
this in all Chronical diseases is of chief use, here, and more then medicam.
therefore there is special care to be taken that it be cooling, and moisten, as
the milk of women, asses, cowes, unless a putrid fever be present; also broths
of chickens, cocks, capons, veal, kid, mutton, yolks of eggs, with barley,
lettice, purslaine, etc. also their flesh, with phesant, partridge, young hare,
panadoes, hordeates, oatmeal-candles, rice-pottage, especially if there be a
flux, add sugar, and a few almonds, or rather the cold-seeds. Boiled meat is
better then roast; if the latter be desired, then roast it less, and temper it
with the juice of limons, oranges, etc. for fish, use those that are taken in
gravelly places. Vide medul. Chirur. For fruit, apples cool the blood, pears,
prunes stewed, or currants thus prepared. passul. mund. lb. j. temperentur in
aq. endiv. bugl. and rosar. and abluantur diligentissime, ut vis laxandi
amoveatur; postea in iisdem. aq. decoq. leviter, add. paulul. sacch. ad
perfectionem, cum quo serventur usui, iisque utatur aeger mane, and post.
singulos pastus. They nourish the body without heating; but because the hectic
heat is fixed in the solid parts, therefore those aliments which are solid, and
viscous, are fit to be used to dissipate it, as the legs, and feet of animals,
flesh of snailes, crabs, tortoises, and frogs: by these the parts are easily
agglutinated, and the dryness of the solid parts removed, they being not
easily wasted with the feverish heat: but these are only to be exhibited in
the beginning, whilst there remains strength in the concoctive faculty, but
in the confirmation not, but rather those of more easy concoction, unless
they be fitly prepared, i. e. boiled to consumption, or prepared by contusion,
especially testudines terrestres; not only in a simple Hectic, but also cum
Tabe. They are diverse ways prepared, either boiled in water, till they be
dissolved, and cast away the shells, and after boiled again in aq. cichorii,
acetos. borag. hordei, and prunor. if a hectic be simple; but if cum Tabe,
then cum fol. rubi, portulac. and plantag. drinking the broth, and eating the
flesh for twenty days; they may be made up in paste; and gently baked; as.
carnis testudin. in aq. hord. elixat. iiij. amygdal. infus. in aq. ros. vj.
pinearum eodem modo infus. ij. 4. sem. frigid. maj. ana. j. anisi non pulver.
sed in furno leviter coct. j s. cinam. ij. sacchar. in aq. ros. dissolut. ad
pondus omnium, fiant morsuli; instead of the snailes, use the pulp of capons,
or partridges, as. pulp capon. and perdicaelixatae a. iij. amygdal. in aq. ros.
macerat. iiij. pinear. j s. sem. papav. alb. ij. gum. Arabic. and Tragacanth. j
s. manus, christ. perlat. ij. cum pauca aq. ros. f. pasta regalis auro obducta;
to those whose stomachs are more weak, give gellies, or strong brothes, as
capon. elect. poplit. vituli vel femor. veruec. pedes vituli N. ij. aut
veruecin. N. vj. coq. in aq. fontan. ad sufficient. consumptione^, jusculum
colat. per expressionem and pinguedin. remotam in colat. dissol. sacchar. alb.
lb j. alb. ovor. N. vj. croci, vel cinam parum; agitentur simul, postea
bulliant leviter, ac transmittantur per manicam Hippocrat. bis, aut ter,
tandemque jusculum accipiatur vasculis, ubi concrescit in gelatinam. If the
taste of the Saffron, or Cynamon displease, or if you would have it cooler,
add instead of them the juice of one Limon, or Citron. For a broth use this,
Take a good Capon pulled, gutted, and chopped to pieces, from which take the fat
and skin, adding if you please Mutton or Veal so ordered; put them in a glassed
pot, in the middle of which let there be a grate of wood, or other matter; upon
which so place the pieces, that the bottom of the pot may be empty, after cover
the pot, luting it well with paste, then boil it in B. M. for 5 hours, there
will be in the bottom a clear broth, of which take with broth, or of it self 2
or 3 spoonfuls, 3 or 4 times a day; these distillations being made per
descensum, strengthen and nourish the solid parts more. Their drink is to be
barly-water alone, or mixed; cum sir. acetos, vel granat. or water wherein is
boiled bread, adding a little Sugar, yet in case the stomach be very infirm,
use thin wine much diluted, which helps concoction, and distribution. Gal. gave
cold water, and by it glories, he preserved many from marasmus. Yet in the
giving thereof there is to be great caution; for where the body is much wasted,
there it is in danger to destroy the languishing heat. It may help, where a
Hectic is threatened, or in beginning in those that are accustomed to drink
it, or where as yet blood abounds. The Air is to be temperately cold; if not,
it is to be corrected; in Summertime the sick is to inhabit under the earth,
which is cold, especially windy, and opens to the West. This alone has cured
in a Month those extremely macerated: if the air be hot in the vault, cast
cold water upon the pavement, or pour it from a vessel (the noise of which
provokes sleep) and then sprinkling the pavement with water will serve, and often
strewing cool herbs. Much company is to be forbidden, unless the Air be very
cold; it is true, cold air may condensate the skin, and so hinder
transpiration; yet the profit gained by receiving it in by inspiration, is
greater then that discommodity which may be helped, if the sick be well
clothed. In case, with the Hectic there be an ulcer of the lungs, then the
Air is to be temperately warm and dry. Motion is not fit, unless gentle, if
strength will permit, a little before meat, or in place thereof soft frictions,
but not much, especially presently after sleep, beginning at the lower parts,
rubbing only till a light redness begins to appear; this calls out the
internal humors, if more, it dries the body; coiture is to be rejected, as
greatly resolving the body: sleep not too long, for it draws in the heat, and
heats the bowels, not too short, for it dries too much; therefore rather the
first, being sleep moistens, which is good in this fever. It Is to be in a soft
wool bed, changing often the linen, which is first to be besprinkled with
Rose Water; Bathes are very beneficial, which are to be moderately hot, using
them in the morning after the excrements of the body are cast out, either by
nature, or art; taking two, or three hours after, broth, or milk, or yolk of
eggs. Let the sick continue in them so long till he wax warm, and after be
cold; but if he cannot stay so long, cold water is to be poured in at pleasure;
yet so, as that there may be in the Bath a threefold quality. The sick is to
stay in the hot a little, in the warm less, and in the cold least of all;
though these by the Ancients were only of simple water, yet it is more
profitable, and humects more, if made of a decoction of mollifying, and
humecting herbs, as Malualthaea, violar. etc. or of Barley, and Almonds, used
especially in Summertime, because those made of herbs sooner corrupt; after
cleanse him gently with warm linen; which done, anoint cum ol. viol. amygd. d.
vel butyro insulso, ung. Zacuti, etc. If the sick cannot endure bathing, then
use Epithemes, as. aq. ros. nymph. and portulac. an. iij. succ. granat. j.
diamargar. frigid. ij. oss. de cord. cervi j. camphor. g. iiij. f. epith. cord.
admovendum, aq. endiv. lactuc. cichor. an. iij. acet. ros. j. trisantal. ij.
spod. ex ebore. j. f. epith. hepati admovendum, to which may be used ung. ros.
vel cerat. santal. but sparingly, because they may increase the fever, whilst
the former medicaments are using, strengthen the bowels with fit opiats, as.
conser. flor. borag. bugl. viol. ana. j. conser. flor. de Nymph iiij. spec.
diamarg. frigid. iiij. rasur. ebor. oss. de cord. cervi a. s. margar. pp. and
coral. pp. a. j. fol. auri N. iij. cum Sir. de pomis fiat opiat. This is to be
observed in great extenuations. Nutritive glisters are often to be cast in, made
of the broths of Chicken, Sheeps-heads, with sugar and eggs, the quantity is
to be but little, otherwise they press the bowels, and stir up expulsion.
The chiefest symptom that follows the disease, is a flux of the belly, which
often brings death, to bridle which, for ordinary drink use the decoct. of barley
tosted, Sir. Cydonior. ros. sic. lact. chalybeat. oriz. coct. in lacte, and
similia. Frogs are excellent in a hectic.

SECT. II.
Preface.
PVtrid fevers are divided into several kinds, as continual, and
intermitting; now the first is subdivided into those that are either primary
essential, or symptomatical; the essential is when putrefaction is inflammed in
the common veins without the private parts, the symptomatical is when the same
is in any particular part, from which by the common vessels, the putrid vapors
are continually communicated to the heart, such appears in Plurisies,
peripneumonias; and inflammations of other internal parts. Again, the primary
continual are double; for one extends from the beginning:o the end without
remission, and is called Synochus or Continens; but others have manifest fits
and remission, and are of three kinds according co the variety of their fits;
as a continual Tertian, Quotidian, and Quartan. Other differences tree given,
which are either accidental, or arising from the ormer: all which shall
briefly and severally be explained.

CHAP. I. De Febribus putridis.
AS continual Fevers are variously differenced, so they might be distinctly
handled, but it is needless, being the same remedies may serve; only a little
varying according to the degrees of the disease, which depends rather upon the
judgment and art of the Physician, then necessity of peculiar precepts;
therefore they may be fitly put together; and what is necessary in respect of
difference, may be noted. Before entry be made upon particulars, receive these
generals. cum horrore and rigore, no antecedent cause preceding, yea no
procatarctick, unless the body be so disposed that it is moved upon small
occasion. Heat from the beginning is not sharp: propter suffocationem, in the
increase biting, propter fuliginosum excrementum; urin is crude, or obscurely
concocted, pulse from the beginning small; the systole more swift then the
diastole, because of the abundance of fuliginous vapors. Thirdly, the
immediate cause is abundance of sharp biting putrid vapors that cannot be
discussed. The mediate is putrid humors, either so in the ill natures thereof,
from ill aliments easily putrefying, or from external, as obstruction of the
pores. Fourthly, aqua benedict. etc. Thirdly, purge; where first, use
lenitives, before preparing, especially in continual, and acute Fevers, then
stronger, after preparing; ye this may be omitted, if the humors in primis
viis, are not mixed with the blood in the veins or it be turned. Fourthly, sweat
by medicament, not too hot, lest the Fever be increased, yet those may be used
in the beginning. It Is to be repeated as often as necessary. V. Diet, in which
let meats of good juice and easy of concoction be used: drink is either to be
nutritive in great weakness, or medicinal, as decoct. Hord. etc. In continual,
at first give little, afterward more copious; in the very fit of intermitting,
none, lest the separation and exclusion of the putrid humor be hindered. But
to return to particulars. A continual primary Fever is begot of putrid humors
contained in the greater veins and arteries, and differs according to the
various nature of the humor. A putrid Synochus arises from putrid blood in
vena cava; and although it may be distinguished into many fits, yet it spends
forth it self as in one, lasting from the beginning to the end. Of this there
are three simple differences; The first is, when from the beginning to the end
it endures equal: in this through the whole disease there is the same quantity
of putrefaction, and this is called acmastica. The second is cal^ed
epacmastica: in this the fit increases a little, because there is more
putrified then dissipated. The third is called paracmastica: in this the fit
decreaseth, here being less putrified then dissipated: these have also their
four times, if they conclude in health, yet various: for acmastic. has a short
beginning and increase, but a longer state, etc. This is to be observed. Time
in putrid Fevers is doubly to be considered, either as to the symptoms, or as
to concoction, or crudity, which two, although they often fall out in other
Fevers, yet not in Synochus. Now a Synochus is twofold, the one from putrid
blood, the other from putrid choler, putrified in the greater vessels, which is
named according to the humor putrified; for although the whole mass of humors
contained in the veins, obtain the name of blood, yet it is to be considered
in its four parts, the more temperate thereof being called blood, the hotter
bile, the more crude and cold phlegm, and the more thick and faeculent
melancholy. Now if the more temperate part called blood do abound and putrify,
it causes Synochus sanguinea, but if the bile, then Synochus biliosa. The
signs Synochus putrida sanguinea has the same signs set down in a simple
Synochus; but more vehement, as heat, watching, pain of the head, thirst,
unquietness: urin in the first two days is not much unlike healthful; but
afterward it is red, thick, very confused, and without sediment; yet sometimes
there is abundance of red and thick sediment: the pulse is great, swift, often,
unequal and inordinate: the systole greater then the diastole; if there be
abundance of humors heaped up in the stomach, in the beginning it provokes
vomiting. If Synochus Biliosa, the urin is sharp, fiery, although in the
beginning crude; pulse swift and often, loathing, choleric vomiting and stools,
thirst bitterness of the mouth, blackness and dryness of the tongue,
delirium; it often falls out in summer, in a dry and hot habit; this is
distinguished from a continual Tertian thus; for this has fits, and that none.
A continual Tertian signs are the same with a burning, only by reason of the
bile it is more sharp every third day, the cause of the remission is as well the
distance of the place where the vapors are begot, as also the less quantity
thereof; for the present vapors are dissipated before others come in the
place. A continual Qua^tanes signs are: the heat is obtuse, and not so sharp
as from choler, yet sharper then from phlegm; the thirst is less then in a
Tertian, but more then in a Quotidian; the pulse at beginning slow, seldom,
languid, after strong, quick, and very unequal; the urin in the beginning thin,
after various; the body dry and lean, the color yellow, the temper cold and
dry, age declining, and the time Autumn, sometimes often spitting. Quotidiana
continua, it is more sharp toward the evening every day, because of the motion
of the phlegm; the heat in the beginning is to the touch gentle, after more
sharp; but unequal, because of the crasse humors which are difficultly
dissolved. Urin in the beginning is white, waterish, and troubled, after
somewhat red and thick. Pulse slow, seldom and less then in other Fevers.
Thirst little, sweat seldom, unless salt phlegm be present, the face is puffed
up, loose and lividish; time, winter; temper, cold and moist, excrements
phlegmy, and the fit daily. Burning Fevers signs are; burning heat, unsatiable
(thirst unless ough causing an afflux of humors from the neighbour-parts
mitigate it) a tossing of the body, urin little, sometimes crude and filthy,
sometimes thin, very bilious and slimy: other signs are set down before in
Synochus Biliosa; but observe; the signs of a bastard burning Fever are more
gentle then the former. Febris Colliquans is known by a sudden Consumption of
the body, and hollowness of the eyes, falling of the temples, sharpness of the
nose, the dejections reddish, fat, tough, stinking, troubled, bilious and
frothy, urin fat and oleous. Febris Horrifica and Assodes are known by what is
to be set down in their description. In Feb. Elodes, the skin is continually
wet with humors, the heat to the touch is not very sharp; if from malign
causes, the urin differs little from healthful; if the fat waste, then its
fatty; if the flesh, then there is like pulse in the urin; or if the blood and
humors waste, then there is a great deal of urin for many days; to these are
added strength much wasted, pulse is small and slow. If from great
putrefaction, the urin is thick and confused, the pulse great, soft, and
frequent. Feb. Syncopalis has its name from the Symptom, and is known by often
swooning and fainting. In Epialas* there is heat and cold felt in the body at
one and the same time. Causes of all are as follows. A Synochus putrid is
wont to be generated of those causes that produce a simple Synochus, and so not
only the constipation of the skin, but the obstruction of the vessel from much
blood, Continua. Tertiana draws it is original from bilious blood putrified in
the Cava, this being produced from hot and dry, or thin diet, hunger, hot and
dry distemper of the liver, etc. Contin. Quotid. is produced from putrid
phlegm in the Cava; it often happens to children and aged, sometimes lasting
sixty days, seldom dissolved before twenty; it extremely weakens the stomach,
hence Cachexia and Hydrops. This Fever falls out seldom, because phlegm does
not so easily putrify. Contin. Quartan. is caused from melancholic blood
putrified in the branches of the Cava, arising from its proper causes: this
happens most seldom. The accidental differences of Fevers are taken from the
complication of perverse Symptoms with the essentials, Feb. Cause. Colliquans,
Horrifica, etc. Feb. Cause. is divided into true, and bastard; the first is from
bile putrified in the greater veins near the heart, in this the Symptoms are
vehement; the second is either from bile mixed with phlegm, or salt phlegm
putrified; and here the symptoms are more gentle. Hence it is manifest, that
there is no other true burning Fever then a continual Tertian, in which the
matter is more sharp and abounding in the vessels near the heart, whereas in a
simple Continual Tertian the matter is less, and in vessels more remote from
the heart. Again, an exquisite burning Fever is of two sorts; one which
continues in one only fit from the beginning to the end, and this is above
called Synochus Biliosa vel Ardens, this is from bile putrified occupying the
vessels most near the heart; Ardens Parodica. In this the same matter is not so
near the heart. Feb. Colliquans is a kind of a burning Fever; for the
greatness of the heat does waste the fat, flesh, and substantial solid parts,
and sometimes the humors in the veins by insensible transpiration, sweat,
urin or stool; it is from a thin, sharp, and bilious matter, which begins to
burn vehemently, and this is not seldom joined with a malign and
pestilential quality Horrific. Feb. in which horror happens, is caused from
bile and phlegm, or serosities mixed, which move unequally, and the horror is
stirred up, either from bile, and crude humors, burnt, putrified and moved, or
thin, sharp, and serous matter biting the sensible and nervous parts; or
lastly, the crude humor shaking nature in vain; hence the heat being driven
back to the center, the extreme parts are cold, and the same presently issuing
out heat. Assodes, this may be referred to the burning Fever, in which the sick
is cast down, grieved with much unquietness, bearing the disease grievously,
and that often with loathing and vomiting, being it arises from sharp bilious
humors biting the mouth, or tunicles of the stomach. Elodes, in this sweat is
continually poured out, and is caused from the great heat of the putrid and
malign matter dissolving the substance of the body, Syncopalis is double: the
one is from humors thin and small, yet venomous and corrupt, and this is
called Minuta; the other is from abundance of crude humors, and is called
Humorosa, which may be referred to pituitous fevers; only here the quantity of
matter is more great, with a weakness of the mouth of the stomach. Epiala, in
this is felt heat and cold at the same time through the whole body. They have
two causes, the one from a certain glassy phlegm mixed with bitter choler
diffused through the whole body: from the choler is the sense of heat, from the
phlegm the sense of cold. The other is from glassie phlegm alone, but partly
putrified, and part not. That which is not putrified causes cold, the other
heat, and both at the same time; it may also be generated, when two
intermitting Fevers fall out in one day, or an intermitting, and continual, the
heat of one Fever falling out with the cold of another. There are other
accidental differences of Fevers, which may be referred to symptomatical.
Those are named Symptomatical, which arise from the putrefaction contained in
any of the bowels, as these following; a Plurisie, peripneumonia, phrenitis,
angina, inflammatio hepatis, and other internal parts, ulcers or abscesses. Yet
diligently observe, that Fevers joined with inflammation of the parts are
sometime essential, and not symptomatical; the inflammation of those parts
following: for the body being full of corrupt blood and stuffed with ill
humors, a Fever is stirred up, and so being in motion, by nature is cast to
the weakest part, or that which is most fit to receive the humor, whence the
inflammation is produced after the Fever, as may be observed in sick, who often
have a Fever two or three days before a Plurisie appear, and so many in the
third or fourth day of a Fever fall into a Phrensy; so for most part in Gouts,
before inflammation, tumors, and pain of the joints appear, there commonly
precedes a Fever for one, or two days before: so the like may be said, when an
Erysipelas. The disposition of the urin also shows the same, discovering
manifest notes of putrefaction contained in the veins; for in the beginning
they appear crude, but after they show signs of concoction: then also the
blood drawn is very corrupt, which is not when Fevers are Symptomatical, or
depend upon other inflammations; now these Fevers, whether Symptomatical, or
Primary, if joined with inflammation of the parts, have their accidental
differences; for if the Fever be from blood, it is called Phlegmonodes; if bile
referring to the nature of an Erysipelas, it is called Typhodes; but a peculiar
Erysip. of the stomach and guts causes Febris Lipyria, in which the outward
parts are cold, and the inner burn, the hot blood and spirits being drawn to
the place inflamed, causes intense heat with unquenchable thirst, whilst the
external parts left by the same, are cold. Feb. Lenta is usually referred to
the Symptomatical; this arises from matter without the vessels poured out into
the substance of some of the bowels, or in the capillary vessels dispersed
through the bowels, and so putrefying. In these is gentle heat afflicting, with
which there is apparent notes of putrefaction, in the urin and pulse no grievous
Symptoms molesting the sick, there is wasting of strength, the body by degrees
consumes, it lasts forty days; purging exasperates, when portion of the
putrefaction is poured out into the veins, it stirs up a Fever. So mild, that
the sick is scarcely sensible of it; others arise from some corruption and
putrefaction out of the bowels, whence by their veins inserted are
communicated putrid vapors to the heart, and heat it; and it is sometimes more
gentle, otherwhile more vehement and acute; these happen most often in
putrefaction of the lungs, call, mesentery, spleen, liver, womb, or the
secondine in the womb; also by fistulas penetrating to the inward parts, and
sometimes by the corruption of these. To these may be added, that often found in
those laboring of the Green-sicknesse, which arise, from serous phlegm poured
out into the body, lightly putrified. Besides these common differences of
continual Fevers, there arise some from peculiar causes which offer themselves,
as is related by Zacutus, of a child who labored of a Fever with grievous
unquietness, convulsive motions, continual loathings, and coldness of the
extreme parts, etc. by blood falling into the stomach after the cutting of the
ligament of the tongue, which he cured by giving of ol. Amygdal. till it
vomited, and glisters: There Is other in children arise, as from corrupt milk,
worms, crudity and teeth, etc. Prognostics are such as follow. Synochus
Putrida, if acute, there be a flux from the beginning, dissolving strength, and
be black and stinking, its ill. Fevers from choler, as they are acute; so they
are dangerous, and that more or less according to the degree of the distemper,
which is not only to be judged according to the degree of heat, but also from
the natural state of the sick, that which most recedes from it, the more danger
is threatened. So a burning Fever in aged, and coming in winter, is most often
deadly; the vehement Symptoms are to be considered in all the faculties, in
the excrements, change of the qualities and proper accidents, and lastly the
strength is to be compared with these; for if the patient appear to have
sufficient strength to encounter with these, there is the more hopes, if not,
there is cause of fear. Quotidian uses to be long from the crasseness and
contumacy of the humor; yet if there fall out in the course thereof many
evacuations, it may be shorter; if the Symptoms be too hard for the faculties,
it is ill; there is often obstructions. of the liver, and spleen, occasioned by its
length, so that there follows a Cachexia, or Hydrops. Quartane primary and
continual is very seldom, yet sometimes it degenerates to an intermitting, and
that is often deadly; for the rest being denominated from their Symptoms, there
to give prognostics is need less; however observe, the prognostics of
Symptomatical Fevers are best drawn from the part affected, vehemence of
Symptoms and strengths of the faculties. Cure ad vasa, or ad vires, either in
the whole, or in part; it corrects the viciousness thereof, revels the flux of
the humors obstructing, restores breathing, cooles the whole body, hinders
putrefaction, and helps to concoct the humors already putrified; therefore
it is to be done presently at the beginning, unless weakness forbid, as in
febris Syncopalis, or other causes, as in age; and here Cups are to take place,
a Glister or a Suppositary is to be premised; for the quantity to be drawn,
it is to answer fullness, strength, age, time of the year, etc. the Ancients in
Synochus putrida, and causus used to let blood to fainting; but it is more
secure and better to do it by repetition. Avicen in these forbids bleeding,
unless urin be red and thick, but nature has instructed us better, who having
foiled its adversary, discharges it by an haemorrhage, and sometimes it
concludes in a frenzy and other inflammations. Lastly, bleeding stays
ebullition, in that the bile with it mixed is drawn forth; for in the mass of
blood contained in the greater vessels there is but a due proportion of bile
remaining. Now if the vrin be crude, and the strength of the sick be lively,
and the blood break forth in a heap together, then only the putrid and that
which offends nature, is cast forth, the more pure remaining in the veins,
nature expelling the most part, this may often be observed; but if it flow from
the vein by drops, it is the most purest. In bilious tempers blood may be taken
sparingly, especially in the middle of Summer, or the Dog-dayes. In pituitous
and melancholic Fevers the less quantity of blood is to be taken; yet in the
first it may be securely done, if the urin be thick and red; in the latter it is
to be drawn from the left arm; in these there is to be regard had, both to
coindications, and contraindications, as when a Quotidian falls out in
children, or aged, in cold regions, or wintertime; also if it be from too much
labor, bleed more sparingly; if a Fever be from too much venery, to bleed is
pernicious. For the time of bleeding, it is not to be done presently upon taking
of meat, but when concoction of the stomach is perfected, and the belly
discharged from excrements. It Is to be performed rather in time of remission,
then in the strength of the fit; for nature cannot well bear the impetus of the
disease and ven. sect. together; that which respects reiteration, if necessary,
it may be the same day, if to evacuate; but if to revell, then in diverse days;
for where it is to evacuate (especially in acute diseases) the body is often
suddenly transferred to another state, the principio presently passing over;
and then bleeding is not so profitable although it may be used. In revulsion
there is respect had to the motion of the humor; therefore reiteration by
intervals is good; for by this the blood in any part is drawn into the veins,
and so farther; bleeding is to be repeated, especially if that drawn be very
putrid, and there seems to be a great quantity in the veins; its most fit to
be performed on the right arm, yet also on the left, when therere's greater
tension of the left Hypochondria then the right; yet if to revell, and strength
be little, the matter assault the head, and there be pain of the head, and
watching, to open veins in the feet is most profitable. Frictions in putrid
Fevers are seldom used, unless in syncopalis; Cups may be often used if
necessary, especially with Scarrification, in case strength and age will not
permit ven. sect. II. Pharmaceutica is to be used, and this is of two sorts:
evacuation, and alteration; the first comprehends purging, vomiting, sweating,
and pissing; in the second is cooling, attenuating, inciding, opening, and
strengthening; all which with their composition and use shall be orderly set
down, beginning first with purgers. It Is controverted by some, whether there is
to be purgers used in the beginning of a putrid Fever, which is thus resolved.
If the quantity of the matter immediately producing it, be contained in the
greater veins, purging in the beginng is not fit, unless it be turgid, i. e.
so stirred up by nature, and provoked by the ill quality thereof, that there is
an endeavor to expel it; for hence it is more ready for excretion; and if not
removed, it is to be feared may rush upon some noble part, and do great hurt,
yet this seldom happens, and therefore concoction is much to be desired before
the matter be evacuated. But if the quantity of the matter contained in the
first ways be much, by which the Fever is much increased; nature burdened, and
the matter contained in the veins be kept from concoction, then purging may be
exhibited the day after bleeding, but so gentle, as only to evacuate the first
ways, i. e. the stomach, guts, midriffe or praecordia, which may be known to
abound by loathing, bitterness of the mouth, thirst, pain in the stomach and
other parts contained in the lower belly, flux, and other symptoms, upon which
account purging sometimes may be permitted the very same day a vein is opened,
with these or the like. cassiae rec. extract. j. pulp. Tamarind. s. cum Sacch.
cand. alb. f. bol. or diacathol. vj. Elec. lenit. vel diapruni simp. s. cremor.
Tart. j. f. bol. or fol. endiv. cichor. acetos. an. Mi Tamarind. s. coq. ad
iij. in colat. dissol. catholic. s. Mannae elec. and sir. ros. an. j. Misce, f.
pot. if you would have it a little stronger, add rhab. j. vel. iiij. in aq.
endiviae, vel cichorii infus. cum Santal. citri, yea rather sometimes if the
Fever be not too intense, add ij, vel iij Senae to the decoction. Some reject
rhubarb, because it heats, also Manna and Sir. ros. because they are sweet and
easily turned into choler, but being either infused or decocted in cooling
waters they cannot be ill, especially if in the said decoction be added Pulp.
Tamarind. which in this case is excellent. Some use in bilious Fevers the whey
of Goats milk, which tempers the heat of the Fever, evacuates choler, and
strengthens the bowels, in Cyatho uno seri lactis insunde per noctem rhab. j.
vel j s. or add Sir. ros. ij. vel iij. exhibit in the morning, and after that
drink lb ij. Note that Purgers to be used in the beginning of Putrids are
called Minoratives, but those used when the matter is concocted Eradicatives,
which also may be fit in the beginning. First, if the matter be turgid, i. e.
either moving to a determinate part, or so disposed as to rush into a part,
which may be perceived by light and wandering pains in diverse parts speedily
moving, as also often change of color in the face. Secondly, if the humors in
primis viis. be not mixed with the blood in the veins.

Sometimes in the beginning of these Fevers, if the sick be given to loathing
and vomit, nature is to be imitated and helped in her motion, lest the
abundance of excrementitious matter do not only hinder its concoction, but
also whither soever it is carried, change the humors into the like, and so
increases the peccant matter. For all uncleanness contained in the stomach,
spleen, pancreas, mesentery, and hollow of the liver, are profitably
discharged by vomit, which sometimes cannot be removed by purging medicines,
though often reiterated. And it is not seldom observed, that the matter cast out
by vomit does take away the Fever at the beginning, which otherwise would
continue long, that matter in the more inward parts of the body, and mixed with
the blood being transmitted. Vomiting medicines are of three sorts, the more
gentle are to be used; as aq. Hord. tepid. cum ol. Amygd^d. or aq. Commun. cum
aceti alb. exigua quantitate, also Sir. acetos. aut oxymel. Simpl. cum jure
pulli, vel decoct. Sem. anethi, raphani, aut atriplicis, to which ad oil. The
quantity to be given is lbj, or more, for les will be retained in the stomach.
But if these be too weak, and not efficacious, it is lawful to fly to more
powerful, as is set down in the General cure. Glisters are not only to be
cast in from the beginning before bleeding, but also every, or every other day
through the whole cure, if the belly flow not freely. They are to be made ex
decoct. emollient. and refriger. as of barley, prunes, mallow, violet-leaves,
mercury, bears-foot, atriplex, lettice, endive, Semperviva, nymphaea, in which
dissolve Catholic. cassia, diaprun. S. Sacchar. rub. mel viol. mercurialis, ol.
Nympheae, viol. etc. Yet in more intense Fevers use not oiles, because they
easily inflame. First.
Frst, the quantity of your Semperviva is not above three or four Scales in the
decoction of one glyster, lest it cool too much, and hurt the guts. Secondly,
glysters in all bilious Fevers are not to be cast in actually hot, but gently
warm. In pituitous Fevers the decoctions are to be made of Emollients with the
seeds of Fennel, Anise, Carthamus, and the flowers of Camomile, Melilot,
dissolving therein Hierapic. S. Diaphoenic. Mel. ros. Mercurialis, ol. Anethi,
Chamom. vel communis. And whereas above it is noted, Eradicatives are not to be
used unless the matter be concocted, the Physician from the beginning after
the first bleeding, and evacuating the first ways, is to use such medicines as
prepare the humor to concoction and evacuation, which together temper the
feverish heat, hinder putrefaction, and open obstructions; such are juleps
broths, and Emulsions formed as follows; Juleps in a bilious matter are made
ex Syrup, Limon. Granator. de Agresta, Acetosa, Sir. de suc. acetos. de
Cichori. simp. oxysacchari cum aq. Endiviae, acetosa, graminis, and cichori: or
much better, ex decoct. rad. acetos. cichorii, capill. Veneris, Scariol. Dentis
Leonis, Sem. frigid. Tamarind. cum Syrup. praedictis; and sometime to cool
intensely, add Sal. prunellae j. for every Dose of the Julep, or spir.
vitriol. vel sulphur. q. s. ad gratam aciditatem. Also this is excellent..
Succi pomor. redolent. recent. extract. and per residentiam depurati iiij.
Succ. limon. iij. aq. ros. ij. Succ. mal. granator. j. Sacc. alb. lb s. f.
julep pro tribus dosibus. But if choler be very thin, quae orgasmum faciat, or
brings forth Diarrhea, or other grievous flux of the belly, Juleps are then to
be made of incrassers, as ex aquis lactuc. portulac. papav. erratic. nymph.
rosar. cum Sir. ros. Sicc. viol. jujub. papav. erratic. papav. albi, or ex
decoct. lactuc. portulac. plantag. flor. Nymph. papav. erratic. and viol. cum
Sir. praedictis. Yet note, that Sir. viol. and those more sweeter are not to be
used alone, because as they loose the stomach, so they increase thirst, being
turned by the heat of the stomach into hot vapors, before they can penetrate
into the veins,
therefore mix them always cum Sir, acetos. that so they may the more easily
penetrate, and resist the feverish heat. In the progress of the Fever
concoction appearing, add to the former decoct. rad. asparag. liquirit. fol.
Agrimon. pimpinellae, hepaticae, and capil. Veneris. In Chronick, and pituitous
Fevers, those things are to be prescribed which incide, attenuate, and open
more, beginning with the weaker, as Sir. acetos. capil. Veneris, Byzant. cum
decoct. Agrimon. capill. Veneris, betonic. liquirit. passul. In the progress,
to the former is to be added syrup. de duobus and 5. radic. acetos. compos. de
Hyssop. oxymel. simp. and compos. and to the decoct. add rad. 5. aperitiu.
fol. Hyssop. card. bened. and (If the matter be much impacted, tough, and
viscid) chamaedryos, and centau. minor. to which if sal tartari, and spir.
vitriol. be added, it will work more happily. In melancholic Fevers is to be
added that which has a quality to humect, as syrup. violar. buglos. borag. de
pomis, in principio, but after sir. de fumaria, and epithym. de 5. rad. oxymel.
scill. cum. decoct. prun. bugloss. borrag. ceterach. capil. Veneris, fumaria,
lupulor. afterward ex. cuscuta, scordij, centaur, minor. cortic. capp. fraxini,
and tamaisci. And lastly, in bastard fevers arising from a mixture of diverse
humors, the foresaid remedies are to be mixed, yet so as the prescribed
medicaments must answer the predominant humor. For the more dainty, medicated
brorhs may be used; instead of juleps; and lest the long use of them may weary,
the roots and Herbs more grateful are to be chosen; and to them, sometimes when
you would cool more, add sal. prunell. vel. spirit. vitriol.

In gentle and long fevers produced from contumacious obstructions, Chamaedris,
though bitter, may be boiled in broth with cichory, it is admirable. In
pituitous fevers the decoction of camomile-flowers is excellent. Emulsions are
very grateful having place here, they are to be used, especially, where with
the fever is joined a dry distemper of the bowels, a thin catarrh, or an
inflammation of the lungs, and the parts of the spirits; or lastly, the forms
of remedies are to be changed, that the patient may not be wearied with the
long use of any of the compositions which are before prescribed. The exhibiting
of great quantity of water has been used and praised both by new and old, but
it is use may be suspected, yet with some addition of spir. vitriol. to the
quantity of X. vel. Xij. may help to allay the great heat of fevers, the
spirits fits the water to open obstructions, and penetrate the sooner,
spreading over the bowels, neither stays it in the Hypochondries, as aquasimp.
does. Mineral waters are good although taken in great quantities, not troubling
the Hypochondries, being speedily cast forth, these open obstructions, amend
strength dejected by the vehemence of the fever. Opiats, and condites to
strengthen are to be made of the conserves of borage-roots, of the leaves of
sorrel, wood sorrel, stalks of lettice, of the flowers of borage, buglosse,
violets, cichory, roses, and pulpe of citrons: adding the powders of coral,
pearl, shavings of jvor, hearts horn; Diamargar. frigid. Trisantal. Diarrhod.
Abbatis, Confec. Alkermes, and de Hyacinth. as. conser. flor. borag. buglos.
and rosar. an. j. confoc. Alkermes j s. diamargar. frigid. rasur. eboris,
coralli. proep. and Margar proep. an. s. sacchar. ros. ad pondus omnium; fol.
Auri. Niij, fiat. conditum auro coopertum, quo utatur frequenter ex cochleari
per se superbibendo parum aq. vel potus ordinarij, vel cum eadem aqua pro potu
admisceatur, vel cum jusculis.. conser. cichor. acetos. lactuc. and acid. citri
an. s. pull. santal. citrin. and margar. praep. an j. spir. vitriol. s, cum sir.
viol. f. opiat.. conser. buglos. rosar. and viol. an. j. aq. Endiv. acetosae
and boragin. an iij. Misceantur, simul, calefiant super cineres, and per colum
trajiciantur; deinde add. confec. Alker. ij, diamarg. frig. s, coral. praep.
Margar praep. and rasurae Eboris. an. j, sir. de limon. and granat. iij, Misce,
detur singulis vicibus cochlear. 1. For the more delicate, and where strength
is much spent, this is most excellent, and grateful;. aq. acetos. Nymph. and
rosar. an. j s. sir. granat. and limon. an. j, confect. Alker. j, Misce, utatur
ex cochleari frequenter. Remedies altering, preparing, and concocting, having
for several days been used; purging is to follow, the fever declining, and
signs of concoction appearing, shunning the critical days, it is to be done
with a little stronger purgers then used in the beginning, as sen. rhab.
agaric. diacathol. duplex, etc. which are to be fitted according to the humor
offending, and the nature of the disease. Also sometimes diagrediated medicines
may be used, as, Diaprun. soluti. diaphoeni. Elect. succ. ros.
aut diacartham, which are most seldom to be used in continued putrids,
because they greatly inflame the humors, and stir up vehement thirst,
especially in burning fevers, wherein they are very hurtful, yea rhubarb,
although benign, and most excellent, yet in very bilious fevers it is
suspected, because endued with a notable force to heat and dry, but that may be
much amended, if it be infused in cooling waters, and mixed with the decoction
of Tamarinds, and cooling herbs, adding Cassia, sir. ros. de cichor. cum rheo,
and similia. If the fever be long, purgings are often to be repeated, casting in
preparers, and concocters, till the whole seat of the matter be removed;
otherwise, if purging be left before the fever be wholly ended, it will be in
danger to return. Yet take these restrictions.
If after many repetitions of purging the fever perseveres, and by degrees
wastes the sick, and seems to hasten a Tabes, leave purging, and oppose the
fever with altering medicines and good diet; for it sometimes happens where a
certain ill affect of the bowels causes long fevers, then as long as
medicaments are used, so long it persists; besides, by desisting, nature, which
before was wearied, gaining strength, concocts the cause of the disease, and
after expels it; yet if gentle fevers arise from obstructions, such as often fall
out in children, often purging and gently, per Epicrasin, drawing out the humor,
is wont to remove the disease, especially if made of rhubarb, which both
opens obstructions, and strengthens the Entrals; and this is to be taken
every day, being infused in aq. End. recent. lb j. rhab. j. dos. iiij. in the
mornings till the fever be removed, or use it for ordinary drink, as Rhei. s.
vel j. according as the child can bear the taste, beaten, and lapt up in a rag,
and infused in water 2 or 3 pints cold, for a whole day. This is to be
continued for a month, or longer if the contumacy of the disease require it;
sometimes, if the fever be very gentle, and the body phlegmatic, some wine may
be added, which corrects the taste of the rhubarb. After the purging of the
Morbifick matter, nature in the declining of the disease casts out the rest by
urin; which although it comes in abundance and thick, its motion is to be
helped with temperate Diuretics, as are above prescribed, in Emulsions,
opening juleps, and broths; to which if the fever be very remiss, may be added
some roots of fennel, and parsley; or leaves of wormwood; and that especially
in pituitous and continual Quotidians. But if nature drive out all the rest of
the matter to the habit of the body, sweating is to be used, but not with those
properly called Sudorificks, which are strong, but those temperate which are
almost the same with Diuretics, and do not only by an attenuating quality
dispose the humor, but also help nature to expel it. By the way, most fit to
these may be added, aq. Card. bened. scabios. spir. vitriol. and others; and to
be prescribed in malign fevers more largely. Besides inward remedies, outward
are to be applied in the state or declination, after the internal feverish heat
by coolers is repressed, and the greater part of the putrefying humor is drawn
forth, but not upon critical days: They profit to temperate the heat, relax the
pores, and strengthen the principal parts, as. aq. buglos. acetos. Nymph.
rosar. aena iij. aceti ros. vel succ. limon. j. spec. diamarg. frig. and
Trisantal. ana iij. Camphor: and croc. ana gr. v. misc. f. Epith. applica
tepide cord. cum panno scarlatino, to strengthen the more, and mend the smell,
add aq. Naph. ij. confect. Alker. j. where you desire to corroborate more,.
conser. bugloss. and ros. ana j confect. Alker. ij. diamarg. frigid. j s. cum
succ. limon. vel aq. ros. f. Epithema solidum, appl c. post liquidum. Or this
which is better,. confec. Alkerm. de Hyacinth. ana iij. Spec. Trisant. and
diamarg. frig. ana ij. cum aq ros. and f. instar liniment. quo illinatur regio
cordis. Also to strengthen, to call out the feverish heat, and vapors, apply
young pigeons cut in the middle to the region of the heart, which may be
sprinkled with cordial powders, as diamarg. frig. and Trisantal. or anoint that
region cum liniment. Cardi. To the liver apply this.. aq. Endiv. acetos.
cichor. ros. ana iij. aq. lactuc. ij. aceti ros. s. Spec. Trisantal. j s.
Spodii s. Campho. s. f. Epith. To cool more;. Succ. cichor. Endiv. ana lb. s.
succ. lact. and acet. ros. ana. ij. pull. trisantal. ij. misc. f. Epith. anoint
the same region with this. ung. ros. j s. Ceral. santal. j. Succ. Endiv. j s.
ol. ros. and cer. ana q. s. ut f. ung. cui add. aceti ros. parum unctionis
tempore; It may also be used to the reins and loins, and because of that
great consent betwixt the stones and the principle parts, so that these cooled,
in great part quench the heat of the whole body: it is profitable to apply
coolers to them also; as. aq. Nymph. plantag. rosar. and cichor. ana iij. aceti
ros. j s. vini alb. ij Misc. hisque immergatur linteum quo actu frigido testes
involvantur; Refrigerating the feet and hands, do much help from that consent
they have with the whole body being the Arteries, Nerves, and Veins, end in
those parts. Some may think these may hinder the breathing forth of the
excrements, but that is not to be feared, being few flow thither, therefore they
more help then hurt: Balls of Marble, Crystal, or Lead, are to be held in the
hands, or macerate them in cold water wherewith there is mixed wine-vineger. To
the soales of the feet apply fol. lactuc. Nymphoeae, aq. and acet. immersa, or
wash both hands and feet with this, fol. lactuc. semperv. viol. portulac. fol.
vitis, salicis, ana Mj. cap. pap. N. xii. vel fol. ejusd. (si adsint vigiliae)
Mj. acet. j. vini alb. ij. aq. font. q. s. f. decoct. cui add. si lubet,
lixivii parum ad corroborationem articulorum, hoc laventur manus and brachia,
pedes and tibiae tepide, bis in die, aut semel hora somni. The Ancients in
putrids have used a bath of aq. dulc. but it is dangerous, unless the fever be
long, the body be hot, dry, and squalid, and seem to degenerate into a Hectic.
This is to be noted, if the fever end by Crises; the rest of the diseased
matter is to be removed by purging, especially if the Crisis be made by sweat,
or Hemorrage; for by these only, the thinner part of the matter is cast forth,
the thicker remaining behind, which acquiring new heat, procures a relapse.
Therefore that Crisis made by a flux of the belly, is wont to be more secure,
yet is it not so to be confided in, as to forbear purging; for even to the last
the praecordia are defiled, and the aliments corrupted, whence either is raised
(as has been observed) a recidivation, or another disease caused; therefore
it is much better once and again to repeat gentle Catharticks; so to remove all
the rest, that that which is feared, may be prevented. For Diet, quilts are
better then fetherbeds, and if the feverish heat be much, it is fit they be
covered with leather; the bed is to be large, that therein the sick may change
places. The linen and other clothes are often to be changed, so that they be
not newly washed, smell of washing, or shifted at time of Crisis, in which
nothing is to be removed, lest the motion of nature be disturbed. The Rays of
the Sun are to be shut out, and much company shunned. Pour water often from
one vessel to another, besprinkle the pavement with water and vinegar, or
rose water, or cold herbs, and flowers, as violets, willow-leaves,
water-lilies, and roses, changing them often in a day; for being dry, they heat.
If there be too much coldness, as in winter, it is to be temperated with a
little fire without smoke. In fevers from phlegm, the Air ought to be meanly
hot and dry. For Aliments, in acute fevers they ought to be thin; the diligence
of the Ancients was much in this, appointing it as the greatest part of the
cure, and if the fever of the sick be most acute, they commended the diet most
thin, nourish the sick only with barley Ptisans, as the most fit, which cooles,
humects, and together attenuates, opens, and hinders no evacuation. These
Ptisans are double, one called simple, not strained; the other is, and is
called, Cremor Hord. the barley is to be boiled in water. But now, what through
the obstinacy of the patient, and the indulgency of the Physician in what fever
soever, though never so acute; leave is given to take broths made of chickens,
capons, mutton, and that every third or fourth hour, in these are boiled
cooling herbs, as Lettice, Endive, Purslain, Sorrel; the broth may be also
mixed with juice of limons, oranges, or citrons; if the feverish heat be great,
and the putrefaction be intense. In fevers less acute, Panatello's may be
given, 2 or three a day, made of bread and broth, also Hordeats with broth and
sugar, or without broth, adding sweet Almonds, but that often troubling the
stomach, it is better to use simple broths, and Panatella's, yet it is very
profitable to boil flesh, adding barley, and so prepare broths. In long fevers
a fuller diet may be admitted, as the flesh of pullets, veale, hens, capons,
partridges, and mutton, or any of them, contused and boiled into jelly, is fit;
but observe, they must not be given in the fit, but when the fever is remitted,
yet if the fit be long, they may be permitted in the declining thereof; in all
continual fevers; a Ptisan of barley and licorish is good, to which if the
fever be hot, add lettice, sorrel, Tamarinds, etc. and to these is wont often to
be added, rad. gram. vel acetos. In long fevers, add rad. foenicul.
petroselini, sem. Anisi, coriand. aut cinam. If the stomach be weak and
offended,. ptisan. vulg. ex Hord. and liquirit. lb ij. spir. sulph. q. s. ad
gratam aciditatem C. C. usti j. utatur pro potu ordinario, vas usus tempore
agitando; or aq. panata alone, or sweetened with sugar, or mixed with a little
vinegar, or water alone boiled, that the crudities thereof may be removed, with
which mix sometimes sugar; as also, the juice, or Syrup of limons,
pomegranates, barberries, cherries, or Spir. vitriol. aut sulphur. q. s. ad
gratam aciditatem, or Sal prunellae, a little, if you would cool more
powerfully; also water wherein are infused Tamarinds, barberries, or prunes,
the decoction of prunes; or boil barley with Tamarinds, and toward the end,
add Santal. citri. and cinam. which drink does not only quench thirst, but
loses the belly, and strengthens, and cools the liver.. Sacchar. fin.
viij. Sal. prunel. j. f. pull permiscendus ptisan. pro potu; to which (if thirst
be great) add spir. vitriol. This is to be observed,
that Spir. vitriol. and sulphuris is to be much used in putrid fevers, both of
them having a notable force in cooling, opening, resisting putrefaction,
prohibits humor from inflaming, and quenches thirst; but yet in Pleuritis,
peripneumonia, haemoptoe, phthisis, and the rest of the affects of the lungs
(unless the vessels thereof obstructed, have risen from crasse phlegm)
inflammation of the stomach, Dysenteria, sangu. mict. the ulcers of the reins,
and bladder hurt much, and therefore in such cases to be forborne. In fevers
from bile very thin and hot, or joined with a thin and sharp distillation;
sharp things are not fit, but rather those which gently incrassate, as Sir.
viol. rof. sicc. cum aq. Hord. vel panata, vel cocta simpliciter permixtus,
when tough and thick humors abound, Sir. acetosus, in the place of the
foresaid, will be most profitable. Sometimes may be used, conser. viol. buglos.
etc. boiled in water, and drawn through a bag, adding some drops of Spir.
vitriol. Or prepare a Tincture of roses, for in color and taste, it is most
pleasant, as. ros. rub. sicc. j. aq. tepi. lb. iij. spirit. sulph. j s. aut
vitriol. infund. per 3. vel 4. hor. frigidae colatur: add. sacch. alb. iiij.
aq. ros. lb. s. f. julep. clarum pro potu ordinario; in the same manner may
other tincture of flowers be made. Julep. Alexandr. is not a little profitable,
and most pleasant; as,. aq. fontan. lb. j. aq. ros. succ. limon. and sacc. alb.
ana iiij. coq. lento igne dum despumaverint. Sleep is very profitable, watching
hurtful, yet too much sleep overwhelmes the native heat, and hinders the
evacuation of excrements. Rest is necessary in acute fevers, but in longer
light exercise is profitable, and often to be used, lest that which according to
nature ought to be expelled, be retained, although all immoderate evacuations,
which exhaust the strength, are to be stayed, and all vehement, perturbations
of the mind are to be shunned.

CHAP. II. De Symptomat. Febrium.
Symptoms accompanying fevers, are diverse; but they are ordinarily more
powerful and vehement in putrids, and therefore they require the next place to
be handled. The remedies prescribed accommodating the disease, may remove some,
but others must come under peculiar consideration, such as often more molest then
the disease it self. Pain of the head, watching, and light-headednesse, are
cured almost with one and the same remedies, i. e. with revellers, repellers,
derivers, resolvers, and anodyns. For to revell or draw back, use glisters,
emollient, and loosing, gentle purging, bleeding, cups, and washings of the
feet. To beat back, use frontals, oxyrrhod. unguents, or liniments. To derive,
open the veins of the forehead, and use vesicatories. And to resolve, use
oiles, and Animals, the which also are anodyns; with these are to be exhibited
proper Juleps and Emulsions, to temperate hot and sharp humors in great
necessity, and where the foresaid remedies prevail not, (the matter of which
medicines are to be found in their proper Chapters, viz. in pain of the head,
Delirium, etc.) Narcoticks may be used of all, but especially of narcoticks,
observe that they be not used in the instant of the crisis; for they will
powerfully disturb the motion of nature, and hinder the crisis. Convulsions
sometimes happen, especially in Malign Fevers, from malign vapors, gnawing
the membranes of the brain. This is to be helped with revelling Glisters, and
Cups, as also giving pull. gutteta, or others proper, in juleps, or broths; and
lastly, anoint the spine of the back with oil of Chamomel, Violets, Amygd. d.
and de Nuc. myristica. Profound sleep coming upon Fevers, is to be cured with
remedies prescribed in sleepy diseases, with this proviso, that those things
heating very much, are least to be used. Thirst is to be eased with drinks
cooling and humecting, but if it be so intense, that moderate drinking
suffices not (for immoderate much hurts, and often casts the siok into danger
of life) other deceiving helps and qualifyings are to be used; as first, cold
air is to be drawn in, the sick is to remain silent, shutting the mouth, and
breath by the nose, and indulge sleep, after wash the mouth with aq. Hord.
tepida, or water in which jujubes, sobesten, Prunes, Liquirish, Lettice,
Purslaine, and the like is boiled. Let him hold in his mouth a piece of
Liquirish shaved and macerated in oxycrate, or wash the mouth often with aq.
Hord. aut simplic, cum modico Aceti, aut cum Succ. Limon. Granat. vel tantillo
Spir. Vitriol. or hold in the mouth the stones of Pomgranates, prunes, or the
peeles of Lemons, Oranges, Citrons, macerated in Rose Water, with a little
Sugar, also the stalks of Lettice, Endive, or Purslaine, or the leaves of
Sorrel, slices of Melons, Cucumbers, first macerated in water, or sharp
Cherrys, Tamarinds, or pieces of Crystal. Also Sugar moistened in Rose Water
with Spir. Vitriol. and again dried. If these will not remove; drink is to be
permitted though in principio, and increase; little, or none, in the state,
some more, but most in the declination, for that drives the heat outwardly, and
sometimes moves sweat, especially largely in intermitting Fevers toward, and in
the end of the fit. The drinks are fit to be of various matter; some are
prescribed in the former Chapter. If thirst draw its original from bilious
matter contained in the stomach, it is to be purged, either by vomit, or stool.
Vomiting is to be provoked, if the sick be full of loathing, cum Sir. acetos.
simp. j. s. aq. Hord. vel decocti Raphan. v. But if not, or there be less
loathing, then purge with a been ex cassiae j. pulp. Tamarind. iij. vel Mannae
ij. in decoct. prunor. and Tamarind. soluta. or,. cassiae rec. extract. vj.
Mucilag. sem. psyllii s. decoct. Hord. prunor. and Tamarindor. iiij. Sir. ros.
j. Misc. f pot. Elec. Zacuti is excellent. The heat, dryness, and roughness
of the tongue and roufe of the mouth, is helped with the following.. Mucilag.
sem. Cydonior. j. Mucilag. Sem. Malu. s. Spec. diamarg. frigid. and sacc Candi.
an. j. Sacc. alb. q. s. f. Eclegma, or. Mucilag. sem, psyllii extrac. cum aq.
Lactuc. vel rosar. s. Sir. Viol. Limon. vel Granat. an. j s. Misce, capiat
parum per intervall. in ore detineat; vel. sem. Cucumer. s. sem. cydonior. ij.
gum. Tragacanth. j s. contunde sem. and gum. dissol. in a^b. ovi, Misceantur
omnia, and f. Trochis. ore detinendi. Or,. Sem. psyllii, Cydonior. an. j s.
gum. Traga. s. Sacc. Cand. Violat. iij. cum Mucilag. gum. Trag. f. Troch. vel
Linteo raro includantur, ut f. Noduli, qui macerentur in aq. rosar. and ore
teneantur. If the roughness be much, and stick fast, make gargarismes ex
decoct. Hord. rad. Althae. fol. lactuc. portulac. flor. Viol. ad. Mel ros. Sir.
Viol. vel Sacchar. candi. vel oxymel. simpl. If filth cleave to the tongue, and
be much, it is to be cleansed with a rough cloth wet in oxycrate, to which also
may be added the juice of Houseleeke, and sal prunellae. If heat be more
intense with notable blackness of the tongue, mix with them more coolers, and
humecters. As,. Succ. Lactuc. Sempervi. Limon. an. j. Mucilag, Sem. Cydon.
Sacc. Cand. an. s. Sacch. alb. q. s. f. Looch. vel,. Sempervivi recent. M. i.
aceti ros. iij. aq. Hord. lb j. Coq ad 3. partis consumption. in colat. dissol.
Sal. prunel. j s. alum. j. Sir. Viol. and diamori, an.. j. f. Gargar. or Sal.
prunell. Solum in aq. Sempervi. dissolvatur, eoque utilissime lingua, and
fauces abluuntur, necnon particula absorberi potest, ut ad aesophagum simili
ardore affectum provenire possit. outwardly the throat and neck is to be
anointed with oil of Violets and Butter washed in Rose Water; this humects the
throat. To cool, use unguent. ros. refrig. Gal. etc. but it is best to apply
the leaves of Lettice, and Purslaine bruised, and infolded betwixt two rags,
vel milliped contus., and applied in the same manner. In great heat, in the
breast anoint it cum ol. viol. Nymph. and amygd. dull. Yea, and if heat urge
extremely, the breast is to be fomented ex decoct. Hord. Lactuc. Nymph. Borag.
Viol. and similium compos. After anoint. These are not to be applied cold, but
hot. To ease the pain of the loins, use Anodynes. Restlesnesse which is wont
to happen in Feb. Assod. and in fits of the Tertian, are cured with purging
choleric humors which bite the stomach, and other sensible parts; and that
either by vomit, or stool, as nature best affects: also it is to be drawn down
by Glisters. Then all things procuring rest are to be exhibited, and cold
drink, and cooling juleps given, with which, sometimes it is very profitable, to
mix a little Sir. de papaver. vel laudan. Also in the vigor of the fit, Sir.
de papav. j. may profitably be permitted. Swoonings in Febris Syncopalis, (the
kinds of which, with causes, you have heard already) are thus helped. That
called Minuta, the air is to be cold, and moist, and a little astringent. That
faintness may be hindered, the diet is to be thin, cooling, and strengthening,
ex juscul. pullorum cum acetosa, portulac, etc. to which add. aq. ros. Succ.
granat. and parum Sacchar. Bread dipped in the juice of Pomegranates, or Oranges
may be given also; Cremor. Hord. cum Succ. Lim. then to restore, use broth of
flesh pressed with the juices added, to the more strong, testes gallorum,
carnes pullorum gallinae, perdicis, ejusdem Succi alterati. In the time of
diet, drink (if there be not present some inflammation of the bowels,) thin
wine, not old, nor vaporous, Out of meat, or if there be some inflammation, aq.
Hord. aut aq. panata, cum sir. granator. Limon. acido citri, julep. ros. etc.
sleep out of the fit is good, in the fit hurtful. Those things which stir up
anger, sorrow, and the like, are to be especially shunned. In the fit cooling
bellows and odoriferous irrorations suppress the resolving of the spirits; the
face is to be sprinkled with cold water, or of Roses with Vinegar. The same may
be applied to the testicles in men, and paps of women; if the spirits, with the
heat, are not called from the heart to the habit, it is to be done by frictions
of the extreme parts, plucking often both of nose, and hair, and calling them by
their proper names. Give bread steeped in the juice of pomegranates, or thin
odoriferous wine well diluted cum aq. ros. or in great necessity may be given
Cynamon-water with rose water. In the interim strengthening broths are not to be
omitted, with which mix confect. Alkerm. etc. or often a spoonful of this;. aq.
ros. ij. aq. Naphae j. aq. cinam. s. confect. Alker. j. margar. and coral. pp.
an. j. Manus Christi perlat. vj. misc. f. pot. To these may be called in the
opiats, and condita in the former chap. the crumbs of hot bread dipped in vinegar
and rose water, and held to the nose is good. Apply to the heart cooling and
cordial epithems, to stop the pores, and hinder dissolution, lap the sick in
linen strewed cum pull. ros. balaust. and santalor. or linen wet, in aq. ros.
and modico aceto. Anoint the whole body, especially the back, with this;. ol.
ros. omphac. j s. ol. my rtillor. cydonior. mucilag. sem. Psyllian.. vj gum.
Arab. dissoluti in aq. ros. ij, cerae alb. q. s. f. liniment. Have special care
of the stomach in which the hurtful humor is heaped up, anointing the Region
thereof cum ol. ros. and Cydon. Also apply toasted bread, moistened in juice of
Quinces, and Pomegranates, and if great heat necessitate, foment it with a
warm decoction of Purslaine, and Roses, or Succ. Solani, portulac. uvae
acerbae, adjecto ol. ros. and Cydoniorum. Thus swooning being removed, and
strength refreshed, the cause of the Fever is to be taken away by altering, and
evacuating, both set down in the former Chapter, in a burning Fever, whither we
refer you, and come to the other called Syncopalis Humorosa, and this being
from another cause, has a contrary cure to the former. The air ought to be
enclining to heat, bright, pure, and dry. Meat to be of good juice, and easy
of concoction, prepared with Hysop, Fenell, etc. Drink is to be thin wine, and
oligophorum, sleep and watching, moderate. Friction with rough clothes is to be
used; from the beginning, first on the feet, and thighs; after the arms,
shoulders, and back; the clothes being first fumed, Styrac. lign. aloes. Thur.
Caryophyl. etc. These also abundantly heat the joints, which with the rest are
to be anointed cum ol. Anethi, Chamom. Irino, Costin. etc. These frictions are
excellent, for by them the heat of the spirits, and the hurtful matter
suffocating the strength, are called outward. In the fit the sick is to be
stirred up by pulling the nose and hair, rubbing the ears, also the lips with
salt, and loud calls; to the nose also is to be held aq. Cinam. vel stor.
aurantior. The infusion of Cloves in Vinegar, and bread steeped in Hypocras,
which also may be exhibited, or Cynamon-water, or else some of this;. aq.
Melissae, flor. aurantior. and rorismar. an. j. aq. Cynam. s. confec. Alker. j.
Sir. Condit. cortic. citri, and Caryophyl. an. j. Misce, f. pot. detur ex
cochleari frequenter; or this opiat,. confec. flor. buglos, anthos, and cortic.
citri, cond. an. s. Nuc. Moschat. condit. iij. confec. Alker. ij. Spec.
diambrae, diamosc. dull. an. j. cum Sir. Condit. citri. f. opiat. Apply to the
heart Epithems, and Pigeons to the stomach, and testicles, in men, and paps in
women, also fomentations, and others set down in virium imbecillitate; whilst
this is doing frictions are to be reiterated, and never omitted in this affect.
Strength being a little regained, the morbifick matter is to be drawn forth by
Glisters, and Purgings, in which Hier. cum agaric. much profits; the purging is
to be gentle, and often, with casting in fit preparatives. Want of appetite is
almost common to all Fevers, for when the stomach is affected with a hot
distemper, it procures thirst, and decreaseth hunger; yea, sometimes the
appetite is so dejected, that the sick can scarcely take broth, which is caused
from vicious humors collected in the stomach, or drunk up in the coats
thereof, or else from corrupt and malign vapors assaulting it. For cure, the
Morbifick matter is to be evacuated by vomit, or stool, even from the
beginning, with an infusion of Tamarinds, and Rhubarb; but in declinatio. if
the Fever be not strong, cum Hier. picr. in decoct. Hord. cicerum, absinth. and
in other cleansers dissolved. After these use purging Glisters which call back
from the stomach. Exhibit often things sharp and cool, as Sir. Limon. granator.
ceras. acid. etc. given either of themselves, or with cooling waters. In
declinatio. feb. may be given Sir. de absinth. pontic. alone, or with sharp
Syrups or juices mixed. Offer to the sick meats very grateful, and not much at
once, but by intervals; for too much spoils appetite. They are to be seasoned
(if a cough be absent) with Olives, aceto ros. Succ. Limon. If the sick abhor
meat, and can eat nothing, cast in nourishing Glisters once or twice a day;
first, casting in cleansing Glisters. If after the Fever is quite gone, there
remain this affect, the sick is moderately to exercise, use Capers, and
Olives, and change the place, going to a colder air. If this suffice not, use
Wormwood wine, and pil. de Hier. or Tinctur. Hier. in vini alb. Cochlear. 3.
singul. mane. Hiccough and Vomiting following Fevers are opposed by various
medicaments, the matter of which is set down in their cures, to which we
refer you;
only observe that you stay not vomiting upon a critical day. Hiccoughs are
often deadly, though sometimes those caused from the exhibiting of cooling juleps
have been cured by wine. An Empl. ex Mithrid. to the stomach is excellent. Flux
of the belly following a Fever, if Critical, is not to be stayed, neither
presently at the beginning, though Symptomaticall, unless strength be very
much decayed, lest the vicious humors run to the principal parts. When it is to
be stayed, it is to be done with gentle purgers, together with glisters binding,
deterging, and strengthening. Also exhibit incrassers binders, and
strengtheners, all which may be taken from the Cure of Diarrhaea, beginning at
the more gentle, and make progress, if there be necessity, to the more strong,
by degrees. Sweat (if critical) is not to be stayed, but if Symptomatical, and
so strength be much decayed, it is, which is performed by cooling the air, in
besprinkling cold water and herbs upon the floor, and if need be, open the
clothes and ventilate a little by moving of them up and down. Use cold, and
astringent medicines, as Epith. cooling the heart, liver, and whole body; and
Unguent. ex ol. myrtin. mucilag. and pull. astringent. compos. applied to the
whole body, especially to the spine of the back: powders ex ros. balaust.
malicor. myrtillis, mastic. terra Samia, etc. are to be strewed on the neck,
breast, armpits, and groines. Or lap the sick in linen, sprinkled with the
foresaid powders; yet beware lest there be any inflammation, or tumor besides
nature, hid in the Hypocondries, for then very strong astringents are not to be
used. Sweat is not to be cleansed, that so it may cleave to the pores of the
skin, and prohibit others from flowing. Exhibit inwardly incrassers, binders,
and strengtheners; as hordeats, ex decoct. lactuc. and sem. frigid. parata,
also restoring broths, cum Succ. granator. agrestae with the powders of Coral,
Pearl, the shavings of Ivory, Sanders, or balaustia. Juleps ex aq. Hord. ros.
lactuc. portulac. cum Sir. granator. de ros. sic. aut cydoniorum, Opiats ex
confer. ros. coral. margarit. terra sigill. Spec. diamargarit. frigid.
Triasantal. etc. In the cure of most acute, and pernicious Fevers,
this is diligently to be noted, that they are for most part accompanied with
certain peculiar affects of the bowels, and often inflammations, wherefore in
the cure, the Hypochondrie, head, breast, womb, reins and bladder is never to
be neglected, that these parts being discharged of what they labor, the rest
may more easily be performed.

CHAP. III. De Tertiana intermittente.
It Is a Fever arising from excrementitious choler putrified in the Mesaraick
veins, afflicting every third day, with shaking, after which follows
hotnesse. This is either true, or bastard, the legitimate ends in twelve hours,
which the spurious exceeds; and this, if it pass twenty four hours, is called
Tertiana extensa: to these may be added a third called Perniciosa. Again, some
are simple, some double, others treble; the first invades every other day, the
second every day, and so it is like a quotidian (unless that it shakes more)
sometimes in this double tertian, two fits appear in one day, the other day
remaining free: Some call this two Tertians, and make a distinction, though to
little purpose. A treble Tertian, is when in the space of two days three fits
appear; this is most rare, yet sometimes seen. These fits are various according
to the diverse matter putrefying in several places; so that every one holds a
peculiar place. delirium, vomiting, etc. If spurious, the heat's more gentle,
and all other Symptoms, the Pulse in the beginning hard, in the progress
(with concoction of the humor) softer, the fit often lasts eighteen hours; yet
from the smalnesse of the matter they may end betwixt eight, ten and twelve
hours. in primis viis; sometimes like that which is in folliculo fellis,
sometimes green, and in the stomach and veins. The causes of a bastard are
choler, mixed with melancholy, or phlegm, generated not only in the Summer,
but in the Spring, Fall, and Winter. Progn. if contrary, not. If spurious, in
the Winter, or Fall; if the sick have used much heating meats, and drinks, it
will be long before it end. Cure, Agaric. Senna, diacatholic. diaphaenic. and
alia, the Glisters in exqui. are to be of mollifying and cooling decoct. cum.
cassia, catholic. diaprun. simp. vel solut. in spurious ex decoct. Emollient.
and incid. dissol. Mel. ros. etc. in your purgers of both may be added, Cremor
Tartar. for it opens obstructions powerfully, cleanses and cooles somewhat.
Secondly, vomit if the matter tends to the stomach and the sick be molested
with pain of the stomach, loathing, and desire to vomit. If gentle Emeticks
will not serve, use stronger, as Asarum in pull. j. with broth, or Sal vitriol.
j. or infus. emetic. vj. with some proper syrup. These often happily evacuate the
matter fixed in the first ways. They are warily to be used, and are usually
given one hour, or a little before the fit. 3. The first ways being emptied, a
vein is to be opened in an exquisite, before the third fit, in a spurious,
after, its to be done on the intermitting day; if the body be plethorick, the
urin red and thick, then bleeding may precede purging, if the blood be very
hot, adust, or putrid, reiterate bleeding. 4. Prepare with medicaments cooling,
moistening, and cleansing the first ways, as Taraxic. acetosa, Hord. Cichor.
Spir. Sal. vitriol. Cremor. Tartar. Tartar. vitriolat. Sir. de acetos. citri.
with some specificks, as Centaur. minor, Morsus diabol. etc. Such used in
continual Fevers will serve, the matter whereof is to be changed, as there is
mixture of phlegm and melancholy with choler. A cooling cleansing Julep may be
this,. rad. gram. cichor. and aspar. an. j. fol. endiv. cichor. agrimon.
acetos. an. M, i. absinth. vulg* and Centaur. minor. an. M, s. coq. in aq ad
lb. j. in colat. dissol. Sir. lim. iij. f. julep. pro tribus dosibus matutinis.
5. Purge (as before) upon the intermitting day, in the morning; if the
intermission happen in those hours, else take the middle time, betwixt the two
fits, whether it be day, or night, so that it be so long after, as the aliment
taken may be concocted. In a double tertian this is hard to be observed,
because there is often but three, or four hours betwixt two fits; yea, sometimes
the fits are so long, that one begins before the the other ends, and this is
named Subintrans. It is to be given in the end of the fit, at such a distance
from the following fit, as that it may have fully wrought before the following
fit invade, but in Subintrantes, it ought to be given in the beginning of the
declination, when it begins a little to remit. In both cases three hours after
the purge given, exhibit some broth; yet so that there remain other three
hours after the taking of the broth before the next fit invade, so that the
medicament must be given six hours before next fit; this is to be observed,
that after preparing the matter for some days, purging is to be used; and if
the Fever continue long by reason of crasse humors fomenting obstructions,
then prepare again, and after purge. Some use gutta gom. Merc. d. cum Scam.
which has often eradicated, not only true, but bastard Fevers, as also aq.
bened j. cum infus. Sen. s. these are to be used in strong bodies. In those
most pertinacious customary purgings are to be used by Apozemes, which are to
be framed of the matter of the Juleps, adding Sen. The. Agaric. Sir. ros. de
cichor. compos. etc. These may be used also after the end of a Tertian (if a
flux of the belly be not present) before the giving of the Apoz. If there be
stretching in the Hypochondries, use an emollient, attenuating, and
strengthening fomentation; as radalthaeae, grami. asparag. an. j. rad. enul.
camp. and cortic. median. Tamaris. an. s. fol. malu. viol. Agrim. capil.
Veneris, and absinth. an. Mi. Sem. Lini, and foenugr. an. j. flor. chamom.
Melilot. ros. an. p. j. coq. in tribus aq. partibus, and una vini alb. sub
finem addit. aceti ij. foveantur Hypocond. calide mane and sero per biduum ante
usum apozemat. post potum illinantur eaedem parts sequenti linim. ol. lilior.
amygd. d. and Tamaris. an. j. unguenti. alth. ij. cerae parum, fiat liniment.
If notwithstanding all this, it pertinaciously continue, and the face appears
tumid and palish, and the feet swell in the evening, let the sick use those
medicaments used in obstructions of the liver, amongst the rest the decoction
cichorii, and chamaedryos in broth is admirable; yet this is to be noted,
sometimes long Tertians are fomented from a hot and a dry distemper of the
liver, which continually producing bilious humors fomenteth new fits. Hence
it is often observed, that many endued with a dry and squalid habit of body, and
altogether bilious, suffer a Tertian for three or four months, especially in a
more hot time, though there be not abundance of humors. To these purgers very
opening, and hot often used, are hurtful, therefore it is most proper to use
cooling and moistening diet, and broth endued with the same quality, and the
superfluity of the humors are to be purged by degrees with mollifying and
cooling Glisters, and Cassia, Tamarinds, cathol. and Sir. ros. And here bathes
of warm water are mavelous efficacious to extinguish the hot and dry
distemper impressed in the bowels; they are to be used on the intermitting day
without much sweat. Sometimes the longnesse of tertians is from a certain ill
diathesis of some of the bowels, especially the liver, or midriff, which cannot
be cured, though purging be repeated, because that ill quality remaining in the
bowels heapeth up daily new humors, which cherish the fit and are to be
removed with diuretics* sudorificks, and other resolvers; as absinth. centau.
minus, card. bened. rad. Dictam. pimpinel. Torment. aliaque which are to be
used for many days. 6. Sweating by sudorificks, as Sal absinthii, centaur.
minus, card. benedictus C. C. praep. magisterium matris perlarum, they are to
be exhibited before, and at the end of the fits. Also Theriac. j. cum vin. alb.
before the fit an hour, thrice repeated. Nuc. jugland. cum Sacch. vel Mel.
conditaeodem modo exhibeantur, where Theriac. cum vino is feared too hot;
first, give it alone, and after drink aq. Plantag. cyath. it has cured many.
Yet this observe,
that these remedies are not to be given till after diligent purging. This I
have proved;. aq Cichorii iij. sal. absinth. j. Spir. Sulph. gut. xij. or Spir.
Sulph. given in vigore paroxysmi in aq. portulac it powerfully extinguisheth
the feverish heat, and if the humor be thin, it expels it by sweat, ut novis
paroxysmis materia non suppetat, and ita interdum morbus radicitus evellatur.
Dos. ab. s. ad j. cum aq. portul. iv. or the same Spirit j. in aq. card. ben.
iv. and Sal. absinth. s. cap. aeger instante accessione. and postmodum pluribus
vestibus te gatur. Some have used succ plantag. depur. iv. alone, or else mixed
cum acet. ros. s. and croci gr. iij. cap. tribus hor. ante accessionem, or
decoct. chamomel. vel aq. distill. ejudem iv, an hour before the fit. Or. aq.
ros. plantag. aq. vitae, an coch. j. and exhib. before the fit. 7. Strengthen
the liver and stomach inwardly: cum sal. absinth. in Spiritu nitri soluto, and
rursus in crystallos coagulato ad j. vel troch^de rhabarb. de eupator, and de
absinth. an. s. spec. diarrhod. Abbat. j. cum Sir. absinth. f. Mass. pil. de
qua capiat j. mane per triduum superbibendo jusculum ex cichorac. and
capillaribus paratum; this strengthens the liver, opens obstructions, and
removes the dyscrasias of the bowels. Or give for many days, troch. de
absinth. vel de rhab. j. cum juscul. inquo Hord. rad. petroselin. cichor. and
borag. bullierunt. Outwardly,. cerat. sant. ij. succi cichorii, s. Succ
absinth. ij aceti ros. parum, with these anoint the Region of the liver morning
and evening before meat. To the Region of the stomach use this; Recipe ol.
nardin. de absinth. and cydonicr. an. s, gall. mosch. j cerae alb. q. s. f.
liniment. To the heart and liver are also to be applied cooling Epithemes, such
as be described in a continual Fever, and to the liver and loins cooling
unguents from the beginning, not forgetting those temperating the feverish
heat, nor cooling and mollifying glisters, which are to be cast in, either in
the end of the fit, or before the invasion, which is very profitable. 8. Apply
Topics, as Catapl. Mynsichti. p. 368. pulvis siligineus, cum virescent. salvia
addit. albumine ovi, aut aceti pauxillo contusa, and carpis alligetur. Or
Recipe. fol. plantag. and chelid. may. an. Mi. telae aranear. Sem. urtic.
fulig. camini, and sal. communis. an. j. aceti fortis. q. s. f. Catap.
applicandum earpis paulo ante accessionem, and 3. aut 4. iterandum. Tela
aranear. and unguent. popul. expertum. Mouseeare beaten with Salt and Vinegar
is good, corte x. interior ramor. nuc. in aceto maceratus carpis applicat.
excel. The strength of these are communicated to the heart by notable Arteries
which run to the wrist. For the stomach.. fol. Hyssop. Tanaceti, minutum incisi
an. p. 1. myrrh. ij. mac. nuc. mosch. Caryophyl. and cinam. an. s. Tereb.
Venet. and succ. Tanaceti, an. 1. misc. omnia, and extend. supra placentam
rosaceam frixam in sartagine cum vino generoso quae pauno lineo involuta
applicentur calide regioni ventriculi per horam ante accessionem. Vel absinth.
and menthae virid. an. lb j. crustae panis assati and aceto rosar. infus. lb s.
pulp. cydon. vel cydon. cum melle confect. ij. mastic. s. macis and nuc. mosch.
an ij. omnia pistentur fortissime cum ol. cydon. f. catapl. quod calide
applicetur ante paroxysmum; it provokes sweat, and removes the pain of the
stomach. Or nuc. mosch. Caryophyl. and cinam. an. iij. myrrh. and zz. an ij. f.
pull. qui excipiatur pice liquida, and fiat empl. admovendum regioni stomachi.
santal. alb. and rub. an. j. farin. hord. ij. aloes s. flor. viol. and ros.
siccar. an. j. cum succ. absinth. and aceto, f. catap. applicandum regioni
hepatis hora una ante accessionem. Some to the wrist apply vesicatories, but
they are unsafe. Febr. Tertian. Perniciosa invades from seven causes; First, if
error be committed by the sick and Physician. Secondly, if the humor sent out
of the vessels, ob occlusionem illorum in primarium membru^ incumbat. Thirdly,
if it be too thin and putrid; for hence there is frequent fainting without much
sweating. Fourthly, if it have a peculiar pravity, either from its ustion, or
aliment; from the inflamed humors arises vehement thirst, and roughness of
the tongue, with hollownes of the eyes; from the resolution of the spirit,
urine fiery, with bilious dejections of the belly, painful ulcers of the whole
body, little sweat, because of the matters thickness. Fifthly, if thick
humors from heat cast into any part, remain there; hence follows unequal
burning, the urine is watery with much and thick sediment; the pulse sometime
intercepts, in the declination they sweat from the navill to the head: neither
the increase, state nor declination is equal. Sixthly, if it draw malignitie,
contagiousnesse, etc. Seventhly, if the heat either draw the womb into consent,
and move the humors contained in it, or stir up a dangerous catarrh, asthma,
or gout.

CHAP. IV. De Quotidiana Intermittente.
IT arises from putrified phlegm in the Mesaraick veins invading every day,
and in this last it is like a double Tertian, and a treble Quartan, which are
distinguished by their proper Signs. This Fever seldom invades, for of 600 of
fits of Fevers that afflict every day, scarce one labors of a Quotidian.
Signs Vrin in the beginning, white, thin, and crude; when the matter is
concocted, thick, filthy, and often red. Pulse is very small and slow, heat is
gentle, and very little, cum praecordiorum difflatione, and intumescentia. The
fit lasts eighteen hours, sometime to twenty four, and appears continual; it
begins only with cold and gentle horror, vomit, and sweat. If the phlegm be
thick by which it is caused, the urine is white and thin, but a little after it
begins to be red, and the hypostasis thicker; the mouth is continually moist:
if from thin acid phlegm, then there is present pain of the forehead, and
left Hypochondria, obstruction of the belly, acide belchings. If from thin salt
phlegm, then there is saltness and dryness perceived in the tongue. Urine red
and thick, coming forth with sense of heat and sharpness. Causes in primis
viis, gathered from the small heat of the bowels, and the cold and moist nature
of the aliments. Also idle life, age, old, and children. Progn. id est, to
forty days, sometimes to three or four months, which greatly hurts the
stomach and liver, and so casts the sick into a Cachexia, Dropsy, Lethargy,
and other grievous effects. If there appear concoction in the urine, or nature
evacuate by vomit or sweat, it will be shorter, if it be by day, it is more
dangerous, i. e. begins in the day and intermits in the night, because they
have longer fits, which often procure a tabes. Beside, meat is to be exhibited in
the night, which is very unseasonable, and often procures watching, whilst there
should be sleep, which weakens and subverts the whole frame of nature. Cure.
Tertian. notha, yet so, that amongst the preparers of the humors, and openers
of obstructions, those are to be chosen which more forcibly attenuate and
incide. 2. The same concocted, evacuate by vomit, ubi extract. esulae, and aq.
ex radicibus Raphani, and nuc. jugland. viridibus cum aceto distillato
laudantur. By purging with phlegmagogues, by sweat with sudorificks. 3.
Strengthen the stomach and liver, especially the first, being often grievously
afflicted, with the catapl. de menth, etc. In the former chapter observe, if
the phlegm be very thick,
stronger Preparers are to be used, often repeated, to which there ought to be
added Tartar. To vomit, use either pil. mercurialis vel Panacea aurea Horstii.
Purge cum infus. diacartham. and fol. sennae cum zz. in aq. Centaur. minoris,
add. aliquot spir. vitriol. guttis; singulis septimanis semel j. There. And romans
exhiberi potest. 4. If the phlegm be thin, hasten the cure, lest it pass to a
quartane. Cut the liver-vein on the left arm, and before the fit exhibit some
specific. If it be thin, and salt, open the said vein on the right arm. To
conclude, the two following medicines have cured many of contumacious
phlegmatic fevers. flor. cham. p iij. comar. absinth. pontic. p. ij. coq. in
lb iij. aq. ad mediae partis consumpt. colat. add. sacch. alb. iiij. cap. mane
v. vel vi. singul. diebus. The other is the decoct of China, and Guaiac.
exhibited twenty five days, although this be feared; and because they heat and
dry too much, yet are they commended, and may more safely be used in cold and
moist regions then in hot, unless the bodies be very phlegmatic and
cachectick. In long Fevers quotidian and quartan. Succ. rad faenicul. iiij. cum
sacc. given for ten mornings together, being in bed well covered, is excellent.

CHAP. V. De Quartana Intermittente.
IT is a Fever arising from melancholic humors, putrefying in the mesaraick
veins, afflicting every 4th day. who are very cold in wintertime not so
pricking, as breaking; the heat because of the thickness of the matter, burns
little; the sick has two well-dayes betwixt his fits. Hence it falling again
on the third day, the ignorant call it a Tertian. The pulse is rare and slow,
but in the vigor of the fit, quick and frequent. Urine in the beginning thin,
and watery, after, more colored and thick. Sweat at first very little, but
after in abundance. The bones are as if they were broken, whence the pain
perceived in quartanes is called, (...). The signs of the spurious are
dejection of the appetite, vehement thirst, pain of the head, redness of the
urine, and as follow in other Fevers, if it be dangerous, then there is great
weakness on the fit-day, the urine is very red and troubled. Cause adust, or
melancholy, mixed with a portion of bile: some are of themselves without any
other disease preceding, others follow some diseases: Those that are dangerous
arise from burning diseases generated of atra bile, from the adustion of the
melancholic humor, or yellow bile converted into ashes. Prog. atra bile. If
it fall out in old, the weakness of the heat being not able to conquer the
matter, If it be double, i. e. when two fits fall out by two continual days,
and the third day escapes, if it be joined with a grievous affect of any of the
bowels; more easy if it be legitimate, and the bowels not affected, if in
summer, if black urine appear; all the signs of concoction are specially to be
eyed. It Is deadly if it change to a quotidian, quia fit mutatio illius febris
quae for^s movetur, in eam quae intra; a quartane following an epilepsie cures
it. A dysentery, (if short) is safe, otherwise deadly, bleeding at nose, coming
upon a quartane pessima est, because the humor causing a quartane, being thick
cannot be evacuated at the nose. Therefore such evacuations during long, cause
a dropsy, therefore it is presently to be prevented by opening the basilica, by
which the putrid blood is drawn out, and the pure hindered from flowing at the
nose. Cure median. vel basilica, presently in the beginning (the first ways
being evacuated) if plethora be present, not presently, if it be absent; in
more abundance, if the blood come forth black and thick; but if it be thin,
presently stay it. To evacuate the first ways, use these. rad. buglos. ij.
herb. 4. emol. mercurial. betae, an. Mi. prunor. dulc. par. 5. 4. semi. frig.
major. and anisi, an. ij. epithy. iij. coq. ad lb j s. in colat. dissol.
catholici j. ol. viol. and cham. an. js. sacch. rub. j. f. clyst. injiciendus
pridie sequentis potionis hora commoda.. sen. mund. s. scm. anisi j. flor.
borag. and fumar. an. Mi. liquir. iij. coq. ad iij. in colat. dissol. mannae
and sir. ros. an. j. f. pot. In the beginning purge gently, lest it turn to a
double or treble quartane, or a continual should be caused: the days free from
fits are best, both to purge and bleed in; yet sometimes blood may be drawn on
the same day, five or six hours before the fit, because the humor beginning
to move, rhey are more easily drawn forth. Zacutus thinks it most profitable to
be done in the full of the Moon, for then by the force of it the terrene humor
is boiled and made more fluid, and so more fit to be drawn. By this he eased
many, and prevented other dangerous diseases. It Is dangerous to reiterate
bleeding, for thereby the body is cooled, and the disease made more
contumacious, yet if the Hemorrhoids be not open, which is very profitable,
leeches may be applied, and those excellently draw away the next cause of the
disease, heaped up in the meseraicks, especially if the matter tend thither,
which is known by the itching of the fundament; and in those in which the
hemorrhoids never flow. Malleoli vena post brachii phlebotomiam utiliter
aperitur; whence often the Fever cease, or ends the sooner, especially in women
whose courses are stopped, or flow more sparingly. The opening of the left hand
salvatella by Zacutus is esteemed admirable, but especially ad Quart.
contumacem saphenae sec. in pede mirabilis. Some do it in the conjunction,
others in the decrease of the Moon, two hours before the fit, for three fits
following. 2. The offending matter is to be concocted and prepared by
iteration, with splenetick humecters, as are fumaria, capill. Veneris,
Ceterach. rad. eringii, decoct. raporum, sir. de pom. redolentibus, etc. Or,.
asparag. brusci, cichorii, buglos. macerat. in vino alb. an. j. cortic.
tamarisc.. s. fol. borrag, buglos. ceterach. capill. Veneris, fumariae,
chamaed. chamaepit. an. M. j. liquirit. j. flor. trium cordial. an. p. 1. coq.
ad lb j. s. in colat. dissol. sir. Byzant. capil. Veneris an.. ij. f. Julep.
pro iiij. dosibus matutinis, quae etiam ulterius continuandae sunt ad multos
dies. For the contumacy of the matter needs long preparing. If the sick be more
dainty, broths may be prepared of part of the foresaid simples, chosing those
more grateful, to which profitably may be added, as also to Juleps. crcm. tart.
In the time of preparing, purgings are to intervene every third or fourth day,
giving some cathartick, with this caution, that so long as the matter is very
crude the more gentle are to be used; but concoction increasing, a little more
strong. The matter of the purgers are to be noted, that they need not be
enumerated. Sometimes it is profitable to prescribe an Apoz. both preparing, and
purging for four or five doses, which may be composed of the matter of the
foresaid Julep, with addition of purges, by which a good part of the diseased
matter may be drawn forth. If the crassenesse and oppugnancy of the humor,
with a cold distemper of the bowels adjoining, threaten length of the disease
and dropsy, then more powerful movers are to be used, as. rad. 5. a periti. in
vino alb. maceratarum an.. j. rad. enul. camp. gentian. aristoloch. and asari.
an.. s. fol. chamaedrys. agrimon. lupul. borag. ceterach, absinth. and centau.
minor. an. M. j liquir. ras. and passul. mund. an.. j. senn. mund. js. Epithy.
j. Agar, troch. rec. iij. zz. and caryophyl. an. j. coq. ad j. in colat.
dissol. sir. de cichorie compos. cum rheo. v. Troch. de capparibus. sal.
absinth. and tamarisci, an. j. f. Apoz. pro 5. dos. matutinis. This disease
obstinately persevering, it is necessary a vicissitude of preparing, and purging
should be used to remove the cause thereof. Vnica enim fere haec causa est, cur
multi quartanarii incurati maneant. Many through impatience, more through
niggardliness, seeing a few medicaments remove not the disease, are ready to
cast off all, but these are requited with the disadvantage. Usual purgings are
to be used, and often reiterated, as magistral syrups, or pil. usuales. A
magistral sir. may be composed of the matter of the Apozema, with a treble
quantity of purgers. For pills usually used in the obstruction of the liver,
as. aloes optim. succ. absinth. diligent. nutrit.. s. Turbith. gum.. ij.
diacryd. j. gum. Amoniac. in aceto soluti and trajecti ij. Mrrrh. electae in
vino calente solut. and trajectae. ij. agaric. troch. rec. j. Sal. absinth. and
Tamaris. an. ij. croci. s. cum oxymel. s. fiat. Mass. pil. de qua capiat.. s.
vel ij. bis in septimana. If the sick be of a more hot temper, use pil. Riverii
in melancholia hypochondria. adding to the dose of spec.. s. and sal. absinth.
and Tamaris. an.. s. putting in stead of troch. de lacca extract. croci j. and
use them as before. Here also pil. tartarea Quercet. at the first is good,
After extract. helleb. nigr. Then pil. de sagapeno. This is familiar, easily
prepared, and very profitable.. decocti ab sinth. iij. in quibus senn. ij.
infus. fuerint, sumendo per intervalla. These purging medicaments are to be
given the day before the fit, because the sick then is more strong, though some
contend to have them given before the fit four hours, because by the fit the
matter is stirred, and rendered more easy to be expelled: this is dangerous
unless in very strong bodies, and concoction appear, because the motion of the
fit, and purging are contrary. 2. Vomit in the beginning of the fit is
commended, because nature at that time is more disposed to that evacuation, and
this may be repeated, remembering before the next fit following there be
exhibited Theriac. Androm, j. in vino resoluta. You have the matter of the
vomits in a tertian, yet in this asari j. in powder exhibited. in vin alb. is
to take the first place, this may be three or four times repeated. In the time
of purging, between, glisters are frequently to be cast in, that nature may be
accustomed to expel the hurtful humors, and that some of the diseased matter
contained in the intestines may be drawn out by degrees. If the disease be long
and obstinate, abstain from remedies for a month or thereabout, that nature
may recollect it self, and endeavor the concoction of the humor, but after
return again to prepare and purging,
observing that in long diseases the same form of remedies are not always to
be used, lest nature be thereto accustomed, and the sick grow weary of them.
Various forms of purgers are formerly mentioned; for openers, besides the
foresaid Juleps and Apoz. the following may be used in the progress of the
disease, when signs of concoction begin to appear.. vin. alb. lb iij. rad.
enule. camp. ij. cortic. rad. cappar.. s. summit, absinth. vulg. sicc. j.
infund. per triduum in B. M. serventur omnia simul, ut hujus vini cap. aeger.
ij. vel iij, singul. diebus mane horis duabus ante pastum. The following pills,
either of themselves, or together with the foresaid wine may be used.. rad.
Gentian. ij. Aristoloch. rotund. j. Artemis. j. bryoniae sicc. iij. myrrh. and
croci, an. j. rad. asari ij. aloes j. cum oxymel. scill. f. Mas. pil. de qua
cap. j. singulis diebus per se, vel paulo ante assumptionem vini praedicti. To
these sppills may be added chalybs pp. and then the sick after the taking of
them is to walk. Steel is very profitable, for it dissolves obstructions, and
casts out the humors which foment the fits. If you would open and strengthen
together, use this.. conser. rad. enul. camp. conser. flor. absinth. and capil.
Veneris, an. j. cortic. citri condit. s. confect. Alker. iij. Myrobal. condit.
Nii, spec. diarrhod. Abbat. ij. sal. absinth. Tamarisc. an. j. croci ij. cum
sir. condit citri fiat opiat. de qua capiat. magnitud. castaneae sing. diebus
mane duabus hor. ante pr^ndium: or if in the morning the sick take other
remedies, it may be taken two hours before supper. Extract. chamaedryos cum
sale Tamarisci permixtum in form. pilularum is excellent. To these are added
diaphoreticks, which in the declining of the disease, serve excellently to
discuss the rest of the diseased matter, signs of concoction appearing.
Besides they correct the distemper contracted by long diseases, mend the ill
habit of the body, and strengthen the stomach, liver, and other bowels weakened
by the length of the disease. Of these Theriac. has the precedence, exhibited
either as before. or in decoct. chamaedryos (if that be too hot) cum decoct.
Agrimon. succ. vel aq. plantag. It Is to be reiterated for many fits: It may
also be given out of the fit in a morning for diverse days, but a little before
is better for it hinders the increase of the cold, and profitably discusseth
the humors, which are the cause of the Fever beginning now to be warm: and by
this either the fit is lessened, or if the matter be but small,
altogether removed. Yet that is to be done with very great caution, lest the
Theriac. or other hot medicaments being exhihited before the matter is
concocted; for so they scatter the putrid humors, and increase the Fever, so
that often of a simple Quartane, a double, or treble, yea a continual is
generated. Therefore give them not before signs of concoction appear. Antimon.
diaphoretic. sal. Armeniac. de purati. gr. vi. vel x. in aq, Cichorii ante
paroxysmum, is good. Others commend china and sarsap. of which they make a
first and second decoction, exhibiting of them for twenty days, and thereby
cure contumacious Fevers. These will be the more efficacious, if with them be
mixed some purgers. Beside these are appropriate medicaments to be given
toward the declination, as. fol. plantag. rec. M. 1. acetos. rec. Ms. aceti,
and Theriac. an. quartar. ji. distillentur, and hujus aq cap. aeger. iij.
dimidia hora ante paroxysmum. Or. sacc. candi. iij zz ij. camph. j. f. pull.
detur. j. cum aq. calida. Saffron in powder to s given in white wine before the
fit, does much diminish the Quartane, also the seeds of wild rue given before
the sit with white wine cures. The following Troch. exhibited, (though in
winter) have cured many. sem. rutae, Petroselini, myrrh. and Theriac. rec. an.
j. opii s. f. tr. parv. dabis unum cum aq. ante Paroxysmum. Also Amoniacum
septies sublimalum, pulvis serpentum in convenienti vehiculo pondere.. j. vel.
js. ante paroxysmum datus, cor leporis, ut pulmon vulpis, praeparatum. ol myrr.
ab gut. 4. ad 8. ante paroxysmum. Narcoticks have an excellent quality to stay
the fits, but before they be exhibited, the greater part of the morbifick
matter must be evacuated, and obstructions much diminished, otherwise they may
be hurtful by retaining the vicious humors in the body, and so generate more
obstructions, and other diseases; yet given as in the former Troch. mixed with
some openers, and inciders, they are the less hurtful. To stay the fit, it is
profitable to give gentle purgers an hour before it invades. These revel the
humor rather by soliciting nature then purging, as. Senn. mund. polyp. q.
Thymi, Epithy. an. j. flor. borrag. p. j. f. Decoct. ad iij. cap. una hora ante
paroxysmum: or. Senn. iij. Turb. j. Cynam. s. croci, and zz. an. s. Sacc. ad
pond. omnium, f. pull. dividendus in tres parts, cap. unam ante paroxismum cum
vino albo, vel pil. sagapeni Camilli. One of them given in the beginning of the
fit, and continued for some days, and a little after anointing the back with a
liniment made ex Theriac. aq. vit and ol. laur. vel de spica; and two or three
hours after the taking of the pills, give broth prepared cum rad borrag. buglos.
Thymi, and pom. curtipend. The anointing of the spine is profitable for easing
the rigor of the fit, and therefore often to be used, although the foresaid pills
be not given; they may also be composed ex ol. Anethi, chamom. irino, costino,
rutaceo, de piperibus, aliisque calidioribus, cum aq vitae, Theriac. Caryopbyl.
castoreo, Sinapi, piper. aliisque permixtis. These ointments will work more
efficaciously, if with them the Spine be anointed before the fit before the
fire, and then put the sick in a hot bed, laying hot bricks besprinkled with
sack, and lapped up in linen, and applied to the soals of the feet and palms
of the hands. Whilst the former remedies are using, special care is to be had
of the Spleen, because that part in this disease is perpetually affected, and
therefore such fomentations, liniments, and emplasters as are used in
obstructions of that part, are daily to be used; yea, and sometimes baths of
hot water conduce, especially after many evacuations, not only to ease the
Spleen, but also to humect the whole body, and help the concoction of the
diseased matter; they are to be used in the intermitting days, only warm,
for otherwise the humors being hastened into the several parts would produce
more dangerous Symptoms. These medicaments used to the wrists, are not to be
rejected; as. fol. Sambuci, Salviae, ped. columbin. rute, an. M. s calthae
tertiam partem, Sal. and Vini parum, omnia si null trita carpis admoveantur ante
accessionem. Or rad. urtic. contusa and aceto macerata brachiorum, and pedum
Arteriis applicentur. Some have cured it by the application of Crowfoot to the
wrists. For Spurious Quartanes are to be cured almost with the same remedies
provided for a Tertian, adding in the decoction of the juleps and Apoz. those
things which peculiarly respect the atrabilious humor. As also those more
temperate set down in the legitimate Tertian, as in the beginning, adding
borago buglos. fumar. lupul, acetos. cichorii, ceterach. Scolopendria, agrimon.
poma redol. The decoctions of these, their distilled waters, and sometimes
their juice, if purified, may be added to the Julep, Apoz. or Magistral. Sir.
In the progress to the former may be added cortic. rad. cappar. med. Tamaris
enul. camp. polypod. q. absi^thi. Whilst the sick are using these
preparatives, purgers are often to be cast in, on the day ante paroxysmum, and
reiterated twice a week, which may be put in various forms. For the dainty
loosing ptisans may be used cum Sir. de pom. Saporis, or chicken-broth altered
cum borrag. buglos. pimpinella; add. Senn. iij. vel s. Bleeding plentifully at
the beginning is to be used, if strength, temperament, and age, etc. concur.
The disease continuing, vomiting is to be permitted, and reiterated as before,
The Hypochond. are to be fomented; as. rad. althaeae, lilior. Enul. camp.
cortic. rad. cappar. and Median. Tamarisc. an. j. fol. Malu. Althae. parietar.
borag. buglos. pimpinellae, absinth. an M. j. Sem. lini. and petrosel. an. s.
flor. chamom anethi, Melilot. an. p. j. fiat decoctio in tribus partibus aq.
and una vin. alb. Sub finem additis, qua foveantur Hypochondria bis die long a
pastu.. unguent. dialth. j s. ol. lilior. chamom. rosar. absinth. an. s. f.
liniment. applicandum post fotum, or oil alone applied cum lana succida. These
correct the ill quality of the bowels, subdue the new matter of the fits, and
greatly mollify and attenuate the impacted humor. Lastly, baths of warm
water are excellent, either ex aq. dulci, or wherein are boiled emollients and
humecters, or only Hord. and Amygd. These often make a full conquest, by
correcting the distemper of the bowels, temperating the heat and dryness of
Atrabile, mollifying the hard, opening and loosing the ways, and concocting
the crude humors, these are to be used as before with the said cautions, and
their operation will be much furthered, if in the entering into the bath
medicaments preparing and opening obstructions be given. Amongst which the
decoction o^ Wormwood, and Elicampane has the precedence, being most
commodious to prepare all contumacious humors, if the great heat of the bowels
do not forbid it: in which case others more temperate may be mixed. And whilst
these are using, gentle purgings are to be reiterated as before. In the real
declination signs of concoction appearing, fly to specificks above prescribed.
In the whole course of the disease, the breast is to be respected, lest they
fall into a Consumption, for the offending humor has an eroding quality.
Diet: herbs is commended borrage, bugloss, pimpinel, spinach, the roots of
fennel, and parsley, and above the rest, turnips, which are first to be boiled
in water, and after in fat broth, which is most profitable for a quartane; a
decoction whereof mixed with butter and sugar, has cured many. Of fruits,
apples stewed; prunes, raisins, figs, almonds, dates, pine-nuts; and to season
meats, use cynamon, nutmegs, and saffron. Abstain from all things that may
ferment the melancholy humor, as aliments that are thick and tough, and are
hard to be concocted, as pork, venison, hare, etc. The Drink is to be pure
white wind, or claret, vel decoct. sarsapar. vel aq Hord. chalyb. The quantity
of the aliment is to be but little, that so strength may be preserved; for too
much generates abundance of crudities, and so lengthens the disease. Be very
sparing in drinking; for nothing renders the Fever so contumacious, as too
abundant drinking; for it fills and distends the Spleen. In the day of the fit
eat not at all, unless it be six hours before the fit; long sleep humects,
and therefore profitable, yet shun it in the beginning of the fit. Gentle
exercise before meat in the intermitting days is good, or instead thereof
rubbings; the belly being first freed from excrements. Those called
periculosae, are most hardly cured. Alum the quantity of half an egg, with
half a nutmeg, and some sugar made into a powder, and given in some
posset drink at the beginning of the fit, has cured many, when many more
valued medicaments have been succeslesse.

CHAP. VI. De Febribus com ositis, and Semitertiana.
COmpound Fevers are, when Fevers are joined with Fevers. They are joined
variously; for sometimes a non-putrid, as a Hectic, is joined with a putrid.
Sometimes a putrid with a putrid; and these either a continual with a
continual, which is scarce observed; or an intermitting with an intermitting,
vel vice versa. Intermittings with continuals have a double manner of
complicating: an intermitting tertian with a continual quotidian, or a
quotidian intermitting with a continual Tertian: and these are called
Semitertianae, though the first more properly. These may be divided variously:
Some are confusae, when two Fevers begin, and end at the same time, so as they
are scarcely discernable, which is from various humors putrified, and confused
in one place: or implicitae, when they may be severally known: others
Subintrantes, when another fit begins before one ends, other Coalternae, when
one fit ending, another begins shortly after: other Communicantes, when the sit
of one begins presently after the other fit. Some are intermittentes, under
which are contained, first a Tertian as double; which is either when it
afflicts once every day, or twice in one day: and it arises from bile
putrefying in two places in the mesaraick veins. So treble, which afflicts
thrice in the space of two days, viz. once in one day, and twice in the other;
and arises from bile putrefying in three places. Secondly, Quotidiana duplex,
which afflicts the sick twice every twenty four hours space. Thirdly, Quartana
double, which leaves one day free, but the next two molests. So treble, in
which the sick are afflicted every day, Fourthly, some are Continuae, such are
Semitertians: this is a Fever composed, as has been said, of a continual
Quotidian, and an intermitting Tertian, afflicting continually, but every other
day cum rigore. It also arises from the same causes, yet very frequently from
the inflammation of some of the bowels. It Is known by the signs of both
Fevers. They are caused from yellow choler without, and phlegm within the
vessels putrefying, and is named Horrifica, because it does not only cause
shaking at the beginning of the fit, but also through the whole course of the
disease, especially in the beginning and the increase, with the two fits joined
together in one, viz. the Tertian, and Quotidian, with many reduplications,
which are no other then unequal shakings and motions in the same fit, returning
by certain intervals from a mutual combat of the two Fevers, in which if
phlegm abounds, there follows horror and coldness of the extreme parts, but
afterward the bile overcoming, the body is hot, and the Fever seems to tend ad
vigorem. Again, when the victory returns to the phlegm, there is coldness
and horror, and so the combat is accustomed to endure, until the Fever comes
ad vigorem. Hence it is that shakings appear only every other day viz when the
fits of the Tertian are strong, and joined with the Quotidian; but when the
Quotidian only bears the sway, there is wont to be no horror. Yet this is to
be noted, certain malign Fevers are to be found which are without mixture of a
Tertian, and Quotidian, and so without any concourse of bile, and phlegm, that
are Horridae. And in them the shakings happen from sharp and malign vapors,
which are elevated from the corrupt matter of malign Fevers biting and gnawing
the sensible parts. But that is properly called a Semitertian, either
exquisite, when putrified phlegm, and bile abound equally, or spurious, when
either choler exceeds phlegm, or when phlegm exceeds choler. In the first the
Symptoms of the Tertian are greater, in the latter, the Symptoms of the
latter. So if bile exubera^e, then the whole Fever is more shaking, and
sometimes with it is associated rigor also; its more hot, and bile is cast out
by vomit, stool, or sweat; but if phlegm prevails, extreme cold occupies the
extreme parts, and little shaking is present, the fits grow out slower, and often
endure a long time, yet not with thirst, or suffering great burning. These
Fevers are known by what has been spoken; the Pulse is often, and unequal, and
the Urin crude, thin, and ill-coloured, and sometimes filthy, with ill, or no
sediment. These Fevers are dangerous, and in them the stomach, have
predominancy, then those things which respect it are to be more used; but if
phlegm, then those things which do more prepare, and purge it; where Agaric
may bear the laurel. And lastly, where both bile, and phlegm abound equally, a
like proportion of both remedies are to be mixed.

SECT. III.
The Preface.
MOst that have writ of Fevers, have distinguished a pestilential Fever from a
malign, and so handle them in various chapters by the name of a pestilential,
understanding the true plague; but a malign, that which is commonly called
Spotted, or that which though it be epidemical, and contagious, is less
dangerous, and in it more escape then die; whereas if the essence of a true
plague consists in it, more die then escape. Yet these Fevers differ amongst
themselves, only according to the greater, or lesser, degrees of m^lignity,
and ought to be cured as with the same method, so with the same medicaments,
and therefore may all be included in the following Chapter, to which may be
given the general name. And after it, to conclude the Section with another,
handling the Small Pox, and Measles, which are perpetually accompanied with
malignity; and therefore not undeservedly by Authors handled in one book.

CAP. I. De Febre Pestilenti.
THese Fevers are called pestilent, which are infested not only with a mere
distemper, or putrid heat, but also with a maligre and venomous quality; they
are contagious, drawn in by accompanying the sick, as well as from common
causes, to wit, the air, or vicious aliment. Sometimes other diseases acquire
this denomination from ill and cruel Symptoms, although a venomous quality
(wherein the essence of a pestilent disease consists) be altogether absent: but
where it s present, whether in a Diary, Hectic or putrid, it may be termed
pestilential, though the two first be much controverted. This venomous quality
arises from the corruption of the humors, which consists not in a simple
temperament, or common putridnesse usually found in putrid Fevers; sed in
totius naturae, insitaeque substantiae destructione, as wine whilst it is
turned into vappam, suffers all sorts of corruption, but when it is changed into
Vinegar, it is thought simply to putrify.

A pestilent Fever differs from the Plague, as species a genere; the latter may
be without a Fever, it being not always necessary, that with the venomous
quality should be joined putridnesse, from which the Fever arises: the
venomous quality may be produced in the humors by the entire corruption of
their substance, and introducing a new form on which depends that malign
quality, for as often as a new form is introduced, the former is corrupted, and
though to their change an ill alteration is necessary, yet not putridnesse;
hence the humors suffering such a corruption may be without putrefaction, yet
because the humors are more obnoxious to putrefaction, they seldom suffer
corruption, but putridnesse intervenes: hence that plague is most rare which is
without a Fever; besides, by an intense, profound and sordid putridnesse (as
it is called) such a corruption is usually stirred up. So that many Fevers which
were not from the beginning pestilential, may (by the ignorance or negligence
of the Physician, disobedience of the sick, or fierceness of external causes
ill handled, putrefaction being made more intense) end in pestilential.

Corruption may precede putrefaction; this plainly appears in those infected
with the Plague by contagion, into whom the venomous quality is first
communicated, and by that the humors are corrupted, putrefaction following;
hence the plague first afflicting, sometimes in the first days is without a
Fever; which after appears, the putrefaction being kindled, as is evident in a
part gangrenated, which is first corrupted, afterward putrifieth; therefore a
pestilent Fever is caused, quando humores corrupti, and venenatam qualitatem
adepti ad putredinem deveniunt: and hence the heart is doubly afflicted, i. e.
both with putrid heat, and a malign quality. This corruption of the humors
being not always uniforme, but sometimes more, otherwhiles less intense; it
falls out that that venomous quality produced from it, according as its various
degrees are more or less pernicious, and so the malignity of the Fever more or
less, which hints that distinction of pestilential Fevers into that simply so
called the Plague, of which more die then live, and malign, in which more
escape then die. The differences of pestilent Fevers are taken either from the
matter in which that venomous quality is produced, or the place in which the
same matter is contained; as in putrids, the matter putrefying being blood,
choler, etc. denominates them Synochus, Tertian, Quart. etc. But by reason of
the place wherein those humors putrified are contained, they are called
continual, or intermitting, as the said humors are lodged within, or without
the veins. So pestilent Fevers are called Synochus, Tertian, etc. Some
continual, others intermitting, although it is supposed, that intermitting
Fevers are without danger; which is to be understood of those that are not
associated with any malignity; for it is often observed, that intermitting
Tertians are accompan^ed with such a height of malignity, that the sick are
removed the third or fourth fit; others that escape, are cast into great danger
of life by reason of cruel symptoms. Other differences are taken from
intensenesse or remissness, viz, Some are more, others less intense or
remiss, as they participate more, or less of the malignity. They are called
more, or less Simple, as the matter is more or less putrid, tum calor
praeternaturam ex ea emergens intensior aut remissior est: but more malign,
and benign according to the degrees of intensnesse of the venomous quality.
Hence it happens that sometimes a pestilent Fever is from the greatest degree
both of putridnesse, and venomous quality, and then it is most cruel, the latter
much afflicting the heart, and the first hurting the rest of the faculties,
producing bitter Symptoms. Sometimes putridnesse is great, the venomous
quality remiss, and then the Fever is more troublesome, the vital faculties
less afflicted; contrary, sometimes the putridnesse is remiss, and the ill
quality intense; then the Fever is remiss with less Symptoms, but the
strength is most cast down. Yea sometimes putridnesse is so remiss, that
there is almost none, and the malign quality altogether intense, and then the
Fever seems little or none, either to the sick or standers by, though then
it is altogether deadly; for the ill quality increasing, dejects the strength,
and overchargeth the heart; and here also the Physician may be put to it, there
being no present signs either of Crudity, or ill humors, withal the pulse
and heat of the body to touch being at first almost natural; the like is wont
to happen in the first difference, when there is a juncture of greatest
malignity; for by fit remedies the putrefaction being overcome and signs of
future safety appearing, yet sometimes death follows, from the not correcting
the malign quality.

The last difference is taken from the adjuncts, and these are often most
evident; for there is no cruel Symptoms, or any kind of deadly disease which
does not accompany this Fever: the Symptoms are headache, delirium, sleepines,
etc. of which hereafter, these being also in common with other Fevers, the
diseases are the Squinsey, Plurisie, etc.

The Signs threaten, or such as show it present, or those that discover when
dead; the first are taken from the disposition of the body, the second from
present Causes, and third from certain middle dispositions. Those bodies
disposed to a pestilential fever, are such as are loaded with ill juices, by
reason of ill diet, and the preposterous use of the six non-natural, or are
plethorick, or fill themselves inordinately or excessively; the passions of
whose mind are extravagant, and use venery too immoderately, especially the
two last; the first drawing the spirits from their proper operations, the other
debilitating the functions by which the humors are alienated, and certain
corruption follows; also hot and moist temperaments being subject to
putrefaction, so the more dense and rare habits, the first wanting free
transpiration, the latter being open to all injuries; the present Causes that
foretell, may be war, famine, unseasonable times. The middle dispositions
that foretell, is, when the present dispositions of the body conjoyne with the
abovesaid Signs, as sadness, deep fear, disturbance in sle^p, voluntary
laziness, thirst, watching, loathing; for all these show the humors to be
strayed from their natural temper, and to begin to corrupt, from which a
pestilent Fever arises.

The Signs discovering at present, may be drawn from threefold Symptoms; for
Symptoms are the effects of diseases, and the disease cannot be well known
without the eff^cts. Some are taken from the Actions hurt, others from
excretions, and others from the qualities changed, to which may be added those
drawn from the effects coming upon it. To understand this a right, premise
first, that Symptoms of the Plague and malign Fevers are almost the same,
only the first are more cruel then the latter. Secondly, there is no absolute
pathognomical sign to be given of these Fevers; for both buboes, and Carbunole
may be wanting in the true Plague; and again, they may appear without
malignity; for the spots, they are sometimes absent in pestilent Fevers, yet
present in those laboring of the suppressed courses, and in some children,
from a light Ebullition of blood, though no Fever appear; yet of all Signs,
these most certainly discover these Fevers. Thirdly observe, all Signs
propounded are not found in all sick* but only part of them, which is
sufficient; for according to the disposition of the body and intensenesse or
remissness of the disease, now this Symptom, now that is wont to appear.
Lastly note, although the Signs in a pestilent and a malign Fever may also be
found in other Fevers, yet they may be as it were proper in this Fever. First,
quia in hisce febribus peculiarem quandam conditionem prae se ferunt, which is
not found in other Fevers; for headache, loathing, vomiting, measure of heat,
while they happen in pestilential Fevers, acquire a peculiar malign condition,
which differs them from themselves, while they appear in other Fevers. So that
they may be discerned by a mean Artist. Secondly, the Symptoms do not keep
that proportion amongst themselves in these Fevers, which is found in other
Fevers; for although the heat be gentle to the touch, the Pulse not much
changed, or little appearance of a Fever: yet there is excessive headache,
watching, sometimes delirium, and other Symptoms, which follow and are often
joined with burning Fevers, all these considered for Signs, the Vrin is
sometimes like those in healthful bodies, i. e. when humors offend more from
malign quality then putridnesse; it often continues thus in the first days, but
after is thick and troubled. Sometimes in the state it appears concoct; yet the
sick hastens to death. Sometime it is thin and crude, having no sediment, if
any, it is not true. Yet very often it is thick and filthy, of high color, having
a thick, red, confused, and troubled sediment; yea all dispositions of Vrin may
happen in this disease, from the various alterations of the putrid and corrupt
humors. The Pulse is as changeable as the Vrin, notwithstanding the heart is
vehemently afflicted, from the venomous quality, therefore the Pulse by
occasion of it is variously altered, according to the variety of times and
diverse conditions of the disease; for in principio often its almost natural and
agreeing with a healthful Pulse; but in progressu and morbi augmento, it is often
small, weak, and unequal. Yea sometimes it will be greater, being increased by
reason of heat; because the heart to repel such an assaultant, moves more then
necessity requires for the ventilating the heat. Cardialgia, or that vulgarly
called heartach, discovers malignity, especially if sociated with distension of
the praecordium, and headache. Thirst sometimes is great, if the feverish heat
be much, yet sometimes is wanting when it is remiss. Loathing and abhorring all
sorts of Aliment, no less then the most ingrate medicaments, arising from
malign vapors afflicting the stomach. Vomiting being from the same cause,
especially if in the beginning. Some vomit presently upon taking solid things,
and retain well liquid, others contrary: some in the casting up of either,
with them vomit various humors: in the mean time thirst, dryness, and
blackness of the tongue increases. Shakings often, and inordinate happening often
in a day, stirred up from sharp biting vapors, and such things as are alien to
nature, delating the sensible parts, which seldom happens in other putrid
fevers, because in them the halatus acquires not the like malignity. Its true
in intermitting tertians endued with malignity, sometimes Signs of malignity
may be taken from cold, and shaking, it sometimes happening in the beginning of
the fit, in which the flesh is as if frozen, and the face appears like one
ready to die; the Pulse so little, it can scarce be perceived. After the heat
follows, which neither in the increase or state is much to the touch, or
perceived sharp: yea the flesh to the declination perseveres endued either with
a warm heat, or coldish. By reason of the increase of heat the Pulse may be
bigger, but it will be small, weak, often, and unequal; many other Symptoms of a
pestilent Fever will be joined, all which confirms that there is not only
continual, but intermitting pestilent Fevers. Weariness of the whole body in
the beginning, and pain joined, as if the members would break, from vapors
spread in the whole body. Headache, watching and delirium, all from the
foresaid vapors, which if they invade the membranes, procure headache: if the
brain it self heating and drying it; if gently, then watching; if more
intense, then it produces delirium. Other Symptoms might be added arising
from this venomous quality, not found in common fevers, unless the Fever be
very great. In this Fever the pain is very peculiar, in that it is very
various. sometimes possessing the Occiput, otherwhiles the Sinciput; now the
forehead, then the eyebrows; sometimes the Scapula's, sides, back, and other
parts of the body; sometimes it afflicts continually the same place;
otherwhiles changes the place, and in all these cruelly afflicting. To some
happen sleepy affects, as those whose brains are stuffed with pituitous
excrements, which being liquified by hot vapors arising from the lower parts,
hinder the functions of the brain. A bilious flux of the belly arising either
of it self, or moved with a light cause, as gentle Glisters, or Purges, and
after contumaciously perseveres, killing many. In these the excrements stink
much, from great putrefaction possessing the humors. Abundance of worms is
used to be cast forth, especially in the beginning of the disease, generated
from the notable putridnesse of the humors. Sweatings often putting forth in
principio, yet small, little, and unprofitable. Heat to touch, is so mild and
gentle, that it scarce seems to be a Fever, the Fever being caused more from
malign quality, then vulgar distemper or putridnesse. Redness of the eyes
appears very often, the menynges of the brain being inflamed from the sharp
vapors ascending, which are easily communicated to the adnata, having its
original from them. Purple spots like flea-bitings peculiar to this Fever,
arising in no other, caused from ill, venomous blood, joined with a putrid
quality of other humors. Sometimes, as has been said, they may appear in
other diseases, but from a contrary cause, i. e. thin blood moved with heat, or
the expulsive faculty, as in children, such as are troubled with fluxes of
blood, the blood thereby being made more thin and aqueous: in those troubled
with the spleene^ jaundise, and long obstructions of the bowels, because the
weakness of the bowels produces aqueous blood: also those inclining to a
Cachexia, for in these the blood being made thinner, flows out sometimes by
the nose and other parts, other while passing through the capillaries, it is
transmitted into the parts of the skin, where being retained, it loses its
proper color, and appears either livid, black, or reddish, of which there are
various differences, yet all differing much from those in a pestilent Fever,
which are produced from putrid humors infected with an ill quality; these
spots break forth sometimes critically, otherwhiles symptomatically;
critically, when putridness is vanquished either in part or in whole, and the
ill quality corrected; nature transmitting the corrupt humors from within
outward, and then there always follows a decrease of the disease. But
Symptomatically, when nature being provoked before the quantity and ill quality
of the morbifick matter be concocted and corrected, sends portion of the matter
to the parts of the skin. Whence follows no ease to the sick, which hints,
nature rather is conquered. The color of these spots are various, discovering
thereby the diversity of the humors. Red being from more purer blood: Green,
Crimson, Livid, from bilious blood more or less adust. They appear sometimes
greater, sometimes lesser: sometimes more, sometimes fewer; they begin to
appear sometimes the 4, 5, 7, or 10th, or other judiciary days when the
excretion tends to good; sometimes in other days, and then they are less
profitable, and not to be confided in; they appear sometimes in all the parts
of the body, yet most often in the loins, breast, and neck. Affects coming
presently with a pestilent Fever are exanthemata, pustles, ulcers of the mouth,
carbuncles, buboes and parotides Exanthemata's differ from the spots, in that
they raise the skin more or less, most like the grain of Milium, their
colors are various; sometimes red, begot from blood; otherwhiles white, from
phlegm or serosities; yellow, from bile; purple, livid, black, from bile more
or less burnt. Sometimes they are Critical, otherwhile Symptomatical, and some
betwixt both. Again, some are dry, others suppurated, and others ulcerate. To
these may be referred pustles appearing in the mouth, which receive the same
differences, and are sometimes so malign, that the sick can scarce eat or
drink. In very young they produce death, the often degenerating into ulcers
exceedingly trouble the sick, by hindering the motion of the tongue, especially
swallowing. Sometimes ulcers of the mouth called Apthae are generated without
any pustles preceding, of which some are deep, others superficial, some clear,
others filthy, some benign, others malign, some with crusts, others without.
The Crusts are sometimes white, yellow, livid, or black; those that are sordid,
deep, and malign, with black crusts, are more dangerous. Carbuncles, and
Buboes happen in many parts of the body especially about the glandulous parts,
because the expulsive quality being provoked from a malign quality, expels the
pernicious matter from the internal parts, especially the noble, to the
external; hence the matter is transmitted from the brain to the glandules near
the ears, from the heart to the arme-pits, from the liver to the groines,
whence Buboes, etc. are generated. Which kind of Tumors, though they may
appear in other Fevers, yet more usually, and especially in pestilent.
Peculiarly Buboes, Carbuncles and Parotis break forth in malign Fevers; but it
is in those wherein is a great degree of malignity, and comes near the Plague.

Signs showing it after death, are spots and strokes, as if beat, especially
if they be livid or black, as also Exanthamata's, Carbuncles, Buboes, etc.
especially if they be of an ill color.

Causes immediate cause is the corruption of the humors joined with
putrefaction; from the first is acquired an ill and venomous quality: From the
second the Fever is generated. The Mediate causes are plethora, Cacochymia, and
obstructions. Fullness is to be understood not ad vasa, but ad vires, which
when not regulated by nature easily conceives corruption and putrefaction. The
like may be said of Cacochymia, or abundance of ill humors. And lastly,
obstructions are apt to produce all kind of Fevers, even as humors shut up in
a hot and moist place, if they breath not out freely, easily putrify: these
mediate internal causes are usually called morbosus apparatus, the force
whereof is such, that sometimes of it self it produces a more remiss
pestilent Fever, commonly called simple, malign, or spotted Fever; and this
without any external, or common cause intervening, as it is often seen in less
Epidemical constitutions, and when no popular disease is raging. Certain of
these Fevers break forth from the il condition of the humors, which are
environed with many Symptoms of malign Fevers, as also with spots. About
obstructions, this is to be noted, they necessarily concur as a special cause
in malign Fevers, which are from an internal cause, and are sporadical. But
epidemical, which are produced from a common cause and the pestilent state of
the air, need not necessarily have such a cause, for from the inspiration of
the corrupt air alone, or from contagion only, that venomous quality is
conceived, by which the humors of the body declining from their proper nature,
freely fall into putridnesse. Even as hoary fruits, and other things easily
putrifiable, although maxim perflentur, yet they cannot be kept from
putrefaction: so also the humors when they have conceived that pernicious
quality, they easily fall into putrefaction. So that although there be no
obstruction present, they necessarily fall into putridnesse and Fever. And the
humors thus led into putrefaction (nature not being able to rule them) often
beget obstructions, by which the Fever is increased, and so obstructions
concur in these Fevers, which although from the beginning they have not been
the cause of the Fever, yet they follow, and a causis labe pestilenti infectis
fovetur. The external are the six things non-natural, which as they are
natural, so they necessarily alter our bodies; when they recede much from their
natural state, they beget malign and venomous qualities in us. Of these the
ambient air requires the first place, which even as it is the most common
cause, so common diseases are wont often to arise from the faults thereof. The
air is hurtful to men under a threefold consideration especially. First, when
healthful winds do not blow; this is evident, for if the air be not difflated
and moved with the wind, it easily corrupts. Secondly, when it is defiled with
polluted, putrid, and stinking vapors; and this is most powerful and most
frequent; those vapors arise from Marshes, Lakes, Pooles, Bogs, Fish Ponds, or
other watery places, which are standing, or stuffed with filthy matter, or
waters wherein is steeped lime, hemp, or from stinking Sinkes, Dunghils, and
narrow lanes that stink, or from dead carcases unburied. Or from caves and
dens, in which the air has been very long shut up, lets out a stinking
putridness, by Earthquakes or by other accident. Thirdly, as the air exceeds
in its first quality, or it be in a preposterous condition, so it afflicts men;
this happens various ways, but especially when it exceeds too much in hotness,
moistness being the principle of corruption; hence the South-winde continuing
long, has been a special cause of all pestilential Fevers; if it exceed in
dryness, it is less hurtful, yet an enemy to our nature; therefore if it
extraordinarily exceed, it procures the like affect with the other, especially
if therewithal be joined excessive hotnesse; by this also is fruit corrupted.
If it exceed in coldness, it procures pestilent Fevers by stopping the pores;
whence is procured greater putrefaction, and more grievous venosity; and hence
these Fevers are more dangerous then in Summer, because then the passages are
more open, through which that which is putrid easily exhales, and preternatural
afflux from the natural, is fitly breathed out. The inequalities of the times
are wont to be the cause of these Fevers, viz. when it is one while hot, then
cold; now dry, then moist, succeeding one another, often interchanging and
continuing long, as when after long heat comes extreme cold suddenly; or when
after long rain, extreme dryness follows: so contrary, or when the air is
preposterous, as hot in winter, and cold in summer; for hence is procured great
confusion of humors, thence acquiring an ill condition fit to produce malign
Fevers, especially in those bodies which before by reason of ill diet are
plethorick cacochymick, or have notable obstructions. To these causes may be
added the air altered by the afflux of ill Planets, as the of and, in which
are humane signs, especially being Lord, and by these diseases are procured
from no other cause, then by the change of the air. Now this change is either
from a manifest quality, i. e. when from their influence the air is changed,
or from an occultnesse, when from the hidden force of the stars, without
notable excess in the first qualities. The first is undubitable, and consented
to by all Philosophers, that these inferiors are governed by the superior
constellations: for as the alteration of the air, which happens quarterly,
arises from the annual motion of the Sun; so the great diversity of years,
one being very moist, another very dry, when as the Sun holds the same course
in the Zodiac every year, it could not be, unless it depended upon the
various Aspects of the Stars; though the other not so easily believed, is
proved by Astrologers. To these may be added Eclipses, Meteors, especially
Comets, which seldom ever appear, but epidemical and pestilent diseases, and
various mutations follow in the world, as may appear by the effects of that
which appeared November 17. 1610. to the truth of which all Europe may give an
experimental testimony.

The next cause is Aliment, when by reason of a certain ill diet morjapparatus
is drawn on, which is the cause sine qua non, and the efficient internal of all
malign and pestilent Fevers; for from ill and corrupt nourishment pestilential
diseases arise, especially if it happen from the foresaid constitutions of the
air.

Famine is another cause according to the proverb, A Plague follows a Famine;
for then the poorer sort filling themselves with ill aliment; thence follows
an ill habit; and especially if after penury comes suddenly plenty; for then
they too suddenly gorging themselves with much meat, which cannot, by reason of
the weak heat of the parts, be rightly concocted; whence a malign putridnesse
is acquired.

Again, when Aliments good in themselves acquire a putrid ill quality, such as
Wheat, Barley, when either too long kept, or put into ill and noisome places,
so also flesh, or when it dies of it self.

For drink, these may cause viz. putrid and corrupt wine and water of corrupt
and putrid and stinking Lakes, also other corrupted liquor.

The last is the non-natural, as excretion and retention, motion and rest,
sleeping and waking, and the passions of the mind; and these may be looked
upon only as adjuvant causes disposing the body to receive malign
putrefaction. First, the retention of the Menses in women, and other accustomed
evacuations in men, as the Hemorrhoids, Hemorrhagiae, and Fluxes of the belly,
which in some happen by intervals, if they fall out in Epidemical
constitutions, they usually produce malign diseases; for that which should be
cast out as superfluous and burdensome to nature, being retained, easily beget
putrefaction. So too great evacuations either of blood or other humors much
weakens the body, diminishes the native heat, which receives more easily the
pollution of the ill and pestilent air. Too much idleness, and too much
exercise also affects, the first for want of free ventilation, which causes
putrefaction; the other opening the pores and dissolving the heat, makes a more
easy way to receive the seed of contagion. Too much sleep heap; up many
excrements, and fills the body with humidities, which most easily putrefie. But
too much watching generates crudities more then the native heat is able to
regulate; whence many obstructions are caused, and so transpiration is
hindered, which generate putrefaction. Passions of the mind, as vehemently to
move the body, and disturb the humors, greatly hasten on this evil,
especially fear and sorrow, which calls the vital spirits inward; whence the
strength of the heart being much broken, is less able to resist danger, yea
and the commotion of the humors in the veins, and their vehement disturbance
dejects the natural constitution, and begets malign putrefaction. However it is
thought the Plague in armies is more raging, not so much from the ill diet, as
the apprehension of the danger of death. Prognostics are uncertain, and
therefore no event to be assured till there be manifest conquest either of the
disease or nature, Pulse keeps equal, and in order, in these Fevers, although
the Fever appears great, there is always good hope; but contrary, if
inordinate, unequal, and contracted, dangerous, especially if it has appeared
weak from the beginning; yet these differences of Pulses are not so pernicious
in malign, as in common Fevers; for although the Pulse intermitting in young,
is deadly, yet in this they have escaped: a healthful Pulse is dangerous,
discovering nature so weakened, that it cannot enter upon the concoction of the
malign matter; hence it not being touched, there follows little labor; and
here the Fever is little, as in external Tumors; so long as the part is
overwhelmed from the abundance, or ill quality of the matter, it causes
neither pain nor Fever, but when nature averse to the matter enters upon the
combat, and attempts to convert it into pus, then at that time the Fever
discovers it self. So in malign Fevers, the sick seems to be freed from it,
when yet it is worse, and he hastens to death. Delirium in this Fever is most
frequent, neither is it to be feared; when it is assuaged by sleep, especially
if it vanish with abundance of sweat, for it is a sign the matter is called
from the brain to the habit of the body; a delirium persevering, is most
pernicious, it shows it will degenerate into a true phrensey. Contractions and
leaping of the members is wont to happen often in these fevers, they are
convulsive motions, and very dangerous, and the more, if joined with delirium,
for they discover the brain to be much hurt; the trembling motion of the
tongue and hands are deadly, it arguing very great weakness, and nature to be
overcome by the disease. Deafness, although in the beginning of acute diseases
be most dangerous, yet appearing in the state, foretells safety, especially in
malign Fevers; for it is observable that thousands laboring of those Fevers,
upon coming of deafness in the state although other Symptoms were very
dangerous, yet they have done well; for it is a sign the strength of the brain
is sufficient to thrust out the noxious humors from the internal parts to the
external. Sneezing in some diseases is deadly; but in malign Fevers, although
cruel Symptoms hold forth danger, yet it holds forth security. Cardialgia or
hichough do threaten danger, and shows the stomach grievously afflicted with a
venomous quality: a great loathing of meat is most dangerous, it signifying the
stomach abounding with an ill quality, and the temper thereof altogether
overturned, so that the laudable aliment which before was most familiar, it
loathes, and hates. The suppression of all evacuations, in the beginning and
increase of the disease is good, for it shows the diseased matter not to be so
malicious as to stir up nature before its due time: but nature as yet
overcomes. If nothing be cast out in the state and Symptoms be cruel it is ill,
it being a sign either of the diseases continuance, or else doubtful whether
it will end well or no. Because the malign matter not cast out, but continuing
long, it so afflicts and weakens the brain, and produces the frenzy,
lethargy, which is most hard to remove. Blood drawn if it be pure, and
according as it ought, it is dangerous; for it is an evident, sign that there is
either more venomous quality then putrefaction, or else the putrefaction is
lodged in the veins next the heart, and so cannot be drawn forth. From urin;
no prognostic can be made in a pestilent Fever, or if any, yet uncertain. For
not only confused, filthy, thicker and thinner urins, which in other Fevers is
ill; but also those which are like healthful. Yea and many signs of concoction
manifestly appearing in the urin, it changing the patient dies worse, and is
removed, but yet concoct urins having a laudable sediment, and that continuing
many days, and day by day uniting it self more, and descending by degrees into
the bottom of the glass is perpetually a certain sign of safety: also in
malign and pestilential Fever. For it shows the natural faculty is strong
enough to conquer the adverse malign quality; therefore in malign Fever where
there is great fear of the sick by reason of cruel Symptoms, yet if there
continue Signs of concoction in the urin, safety may be prognosticated with
great confidence. Vrin fat and oleous, black or livid, with the Hypostasis
black or livid, does certainly pronounce ill, Abundance of urin (a lessening of
the Fever not following) is ill, because it signifies colliquation. Sweat in
this Fever, although it fall out with requisite conditions, yet if not on a
critical day, there cannot be safety judged. Yea, sometimes the Fever remits,
the first day by sweating, but after the Symptoms increase, the sick after
many sweatings dies. For much sweat not lessening the disease arises from the
wasting of the whole body, neither is that to be credited, that critical sweats
in this Fever is never profitable, nam quo minus venenositatis febris
obtenuerit, eo magis prodesse poterunt; as in other vulgar Fevers this is a
certain observation, if the sick from the beginning of the Fever break forth
with frequent sweats, it may be profitable, being a sign that nature by little
attenuates the matter, and casts it out by sweat. The Flux of the belly of all
is most uncertain; for if it happen in the beginnig, it may be sometimes good,
otherwhiles deadly. Again, premise some concoction maybe seen in those
laboring of a Flux, yet they may die, though sometimes some escape. Yet it is
thus to be distinguished, when the venomous quality is of most force, by which
the matter from the beginning falls down by a Flux of the belly, that is more
secure; but when the disease arises for most part from putrefaction of the
humors, its worse, if the Flux come at first. The spots when they are many,
great, of good color, and break forth critically; they pronounce nature the
Victor: but if few, less, and ill color, and symptomatical, it signifies the
disease prevails: Furthermore, if they return in after they appear, it is
worst: for it shows the morbifick matter to flow inwards. Exanthe mata appear
in various parts, and are companions of great malignity, and therefore portend
great danger. Carbuncles, and Buboes testify the same, when they are wont to
accompany these Fevers, (whereof they are a peculiar character) for in them
more die then escape. Anthrax, and Buboes, farthest from the heart, increase
sooner, and come to maturation; these are less dangerous: yet if the humors
increase suddenly with cruel symptoms, it is ill. Very great Carbuncles of a
naughty color, with eating Ulcers, or which are changed into a Gangrene, are
deadly: as also those near the heart, or pass nigh the throat: This is
certain, many Carbuncles are more dangerous then few, contrary, the more Buboes
the more secure then few. Parotis in malign and spotted Fevers, in the
increase or state is deadly; but if they appear little at the declining of the
disease, and come to suppuration, they are safe.

Cure preservation, cure, and removing of Symptoms. Preservation of those on
whom it is not yet broke forth, consists, especially in removing the causes,
which fit the body to receive the Fever: and those things that produce it,
which are either internal, or external: the first are Plethona, Cacochymia, and
obstruct. the second, are especially naughty air, and wandering Contagion;
those that dispose the body to the disease, are either by nature, or accident
above measure, moist, weak, loose, fine, dense and compact bodies. More moist
is to be dried, and those more dry are to be kept so, therefore the more moist
are to shun a full diet, and large drinking, and all moist aliments, as fruits,
fishes, south-winde, and fogs, especially in the night: idleness, long sleeps,
especially at noon; bathes, and all other things which humect the body. The
weak body is to be restored with an analeptick, and strengthening medicaments:
the fine and loose require the same with the moist; but the dense and compact,
because they are disposed most of all to receive a pestilent Fever, they are to
be freed with more diligence from Plethora, Cacochymia, and obstructions, which
causes, when they produce these Fevers in all bodies, as the first causes, they
are perpetually to be removed. Plethora calls for cutting a vein, if nothing
hinder. As the time of the year, being too hot, or cold, or the state of the
air pestilent, then it is to be forborne, unless fullness ad vasa urges much,
or accustomed evacuations of blood, as Haemorrhoid. Menses, Haemorrhag be
suppressed, for blood being drawn, the pestilent air is more easily received,
and oppressing the actions, makes the disease more hardly to be conquered: even
as in those, which after drinking of poison, make it. more easily penetrable,
and more hardly cured. Cacochymia requires purging, proper to the humor
offending, fit Preparatives premised, (if necessary,) provided they be benign,
mixing with them some things of a Bezoartick quality. Obstructions being caused
from a multitude of cross, and tough humors; the multitude is to be
evacuated, crasse attenuated, and tough cleansed. 1. By reason of external
causes, prevention is to be appointed: as first, the excess of the air is to
be corrected, i. e. the hotter to be cooled, the more humid to be dried with
fires, both in public ways, and private houses, as much as may be. The fires
are to be made of juniper, bays, nosemary, and the like. Secondly, all causes
are to be removed which may infect the air. Thirdly, if it be infected, it is
to be dissipated, which is done by fires, fumes, and shooting great guns, most
effectual, but if it be endued with a very pernicious quality it is best to
remove, and those that are constrained to stay, are to use frequently
Antidotes, and those no less quantity then are prescribed to cure. The Cure is
to be taken from the putrefaction, and the malign quality; the Fever is to be
opposed with cooling, and humecting, the putrefaction with evacuations, and
alterings, and the malign quality with Alexipharmacons. Here blood is first to
be drawn, a glister premised, for that is most fit, because of the greatness of
the disease, the hot distemper, and putrefaction, but if the fault lie in the
quality of the blood, it is to be taken away with the greatest prudence; for
bleeding then may rather hurt then do good, the vital faculty being thereby
rather debilitated, and death hastened; therefore if the malign quality be
more then the putrefaction, which may be known as before, lesser quantity is
to be drawn; if the putrefaction infect more, then more plenty may be taken;
and so more especially, if malign Fevers arise ex morboso apparatu, and putrid
humors kept within the veins, and then bleeding may be reiterated twice or
thrice, until the heap of vicious humors contained in the veins, be
exonerated, which humors rise in these Fevers, but bleeding is to be maturely
appointed in the beginning of the disease; for it is ill in the progress, the
malignity then having diffused it self into the whole mass of blood, and so it
does not only not help, but also exceedingly debilitates nature, so that many
think it not good, the fourth day being past, especially when they begin to be
common, or cruel, then it is diligently to be observed, who of the sick, gain
benefit by bleeding; for in some kind of Synochus, in which putrefaction is
intense, and malignity remiss, bleeding diminishes it: but in others, the
nature whereof consists almost altogether in malignity, bleeding is more
pernicious. This appears in a true plague, in which many and most approved have
had experience of, that all the sick who have had a vein opened, have died. So
also in pestilential Pleurisies it does more hurt then good making the disease
only more cruel; yea, and in other epidemical diseases, endued with less
malignity, yet in which the malignity was almost altogether in vitio, the same
event has happened; as in that epidemical Catarrh, which wandered through
Europe, in Anno 1580. in which scarce one of a thousand, troubled with it died:
yet almost all who were let blood perished; and that is diligently to be
observed, that in the Cure of Carbuncles, bleeding is to be used to fainting,
that so the boiling blood, which is the cause of the Carbuncle, may be drawn
forth more abundantly. But this is only in a simple Carbuncle without
malignity; in the other it is not safe: it is controverted, whether a vein is to
be opened, when exanthemata's, or spots appear. For answer, some think it a
heinous fault to draw blood then, in that the humors are carried at that time,
from the Center to the Circumference, which motion is altogether to be helped,
but by the opening a vein, it is altogether hindered, and the blood drawn from
the Circumference to the Center, for emptiness being made in the inward part,
the blood contained in the external parts, does run into the internal. But
notwithstanding this, with the more sound Physicians this is not regarded, but
bleeding is prescribed, if the spots appear in the beginning of the disease,
and in those days, in which venae sectio ought to be performed, in case
sufficient has not been drawn before: it must be drawn moderately, lest it
procure danger. For those that break forth in the beginning, are not critical,
but symptomatical, arising from a notable ebullition, and heat of blood, and
malign humors putrified, and therefore cannot hinder natures, motion, which
is none at that time: nay, if they appear in plethorick bodies, having red, and
thick Urine, if a vein be not cut, nature not being able to overcome so great
a quantity of humors, often procures great hurt by their sudden rushings into
some internal part, and there causing a dangerous inflammation. Yet this is
cautiously to be performed, lest the veins being emptied too much, a
retraction of the humors may succeed, from the external to the internal parts,
therefore only the great plenitude thereof is to be removed. And thus the
expulsive motion of nature, is helped to the superficies of the body, as has
often been observed in these, where ven. sect. has been warily performed, within
few hours after a safe Critical sweat has followed: and in this account,
although nature might be judged sufficient to overcome its enemy: yet it is not
to be neglected, for by this means the Conquest may be more sure and speedy.
Yet note, that after bleeding, many Cups are to be applied, that so the motion
of the humor may be expedited to the external parts. How and where they are to
be applied, will hereafter be discovered, that you may securely perform what
is pressed. Observe, that those spots, or exanthemata's are symptomatical,
which appear in the beginning of the disease, and before the fourth day; and
then the sick is so far from being eased, that grievous symptoms trouble. Here
bleeding is not to be neglected; but those are Critical, which break forth
after the fourth day, in abundance, upon which the sick finds ease, and
symptoms remit. Here abstain, and fix to many Cups with scarification, which
is excellent. What has been said is to be understood of opening a vein in the
arm. The cutting of the lower veins in some cases is very advantageous, viz.
1. Where there is great debility, and so a vein opened in the arm cannot be
borne. 2. In women, where it is most proper and profitable, by reason of the
excretion of nature, yea, especially in the absence of the menses, because then
the blood abounds in the veins near the womb. Thirdly, when there is feared a
translation of the humors to the brain, which often happens in this Fever
procuring a frenzy, which is discovered by a white thin, colourlesse Vrin.
This has been observed in pestilent times, after the drawing of two pound of
blood, from the inferior veins, many have been cured. Of the like efficacy is
the opening of the Haemorrhoids, by leaches, especially in those that are
melancholic. After bleeding, revulsion is to be made with Cups, without
scarifications, if simple revulsion be only required, but with scarif. if blood
abound, and cannot safely be lessened otherwise. These first diminish strength
little; And secondly draw malignity from within outward; they are to be
applied, first to the thighs and hips, that portion of the malignity may be
drawn to the remote parts, but being this is not sufficient to draw the
venomous humors and vapors, from the parts near, they are to be applied to
the scapula's and back, yet not here neither in the beginning of the disease,
nor if there be fullness of the body, unless universal evacuations have been
sufficiently used. As in Pleurisies, if in the beginning Cups be applied to the
pained part, it increases the fluxion the more, but if after much bleeding it
only draws what is there fixed, and hence the disease is dissolved; yet it is
more dangerous in this affect, being so near the heart, if they be applied to
the arm pits, and groyns, they draw the ill juice to the ignoble parts Amongst
revellers are frictions of the extreme parts with rough clothes often repeated.
But that is best which is made on the whole body with this Linim. ol. Amygd d.
and aq. fontan. an, iij. sal. nitri ij. bull. ad aq. consumpt. and manibus hoc
oleo inunctis perfricetur calide totum corpus mane and sero. This opens the
pores of the skin, by which the venomous vapors are vented. Vesicatories are
fitly applied to various parts, which powerfully draw and revel the venomous
Ichor. They are commonly applied to the neck, and so they draw from the head,
by which sleepy affects are prevented, which often falls out in these Fevers. But
if the malignity of the matter be great, possessing the whole body, producing
cruel symptoms, apply at once to several places, as to the inside of the
arms, betwixt the arme-pits and elbowes, to the inside of the thighs betwixt
the groine and knee. By these the malign matter is drawn forth. But lest they
should procure suppression of Vrin, use an Emulsion to temperate the heat, and
sharpness of the Vrin. With the vesicatory plasters may be mixed sem. Ameos
powdered. A Cataplasme of raddishes, powerfully revels the malign matter, it is
used in slices with salt and vinegar: Or, rasur. raphan. and brion. utriusque
an. ij. sem. nasturtii. j. gran. parad. s. sal. marin. iij. mixta irro rentur
aceto fortissimo and excipiantur q. s. sap^n. liquid. f. veluti. Cataplas
applica plantis pedum e stupis pexis ca lide hora somni. These revellers
usually, are to be used through the whole course of this disease. Purging is
much controverted, whether it is to be used in the beginning of this disease?
Some utterly reject it: First, because matter concoct, not crude is to be
purged. Secondly, thereby the malign matter is too much stirred up, and more
largely diffused, and so a pernicious flux often procured. Others contend for it,
that so some part of the abounding matter, in the first ways may be removed,
lest it infect the rest of the mass of the humors; and so nature, though
helped with Alexipharm. and strengthners be foiled. But to reconcile, purging
medicaments are to be waved, and those humors, lodged in the first ways, are
to be drawn forth with glisters. But if it cannot thus be sufficiently
performed, which especially happens, when all humors abound in the stomach,
which is known by want of appetite, bitterness of the mouth, loathing, and
vomiting, or when worms are present, then it is fit to use purgers, that so
that matter in the veins may be the better conquered, being concocted. Hence
observe, that it is necessary that the matter in the veins be concocted, before
purged: but that in the first ways not. The Purgers used are to be gentle, as
Cassia, Tamarind. Manna, Sir. ros. and de cichor. compos. And all others are to
be neglected, unless senna, and rhabarb and those are to be used in small
quantity mixed with the other, and that when Cacochymia abounds. Their form is
set down in putrid Fevers; glisters are to be used, not only in the beginning,
upon the former account, but also through the whole disease, if the belly flow
not freely, and that every, or every other day. For thus first, the daily
excrements are drawn forth, and certain portion of the diseased matter is
brought away. Secondly, humors turning to the upper parts are called back to
the contrary parts, which is most agreeable to nature. They are to be framed of
mollifying, and cooling decoctions, adding gentle looseners, shunning
diagrediats, which often draw on a dangerous flux of the belly. Whilst the
foresaid medicaments are in use, correct the feverish heat, putrefaction and
malign quality with these following; First, altering juleps, set down in
putrid Fevers, will be very fit, especially if of decoction made of the roots
of Sorrel, Cichory, Grass, Buglosse, Sharp docks, and the leaves of Endive,
Succory, Sorrel, Pimpinel, Maiden-haire, and Tamarinds, to which may be added
such as have a specific quality to oppose venomous humors, commonly called
Alexiphar. as the roots of Cinqfoile, Tormentill, white Chameleon, the leaves
of Scordium, Carduus bened, vipers grass, meadsweet, the flowers of Marigolds,
Clouegilliflowers, pieces of Limons, Pomegranates, Sorrel, and of the juice of
Sorrel, and with these are often to be mixed sharp medicines, as juice of
Citrons, Limons, Spir. vitrioli. or Sulphur, for they excellently resist
putrefaction, and the venomous quality, so that some have been recovered, only
by the use of Citrons, infused in ordinary drink, or juleps. The two foresaid
spirits are gallant, for there is no putrefaction, whose strength they break
not, nor infection which they overcome not, nor no ill humor which they amend
not. To the said juleps may be added sal prunella, which powerfully cooles, and
extinguisheth the Feverish heat, and has some force to procure sweat, upon
which account its very profitable in malign Fevers. In place of juleps, to
those of dainty palats, use medicated broths, wherein is boiled the leaves of
Borage, Sorrel, Pimpinel, and other herbs of a more grateful taste, with the
pairings of Peare-mains, pulpe of Citrons, the meat being a pullet to them.
Sometimes add Sal Prunella, to cool the more Emulsions prepared of Almonds,
and the four cold-seeds, with the decoctions of the juleps is excellent, to
which may be added the seeds of Citrons, Napi, and Carduus bened. which oppose
the malign quality, as also the foresaid Syrups. Through the whole Cure use
Alexipharmacons, not only in juleps, broths, and emulsions, but also in other
forms. And because they are not to be used promiscuously, nor at any time of
the disease, therefore they are divided into four Classes: the first
containing those, which as by a specific quality resist venom, so being cold,
dry, and a little astringent, resist putrefaction, strengthen the heart, and
bridle the venenosity, lest it be too easily poured out into the whole body,
and resists by a certain compressure, the dissolution of the parts. Such are
bol. armen. terr. sig. coral. rad. pentaph. tormentil. The second, contains
them, which by their coldness, and thin substance resist putrefaction, and
bind up malignity; such are juice of Limons, spir. vitriol. and sulphur. as
also all sharp things. The third Classis contains those that are hot and
diaphoretick, which expels venomous humors and vapors from the heart, or the
Center to the Circumference. Such are Angelica, zedoaria, dictamn. meadsweeet,
scordium Card. bened. Scabious, Theriac. and Mithrid. and aq. Theriacal. The
fourth contains those which are specific, without any excess in the first
quality, these oppose the venomous quality; as lap. bezoar. c. c. and
monocerot. troch. viperin. etc. The first, second and fourth Classes are more
proper in the beginning and increase; the third in the declination, and these
are to be varied, according to the several degrees of the malignity, and
putrefaction, and intensenesse, or remissness of the Fever, temperament of
the sick, sex, age, and other circumstances, which wholly depends upon the
judgment of the Physician; only observe, where the Fever vehemently burns,
add here to cool and sharp things, shunning hot, and diaphoreticks, which yet
are proper where the Fever is remiss, and malign quality intense Of these may
be compounded various medicaments, of which this may be a pattern.. rad.
acetos. buglos. torment. an. j fol. endiv. cichorii, acetos. pimpinel. an. Mi,
tamarind. j. coq. in lb j. aq in colatur dissolv. sir. de Limon and granata an.
js. f. julep. pro tribus dosibus bis in die sumendis, addend. unicuique dos.
confec. de Hyacinth. 1. lap. bezoar gr. vi. This may serve in principio, if the
Fever be very intense, and in a bilious body, add to every dose sal prunel. j.
vel spir. vitriol. aut sulphur. ad* moderatam aciditutem. In Fevers remiss,
there may be added to the decoction, rad. carlinae, and pentaphyl. fol. scord.
and scabiosae.. amygd. dull. exortic. j. sem melon. cucurbit, napi. and card.
bened. an. ij. contund. in mortario marmor. sensim affundend, decocti julep.
praedict. lb js. sir. limon. iij. sal. prunel. iij. f. Emuls. pro tribus
dosibus bis aut ter in die sumendis. Through the whole cure use broth, in which
is dissolved confect. de hyacinth. or Coral. praep. margarit. praep. rasur.
Ehoris c. c. usti lap. bezoar. an. j. f. pull. of which give 10 gra. in every
mess of broth, where the malign quality is very strong, Alexipharm is to be
given in all the broths, juleps, and ordinary drinks that are taken. Bezoar
gra. vi. or vii. with meadsweet water, or of vipers grass. card. ben. etc.
does not only oppose the malign quality, but causes sweat; but being that
which is true, is hard to come by, contraherva is rather to be confid^d in,
performing the said intentions surely and speedily, the root it self given in a
fit vehicle, to j. is good.. sacc. cand. iij. zinzib. ij. camphor. j. fiat.
pull. dos. (...). If there be great pain in the head, or stomach, this is
warily to be used, because of the Camphire. bezoar. mineral. iij. sal. prunel.
ij. Camphor. j. mis. dos. j. in aq. card. bened. or smaragd, p. p. lap. bezoar.
an. gr. vj. hyacinth. p. p. gr. iij. mis. f. pull. pro una dos. This is
excellent, and given in Marmalade, has cured desperate fluxes, dos. gr. xij.
Troch. viper in. cum aq. Cordial. vel julep. is admirable. The third Classis of
Alexipharm. are only to be exhibited in the state and declination, which is to
be understood of simple malign Fevers, and spotted. For in the true plague,
they may be used from the beginning, that so the venomous quality, ready
suddenly to strangle the Patient, may be powerfully opposed, and the malign
vapors discussed; yea, they may also be given in simple malign Fevers, if the
malign quality abound more then the putrefaction from the beginning, but in
smaller doses, especially those less hot, or mixed w^^^ cooling medicaments.
Of these sweating medicaments there are several degrees; for some are more hot,
as angelic. zedoar. dictam. theriac. mithrid. and aq. theriacal. These are to
be given, when the Fever is remiss, and malignity more intense. Others are less
hot, as Card. bened, scabios. scordi. meadsweet; these give when the Fever is
strong, and the malignity is remiss. Take the waters of meadsweet, and carduus
bened of each two ounces. juice of Limons one ounce, old treakle a dragme or
two scruples, (as heat is more or less feared) mix them, and make a potion,
giving it warm, and cover the body little more then ordinary, this is
excellent. If the Symptoms be great and vehement, theriac. rec. is more fit,
the opium therein temperating the fierceness of the Symptoms, and hinders the
boiling of the humors. Sometimes, when theriac. is not fit, (as in the
beginning, and increase) lauda. opiat. may be profitably given, being mixed
with Alexipharm. for it is narcotick quality, does not only congeale the hot
spirits which vehemently infest the heart, but also stay the morbifick matter,
(whilst it is in a most pernicious flux) so that it remains almost immovable.
Aq. theriac. is to be preferred before theriac. it self, for it being thin and
spirituous, sooner and more easily enters and diffuseth it self over the whole
body, moving sweat; that of Bauderonus is accounted most excellent, dos. ab. s.
ad j. exhibited in sudorifick waters or decoctions. Some are framed more hot of
white wind, or spirit of wine, which are to be given in lesser quantity. These
are more penetrative, provoking sweat more abundantly, and have place
especially in the plague; as rad. angelic. carlinae gentian. tormentil. zedoar.
c. c. an. j. trium santalor. an. s. theriac. iij. camphor. j. contundantur
omnia, and infundantur in vini alb. lb ij, in loco calid. per triduum, deinde
distill. in B. M. and aq. servetur ad usum, dos. ab ij. ad s. In cooling juleps
adding spir. vitriol. spir. vini opt. rectific. lb js. theriac. veter. viij.
myrrh. electae. iiij. croc. orient. j. camphor. s. infund. per 24. hor. in B.
M. postea distill. in eodem bal. and eliciatur aq. sum efficax. The Chemists
have their Bezoardickes. In the Cure of these Fevers observe; first, that you
often change the alexipharm. lest nature being too much accustomed to one, it
prove fruitless; besides venenosity is not always the same. Secondly,
mithrid. and theriac. and those strong are not to be given to women with
child, and children. Thirdly, In sweating abstain from sleep, and in sweat
give juice of Citrons, and aq. card. whilst these are in use, if you would have
the venenosity more drawn forth to the superficies of the body, apply external
medicaments, as cups with and without Scarif. often and many also vesicatories
which are most fit in the state; at which time Sudorificks are to be used. Also
ol. scorpion. Mathioli, which is admirable; anointing therewith hot the
Emunctories, as the groynes, armepits, etc. as also the pulses of the temples
and wrests, with the hands and feet, three or four times a day, or every third
hour; in want of this, prepare a linim. of Theriac. dissolved in the juice of
Lemons, adding a little Saffron and Camphire; by these the strength of the
malignity, that resides in the center, is called to the externals. If the
malignity seem to over-match nature, then assist her with strong sudorificks,
giving them in greater quantity then ordinary, as aq. Theriac. vel bezoard. to
which add camphire, and outwardly at the same time, the following fomentation
is to; used be. rad. Angelic. and gentian. an. ij. fol. meliss. origan.
scordii, an. Miij. sem. card. bened. j. flor. cham. verbasc. melilot. Hyper.
centaur. minor staechad. Anthos. and calendul. an. p. ij, fiat decoct. adden.
sub finem parum vini alb* quo foveantur pedes inguina, axillae, and latera
calide cum spongiis. This method calls forth malign vapors, and has cured
many. If dryness of the tongue, thirst and other symptoms prevaile^ the
fomentation is not to be used; but instead thereof, Hens divided in the middle,
or the lungs, or cauls of Sheep new killed, is, to be applied to the belly.
Strength being much weakened by the venomous quality, is to be supported
through the whole cure, with convenient brothes made of Capons, or the liquor
thereof distilled, per descensum in B. M. to which may be added sometimes,
confect. de Hyacinth. which does not only relieve the remaining strength, but
opposes malignity. In the said brothes, gelly of Harts-horne, is good, but
Alkermes is most excellent, which strengthens much; yet increases not the
feverish heat. Wine discreetly exhibited, is good and cordial; and to smell
to bread macerated therein, is excellent, having added thereto Rose Water. The
foresaid confect. Alkerm. may be mixed with potions in great weakness, as this
which is excellent.. aq. naphae, and rosar. an. js. confect. Alker. j. sir de
pomis. j. succ. lemon. iij. f. pot. If the Fever be not very intense, add aq.
Cinam. ij. vel. iij. and sometimes Ambra-griefe to gr. 5. vel. 6. Yea, in case
the patient be in danger of death, strengtheners that are hot, are not to be
feared, being they may be temperated by mixing therewith sal prunel. spir.
vitriol. etc. this course may also be observed, when Alexiphar. Sudorificks, and
others are exhibited, or outwardly applied. Epithemes by some are rejected,
because usually framed of those things which cool and repel, and so drive back
to the heart; but this may be helped by forming them of cordial waters and
diaphoreticks, as. aq. scabios. card. bened. an. iiij. aq. naphae ij. confect.
Alkerm. ij. diamarg. frigid. j. croc. and camphir. an. gr. vi. f. Epithem.
applic. region. cordis tepide frequenter,. confect. Alker. s. spec. Triasantal.
and diamargar. frigid. an. js. aq. naphae parum, fiat liniment. apply it to the
said part after the use of the Epitheme. The malign quality being thus foiled,
and the Fever growing remiss, the disease inclining to declination, and
manifest signs of concoction appearing, purging is to be appointed according
to the strength of the sick, as. sen. Alexand. s. sem. anisi. j. fol. scabios,
scord. an. Ms. liquiritiae iij. coq. in aq. ad. iij. in colatu dissol. rhei in
aq. bugloss. cum santal. citrin. infus. iiij. Mannae elect. and sir. ros. an.
j. f. pot. Here purging, if necessary, is to be reiterated twice or thrice,
intermitting a day or two, that so the matter may be thoroughly eradicated,
otherwise the sick may be either in danger of recidivation, or else will be
longer in healing: For although nature may be strong enough of it self to cast
out the diseased matter, yet not of a long time The diet in this Fever is to
be like that in continual Fevers, only these things are to be observed. First,
sharp things in broths and drinks are often to be used, for so they will be more
fit to oppose putrefaction, and the malign quality. Secondly, the use of Wine
in this Fever, may sometimes be profitable, being very cordial, and an enemy
to malignity; being given to those whose feverish distemper is remiss, the
venomous quality much, and the Patient being of a phlegmatic constitution, yet
it is to be much diluted; but contrary, if the Fever be great, and the body be
choleric; 'its very pernicious, especially in spotted Fevers. Thirdly, Wine
is never to be given in the first days of the disease, lest the crude matter
be moved too much; but only in the state when the signs of malignity appear.
Zacutus gave it in great thirst, with dryness and blackness of the tongue
with happy success, and by it cured. Hence the sentence of Celsus is not
strange, Saepe. quos ratio non restituit,, temeritus adjuvat. Often that which
reason restores not, rashness helps. That the cure may be complete, somewhat
is to be said of the symptoms; As first pain of the head, watching, and
delirium, which are to be encountered with all sorts of revellers, as opening
the inferior veins hemorrhoids, casting in Emollient glisters, friction of
the lower parts; cups applied, first to the hips, and after to the back and
scapulas, both with, and without scarification; also vesicatories, if the
delirium be from a bilious cause, are to be applied to the arms and thighs;
but if therewith be joined stupor and sleepiness, also apply them to the neck.
After these to the forehead apply oxyrrhod; only observe, they are not so fit
in malign, as in simple putrid Fevers; because the difflation of venomous
vapors, ought rather by all means to be procured, then retained. Therefore,
first, use more gentle repellers, and if symptoms be more violent, use
stronger, but not long. The more gentle are flor. nymphae. violar. rosar. sem.
frigid. Major. and gran. Kermes, or. ungu. popul. j. conser. violar. and rosar.
an. s. ol. viol. and ros. an. iij. acet. ros. ij. Misce omnia, excipiantur
stupis pexis, and duobus linteis inclusa fronti applicentur. Emulsions of the
cold feeds are to be used, which sends cold and benign vapors to the brain,
and so case the said symptoms; which if they suffice not, narcoticks are to be
used in small doses, as sir. papav. s. or in great necessity, lund. opiat. cum
conser. rosar. gr. ij. or dissolved in some julep, or else in place of these,
Theriac. recens, these admirably hinder the malign sharp vapors sent to the
brain, only use them seldom, lest they concenter the venom. After the use of
repellers one or two days, come to derivers as vesicatories to the neck, the
opening of the frontal veins, from which draw to v. or vi. ounces of blood
which happily succeed, the arm vein having been first opened, and sufficient
blood drawn. Leeches applied behind the ears is good, although not so
efficacious as the former. Toward the state and declination of the frenzy,
Resolvers are to be used, especially Animals or their parts, as the lungs of
sheep, which ls more profitable then young Pigeons, or Whelps, in that they
incompasse the whole head, and so partly resolve the hurtful humor contained
in the brain; and partly concoct and maturate it, that so after nature does
more easily expel them. They are by some ill applied in the beginning of the
frenzy, because they increase heat, and move fluxion to the brain, and so
increase the delirium. As for the inflammation, dryness and heat of the
Tongue, what has been set down in putrid Fevers may serve, especially that
framed of the water, or juice of sempervivi and sal. prunel. or this
experimented.. butyr. rec. in aq. ros. lot. j. sal. prunel. an. s. Misce, keep
it in cold water, and give of it often in a day the quantity of a pease or bean,
and hold it long on the tongue. It Is a sign the cure succeeds well, if that
suliginous blackness falls, and the roughness of the tongue begins to
moisten, and the furrednesse comes away, leaving excoriations; so that the sick
in excreting, cast it off the roof and palate. At that time those parts are so
sensible, that they cannot endure the use of sharp things, and are subject to
inflammation, for which use this, S^m. psyll. and Cydonior. an. j s. gum.
tragac. j. cum aq ros. q s. ex tract. mucilag. satis liquida cui add. sir.
viol. parvam quantitatem, fiat instar gelatini, quo utatur frequenter ex
cochloari, diuque in ore contineat. Hot milk gargarised, eases pain,
temperateth inflammation, humects the tongue and roof of the mouth, and draws
away the venom; the following is also good,. Sem cucumer. mundat. and contus.
j. gum. tragacan. subtilis. pulv. s. alb. ovo. q. s. form. pil. quas teneat in
ore frequenter, or. Cucurbit. and melon. mund. and contus. sem. papav. albi,
an. j. liquiritiae, and Tragacanth. an. j s. contund. and pull. and cum mucilag.
cydon. extract. cum aq. ros. f. pil. in ore detinenda. But because the foresaid
effects of the Tongue proceed from inward heat, to extinguish it, cooling
juleps are often to be used, to which add sal prunellae, and spir. vitriol.
which may also be mixed with ordinary drink. For vehement thirst, want of
appetite, loathing, hichough and vomiting, you may find sufficient in the
place forecited, only in thirst be sure with your juleps you use sal.
prunellae and spir. vitriol. and for vomitings, which are frequent in this
Fever, and vex so sore, that it casts up all taken; yea, thin juleps; it is
certainly cured with one dragme of the salt of Wormwood given in a spoonful of
the juice of Lemons.

The Flux of the belly in this disease is most frequent, and therefore requires
the greater care and prudence: For if it be preposterously stayed, the venomous
matter will be kept within, and endanger much; if not stayed, it dejects the
strength, and often procures death, therefore use this method. If it be moderate
and dejects strength not much, it is not to be stayed, but only allayed with
gentle glisters; but if contrary, it is to be stayed with Theriac. rec., or
laud. opiat. a gr. ij. ad. gr. iij. This has often been observed, that
pernicious fluxes tending to death, have been stayed in a moment by giving
powerful diaphoreticks in great quantity.

Worms often infest this disease, being begot from great putrefaction of the
humors; to rid these, sweet glisters are to be used, and exhibiting potions
framed of the decoction of scordium, which has force both against them and the
venenosity; if with it be boiled Purslain and Sorrel, it temperateth its heat.
Cor. Cer. usti. vel rasur. j. is good, although a Flux of the belly be present.
When the malignity and venomous quality abound, there happens Parotes, Buboes
and Carbuncles. For Parotis when they begin to appear, and notably increase,
apply drawers, and exhibit Alexipharm. diaphoreticks, which help nature to
expel the diseased matter; to the part apply ungu. Dialthaea upon wool, this
loosens the part. Make attraction by applying Pigeons and Whelps, which also
ease pain; to draw more strongly, make a plaster, ex fermento, caricis,
caepis, columbin. stercor. add. butyr. pingued. galin. axungia suilla, rec. ol.
lilior. vel Amygd d. If by these attractors the part be made more hot, and the
pain greater, intermit them by times, applying a Cataplasme of white bread,
lan. succid. vel ungu. dialthaea. If the part be not capacious enough to
receive the diseased matter, as it seldom is, then derive part of it by
applying vesicatories to the neck, often exhibiting diaphoreticks. The matter
being called to the external parts, is to be suppurated by applying a
Cataplasme of the roots of French Mallows, Lilies, Figs, Linseed, axungia and
ol. praedict. composit. The tumor being suppurated, is to be opened, and the
residue of the matter is to be concocted by continuing the foresaid Cataplasme,
or Emplast. crocatum, vel diachyl. cum gum. the Ulcer is to be cleansed with
Turpentine, Yelkes of Eggs, and Oil of Roses; keeping it long open with
Tents, that so the venom may be sufficiently purged, and after this cicatrise.
This is to be observed, if the Tumor so increase, that there is great danger of
suffocating, it is to be opened before perfect maturation; for so some part of
the matter is discharged, the tumor lessened, and that danger escaped also; if
malignity so abound, that it overcomes nature; the tumor is to be opened, yea,
before maturation; for so the venom, expiring often health follows: Upon the
same account buboes are so to be dealt with, and cured as the former; these, if
great and eminent, if they break forth presently at the beginning, and in the
groynes, are more secure; but if livid and black, if they lie in the skin, if
they be about the neck, or under the arme-pits, breaking forth the 3d. or
fourth day more dangerous. But most dangerous when by reason of strength foiled
they return in. To these apply the cups as also to the former, every sixth
hour for twice or thrice; after apply a Catapl. ex rad. raphan. and scorphul.
Major. cum pauco sales and aceto, and after follow the course in parotis, and
Parotis following a malign Fever the ninth or tenth day, for most part
procuring death, was cured with bleeding by repetition, beginning with ij. or
iij. and four hours after drawing, vj. and after both purging; all to whom
this method was used were cured, This is to be noted; often Parotes are critical,
and profitably appear, and by them the sick is delivered from death; i. e.
when they happen in declinatio, and at their appearing symptoms remit, being
in fevers less malign; but if they be symptomatical, and fall out in statu,
they are mortal, and to these the foresaid medicines are to be used. In
Carbuncles following malign Fevers; if before their appearing sufficient
blood has not been drawn, or if the sick then can bear it, open the veins
nearest the Carbuncle, that so there may be made the greater attraction to the
part affected, after scarifying the Tumor round about, deep foment it with salt
water, hot; that so the concretion of the blood may be hindered, and be made
more apt to flow; then presently apply upon the midst of the pustle a grain
of Cavstick, and to the whole tumor this Cataplasme.. fol. rutae, and scabios.
contus. an. Mj. ficuum siccar. contus. par. iij. fermenti acris j. piper. pull.
j. vitel. ovor. Nti. Misc. f. Catapl. Let it be applied for two days, after
apply this. succor symphyti major. scabios. calendul. an. j. Theriac. veter.
iiij. sal. j. vitel. ovor. nii, Misce, after the tumor is come to the increase,
lest the malign matter flow to the inward parts again, anoint about it twice
aday cum vngu. boli. but upon the escar. that the fall thereof may be procured,
apply ungu. Basilic. cum Butyr. aut axung. suil. permixta, after it is fallen,
cleanse the Ulcer with this, succor. calendulae, absinth. scabios. and apii,
an. j. Myrrh. elect. rad. irios Florent. aloes, sarcocol. an j. Mel. ros. ij.
f. ungu. continue this to the end of the Cure.

RICKETS.
THis disease is, as new; so, as peculiar to children; it has received several
names, as Paedesplanch nosteocaces, this I saw in Print, in a Thesis long
before the Doctors Tract on the subject; others Cachexia, Scorbutica, and the
Doctors; the Rachitis, nearly bordering on the vulgar name Rickets, and
signifying the spinal disease, the spine being the first and principal, amongst
the parts affected in this evil. Signs are either such as discover the affect
present, or such as show the difference of the disease, or those that presage
its event. The Diagnosticks are these, loosnesse, and softness of the parts
first affected; the skin soft and smooth, to touch the musculous flesh, less
rigid and firm; the joints easily flexible, unable to sustain the body;
debility, weakness, and enervation of parts subservient to motion; this
depends on the former, and is from the beginning of the disease; so that if it
infect in the first year, or thereabout; they take to their feet later, and often
speak, before they walk, accounted a sa^ Omen. If the disease afflict after
they begin to go; then by degrees they stand, more and more feeble, often
staggering as they go; and stumble on every slight occasion: neither can they
stand long without sitting, or play with usual cheerfulness, till they have
rested. After a vehement increase of the disease, they wholly lose the use of
their feet; yea, they scarcely can sit, in an e^ect posture; and their neck is
so weak, that it can hardly, or not at all sustain the head. Slothfulness and
Numnesse, does invade the joints presently after the beginning of the disease,
and daily by degrees, increasing makes them more averse from motion; those so
young, as they are carried in nurses arms, when played with, laugh not so
heartily, nor are so game some; and if angered they sprunt not so fiercely, nor
cry so heartily. If such as can go, they are soon weary; love to play rather
sitting then standing: and when they sit, they bend sometimes forward,
backward, or on either side, seeking some, props to lean upon; to gratify
their slothfulness, they love not violent motion, they are moderate in
sleeping, and waking, unless some other disease intervene, for the most part
ingenious, and for the most part of forward wits, their countenances being much
more composed and severe then their age requires; where those are present
together, they certainly witness the presence of the disease. Observe,
although these may appear in other diseases, yet then they come more suddenly,
and as soon vanish; here contrary: these relate to the Animal actions. Those
belonging to the disproportioned nourishment of the parts follow, as an unusual
bigness of the head, with a fuller and livelier complexion of the face, then
other parts of the body; and this is more or less, from the beginning to the
ending; unless the leanness of those parts come upon some other cause. The
fleshly parts below the head, especially those full of muscles; in the
progress of the disease, are daily more and more worn away, made thin and
lean. Swellings and knotty excrescentes about some of the joints, especially
conspicuous in the wrests, less in the Ankles; as also on the ribs, where they
are conjoined with gristles in the breast, these appear early. The bones wax
crooked, especially those in the leg, first the lesser, then the greater; also
those below the elbow, sometimes the thighs, and shoulders; sometimes the bones
shorten, growing in thickness more then length; hence children long afflicted
with the disease, grow dwarfes. The bones of the forehead stick out, the teeth
come forth, both slowly, and with trouble; grow loose on every slight occasion,
sometimes wax black, and fall out by pieces; in their stead new ones come
again, though late, and with much pain; in the higher progrese of the disease,
the breast becomes narrow, like a capons, this last belongs to the signs
belonging to respiration: as also a swelling of the belly, and an extension of
the Hypochondriacal parts, although outwardly they appear extenuated. Cough,
difficulty of breathing, with other faults of the lungs. They are averse from
lying on either side. Those that belong to the vital influx are, the veins and
arteries, are more slender then ordinary, in the first affected part; the pulse
small and weak, a moderate ligature cast about the elbow, or knee, does not so
soon swell and color the part beneath and above it with blood, as in sound
children of the same age; their appetite is moderate, or unduly weak. I have
known it very much, yet no Fever present; they are usually averse to sweet
things, they sometimes weigh heavier then other children of the same age and
stature. The next are signs of the differences of the Rickets. The differences
are taken, 1. from the essence of the disease, 2. causes, and 3. conjoined
diseases. These receive subdivisions. Under the first, is the secondary
essence; the magnitude and vehemence of the disease, with the spirits and
times; the magnitude is the mildness or fierceness of it. Under the vehemence
is the slownesse, and quickness of its motion. For the times they are
generally four: beginning, increase, state, and declination; in all which
consider, first, the beginning is when it appears to our understanding.
Secondly, the increase and declination in long diseases, may be subdivided, as
the increase may extend beyond the consistence; if the progress be to death;
and the declination is either legitimate, i. e. when the sickness declines to
health, or spurious, i. e. when the disease remitting falls into another kind.
The last are taken from the spirits or strength of the child; for if the
disease fall in upon a child less strong, it must needs be more dangerous,
then if on one strong. The differences as to the causes are various; as either
it is a natural affect, or newly contracted. The first is twofold, viz. either
properly, i. e. when the sick is born actually affected with the disease, or
improperly, i. e. when he is strongly disposed by his native principles to fall
into it; this difference is of more use to prevent, then to cure. The disease
may be said to be newly contracted, when not fomented by a natural
disposition; and this is also twofold, either succeeding some foregoing
disease, or it is immediately produced by an erroneous use of the six
non-naturals. The difference by reason of other diseases conjoined; those most
usually are, Dropsy of the head, faults of breeding teeth; Asthma, Phthisick,
Hectic, a slow and erratick Fever, and the Ascites, i. e. that Dropsy, when
water is got betwixt the flesh and skin; these have a certain dependence upon
this disease, and the causes of it; those that have little, or none at all, are
a Malign Fever, French Pox, Scurvy, and struma^s. The first sort of diseases
may happen to children, although the Rickets have not preceded; yea, they may
be the cause to introduce it; to deliver in signs answerable to these
differences, would be needless; those belonging to the three first may be seen
in the diagnosticks, the fourth in the prognostics; Indeed those that belong
to the times, may be a little more considered, especially those that pertain to
the beginning, that so its first rise may be known; those that discover it new
begun, are those signs that are ascribed to the Animal action. Also those that
next adjoyne, as the knots of the wrests, greatness of the belly, etc. and
these taken together, do certainly discover the presence of the disease, from
the beginning. These signs more intense with the extenuation of the parts,
denote the increase. In the state they are more outrageous, etc. as for those
signs appertaining to the causes; if it be a natural disease, improperly so
called, there is a weak and sickly constitution, 2. diseases of one or both
Parents, as cold and moist distemper, ill habit, cachexy, dropsy, atrophy, etc.
2. Sloathfulnesse, effeminacy, idle life of the Parents. 3. Errors of the
mother during her being with child. 4. Debility of the newborn infant, if it
be not from hard labor, with many others. For signs of the disease newly and
totally contracted after birth, they are contrary to these; as for the signs
belonging to the several conjoined diseases, they may be seen in their several
cures elsewhere handled. The essences of the disease consist in a cold and
moist distemper, want of inherent spirits, their astonishment, the softness,
looseness, etc. of the Tone of the parts, the unequal distribution of the
vital spirits unequal nutrition of the parts, and imperfect distribution of the
animal spirits, these are essentials.

Causes either such as on the Parents part may produce it, or those which
happen to children after birth. The causes on the parents parts, are either
such as relate to the generation of the seed whereof the Embryo consists.
Others have reference to the Embryo now conceived, and yet in the womb. The
faults of the generation of the seed, proceed either from the man, or woman, or
from the whole body, or parts only dedicated to generation. That which depends
on the whole body, has the strongest influence into the child. The fault of
the seed is from a cold and moist distemper of the matter whereof the seed is
generated, which falls out in parents of a cold and moist constitution,
occasioned from ill juice, a cachexia, dropsey, green sickness, unsubdued
before conception; as also such effects, as pollute the blood, as scurvy,
French Pox and jaundice. 2. The penury of natural spirits occasioned by
extenuation of the bodies, from vehement evacuations, chronical diseases,
wasting the strength, not repaired before coition; imperfect concoction of the
last aliment, etc. 3. The stupour of the matter, transmitted to the parts of
generation; as in soft, and effeminate constitutions; over-moist and full diet,
delicacy of life, immoderate sleeping, etc. 4. Such parents as were subject to
it themselves in childhood. These are faults depending from the whole body.
Those that peculiarly reside in the Genital parts, are their to much coldness,
sometimes moistness; whence they cast forth, either an unfruitful seed, or
propensity too this disease, as is in those troubled with a waterish
gonnorrhea, red, and white fluxes in women; the application of too cold
medicines as Narcoticks; especially if often used. Thus much for the principal
causes before conception. Now for the faults of the mother while the Embryo is
in the womb. As, 1. A cold and moist distemper of the womb. 2. All those things
which hasten crude, and impure juices to the Embryo; as naughty diet, which
heap up crudities; imperfection of the first and second concoction; moist and
cold-diseases. 3. All those ways which defraud the Embryo of due aliment, as
excessive evacuations, especially of blood; sucking children too long after
conception. 4. Excessive sleepiness of women with Child, sloathfulnesse,
ease, vehement labor. Hence note, moderate labor, watching, and exercise,
which offer no violence to the womb, are good. Thus much of the causes before
birth. Now of those incident to children after birth, which are, 1. Errors in
the use of the six non naturals. 2. Preceding diseases. For the first,
considering children are seldom given to vehement passions of the mind, and
are unfit for venery, the five other shall only be touched. The first is air,
which procures this affect; if too cold and moist, which usually is most
frequent in the beginning of the spring. Be then cautious. As also when the
air is cloudy, thick, rainy and full of vapourous exhalations; therefore
places near the Sea, great marshes, houses near the banks, of great Rivers,
Ponds, Meeres, are condemned. Also too frequent bathings in sweet waters; cold
and moist linen, soft linen not well dried. Use rather course clothes, and
woolly coverings, each of which by rubbing and tickling the parts, excites, and
augments the inward heat, and irritates a more copious afflux of vital blood
to the habit of the body. Secondly, if infected with metalline exhalations, as
lead, antimony, quicksilver, etc. as also ointments made of them, used. Hence
children anointed with mercuriall ointments for the scabs, have after fallen
into this disease. Thirdly, a vehement, and subtle air; for it extremely
attenuates, and dissolves the inherent spirits. Also hot ointments; hot, sharp,
saltish baths. Fourthly, air filled with narcotick vapors; also medicines of
the same quality, as Hemlock, nightshade, etc. these procure a benumb'dnesse to
the first affected parts, and dull and diminish the vital influx of those
parts. The second is Meat and drink. As 1. All aliments, too moist, and cold,
as fish and crude meats; too plentiful diet, cold and moist medicines also
taken inwardly. 2. Such aliments, as are too thick, tough, and obstructive, as
hung beef, salt fish, bread new drawn, almost all sweet things. 3. Such as are
of an extreme hot, and biting quality, sharp, and corrosive; as old and strong
wines, pepper, spice, and immoderate hot medicines. Thirdly, Motion, rest,
exercise and actions, ( i. e. if they exceed a mean) defect in motion, and want
of exercise, does most effectually procure the disease; for by this means the
instruments of motion are dulled. Fourthly, sleeping and watching, as if too
excessive, or defective, they procure the same evils, as the like in rest and
motion. Fifthly, things praeternaturally cast out and retained; of this more
largely; for all the internal causes of diseases, may not incommodiously be
reduced to this, although more rightly they may be distinguished into two
kinds. 1. Those things preternaturally retained, and cast forth. 2. Such
things as are contained in the body preternaturally altered. The latter are not
only removed by casting out, but by alteration; may be reduced to an agreeable
proportion of nature. However, there is a great affinity betwixt both. It Is
matter of judgment, to know humors particularly predominant in diseases: and
also by what ways they may be spied out: which are various, yet not unfitly
comprehended under the four humors, viz. choler, phlegm, etc. Whether
excrementitious humors retained, or vitiated by alteration, the interne causes
of diseases. Only blood properly so called, is scarce here faulty. Only
choler, melancholy, phlegm, and a waterish humor, or an undue transpiration
and sweating. Choler, if it abound may probably be the cause of this affect,
being apt to hinder the nourishment of the parts, and consume, and dissipate
the natural spirits. Melancholy, if superabounding, and not purged out after a
due manner, may be arrested as cause of this disease. For it rendereth the
blood unapt to nourish the parts, especially those first affected. But,
Thirdly, phlegm if retained, or abounding, may more properly be called the
cause of this disease. For it is cold, moist, slow, thick, benumbed, little
spirituous, soft, and affected with an internal slipperinesse. The next is the
undue transpiration of these humors, as also immoderate, or defective sweating;
which may be sometimes numbered among the causes of this affect. For they
dissipate the spirits, and withal dissolve the parts; especially the external,
which in this disease are first affected. If they be retained, they easily
kindle a feverish heat, which likewise injure the spirits, and dissolve the
parts. Both of them exposing the parts to a cold distemper. And Lastly, any
humor cast out above measure, does easily procure a wasting of the parts and
dissipates the spirits, leaving the body to this affect. Thus much for
non-naturals. We lastly come to diseases; which preceding, may be the cause of
this disease. 1. Some have affinity with it; as any cold distemper, or moist,
or both together; ill habit from too much phlegm, melancholy, and mixed
obstructions proceeding from such humors, a cachexia, dropsey, etc. 2. Such
diseases as make lean the body, as daily long diseases; also all fevers,
especially the hectic, ulcers of the lungs, with a putrid fever; any
continual fever that is violent, as a burning, malign, pestilent fever,
pleurisy, inflammation of the lungs, small Pox, etc. Also all fluxes of blood,
or otherwise diseases, that by consequence waste the substance of the parts, as
diseases of the stomach, guts, Mesentery, spleen, liver, etc. yea, diseases in
the Jaws, mouth, and throat, that hinder eating, also worms, teeth, apoplexy,
palsy, etc. Luxations, fractures, of thighs, legs, or backbone, also tumors,
paeines, or like affects, hindering the walking, playing, standing, etc. of
children.

Prognostics. This disease in its kind is not mortal: Sometimes it is so
gentle, as that it is wrought off by age: Sometimes so vehement, that it rejects
all applications; and concludes in death. Hence Prognostics are seriously to
be contempl^ted, that the event may be discovered. If it invade before birth,
its most dangerous, and seldom, if ever ends, in health. It discovering a
deprivation of the seminary principles, and insinuates a vehemence in the
causes. The more early it afflicts after birth, the more dangerous. If it
depend on the natural inclination, proceed from preceding diseases, dangerous.
Not altogether so, if either contracted by the mere error of the nurse, or
from an erroneous regiment of health. If the backbone be weak, the neck cannot
support the head, danger of life. If the first affected parts be extenuated,
the head be great, they unwillingly draw their knees upward, or suffer them to
be extended, its also hard to cure. Girls as they are more easily infested, so
they are more easily cured then boys. If the swellings in the bones of the
wrists, and ribs be great, it will be of long continuance. As also if either
the bones be crooked, as of Arms, and Legs: or there be great bending of the
joints. If with the Rickets, there be complicated a dropsey of the head;
especially if the futures gape, mortal. If they breed teeth painfully, if with
the Rickets be conjoined an Asthma, Phthisick Dropsey, French pox, deadly. If
there be the scurvy, strumatical tumors, either within, or without, little
hopes. If the teeth wax black, and fall out by pieces, dangerous. They who
easily endure agitation of the body, have scabs, wheals, pimples, or itch, come
after this affect, hopeful. They who attain to the consistence of the disease,
escape the danger, if carefully looked to. The declination of the symptoms
promises good. If the disease continue long, it easily procures a Phthisick,
unless some other affect, or grievous symptom do intervene; as convulsion,
loud cough, swelling of the lungs (vulgarly called the rising of the lights) a
continual Fever, Pleurisy, and so kill. Infants who have had red-haired women
to their nurses, have been most obnoxious to this affect. This disease chiefly
invades the cradles of the gentry, especially those who live at ease, and fare
deliciously. They whose thigh, and shankbones are much increased, rather
according to latitude and thickness, then according to longitude, for the most
part become dwarfs. Whosoever are not perfectly cured, before the first five
years of their age be spun out, they afterward for the most part, live
miserable, and fickly, and being either Asthmatical, Cachectical, or
Phthisical, they die before they arrive to the consistence of their age; or
else they grow deformed, crooked, and dwarfish.

essential parts of this disease be various, yet may they all be met with by
medicines temperately hot, and dry. And although the spirits prohibit all
extreme hot things, yet they allow of moderate. Being the disease is great, and
the spirits admit not a suitable remedy, it must be divided and given by
turns, that is, purge by degrees. For the Chirurgical Cure: The most used and
effectual is to divide the ridge that crosses over the ear, a little above
the hole, stopping the hole with lint. It Is to be done in both ears, twice or
thrice reiterated. Some say in a week; I have done it succesfully once a
month: it is to be done with a blunt knife, that the nerve, (usually burnt for
pain in the teeth) may be divided. This I have known succesful when all other
means have been fruitless. This particularly evacuates the head, by which the
blood is corrected: and hereby in some measure the astonishment of the parts is
driven away. Remember universals are to precede. Some highly commend issues: If
the disease cannot be conquered by other means, it is to be made in the neck by
incision; yet I have known some after by reason of the pain, have been less
gamesome. If with the Rickets an acute disease be complicated, vesicatories are
to be used in the neck; moderate ligatures may be used, swathing of some parts
with boulsters are to be used, as ankles, knees, etc.

For the Physical Cure, be sure let the first ways be first washed from their
impurities, which is done either by 1. Glisters, 2. Vomits, or, 3. Lenitive
purgers. The first is required chiefly, when the belly is costive, and
excrements hardened, when windy humors torment the guts, or some vehement
pain in the bowels afflict the Patient. In these cases they are not only to be
injected before preparation; but also before a vomit or a lenitive purge. They
are frequently framed of gentle purgers; sometimes only of such things as have
a faculty only to make the ways slippery, and to expel the wind. Never of
strong Catharticks. They are to be injected warm, or lukewarm. After long
abstinence from meat take some forms.. new milk warmed, iij. four, five, or
six, Coriander-seeds bruised s. course sugar j. sir. viol. vj. mix them, and
make a glister. This I have experimented in case of wind excellent, as also in
old, the quantity being increased. The Doctors in stead of the Coriander use
Anise-seed s. This I know, the powder of new anise-seeds, being very fine, and
mixed with pap, etc. and given by the mouth to a child, a day, or two, or more
after it is borne, purges gallantly, removing a green matter impacted in the
intestines, which torments the child. A sufficient quantity of the emollient
decoction, with lenitive electuary s. sir. of roses solutive, and syrup of
violets, each vj. oil of Camomile j. mixed, will serve. Or,. Althea-roots
beaten, s. melilot-flowers. ij. mallow-flowers, as also of mullin, each j.
bail them in whey sufficient quantity to iiij. or five, strain it, add red
sugar. s, man. calab. iij. oil of Camomile. s. mingle them and make a glister.
But to pass to Emeticks, these are excellent, and procure many advantages, if
considerately administered, and the dose fitly proportioned, otherwise
dangerous, they are to be forborne; unless the humors incline upward of their
own accord, and the children are either naturally or customarily apt to vomit,
or can easily endure it. Also if they spit blood, use to bleeding at the nose,
or any internal opening of the veins, tyssick and consumption, and if the
vomits be vehement; therefore they are either to be gentle in their own nature,
or if vehement, be corrected and given in a less dose; I have known given to
children white copperas of it self, which has wrought well and securely; the
salt of it is excellent from five to ten grains, dissolved in convenient
liquour. Your juice of Asarabacca is more churlish, so is infusion of glass of
Antimony more crabbed then that of crocus metallorum, the last may be infused
either in sack or white wind, made in a cold place, and well purified. Dose,
from j. to ij. to which add syrup of five roots, j. dissolving them in
posset drink, to which add cynamon-water ten drops, or if you fear Convulsion
fits, aq. ante pilepti. Lang. drink it warm. Or,. the tops of groundsel, Ms.
raisins j. ale a pint, boil them together till the half be wasted, to iij. of
the strained liquor add syrup of vinegar, simple, s. mix them, and drink them
lukewarm. Some administer vinegar of squills, with some oxymel of the same,
from half a spoonful to two spoonfuls. Lenitives work without tumult, and
therefore require not such care as vomits, or strong purgers; only let them not
be nauseous to the stomach, lest they procure loathing of all other medicines,
nor oppress the stomach by their too great quantity; and lest they vomit them
up presently, let the mouth be moistened with pleasant liquour, or use sugar,
candid cherries, preserved barberries, or the juice of oranges, etc. The
Lenitives are either simple, as manna, cassia fistula, aloes succotrina,
tamarinds, oake-foarn roo^s, jujubes, sebestens, sweat prunes and damascens,
figs, dates, pap of roasted apple, whey, etc. (These are to be mix't with other
catharticks, otherwise they will not satisfy:) or Compound, as Cassia drawn
either with, or without sena, diacassia, lenitive electuary, electuary of
raisins, common purging decoction, syrup, and honey of violets, syrup of roses
solutive, etc. Or,. best manna vj. cream of tartar, gr. 6. dissolve them in
possetale, in which a few anise-seeds have been boiled, js. mix them and give
them in the morning. Or,. polypody of the oak. ij. cream of tartar, ij.
pippins, number twelve, raisins of the Sun stoned, ij. boil them in a quart of
water, to lb j. in the decoction infuse all night best sena, js. rubarb, ij.
pulp of Cassia new drawn, s tamarinds, j. liquorish, anise-seeds and
coriander-seed, each js. the next morning strain it through a linen cloth,
and to viij. of the straining, addc vj of white sugar, boil it a little, after
add to it manna, dissolved in syrup of roses, of each ij. and make a lenitive
syrup, dos. j. in succory water. Or of pellitory of the wall, with j. of the
juice of lemons. For a pill your aloe rosata in a candid cherry, the skin
pulled off, is excellent, It Is to be exhibited at sleeping time. In the morning
give of syrup of roses solutive, j. in posset drink. These and such like are to
clear the first passages from impurities, or excrementitious humors collected
and compacted there, which do not only (if not removed) infect the nourishment
inward, but dull, or otherwise hinder the appropriate medicines. From these we
pass to the Preparatories, which relate partly to the preparation of the
humors, partly to the ways thorough which they are to be expelled, and partly
to the passages themselves wherein they are contained, and this is required
most of all before purging medicines, seldom before vomits; the medicines are
to be moderately hot, (unless a Fever be present) also thinning, opening and
cutting, as also have a peculiar respect to the parts affected, as lungs,
liver, head, etc. with which is to be mix't such things as are appropriate to
the affect. The simples are the capillaries, especially, wal-rue roots of
osmond royal, buds of male fearn-brake, newly sprung up, polypody, hartstongue,
liverwort, ceterach, agrimony, doddar, scabious, betony, leaves and barks of
tamarisk, bark of eaper roots, roots of succory, endive, grass, sparagus,
myrobalons, liquorish, raisins, prunes, damascens, Seeds of annise, sweet
fennel, coriander, caraway, syrup of maidenhair, betony, simple and compound,
syrup. Byzantinus, succory with rubarb, eupatory, five roots, staechadis, and
hart's-tongue. Observe, none of the simples have all the qualities necessary,
therefore compounds are necessary, the barks of ash, tamarisk, and capers
infused in midling beer and used, is excellent, five little buds of male
fernbrake boiled in lb s. of milk to iij. drink it on an empty stomach in a
morning. This may be used to those used to milk. One handful of the said buds,
male betony, Hart's-tongue, liverwort, of each Ms. Tamarisk flowers, p. 1.
corants, js. with these, and a chicken, and oatmeal, make some broth, of which
give to the child iiij. in the morning, and so much at four a clock
afternoon, adding cream of tartar. s.

If you would have one effectual against pertinacious obstructions in the
Mesenterie, liver, etc. Maidenhaire, liverwort, agrimony, doddor, each Ms.
roots of ma^e fernbrake, grass, sparagus, each s. Cream tartar, j. liquorish,
s. mace j. boil them in lb ij of fountain water, to lb j. of the decoction
add iij. of white or renish wine, syrup of Hart's-tongue js. mix them and let
the Patient take a draught of it as before. If there be obstructions in the
lungs, Coltsfoot, maidenhair, hart's-tongue, liverwort, each Ms. roots of
sweet chervil and sparagus, each s. Spanish liquorish, js. mace, j. Raisins of
the Sun stoned, j. jujubes, number 6. sebestens 8. two figs cut in pieces,
boil them in lb ij. of barley-water to a pound, to which being strained add
syrup of maidenhair, js. mix them, use it as before. Or sweet wort lb ij.
liverwort, maidenhaire, hart's-tongue, scabious, coltsfoot, feather-few, each
M. j. blew figs, raisins of the Sun, each lbs. cut in pieces, liquorish,
anise-seeds, each ij. boil them over a gentle fire nine hours, strain it, and
keep it for use. It Is good for the former. If there be suspicion of the scurvy
or french pox complicated, zarzaperilla cut and well beaten iij, China,
hartshorn shavings, ivory, each j. leaves of male betony, liverwort, scabious,
each M. iij. buds of fernbrake, and osmond royal, each ij. boil them in four
gallons and a pottle of new ale, for four or five hours, over a gentle fire,
then after some hours respite, strain it thorough an hair sieve; after put in
of the juices of scurvy grass, and brooklime, each lbs. barm it up after a due
time draw forth for ordinary drink. The next comes Elective purging remedies,
the matter having been prepared to expel it. Now these concern partly the
humors, and partly the parts, wherein they are lodged; in each, due regard is
to be had to the spirits. The most violent are rather to be relinquished, or
duly corrected, or diminished in the dose. Its safer to exhibit a little too
little, then the least measure too much, therefore purging by degrees is better
then to remove it at once. They are to be suited according to the humors, as
also to the parrs affected, and if there be not peculiar simple purging
remedies to supply to the parts, then mix such ingredients as are familiar to
those parts. Be sure you make choic of such purgers, as are directly opposite
to the essence of the disease, amongst which rubarb is chief, the former
lenitives which may qualify the violence of the stronger; as Scammony,
agarick, seeds of bastard saffron, mechoachan, jalap, turbith. Merc. dulc.
senna, syrup of roses with agarick, magistral against melancholy of apples,
diabalremer, diacatholic. confectio hamech, benedicta laxativa. Of these may be
framed others answering every constitution, etc. as if choler abound, rubarb.
poudered gr. viij. syrup of cichory with double quantity of rubarb, vj. syrup
of roses solutive ij. fernbrake water, vj. mix them and make a potion. For
melancholy, senny, polypody, epithymum, each j. rubarb, j. cream of tartar,
fennel seeds, each j infuse all in a sufficient quantity of fumitory water, to
the strained infusion add syrup magistral. vj cynamon water drops 7, or aq.
epilept. Lang. s. mix them for a potion. For phlegmatic humors, which are
most usually offensive.. senny, js. agarick trochis. s fennel-seeds, s.
camomile flowers 10. boil them in a sufficient quantity of fountain water; to
x. or js. of the decoction add s. or vj. of syrup of roses solutive with
agarick, manna iij. make a potion. To evacuate mixed humors, as also those that
are sharp and adust, may from these medicines be framed suitable in case either
the scurvy, strumaes, French Pox be complicated, mercury dulc. is admirable.
And I had almost said in all the cases aforesaid being a panacea, and if well
prepared, and discreetly given cannot be harmful; only, let there be mixed
with it, either jalap, or its Magistral, or diagredium, as mercury dull. gr.
viij. diagred. gr. vij. fol. Auri. N. j. f. pull. give it in pap, panadoes, etc.
If you would have it in lozenges, sweet mercury j. magistral of jalap j. white
sugar dissolved in betony water iij. or s. make them into lozenges according to
art of the weight of j. or ijs. of which administer one at a time; it will not
be amiss, if you add Confect. Alkermes j. if they be very weak. If you would
have pills, use aloe rosata, with which (if you please) you may admix rubarb.
If the child be greedy of drink, of rubarb js. raisins of the sun the stones
pict out Ms. of ordinary ale lb j. infuse them for twelve hours, strain it,
if your purses will not reach the best rubarb, a double quantity of our English
may perhaps be better. And here we take our leave of purging medicines, and
come to specific altering medicines, which are to be used: the causes of the
disease, having been prepared, and in part evacuated; or at least so subdued,
that for the present they cannot retard the cure. Now these are directly
contrary to the nature of the disease, and are either, 1. Simple. Or, 2.
Compound. The first are roots, or rather the spike of the roots of osmond
royal, the middle being thrown away, the roots of male fernbrake, or rather the
little buds before they peep forth out of the earth, Roots of grass, succory,
sparagus, madder, eringo. All the maiden hairs, ceterach, hart's-tongue;
liverwort, betony, the flowers and leaves of dead nettles, borrage, sage,
rosemary, tamarisk, southernwood, sea wormwood, greater Celendine, saffron,
turmerick, sarsaparil, sassafras, china. 3. Sanders, guaiacum, and its bark,
flower of brimstone, ivory, prepared steel, white, and Renish wine, sperma
ceti, musk, ambergreece, castory, earthworms, liver of frogs, and young ravens,
woodlice washed in whitewine, baked in an oven, and beaten to powder. And note,
because none of these simples distinct, do meet with all the causes of the
disease; therefore, they are duly to be compounded, and made fit for the
disease. And be sure it be so performed, that they be grateful to nature, and
pleasing to the sick child. I shall give you one with which I cured many in
Northamptonshire, Nottingam-shire, and Warwick shire, Ceterach, maidenhaire,
each Mij. Scurvygrasse, Tamarisk, each Ms. Hart's-tongue, liverwort, Mijs, China
sliced two spoonfuls, anise-seeds, liquorish, each j shavings of ivory, and
harts-borne, each vj. boil them all in three gallons of new midling-wort to
the consumption of the third part, after strain it, barme it up, after it is
ready drink of it morning, at four a clock in the afternoon, and in the night,
if drink be called for, yea, at all times. Or rosemary, Ms. liverwort,
scabious, Agrimony, Maiden hair, each M j. Speedwell, Miij. roots of osmond,
iiij. or rather the spikes of the roots, Currants, Mj anise-seeds
fourspoonfuls, boil all in three quarts of water, till half be wasted, strain
it, adding fugar-candy, to sweeten it; and powder of red sanders, and roots of
oris tied up in a fine cloth. Or. Ceterach, j. Maidenhair, M. j. anise-seed, j,
liquorish, j, raisins of the sun stoned, and Currants, each ij. liverwort,
hart's-tongue, woodsorrel, each M. j. Malefern-buds, ij. shavings of
harts-horne, ij, of ivory, j. boil them in three gallons of wort, to the third
part, and use as before. Or. liverwort, maidenhair, each M. j. Hearts tongue,
speedwell, each M. s. pennyroial, p. ij. raisins stoned, iij. Liquorish j.
boil them in fountain water, till half be wasted; to which add whitewine a
pint, and common treacle a penniworth, white sugar candy ij. drink of it as
before. These have all been proved sufficiently. If therewith a consump^ion be
complicated, use this,. liverwort, coltsfoot, Jerusalem cowslips, each M. js.
maidenhair, agrimony, scabious, each M. j. french barley, iiij pearmaines, N.
20. snailes, N. 30 shaved liquoris, j. raisins stoned, ij. shavings of
harts-horne, and ivory, each iij boil them all in six quarts of spring water,
in a vessel well stopped, till half be wasted, after strain it, and sweeten it
with honey, or sugar candy, drink of it as before. If you would have one proper
for the pox, or strumaes complicated, for the first drink take this of the
Doctors,. sarsaparilla cut and beaten, iiij. China sliced, ij. infuse them in
seven pintes of spring water for twelve hours, after boil them till half be
wasted; then add the roots of sassafras, and osmond royal, leaves of
hart's-tongue, ceterach, maidenhair, dead nettle, each M. s. Spanish liquoris,
ij. mace, j. boil them to lb. iij. to the decoction add honey, or sugar iij.
drink it ordinarily. flowers of tamarisk M. j. male Paul's betony, M s. bruise
them gently, and infuse them in two pound of ordinary beer cold in a stone, or
glass flaggon, well stopped with cork, for ordinary beer. Broths may be made
with some of the foresaid simples, a chicken, hen, old cock, etc. and some
oate-meale, panadoes with the broths, grated bread, adding butter, and sugar,
and the yolk of an egg, you may add a little saffron; with these may be mixed
proper pouders made of the best tasted of the same simples, as of woodlice,
livers of frogs, or young ravens to be prepared as before. Dos. is from s. to
j. of the pouders may be framed electuaries with honey, sugar dissolved, or
syrup. You have choice of all in the Doctors Tract. They may be used for
change, although I believe, your drinks will be more acceptable, go down with
less trouble, and be as, if not more, efficacious. Thus having showed how to
combat with the disease. We come now to take order with the Symptoms.

In which consider, if they be eminent and grievous, leave the true method of
cure, to resist them: These are flux of the belly, profuse sweats, painful
breeding teeth, and toothache. The first of these falls out often; which if it
persevere, for long time, or if very violent, easily wastes the spirits and
consumes the solid parts. It Is true a bloody flux rarely happens a lientery
often. With which there is a concurrence of other causes, as ill digestion,
fever, watching, worms, painful breeding teeth, etc. all which rather procure
a lask or lientery, rather then a bloody flux or Dysentery. For Cure, it is
partly perfected by purgations, partly by astringent medicines, partly by such
as open, partly by such as strengthen the parts. For purgers, rubarb is most
excellent, either taken in a bole with conserve of roses, made up with syrup of
coral. Dose of rubarb s. to j. in powder well dried at the fire. The same
powder, s, in saxifrage water, j. with syrup of dried roses, and quinces of
each ij. may be made a potion. Observe first, if the flux have not been long or
immoderate, and the peccant matter be much, use instead of the foresaid syrups,
the syrup of roses solutive, Augustan, or succory with rubarb, but rather which
is safest, augment, the dose of rubarb, not omitting the syrup of dried roses.
In the evening after the purgation, administer s. of diascordium boild in wine
with cloves, and a little cynamon mixed with a third part of corn poppy water,
and some syrup of clove gilly flowers, to strengthen the stomach, and stay the
flux. To procure sleep. white wine posset drink (aromatized with a little
saffron tied up in a rag, crushing it gently between your fingers) confectio
Alkermes, j. powder of pomegranate pills, gr. vij. diacodium, ij, mix them. Or
ladanum, gr. s. Magistral of coral, gr. xij. Conserve of red roses, j, with
sufficient quantity of syrup of quinces, make a bole; take at bed time. If
there be obstructions you may prescribe Crocus martis, or salt of steel to be
taken in the morning. As. Conserve of red roses, j. preserved succory roots,
preserved myrabolans, each s. salt of steel, s. or crocus martis j. cynamon,
liquoris, red coral, each gr. viij. saffron, gr. js. syrup of succory, without
rubarb, sufficient quantity, and make an electuary, dos. s. Every morning, in
its ordinary drink, quench red hot iron for the same purpose. If the child be
troubled with a violent flux, you may give it conserve of slows, mixing it with
such things as the child delights to eat, being sure to please its palate.

For profuse sweating, which wastes the spirits, and retards the cure, be
cautious you do not rashly restrain it; especialy if a Fever, feverish fit,
or immoderate heat has preceded, for then it either may be critical, or may
bring more advantage to the body, then damage to the spirits; for nothing more
sweetly, and potently expels feverish heat, then sweating. But if it be
inordinate, and causeless, (arguing the body oppressed with obstructions,
crude juices, and unprofitable superfluities) it is to be corrected. For which
there is nothing more fit then purging, by which the superfluities are removed,
draws them off from their former motion, and clears the way for opening
medicines, such as strengthen the skin, and move forward concoction. Amongst
purgers in this also, rubarb is a none such. Thus it may be used. rubarb
sliced, ij. Raisins stoned, and slit, j. small beer two pintes, put them in a
vessel stopped with corck. Set it in a very cold place, and stir it often; before
you use it, let it settle again a whole day, then use the liquor for ordinary
drink. When the vessel's empty, fill it again with beer, to the same rubarb. To
these may be called in former electuar purgations. Those that are opening are
French and Renish wine, which are to be mixed with borage, or red rose water,
or temperated with roasted apples, adding a little sugar, and grated nutmeg, let
them be taken in a lesser quantity, only at meals. For steel so highly
commended, must be cautiously used, and a man of reason although versed in the
Latin, when he has well weighed the Doctors caution; it seems he must come to
them, or else it cannot be regularly used; which does either proclaim the
imperfection of their cautions, or else that they have monopolized all others
wit within their Craniums. If I miss not of their meaning, as it is to be
forborne where there is a catharre, cough, obstructions of the lungs,
peripneumonia, pleurisy, spitting blood, or pronenesse to them, as also in
acute Fevers, so it is not to be used but in the beginning of the disease, and
beginning of the increase; for in the rest of the times there is usually a
considerable Oligotrophy of the parts; and as to my simple observation, who
have seen many, I seldom have observed superfluous sweats, till there has
appeared an evident Oligotrophy of the parts. Other openers, although of less
note, in children may be effectual, (or else why used in weak men
successefully?) are roots of succory, borage, conserve of their flowers, roots
of grass, sparagus, fernbrake, maddar, leaves of ceterach, spleenwort,
maidenhair. Among the compounds species of the three sanders, diarrhodon
abbatis. As,. best sugar iij, dissolve it in rose water, boiling it a little
beyond the consistence of a syrup, add then conserve of barberries j. diatrion
santal, and diarrh. abbat. each j. powder of saffron, gr. 1. mix them, and make
an electuary; Painful breeding and aching of the teeth, is the last mentioned,
these producing Fevers, unquietness, watchings, and other evils, require
mitigation. If pain be caused by its working through the gum, without delay
(if not done before) evacuate universally. First, by vomit, which is a potent
remedy against toothach. It may be moved by tickling the throat either with a
feather, or with the nurses finger, or else rubbing the tooth breaking forth
with a tobacco leaf wrapped about the nurses finger, and a little moistened with
beer; or lastly, by giving some vomiting draught formerly prescribed. The day
following use a Cathartick, after use topicals, as rubbing the gums with coral,
yea rather with the root of marsh mallows, which is far better, or this
ointment.. butter without salt, iij. grease of capon and ducks, each ij. red
poppies, j. boil them in the juice of crab-fish, bruised and drawn forth with
water of sea-wormwood, french mallow-roots, each ij. to the consumption of the
juices, after strain them, adding white sugar candy, iiij. nutmeg, j. one yolk
of an egg, mix them, and make a balsome. You are to anoint the gums often with
it, it mollifies and thins the gums, eases pain, causes the teeth to come
forth easily, and often may deliver from death. If universals prevail not, use
opiats, especially when watchings are troublesome, as. diascord. gr. vij.
diacodium, ij. white wind posset drink tinctured with saffron, j. give it at
bed time, the night following the purgation. Or,. laudani, gr. s. gascoins
powder. s. add conserve of clove gilli flowers, j. with syrup of balm make a
bole; let it be swallowed at sleeping time.

We are at last arrived at external remedies; and those, whether exercises, or
outward applications, are to follow after purgations, and to be used with
specificks. For exercises, (which children that have the Rickets are extremely
averse unto, especially those that are violent.) You are to begin with those
more gentle, they are to lie on their sides, unless in case of much weakness
from diseases, rocking in cradles is good, if very weak, unless in time of
sleep, carrying about, and tossings and wavings of it to and fro, holding it
either by the hands, rather, if weak, under the armpits, swinging it, is very
beneficial; fit rollings are good, also playings, tempting them to the use of
their feet, walking is helpful if they be strong, and their joints be knit;
otherwise not, hanging of the body, frictions are excellent; this last is to go
before, and in the application of outward medicines, beginning at the
backbone, the child being laid on his belly; thrusting your fingers under the
short ribs, and so hinder the growing of the liver, a great cause of the
Rickets.

But leaving these, we come to outward applications, which are to be
administered with gentle frictions. They are either universal, respecting all
parts, or particular, dedicated to certain regions of the body; the matter of
the first, are the same before specific Alterants. The second are to be
proportionated to the particular region, to which they are to be plied; the
forms of both are liquours, oils, liniments, ointments, plasters. The
liquours are all kinds of wines, especially muskadine, aqua vitae, or proper
decoctions may be framed; although seldom used, unless mixed with oil,
liniments, or ointments They must be used before a warm fire, and rubbed in
with a hot hand, till they be dry; they are framed of specific alterants, in
wine, or water and aqua vitae, equal parts, either by decoction, or infusion,
For oils, they are oil of earth-wormes, chamomile, marigold flowers, Paul's
betony, neatsfoot oil; also oil of foxes, whelps, swallows, if simple; but
yet these and others are not so effectual as specificks, which are such as
follow: camomile, pennyroyal, ground ivy, coltsfoot, fetherfew, each lb j. red
roses M j. mace j. shred them all small, and mix them with lbiiij. of new
butter unsalted, and so let them stand for two or three days, after boil them
till the juice be wasted, after strain it, and reserve it for use after it has
stood; If any juice remain, let it out, and separate the ointment from the
dregs, so will it keep the longer; with this I have cured many. Or, 2.
speedwel, liverwort, each M j. rosemary, and bays, M. s. shred them, and make
an ointment with butter, lb js. and reserve it for use, Or, 3. camomile, sage,
pimpernel, marigold flowers, and time, each M. j. rosemary, bays, angelica,
each M s. butter without salt, lb ij. and make an ointment, as before. Or, 4.
roots of osmond royal iiij. clary, lavender, hysop, tops of mints, each M j.
rosemary, hartstongue, marigold flowers, betony, each M s. flowers of sage,
chamomile. and melilot, each p. ij. May butter, lb iij. aq. vitae, and
white wind, each iiij. make an ointment as before, strain, and reserve for use;
most or all of these have been approved. If you have a mind to the Doctors,
see their Tract, for particular parts; if the region of the belly be hard and
swelled, and the Hypochondries,. oil of capars, wormwood, elders, each j. of
the third prescribed ointment, js. mix them, and make a liniment; oil of
saxafrage, made by manifold infusions, and after the herbs therein boiled, is
excellent, if mixed with the foresaid ointment. You may with these mix
appropriate liquors for penetration sake; as, the flowers of elders, and red
sage, bay berries bruised, white sanders slightly beaten to powder, each ij.
white wind, lb ij. steep them for three days in a cold place, in a glass
vessel well stopped shake it twice a day: when you use it, strain as much as
will serve your present occasion then stop your vessel again. This mixed with
the ointments, and heated at the fire, must be rubbed upon the abdomen,
especially the Hypochondries, even to dryness; Balsom of Tolu is excellent,
mix^d with any ointment or plaster, and so applied to the region of the back,
either in form of an ointment or plaster, to the Hypochondries may plasters
be used, applying them to that side most hard, For this emplast. crocatum or
cicut. may serve, to which may be added some of the foresaid ointments with
some powder of sanders.

If the lungs be affected, use some pectoral ointment; as,. oils of violets
and lilies, ointment of orange flowers, each j. mix them, rub them well on the
breast till it be dry, after apply a London-brown paper, lined with wool or
linen cloth. Or, unguent. pectoral, ij. simple ointment of liquoris, js. oil
of violets, j. mix them, anduse as before. The ointment of liquorish is thus
made. new juicy liquoris iiij. new unsalted butter, washed in rose water, lb j.
slice the liquoris, and beat it well with the butter in a stone mortar,
afterward fry them then strain and squeeze them, repeat the same labor thrice,
with a new quantity of liquoris. Some plaster may be prepared for the
weakness of the back, which often happens in this affect with any of the
foresaid ointments, adding bees wax, mastick, olibanum, myrrh, etc. The
following has been often proved.. of hogs grease, and sheep sewet, each ij. oil
of mastick, myrtles and irini, each ij. pitch, wax, and Burgundy pitch, each
vj. bole armoniack, iij. white turpentine, js. mastick, ol^banum, frankincense,
myrrh, each ij. gum amoniack dissolved in vinegar, vj. of all these make an
emplaister. With this sometimes is mixed beer boiled to the consistence of a
plaster, it is to be spread on leather; empl. palmei slot. is good, they are to
be applied to the backbone. If the upper part of the backbone be weakest, use
a longish form, stretching down to os sacrum. If the lower parts, then use
almost a triangular form, which apply from the loins to the utmost end of the
os sacrum, the broader end upward. Some commend a liniment for the weakness of
the backbone, for this you heard before balsom of Tolu added to the first
general ointment will be excellent. But to conclude, for my own part, I have
cured very many, and known many more cured by Mr. Montjoy, only with an
ointment, appropriate drink, and cuttings in the ears, having before given,
Merc. dull. cum diagred. and fol. auri, to purge withal.

CHAP. II. Of the small Pox and Measles.
THese being contagious and killing many, are fitly referred to malign and
pestilential Fevers. The first are pustles, coming to ripeness. The second
are small tubercles with intense redness, like an erysipelas, which within
five or seven days are discussed without maturating, both these are accompanied
with a continual Fever; these have their companions, of which hereafter Signs
delirium, trembling and convulsion, beating of heart, neezing often,
hoarsenesse, heat, redness, and pricking in the whole body; troublesome sleep,
sorrow, and restlesnesse, shining and itching of the eyes, voluntary tears,
tumor of the face with a little redness. These symptoms being often as
vehement in the beginning as in the state. Urine sometimes like healthful, the
vicious matter being thrust out to the habit of the body; otherwhiles filthy
from the great ebullitiof the humors.

Cause internal, is the impurities of the mothers blood, which the Infant in
the womb draws in in the last months, the purer being not sufficient, this
being attracted into the whole fleshie substance, is then hid insensibly for
some years, yea sometime many. Now when nature cannot any longer suffer these
impurities, it begins by ebullition to foment them like new must. By that
ebullition the pure is separated from the impure, the impure by a cer^ain
crisis is thrust out, and the heat communicated to the heart kindles a Fever.
This is to be obser^ed, there is found in the mass of blood a double excrement,
the one thick, the other thin; Of the first is generated the pox; of the second
the measls; although they are both infected by one and the same ill quality.
Ex^ernal causes are either contagion, as when a body so diseased, communicates
the disease to another, called infection, or the air, from the influx of the
planets or other causes, corrupting or disturbing the humors, and as the air
analogizeth so it produces the pox or measles, whence they are sometimes more
rife one then another. Now both these, although they break forth in the whole
body, yet more abundantly in the face, feet and hands, contrary to the spots in
Fevers, which rather appear in breast and back, the account of the difference
is, the pox arising from the ebullition of the blood, the original whereof
being the liver, it makes expulsion to the foresaid parts as its emunctories;
which appears by this, that the more hot the liver is, the more red and pustly
the face is: and there is also perceived more intense heat in the palms of the
hands, and soles of the feet, the expulsion being the greater to those parts.
Whereas the spots in malign Fevers arise from the heart affected: whence they
break forth near the heart especially, and in the loins, because the hollow
vein ascending, and the Artery is near; besides, the spots often appear the
seventh day symptomatically, rendering the disease worse, whereas the small pox
and measles appear the third or fourth day from the beginning of the Fever,
Critically, and that safe.

Prognostics. If they break forth quickly, easily, and come speedily to
ripening. If the Fever be gentle, the symptoms be mild, and after their
breaking forth, remits or diminishes. If the voice be free, breathing easy,
especially if the pox be red, white, distinct, soft, few, round, sharp top't,
be only in the skin, and not in the internal parts, and if there preceded a
large bleeding at the nose, there is good hope; for these show the diseased
matter to be little, obsequious, benign, and nature strong and sufficient to
expel them, but if they either difficultly appear, or go in again, if they are
blew, green. livid, hard, all in one, if after they break forth, the Fever
lessens not. If there be swooning, difficulty of breathing, great thirst,
quinsey, grief, unquietness, doubtful. If a flux of the belly happen after
they break forth, if the urine be bloody, or pure blood be cast forth by the
belly, or by the gums, nose, and other parts deadly, if therewith be
complicated a spotted fever, and the spots be livid, dangerous.

Cure is secondly, either preservative, which in those of age is perfected, by
opening a vein, purgeing, and flying the contagion. In Infants only use the
last, or curative, this consists, First, in the mitigating of the ebullition;
and here bleeding, (if blood any what abound, and age will bear it,) is
excellent; it is to be performed the first day, if this has been neglected, it
may be profitably done before they break forth, or at their first beginning to
appear, which is usually the fourth day from the assault of the Fever, but
with this caution; If at their appearing, the Fever and other symptoms
diminish, then forbear, leaving the whole business to nature, which will be
able to expel its enemy. But if then the Fever be more intense, there be
anxiety, difficulty of breathing, the urine be thick and red, and other
symptoms appear vehement; it is a sign nature is overburden'd with the humor;
so that it cannot fitly expel it. Here bleeding is necessary, by which portion
of the burden being removed the rest is more easily expelled. But in a word, in
these diseases, there is a double ebullition of blood, one is perfect, i. e.
when only the impure part of the blood is putrified, and is by nature so purged
that the whole mass is left pure; here bleeding is needless, for then the pox
are more safe, and often cured without the help of a Physician: the other is
corrupt, i. e. when both the excrementitious part of the blood, and the mass
it self is putrified, hence there is the more danger, and here bleeding is
necessary. This ebullition happens when these diseases generally reign, and are
stirred up from a malign constitution of the air; and those are sometimes the
forerunners of the plague, and are reckoned amongst acute diseases, viz.
ending in fourteen days, and here the fourth day is accounted the beginning,
the increase is drawn forth to the seventh, the state to the eleventh, and the
declination to the fourteenth, in which time the pox are usually dried, yet
that sometimes is not till the twentieth day; whereas in the other the
beginning is the first day, the increase the second, the state the third, the
declination at the fourth, for then the Fever and other symptoms remit. But to
return; in the corrupt ebullition, bleeding is so necessary, that the tender
age of children is not to hinder: it may safely be used at four years of age,
and not seldom at three: the Paris-Physicians do use it to sucking children,
though this cannot be approved If that youngnesse hinder, and the fit time be
past, then the abundance of blood is to be removed by cups, with
scarifications, applied to the back, scapula's, and thighs, which also much
profits in the state of the disease, for by them the motion of nature is helped
in its expulsion, from the center to the circumference; but beware in children
scarifications be not too deep, for thereby the veins being divided, the hot
blood will flow out so violently, that it will be difficultly staid. Purging
here is suspected, as hindering nature in expulsion, and drawing the matter
flowing outward, inward: for whosoever having the pox, are assaulted with a
flux of the belly, the pox suddenly returns, and often procures death, yet
notwithstanding purging is very profitable before the pox appear, and the Fever
be too violent, viz. when, as it were, children are falling into a neutral
estate. Then if cacochymia abound, its good to abate it, that so nature may the
more cheerfully thrust out it is adversary; but if either the pox appear, or
there be great malignancy, (as in an epidemical season,) Purging is very
pernicious. Those that are used are to be benign, as rubarb, cassia, manna,
tamarinds, syrup of roses, etc. in the whole course of the disease, if the
belly be bound, it is to be moved very gently, and not provoked with
suppositories of honey alone without salt, or a glister of broth, milk, or
decoction of barley, raisins and liquorish, with sugar and yolks of eggs.

The second work is to help nature to expel, and this is to be done, not only
with specificks, which turn out the humors to the skin, but also
diaphoreticks, and alexipharmicks, especially if the pox be epidemical, and
partake of great malignity, To expel figs vij. lentils skinned iij. gum lac.
ijs. gum tragacanth. and fennel-seed, each ij. boil them in fountain water,
till a third part be wasted, and give of it to drink; some add saffron gr. xv.
and currants v. the saffron fortifies, and opens, the currants fortify the
liver, etc. Or, roots of fennel, and sorrel, each j. hartshorn shaved, s.
leaves of scabious, scordium and St. Johnswort, each M j. figs N. 6. gum lac.
iij. napeseed, and of carduus benedictus, each ij. lentiles skinned, s. gum
tragacanth. js. boil them in fountaine-water to lb js. take of the straining
iij with j. of the syrup of lemons; give it twice or thrice a day. Or the
following, which is experimented, and easy, clear posset drink of Ale, lb j.
boil therein marigold flowers three spoonfuls, figs sliced N. iij. citron
seeds bruised N. xij. a little saffron tied up in a fine linen cloth, but let
all be boiled a good while, after strain it, and so give of it to drink daily,
till danger be past. Or, seeds of watercresses, and columbines, each j.
shavings of hartshorn, s. red coral and pearls prepared, each j. make them
into powder, and give a s or j. decoct. ficuum, Minfich. or Gascons powder with
bezoar are excellent. If malignity be very forcible, as it is common when the
pox are epidemical, then appoint alexipharmacons, as confectio de hyacinth.
bezoar, etc. such as are appointed in malign fevers, and you are not to omit
such cordials, as fortify both inward and outward parts, this is to be
observed; medicines expelling are not to be used in all that is sick, for so it
may cause the Pox to come forth too violently: and here the ebullition of the
blood is to be contemperated, lest it procure death. To bridle which barley, p.
1. roots of five leaf, and tormentil, each j. leaves of sorrel, endive, and
wood sorrel, each M. j. lentils skinned s. gum, tragacanth, j. boil them in
water, lb ij. to lb j. in the straining dissolve syrup of lemons, or citrons,
iiij make a julep for four times, to be taken twice a day. For ordinary drink,
use barley-water and sorrel-roots, which continue, until the heat be somewhat
remitted, and after that use such as expel.

The third work is to defend the parts, which are either inward, as the guts,
liver, and spleen, which are defended with the first decoction, the lungs are
secured with conserve of roses, violets, syrup of jujebs, violets, myrtles, and
of dried roses; also this,. syrup of violets, jujebs and dried roses, each j.
syrup of poppies s. mix them, using it often, licking it by degrees from a
spoon. Or,. lent. skinned, and finely beaten iij, white poppy seed,. j. conserve
of roses ij. julep of roses sufficient to make a looch. If a violent flux rush
into the lungs, and procure hoarsenesse and suffocation, the foresaid remedies
are not only to be used, but it is to be revell'd by cups with, and without,
scarifications, and bleeding, if necessary, but with mature consideration. In
this case, for ordinary drink is to be given the decoction of barley, jujebs,
and liquorish; or this, seeds of marsh-mallowes, mellons, gourds, and white
poppies, each ij. raisins cleansed, and jujebs, each N. viij. boil them in lb
ij. of water, till half be wasted, in which dissolve conserve of roses, and
violets, each s. species diatragacanth. frigid. iij. sugar candy, and of roses,
each sufficient to make a licking. The roof of the mouth and throat may be
defended before the Pox break forth with this.. French barley, p. 1. leaves of
plantain, M ij. red roses, p. 1. pomegranate-flowers, seed of sumach, each ij.
boil them in lb ij. of water, till the third part be wasted, in the straining
dissolve syrup of raspis, and pomegranates. each j. mix them and make a
gargarisme. If children be so young, as that they cannot use a gargarism, then
use a lambative of syrup of mulberries, pomegranates, or of dried roses, either
alone, or mixed with rose water, which use often in a spoon. If the flux from the
abundance cannot be stayed, and so danger of suffocation be threatened. To
lubrifie the passages, and help excretion, use this,. mucilage of
fleawort-seeds, and oil of sweet Almonds new drawn, each js. white sugar
candy, ij. mix them and make a lincture, giving it every hour. If through the
acrimony of the flux, or abundance of Pox the mouth be ulcerated, it is to be
cleansed with barley-water, and honey of roses or alum-water. Or this I have
used successefully, water-vineger so mixed, that it offend not by its acrimony,
sweetening of it with sugar, if these ulcers grow putrid, to the former may be
added, mel Aegyptiacum, i. e. the honey-part that flows on the top of the
unguent. Outward parts are, especially the eyes, which are chiefly to be
preserved from the Pox, for they being endued with a soft and humid substance,
the matter of the Pox is easily driven to them, whence most grievous evils
happen, yea, sometimes loss of sight it self; therefore, before they break
forth, or whilst they begin to appear, moisten the eyes with the waters of
plantaine and roses, in which a little saffron has been dissolved. Or this
which preserves powerfully,. waters of roses and plantain, each js. powder of
the seeds of sumach ij. infuse them, and strain them hot with many expressions,
to the straining add camphor s. saffron gr. v. and make a colyrium, which will
be more effectual, if in stead of the waters, the juice of plantain and
shepherds purse, be purified and mixed with the rest; If the pustles do begin
to arise in the eye it self, doves blood is often to be dropped in, that they may
speedily be dissolved. Or rose water, j. of eyebright s. troch. alb. Rhasis,
j. tutia prepared, j. camphire, gr. v. saffron, gr. iij. make an eye-water,
with which moisten the eye very often, with a fine rag. If the eyes be so
tumifi'd, that they cannot be opened, they are to be washed often with a
decoction of the seeds of lin. fenugreek, quinces and mallows, or warm milk.
If in the eye there seem to be clouds, they are to be cleansed with sugar candy
most finely powdered. If the eye be ulcerated, white lead washed. iij.
sarcocol. j. gum tragacanth. j. opium gr. ij. with mucilage of gum tragacanth,
drawn with plantaine, make troches, which dissolve in women's milk or
rose water, to use. To preserve the nose use noduls of sanders and camphire;
dipped in rose-vineger, or smell often to vinegar alone: or make tents, which dip
in the colyrium, made with juice of plantain, and shepherds purse, and put them
up the nose. If for all this the Pox be got into the nose, that the crusts may
fall quickly, anoint them with oil of sweet almonds, if there happen ulcers,
apply a liniment, framed of the yolks of eggs, and juice of plantain, being
mixed long in a leaden mortar. To preserve the face, some have used rose water
and other astringents, but very unfitly* for great portion of the impurities
being sent to the face, which from the looseness and moistness of the skin,
is apt to receive them, are by this means, not only kept in, but also thereby
nature is hindered in its motion; therefore when the Pox appear, they may be
anointed twice a day with oil of sweet Almonds, to help on their ripening, and
being ripe, which is discerned by a spot in the middle, open them with a gold
or silver needle, or rather let them break of themselves, however the oil is
to be used, till such times as the crusts fall off, for it qualifies the
sharpness of the choler, ripens and hastens the fall of the crusts, which
otherwise would lodge the matter under them, and so deeply ulcerate the skin;
oil of new nuts, newly drawn without fire, mixed with a like quantity of rose
water, and reduced to a liniment, is most efficacious. I have with good
success used oil olive ij. and carduuswater. js. mixed together. After which
few scars have remained, if through the neglect of these or the like medicines,
notable scars remain, it is to be helped as much as may be with the oil of
yolks of eggs, and sheeps sewet. For filthy scars, first wash the face with
water of beanflowers, or water distilled from cowes dung in May, after anoint
them with man's grease. Or, oil of sweet almonds, and white lilies, each i.
capons grease, iii. powder of the roots of piony, oris, and lytharg. of gold,
each s. sugar candy i. mix all these well together in a hot mortar, and strain
it hard through a linen cloth, and anoint the places morning and night, and
after wash them well with the water distilled from calves feet, or in want
thereof, some of the foresaid waters.

The fourth and last business is to remove symptoms, which are various, as
itch and exulceration, especially in the palms of the hands, and soles of the
feet, by reason of the compactnesse of the skin hindering their eruption, to
help which hold those parts in hot water, or foment them long in an emollient
decoction. If itch fall out in the face, which causes the sick to scratch,
whence follows notable scars, use this, leaves of po^^itary, M i. flowers of
chamomile, and melilot, each p. s. boil them in lb j. of scabious water, in
the straining add wood-binde water, in this being hot moisten some cotton, or
fine lint, often moistening the itching Pox therewith. Ulcers that arise from
malign and eating Pox, are to be cured with white ointment camphorated. Or,.
burnt lead- ii. litharge. i. white lead wash t, and vinegar, each s. oil of
roses, iii. honey of roses. i. three yolks of eggs, myrrh. s. wax
sufficient. to make an ointment; for convulsion, epilepsy, palsy, hearing
hurt, inflammation of the eyes, etc. See in their proper chapters; only if a
bloody flux accompany, wherein often the Pox become deprest, the following is
admirable. the roots of five leaf, and tormentil, each i. leaves of pimpernel,
and scordium, each M i. yellow sanders, and shaving of ivory, each ii. boil
them in water, to xii. in iii. of the straining dissolve aq. naphae, and of
roses, each s. troch. viper. i. bezoar, gr. iiii. make a potion: which give to
those that are greater, at one draught twice a day, but to such as suck, give
of it often in a spoon.

The Measles require the same cure with the Pox, only observe there is in the
mass of blood a double excrement, the one thick, the other thin, the measles
is from the last, which it may be is the cause of their discussion, without
maturation. To these are referred, first pustles of the bigness of lupins,
without redness, inflammation or fever, being white, and filled with serous
humors, these after three days break and die, and are seldom dangerous,
there are other tubercles, as some red, invading with heat, and dry cough,
other like red spots burnt, etc. which have nothing singular in the cure.

THE MILITARY CHEST.
WArs prophesied must be accomplished. Providence are oft-times real Comments
on holy Writ; witness these times, wherein the day of Gods vengeance is in his
heart, and the year of his redeemed is come. I shall not dispute, or question
the truth of that which is so evident, as that those who are most against it,
speak the verity of it in their actings. But to pass this, and come to meet
with those events that occur, and are the proper subjects of the discourse, as
wounds, etc. and here is not to be expected, the methodical cure already
elsewhere dispatched: but only, as it were, a Catalogue of the matter by which
it is effected, with their virtues and qualities annexed.

Now the means or matter, are either medicines, or fit instruments fitly
placed in a convenient chest. The medicines are either Physical, or
Chirurgical. The instruments are either hard, or soft, all which are to be
fitly placed to prevent confusion, and to be ready for use.

They are by Hildanus divided into twenty Classes, whose method we shall
follow, taking in what he has judiciously set down, only take the liberty to
add where there is necessity requiring, that so it may be full for our own
Climate.

In the first Classis is the simple purging medicines, which are with their
virtues, as follows.

Agarick.
It potently purges phlegm from the wholebody, especially the excrements of
the mesentery, wonderfully removes the affects of the brain, purges the
breast, and the womb, heals asthma, difficulty of breathing, and jaundice,
begets a good color, moves urin, and courses, is excellent in pain of the
colic, yet ingrate and adverse to the stomach, it is to be corrected with
ginger, cloves, and being slow in operation, may be acuated with salt gem,
cream of tartar, etc. it is hot in the first, and dry in the second; dose from
i. to ii. in infusion, from i. to five, that is the best which is white, light,
rare, brittle, at the first taste is sweet, but after bitter and stiptick.

Aloes.
It Is a remedy against many diseases, is conveniently administered in those who
are molested in their head, for it draws the vapors ascending from the
stomach to the head without trouble, and is therefore good in those whose pain
in the head arises thence. It Is profitable in swimming of the head,
inflammation of the eyes, cataracts, especially if they arise by consent from
the stomach. It Is profitable for those that are troubled with nidrous
crudities, it procures a good color, and removes the excrements of the belly,
heales the jaundice, and those troubled in their sleep, preserves from
putrefaction, and plague; and therefore excellent in such seasons. It sharpens
the sight, stays fluxes of blood, and kills worms, it consolidates, and
cleanses. If Zacutus may be credited, it does not inflame the liver, it is hot
in the third, dry, second; Dose is according to its preparations, that prepared
with roses is best to be given inwardly; that is to be chosen which is pure,
fat, shining, glutinous, transparent, without gravel and stones.

Rubarb.
Of all catharticks it is most in use, and of least danger, fit to be used in
all ages, sexes, and conditions. It peculiarly draws forth choler, and after
phlegm, though viscid, and tartarous heaped up in the stomach, and the first
ways, it strengthens the internal parts, purges sweetly and without
trouble, it is most proper for the liver, purges the blood, frees from
obstructions, hence cures the jaundice, dropsey, tumors of the spleen, putrid
fevers, also removes those that are long, and malign, pains of the sides; is
excellent in fluxes of the belly, is gallant in the rickets, kills worms,
and strengthens the bowels. Hot and dry 2. Dose in powder to ii. in infusion
to s. that is to be chosen, that is new of deep brown, etc.

Cassia.
It Is a gentle medicine pleasantly evacuating choler and phlegm, may be given
to children, weak, in long consumptive diseases, when other medicaments cannot
be admitted. It Is excellent in fevers, it retunds the acrimony of yellow bile,
resolves phlegmons in the breast and lungs, smooths the winde-pipe, is a remedy
in hot defluxions from the head, and in curing of burning and malign fevers is
gallant; it is temperate, yet moist, and to be corrected with cynamon, mastick,
annise-seed, etc. Dose in Infants is to is. in adults to is. in glisters, ii.
that is best which is new and weighty, which being shaken in the pipes, make
least noise shivering.

Crocus metallorum.
It Is useful in pains of the head from impurities of the stomach, which
happens not seldom also in the epilepsy, pleurisy, melancholy effects, fevers
especially, intermitting tertians in the plague, camp fever. It preserves from
the gout, excellent in most pectoral diseases, yea, in squinsey, works both by
vomit and stool, given in glisters is excellent in the colic; dose is from
three grains to vi. the infusion is most safe. Some give stibium the
precedence, but it is more churlish; an infusion prepared of an equal quantity
of both some think excellent; they are to be exhibited with proper waters, and
so serve in most diseases, that crocus prepared with salt of wormwood is
accounted best.

Coloquintida.
It purges thick and glutinous phlegm from the more deep and remote parts; as
from the brain, nerves, joints, lungs. Hence exhibited with profit in swimming
of the head, meagrim, falling sickness, apoplexy, scabs, and French pox; but
because of its violence, and bitterness, as also because it hurts the guts, and
stomach, and so draws on sad affects, as dysenteria, etc. It Is not to be given
in substance, unless to those that are very strong, and that with correctives,
dose in substance is from gr. vii. to s. in glisters to s. ti'd up in a rag:
that is best which is whitest and lightest, it is hot and dry third; of these is
made your troc. alhandal. is. of which infused in x. or xii. of spirit of wine
is framed, spir. vit. aur. Rulan. being filtred, which purges by the belly
without danger all viscous humors, both cholers, and water, if exhibited in
the morning every third day, dose a ii. ad i. vel is.

Scamony.
It draws out choler effectually after that phlegm tough, and adhering in the
most remote parts, is excellent to sharpen other medicines, it purges
serosities, it is to be corrected with quinces, sulphur, etc. it is hot and dry
3. Dose from gr. vi. to s. vel gr. xii. outwardly it is good in pains of the
head and teeth, that is to be chosen which is clean, shining, easily powdered,
of good smell, and touched with the tongue is whitish.

Senye.
This is catholic, is safe, familiar and benign. Securely given to breeding
women; also in every age Evacuates melancholy, both cholers and salt phlegm,
from head, liver, spleen, and lungs; and being continued, from the joints. It Is
profitable in long diseases, from phlegm and melancholy, sharpens all the
senses, procures cheerfulness, and conservs the body in health, and youthful.
It Is hot and dry 1. to be corrected with flowers of borage, ginger etc. That Is
best which is cleanest without stalks, and dust, is long, and of color whitish
green; dose in powder, from i. to ii. in infusion, from iii. to s. or vi. in
whitewine or whey. It Is excellent in itch and scabs. Of i. of this, and s. of
sarsaparil with a little sugar, is framed a fine powder, for soldiers, etc.
against the French pox; dose ii. in some convenient liquour, and given in a
morning for continuance.

Hermodactyls.
They most profitably purge phlegm from the most remote parts, good in
chronick diseases, as dropsey, french pox, and pains of the joints, kills
lice, good to make peace for issues, to cause them to run. Its hot and dry in
the beginning of the second; Dose in substance is from js. to js. in infusion
from ij. to s. that is best which is white, solid, heavy, and is easily powdered.

Manna.
It drives forth yellow choler, is given to those which cannot take strong
medicaments; it may safely be given to children and women with child, it
smooths the throat, breast and stomach, cleanses, quenches thirst, and is
most profitable for curing catharous defluxions, is profitable in the
pleurisy, helps inflammations of the lungs, purges the womb from filth (mixed
with infusion of agarick) and the stomach, if made into a bole with turpentine,
or styrax. Dose in infants from ij. to vj. in milk, and is good when they are
scabby; to adults from js. to ijs. its to be forborne in fevers, unless mixed
with cold things: that is best which is white, shining; if a little yellow it
may pass: but if much, it discovers antiquity.

Mechoacan.
It draws forth gently and without molestation, pituitous and watery humors
from the whole body, especially the head, nerves, and breast, therefore most
profitable in catharres and diseases rising thence, in the dropsey, all gouts,
French pox, its excellent in all cold effects of the head, opens all
obstructions of the bowels, as liver, etc. and strengthens them, for the
colic, suppression of urine, mother, diseases of the skin, difficulty of
breathing, its very good in children, it removes the crudities in the stomach,
and liver. Dose in Infants j. in adults from j. to ij. in infusion to s.

Jalap.
Its supposed more effectual then the former, in the said diseases, it purges
all noxious humors, especially watery, without trouble, Dose is from s. to s.
in infusion, from js. to ij. its hot and dry in the second, they are safe
medicaments.

Myrabolans.
They are of five sorts, the yellow purge choler, strengthen the sight; the
black purge burnt choler, good in quartanes, leprosy, and affects of the skin.
Those called chebul purge phlegm, sharpen the sight, cleanse the breast, and
help in long fevers. Those called emblik draw forth phlegm, strengthen the
stomach, stay vomitings, help the resolution of the nerves, and lethargy. Those
called Belleric. remove purulencies, stay the flux of the hemorrhoids. Dose
from vj. to js. dry in the first, cold second; those are best which are fleshy,
thick, and ponderous.

Juice of damask roses.
It purges choler and phlegm, and excellent to prepare your aloes withal.

Troch. Alhandal.
They all viscous humors, as also bile and serosities, and are more safe for
those diseases expressed under coloquintida, then it.

Turbith.
It draws out phlegm most strongly, therefore wonderfully helps for the remove
of the cause in long diseases; it purges the water betwixt the skin, is good
in venereous pains of the joints, gout, dropsey, scabs, and asthma. Its hot in
the third. Dose from ij. to iiij. in infusion, from ij. to iij. that is best,
which is gummy and white, and breaks easily; give it not to infants, or
breeding women.

Tamarinds.
They repress the heat, and sharpness of humors, gently draw forth bile and
adust humors, quench thirst humect dry bodies, are good in the plague,
pestiferous and malign fevers. Cold and dry 2. Dose from ij to iiij. used in
glisters, mitigate the heat of the liver.

The Second CLASSIS has in it compound purging medicines, with the virtues,
etc. as follows.
Benedicta Laxativa.
Its seldom or never given by the mouth, most often in glisters, for the
evacuating of pituitous humors, mixed with bile, although sticking hard in
remotest parts. Its good in the colic, cold effects of the reins, womb, and
joints, from which parts it draws forth mucous phlegm, and discusseth wind.
Dose by the mouth, is j. but in glisters to js.

Confectio Hameck.
It purges melancholy, burnt choler, and salt phlegm, is good in all affects
of the skin arising from the said humors, as scabs, itch, etc. its of
admirable virtue in melancholy diseases. Dose is j.

Diacarthamum.
It marvellously draws out yellow bile and plegme; Dose from js. to vj.

Dacatholicon.
Its as profitable as commonly used, it evacuates all humors, principally
choler, burnt melancholy, and then phlegm, its very gentle, and may be used in
all ages, states, and times, either by it self, or dissolved in some proper
liquour, its helpful in acute aad peracute diseases, it mollifies, alters, and
strengthens, is good in affects of the liver, spleen, it helps gouts of all
kinds, also tertians, quartanes, and quotidians, as also pains in the head.
Dose is from s. to j. you may take j. when you go to bed, and in the morning,
drinking a good draught of possetdrink, may go abroad. The same virtues has
Tryphera Persica.

Diaphoenicon.
It purges phlegm mixed with bile, and amongst those which receive scammony,
it operates gently, its good in all cold diseases, especially in pains of the
colic contracted from a cold cause, as also in long fevers, as bastard
tertians, and quotidians. Dose is to x. from s.

Diaturbith cum rheo.
It purges phlegm, and choler.

Electuarium Lenitivum.
Its profitable in humoral fevers, and pleurisy, eases coughs, smootheth the
breast, mollifieth the guts, and purges without molestation. Dose is to j.

Pull. sen. praepar.
It purges melancholy, adust, bile, and salt plegme, cleanses the head and
rest of the body, is good in affects of the skin.

Syrup of Roses solutive.
It purges choler, and water, strengthens the stomach, and guts, therefore
used profitably in burning and malign fevers, it strengthens the heart, and
brain. Dose from iij. to v. Its made with nine infusions of damask roses; if it
be done with red roses, it will be very profitable in dysenteries, diarrhea,
tenesmus.

Syrup of violets.
If this be made of nine infusions, it gently purges choler, and draws it
forth gently from the first region of the body, breast and urinary passages,
its cordial; therefore profitable in malign fevers, pleurisies, hot catarrh.
and diabetes. Dose from iij. to s.

Pil. Aggregativae.
They evacuate universally all humors, although chiefly bile, next that
phlegm, and then melancholy, especially from the parts serving the natural,
and animal faculties, they are profitable in long fevers, remove faults of the
head, stomach and liver. Dose from ij to j. Beware you use them not a flux
reigning.

Pil. Aureae.
From the excellency of the operation they are so called; they evacuate without
hurt bilious humors with some portion of phlegm; these humors they especially
draw from the head, eyes, stomach, and wonderfully help the actions of those
parts. Dose is to js.

Pil. Cocheae
They purge the whole body, especially the head from pituitous humors,
therefore profitable in cold affects of the head, which arise from tough and
thick humors, as lethargy, etc. Dose to j.

Pil. de agarico.
They cleanse the breast from gross and putrid humors, and so good against
asthma's, and old coughs, Dose to j.

Pil. lucis major.
They purge excrementitious humors from the head, and strengthen the head and
sight. Dose to j.

Pil. de Euphorbio.
They draw forth cold phlegm and crude humors, which descend to the nerves,
excellent in the gout, dropsies, pain in the loins, gouts, scurvy, palsy, and
remove the cause of tumors. Dose from j. to js.

Pil. Ruffi.
They are commonly used to prevent pestilential diseases, are good to
exhilerate the spirits, much refresh and deliver the stomach from any
oppression. Dose to j.

Aloe Rosata.
Its an excellent purger of choler, frees the stomach from superfluous humors,
opens stoppings and other infirmities of the body proceeding from choler and
phlegm, as yellow jaundice, and strengthens the body exceedingly. Dose j. or
s. when you go to bed.

Extract. Rudii.]
It cleanses both head and body of choler, phlegm and melancholy. Dose a j.
to js.

Spec. for suppository is Hiera, etc.

Pull. Arthritic.
It purges surely and gently all defluxions, and may be used, and is although
covertly in most cases. Dose from s to j. in white wind or posse^-drink with
sugar, to those that are weak, in sack I have used it with admirable success,
in form of pills, in pain of the teeth, and deflux^ons from the head. This is
the Recipe. Sen. turbith. gum. hermodactyl. diagrid. oss. human. calcinat. an.
s. misc f. pull. subtiliss.

The third CLASSIS are Electuaries, and pouder^ strengthening the heart, and
noble part, which with the operations, follow^.
Aromat. Rosatum.
It heats, yet strengthens more all the noble parts, and those serving to
concoct, it opens, attenuates all pituitous humors, and wastes superfluous
humidities, sharpens the senses, is profitable in cold affects of the said
parts; especially in the plague, swooning, fever, dropsey, crudities of the
stomach arising from thence, the liver, and other parts weakened by cold. Its
to be dissolved in cordial liquours, if given inwardly, Dose to ij. if
outwardly applied, its to be mixed in waters, unguents, etc.

Bol. Orientalis or East-bole.
It greatly binds dries and strengthens. Its use is most excellent in staying
fluxes, thickening humors, hindering putrefaction, and resisting venom, in
which account its diarrhea's, dysenteries, menstrual flux, bleeding at the
nose, wounds, etc its outwardly to be used by way of cataplasmes. Dose to j.
inwards.

Camphire.
It resists putrefaction and venenofity, hence often used in malign diseases, as
fevers, etc. It dulls and if credited, hinders conception, s. of it made into
a powder, with s. of sal. prunel. and divided into four parts, and given in
cooling juleps every third hour, is gallant, as to quench violent heat in
malign fevers, so also to resist malignity, and quench thirst; its good in
gonorrhea, outwardly it eases pain in the head (used in frontals) pain of the
teeth stopp't with it; agues, if in a nodula smelt to, and is good in
gangrenes, and inflammations.

Confectio Alkermes.
It heats in the end of the second degree vehemently, strengthens the heart and
chears it, regenerates all spirits in great quantity, removes malign
putrefaction, and so preserves and defends all the inward parts, its helpful in
melancholy diseases, swooning, beating of the heart, pestilent and malign
fevers. It Is profitable against venom, and against the bitings of virulent
creatures; and hastens birth, given with cynamon-water, to the quantity of j
Dose to js.

Confectio de Hyacintho.
Its temperate in quality, and has a most gallant faculty to strengthen the
heart after that the stomach, and liver, and by reason of its cardiack, and
alexipharmick quality, it produces spirits in great plenty, and extinguisheth
all venomous qualities, hence it helps admirably in venomous affects,
especially in pestilent, malignant and spotted fevers, is a remedy against all
bites of venomous creatures; Dose is to js. dissolved in cordial liquours or
juleps.

Prepared Coral.
It binds, cooles, dries and strengthens, peculiarly the heart, then the
stomach, and liver, purifies the blood, good against the plague, venomous and
malign fevers, stays all fluxes of the belly, womb, and yard, prevents
gonorhea, as also the falling sickness, if given when new born in its mothers
milk, to gr. x. before any thing else; it fixes the spirits, is good in the
Rickets; the tincture made of vi. grossly beaten in juice of lemons, in B. M.
for four days, after separated from the faeces, is admirable to cool and
strengthen the liver. Outwardly, its good in ulcers to incarne and cicatrize,
and in Colyrium, to recreate the sight and stop watering of the eyes.

Burnt harts-horne prepared.
It resists putrefaction, stays fluxes of the belly, kills worms, moves
sweat, and is a very familiar medicine in Infants. Its excellent in juleps for
fevers in all sorts, and all sorts of people. Its good in jaundice, pain of
the bladder, and flux of the womb; for a julep: Take of it. j. water three
quarts, boil them till a quart be wasted, after remove it from the fire, and
add syrup of lemons iij. rose water iiij. sugar to sweeten it, and some drops
of spirit of vitriol.

Creamo tartar.
It cuts and thins thick and tartarous humors, especially those heaped up in
the first region of the body; therefore profitably given in obstructions of the
spleen, mesentery, reins, and hypochondries. Its used as a catholic
digestion, and so given before catharticks, yea, if a gr. or two of diagridium,
or gum gutta be mixed with it, loosens the belly. Dose is from s. to j, or ij.

Diaireos.
It comforts the breast, is good in cold coughs and hoarsenesse, you may mix it
with any pectoral syrup, appropriated to the same disease, and so take it with
a liquorish stick.

Diamargariton frigid.
Its of a cooling quality, extinguishing the heat of blood and choler, has an
excellent faculty to strengthen the stomach, liver, brain, especially the
heart, so restores the vital spirits in great quantity, defends the noble parts
from all putrefaction, removes malign fevers, helps in cardiack affects, is a
remedy in the trembling of the heart, is a restorative in Consumption, helps in
Hecticks, coughs, asthma's, and restores such as have long labored under
languishing and pining diseases, Dose to ij.

Diarrhodon Abbatis.
It a little heats, yet dries and marvellously strengthens the liver, and all
the inward parts, helping their concoction, helps also in fevers from
phlegm (in which it has great force) although there be mixed therewith
choleric humors. Its inwardly in powder dissolved in Hen-broth or cordial
julep, or in tablets. Outwardly in epithems or unguents, and so it strengthens
the stomach, helps concoction, discusseth wind, and stirs up appetite.

Diatragacanthum frigidum.
It lenifieth the winde-pipe, easily procures spitting, is very profitable in
affects of the breast and winde-pipe, helps consumptions, leanness,
inflammation of the sides, pleurisies, inflammation of the lungs, stays the
flux to those parts. Dose to ij. in tablets.

Flower of brimstone.
It resists putrefaction, dries, provokes sweat, hence profitable in the plague
and pestilential fevers, whether to cure or preserve, helps in catarrhs,
affects of the lungs, coughs, consumptions, asthmas, etc. Dose from s to j. To
preserve, exceed not s.

Bezoar stone.
It strengthens, moves sweat, is alexipharmick, hence profitable in the plague,
vertigo, falling sickness, swooning, beating of the heart, jaundice, colic,
bloody flux, worms, stone, obstruction of the courses, difficulty of birth,
melancholy, green sickness, excellent in malign fevers and venom. Dose from
gr. iii. to xii. or i. yea Zacutus gave j. and succeeded when the Patient was
hopeless.

Prepared Pearls.
Its cool, has a cardiack force, therefore strengthens the heart and defends
it and the rest of the principal parts, serving to nutrition, bridles the heat
of blood, and choler, resists malignity, therefore has an admirable faculty in
malign, pestiferous and burning fevers, it cheares the spirit excellently.
Dose to iii.

Mithridate.
It heats, dries, attenuates, incides, powerfully opens obstructed passages of
the brain, and strengthens admirably the rest of the inward parts, moves the
courses, discusseth wind, provokes urine, heats and evacuates cold humors, in
the head oppressed with cold juice, its helpful in fits of the
falling sickness: the palate being anointed; is happily given in the plague,
pestiferous and venomous diseases, in pain of the colic and of the stomach,
from a cold cause; yea, also in vehement pains of the gums, being therewith
anointed; it helps continual waterings of the stomach, ulcers in the body,
consumptions, weakness of the limbs, provokes appetite, casts out the dead
birth, and helps such women as cannot conceive by reason of cold: is admirable
in melancholy; inwardly it may be taken of it self in a bole, or dissolved in
liquours, outwardly mixed with oil of scorpion, to provoke urine and courses.
Dose to ii. you may take i. or s. in the morning, and follow your business.

Diascordium.
Its helpful in pestilential diseases, may supply the place of theriaca,
especially in those which cannot bear the other, as in children, and breeding
women; its a remedy in malign fevers, and is adverse to venom and venomous
diseases, it sustains the vital faculty, strengthens the animal, and begets
plenty of all spirits, it provokes the courses, facilitates and speeds labor,
it stops fluxes, strengthens the stomach, and procures sleep, therefore good
in such fevers, where there is want of sleep. Dose from s to j.

Theriaca Londinensis.
Its cordial, resists the plague, and is a good preservative in pestilential
times, resists poison, strengthens cold stomachs, helps digestion, removes
crudities. Dose ij.

Opium.
It quiets the unquiet and seditious motion of the spirits, procures sleep,
eases pain, not to be used inwardly without preparation, outwardly its
profitable in unguents.

Laudanum opiat.
Its a gallant anodyne, seldom frustrates expectation, for it helps without
molestation or any trouble of the brain, against all pains from whatsoever
cause arising, against all hemorrhoids or fluxes of blood, in what part of the
body soever, against all defluxions therefore gr. excellent in chin-cough,
against all fluxes of the belly, dysenterick, hepatick, lienterick, etc. it
procures admirably rest in fevers, and bridles the impetuosity of the humors,
its excellens in madness, melancholy, vomiting, falling sickness, hiccough,
colic, weakness of the stomach, pleurisy, all kind of gout and stone. Dose
from gr. j. to iij. or iiij. by degrees I have given six; its to be given, the
body having been evacuated.

Mecorium.
As opium is a distillation from the plant incised, so this is the juice
thickened by decoction, which being well prepared, is excellent in the effects
in opium described, etc.

Theriac. Andromac.
This being in little use, and theriac. Land. as a substirute put in room of
it, we shall say little, only look the virtues of ^ ithridate.

Philonium Romanum.
It cooles in the third degree, powerfully induces stupefaction, stirs up deep
sleep, is very profitable in intense pains, in what part soever.

Shaving of Harts-horne.
Its cordial, resisting venom, cheareth the heart, dispelleth wind, eases
the colic, opens obstructions, kills worms, helps the jaundice, eases
pains in the reins, and bladder, drives forth the small pox, and measles.

Sal Prunellae.
Dissolved in convenient liquors, or ordinary beer, its excellent in burning
putrid fevers, especially those called spotted; its good in pleurisies, with
red poppy-water, as also in inflammation of the lungs, for the stone in the
kidneys or bladder, given in vulgar ptisan or in pellitary-water, with syrup of
French mallows, nothing better. It helps in obstruction of the liver, and
meseraicks. It extinguisheth thirst, is good in inflammations of the mouth and
squinance; dissolved in gargarismes, it eases pains, and cures scalds or
burns dissolved in proper liquour, and applied. Note, its not to be given in
loosnesses. Dose from ij. to iv.

Tartar. vitriolatum.
Its a most excellent digestive, resolves tartarous humors most effectully;
hence most profitably given in obstructions of the bowels, meseraick veins,
good in all Fevers, especially quartanes, and in obstruction of the courses.
Dose from s. to j.

Sealed earth.
It dries, binds, resists putrefaction and venom, resolves grumous blood,
comforts the heart and head, dilates the blood, therefore moves sweat. Its
used especially in the plague, malign fevers, diarrhea, dysentery, in venomous
bitings; outwardly in wounds, especially malign, as also venomous bites.

The fourth CLASSIS are Aromatic, which with their virtues follow.
Calamus Aromaticus, or sweet garden flag.
Its especially used in affects of the womb, and pains of the sinews, it
provokes urine, strengthens the lungs, helps bruises, resists poison. Dose, if
given inward, is s.

Cloves.
They have a notable peculiar cordial, cephalic, and stomacaical quality. They
profit in fainting, toothach, crudities of the stomach, vertigo, they also
qualify malign and uterine diseases, stop loosnesse, help digestion, provoke
lust, and quicken the sight. Hot and dry in the third. For fainting s. Of those
with j. of cynamon, and xv. grains of galingal beat and boiled with half a
pint of rose water in B.M. for three hours, is excellent.

Cynamon.
It opens, discusseth, moves the courses, cheareth the parts, refreshes all
the spirits and bowels, helps concoction, used often in faintings, and in cold
affects of the head, stomach and womb, procures urine, speedy delivery,
resists poison; good in defluxions on the lungs, dropseys.

Crocus or Saffron.
Its proper to the heart and lungs, good for the womb, and familiar to the
rest of the bowels. It opens, cleanses, mollifies, eases pain, procures
sleep, expels the courses, birth, small pox, often used in swooning, apoplexies,
mother, jaundice, plague, and other venomous diseases; good in asthma, with
oil of sweet Almonds. Dose to j. Its used outwardly in collyriums and
cataplasmes, to ease pain, in which it excells.

Galingal.
Its proper for the stomach, head, and womb; incides, opens; is used in the
crudities and inflation of the stomach, vertigoes, obstructions of the womb
and other affects of the whole body, arising from cold and wind; its excellent
in errhins, for the head inwardly. Dose s. hot and dry in the third.

Nutmegs, and Mace.
The latter is but the cover of the first. The first is proper for the head,
stomach, and womb, discusseth wind, helps concoction, mends stinking breath,
recreates the birth, helps faintings of the heart, lessens, and eases the
pain of the spleen, admirably stays fluxes of the belly, and vomiting, eases
pain of head and joints, adds strength to the body, is a good masticary in
debility, and defluxion of the brain. Mace has the same virtue.

Pepper.
Its used in coldness and crudities of the stomach, colic, especially white
pepper, its used in weakness of the sight; outwardly it may be used in
apophlegmatisms, gargarisms, neezings. It eases the toothache, abates the
swelling of the palate, and gets it up, and is good in cold affects of the
sinews.

Sugar.
Its use is to sweeten broths, and other aliments, it profits in the cough and
other affects of the lungs, is good in the reins and bladder, especially the
candied, hot in the first.

Ginger.
It powerfully heats, opens, incides, attenuates, helps the stomach to digest,
expels wind, resists putrefaction and malignity, cleares the sight, heats the
joints, and therefore profitable in the gout.

The fifth CLASSIS are waters, and juices, which are as follows.
Some of these are simple, distilled from some particular herb, others are
compound; the former of these, it would be useless to set down their virtues,
being they will be writ in the Classis, which is of herbs. The simple are
these.

The waters of sorrel, borage and buglosse, marigold-flowers, balm, plantain,
roses, angelica, carduus benedictus, red poppies, and purslaine. The Compound
with their virtues follow.

Anise-seed-water.
Its good for those troubled with wind, and for a cold stomach, and taken in
time, may prevent surfets by flesh or fruit.

Aqua vitae, or rather spirit of wine.
The first may be used in the foresaid affects, the latter has a great heating
quality, and dries much. It attenuates, incides, and discusseth wind,
therefore profitable in the colic, for cold distempers which vehemently
oppress the stomach, liver and other parts. This keeps every thing from
corrupting, it helps concoction, frees from crudities, refreshes the vital
spirits, dries up humidities that oppress the brain, quickens the
understanding, helps the sight, and repairs the memory. Its excellent in all
ulcers, fistulaes, gangrenes, and wounds of the head, although in the brain.
Its good in Convulsions from fullness, as also in palsies, and in both
admirable. Its good to generate hair.

Cinamon-water distilled, without wine.
It may be given in pestilent fevers, to women in labor to hasten the birth,
and drive sorth the secundine. It strengthens the liver, stomach, heart,
lunges, spleen, brain, and sinews, quickens the sight, is profitable in
venom and venomous bites and diseases, it procures the courses, removes
loathing and vomiting, discusseth wind, and refreshes the vital faculty.

Aqua Mirabilis.
It Is usually distilled in a limbeck, but I have known it distilled from an
ordinary cold still, and so received into three several glasses, each water
differing in strength, and has been effectual in the effects following. It
helps the pain in the stomach, it cleanses the lungs being wounded, it
helps them, it suffers not the blood to putrefie, nor phlegm to have
dominion over nature, it mightily conduces in rheumatick distempers,
depresseth melancholy, conserveth memory, helps the palsy, makes a good
color, and conserveth youth in his perfect state, is admirably good in fevers,
and at point of death: of all waters artificial, there is none better. It Is to
be taken once in the week in the morning fasting, three or four spoonfuls at a
time with some sugar, or at any time when one is not well. It somewhat differs
from that in the dispensatory, for to the species is added melilot j. to the
juice, as much severally of the juice of mints and balm.

Worm-wood-water.
Its excellent good for cold stomachs, helps digestion, kills worms in the
belly, eases pains in the head and teeth, provokes appetite, and consumes and
breaks wind admirably; and is cordial.

Angelica-water.
It Is an excellent preservative against the plague, or any infectious air,
comfort the heart, and cheareth the vital spirits.

Juice of Barberries.
It cools, moistens and binds, stirs up appetite, strengthens the stomach and
liver, is in common use in diseases, where cooling and binding are needful, as
in diarrhaea, dysenteria, etc.

Juice of Citrons.
It Is good against venom, resists putrefaction and malign diseases, drives
out the worms, and is diaphoretick; it cooles the blood, strengthens the
heart, and mitigates the violent heat in fevers.

Juice of Pomegranates.
It Is convenient for the stomach, good in all fevers, in gonorrhea, longings,
corrects putrefaction, is cardiack, and cephalic, and is used primarily in
swoonings, and vertigoes, etc.

Juice of Sloes.
Its excellent in fluxes of the belly, strengthens the stomach, heateth
exulcerations of the intestines, either used in glisters, or eaten in a gelly,
Dose from i. to ii. the decoction is better.

Juice of Limons.
Its cordial, excellent against the scurvy, opens obstructions, reforceth
nature, bridles the heat in fevers, is excellent in cordials and juleps.

Juice of Liquorish.
It smootheth the throat and windpipe, cleanses the reins and bladder, is good
for the cough, helps expectoration, and strengthens the lungs.

Vinegar of Roses.
It has the same virtue of the roses wherewith its prepared.

Wine-vineger.
Its excellent to mix with fomentations, cataplasmes, to discuss, only take
heed the parts to which its applied be not excoriated, and good in gargarismes.

The sixth CLASSIS contains Syrups, which with their virtues are as follows.
Syrup of Sorrel.
Its profitable in burning, malign, and pestilential fevers, helps wonderfully
the inflammation of the stomach, respects it, and the heart, quenches thirst,
cures the hiccough begot from a choleric humor.

Syrup of unripe Currents.
It Is cold in the third, attenuates, incides and prepares choler, impacted in
the liver and stomach, strengthens it, and stirs up appetite, stays vomiting,
asswageth thirst, but hurts the womb.

Syrup of Barberries. See the juice of Citrons.
Vide juice also of Pomegranats, limons; for the syrup of the juice of bugloss,
see the herb.

Syrup of Quinces.
It Is cold in the second, is profitable in all fluxes, strengthens the
natural parts, therefore helps in diarrhea and dysenteria, stirs up the
appetite, removes loathing and vomiting, bridles the hot distemper of the
stomach, procures sleep, wonderfully prohibits biting vapors and exhalations
from ascending to the head: stops the immoderate flux of terms in women.

Syrup of Liquorish.
It concocts phlegm, especially respects the breast, facilitates spitting,
cleanses the lungs, removes the cough, when it draws its original from cold
distillations.

Syrup of Poppies.
It thickens hot and thin humors, provokes sleep, extinguisheth thirst,
represses the ascending of sharp and biting vapors to the brain; wherefore
profitable in phrensies, immoderate watchings, hot catarrhs, dry cough, to
smooth the breast and windpipe, and provokes spittle, is profitable in burning
and malign fevers, when the sick is infested with superfluous watchings; its
good also in consumptions.

Syrup of Roses.
It Is made of the infusion of roses fresh, it cools in the second,
strengthens the stomach, head and heart, quenches thirst, profits chiefly in
bilious fevers, removes putrid malignity, stays all fluxes arising from
hotnesse, and strengthens the natural faculty.

Syrup of dried Roses.
It temperates hot humors, strengthens the stomach and guts, bridles fluxes
arising from heat, therefore profitable in bilious diarrhea's, dysenteries,
stops all fluxes of blood, whence ever they flow, and does excellently
familiarize with the natural and animal faculties, stays vomiting, strengthens
the heart, and comforts the spirits. Of this Syrup with the syrups of violets,
jujubes, and poppies in equal parts, is made a gallant syrup to stay fluxions
and cough, taking a spoonful at a time.

Syrup of Violets.
This is made, either of the simple infusion, or rather the juice, although
more chargeable, they cool and moisten in the second, profits in fevers and
hot distillations, thickens thin and hot humors, removes thirst, resists
malign quality, smooths the winde-pipe and breast, respects the heart, and
brain, strengthens the natural and animal faculty, facilitates spittle, moves
sleep, concocts choler, humects dry and squalid bodies, therefore excellent in
hectic, it comforts hot stomachs exceedingly, and cooles the liver.

Syrup of the five roots.
It Is usually given almost in all cold affects, in asthma, difficulty of
breathing, palsy, convulsion, from fullness, is profitable against
obstructions, provokes urin, its excellent given in vomits.

Oxymel Simpl.
It Is made of four parts of water, two of honey, and one of vinegar; heats in
the second. It powerfully heats, attenuates, digests, cleanses and resolves
both cross and tough matter, is given in long fevers, bastard tertians, and
quotidians, cleanses the palate and throat, and has a consent with the
stomach, and strengthens it; it is a good Preparative for a vomit, and is also
good in cataplasmes.

Oxymel. Scilitic.
Hot in the second, powerfully attenuates, and incides cold and thick humors,
although impacted in the depths of the body, respects the head and stomach,
which parts it roborates, helpful in suppurating pleurisies, provokes cough
vehemently, and therefore breaks the aposteme, Yet its to be mixed with other
expectoraters; it helps sour belchings.

The Seventh CLASSIS.
Roots of French Mallows.
They mollify, loose, digest, ease pain, ripen tumors, mitigate and correct
sharpness, used especially in affects of the bladder, breast, pleurisy,
stone, help bloody fluxes and griping in the belly, being bruised, boiled in
milk, and drunk, their use is admirable in cataplasmes and glisters. They are
in quality as mallows, which are good in affects of the lungs, bladder, guts,
womb, as consumptions, cough, stone, erosion of the bladder and guts, and
hardness of the womb, and resist poison. By what has been said, you may
perceive in what cases their syrups are useful; meanly hot.

Angelica.
They are a most noble Bezoartick, and cordial, they open, attenuate, provoke
sweat, are vulnerary, move the courses, good against the mother and malign
diseases, help venom and plague, drive forth all venom by sweat, they are
good in putrid ulcers, and venomous bites. Dose s. in the morning, if it be
inwardly taken, hot and dry in the third.

Birthwort long, and round.
They are both proper for the liver, head, and especially the lungs, they
attenuate, open, hence profitable to resolve and expectorate tough humors, to
move the courses, break inward tumors, and discuss venom; the long is used
for the drying scabs, and outwardly in decoction, for the drying and cleansing
of wounds and ulcers; the round is of thinner parts, then the longer, and
therefore more efficacious, especially in moving speedily the course, and as
speedily removing both birth and afterbirth; its good also in ruptures,
convulsions, and hardness of the spleen, hot and dry in the third.

Bistort.
They are very astringent, alexipharmick and sudorifick, used especially in
staying vomiting, in preventing abortion; they resist the plague and poison,
help ruptures and bruises, stay fluxes, and immoderate flowing of the courses,
s. taken at a time. Outwardly its good in drying catarrhs, staying fluxes of
blood in wounds, etc. is excellent in vulnerary passions and in injections for
ulcers, cold and dry in the third.

Bryony.
They purge strongly, serous and pituitous humors, are proper for the spleen,
womb and liver, opening their obstructions, they draw forth dropsey-water by
vomit and stool, move the courses, cast out the birth, admirably bridle the
mother, free from asthma, good for the gout, used either inwardly or outwardly,
its excellent in scrophula's, called Kings evil, for which take this roots
receipt. Take of this root well washed and beaten lbs, cut them in small
pieces, boil them in lb iii. of oil-olives till it be wasted, then strain it,
and to the straining add turpentine, lbs and iiij. of wax, and removing the
vessel from the fire, make an unguent, which is excellent.

Avens.
Its proper for the head, and is cordial, used peculiarly in vertigoes, falling
sickness, and other affects of the head and nerves, in swooning and beating of
the heart, expells worms, eases birth, outwardly it eases pain of the head
and teeth, draws forth bones, and good in wounds of the head, are moderately
hot and dry, and to be gathered in March.

Onions.
They open, incide, cleanse, of thick parts, therefore windy, used peculiarly
in tartarous humors of the lungs, to cut and expel them; if boiled in honey
and eaten, they being infused move urine and courses, and expel worms,
outwardly they ripen and break tumors, being roasted and applied, and if
mithridate or theriac added, are excellent in pestilential tumors, being
beaten raw, they cure the biting of mad dogs; and if a little salt be added,
are excellent in burns and scalds: hot and dry in the fourth; naught for
choleric people, they are better physic then food.

Succory.
They are proper for the liver, do attenuate and provoke urine, also cleanse,
their special use is in obstructions of the liver, and in fevers, cold and dry
in the second.

Comfry.
They are vulnerary, obtund the acrimony of humors, as also incide. They are
especially used in all fluxes of the belly; in erosion of the lungs, ruptures,
broken veins and bones, stopping courses; outwardly they heal wounds, and stay
their bleeding, are good in fractures and ruptures; they will join two pieces
of meat together, if boiled with it. They are cold, yet pretty temperate.

Sowbread.
They powerfully incide, open cleanse, and is an errhine; they are used
properly in obstruction of the terms, in expelling dead birth; in jaundice, in
expelling the stone, discussing struma's and tubercles, beware of using them
inward; hot and dry in the third, gather them in the fall.

Elecampane.
It cleanses, discusseth, opens, is proper to the lungs and stomach, and is
alexipharmick, sudorifick, is used peculiarly in the attenuating and drawing
forth tartarous humors in the lungs and reins, hence used in cough, tyssicks,
and crudities of the stomach, and frees the ureters: also in the plague,
contagious diseases, and scabs, itch, in ointments, helps also rupture, and
provokes. Hot and dry in the third.

Eringo or Sea-holly.
Its hepatick, nephritick, and alexipharmick, opens, discusseth, used
especially in stopping of the courses, urine, liver, bladder, gall, and spleen:
hence good in the jaundice, colic, they increase seed, etc. they help
scrophuiaes. Temperately hot and dry, and are to be gathered, the Sun
existent in Cancer.

Fenel.
Opens, resolves, discusseth, is diuretic, carminative, and bechical,
roborates the stomach, increases milk, comforts the sight, lenifieth the
windpipe, provokes the courses, strengthens the liver, is good against
dropseys, discusseth wind and humors speedily, and iiii. of the juice of the
roots drunk with sugar, fasting for ten days, being in bed covered, cures long
agues, as quotidians, quartanes, etc. Hot and dry.

Gentian.
Its alexipharmick, opens, and attenuates, is used especially in the plague,
and other venomous effects. In obstructions of the liver, spleen, etc. hence
good in dropsey, mothet, weakness of the stomach, in worms, fevers, biting of
mad dogs, procures the courses. Outwardly used in wounds to open them, also to
open issues closing up or new made, its of excellent use in intermitting
fevers, in which j. or iiii. is to be given before the fit. If to ij of it you
add the like quantities of bayberries, long pepper and saffron, and infuse
them in whitewine a quart, you have a gallant medicine to procure the courses;
if drunk for five days, being so many before the accustomed time.

Swallow-wort.
It heats and dries moderately, attenuates, and is a notable alexipharmick and
sudorifick. Its specially used in the plague and other venomous effects, in
obstruction of the courses, beating of the heart, faintings, and dropsey.
Outwardly in sordid and malign ulcers, to venomous stings, and ulcers in the
paps: Inwardly, Dose j. excellent in curing the rupture.

Orris.
It incides, attenuates, expectorates, cleanses, and mollifieth, used
especially in tough humors of the lungs, cough, asthma, obstruction of the
terms, pains in Infants bellies, resists poison, and are good in dropseys;
outwardly, cleanses the skins from spots, mends the stinking of the mouth, and
is good in ulcers. To lbs. of this, add of storax and benjamin, each ii. and
make it into a powder. Its most delightful to the smell, and dries and
strengthens the brain. Hot and dry in the second.

White lilies.
Cleanse, digest, mollify, and especially ripen and ease pain in tumors,
good to be applied to corns and burns.

Parsley.
Heats and dries, 1. Attenuates, extergeth, is diaphoretick, hepatick, etc.
used specially in obstructions of the lungs, liver, spleen, reins and bladder;
hence good in coughs, jaundice* stone, courses, asthma, etc. Outwardly,
resolves hot humors, hinders the falling of hair, and diminishes milk.

Pimpernel.
Its sudorifick, attenuates, opens, abstergeth, is good against the stone, is a
good vulnerary, used specially in preventing and curing venomous diseases, in
opening stoppings of the liver, kidneys, lungs, and womb; is good in the
stone, gravel, strangury, colic, cough, asthma, and inflammation of the
lungs, crudities and weakness of the stomach, and in the French pox.
Outwardly, in pains of the teeth, to ripen buboes, increase milk, cleanse the
spots of the face and cancerous ulcers, and consolidates wounds both old and
new.

Plantane.
Its hepatick and vulnerary, used especially in all kinds of fluxes, in which
its gallant, as fluxes of the belly, spitting blood, gonorrhea, pissing abed,
immoderate courses, is good in the jaundice, ulcers of the reins and kidneys;
one bit of it eaten, stays pains of the head to admiration. Outwardly, it
cleanses and consolidateth inveterate wounds, and ulcers. Cold and dry in the
second.

Polipody or Oak-fearne.
It draws forth burnt choler, melancholy, and tough phlegm; hence most
profitable in stoppings of mesentery, liver, and spleen, therefore used in
hypochondriack affects, scurvy, yet seldom given alone; its very familiar to
our nature, helps quartanes, hemorrhoids, is good in French pox, and pain of
the joints, takes away all swellings in hands, feet, knees and joints, also
stitches and pains in the side and rickets; its to be corrected with a few
anise-seed, and being bruised, is to be boiled in white wind till half be
wasted.

Squills.
They attenuate, absterge, discuss, resist putrefaction; for further, see the
vinegar and oxymel. Outwardly, they are good in ulcers of the head and kibes,
being infused in oil. Hot and dry in the second.

Tormentill.
Without signal heat, astringeth, is vulnerary, diaphoretick, and
alexipharmick, used especially in the plague, and other malign diseases,
especially when associated with fluxes of the belly; its also good in
pestilences, dry catarrhs, in French pox, in venom, in vomiting, and in
wounds, and ulcers.

The Eighth CLASSIS are Herbs.
Common and Roman wormwood.
This first especially respects the stomach, is proper for the liver and
spleen. It attenuates, astringeth, opens, and is bitter, hence kills, draws
forth choler, discusseth, helps surfets, resists poison, cleanses the blood,
is good in fevers, especially tertians. Outwardly, it comforts the stomach,
sharpens hearing, is good in gangrenes, and to discuss tumors. A Ms. of this
with the like quantity of agrimony and centaury boiled in water, lb j. to lbs,
and drunk for three mornings together, with a little sugar, is made a gallant
decoction, which procures appetite, eases pain, cleanses the stomach of
phlegm, and expells wind.

The second does more astringe, incide, discuss, and resist putrefaction,
draws forth choler by urine, therefore good in all affects of the liver,
gall, stomach, pain of the belly and womb, and stays vomiting in Infants. Of
its salt j. in a spoonful of juice of limons, stays vomiting gallantly,
although in a malign fever.

Agrimony.
Its a most noble hepatick, as splenitick and vulnerary, it opens, digests,
roberates, is excellent in all diseases arising from the liver, as dropsey,
cachexia, etc. outwardly, its used in fomentations, and lotions, etc. for
wounds and ulcers. Hot and dry in the second.

Ladies mantle.
Its a gallant vulnerary, consolidates, binds, and cleanses, thickens blood,
stops excessive courses, stays vomiting, and the whites in women, its very
profitable in those subject to miscarry through cold and moisture; outwardly,
it helps wounds, reduces women's breasts that hang flagging, heals bruises and
ruptures.

Jack of the hedge, or sauce alone.
Its profitably boiled in asthma's, the seed is good in coughs, the juice in
malign fevers. Outwardly, the juice or seed powdered provokes neezing, stirs
up the epilepsy and lethargy, the seed made into an emplaister with vinegar, is
good in the mother, the leaves boiled in glisters, are good in the colic or
stone, being beaten and applied, may cure noli me tangere; the juice is
excellent in malign ulcers, (it may be a substitute for scordium) in
cataplasmes for gangrenes, and other putrid, sordid ulcers, it cleanses and
resists putrefaction; its to be gathered either the latter end of April, or
beginning of May; after dry it in the shade for a day, then shred it, and
press out the juice, which may be kept two or three years, if put in a vessel
with oil. Hot and dry in the fourth.

Althea or Marsh-mallowes; See the root.
Both are better, the syrup made with its juice is excellent in the stone.

Betony.
It discusseth, attenuates, opens, cleanses, is specially proper for the head,
also liver, spleen, breast, womb, is vulnerary, it helps the epilepsy, all
headaches, from cold, cleanses the breast and lungs, opens stoppings of liver
and spleen, good in the rickets, procures appetite, helps sour belchings,
provokes urin, breaks the stone, helps cramps and convulsions, resists poison,
helps pox out, and such as piss blood, kills worms, helps bruises, and
cleanses women after labor. Dose j. in white wind. Outwardly, its good in
plasters, injections, etc.

Carduus benedictus.
Its an herb much used in posset drink, and not in vain in Agues; its
cardiack, alexipharmick and sudorifick, it attenuates, discusseth and opens,
resists venom and putrefaction, cures inveterate fevers and quartanes, is
good in vertigo, deafness, strengthens the memory, helps griping pains in the
belly, kills worms, provokes sweat, expels poison, helps inflammation of the
liver, good in plague and French pox. Outwardly applied, ripens plague-sores,
and helps hot swelling, the bitings of mad dogs, venomous beasts, and foul
filthy ulcers.

Centaury.
Its proper to the spleen and liver, it gently binds, cleanses, opens, and is
vulnerary. It draws out very gently bilious and pituitous humors by the
belly, and serosities by the pores in the skin; hence profitable in fevers,
jaundice, suppression of the courses, scurvey, gout, worms, green sickness,
and bites of mad dogs. Outwardly, its excellent in wounds, ulcers, gangrenes,
etc.

Knotgrasse.
Its astringent and vulnerary; its special use is in staying all fluxes,
whether of blood, or otherwise, comeing by spittle, vomiting or stool, good in
gonorrhea, weakness of the back and joints, inflammation in the privities.
Outwardly, its profitable in wounds, ulcers, inflammation of the eyes, and
tumors of the paps.

Cuscuta.
Its specially proper for the spleen, and hepatick, cleanstth, opens, corrects
melancholy humors, is profitable in scabs, black jaundice, and obstructions of
the liver and spleen. Hot in the first, dry in the second.

Dittany of Creet.
Its proper for the womb, its alexipharmick, heats and dries, attenuates,
cleanses and opens, used especially in obstructions of the courses, in
hastening the birth, also in venomous bitings, and drawing forth extraneous
bodies, from wounds by gunshot, etc. Hot and dry.

Horse-taile.
Its vulnerary, thickens, and binds, used primarily in staying hemorrhoids, in
ulcers, wounds, reins and bladder. Cold, and dry in the second.

Eyebright.
Its proper for inflammation of the eyes, and is cephalic, used especially in
suffusions of the eyes, restoring sight, in which its admirable. Dose, j. it
also helps the memory.

Fumitory.
Its safely given in fevers, especially arising from phlegm, and melancholy;
its proper to the spleen, and liver, attenuates, purges by degrees, serous,
bilious, and adust humors, frees the bowels, and strengthens them, purifies
the blood, is used especially in the scurvy, and other mesenteriack, and
splenetick diseases, as the jaundice, scabs of all kinds, and admirably eases
melancholy affects, and is good in the rickets. Remember that this and all
opening things are to be boiled in white wind.

St. Johnswort.
Its vulnerary, and diuretic, used especially in cleansing, and healing
wounds, in resolving coagulated blood, breaking the stone, expelling worms, in
contusions, especially of the nerves, in tremblings, and to hasten birth. It
helps spitting and vomiting blood, provokes the courses, and is good in aches
of the joints. Hot and dry.

Marjarom.
Hot and dry, digests, attenuates, used especially in affects of the head, and
nerves; hence proper for the womb and stomach, made in pessary, moves the
courses, in errhines, etc. strengthens the brain. Hot and dry.

Balm.
Its cordial, heats, and attenuates, therefore provokes sweat, eases the
breast and winde-pipe, concocts phlegm, strengthens the heart, therefore
profitable in swoonings, quotidian fevers, and in cold distempers of the
heart, strengthens the brain, restores lost memory, and is profitable in all
melancholy affects. Outwardly, with salt it helps scrophula's, biting of mad
dogs, and venomous beasts. Hot and dry.

Mints.
Used especially in weakness of the stomach, crudities, hiccough, vomit^ng,
wind, obstruction of the bowels, helps pain in the head, digestion, vertigo,
hinders curdling of milk. Outwardly, it strengthens the stomach, and is good in
the colic, hardness of the paps, biting of mad dogs, and in sore heads of
children. Hot and dry in the third.

Mercury.
It cleanses, moves the belly, purges bile, and water. Outwardly used to
vulva, draws forth the secundine, mollifies tumors, is excellent in glisters.
Its given to children in pap to loosen the belly, and prevent gripings. Hot and
dry in the first.

Nep.
It attenuates, opens, used especially in affects of the womb, with
obstructions, barrenness, driving forth the birth, also in cutting phlegm in
the lungs, and in wound drinks. Hot and dry in the third.

Origanum.
It opens, cleanses, used primarily in stoppings of the lungs, liver, and
womb, hence good in coughs, provokes urine, and courses. Outwardly, is good
against venomous bites, scabs, itch. Hot and dry in the third.

Plantane.
Amongst coolers and thickeners, this is second to none. It represseth all
fluxes, it has a consent with the kidneys, in which, as in the whole body, it
bridles choler, and removes hot distemper, the decoction, or juice prevails
marvelously, in tormenting excoriations of the guts in bloody flux, stops the
courses and spitting blood, helps the consumption of the lungs, kidneys, and
gonorrhea, Also whites of women, pain in the head and phrensies. Outwardly, its
profitable in ulcers, especially from the liver, cleares the sight, takes away
inflammations, scabs, itch, shingles, and all spreading sores.

Self-heal.
Its vulnerary and consolidates, used especially in wounds of the lungs, and in
coagulated blood, helps the rickets and stopping of the liver. Outwardly, its
excellent in curing wounds and ulcers, excellent also for squinseys, and
affects of the mouth, in gargarismes. Bugle is of the same virtue. Hot and dry.

Red beets.
Cooles and dries, astringeth, consolidates, is vulnerary, both inwardly and
outwardly used.

Rue.
It incides, attenuates, digests, discusseth, is alexipharmick, cephalic, and
nervine, used in various diseases, as plague, all malign affects, both to
preserve and cure, it is excellent against poison, sharpens sight, represseth
lust, cures the pleurisy, corrects a weak stomach, helps the colic,
difficulty of breathing, inflammation of the yard, and womb; outwardly, is
good in venomous bites, carbuncles, to bridle the fits of fevers, by anointing
the back, good in pains of the head, epilepsy, etc. hot and dry in the third.

Sage.
Its diuretic, moves the courses, causes fruitfulness, excellent to
strengthen the brain, senses and memory, helps spitting and vomiting blood, is
good in palseys, vertigo, trembling, and catarrhs. Outwardly, in cancer of the
mouth, and applied to the side with vinegar, helps stitches.

Sanacle.
Its a gallant vulnerary, used in healing wounds, ulcers, fistula's, ruptures
and erosions. Hot and dry.

Scabious.
It cleanses, attenuateth, discusseth, is sudorifick, alexipharmick, and
pulmonick, used especially in apostemes, pleurisies, quinseys, cough, asthma,
plague, fistula's, or old ulcers of paps, and thighs; outwardly in scabs, itch,
ring-wormes, ulcers, of the head, in spots and bruises of the face, and pain
of the hemorrhoids, the roots of that with purple flowers, is as forcible in
lue Venerea as sarsaparilla.

Scordium.
Cleanses, attenuates, incideth, resists putrefaction, is alexipharmick and
sudorifick, used especially in the plague, pestilent diseases and malign
fevers, both to cure and preserve; it provokes urine and courses, opens
obstructions of liver, spleen, reins, bladder, and womb. Outwardly, it is good
in gangrenes, wounds, ulcers, etc.

Purslaine.
Its profitable in spitting of blood, and all hemorrhoids, in burning fevers,
erysipelas, pains of the mouth of the stomach, rising from choler, kills and
expels worms, is good in the heat of urine, and scurvy; a syrup made of the
equal parts of the juice of this and sorrel restores lost taste, of excellent
use in pestilent fevers.

The Ninth CLASSIS. FLOWERS.
Tops and Flowers of Dil.
They digest, discuss, maturate, ease pain, increase milk, provoke sleep and
urine, decrease venery, help hiccough and vomit, fits of the mother. Outwardly,
used in glisters, catapl. oils and ointments, to ease pain, and discuss
wind, and tumors.

Betony flowers. See the Herb. Borrage and Buglosse.
They correct the blood, hinder putrid malignity, heal the hot distempers of
the bowels, cheer and strengthen the brain and heart, remove affects of the
skin, are profitable in melancholy diseases. Cold.

Chamomel.
They digest, loosen, mollify, mitigate pain, move courses, and urine, and
are excellent in the colic, and stone. Outwardly, used in cataplasmes, etc.
to mollify, ease pain and ripen. Hot and dry.

Pomegranates.
They bind, cool, thicken; therefore good in all fluxes, as diarrhea,
dysentery, whites, stop blood in wounds, mend looseness of the gums, and cure
ruptures.

Melilot.
They mollify, discuss, mitigate pain. Outwardly used in tumors, pains,
redness of the eyes, in glisters, heal wounds.

Primrose, and Cowslips.
They gently heat, strongly dry, are anodyne, used specially in affects of the
head, as epilepsey, apoplexy, palsy, in pain of the joints, procure sleep,
the latter specially. Outwardly, good in the gout, venomous bites. The vinegar
made of them drawn into the nose, wonderfully helps toothache. The juice of the
roots of Primrose, snuffed up into the nose in the full of the Moon, and after
eat the roots of piony boiled in sugar and butter, a round slice at a time in
a morning, has cured the falling sickness in diverse.

Elder.
They discuss, mollify, resolve, are sudorifick, and anodyne, used inwardly
to help the dropsey, cleanse the blood, to open obstruction of the liver, and
spleen; outwardly, used in burns, erysipelas, collicks, etc.

Roses.
Are cold and dry, astringent and cordial, thicken, and temper thin humors,
and from the alexipharmick quality, resist venom, bridle putrefaction,
strengthen the heart, brain, and stomach, are good in malign fevers; used
outwardly in headache, watching, vomiting, pain of the ears, inflammations and
ulcers of the mouth.

Mullon.
Hears moderatly and dries, mollifieth, discusseth, eases pain, used
especially in diseases of the breast, cough, spitting blood, gripings of the
belly; outwardly, admirable in easing all pains, specially in affects and
tumors of the fundament.

Marigolds.
Are hepatick, and also thought to be cordial, they open, discuss, move the
courses, and sweat, cure the jaundice, expel pox and measles, used as
follows. Boil three spoonfuls of them in clear possit-drink with three figs
sliced, twelve citron-seeds, and a flake of saffron, tied up in a rag, after
its boiled well, drink of it every day till the danger be past; its excellent.

The Tenth CLASSIS. SEEDS.
Dill. See the Flowers. Anise-seeds.
Heats and dries, attenuates, discusseth, is diuretic, increases milk, good
for wind in the stomach and guts, cough, dropsey, and headache. j. new, and
well powdered and scarc'ed, given to infants,

Caroway.
Hot and dry in the third, discusseth, attenuates, is good to expel wind in
the stomach, is diuretic, increases milk, helps in colic, vertigo, etc.

Coriander.
Specially proper for the stomach, hence used in its looseness, eaten after
meat, for they shut it, and suppress exhalation; which grieve the head, and
procure belchings; they are to be prepared by steeping them in wine-vineger a
night, and after dried.

Cummin.
Hot and dry in the third, attenuates, digesteth, discusseth wind, resolves
profitably the colic, tympany, and vertigo, eases pain, helps the biting of
venomous beasts; outwardly, used in catapl. empl. foment. to discuss, etc.

Quince.
Cool and moist, its mucilage, eases pain, and qualifies sharpness, used
specially in dryness of the tongue, eases the pains of the hemorrhoids in
glisters, cures opthalmiaes, heals the chops of the paps, and cures burns.

Fenugreek.
Mollifies, digests, maturates, discusseth, eases pain, excellent in
cataplasmes, good in gl^sters, to mollify, remove sharpness and erosion of
the guts, the decoction of them cures scabby heads: hot in the second, dry in
the first. Linseed has the like virtues.

Barley.
Cleanses, opens, digests, mollifies, is diuretic and nutritive, excellent in
decoctions. Outwardly, mitigates the headache, and remedies hot defluxion of
the eyes.

Plantane. See Root and Herb. Raddish.
Hot in the third, dry in the second, opens, attenuates, cleanses, used
specially in breaking and expelling the stone, moves urine and courses, in
obstructions of the liver and spleen, attenuates viscid phlegm in the stomach,
helps to the distribution of the chyle, the roots are outwardly applied to the
soles of the feet in fevers, as also to the eyes, also to remove pains of the
head, accompanying malign fevers.

Mustard.
Hot and dry in the fourth, incides, draws, attenuates, rubifies; used
specially to stir up appetite, move chylification, if you please, digestion, in
affects of the hypochondries, also in quartanes, and quotidians, (given before
the fit, j.) in the stone. It purges the head, used outwardly for sinapismes,
within to prevent sleepiness, opens tumors and ripens them.

The Eleventh CLASSIS. FRUITS.
Almonds sweet, and bitter.
The sweet are nutritive, temperately hot and moist, qualify the sharpness of
humors, as also pains and watchings arising from acrimony: they are given
especially in emulsions, unless there be pain in the head. The bitter are hot
and dry in the second, open, absterge, are diuretic, help obstructions of the
liver, spleen, mesentery, and womb. Outwardly, they remove morphew, and other
spots, if chewed and anointed, and in a frontal, ease pain in the head.

Bay Berries.
Hot and dry in the third, do mollify and resolve, used especially to move
courses, and urine, in affects of the nerves, in the palsy, colic, pains
after birth, and in crudities of the stomach; outwardly, in emplasters,
cataplasmes, to resolve and ease pain.

Acorn-cups.
They cool, dry, astringe, are used in fluxes of the belly, womb, seed;
outwardly, in pain of the teeth, and flux of the womb, etc.

Figs.
Hot in the second, the new are more moderate, both of them moisten, are proper
for the lungs, and are good in gravel of kidneys and bladder, resist venom,
drive out the pox and measles; they ripen, mollify, and draw, hence help
pestilential buboes, good tosted, and eaten by women near the time of birth to
facilitate it; they are also, being steeped in spirit of wine, good for a
cough, excellently used both inwardly and outwardly, helping the tumors of the
tonsils, or almonds of the ears.

Preserved cherries.
They strengthen the stomach, and heart, profitable to mitigate heat and thirst
in fevers, good in affects of the sides, also in affects of the head, as
apoplexy, palsy, and epilepsie, especially the black, excellent to administer
pills in, the stones being taken out.

Quinces.
Cold in the first, dry in the second, proper for the stomach, astringe
nourish, used specially in vomitings, fluxes of the belly, hiccough, and
looseness of the stomach; if taken before meat, they bind, if after, supposed
to loose.

Acorns. See the Cups. Lupine.
Eases the pain of the spleen, kills worms, and casts them forth. Outwardly,
excellent in lixivium and poultisses for gangrenes, they cleanse filthy ulcers,
help scabs, itch and inflammations.

Oranges.
The same virtue with citrons, only weaker* the skins are excellent, being
powdered, in colic and green sickness, yea, to remove fevers, if they sweat.
Dose from j. to j. Take a crab orange, and make it full of holes, after strain
out the juice, and with it mix a little Theriac. Andromac. saffron, and
vinegar, and put it in again, and roast it under the ashes, then strain it
forth. It will be excellent to kill worms in infants; if put upon the naval
and left on. Qualifies the heat of the heart, if the region of that part be
anointed; provokes sleep, the temples anointed therewith.

Pomegranates.
They are convenient for the stomach, nourish little, the sweet ones are good
in long coughs. The skin or pills are excellent in all fluxes.

Myrtle-berrie.
Quenches thirst, mitigates inflammation of fluxes, helps the laxeness of the
joints, and broken bones, used in falling forth of the womb and fundament,
removes tinea, dandriffe, etc.

Cypress nuts.
They are especially used in hemor. rhoids, diarrhea, dysenteria's, pissing in
bed, and curing ruptures; a little hot and dry in the third.

Pediculi Rosarium.
Some call rose-seed, they grow up in the middle of the roses on little
strings, as it were, are of the same quality with the roses.

Currants, and Raisins.
They lenifie, loose the belly, qualify sharpness, are grateful to the
tongue, lungs and liver, and mitigate the cough; the first is usually boiled in
water, and the decoction drunk in fevers.

Elder-berries.
They purge serosities excellently, of them take lbs. being ripe, and lb j. of
Danewort-berries ripe, and press out the juice hard, after infuse them in
four times as much white wind, after they have stood for ten days, cast in j.
of cynamon, boil them at a gentle fire till a pound be wasted, after strain it
and keep it. j. of the wine drunk in the morning, dissolves the wind and
humors in dropseys, and casts them out by stool, asswages the belly, and
mitigates thirst.

Prunes.
They are cold and moist, if new, crude; they mollify the belly, specially
after meat, but they easily corrupt* therefore moderately to be used: those of
Damascus are more fit, they mitigate sharpness, quench thirst, and are good in
fevers.

The Twelfth CLASSIS. OILS.
Oil of sweet, and bitter Almonds.
The sweet lenifies, maturates, and is anodyne, used principally in the cough
with sugar candy; in pains caused by the stone and colic, drunk to ij. with
manna, or sir. de althaea. Given to children newborn, prevents torments in
the belly, with penidies, as also torments after birth; if it be used inwardly,
let it be new drawn. The bitter opens obstructions of liver, and spleen, helps
such as are deaf, helps the hardness of the sinews, and takes away spots in
the face.

Oil of Dill.
Its discussive, anodyne and comforting, it concocteth crude humors, eases
pain of the head, procures sleep, asswageth aches, strengthens the sinews,
and is good in convulsions.

Oil of Anise-seeds.
It chiefly operates upon the breast and lungs, it helps narrowness of the
breast, rawness, and wind in the stomach, all infirmities there, coming of
cold and wind, strengthens the sinews, six drops is enough at once, taken
in broth, or other convenient liquour.

Black balsom or of Tolu.
Its hot and dry, digests, discusseth, moves sweat, is chiefly used inwardly in
coughs, apostemes of the lungs, to break the stone, move urine, in immoderate
flowing of the courses, as also the whites, and to expel the dead birth.
Outwardly, it heals wounds, discusseth rupture, mollifies hardened nervs and
nodes, and is profitably used in plasters for the Rickets.

Vigo's balsame.
In wounds after digestion most excellent, its gallant in cramps of fullness,
palseys, pain of the joints, fistula's, deafness, weakness of the sinews, etc.

Oil of Caroway-seed.
Its good in wind of the stomach or guts, as colic, also in vertigo,
strengthens the stomach, provokes urine.

Oil of Cloves.
It strengthens the heart, brain, and all the vital spirits, helps concoction,
is good in cold affects of the stomach, wastes all impurities, is most
profitably used to the stomach in plasters, it sharpens the sight, and
wonderfully helps the dysentery, and other affects of the guts.

Oil of Chamomel.
It discusseth, is excellent in contusions, strengthens the nerves, asswageth
pain, good in weariness of the members, and in glisters is good for the colic
and stone, of the same quality are the oiles of linseed, nuts, and sesamuum.

Oil of cynamon.
It Is excellent good for such as are in consumptions, one drop is sufficient at
once. It moves the courses, and expells the birth, cleanses the face from
spots, and stays cold catarrhs from the head to the breast.

Oil of wax.
Its excellent in swellings, to assuage them, as also for ulcers, and is
diuretic; Dose, inward gut. iij. iiij. 5. its good in the gout, and cures all
wounds, its gallant in chops in women's paps, and elsewhere.

Oil of Fenel-seed.
It cleanses the brain of cold infirmities, lethargies, indisposition of the
body, numbnesse, want of motion, also it helps the stomach, and expells wind.

Oil of St. Johnswort.
Its excellent in green wounds, eases pain, and is good in affects of the
nerves, or if wounded, is good in convulsions, cramps, burnings, scaldings,
sciatica, as also tumors in most parts.

Oil of white lilies.
It mollifies hard tumors, asswageth pain, eases the heat of the kidneys,
used in glisters to mollify and ease pain.

Oil of earth-wormes.
It comforts the cold nerves, is profitable in pains of the joints, is good in
convulsions, cramps, as also for sinews wounded, it has some consent with the
glandulous parts, the small tumors, whereof it resolves, mollifies tumors,
and is good in bruises.

Oil of mastick.
It comforts the stomach, liver and joints, eases pain, helps hard tumors,
stays vomiting and fluxes, and roborates the nerves, of the same nature are
the oil of nardus, wormwood, only the last kills worms more powerfully, and
discusseth wind.

Oil of mints.
It wonderfully strengthens the stomach, helps digestion, stays vomiting,
procures appetite, resolves schirrus and hard tumors.

Oil of Myrtles.
It comforts the heart, stomach and intestines, stays vomitings, binds the flux
of the b^lly, if with it the stomach or navil be anointed, it helps,
concoction, and provokes appetite. The same virtue has oil of quinces, and
mastick wood.

Oil of nutmegs.
Its excellent in the colic, gut. ij. or iij is profitable in the tumor of
the spleen, is good in dysentery, in any fit vehicle, strengthens the stomach
and the bowels, its good in old ulcers, mixed with oil of chamomel.

Oil of Olives.
It heats and humects moderately, yet the older the hotter, it mollifies,
digests, is vulnerary, loses the belly, j. taken in beer hot, corrects the
dryness of the breast, mitigates the torments of the belly, loses the
urinary passages; outwardly, its excellent in glisters, hot tumors, burnings,
etc.

Oil of Roses.
It cooles and strengthens, is good against hot tumors, strengthens the
stomach, eases pain of the head, removes inflammation, and abates swelling;
its good inwardly given in fluxes, to retund the acrimony of the humors.

Oil of violets.
It cooles and increases, is anodine, cures all tumors arising from a hot
cause, procures sleep, lenifies the breast and windpipe, temperates the heat of
the reins, and is good for the hot distemper of the liver; it also eases the
pleurisy and pain of the breast.

Oil of Scorpions.
It heats, humects, mollifies, disobstructs, eases cold pains, discusseth
wind, provokes urine, and cures the suppression thereof, breaks the stone in
the kidneyes, and is profitable in the cold affects thereof, is a remedy in
cold nerves, in glisters, is excellent for the colic, as also to provoke
urine and discuss wind, anointed outwardly, it renders the passages more
open, because it loosens and mollifies the parts.

Oil of Turpentine.
Its wondrous good in cold affects of the nerves, and all diseases coming of
cold and wind, it corrects the cold affects of the lungs, as asthma's,
difficulty of breathings, etc. its good in the stone. Outwardly, it adornes the
body, takes away the print of scabs and the small pox, chops in the skin and
breasts of women, and deafness, being dropped into the ear.

Oil of yolk of eggs.
It cleanses ^he skin from tettar, ring-wormes, and helps it in other affects,
begets hair, it eases pain, is good in burnings or scalds, profitable in
malign ulcers, fistula's and chops in any part of the body, of the same nature
are oil of Tartar, oil of Elder, and of Wheat.

Oil of Foxes.
It greatly heats, attenuates and resolves cold matter, especially in the brain
and nerves, which parts it wonderfully respects and strengthens, therefore is
most profitable inconvulsions from fullness, palsy, sciatica, all kind of
gout, strengthening the joints, of the same virtue are the oils of saffron,
castory, bays, euphorbium, but this is more strong, and therefore to be used
only in small quantity, and in contumacious affects.

Oil of vitriol.
Its of most intense heat, therefore not to be used inwardly alone, but mixed
with other medicines in small quantity, viz. until they be sufferably tart, its
put to the hemorrhoids, when the pain is vehement; after its applied, the water
is to be washed with cold water, it hinders the spreading of ulcers, and lays
a good foundation of healing; inwardly, it strengthens the stomach, resolves
and attenuates crasse humors, impacted in the coats thereof, helps in
hiccough, and colic from cold, removes obstructions of the liver and spleen,
bridles the putrefactions of burning, and malignity of pestilential fevers.

Oil of brimstone.
Its most efficacious to waste the humidities of the gums and teeth, fastening
them and cleansing them from filth, cures scabs, generates flesh, cleanses
fistula's, and ulcers of the mouth, it is most admirable in the cure of
gangrenes. Inwardly, it helps all agues, given in proper vehicles, a little
before the fit; the epilepsey, if given in the decoction of piony; the cough,
if in the decoction of nettle seed or hyssope, the colic in aq. flor.
chamomel, for stoppings of the spleen, and rickets in tamaris water, the worms
in wormwood water, for fits of the mother, french pox, suppression of urine in
fit waters, for pain of the teeth, if stopped with it.

The Thirteenth CLASSIS. OINTMENTS.
Unguent. Apostolorum.
It is efficacious against wounds, and ulcers of difficult curation, as also
fistulaes, wastes corrupt and dead flesh, and restores it where its wanting, it
mollifies hardness.

Unguent. Aegyptiacum.
It vehemently heats, powerfully cleanses filthy ulcers, and old fistulaes,
removes putrid flesh, and so helps chiefly putrid ulcers, specially those of
the secret parts, it removes proud flesh, and is excellent in gangrenes, as
also in all venomous wounds and gunshot; its to be applied hot.

Unguent. Aegyptiacum Hildani.
It resists not only putrefaction, but temperates and lessens the malign
vapors, which perpetually arise from the part possessed with the gangrene, and
hurt the principal parts, its the most excellent unguent to help gangrenes,
separates the dead flesh from the living and good, and begets an eschar. Its
this, Take vert-de-greece iiij. the best honey clarified, with the juice of
wormwood, and scordium* wi. vinegar of squills vi. roach alum, sal ammoniack
a j. juices of rue, both scordiums, and jack of the hedge, curb iij. boil them
^o the consistence of honey, after add theriac optim. mithridate, each s.
camphire. j.

Unguent. Album.
Its cooling and drying, is good against ulcers, scabs and burns, as also in
itchings, in wounds, excoriations and inflammations about wounds and ulcers.

Unguent. Aureum.
In delicate bodies it dries, concocts, and generates flesh, in more robust
bodies it procures pus.

Unguent. de minio Camphor.
Its profitable in ill and old ulcers, draws on a cicatrice, and is powerful
in glutinating and generating flesh, its also good in defluxions.

Unguent. Dialthaea.
It heats, resolves, mollifies, humects, eases pain, is excellent with oil
of sweet almonds, in the pleurisy, s. of the oil, being mixed with j. of the
unguent. It also is good in stiffenesse, and pains in the joints.

Unguent. Diapompholygos.
It heals old ulcers in any part of the body, specially if mixed with burnt
alum, yea, venereal in the yard, if mixed with mercurius dulcis.

Unguent. Nicotian.
Its excellent in curing tumors, wounds of all sorts, scabs, itch, all stings,
scaldings, burns, putrid ulcers, fistulaes, redness of the face, headache,
against all infirmities of the stomach, colic, iliack, worms, hemorrhoids,
piles, and gout.

Unguent. Nutritum.
Its good for the shingles, excoriations and inflammations about wounds and
ulcers, for any thin humor in any part of the body, also against any light
scabbinesse or itching humor, whence soever it proceeds; its a good
defensative against hot humors, flowing to any ulcer; when it separates, mix
it again together.

Unguent. Populcon.
It vehemently cooles and, moistens, is most profitable in provoking sl^ep,
mitigates pains, eases the heat by fire or hot water, it asswageth the heat
of the head, and kidneys.

Unguent. Rosarum.
It strengthens the brain and stomach, for it cures the hot distemper of these
parts, and in a wonderful manner eases their pains, from thence its profitable
in all inward inflammations from hot defluxions, but espeaially of the kidneys,
its excellent in erysipelas. In fevers its good to procure sleep, and cures
galling, frettings, etc.

Hildanus Ointment for Burns.
This is profitable from whatsoever matter the burn or scald comes, yea, most
excellent, specially before it blister. Take onions js. salt white, venice
soap, each j. mix them in a mortar, and make an oinoment with some oil of
roses, and oil of sweet almonds.

Liniment. Arcei.
This is a gallant balsome, it cures wounds in all parts, and of all sorts, if
not venomous. Its good also against burnings and scaldings, but most excellent
in wounds of the head.

Unguent. Basilicon.
It digests and maturates ulcers and tumors, breaks furuncles, its good in new
wounds and ulcers, in the nervous parts and head. Its fitly mixed with Unguent.
Aegyptias. or praecipitate, the more easily and better to cleanse an ulcer.

Unguent. Martiatum Magnum.
It resolves, heats and discusseth humors, contained in cold, specially, in
nervous parts, and so eases their pain; and is very profitable in all pains
of the joints, french pox, iliack passion, is good in cramps, hardness and
tumors, but above all for pains, if mixed with some proper chemical oil.

Unguent. Ebulorum.
Its excellent in all dropsey tumors; for if with it the belly and other parts
be anointed, it resolves the wind and removes the tumor. Its excellent in
pains of the joints and gout, arising either from a hot or cold cause. Take
the juice of the roots of Danewort, ij. boil it with viij. of oil of
chamomel, to the consumption of the juice, and with wax make an ointment; when
you anoint mix with some a little vinegar or wine.

Unguent. pro Scabie.
It kills the itch, removes the scabs and pustles, whether from melancholy, or
salt phlegm. Take turpentine washed in rose water, butter washed in
plantane-water, each ij. oil of roses, j. juice of sour limons, ij. two yolks
of eggs, and quicksilver, s stir them together, and make an ointment,

Unguent. Potabile.
Its excellent to consolidate the inward bowels, and so profitable in falls
from on high, and therefore very precious. Take new butter without salt, lb
iij. madder, castory, sperma ceti, tormentil. each j. boil them in sufficient
quantity of wine, till the wine be wasted, and make an ointment.

The Fourteenth CLASSIS. FATS.
Of Geese.
Its more hot then hogs grease, therefore penetrates, and resolves more. Its
good being cast into the fundament to hinder erosions, it removes alopecia,
heals chaps in the lips; cures sounding in the ears, the cramp, and roughness
of the nerves, it looseneth the belly of Infants, especially put on the navil,
or applied to the belly.

Of Beef.
Its good in gnawing of the guts and tenesmus, helpful in the gout, and
schirrous aff^cts, and helps chaps in the lips.

Of Capons and Hens.
The first is more excellent, they have a heating, humecting, mollifying and
easing quality, is fit in pains of the ears, chaps of the lips, and pustles
of the eyelids, as also for pains.

Of Dear.
Its good in tumors, mollifies, helps wounds, eases pain, and is good for
chilblanes and sore paps, mix't with oil of St. Johnswort.

Goats.
It discusseth most strongly, helps the gout, especially if mixed with saffron,
and put to the navil, removes the strangury.

Man's.
It strengthens, discusseth, eases pain, removes contractions, smooths
cicatrices and scars after pox, and is good for those limbs that fall away.

Pork.
It lenifies, eases pain, is of common use to put in cataplasmes, makes
ointments, it is good against burns.

Bears.
It stays the falling of the hair, it heats, resolves, mollifies, and
discusseth, is good in gouts, parotis and other tumors, and heals ulcers of
the feet, being mixed with bulls grease and wax, in equal parts to make a
plaster.

The fifteenth CLASSIS. PLASTERS.
Empl. Apostolicum.
It heats, resolves, cleanses, comforts and consolidates broken bones.

Empl. Basilicum.
Its excellent in all wounds, specially of the head, and nervous parts; its
this, Take betony plaster, iij. gum. elemni dissolved in oil of r^ses,. j.
powder of roses, and myrtles; each j. mastick, calamus aromaticus, roots of
angelica, and avens, of each is. with sufficient oil of roses, and a little
wax, make a plaster.

Empl. Betonic.
Its excellent in fractures of the scull, after it covers the bones with flesh,
draws forth ossicles, as also filth from the bottom of deep ulcers, restores
flesh lost, vehemently cleanses, and the bafilic. is more powerful*

Emplast. Diapalma.
It induces a cicatrice, resolves, and together repercusseth, profitable in
contusion in the first days, being dissolved in white wind; as also in burns,
if dissolved in oil of roses, and so heals chilblanes; its good in pains and
heat of the back, caused from the stone or gonorrhea. Its a good defensative
against venomous humors, very proper in pestilential sores after broken; its
good in ruptures and fractures. That set down by Hildanus is more excellent,
which is this, Take new hogs grease xii. oil of roses the most fragrant, and
red lead, each xx. chalcitis burnt, but not to redness. burnt alum, each ij.
Dear sewet, iiij. mastick and olibanum finely powdered, each ij. make a
plaster according to Art, and stir it with spatula of palm well, new got
and juicie.

Empl. Melilot. Simp.
Its excellent in green wounds, it brings forth a cold tumor, and is most
excellent in kibe-heels and chilblanes, and mixed with gum, elemni, and ol.
hyperic. is a gallant balsom, both in incised and intused wounds.

Empl. Melilot. Comp.
It heats, humects, mollifies, resolves tough humors, removes pain, is
profitable in pleurifies, mollifies all hardnesses of the stomach, liver,
spleen, bowels, and other parts, excellent in winds of the sides, and is good
in the rickets.

Empl. Mucilage.
It ripens swellings, and breaks them, cleansing them when broken, it heats,
humects, and resolves tough and thick humors.

Oxycroceum.
It asswageth pain in the gout from cold causes, as also from all other cold
aches, it draws forth vapors by the pores of the skin, and so unloadeth the
part of vicious humors, it dissipates cold swellings, is not good in
fractures, unless at the very latter end, to comfort the part.

Empl. ^ig^^. oxye^^^.
Hildanus highly approves this, and far before the other, as having experienced
it in fractures and dislocations, the symptoms being removed, it resolves,
mollifies, and discusseth hardnesses, smootheth scars. He advises at the first
in fractures to apply the following. Take the roots of comfry, of tormental, of
bistort, each s. white bole j. pomegranate flowers, j. cypress nuts, galls,
red roses, each. ij. make of them all a very fine powder, with which mix vj of
barley meal, of which powder take as much as is needful for the broken member,
and make a cataplasme in a mortar or other vessel with posca, one egg, save
the shell, and a little oil of roses, renew it every third or fourth day, till
the symptoms be removed, and not to be feared; then apply either Vigoe empl.
or the following. Take emplast. diapalm. Hild. vj. new wax ij. colophon, and
gum. elem, each j. dissolve them at a most gentle fire, after strew in the
following powders, of comfry root, pomegranate flowers, cypress nuts, roses a.
j. mastic. olibanum, an ij. mix them together, adding sufficient of oil of
roses to make a cerate; in adults and lean, add to s. of the plaster
asteocolla p. p. j. as also every day, three hours before meat take of the
same in broth.

Paracelsus.
It eases pain, strengthens members, good in all wounds, is cautiously
applied, and is helpful in all cold aches, and ulcers.

Empl. Diachylon. Sim. comp. and cum gum.
The first mollifies hardn^sse of the liver, schirrus of the spleen, stomach
and other parts, yea, mollifies strumaes, is excellent in sore breasts and
nipples. The second is more effectual, ripens apostemes, mollifies hardness,
resolves, digests, cleanses sanies, cures phlegmons, and generates flesh. The
third is most forceable to mollify all tumors.

Empl. de Minio.
Its a fine cooling, healing plaster, is good in wounds and ulcers, also
eases pains, and asswageth tumors.

Empl. de Ran. Vig.
It heals ulcers in the french pox, when mundified; removes those pains of the
joints usual to that disease, mollifies scrophulaes, resolves hardness,
removes corns, specially if treble quantity of quick silver be mixed.

The Sixteenth CLASSIS. GUMMES, etc.
Ammoniacum.
Its hot in the second, and dry in the first, mollifies, attenuates, resolves,
digests, ripens, draws, moves the belly, is proper for the spleen; its of
special use in a^phritick pains, in resolving tough humors in the lungs, hence
profitable in obstructions of the liver, spleen, womb and stone. Outwardly
good in so^irrhus, nodes in the joints, scrophulo^s, and resolves hard tumors.
Dose inward^ from j. to j.

Benjamine.
Hot and dry in the second, incides, attenuates, is proper to the lungs,
inwardly, its special use is in affects of the lungs, catarrhes, coughs,
asthmaes; outwardly, in purging the brain by neezing, in the toothache is
chewed, in cleansing pimples of the face.

White waw and yellow.
Their proper use is to be mixed with plasters, cerates, unguents, etc.

Colophonia.
It heats and dries, its a kind of rosin, and retains its qualities, yet
less penetrable, therefore it heats and dries, mollifies, glutinates, and is
dissolved most fitly in plasters.

Gum. Elemni.
Its temperate, mollifies, digests, resolves, ripens, eases pain, is good in
affects of the head, and nerves, as also their wounds. Its profitable in
bruises of the joints, and moves urine and courses.

Euphorbium.
It has a notable quality to purge water from the whole body, but yet not
without violence. Its good in palseys, gout, cramp, old ulcers, and is
excellent in scaling bones that are foul.

Mastick.
Hot ane dry in the second, mollifies, strengthens the stomach, is used
specially in vomiting, loathing, and flux in the belly. It dulls and corrects
sharpness in purges, it represseth exhalations ascending from the stomach to
the head; some grains swallowed after meat, strengthen the head and nerves; it
helps spitting of blood and cough, mends an ill breath, draws phlegm from the
brain, being chewed and swallowed cleanses the stomach, s. boiled in three or
four pound of water, is a gallant ordinary drink in diarrhea; outwardly, its
excellent in plasters etc. for the stomach.

Myrrh.
Hot and dry in the second, opens, attenuates, maturates, discusseth and
resists putrefaction, is used especially in obstructions of the womb, to expel
the birth in the mucilage of the lungs and guts, hence helps coughs,
hoarsenesse, squinancy, pleurisy, colic, worms, diarrhea, dysentery, as
also the shaking in quartanes; outwardly, its profitable in wilde-fire,
gangrenes, tumors, in old and new wounds, especially of the head and french
pox. Dofe from s. to ij.

Olibanum.
Hot and dry in the first, used especially inwardly in affects of the head and
breast, as also in fluxes of belly and wombc, for the cough swallowed at night,
vomiting, spitting of blood, diarrhea and dysenteria, outwardly in a sum with
amber, to strengthen the brain, to dry catarrhs. It fills ulcers with flesh,
and produces a cicatrice, glutinates wounds in the head, heales chilblanes and
kibes, mixed with hogs grease. It mitigates the pains of ulcers in any part,
if beaten with milk into a liniment, specially if in the anus. Helps
opthalmiaes and redness of the eyes with rose water and women's milk, and is
good in the beginning of warts and ring-wormes, being mixed with pitch aod
vinegar. i. roasted in an apple, and with the apple eaten with sugar candy, and
drink iv. carduus-water after it, it being well covered in bed cures the
pleurisy.

Pitch.
Its good in inward bruises, it heats, discusseth, mollifies, digests and is
anodyne.

Turpentine.
Inwardly, it profits in coughs and affects of the lungs with honey; it moves
urine and stool, is proper for the liver, spleen, reins, bladder, and helps
expectoration, and helps a consumption in the beginning, draws forth the
stone, is gallant in the gout, frees the womb from ill humors, is good in
running of the reins, outwardly it moves pus, maturates and helps scabs.

Styrax Calamit.
It heats, dries, mollifies, concocts, is proper for the head and nerves, helps
a cough, hoarsenesse, catarrhs, is excellent in hardness of the womb, either
used inwardly or outwardly. Its mixed with cardiacks. It also moves the belly,
if formed into pills with turpentine.

Gum. ^ragacanth.
Its temperate, lenifies, obstructs the pores, mitigates sharpness, and
thickens, is used specially in inveterate coughs, roughness of the wind pipe,
hoarsenesse, and all distillations mixed with honey, is profitable in pains and
erosions of the kidneys, and dysentery, in broth; outwardly its good in
glisters, for the bloody flux, for redness and sharp rheumes in the eyes,
dissolved in milk, or rose water, as also for the roughness of the eyelids.

The Seventeenth CLASSIS. METALS, etc.
Crude Antimony.
It astringeth, dries, obstructs the pores of the body, wastes proud flesh,
procures a cicatrite, cleanserh the filth of ulcers, and is good in ulcers of
the eyes in* collyriums.

Arsenick.
Its used as a caustic, and mixed with other medicines in gangrenes; and to
cauterize up the vessels after amputation.

Alum crude, and burnt.
The first is used properly outwardly, yet sometimes and often by empiricks, to
remove agues both tertian and quartane, its good in the squinsey, looseness of
the palate, putrefaction of the gums and phlegmatic tumors in the feet. The
second is good for removing proud flesh, either in wounds or ulcers, and to
hinder putrefaction, as also to procure a cicatrice.

Cerusse.
It cools, binds, dries, is good in childrens gallings, keeps down
spungious flesh, mixed with plantane water, is good in excoriations of the yard
within the passage.

Calx lota.
It dries without bitings, therefore good in contumacious ulcers from the
french pox, also in burns and other ulcers that do not easily admit cure.

Crocus Martis.
Its gallant in dysenteries, lienteria, gonorrhea and the like, and outwardly
it dries wounds and ulcers, Dose from s. to j.

Gypsum.
Its restrictive, without burning, is very profitably used in unguents to
cicatrice, as also in powders to stay outward fluxes of blood.

Lapis Calaminaris.
It dries gently, cleanses, binds, fills ulcers with flesh, draws on a
cicatrice, excellent in the eyes and excoriations in children.

Lapis Causticus.
Its used properly in opening tumors, and to make issues withal.

Lapis medicamentosus Crollii.
It removes all defluxions, heales ulcers and wounds, although inveterate,
cures erysipelas, scabs, tinea and ring-wormes, is good in ophthalmiaes,
cancers, burns, and ficus, one ounce of it is to be dissolved in rain or
river-water, lb j. after filtrated, and used.

Lapis sabulosus pp.
Its good in agglutinating of broken bones, both given inwardly, and used in
emplaisters and cataplasmes outwardly. It Is prepared thus. Take of the stone,
and grind it very fine in a marble-mortar with comfry water, Dose j. in broth,
etc. to procure a cal^us. Or take of the stone thus prepared, i. cynamon, iii.
sugar, ii. make a very fine powder. Dose ii. in broth.

Lytharge of gold, and silver.
They both bind, dry, and cool, heal ulcers, cleanse, and are sarcotick.

Quicksilver.
Inwardly it cleanses the blood from defilements, especially from the french
pox, drives forth worms, facilitates birth, and in iliaca passio, yet seldom
given. Outwardly anointed, heals all kind of scabs, kills lice, resolves hard
tumors; hanged about the neck preserves from the plague, and some say from
witchery and enchantment.

Sublimate.
This is excellent good in the french pox, its laxative, diuretic and
vomitive, and an excellent corrosive medicine, it cleanses venomous ulcers,
heales malign pustles of the privy parts, mixed with unguents.

Precipitate.
Its excellent in ulcers to cleanse and remove proud flesh, especially if mixed
with burnt alum, it may be used inward in the french pox, gout, jaundice, and
other infirmities, its churlish, and need ^e well prepared, otherwise it may
kill in stead of curing.

Nihil prepared.
It cooles, dries and binds, is excellent in cancerous ulcers, and for ulcers,
and inflammation of the eyes.

Niter crude and prepared.
Crude resists putrefaction, quenches heat and thirst, cuts tartarous humors,
resolves coagulated and grumous blood, and mitigates pain. The prepared is more
powerful, and fit to be used.

Burnt-lead.
Is astringent, fills up wounds, eats away their excrescences, stays the
rheum in the eyes, is profitable against ulcers in the fundament, hemorrhoids,
and other inflammations.

Realger.
Its a thing seldom in use, its caustic, and may with other medicines be
mixed, to use after amputation.

Seif. Album.
Its used in affects of the eyes, as inflammation, ulcers, cancers, etc. in
collyriums.

Tutia prepared.
Its of the same efficacy with Nihil. p. p. put especially in the eyes, it also
induces a cicatrice.

Coporas crude, and burnt.
The crude, it heats, dries, astringeth vehemently, moves vomit, routs the
worms. Outwardly it may be used in errhines, the burnt is used in emplaisters,
also eats away proud flesh, to stay outward fluxes of blood, as from the nose
upon a wound, etc.

The Eighteenth CLASSIS. MEALS.
Of Bayberries.
Hot and dry in the third, mollifies, resolves, used especially in moving the
courses and urine, in affects of the nerves, palsy, colic, in pains after
birth, and in crudities of the stomach; outwardly discusseth tumors, and is
mixed with cataplasmes and plasters.

Beans.
Its emplaistick, cold and dry in the first, incrassates, cleanses, is
profitably given inward, for diarrhea, lienteria, etc. outwardly, it removes
Sun-burne, and all filth and spots of the skin, discusseth blackness, and is
excellent in watery ruptures, made into a cataplasme, with vinegar and water,
and a little oil of roses.

Barley.
Its cold and dry in the first, cleanses, opens, digests, mollifies, is
nutritive, and diuretic.

Lentil.
It extinguisheth inflammations, is good in scabs, gangrenes and putrid ulcers.

Loly.
Darnel growing amongst corn; its that, which being eaten, procures bad
symptoms, yet is good in cataplasms, and foment for gangrenes, etc.

Lupines.
Ease the pain of the spleen, kill worms and cast them forth; outwardly, they
cleanse filthy ulcers and gangrenes, help scabs, itch and inflammations.

Mill-dust.
Excellent in stopping bleedings.

Pulvis ad sistendum sanguinem.
It stays the blood in all wounds, dismembrings, as also bleeding of the nose.
That of Hildanus is of gallant use. For its composition, his Tract. de gangren.
or melific. chirurgiae.

The Nineteenth CLASSIS. INSTRUMENTS.
Besides the aforesaid medicines, its necessary the Surgeon should have
instruments; these are either those that belong to his box, or to the chest.
The first should never be gone without, especially to the sick; they are the
following.

Rasour.
Its very useful in wounds of the head and hairy parts, to remove the hair,
otherwise medicaments will not stick long, neither can they be kept clean about
the wound; its always to be kept sharp and free from rust; its true, Scissers
may supply, but not so conveniently; for the Rasour will do it more quickly,
clearly and neatly.

Scissers.
They are to cut the hair in want of a Rasour, as also to cut plasters and
other things necessary to be used, as Rowlers, etc.

Incision-knifes 2: one edged on both sides the point, and crooked.
They may be used, especially the latter, to open apostemes that are ripe, to
scarifie after or before cuppings, and to open fontinels in any part of the
body.

Phlegm.
Its proper use is to divide the gums from the teeth, either that they may
bleed, or else that a tooth may be taken without danger of tearing the gums, at
the other end is a round sharp point, which is to stop teeth withal.

Forceps.
Its to draw extraneous or strange bodies forth of wounds, as ossicles, hairs,
rags of woolen or linen carried in with bullets; yea, if they be of good steel
they may draw out bullets that are but superficial, the silver are too weak,
they are to pull off plasters, to draw forth things that may fall into the
ears, etc.

Stitching quill, needles and burras pipe.
All these may be included in one, the first is to preserve the needles in, and
having a round ring, yet flat made at one end, is helpful to keep the side of
the wound firm, whilst the needle is thrust through, as also so to receive it,
that its point may not injure any other part. The needles are to be either
flat-pointed, or square, they need to be six in number, of several sizes, to be
armed (when needful) with strong silk, waxed, and anointed with some balsome,
they are to stitch up wounds in the musculous parts, not nervous, not in the
face, for a dry suture so called is more proper, yet if this be wanting the
needle may supply, let your stitches be at least a fingers breadth one from
another, unless in penetrating wounds of the abdomen, then they are to be more
near; tie not your silk too hard, lest it occasion their breaking, be sure you
mind the true beauty of the part, lest your work prove deformed, 3. needles,
ordinary ones, you had need have also to make rowlers, etc. The burras pipe is
to preserve in it corroding powder, as praecipitate, turbith mineralis, burnt
alum, etc. to cast on proud flesh, appearing in wounds and ulcers.

Spatula.
Its to take out unguents out of the Salvatory, and to spread upon pledgets; it
may be useful in spreading plasters, in removing filth hardened, and to remove
plasters if the one end he crooked.

Probes.
Their use is, that being armed with fine lint, they may cleanse wounds and
ulcers, but in this we are not to be too curious, lest we also remove the
gluten sent to the wound or ulcer, to repair its decay; sometimes being thus
armed, its dipped into proper medicines, and the wounds or ulcers touched with
it. The Probe is to have an eye, by which flammula's may be drawn through a
wound, especially near great joints, as shoulder, etc. especialiy if the body
be infected with lue vener. Such a Patient I had taken prisoner near Banbury,
run through the shoulder, through which I drew a flamula, and there kept on
till he was rid of a bad companion, and then drawing it forth, speedily cured
the wound. Its also to search into wounds, ulcers, and fistulaes, but force it
not in your search too far.

Speculum linguae.
The one end is to hold down the tongue, to see the affects of the mouth and
throat, and whilst the uvula spoone is using the other end is to cleanse the
tongue in fevers, etc.

Uvula spoon.
Its properly used to hold till blown up such powder as are fit for the palate,
as salt and long pepper, etc. you are to fix the spoon right under the uvula;
it may also be used to melt medicines in stopping the hole up.

Levatory.
Is to raise up depressed bones in fractures of the scul, especially if they do
or may cause ill symptoms, otherwise nature will discharge that office. A
Directory to enlarge a straight orifice is to be had.

Lancets.
A Surgeon had need to have 2. cases of Lancets, and each case six; their
proper use is to open a vein, although they may be useful in opening apostemes
in the gums, mouth, etc. The manner how to use them you have in mellific
chirurg. Its very requisite a hone and whet-stone should be kept, to set your
lancets, incision-knives and rasours upon. Thus of instruments for the box.

The Salvatory usually has six parts; sometimes eight; if six, then they
contain Unguent. Basilicon, Apostulorum, Aureum, Nutritum, Desiccat Rub. and
Album: if instead of Album there be lin. arc. the place will be better
supplied; if there be eight rooms, then dialthaea, and Diapompholigus may be
used, for populion is unruly, it will not keep its place; and if you please,
instead of Nutritum may be Album. Hildanus would have the box to be made of
Ebony, Guaiacum, or box, rather then of any metal.

For your plasters to be ready spread, and to be in the box, they are to be of
three sorts at least, as Empl. Paracels. Diapalm. and Betonica, or Basi^icum.

Its needful that you have always, if there be service, some oil of roses to
anoint about the wound; for it eases pain, strengthens the hurt part, and
prevents ill symptoms. Thus of such instruments as he is to carry about him.

Now of the rest, and first of those used about the head; as first the

Trapan or Tresin^.
Which is used in great contusions or fractures of the scull, to make way for
concreted blood to pass forth. The Levatory as before. The Scalpra is to
scrape the cariousness off the scull. The head-saw is to remove a piece of the
cranium. The speculum oris is to depresse the tongue, in great inflammations of
the tongue and throat, as in the Squinsey. There is another of them which is to
open the mouth, in case of convulsions, etc. to pour in fit medicines. Several
instruments to draw teeth are to be ready, as pullicans paces, punches, crows
bills. Instruments for the drawing forth of bullets, as terebellum, crannes
bills, etc. A great saw to dismember with dismembring knifes and catlings,
cauterizing irons of all sorts, of all which you may see their use, in
Mellific. Chirurg. in proper chapters.

Now because amongst soldiers, by reason of mixture, and copulation, there is
gonorrhea, caruncles and suppression of urine, therefore there is to be
catheters, syringes and wax candles. In case of fracture where the hand is not
sufficient a pulley is useful, also there is to be ready splints and junckes
fitted to the fractured part; they may be made of wood, sword scabbards, bark
of trees, etc. as you may see in the chapter of fractures in the said book;
besides there is to be ready mortars, fives, skillets, glister-pipes and pot,
cups, funnel, tape, towe, spunges, leather, linen, diet-pot, spatulas,
weights, and scales, strainers, paper brown and white, pipkins, thread,
chafing dish, blood-porringers, and other. Tinder box, etc. most of which
although necessary in case of sea-voyages, yet may be supplied at quarters in
land-service; of the uses of these, besides what reason may teach you from
their very names, you may find in the book aforesaid, to which I refer you,
only some of these come under Hildanus 20. Classes.

The Twentieth CLASSIS. LINEN and BANDAGES.
Without these the chest is not complete, for although there be excellent
medicines, yet if these be wanting, especially in great and dangerous fluxes of
blood from wounds, in fractures, and dislocations, etc. they will be useless.
Now these are Rowlers, Stuphs, lint, and of it pledgets, tents to be armed with
medicines only, tents, in some cases may be made of prepared sponge, gentian
root, etc. to enlarge a narrow orifice; there is also to be bladders, both for
glisterpipes, and also in case of dismembring to be applied afterward.

A Camp-Physician or Surgeon, known well in what has been said, being
faithful, pious, watchful and expert, may in his operation preserve many
wounded, and deliver them from the danger of death. Its very probable a chest
of less general use may have in it fewer medicaments, and others supplied with
some that may be experimented by Practitioners, yet be sure of this, that such
medicines and instruments may be provided, which necessity requires to succor,
and withal exact diligence be used. For the subject to be dealt withal, is not
a beast, but man, for whom in some sense the Son of God has shed his most
precious blood, and if there be neglect it must be answered before the Lord at
the dreadful day of judgment, when all secrets shall be laid open; it will be
terrible when the Lord shall say, Thou art to be condemned for
blood-guiltinesse in neglecting thy duty, or some, both for that and
drunkenness added; by which they were either altogether unfit for the work, or
else did miscarry in its performance to the ruin of men: it may be, bearing a
more fuller representation of God on them, then themselves.

Now only a word or two, as to the preserving of the medicines, which should
have been by intent affixed at the end of every Classis, but forgot.

The purging Simples are to be put up in leather bags, except cassia, manna,
tamarinds, etc. which are to be put in gally-pots, and after all put into a
satchel, and written, upon simple Purgers.

The purging Electuaries are to be put up in gally-pots, and covered with
paper, and leather. The syrups, and waters are to be put in double glasses well
stopped, and after put in bladders, and so placed that they may not break or
move, by putting hurds in waste places. The pills are to be lap' tup in white
leather, anointed with oil of sweet Almonds, and after put in pots of earth,
or pewter. The cordial powders and Electuaries are to be put up in pots, and
boxes. The herbs, flowers, and roots are to be lap't up in papers, and after
put in bags of linen cloth severally, as the roots by themselves, etc. The
oils and balsomes, sometimes are put in glasses, put in bladders, and
otherwhile in pots of pewter, which is more secure, unless your chemical
oils, and balsome, and those are better in glasses or silver. Unguents, and
Fats are best in pots. Emplaisters, gums, wax, sewet of Deer, Cow, Goats, and
the like, which are of a solid consistence, are to be put in bladders, covered
with paper. Metals, subterraneous medicines, as vitriol, alum, etc. as also
meals are to be included in leather bags, but tutia pp. seif. alb. ost eo
colla pp. and the like, which are to be used inwardly, are to be carefully
lap't up, and put also in leather bags, and put with the cordials; let all the
bags be marked and classically placed to shun confusion, and to prevent a great
deal of useless labor. For arsenick orpiment. mercurius sublim. etc. which
are of a venomous quality, are to be all preserved so apart, that if a glass,
or what is there included in break, they may not mix with other medicaments,
and so not only corrupt them, but also endanger the killing of the sick. The
instruments are to be preserved in order, those that are edged in sheathes, the
rest to be lap't up in papers, writ upon, that so they may with ease and
without mistake be ready. And to conclude, be sure also according as you divide
your medicines, so be sure you have a Catalogue, which will be very useful.

FINIS.

