THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT BY THE REBELS IN JREland to the Lord Dillon, to
declare to his Majesty the cause of their taking up of Arms.

Together with the Copy of the Oath or Covenant which the Rebels have taken
and made, which they sent to the Lord DILLON: whereunto is added a true
Relation how some of the Rebels by Treachery have got possession of the City
of Dublin. December. 18th. 1641.

London Printed for Io: Thomas. 1641.

A Copy of the Rebels Leter sent to Lord Dillon from Sept of Ferrars.
YOur Lordship is in entreated to imparte to his Majesty the cause of our
trouble and the redress.

The Papists in neighboring Counties are severely punished: and there misery
might serve as a Beacon to us to look to our selves where our neighbors houses
are thus set on sire, and we and other Papists here in Ireland in former
troubles have been as Loyal subjects as any in his Majesty's dominions, for
manifestation whereof we send here enclosed an oath solemny taken by us which as
it received impression in our hearts shall be signed with our hand and sealed
with our blood.

2. The Statutes of 2. Eliz. against us and others of our Religion does not a
little disanimate us and the Pale.

3. The avoydance of grants of our Lands and Liberties by quirkes and quidities
of law without reflecting upon the Kings regal and real intention for
confirming our estate, his broad seal being the pawn between him and his
people.

And we conceive and humbly present unto your Lordships consideration, that in
the beginning of this commotion as it is hereditary you will be a bridge to
purge those diseases in us, and by our examples, doubtless it will begeet like
success in all other parts of this Kingdom, and it will be recorded that you
are well affected to God, King, and Country, and a salver of all the
forementioned sores.

Your Lordship is to be an humble suitor on our behaltes and of the rest of the
Papists, that out of the abundance of his Majesty's clemency there may be an
act of oblivion, and a general pardon without appeal of Statutes formerly
made to the Country, and not by Proclamation, but Parliamentary Charter in
ample manner, and this being granted, althings else will follow all which we
leave to your honors care, and we will as ever we did, and do remain

Your Lordships humbe and assurd ever to command

The Copy of the oath of the Rebels in in Jreland sent to the Lord Dillon.
I A.B. Do with firm faith believe all and singular the Articles which the
Catholic, and Apstlique Roman Church, believes and confesses and to my
dying day will by Gods grace maintain, and defend the same faith against all
Sectaries, Jews, Atheists, and enemies whatsoever with the loss of life,
goods, and estate.

Secondly, I do promise and in my Conscience sinceerly believe, and
acknowledge King Charles to be my soveragine Lord and to be King of England
Scotland France and Ireland whose previledges prerogatives and attributes
regal dye to his Imperial Crown and Royal dignity I promise and vow unto God
to maintain and defend by Gods grace against all evil affected persons what
soever be they of what Country or sect soever with the loss of life goods and
estate.

I promise and vow to be trve to my poor oppressed Country the kingdom of
Ireland with loss of life goods and estate and will endevouer to free it from
the bondage and greveious government under which it groaneth by the means of
evil officers and Ministers contrary to his Majesty's intention.

4. I promise and vow to God to wrong no Catholic nor Challenge any estate or
Lands if so they be posessed of it before the Plantation begun 1610 nor any
Lands possessed by aney of them since then so he or they purchased it for money
or otherwise.

5. I Promise and vow to make noe difference of or disparity between the mere
Irish and them of the Pale, or between the old Irish, and the new, be they of
what standing calling or quallity soever, so they be professors of the holy
Church, and maintainers of the countries liberty.

6. All these and every of the Precedent Articles I the said A.B. do promise,
vow, and swear, to maintain and cause all others, over whom I shall have
power to maintain, and defend the same by Gods grace: So help me God and all
the contents of this holy Gospel.

A true and exact Relation, how the Rebels by Treachery, got possession of
Dublin.
THe procedings of the Rebels in Ireland against the Protestants, have been so
cruel and so bloody, that they have neither spared place, nor person, but have
overrun almost the whole Kingdom, whereupon the clamor and cries of the
oppressed, and the audacious attempts of the Papists being insufferable, It was
decreed upon by the Parliament held in Ireland, that present forces, and aid
should be provided, for the defense of Dublin, which were accordingly
furnished, and placed in that City, to the number of 70. Horse, and 200. Foot,
all which were planted within the City, and were always ready if occasion
should have been offered to resist any Rebellious power, or attempts made
against the City, upon the 18. Of this Month, the Progress and strength of
the Papists being considered, It was thought convenient and agreed upon, that
the forces should be doubled, for the aid and defense of the City of Dublin;
and from this supply of strength began their misery, for when these last forces
was planted in Dublin, and had gotten sure possession of the City, they every
man most treacherously revolted, and sided with the Rebels and Papists, of
which there were great store within those walls, now were the poor
Protestants more deeply plunged then before, and to submit were worse then
death, for the daily Tyrannies expressed to their brethren, were very fair
instructions unto them, telling them what they must expect at the hands of such
Mercylesse enemies, they had as small hopes if they gave them battle, for the
number of Papists do Treble the number of the Protestants within that City. The
Rebels are hungry for their prey, and will admit no longer delay, and having
now gathered a strong head and power together, they expel first of all those
armed forces out of the City, disarming and slaying all who would not side, and
turn to their (...).

They have gotten possession, and footing of the ptime and hiefe City of the
Land, but as yet they do not exercise their accustomed cruelty to the
Inhabitants within the walls, but only to those who live in the subburds,
they are very exquisite in their Torments unto the poor Protestants, and one
unparaleld piece of cruelty, I cannot omit, the like of which, was never read
of in all those bloody persecutions, under which the protestants did groan, in
all former Ages. The Relation was made by one Master Georg Iackson, a spectator
of this inhumane and barbarous cruelty, they use diverse and strange tortures
against them, but this is most remarkable because it wants an example, It was
after this manner. Having conquered these (as they call them) Heretics, and
now taken them captives, they most cruelly makes holes in their bellies,
cutting away the skine, so that their entrails may be seen, and laid hold of,
then they fasten a Lute or Violl string unto the umbelick or Navill gut,
letting them remain thus a while, without any further Torture, after some
small space, they with whipps, and goades, force them forward, one holding by
the string which is fastened to the Navill, in this bloody manner they compel
them forward, until they have drawn forth all their entralls. And by this
means have forced them to a most wretched and miserable end, nor does their
malice stay here, but even triumphs over their dead bodies, and after a most
Impious manner Lacerate and dismember their Butchered Trunkes, endeavoring
(if-it were posible) to to make their bodies as Infamous as their Crvelties,
these are those persecutions which the professors of the True Gospel of
Christ, suffer for the testimony of a good conscience, and a good cause, which
the Lord in his good time, turn to his glory, their eternal comfort, and to
the confusion of their blood-thirsty enemies.

FJNIS.

