A COPY OF A LETTER AGAINST THE ENGAGEMENT. As it was sent to a MINISTER, who
persuaded his Neighbor that he might SVBSCRIBE.

Printed in the Year, 1650.

A COPY OF A LETTER Against the ENGAGEMENT.
SIR,
THough my knowledge and acquaintance with you be not overmuch, yet neither am
I so very a stranger as to be wholly unconcerned in what you do; for beside
that Civil respect I bear you as a Friend, I am so doubly a kin to you, both
as a Christian and a Minister, that in whatsoever you behave your self contrary
to those Professions, I cannot but resent it as a Taint and Blemish upon our
Blood: As for those who have cut themselves off long ago from our Family, and,
I fear, at last from the Body of Christ, They shall bear their own shame: But a
blush is the least we can be put to, to hear of a Member and Minister of our
Church, and a Subject of the same Kingdom (for such I conceive you profess
your self still to be) helping on, and persuading to this State-Engagement:
Though Christ must be wounded in the house of his friends, yet I am sorry any
of his Apostles should give the Blow.

For, I beseech you Sir to consider, what it can be other than a spear in the
side of Christ, to encorporate and plight ones Faith to that Power which have
slaughtered his Anointed, and raised themselves merely upon the Bones and
Ruins and of his Vicegerent. The King is, without peradventure, the greatest
Image, and clearest Representation of God amongst us; and if there be such a
Sin possible now to be committed as the Crucifying our Savior, they are
certainly not over-far from it who have killed their Sovereign.

But here you wash your hands, I believe, and protest your own Innocence and
abhorrence from so foul a wickedness; you know what S. Paul says, (...), you
know what our Law says, There are no accessaries in Treason, a little finger
brings one within the compass of having a hand in the business: And though
the fact be past and done, yet a part post, will still entitle one to the
Dolebit that belongs unto it. 'Twas our Saviors Argument against the Jews in
his time, That they had killed the Prophets, in that they allowed the deeds of
their Fathers; yet, which is very observable, not by any plain or explicit
allowance, nor very far from this: If we had been in the days of our Fathers,
say they, we would not have been partakers with them in the Blood of the
Prophets: And therefore to Subscribe, or set ones Hand to those words in the
Engagement, [Without a King] for so I remember it runs, will be a louder and
more open allowance, and so consequently bring a greater guilt upon us, in the
Blood of the King, and pulling down of Monarchy, than could be charged upon the
Jews in Abel or Zacharias. Touch nothing of these Men's, is Moses's charge to
the Congregation in the case of Corah, Lest ye be consumed in all their sins;
a Touch only, and we may be consumed in All their sins. And truly, where God
has set so manifest a Brand upon'em, by giving them over to such a deep
incarnate Sin, unheard of among all Christians, and exalted many degrees beyond
the designs, and modest attempts of Corah and his Covenanters; it is to a true
Believer, who does not fancy with Epicurus, that God is an Idle spectatour of
what is done here below, as importunate a Call, and warning to Touch nothing of
these Men's, nothing especially of their Contracts and Engagements, as if the
Earth should immediately open and swallow them up.

Sir, if there be any Aguments to salve this (...) now, and make firm ground
and footing of the Engagement for all this, they must be of another manner and
mould than any I have yet met with; however, leaving this with you, such as
they are, I shall not think it altogether lost labor to examine them.

1. And first by True and Faithful, say some, we only promise that we will
sit still and be quiet: I Answer, this is first an interpretation barely of our
own, and may not therefore be relied upon as the sense of the Engagement;
which, in that it is put in the same words to us, and their whole Army seems
to require, something, at least, of Acting for them, else 'twould be no
security for 'em at all, if the Soldiers, as being engaged, only, by this, not
to fight against them, might lawfully sit still, and suffer the King to enter
without striking a Blow. But then secondly, to be Faithful here, and sit still
when the King may, perhaps, Summon us to show our selves for him, is a breach
doubtless of our Faith and Truth in the Oath of Allegiance, where those words
are explained, not to mean only a sitting still, a not rising up against the
King and his Heirs, but that we will defend and preserve them with the utmost
hazard of our Lives.

Two Replies may may be started, I foresee, against these two Answers. To the
first, it will be said, what obligation soever, these words True and Faithful
may lay upon the Army to be active and fighting for them, in that they are
Soldiers, and it is their Profession; yet to others it must be understood
only, and by the same Reason within the limits of their own Calling; which is,
not to be Soldiers, or Fighting Men, but Farmers, Tradesmen, Lawyers,
Ministers, and the like. And therefore not fighting, or sitting still; as to
such, is all that is imposed, or can be pretended to be imposed upon them by
this Engagement.

1. Sir, whatsoever may be said of Ministers, whose hands seem tied up indeed
by the Apostle from being strikers, and very expressly by the Laws and Canons
of the Church, yet for Laymen, all Laymen whatsoever, it is very consistent
with their Vocation, and within the limits of their Calling to be Soldiers:
Soldiery and Fighting being not any particular Trade to be engrossed, or taken
up by such or such a Company, but the general calling of all under Authority,
in relation, and for the defense of that Authoriuy they are under, when they
are so summoned to it. A Soldier of Fortune is, I confess, as unfortunate a
piece as any the Christian world groans under; and to think, because I have
skill and dexterity to slay Men, I may therefore lawfully, as by my Calling,
draw my Sword, and engage in the wars and quarrels of other Princes, on that
side, at least, that seems fair and just unto me; is beyond the bounds of my
Christian Calling to run before I am sent, for who has made me a Judge or a
Divider? and not having, as all this while, it is supposed, I have not, any
Grant or Commission from that Authority, which only under God has lawful power
over my Life, not I my self; if I am killed, thus fighting, I am foully
accessory to my own Death; and if I kill, whatever the Enemy be, (for sure it is
possible to commit murder upon a Jew or Turk) I am dangerously guilty of
Murder: Authority is the only Call that can make Fighting to any man a lawful
Calling; and having that, no particular Calling whatsoever (the Ministry only
excepted) does so exempt, or free a Man, as he may not lawfully, and in some
cases ought to Fight. But say it should never come to this, yet True and
Faithful will oblige us, in the mean time in our particular Callings and
Professions, to govern our selves by their Laws, and in all things to
acknowledge and promote their Authority; the Lawyer at the Bar, the Judge on
the Bench, to make their Acts the Standard for Aequum and Iniquum, and all of
us to serve at their Courts and Assizes, to submit with cheerfulness to their
Award, and Sentence, as of Right and Justice, to be aiding and assisting to
them in our several places, if need be, for the execution of it upon others:
And so the Minister in his Calling to observe their Fasts, to rejoice with them
before the Lord, on their Victories and Days of Thanksgiving, to pray for
their Success; and being sent into the Desk or Pulpit by them, upon Balaams
arrand, Come curse me Jacob, and come defy me Israel, to Curse and Pray
against the King from thence, and all that take part with him.

To the second, wherein we urge it, even in that first qualified sense, of
sitting still, if True and Faithful, should mean no more then so, to be a
Breach; however, of our Faith and true Allegiance sworn to the King and his
Heirs; your neighbor possibly has never taken that Oath, and so has no
obligation upon him, by that it may be said against this Engagement.

2. It is very clear, that by the Law, he ought to have taken it, and 'twill be
then as clear, among all Casuists, that no man acquires any privilege by his
own failing and default: And therefore, though he have not taken the Oath, he
is not exempted or execus'd, by this (because he ought to have taken it) from
that Duty and Allegiance required by it. But, I answer further, every man is
brought forth into the world by the Providence of God, in the same terms of
freedom or subjection wherein their Father that begat them then actually
stood. Thus the son of a Bond-servant, of old, was born a Bond-servant, and S.
Paul tells us of himself, that he was Freeborn; not absolutely free he does
not mean, so as to be absolved from all Obedience and Subjection to Authority;
for he makes his appeal to Caesar, and so we have him standing afterward at
Caesar's Judgment seat, where says he, I ought to be judged; but freeborn, as
to some certain Privileges and Immunities, in which, that he was a Citizen of
Rome, above the Bond-servants. Whence it appears evidently, that our Actual,
Personal assent is not at all necessary to make us Subjects, for that we are
born so; and withal, that we are bond or free, born subject; that is to say,
in the same degree, with the same burden of duty and obligations upon us,
greater or less, as lies upon our Parents when they beget us. And therefore
our Fathers taking the Oath of Allegiance does make the duty and burden of it
descend upon us, though we do not take it, or were not obliged by the Law to
take it in our own persons: So Livi is said to pay tithes in the Loins of his
Father Abraham: And Saul is accounted to have made that Oath to the Gibeonites,
as is plain by Gods avenging his breach of it on seven of his Posterity, which
yet was made by his Forefathers the Israelites, and their leader Joshua many
years before he was borne.

Sir, from our former instance of S. Paul, give me leave to observe unto you
one main fallacy that has been put upon us; for, because we are in some records
and passages of our Law, acknowledged by the name of Freeborn Englishmen,
and the Freeborn people of England, hence diverse pregnant apprehensions have
taken advantage to tell us, because Freeborn, Ergo, the Dominion and Authority
is doubtless in our selves, and our Govornours no longer to be looked upon as
such; but while they proceed according to our Law and Dictates, and to be
accountable and punishable by us therefore, in case they shall transgress.
Whereas S. Paul greater in Power, as freeborn as M. Lilburne himself, thought
not himself priviledg'd by this to bring against them a railing Accusation,
much less to rise up against the Ruler of the People, though Ananias, an
inferior Magistrate, sitting to Judge him according to Law, he commanded him
to be smitten (and sure if any thing could have made it lawful, Blows would
have done it, and from an inferior Magistrate, and in his own defense, and in
a case of Religion) contrary to Law. But to return to the Engagement.

2. The second Argument is, we may Subscribe, so it be without a purpose to be
obliged by it. He that shall urge this, acquits himself fairly, I must needs
say, to be no Heathen: Poor ignorant men, they lived in mere darkness from
this new Light, so absolutely destructive indeed, to all society and commerce,
so directly opposite to the Being and Creation of Man, who is (...), that
unless we can believe, Christ took not on him the nature of Man, but of some
other thing which I dare not mention; and that he came to destroy the Law of
Nature, and common Honesty, to condemn and abrogate all that was
praiseworthy, or of good report among us, unless we can take Machiavels
writings for Quintum Evangelium in opposition to the other four, we cannot hope
to be Christians upon these terms: But then, it would be considered withal,
how glibly so ever a Lie would go down with us, a solemn and deliberate Lie;
yet to enter into this Engagement, does necessarily involve us in Perjury,
whether we perform it, or no; if we keep it, it is then a Breach, to be sure,
of our Oath of Allegiance, or, though we do not, but resolve against it: Yet
the very Subscribing to the Commonwealth of England as it is established
without a King, is a plain denying and going against that Sovereignty, in the
King and his Heirs, over this Realm, which we swore, and acknowledged in the
Oath of Supremacy; and we are ipsissimis Verbis, though it should never come to
ipso facto, formally and directly perjured. An assertory Oath, for such is the
Oath of Supremacy, (if it can be broken at all a part post) being violated,
doubtless, by saying, or subscribing against it, as a promissory Oath; for
example, the Oath of Allegiance, by not doing it, or doing against it, though
we should not de novo, Swear against either of them.

Sir, my Answer to the second Reply in the former Argument will, if you please
to apply it, ease me of all Consideration here, whether your Neighbor have
taken this Oath of Supremacy, or no.

3. But then thirdly, it is said the King is not able to protect us, and
therefore we are freed from our Allegiance and Subjection to him. We know what
they were who said, Can this Man save us? And the doom that followed upon,
Nolumus hunc Regnare, because their Lord was gone (not driven, which will make
our Sin, and our Doom, much the heavier) into a far Country. To lay the
absurdity therefore at their own doors, if their servants should rise up
against them, and cast them out of the Family, would they suppose it
reasonable, or lawful, in their Wife to engage her self to be True and
Faithful to another Man? Truly this Objection might yet carry some seeming
force with it, if we were to be subject, namely, for wrath; which, God knows,
we have no great occasion to fear, and not also for Conscience sake if our
obedience were terminated in the King, and not directed further by the Apostle,
as to the Lord, and not to Man; Or, if we could say, this Lord is not able to
protect us, will it be lawful for us to deny or forswear Christ because he
shows himself to us in much weakness, and under the Cross? Or, is not a Son
to Honor, and acknowledge his Father because he is poor and impotent? And sure
'twould be full out as strange, that our natural and sworn Duty of helping the
King should be avoided by this Reason, because he has no power to help himself.

4. The fourth Plea therefore is, that what we do, is in Loyalty and pure
affection to the King, that we may preserve our selves and our Estates for his
Service: To do evil that good may come of it will be so far from justifying
us, as it does justify our Damnation, for what is this, but to be wiser than
God? and to seek out the seeming failings of his Providence, with our own
Prudence? He has no end, says the son of Syrach, of a wicked Man, and can
doubtless, bring about his Ends, and work out his Glory, though we should keep
our selves within the bounds that he has set us: Better the Ark should totter
to the ground than Vzzah stretch forth an unlawful hand to hold it up.

The sum of the whole Argument is briefly this: It is more probable and we
are better able to restore the King without God, than God without us.

5. In the fifth place it is objected, that by taking this Engagement we do
but the same thing, as in paying Contribution: Truly I am not over-forward to
be a party or stickler, so as to contribute, in the least, for Contribution:
And to him that makes this Objection, and shall apprehend the same
unlawfulness in submitting to Taxes, as is evident in Subscribing the
Engagement. I shall advise, and propound it, as the only safe way to keep
himself from both, and not from that sinfulness he has indulged to himself,
perhaps in one, if he think, or doubt it to be Sin, frame an Argument from
thence to engage himself in a second. But, I must confess, there is, to my
apprehension, a very manifest difference between these two: My paying of
Contribution being but Actus simplex, a bare single Act, without any Tie or
Obligation upon me, as in the Engagement for hereafter: And you know many
things be lawfully and commendably done, pro hie and nunc, here, and at this
time, which by change of the Circumstances, and at another time, will be
utterly unlawful; and I may not therefore, be engaged, or oblige my self unto
them. But then Secondly, paying of Taxes or Contribution is none of mine own
Act; and I cannot be thought to be any more accssary to the assisting and
maintaining the present Usurpation, by this, then I might be thought Accessory,
to the robbery of my self, and the enriching and strengthening of Thieves,
against Honest men, when being assaulted by a strong Force for my Purse upon
the Highway, I put my hand in my Pocket and deliver it: This will not be the
case now in the Engagement, which however I am under a strong Temptation
indeed, must yet be interpreted my own Act, if I take it since no Force could
put it upon me; they could not have my promise unless I gave it them, nor
could I possibly be engaged but by my self; whereas in the case of Taxes, as
in that of being robbed on the Highway, my Money would have been taken from me,
and the Thieves enriched and made strong by this means, do I what I could: And
therefore I may be allowed here it, as a piece of sinlesse Prudence, not to
enrage them needlessely against me; and for the saving my Life, and the rest of
my Estate; as suppose a little parcel of Gold about me, which by not provoking
the Thieves to strip me I go clear away with, when as the very same
considerations will make nothing at all for the Engagement; since, they are
not, or cannot be urged, this saving my Life, or Estate, to make the assisting
and enriching of Rebels by my contribution lawful, but only Prudent: the
lawfullnesse, or sinlesnesse rather, being first supposed, in this, (which can
by no means be said of the Engagement) that it is not in my power to prevent
it, or keep my Money from them.

6. From hence we shall be readily able to draw out an Answer to the Objection
of Force, whereby our subscription is pretended lawful, and excusable, in
respect to the great Fear, and strong Temptation that is upon us: for, we fall
not here, God be thanked, within the reach, or power of Force: And, as to
Force, I can no more be forced to promise my fidelity to these Men, than I can
be forced to deny, or renounce my Savior; which, if a strong fear might be
interpreted force, for force I shall grant does excuse; S. Peter lavished away
abundance of Tears to no purpose. The unequalnesse of these two sins comes
not within the case; for, as to force, they are the same: and supposing them
both unlawful, and in genere mali, I am, without peradventure, to lay down my
life, rather than be guilty of either. To commit a Venial sin, say the Romish
Doctors, thinking it to be Venial it becomes Mortal: And let the Engagement
be supposed as diminutive, and minute a Transgression, as Art can make it, or
your own heart could wish it, it will be no longer so when it is presumptuous.
He that is unjust in the least, our Savior tells us, is unjust also in much:
And truly, they that upon these terms and qualifications only, think fit to
take the Engagement, acknowledging it otherwise, and of it self sinful, I
should very much wonder at their niceness, to find them stick at
Nebuchanezzars Image, when the force is greater, the Furnace heated seven times
hotter; and, while their Bodies bow down to Worship, their Souls may be as
upright in them, as their hearts are firm to the King, and their former sacred
Oaths, and Obligations, while they set their hands to the Engagement. Fear,
though it should be of that (...), even of death it self, will no more excuse
me from Sin, than that other passion of Love, which is stronger than death,
would excuse one from all the adultery and fornication he should commit, where
he were so in Love. And as to a strong temptation, if there be any virtue in
that, it is the only best Argument I have heard, I must needs say, for giving
over the Lords Prayer; for 'twould be a very inconsiderate and ill advised
Petition to pray against Temptation, as we do there, Lead us not into
Temptation, if the Temptation, the very being led into this temptation, be the
same thing which we Pray for; so immediately in the next words, But deliver us
from evil.

7. But, must we be Martyrs, say some, for the King and Government? if it were
for Christ, we knew what we had to do, rather suffer many deaths than
Subscribe, or set so much as a little finger against him. Here is the mistake
which runs through every Argument, remember what our Savior says; In as much
as ye have not done it unto these, ye have not done it unto me. For obedience
to the King, in that he is the Minister of God, is to be interpreted as direct
an obedience to Christ our King, as our Charity to the Poor, in that they are
his Members, will be interpreted, and rewarded, as done unto himself; which,
yet, will not give me a liberty of obeying the King in unlawful things, no
more than in Alms to the Poor, (for so unlawful things are none of mine) I
may take liberty to steal from another. And therefore, though the King should
be willing, and desire we would subscribe the Engagement, we may not do it for
all that, because I am commanded by a higher Law, which therefore the King
cannot dispense with; not to dissemble with a double heart, not to let my mouth
speak guile, much less my hand attest it. Or if (to answer that exception with
a wild supposall) he should be willing that we should perform it too; Really
abdicate his right of Sovereignty over us, accept of a place in the Council of
State, and be one of the Commonwealth; yet when that is done, if it could be
so done, there is still a Noli me tangere, upon the Engagement, in as much as
the Right of the Crown, and the Sovereignty of a Monarch, reverts immediately
upon his abdication of it to the Duke of York; and so, as long as there are any
of the Blood to lay claim unto it, for that is the nature of an Hereditary
Kingdom; and that this is such, appears most demonstrably to any man, by our
Oaths taken to the King, and his Heirs: It Is not therefore that we are Martyrs
for the King, or Government; for supposing we were free, and at liberty to
choose, though we should infinitely prefer Monarchy before a Commonwealth, and
this King by what we have heard of him, and for that he comes of so good a
Breed, before any other, yet not perhaps at the price of our Lives. A King and
Monarchy are but by accident in our Case, it is to free our selves from Blood
and Perjury, and in regard of the Oath of God, to avoid Sin, that we think it
fit to embrace sufferings, and submit our Heads to the Axe, rather than set our
Hands to this Engagement.

8. There are some you may meet with perhaps, have a fine way yet to mince the
matter, and make it lawful enough, as being but a Paroll, which no body
therefore needs to Scruple at. I answer, a Paroll may be drawn, doubtless, in
such a Form, and upon such Terms, as 'twill be unlawful to sign it or oblige
my self by it; And therefore the liker it is to such a Paroll, it is but the
more like to be unlawful. Yet every Paroll I conceive, will differ mainly from
the Engagement, in that Eo Nomine as it is a Paroll, it presumes and
necessarily supposes we are Enemies between whom such a Paroll is given and
received, for there is no Paroll passes between friends: Whereas the Engagement
has no such distinguishing note upon it, but being taken by themselves and put
to all men, promiscuously, and indifferently, in the same terms it must be
looked upon, not as a Paroll to Enemies, but as our absolute Matriculation and
employing our selves with them; and I am as very a Commonwealths man by it, if
I take it as Mr. Martin, or the greatest Republican of them all. But then
Secondly, giving my Paroll to the Enemy, is therefore lawful, because by
giving of it, I give nothing, give nothing to his Authority, nor Secondly, give
my self at all out of my own Power; since by rend'ring my self again, at
any time a Prisoner, (which is always in my Power, and which it is supposed I
would do, when it were better and honester, and therefore more Eligible for me
to do so) I am, where I was, before my Paroll, and under no Tie or Obligation,
not to do 'em the utmost disservice I am able, whereas the Engagement, being
limited to no time, and entered into upon no Conditions, or Capitulations, (I
wonder what there is in it now like a Parol) is in the mildest sense of it, a
public disclaiming and denying the good Cause for which I suffered, and a
disavowing my Allegiance for ever. For no man can suppose, that if I should
bring them their Engagement, the next day after I have taken it, professing not
to be Engaged by it, I were any more discharged from the Obligation of it by so
doing, then I could be free of my Bond which I Sealed yesterday, by saying to
day I would not be Bound by it, or, that they were to take such a discharge for
good payment: Ipse videris, would be the Answer, as from the Jewish Council to
Judas, so to us, from the Council of State, what is that to us? See thou to
that. But then Thirdly, however we could dispense with the time, yet that it be
mutual and Conditional, is so necessary to the Nature of a Paroll, that after
it be given and accepted on both sides, the Obligation on either side holds no
longer, then while the other side performs the Conditions. As for example, if
I should be let out of the Tower to walk in London, upon my Paroll of doing no
differvice to the State, and be then seized on as a Spy, and clapped up in
Newgate, My Paroll lays no Tie upon me that I shall not break Prison now, as
soon as I can, and do what lies in my power against them: So on the other
side, they allow me the Liberty of the Town, upon my Peroll, as before, of
doing no disservice to the State: if I should make use of this Liberty, to lay
a Train for the blowing up of the Council of State, I could not plead my
Paroll, or suppose they were Engaged by virtue of that to save me harmless. I
can see nothing of this now in the Engagement, but if they should clap me close
Prisoner, tie me neck and heels together, Sequester and sell my whole Estate,
as soon as ever I have taken it, or use any extremity upon me, This would not
quit me at all from having the same Obligation, of being True and Faithful to
them, as if they did not so use me, or impose any hardships upon me, that the
Cavaliers by their taking it, may be unbewitch'd, perhaps out of their five
Miles Circle, will be nothing to this purpose; for so perhaps they may not, sub
Judice lis est, Their Cause comes, but then to scanning, and they have little
reason to assume over hastily, since their Judges are so sufficiently bribed
against them; However it should fare with them, they could accuse no body of
dealing falsely with them in relation to this Engagement any more, then because
the Law says, he that has an Estate of forty pounds a year, above the degree
of a Yeoman, may be chosen Knight of the Shire, for that Country where he
lives, a Gentleman of such an Estate should complain, he had Injury done him;
and it were against the Law, if he were not sent up to serve in Parliament at
the next Session.

9. A pretty Sullen kind of Argument there is, in the Mouths of some men,
it is a Snare, a trap merely intended say they, to catch our Estates, and
therefore whatever becomes of us, as long as we can help it, they shall not
have their Ends upon us, or gain any thing by the Bargain: Here I am put to
turn the Tables indeed, and prove Advocate, for the Council of State; they
had no such design, good Men, I dare promise, to wrong you of a Farthing, for
if Money or Estates had been the english of the Engagement, it would without
peradventure, have been put into an Oath, drawn up in such gross, open, and
Notorious Terms, (which they have endeavored we see by True and Faithful, to
disguize and sweeten what they could) as like a Gorgons head might affright and
appale every one at the sight of it, and that no Man might any way be deluded
or deceived into it. Nor secondly, could they hope any would be, or think
themselves greatly obliged by This, to be a whit more True, or more Faithful
to them. And therefore to unfold the Riddle, it is a draught and Copy of the
same Policy, which Balaam advised the King of Moab against Israel, and while
they can Engage the Cavaliers with the rest of the Kingdom to their Sin, to
Commit Whoredom as it were, with the Daughters of Moab, prevail with 'em to
worship their Gods, and the Commonwealth which they have set up, it is the only
sure weapon that can prosper against so good a Cause, or secure and prolong
these Men in their unjust possession.

10. There is yet one way more of taking the Engagement, which may seem to be
untouched in all we have hitherto said, and that in Seeming to take it,
procuring and producing a Ticket as if we had Subscribed. Sir, I need not tell
you how much this Seemingnesse and dissimulation is opposed, to that pious
simplicity which becomes Christians. Without Guile, being a maine necessary
qualification, to denominate us True Israelites. Nor secondly, how besides the
certainty bringing guilt upon him whom we tempt to this Ticket, we cannot
dissemble it so well, but it will lay us open to the sin of Scandal in respect
to our Brother, and give the Adversary occasion to blaspheme and cast out our
Religion to pride, and harden themselves in all their Impieties, while they
shall see the design of their Souls accomplished by this Means, and their
Bramble Government set up. And whereby they shall be better able, and upon more
reasonable Terms to justify all those after Injuries, and Oppressions, and
Persecutions, they shall think fit to bring upon us, if we should not rise up
with them hereafter in every thing. Since we shall now seem to be under some
Tie and Obligation to them, and our pleadings of Conscience, with good show of
Conscience, may be rejected by them, in that we have given them just Cause to
believe, it is not Conscience, when we so hold off, but Stomach, a perverseness
only and stubbornness in our Spirits; nothing being supposeable of a more
Cammell Temper, in relation to our Oaths and Duties, (if such had indeed any
True power with us) then this Engagement, which now we shall seem, and that is
the same thing to whom we shall so seem to have taken down and swallowed.
Ecclesiastical Story tells us what severe penance was inflicted on the
Libellatici in the primitive Church, and we have a famous example you may
remember, in the 2 of Macchab. of old Eleazar a Jew, when being Commanded by
Antiochus, to eat Swines flesh, which was against their Law, he refused; and
his friends and acquaintance, in much favor to him, bringing him other Lawful
Meat, only, that by eating of this, he might seem to Antiochus to have eaten
of the unlawful, and so save himself from Death. He willed them straightway
to send him to the Grave, (which they accordingly did with extreme Torments)
rather then he would stain the Holy Law, and the Excellency of his Ancient
years, or lay a stumbling Block in the way of his Brethren through his
Hypocrisy. But there is a further and much stronger Argument in our Case,
against this artificial Dawbing and Dissimulation, for that there is a
Dissimulation in our very Dissimulation; and it does not really as it does
pretend, deliver us from the Engagement. For, the formallity and essence of
being Engaged, does not stand in writing my Name, or having my Name written in
a Paper, (a Eleazar indeed could not be defiled with Swines flesh, but by
eating it) but in my assent and owning it, my taking it upon me, before those
to whom I am required to Engage, by any way of expression whatsoever, though
but with a Nod of my Head (whence annuere to nod, signifies to assent) if they
should tell me before hand, this should be interpreted, and taken by them, as
the sign and assurance that I were Engaged with them. (...): And therefore the
producing, and showing a Ticket, which way soever we come by it, is in figures
at least the same thing, as writeing my Name is in words at Length, really and
in good Earnest taking the Engagement.

11. But then in the last place, these may, for ought we know, say some, be set
in Authority over us by God, having outed the King, and gained the Dominion by
strange and admirable successes. I answer, a wrong can never beget a Right, and
when there cannot be a lawful War, as in Subjects against their Sovereign,
there can never be a Rightful Conquest. Jus Victoriae, in those that are the
stiffest Assertors of it, does always suppose, Justos Adversarios, as between
England and Spain, Spain and France, and the like: But then, to conclude from
that success wherewith God has been pleased to harden, and give them up to
this height of Impiety, that he does thereby invest them with any Just power or
Authority over us, were to overthrow the whole Economy under the Gospel, and
to fight for Mahomet against Christ. Nothing can go beyond his Majesty's own
words, in his Divine, and most incomparable (...). The wind which fills the
Pirates sails (when there is nothing at all of Man in it, and so more
immediately the hand of Heaven) does not at all justify their Pyracy, or give
'em a right to those ill-gotten goods they are possessed of, though it bring
'em save into the Harbor. If it be not of God, says Gamaliel, it will come to
naught: But because we cannot promise our selves so long a time to make the
experiment, and may not girt up God to our short moment; our Savior has given
us a much surer rule in his, ab initio: if it were unlawful in the beginning
if they came not in by the door, by lawful and just ways, but have Climed up
some other way, by Perjury, Treason, Rebellion and Regicide, though they are
got in, and seized upon the Regalia, the Sheep-hook and the Scrip, pretending
by these Ensigns to be (...), they are yet no other then Thieves and Robbers;
and the Sheep owe them neither Audience, nor Obedience,, neither to hear, nor
follow them. I need not be told this was meant by our Savior, especially in
relation to False Teachers; for, however it serves to prove what I only urge it
for, that a violent, and forcible, and injurious Entry; however it succeeds, is
not to be looked upon as Gods Providence, for then climing up would be the same
thing as coming in by the door. God only can be said to transfer, or
translate a Kingdom (since he Rules not immediately among us, as among the
Jews) when his Providence so disposes and orders, that by the Laws and Rights
among Men, it is removed to another.

Sir, these are all the Objections and Evasions my memory could readily supply
me with; and though, I believe, some of them might have spared, yet not knowing
which was your Achillium whereon you ground your persuasion, I could not tell
which to omit: As for my Answers, I have not every where marshalled 'em into
that Posture and Array, as to fight 'em at best advantage; for, considering to
whom I write, you would be able to improve 'em in your own thoughts, I knew, to
their full force and importance. And, when that is done, and you are convinced
of the utter absolute unlawfullnesse of this Engagement, 'twill be no new task,
I trow, to fortify you against the losses and sufferings, may light upon you
perhaps in this behalf: For, beside the Reward and Glories of another life,
there is so much Epicurisme and Voluptuousness: let me mind you in the Feast of
a good Conscience, as the whole world and the fullness thereof, cannot be
cook't out into any Comparison, or Resemblance with it; and the hundred fold
return even in this life with Persecutions, is as particularly and expressly our
Saviors promise, (if we can count him faithful that has promised) as in the
world to come Life Everlasting. But I humbly crave pardon for my
over-importuning you in this unnecessary length, and beseech you to accept it,
with the same Right* hand of Charity, and Goodwill, as it is presented to you. I
have my Ends, if it may take you off from being any offense, or scandal in
this matter: And as not to bring the Kings Blood upon you by listing your self
in the Engagement; so nor your Peoples Blood, by holding your peace when need
requires; It is no time to provoke God when his wrath is already in so high and
hot displeasure gone out against us. Take thy Censer and go quickly, say
Moses, that's our proper Vbi, between the living and the dead, and in Joel
between the Proch and the Altar, saying, Spare thy people O Lord, and give not
thine Heritrge to this reproach, which I shall no longer divert you from, then
to renew my suit for your fair and friendly Interpretation of what is meant,
and offered you in this Letter, though you should suppose it from Dead Elijah.

Postscript.
SIR,
HAving been so long in my Letter, I am obliged to be a little longer, and to
shoot away one Arrow more to find the rest, in case they should be all lost
perhaps, as to the Mark I aim at; and your neighbor, while this is coming to
his hands, already engaged. Truly Sir, that there will, then, lie an Engagement
upon him, must be granted on all hands: And because I shall suppose, by what
has been said, it will be very clear for Repentance; that Repentance is that
duty he is, now, so solemnly engaged to by this Subscription. My only next care
is, to warn him from splitting twice on the same Rock; and that this Secunda
Tabula prove not a worser ruin, and breaking to him than his former
Naufragium. And therefore, however, True and Faithful, betrayed him before, as
with a Sirens Song, to be interpreted of quietness only, and sitting still;
He must remember to sail another way, to turn the quite contrary ear unto it in
this Engagement, and duty of Repentance; to be True and Faithful here, must be
understood to be Active and Operative, not to sit still only, and be sorry for
what he has done. He that sits down here, will never come at True Repentance.
No! Sorrow, says the Apostle, works Repentance; works, as is well observed
by Bishop Andrews, and therefore is not it, unless a thing can be said to be
the cause of it self: it is here as with Faith dead without works, so Repentance
without Fruits, a Repentance only to be Repented of: Our Saviors words are
very plain, To whom much is forgiven, he loves much; and which way soever we
expound them, either much forgiveness, upon much Love, or much Love upon much
forgiveness, they are not to be parted: And he that does not go much higher
after his much Sin, show himself further for the King, and the Laws, than he
did, or was obliged to do, before this Engagement; has nothing to do with
much Forgiveness, the sin of his Engagement lies still upon him, and he is yet
in the Bond of his Iniquity.

FINIS.

