A Copy of a Letter sent from the Committee at Lincoln, to the House of
Commons, directed to the Speaker of the said House, and subscribed with the
names of the said Committee.

Die Sabbati 4. Iunii. 1642.

Likewise an Order from both Houses of Parliament, concerning the Ordering of
the Militia, directed to the Deputy Lievtenants of the respective Counties
throughout all England, and Dominion of Wales.

Ordered that this be Printed and Published.

Hen. Elsinge, Cler Parl. D. Com.

Also Exceeding Joyful News from York.

With the RESOLVTION Of the Protestant Gentry and Commonalty of CHESHIRE,
Concerning their Petition lately presented to the Kings Majesty at York.

London, Printed for J. Horton, 1642. June 6.

Die Sabbati 4. Junij. 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the
Deputy-Lievtenants of the several and respective Counties within the Kingdom
of England and Dominion of Wales, that are not Members of the House of
Commons, be hereby required and enjoined to be present at the days, and places
which are, or shall hereafter be appointed by the Lord Lievtenants, or their
Deputies, for the Training, Mustering, and Euer^ising of the Inhabitants of the
said Counties, according to the authority given unto them by an Ordinance of
both Houses of Parliament. And it is further Ordered, That all Deputy
Lievtenants, as well those that are Members of the House of Commons, as others,
shall give such dispich, by preparing of Warrants, Commissions, or Letters, and
subscribing of the same as the service shall require; And that such as shall
refuse, or neglect so to do, that their Names be certified unto us by their
fellow-Deputies, or any one of them that shall or do perform the said Service.

And it is further declared, that it is the intention of both houses, fur the
better encouragement of so good a Work, so much conducing to the safety of his
Majesty's person and Kidgdomes that some of their Members at the times and
places appointed, or to be appointed for the execution of the said Ordinance,
shall be sent down to give their Personal attendance upon the said Service.

Ordered to be printh^. Hen. Elsinge Cler. Parl.

The Resolution of the Protestestant Gentry and Commonalty of Cheshire.
SUch have been the fears and distractions of the County of Chester, by
reason of the innumerable and indeed unsufferable assemblies and tumultuous
meetings of the Papists, and others that are Newtralls, or as we may term
them, lukewarm both in Loyalty and Religion, that the Gentry and Commonalty of
the Protestant Party were constrained to draw themselves to a head, and set
down their Resolution, protesting to to perform these two particulars.

First they resolved to be Loyal to his Majesty, according to their Petition
lately presented to his Majesty at York, by the Gentry and Commonalty of of the
said County.

Secondly, they resolved to be obedient to the Parliamen.

Withal desiring that all true hearted Protestants, that desire to express
themselves Loyal Subjects to his Majesty, and obedient Servants to the
Parliament, would with unite consent take the same Resolution.

The manner and Form follows in as true and as exact a manner as could be
gathered by one that was a spectator when the Oath was taken, and Resolution
declared to the high Sheriff of the said County.

First they resolved and sollemnely Protestest to declare themselves true and
loyal Subjects to his Sacred Majesty, and to his heirs for ever.

Next to maintain and to defend the Protestant profession in all points
whatsoever, agreeable to the Church of England, against all Sects and Schisms,
against all Papists, Donatists, Arminians, and all other Hipocriticall
Doctrines whatsoeves, all so to maintain the just Prerogative of his Majesty's
Regal Authority, against all opposers whatsoever.

Secondly, they Constantly and with a joint consent resolved to maintain and
defend the high Court of Parliament, and according to their bounden Duty to
acknowledge them (next to God, and his Majesty) the chief Authors of their
present security, and the only means of their happy continuance, and future
preservation, declaring their Councels to be Religious, their Commands Lawful,
and their Actions Loyal, withal promising and protesting obedience to their
Commands, and to those appointed (...) by them to have Command, and to be
Governors of the Militia.0

This is the Resolution of the Protstant Gentry and Commonalty of Cheshire and
this ought to be the resolution of all the Prottestants in the Kingdom, seeing
that we have so many unknown Enemies, so many Absoloms which daily rebel
against his Majesty, seeing we have so many disturbers, so many Arons lifting
up the golden Calfe of Idolatry so many deceivers sowing tears among the
Corn, so many Goliah's blaspheming the Lord of Hosts, plotting the destruction
of Gods anointed, we had need to have some David's, to quell their swelling and
ore daring Pride, we have need of some true hearted Protestants, to defend the
Protestant Religion, seeing we have so many Papists, so many wolves in Sheeps
clothing, so many destroyers, so many private conspirators, that daily conspire
the downfall of the Gospel.

Wherefore let all those that would be esteemed either the zealous Servants of
God, or the Loyal Subjects of their gracious Sovereign and obedient Servants
to the high Court of Parliament, let them I say take up the resolution of the
Gentry and Commonalty of Cheshire and with them cry, long live King Charles,
and God preserve the Parliament.

The Copy of a Lerter sent from the Committee at Lincoln, to the House of
Commons, directed to the Speaker of the said House, and subscribed with the
names of the said Committee,
SIR,
SUch is our earnest desire, to manifest our obedience to the Commands of both
Houses, That we cannot omit any opportunity to advertise you of our first days
proceeding, and success therein. The Lord Francis Willoughby appointed by the
Ordinance of Parliament, to be Lord Lieutenant of this Cnunty, had by his
Warrae^, summoned the chief Cons^^bles to attend him yesterday, the last of
May, in this place, to give him (...) account concerning the Arms of the
Trained Bands and Ammunition, within their several hundreds, and Wapentakes,
which service accordingly they performed with all read nesse and alacrity, even
beyond our expectations; there being the fullest appearance of them that we have
observed upon any occasion heretofore, so as about fourscore in this great
County, not above two or three of them were absent; Neither did the Kings
Proclamation (published of purpose as we conceive, throughout the County, and
which some had officjously fixed upon the Gates of the J^ne where we met;) nor
this enclosed Letter from his Majesty sent to the old, (but as we hear new
established Deputy Lievtenants, under the Earl of Linsey, who likewise has a
Commission under the Broad Seal, for the Lievtenane of Lincolnshire, as we are
informed, any whit deter, or hinder them.

We have all ready delivered forth Warrants to those head Constables for
Musters to be held (for the more convenience) in several places of this
County, at each of which, God willing) we all of us intend to be assistant;
the rather because we understand that our presence here both not a little
revive she Spirits of all honest and well afflicted persons in this County;
Whose forward good examples will (we doubt not) be a means to draw the rest to
a more ready conformity,. Jn which hopes we are further encouraged by this
days trial in the City, finding, besides the Trained Bands thereof a like
number of Volunteers well and completely Armed, who are ready to make tender of
their Service, for the defense of his Majesty's Person, the Parliament, and the
Kingdom, according to their late Protestation. These are our first beginings
in your Service, which we humbly submit unto you, and so remain,

Your affectionate Friends and Servants, W. Armynne, Edw. Acsseou^^, The
Harcher, Christo. Wray, Antho. Irb^ Ioh. Broxolme.
Linclne, 1 Iunij. 1642.
Or^^^ed by the ^^^se of Commons, that this be forthwith printed.


