Vnum Necessarium: OR, The Poor Man's Case: BEING An Expedient to make
Provision for all poor People in the Kingdom.

Humbly presented to the higher Powers: Begging some Angelical Ordinance, for
the speedy abating of the prises of Corn, without which, the ruin of many
thousands (in humane judgment) is inevitable.

In all humility propounding, that the readiest way is a suppression or
regulation of Innes and Alehouses, where half the Barley is wasted in
excess: Proving them by Law to be all in a Praemunire, and the grand
concernment, that none which have been notoriously disaffected, and enemies to
common honesty and civility, should sell any Wine, strong Ale, or Beer, but
others to be licensed by a Committee in every County, upon recommendation of
the Minister, and such of the Inhabitants in every Parish, where need requires,
that have been faithful to the Public.

Wherein there is a Hue-and-Cry against Drunkards, as the most dangerous
Antinomians: And against Ingrossers, to make a dearth, and cruel Misers, which
are the Caterpillars and Bane of this Kingdom.

By John Cook, of Graies Inn, Barrester.

Prove. 11.26. He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him, but
blessing shall be upon the head of him that sells it. LONDON, Printed for
Matthew Walbancke at Grayes Inn Gate. 1648.

The Matters briefly touched are,
1 THat God suffers some to be poor, that rich men may have occasion to do
good. 2 That it is lawful to hoard up corn to prevent a dearth, but not to
make it. 3 Ingrossers of Corn to make a dearth, seldom die unpunished. 4 That
it is treason against the Kingdom; and the Ingrosser to be punished as a
Patricide. 5 The scarcity of corn is such, that it is better to restrain
maulting, then enforce men to sell at a reasonable rate. 6 Yet we need not fear
a dearth, but for the hardness of some men's hearts, and intemperance of
others. 7 Alehouses the great Nuisance to poor people, like stubborn children,
are grown almost masterlesse. 8 What punishment a Drunkard deserves this deer
year; and that the Statutes ought to be strictly executed against Vintners and
Victuallers, which permit excessive drinking. 9 How Malt would make good
English Sack, if Barley were cheap. 10 That the Magistrate ought to provide
bread for every honest poor man; for subjection draws provision with it. 11
How things were said to be in common among the Primitive Christians 12 To hold
a community is a proditorious position; and to drive at a parity, is a
senseless opinion. 13 What are the true causes of all contracts. 14 That
charity consists as much in lending and selling to the poor at a moderate
price, as in giving. 15 In what sense a famine may be said to follow the sword.
16 A sad consideration, that Protestants are greater Drinkers then Papists; yet
not so libidinous; and Germane Drunkards chaster then others. 17 Why the
Hollanders call strong beer great Pharaoh, middle beer little Pharaoh, and
small beer Israel. 18 The several ends of meat and drink, and the
commendations of bread above all other things edible. 19 Better Beef should be
at ten shillings a stone, then Barley at ten shillings a bushel. 20 In
bargaining the smallest beer ever best for honest men. 21 Penurious customs,
unworthy of Gentlemen, unless the poor be thereby relieved. 22 The cursednesse
of that Proverb, Every man for himself, and God for us all. 23 That Alms this
dear year are the best Sermon-notes, and he that is not now charitable,
cannot be a Christian. 24 The merciful man does good to himself, and loses no
more, then the Sun by shining. 25 That this is a special time for rich men to
honor the Gospel. 26 That it is not lawful to get great estates in time of
calamities; and whether it be lawful at any time. 27 No wise Christian will
desire more then a competency, for many reasons. 28 A Law, that no man shall
gain above so much by any Profession, or Trade, is both Angelical and
politic. 29 That Brewers and Bakers, that have gained well when Corn and Malt
was cheap, ought not to increase their estates this dear year. 30 A Caveat to
such Cormorants, that resemble the ancient Jews, by engrossing all; the poor
will not be famished, if they can by any means prevent it. 31 No man to be
poisoned or famisht for the greatest offense being against the Law of Nations.
32 The dismal cries at Newgate, Ludgate, etc. a great dishonor to the City.
33 More cruelty in English prisons, then in all the world. 34 English poor
rather languish then live, and Farthings made more beggars then ever they
relieved.
Twelve Propositions and Entreaties for the Poor.
1 That they may have the Forfeitures of all just penal Laws, as the Statutes
of 13. Eliz. 8. 39. Eliz. 18. whereby he that takes less then 8. per cent.
forfeits the interest only: the Statutes against drinking and tippling,
swearing and cursing: the Statutes for charitable uses to be speedily executed,
and maintenance for the poor out of Impropriations, by 15. Rich. 2. 6. and 4.
H. 4. 12. 2 That poor people that bring a pledge, may pay no interest. 3 That
all earnest-money is Gods money, and to be given to the poor. 4 That men of
estates, who make but one set meal a day, would bestow the other upon the
poor. 5 No health-drinkings this deer year, indifferent things to be disused
for a general abuser, concerning the holy kiss, and kiss of courtesy. 6 All
money won at play to be given to the poor. 7 Things lost and casually found,
and Mines, which are Natures presents, to come into the poor man's Box. 8 What
is unnecessarily spent in mourning, might comfortably relieve the poor. 9 That
poor men might have their Grists Toll-free, and the great abuse of the
devouring Engine of corn, called a boulting Mill. 10 That Ministers would be
hospitable, and thunder out Gods judgments against all oppression,
covetousness, and delays of justice. 11 That Physicians, Chyrurgions and
Apothecaries might be assigned in forma pauperis, as well as Lawyers,
Atturneyes, etc. 12 That Lawyers would give every Tenth Fee to the poor.
Lastly, concerning good husbandry, and how to make a virtue of necessity.
The Poor Man's Plea: BEING An expedient to make provision for all poor People
in the Kingdom.
IF all men were rich, Charity would be but little exercised, therefore Christ
says, The poor ye have always with you that rich men may have occasion to
do good; what a sad thing is it, that in a plentiful Kingdom, any man,
woman, or child, should be ready to famish for want of bread: that hunger
should kill whom the Sword has left alive! Of all judgments, Famine is the
sorest; to prove which, there need no other argument, but that the Pestilence
is more desirable: that which is worse then the Plague, must needs be a most
heavy affliction: and this is very considerable, that all evils may be
overcome by patience, except Famine; for a hungry man cannot by patience
overcome that: For, it still increases, and makes him more and more impatient.
There is a Famine of Gods sending, and a scarcity of some men's making. He that
stores and hoards up Corn in a plentiful year to prevent a dearth, is a good
Common-wealths-man; and he that will sell it in a deer year at a reasonable
rate, so as the poor may live by him, is a charitable man: For, when Barley is
at 18. pence, or 20. pence a Strike, there is commonly too much havoc and
spoil made of it, not eating up our crusts, as we use to say; and brewing Ale
and Beer excessive strong, which occasions drunkenness, and many enormities;
as if God gave abundance of his good creatures to abuse them; as some that will
lie in bed till nine or ten a clock, because they have nothing to do when they
are up, which if their hearts were bent heaven-wards, they would find
employment. Others, when things are cheap, think they may eat and drink their
fill, because God sends plenty: But, as heavenly Doctor Sibbs was wont to say,
When thou can not sleep in the night, that is a special time appointed by God
to make thy peace with heaven, for no worldly business can then hinder: So
when God sends plenty of grain in this Kingdom, we should consider, that God
would have some of it spent another year: The husbandman fills his barnes but
once a year, and he is all the year long in emptying them; and this year corn
goes very close together, as they say, it lies in a little room. But if they
complain that have some, what shall the poor do that have none? But now to
hoard up corn, or to reserve old stores to make a dearth, as some cruel
Hucksters have done in this Kingdom, is like the sin of murder, that is very
seldom unpunisht in this world: He that fills his coffers and barnes, and will
not relieve the poor, for whom nothing is prepared, and such it may be for
whom Christ died, goes seldom unpunisht to his grave: For, it is a double
iniquity, the sin of robbery and stealth: as if a man be robbed and bound hand
and foot, and cast into a wood by the robbers, if an honest man that passes by,
will not play the good Samaritan, but suffer the man to perish, whose life he
might easily have saved, this man is guilty both of theft and murder.

There was never more need to make some provision for the poor then this
year; for there is less work for them then ever; a Labourer will thrash as
much corn in a day, as the last year in two; and corn being dear, those that
kept three servants the last year, will keep but two the next; those that had
two but one, and those that had one, will do their work themselves; and every
one projects for himself, to spend as little as may be, but who takes care for
the poor, how shall they be provided for? If a poor man have work all this
winter, and get six pence a day; what will three shillings a week do to
maintain himself, his wife, and three or four children? For English families
commonly consist of six or seven.

Butter and cheese are excessive dear, by reason of the dry Summer; the earth
having not yielded her increase so kindly as other years; and if the poor
have not bread to eat, what will become of them? He that will not feast till
his neighbors have sufficient to eat, is the most tender-conscienc'd man; and
he that desires it should rain as well in his neighbors garden as his own, is
the best neighbor.

I know it has been attempted in deer years, to set a rate upon corn, that no
man should exceed: every man will agree that this is likely to be an extreme
hard year for the poor; for bread is the staff of their life; and he that
defrauds them of it, is a man of blood; and it is a truth as clear as
Crystal, that as obedience is due to the Magistrate for conscience sake; so
it lies upon him in point of conscience to provide for the sustentation of all
that are subject to the civil government: for subjection draws protection and
provision with it: but the question is, what is the most proper expedient, and
speedy way, to abate and bring down the prices of corn, especially Barley: I
confess I am out of my proper element, it being a matter rather of discretion
and State Policy then of Law: therefore my needle having not been touched in
corn matters, if I vary a little in the compass, or meet with a rock, and
present any thing crude or undigested to mature and deep judgments: If the
strength of my affection toward the poor, whose good I hope every honest man
will desire, shall discover any weakness in judgment, I hope it will easily
find favor with all charitable men; and for others, I know little use of them,
especially this deer year: he that will not be liberal this year, does not
deserve the name of a Christian.

Christ was moved with compassion when the people were hungry, and he wrought a
miracle to feed their bodies; let every man study this point as the only
necessary thing, and be humble suitors to the Parliament all as one man, to
ordain some effectual means and present remedy to bring down the price of
corn, for poor people must not be famisht. I have ridden some miles, to talk
with those that are honest and judicious in such matters; and I shall humbly
presume to express the result of what I have heard, with all dutiful
submission to Authority.

Some are very zealous that men should be enforced to sell Barley at 10.
groats, or 3. shillings 6. pence a Bushel, which in Leicestershire, is our
Strike, as thinking there is great store of old Corn in the Kingdom: but
herein I rather commend their zeal then discretion, for I do not see how men
can be constrained to sell their Corn at a certain rate, they may easily
pretend want of it themselves, and who can tell how much of it they may have
occasion to use? besides, I suppose the stock of corn would quickly be spent;
for if the poor might have as much corn as they would spend, for 3. shillings
or 10. groats a Bushel, they would spend more by half then now they do: they
are forced to make a Bushel go as far now, as a Bushel and half the last
year: I hear many say, that they which allowed themselves 12. pence bread in
a week, make shift with two six penny loaves as formerly, though they be far
lesser; therefore it was a good policy in Caesar, when corn was dear, to
command that they should not raise the price of loaves, but make them less,
which is well observed still to make half penny and penny loaves, though less
then before: I know in other Countries the price of corn is appointed by the
Magistrate, the great Baker at Rome has all the Corn brought into his Granary,
Non Pontifex sed potifex, non potifex sed panifex, non panifex sed carnifex,
est Papa pater Pontifex.
and he sells it out as he lists, and so it is in the most free States where
there is the least show of Tyranny; but I suppose it was long before things
were brought to so good order, and alteration in States are not easily to be
admitted, unless in case of pregnant necessity: England is a Kingdom very
populous, and people very querimonious, how feign would this Kingdom have made
themselves slaves, and fought themselves into a perfect bondage? What says the
husbandmen, if Corn be dear but one year in seven, then every one labors to
abate the price, but in plentiful years, when the husbandmen can scarce sell
for 2. shillings a Bushel, who labors to make it dearer, taxes have been
multiplied and much free quarter upon the Yeomanry, and how shall they pay
their rents and defray extraordinary charges, unless corn bear a good price?
and every man that has Corn to sell says, let me sell as dear as the Market
goes, though I buy again and pay dearer for it; as Sir John Needham always
about Michaelmas time goes with his sack to the Market, and must sell what
Corn he has, and buys again about seeds time, so impatient are men of the
least restraint and regulation, though it be for the best.

Others are of opinion, that the best way is to restrain maulting, or to
ordain that no man shall sell any Malt this dear time above 4. shillings a
Bushel, by which means much Barley will not be maulted, and so they think it
a better policy to restrain maulting, or the selling of Malt above such a
rate, then to injoyne the selling of Barley at a certain moderate price, as
being generally conceived, that above half the Barley in the Kingdom is
maulted, and above half that spent in Innes and Alehouses.

But it will be difficult to prove what is paid for every Bushel of Malt,
Ale-men and Tipplers will have it whatever it cost: therefore that which I
humbly conceive to be the most effectual remedy pleasing to God and all good
men, will be the present suppression and putting down of all Alehouses, and
the reforming of Innes, which have been guilty of more enormities, and
occasioned more mischiefs and discommodities to this Kingdom, then the
Star Chamber, High Commission Court, Council Table, Court of Wards, and all
the Arbitrary Courts have done: And new Licenses to be granted in every Parish
where there is need to such only as know not how to subsist otherways, and are
well-affected to the Parliament.

Some conceive it would be sufficient to reduce and abate the number of
Alehouses, as where there is four in a Town to permit but one or two; but
this is but pairing the nails or rather drawing the blood into one vein: for,
if there be any strong Ale in a County, all the good fellows will flock
thither, and good Wine needs no Bush, men naturally run upon things prohibited,
one Alehouse will spend as much as those four: rather then so, it were better
for the Kingdom that every man that would might brew to sell, for then they
would outvie one another, and strive who should make the best drink to gain
the confluence of customers: where the most shops are, there is always best
choice of commodities; but the first thing absolutely necessary for the safety
of this Kingdom in point of reforming general abuses, is a provident care
that no debaucht, dissolute, or licentious persons, which are notoriously
disaffected to the Parliament, should be permitted to vend any strong Beer or
Ale, because it is but putting a sword into a mad man's hand, he that takes away
a knife or a sword from a fool or a madman, offends no just Law, to prevent
the mischief is not to deprive him of his property; is it fit for madmen to
keep Gunpowder-houses? In Sicily no man of a loose behavior is permitted to
wear a sword for fear of doing mischief, preventing justice, like Physic at
the Spring taken for prevention, is more noble then executing, because there is
neither offense nor punishment.

Vintners, Inne-keepers, Ale-men and Hostesses had need to be the most
abstemious, temperate and sober men and women in the Kingdom, because they are
most familiar and conversant with persons of contrary dispositions, what the
wind is to the waters to make them rage, and the evil Spirit to a wicked man
by working upon his corrupt humors, such are licentious and disorderly
Inne-keepers and Ale-men to their daily customers and associates; they say
every man is free to call for what he pleases, but they are displeased if a man
depart sober and there be not the Drunkards four outs as they call it, all the
money out of the purse, all the wit out of the head, all the grace out of the
heart, and all the Ale out of the pot, and then the Host reckons as he list, 2.
shillings to pay and you are welcome, and one having so much wit left by the
help of his buttons to say, that he had drunk but six pots, says the Host you
have six in your belly and six in your head. For as the case stands, any man
that will may be drunk when he lists, if he have no company, he knows where
the Host is a bonius socius and no starter, it is a sad observation that
Drunkards came not into this Kingdom till the Reformation of Religion, and a
sadder observation which I have found true, that Protestants generally are
greater Drinkers then Papists, who are far more libidinous and unchaste, what
a mercy is it, that in Italy, Spain and those hot Countries, Wine should
better agree with the constitution of their bodies then beer, and that with us
and in Northern Clymates Beer should best agree with our bodies, I verily
believe that our English Malt would make such strong beer, being well boiled,
hopped and kept its full time, that it might serve instead of sack, and be as
pleasing and cordial English sack as the best Canary, to the great
encouragement of husbandmen, and improvement of Hop-grounds: but this must be
when Barley is about two shillings the Bushel, so as a poor man may get a
Bushel of Corn weekly for his Family, and twelve pence for other necessaries;
I wish it were high Treason to ingrosse any Corn to make a Dearth, such men
deserve the punishment of a Patricide, which was in this cruel but proper
manner: He that killed his Father was to be put into a great barrel made of
leather, with a Dog, a Jackanapes, a Cock and a Viper, and cast into the Sea,
that he might be deprived of all the elements, fire, water, earth and air,
(for the leather kept out the water, and no more air came in then to live)
whereof all creatures are made, who had killed him that gave him his being, the
Dog an unclean yet faithful creature to his Master, to vex him for his
unthankfulness, and after for hunger to tear him in pieces, the Ape to show
that he that would imbrew his hands in his Fathers blood, had nothing of man in
him, but a humane figure like an Ape; the Cock that he might never sleep, but
be perpetually vexed, and the Cock is an enemy to the Viper, and that Saylors
hearing the Cock might know the man, the Viper a thing fearful to men, and
obnoxious to the same offense, coming to light by the Parents death: what
gre^ter ingratitude can there be that poor people should take all the pains to
plough the ground and bring in the harvest, and then miserable Hucksters should
suffer them to be famished for want of bread? a few Ingrossers may undo a whole
Town or Country: but may not I do with my own what I list? (says the old
Cormudgin,) No, that thou may not thou Devil in the the shape of a man, a
man may not be drunk with his own wine, nor play the Glutton at his own table,
but it is none of thine, thou art a Liar, thou miserable wretch, truly
miserable in soul and body, thou have no money, the money has thee, it is
none of thine, it is the poor man's bread which thou lockest up in thy barnes,
when thou take six shillings for a Bushel of Barley from him which thou
may well afford for three shillings, thou squeezest too much blood out of his
veins, and God will call thee to an account for it, however the law of man may
be defective; if thou escape punishment here, thy reservation is but a
preservation to a greater misery; how many Ingrossers have had their Barns
burnt and Corn consumed that would not sell at reasonable rates? we have good
books printed of Gods judgments against swearers, and drunkards, and Gods
revenge against Murders, I wish some able man would take the pains to make a
collection of Gods revenge against Ingrossers and Usurers of Corn, and covetous
cruel men of all sorts, who deserve to be kicked out of all honest men's
companies, for God abhorres them, as being most contrary to his diffusive
nature.

But, what Law is there to punish such men? all the reason in the world for it,
for the health of a sick man is the Physicians supreme Law, Law must give place
to necessity, if there be such an inundation of waters that a man cannot pass
in the ordinary road, a man may justify to go through the next Lands, for the
division of Lands was made with this condition, reserving a liberty for every
man to pass in such a case of necessity, and so every man must have a way
through his neighbors ground to go to his own Land, for by the grant of the
ground all things are granted to make it profitable, and when the Magistrate
inforces men to sell their Corn at reasonable rates, Non est involuntaria
venditio sed accommodatio proximi.
so as the poor may live by the rich, this is not in judgment of Law, an
unvoluntary and enforced sale, but an accommodation of ones neighbor in
charity, natural equity and humanity, according to the condition of the fields
and nature of the place and society of men with whom we live. Valde bonum, a
commodum Genesis 1.31.
And God saw every thing that he made, and it was very good, the Caldeans read,
very profitable for man.

At Naples the great treasurer of corn being entrusted with many thousand
quarters at 3. s. the bushel for the common-good, finding an opportunity to
sell it for 5. shillings the Bushel to foreign Merchants, enriched himself
exceedingly thereby, and Corn growing suddenly dear, the Counsel called him
to account for it, who proffered to allow 3. shillings for it as it was
delivered into his custody, and hoped thereby to escape, but for so great a
breach of trust nothing would content the people but to have him hanged, and
though there was no positive Law for it to make it Treason, yet it was resolved
by the best Politicians, that it was Treason to break so great a trust, by the
fundamental Constitution of the Kingdom, which by all intrinsicall Rules of
Government ought to preserve it self, and that for so great an offense he
ought to die, that durst presume to enrich himself by that which might
endanger the lives of so many Citizens; for as society is natural, so
Governors must of necessity and in all reason provide for the preservation and
sustenance of the meanest member, he that is but as the little toe of the Body
Politic.

To speak a word how far the Magistrate is to regulate and give a Law to the
prizes of Commodities for the public good, I agree with Aristotle and all the
Roman Authors against that erroneous opinion of Plato, that Property and
Divisions of Lands and Goods is by the Law of God and nature, yet so as one man
is not to feast and another be famished: Contracts are by a natural Law and
right of all Nations, yet so as Gods divine Law is the efficient cause of
Contracts amongst men, for we are bound to sell to one another by Gods Law,
else mankind could not continue, for all things are made and created for man's
sake, as that Prophetical Psalmist David says, Omnia subjecisti sub pedibus
ejus.
thou have put all things in subjection under his feet; the material cause of
contracts are all things necessary for man's sustentation: for if there were no
means to buy those things we want, or to exchange other things for them, as
formerly, men when there was a little money, exchanged Corn for Cattle, we
should tear and destroy one another like brute beasts. Now the formal cause
is the form and manner of buying and selling, for money, or by way of exchange,
if the owner will not sell, then he may lend or pledge, or hire the use of it
as he pleases; and the final cause of every contract is that we may use and
enjoy Gods good creatures honestly and profitably, that one man be not grievous
to another, that so a commutative equality may keep the peace, and peace may
make the Kingdom happy, wherein we are all, as in the same ship, therefore
all Contracts must benefit our neighbors, every wise man looks at the end,
when I sell a Bushel of Corn, the Law says I do thereby do good to my
neighbor, yet so as that he wants my Corn, so I stand in need of his money,
which is a less principal end and consideration in the eye of Law; for money
is but artificial, a thing that is turned Trump by policy, not by any natural
inherent virtue that there is in it in comparison of living creatures, or the
natural fruits of the earth created for man's sustenance; therefore I may take
a moderate gain for my Corn, but not excessive, let no man weakly object that,
for the Magistrate to set a price upon Corn or Cattle, is against the
Freedom and Liberty of the Subject, as if the harmony of health should
endanger the body natural, when the spleen swells the body pines; if a cruel
miser have 100. quarters of Corn to spare, and 100. of his poor neighbors are
ready to famish for want of bread, who have not money to pay him an
extraordinary rate, if the Magistrate enforce him to sell it at a reasonable
rate, it is but just by the Law of God and nature: we have been so long
accustomed to the yoke, that most in this Kingdom had rather be in subjection
to their old Taskmasters, then to be set at Liberty by our noble Reformers, if
there were 100. Mariners in a ship, and one should keep bread sufficient for
20. and the rest have nothing to eat, does not that Pilote deserve blame who
will not force him to contribute of his superfluity to his brethrens necessity?
the rule of charity is, that one man's superfluity should give place to another
man's convenience, his convenience to another necessity, his lesser necessities
to another extreamer necessities, and so the mechanical poor to relieve the
mendicant poor in their extreamer need, and this is but the Dictate of the Law
of Nature: and can any man question but that the Magistrate is empowered by God
to command every man to live according to the rule of nature and right reason?
The Romans were never more free then when they had a certain price set, and
taxed upon all manner of commodities and things which were bought and sold; and
so it is for many commodities in that well governed State of Venice, the
Magistrate sets the price of all flesh that no man can be deceived in buying in
the best ground in Spain: near Granata, the Landlords may not plant Olives,
nor make Vineyards as they desire, that so there may be more store of Corn for
the poor, and more plentiful pasture for cattle, which are brought to that
City: by Gods Law a man might refresh his horse upon his neighbors ground, and
himself in the Vineyard, Deuteronomy. 23. Mark. 12.
though it was not in a case of necessity, as the Disciples plucked the ears of
Corn and the gleanings are reserved for the poor; how much more then may and
ought the Magistrate to take special care that corn be sold at such a rate as
the poor be not famished, for to offer him a Bushel of Barley for 5.
shillings, who has but 3. shillings to give for it, is to deny him bread to
eat, or to set the loaf upon an high place and bid the little child eat, who
cannot reach it: every man is bound to love his neighbor more then his own
goods, we are commanded to give our goods to save another man's life, much more
to sell our goods at a reasonable rate, it is a common error that all charity
is in giving, not in selling; if I give I shall be thanked for it, but let me
sell as dear as I can, is the language of such as will give away but little.

He that will sell so much Barley as he can reasonably spare this dear year,
to poor men for two shillings or half a Crown a bushel, is a more
charitable man then he that now and then gives an Alms to a beggar at his
door; no man ought to defraud, or go beyond his brother in bargaining, we say
in Law that a thing is worth so much, as it can be sold for, Preci^m Suprem^m,
medium and infimum.
but in conscience no more then the buyer is able to give: there are three
prizes of things, supreme when things are dear, moderate when things are at an
ordinary rate, and inferior when things are at a low rate; within which
latitude buyers and sellers may deceive one another, because an exact and
Mathematical equality of price would hinder contracts: but there is a
difference (as we say proverbially) between staring and stark blind, if the
thing that is sold for 20. pound be not really worth ten pound, this bargain
ought not to stand, for the hurt is above half the just price, I know the
price of a thing is perpended by the common estimation of men, not from the
nature of the thing, for then every living creature should be dearer then
things inanimate, a Pigeon should cost more then a Diamond, but if a man shall
sell a Jewel for 100. pound which is not worth 50. pound, this ought not to be
suffered in a Kingdom well governed; for the buyer must either be deceived, or
was in great necessity, and being against the end of Contracts (which is the
good of the party with whom you contract) it is a mere nullity and not binding:
that old saying, let the buyer beware, Caveat Emptor.
takes all care from the Magistrate, as if men might cozen or surprise one
another, and the Judge was not to rectify all abuses and extremities in that
kind, whereas it is a sin to offend my brother in bargaining, 1 These. 4. Nemo
superveniat. and Lev. 25. Non fratrem tuum.
or to contristate his spirit against commutative Justice, that of Paul to the
Thessalonians is, let no man overcome his neighbor; truly, it is a great shame
to consider how men (for the most part) abuse their callings, as I have often
said.

The Civilians, who are the best moderatours of natural equity, say, that a
Magistrate may enforce a man to sell his Patrimony for public necessity, not
for the Princes pleasure, Est necessitas quoad rem non quoad precium.
Necessitatem non utiltiate, pro constructione non ampliatione.
but then a reasonable price must be given for it, for the State must not want
money in that case: as if any man have a large house which is conceived
necessary to make a Court of Justice, the owner ought by the Law of God and
nature, to sell it at a reasonable price for that purpose, and so a piece of
ground for Martial Discipline, or to erect fortifications for the public
service, and the reason is evident, because the right which he has to his
house or land is by the Law of that Kingdom, which cannot be maintained but by
doing justice, therefore that which is most conducible to public Justice must
be preferred, and every man is to prefer the public good before his own
private; a man is bound to do good to his Country and acquaintance when he may
do it without his own destruction. Is it not a sad thing that the poor people
which plow the ground, manure it, and sow it, weed it, and get in the harvest,
and take all the pains, should bring it into a Misers Barn and then be
famished themselves for want of bread? in a time of war corn was so dear
that the soldiers had scarce bread: says the Emperor, shall the poor men
defend your City, and keep your corn in your Barns, and will you not feed
them? and constrained them to relieve the poor.

Let no man pretend that he may want the next year for his own family, and
therefore will not sell to the poor at a moderate price, for this is a manifest
distrusting of Gods providence, as if he could not send plenty next year, and
putting too much confidence in an arm of flesh; how different is this from
that excellent Petition of Give us this day our daily bread? not so much corn
in my barnes this year as may serve me seven years, suppose a man did
certainly know, which cannot be imagined, that there were seven years of
scarcity approaching, may any man therefore ingrosse all the Corn in the
Kingdom to sell it as they please, and suffer the poor to famish in the mean
time? nothing less: the Holy Ghost in Deuteronomie most convictingly meets
with such Objectors, Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked heart,
Deuteronomy. 15.9, 10.11.
saying, the seventh year, the year of release is at hand, and thy eye be
evil against thy poor brother, and thou give him naught, and he cry unto the
Lord against thee, and it be sin unto thee, thou shall surely give him, and
thine heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto him: because that for
this thing the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in all
that thou put thine hand unto, for the poor shall never cease out of the
Land; therefore I command thee, saying, thou shall open thine hand wide unto
thy brother, to thy poor and to thy needy in thy Land.

The Argument is unanswerable, if I must lend to my poor brother when I am sure
to lose it, much more am I bound to sell my corn unto him at reasonable rates,
though hard time; should come, which yet are not likely; for God that provided
for us in times of war, when we had more cause to fear a famine, will
undoubtedly bless this Kingdom with increase in times of peace, if our
ingratitude and uncharitableness to the poor do not set bounds to his mercies.

If any man object, that this general suppression of Alehouses is like
Lycurgus his Law, to stock up all the vines and suffer no more wine to grow to
prevent drunkenness, as if the use of meat should be prohibited, because many
Gluttons surfeit upon it, and no use of candles, because some negligent people
have thereby set houses on fire: these are as weak Argumentations as that the
Poisoner ought not to die, because not he but the poison was the immediate
cause of death: to reform abuses is not to extinguish or diminish the use of
the creature, there is a necessity to drink, but a greater necessity not to be
drunk; as the faithful Messenger, Sola necessitas est non peccandi.
who being employed about the safety of a Kingdom, was dissuaded from
imbarking in a great storm, says he, it is necessary that I go not that I
live; Peccatum est Semper mavis malum.
a man must suffer the greatest evil of pain rather then commit the least
evil of sin, of two evils we must choose the least, but the least sin is the
greatest evil: this giving liberty to none, but such as are well-affected to
the Parliament, to sell Ale or Beer is to prevent sinful disorders; Obstare
principiis.
for they are generally such as do not allow drinking of precursory healths,
which is like giving the first blow; it has ever been observed that the first
health has been like opening the floud-gates, I have in my thoughts compared
it to S. Bartholomewes Island in Rome, which began by one corn that arrested
at a tree, sticks and other things came to it which obdurated; and in process
of time became an Island, or as the King of Sweden was wont to say, the loss
of a nail may be the loss of an Army; for the loss of a nail may be the
loss of the shoe, the loss of a shoe may lame the horse, and so endanger
the rider, and the fall of the rider may disorder the Troup till at last all be
routed.

I wish the application were not too true, I am confidently persuaded that the
disorders in Taverns, Innes and Tipling-houses, have been chief motives and
occasions of this Kingdoms miseries; what mischiefs almost are at any time
brought to light, but have been hatched and conceived in some of those wombes,
to the great dishonor of Almighty God, and the insufferable abuse of his good
creatures? and when the goods are ill spent, the master must needs be angry:
what a monstrous thing is it for a man to make himself a beast, to unman
himself and become a Lion for fierceness, a Hog or a Dog for beastliness, as
the boy that waited upon a great Drinker, who gloried in making others drunk,
entreated his Master to make him a sheep, how can I do that says the Master,
yes Sir, says he, as well as you made Mr. such a one a Lion, and another a
Bear, and a third a Hog, why may not you make me a sheep?

A Drunkard breaks all Gods Commandments, he acknowledges no God but his
belly, he commits Idolatry, drinking healths always uncovered, many times
standing and sometimes upon his knees, a gesture fit for a prayer, unless
sitting may better elevate the affections, what fearful Oaths and horrid
Execrations are daily belcht out in Tippling-houses, no wonder that the plague
invades them, how shamefully are Sabbaths profaned, notwithstanding good Laws
and Ordinances to the contrary, which are contemned and broken like Spiders
webs, for because the doors are kept shut in Sermon time, that good fellows
cannot enter, therefore they make a perambulation in Moorefields, Islington and
other places, till Sermon be done, and then swallow it down with better
appetite, and so make good Laws as good sawces to drink Ale without an Orange.

These places principally are the corrupters of youth, and the first rise of
disobedience to Parents is commonly from a Tavern or a Tipling-house; youth is
like a fair built house, an Alehouse is the bad Tenant that lets it rain in:
is there any quarrelling? it begins there; as there was seldom or never any
Treason in times of Popery, but there was a Priest or a Jesuit in it, so is it
in point of murder, the quarrel commences or is fomented in some
drinking-house, Nunquam Ebrium putabo castum.
the veriest coward is pot-valiant, and never was any English Drunkard chaste:
however the Germans and Dutch from whom this Nation has unhappily contracted
the guilt of this bestiall sin of drunkenness, are yet accounted chaste,
either because their drinking procures speedy sleep and evaporations, as some
ground is made fruitful by that rain which gluts other land and hinders it
from producing natural operations, or it proceeds from some occult quality in
nature, but a particular instance against a general observation is
sophistical.

A Drunkard is the greatest Felon, he robs himself of all that is worth
owning, a most odious creature to every honest man, how many Rascals drink the
very blood of their poor wives and tender Infants in a Tippling-house, and
spending that riotously that would refresh a wearied family? Drunkenness by
the Turks Law is punished with death for the second offense, and whether he
that steals a strike of Corn this deer year, or he that shall consume 20.
strike more then he needs, which is but in effect robbing of the poor, better
deserves death, let every sober man seriously consider.

For my own part, I think it would be a most excellent Law, as the case
stands, to make drunkenness for the first offense imprisonment three days,
and to live with bread and water; for when a poor man is drunk to make him pay
5. shillings is but to punish and add affliction to the innocent and afflicted
wife and children for the guilty husband, I wish such penal Laws were
reformed, and more proper punishments inflicted: for the second offense a fine
to the poor, to the full value of so much as according to the discretion of a
good Judge and Jury he has consumed and wasted in excessive drinking; as for
example, if a man have been a common frequenter of Tavernes or Alehouses, or a
great drinker in private houses, for the space of twenty years, it is probable
he has spent in that space a Crown a week at the least in excessive drinking,
more then would have preserved health and increased strength, the only lawful
ends of eating and drinking, which amounts to above 200. l. it is justice to
make him pay it if he be able, if not let him be whipped or burnt in the hand:
The third offense to be Felony, yet so as only to bear the shame and
reproach of it by holding up his hand and tried for his life, but to be saved
by something equivalent to Clergy as a matter of form, and for the fourth
offense to sustain the pain of death, as unworthy to live in a well-governed
Kingdom, a Drunkard being the greatest robber of poor people which are ready
to famish for want of bread, a rebel against divine and humane authority, and
a sworn enemy to all humanity, what lies and inventions are daily hatched and
contrived in these ungodly Seminaries? how are honest men disgraced and
scandalized, godliness scoffed at, and honesty traduced by these vermin and
Catterpillars of the Commonwealth? All the lies, calumnies, and falsities that
have been contrived, invented, and fabricated against the Parliament, Army, and
all the godly honest men in the Kingdom, what have they been but the
ebullitions of some tipsey Tavern, or frothy Ale-bench? and if the most godly
men are exceeding privy to their daily failings and infirmities which break
forth in the first motions and risings of the heart against the deliberate bent
of their wills, and yet are sins against the last Commandment, how guilty is
the Drunkard that is a Mass of himself, and makes it his daily trade to break
the whole Law of God, which is holy, just and good? so that the Drunkard is the
grand Antinomian, against whom the Parliament, Army, and all honest men are by
the Laws of God and Nature, to shoot all the arrows of their deepest
displeasures. If Sack were but at six pence a quart, and Barley but at twelve
pence a bushel; but now that Barley is at five shillings, and in probability
will be ten if this drinking continue: but I trust our noble Worthies in
Parliament will speedily take a severe course to restrain it: when one is
drunk they use to say he has got a Fox, and so make but a jest of it, but he
deserves to be hunted as a Fox, these are the Foxes that spoil the vines, that
drink the poor man's blood, and are guilty of the death of every poor man,
woman, and child that shall be famished to death for want of bread, as it is
greatly to be feared many will be: there was a Law of Wolfehead in this
Kingdom, he that had killed a Wolf had so much for his pains, and we reward
him who kills Moles, Hedge-hogs, or such noxious creatures; I remember that a
late Favorite in Dublin had a project to get a Patent for all the foxed groats
in that City, that every one that was drunk over night should pay him a groat
in the morning, conceiving upon good grounds it would have been worth many
hundreds a year, though that succeeded not: yet really, I would now have a Law
of Foxhead, every man that can find out a Drunkard to be well rewarded, not to
kill him, because the Magistrate must have a care of his soul in such a case,
and if he should die drunk then one great Drunkard was afraid that he should
rise drunk at the Resurrection, but to bring him into the gates of the City,
the Courts of public Justice, that the poor people may throw dirt in his face,
and say, this is that monster in nature that drinks as much in a week in wine
and strong drinks, as would relieve many of our hungry souls, he surfeits and
vomits it up again and our little cruse is almost spent, we must this night sit
down and eat the last bread and die, for there is no more corn to be had, this
Rascal that has a Devil in his belly, that devoures as much strong drink as
the Idol Bell did, for he had but 6. pots of wine every day; which sufficed
Bells Priests being 70. in number, besides their wives and children, which was
not two barrels a day, is there not as much spent in many drinking-houses in
this Kingdom? let us have justice upon him or we will stone him, or rather hang
him upon a Gallows, and starve him to death, a proper end for all Cormorants
and devouring Gluttons; the Eagle that King of birds dies for hunger, the upper
beak so inclasping the other, that it cannot eat: Oh that these mystical
Foxes, five times more dangerous then Wolves, which prey upon sheep, might be
hunted into the Sea, that delight so much in liquid elements, that they might
be abjured the Realm and sent beyond sea whence they first came, and go chin
deep in water every day, until they find a convenient passage: these Serpents
sting poor people to death, I hope there will be a present Hue-and-Cry after
all these excessive drinkers, let them be inquired after with Eagles eyes some
honest sober men in every Parish appointed to bring them to condign punishment.

Quest. But the doubt is, who shall be said to be drunk, which makes the
Statutes against drunkenness to be of little use, because it is so hard a
thing to prove a man drunk, for penal Laws are to be construed strictly.

Resp. Tradition says that he is not drunk that can creep out of the cart way
from the danger of the cart-wheel, like that of killing a Swan, that it must be
hanged up by the head, and the killer or stealer must cover it over with wheat,
which must go to the owner. I find no such case in Law, but something to that
purpose of a hog rooting in another man's ground, Dominus porci tenetur
verrificationes frumento implere.

He that ree^s or staggers is drunk.


the holes must be filled up with corn; David seems to compare a drunken man
to a ship at sea, they reel to and fro like a drunken man and are at their wits
ends; we say commonly the man is drunk or mad that does not understand himself,
and so make drunkenness to be a privation of sense and understanding: but for
my own part I love to adhere to the Scripture, and judge that man to be drunk
who has taken more then his body requires for health or strength inordinately:
no drunkard like the old Drunkard that can sit all day from morning to night,
and by the help of that witch Tobacco (against the moderate or unlustful use
whereof I except not,) as K. James calls it, which will make a drunken man
sober, and a sober man drunk, will be as fresh at night as at the first cup; oh
that ever such destroyers of the poor should be suffered to live in a dear
year, I know a man may rejoice more freely in a lawful use of the creature
sometime then others, but never immoderately, for there is no degree beyond
moderation; a man may drink to refresh himself, ut vires reficiant^^ non ut
opprimantur Ebriosus non solum peccat sed ipse totum est peccatum.
but not to oppress nature; and the Cannonists hold that if the Physicians
shall prescribe a pint or quart of White Wind, to a weak brain, to make a
vommit for healthes sake, it may be done with much caution, so as health be
only intended; because the end of meat and drink is health, and strength, and
the creature is not abused to any unworthy end; but, a man may not commit
Fornication by any advise for healths sake, because coppulation was appointed
for other ends: but a man must nor overcharge and oppress nature, as pot
companions do, for such a man does not only sin, but is himself wholly sin.

Therefore an Ordinance to suppress and restrain excessive drinking, would be
most excellent for men's souls, bodies, and estates; what an Angellicall and
Divine Ordinance would it be to preserve, by Gods blessing, the Souls, Bodies,
and Estates, of many thousands in this Kingdom from Ruin, Consumtion, and
Perdition; what an infinite happiness would hereby accrue to this Kingdom, if
the Taverns and Inns were regulated, and Alehouses Universally suppressed and
restrained from selling Ale, and strong Beer, after such a time, and in the
mean time, to License so many as are well-affected to the Parliament, honest
sober men, that should not suffer any disorder in their houses; and to sell no
Beer or Ale stronger then what they can afford for a penny a quart, unless it
be to sick or poor people, or such as they are sure will not abuse themselves
with it.

Question. But is it not sufficient to diminish the number of Alehouses or to
suppress and restrain unlicensed and more disorderly Houses,

Re. Truly I fear that will not do the deed, that plaster will not be wide
enough: It is conceived upon good grounds, that above two parts of all the
Barley throughout the Kingdom will be Ma^^ed this year, Licentia omnes
deteriores sumus
which if that were restrained then might the poor buy it for about 3 s. a
Bushel, which is a reasonable price for buyer and Seller: those Ale houses
which are licenced do but maintain Idleness, Drunkenesse, and all manor of
Excess and Riotousnesse by authority; and that conceit of my Lord Bacon may
fitly be applied, that for Licenses we are all the worse.

But why all Alehouses to be restrained? Truly because that is soonest done,
and never did any disease in the Body Politque since the Gunpowder plot,
require a more speedy remedy, for the Malsters are traveling up and down the
Country in every place, to buy Barley at any rates, to make sport for Drunkards.

A more dangerous generation of men then the late spies were, I do not find
that a Maulster is an addition in Law, Maulting is no legal trade, but a craft
and mystery whereby they ingrosse much money, most of them being men of other
trades; last year they bought Barley for 7 groats and half a crown a
bushel, and sell it for 5 shillings and sixteen groates a bushel in malt, and
yet gain a strike in a quarter, which is not worth above a groat a b^shell
Malting, and some of them sold the same Barley again for four shillings, and
four shilllings and six pence a bushel, and so they grind the faces of the
poor, and keep them hungery in spite of their teeth, and these tippling houses
will have vent for it if it were at 10 s. a bushel, for Ale, in many places,
is sold already for a groat a quart.

But is it justice to deprive men of their callings; what shall these Ale-men
and favorites of Bacchus do, they have been fed with the finest of the Wheat,
and their joints anointed with the Oil of Sir John Barlycorne; how would you
have them live.

I confess it is a weighty question, therefore I would have honest poor men
to be Licenced to keep Uictualling houses, such as have no other trades or
calings to maintain them, and some must work for their livings as others do,
If the Majestrate would be pleased to provide continually corn for the poor
at easy ^ates, they would make a pretty shift to subsist; ah, says many a poor
Creature, if I can but get bread for my poor wife and small Children this
dear year I care not; I would work almost my heart out, but I can scarce get
a days work, every thing rises in price, but that which should rise, the
day-Labourers wages, many work now for a groat a day which had 6. d. and 8. d.
Certainly it lies upon the Magistrate to provide bread for every honest man at
such rates as men be not enforced to steal?

I observe a great disproportion between the prices of things, and the poor
hirelings wages, most day-Laborers in matters of Husbandry yerne but 6. d. a
day, who being 6. or 7. in Family, what will 3. s. a week do to maintain
them, It will but half buy bread, for they have little else to eat; England is
a famous Kingdom for corn, especially for Barley, we exceed all other
Countries. It Is marvel that we have not always 2. or 3 years provision
before hand, but the least immoderate rain, or unkind and unfruitful year
causes a Dearth that the poor people who live from hand to mouth are in danger
to be starved, what is the matter in the name of God? Is there not corn ground
enough in the Kingdom, why so many enclosures suffered, there is no necessity
of having so much Mutton and Beef in the Kingdom, let it be as dear as it
will, poor people can live without it, It would be a happy thing if the
Justices of Peace in every County were authorized and enabled to take care and
make provision that there might be corn sufficient for every poor man at a
reasonable rate, why are not many Forrestes (where the poor people will not
suffer in point of fuel) which have been receptacles for wild Beasts and
Dens, and Nurseries of Licentious people, where there are many close Alehouses
that are receivers of Rogues, and Theefes, he being as guilty that holds the
Bag, as he that fills it) dis-aforested and converted into tillage and many
large farms erected there and made comfortable habitations for Laborious
Husbandmen; I know the preservation of wood very necessary for the well-being
of this Kingdom; but under pretense of nourishing wood, there is abundance of
Depopulation permitted, and the poor people driven into Market-Townes and
Corporations, which are so populous, that every unseasonable year for Corn
threatens a present dearth, which is sad in the contemplation of it, but will
be heavy and fatal to this Kingdom if not timely prevented. See the Stat. 1
Iac 9.4 Iac. 21. Iac. 7. Dal 26.31


But for the matter of Justice, this is the case that all Ale men are in a
Praemunire and have all forfeited their Lycences, so visibly, that it needs no
further proof, for the law is positive and plain, that whosoever shall sell
less then a full ale quart of the best and strongest Beer or Ale for 1. d. Is
disabled to keep an ale house for three years, after, nay if such a man be
licenced again within 3 years such license is void, and he is to be punished
as victualling without Lycences

I Believe there is no Alehouse in this Kingdom but is guilty of the breach of
this Law. and therefore it is but just to suppress them all for 3. years, or
rather then fail, but for this year according to the statute, for they have
occasioned this threatened dearth, we have had plenty of late years to
admiration, and there might have been barley enough in the Kingdom for the
releef of poor people, at 2. s. a Bushwell if it had not been superfluously
consumed and squandred away in Alehouses, and though some houses have been
more orderly and civil then others, yet all are guilty, and the best way to
avoid exceptions, and to prevent a Famine, is to suppress them all after such
a time, and in the interim to license so many honest men as are needful in
every place to keep Alehouses, observing the statutes, and selling a quart a
penny, which they might well afford if Malt were at easy rates, Besides Ale
houses are none of those trades, wherein men have a freehold for their lives,
no man need to serve a Prentiship to learn to sell a quart of Ale or Beer for
a penny, and no man ought to live by a sinful calling, it is a lamentable case
that people cannot live unles men be disorderly, and drink excessively in
their houses, it is a cruel courtesy to afford a man his supper, for 6. d. at
an Inn, but then he must spend 6. d. or more in drink after supper, and
commonly goes foxt to bed, or else the Landlord gets nothing by his guests
company, If any man cannot live but by the sins of other men, send him to Bride
well, and he will learn a better trade, for he that will not work if he can let
him not eat, it is no charity to suffer the childrens bread to be eaten up by
such ungodly wretches, But it will be objected that there are many good and
profitable laws made to this purpose, which if carefully put in execution
might be preventing Physic to cure a Famine which is so justly feared, I
confess the Laws are very excellent, and by putting of one statute in execution
might do the deed; for the Justices of Peace, or the greater part of them may
in open quarter sessions restrain the converting of Barley into Malt. 39
Eliz. 16.
But they are not pleased to do it, and laws without execution, are like Bells
without Clappers I know not by what unhappy fate many rich men, and men in
office, are turned Maulsters, and sell Ale and strong Beer, and these
Cormorants will not suffer any Barley to come into the Market, I know a Mayor of
a Town that now sels Ale for a groat a quart.

The Justices of Peace have absolute authority to authorize or suppress
Alehouses in part, or in all, as they please, and have the correction and
regulation of all disorders and Irregularities there committed; all immoderate
tippling; and Excessive drinking is punnished by statute, Learned and Reverend
Mr. Justice ROLLS, in his Mediterranean Circuit with much Wisdom and
Integrity, declared the Laws in that particular, and gave them charge in a
most Excellent manner desiring the worthy Ivstices and grand Jurors every where
to be very vigilant and active in putting those good and wholesome Laws in
Execution. His Lordship pressing the necessity and usefulnes thereof with much
life and Judgment, omiting nothing that could be said materially, either to
Inform the Cuntrymens understanding, or to work upon their affections but
good charges are but like good Sermons,, If Judges could stay till all things
were put in Execution, it would be happy for this Kingdom, the truth is that
Alehouses like untoward stubborn children are grown too headstrong and
masterlesse for their Parents, they are so numerous, and such abundance of
tippling in every Country Town, that it is a difficult task to restrain it,
every man finds some friends or other to Ingratiate himself for the
continuance of his License, and before this Epedemicall disease can be cured in
an ordinary way, I fear all our Barley will be maulted.

As for some Market Towns I may truly say, as the Ingenious Bishop did; All
our houses are become Alehouses, No Galants but in their Gallons; was it so in
the days of Noah? ah no, to consider which of these are fittest to be suprest,
will require much time and deliberation, which this violent disease will not
permit, therefore one good Ordinance to batter them all down, root, and
branch, No more strong beer or ale to be sold by retaile after such a day, but
good wholesome drink of a 1 d. a quart, by honest sober men, licensed to keep
victualing houses, and to lodge Travelers where need requires, never was any
Law more seasonable and reasonable; the very wind of such an Ordinance would
kill half the Maulsters, such an Ordinance of Parliament being like an
Ordinance of God, not to be disputed, but obeyed; such a Parliament must needs
be blessed that has the prayers of so many poor people, If God to save the life
of a poor sheep, was pleased to dispense with his Holy Law, at least in the
Letter of it, being delighted in works of mercy, how active and zealous should
good Magistrates be, to save the lives of many thousand of poor men and
women, and Children, who are likely to be famished, and pined to death, before
the next harvest, if some speedy course be not instantly taken to prevent it.

For thus it stands, either the poor man's wages must be raised, or the price
of Corn abated, or this poor man must make bold with them ^ha^ have it, or he
must be famisht in probability, for men's hearts are as hard as the nether
millstone, believe it, this argument is made of brass, and cannot easily be
battered; the best peace and settlement which we have so long prayed for, and
can be imagined will not make us happy, if there be a famine of bread; all the
Malignant blood is not as yet drawn out of this Kingdom, there are those that
are negotiating to engage us in a Second and more bloody and destructive War,
and where bread is wanting, Men's humors are so corrupt, that the least scratch
may turn into a Gangraen, the least spark into a great flame, the poor will
rise upon small occasions if they want bread, which must unavoidably follow for
ought I can see to the contrary, unles Alehouses be suppressed, and Innes and
Victualing houses regulated, and the Statutes for selling a quart 1. d.
executed withal vigilance and severity.

We have been beholding to our Neighbors for Dans Rye, which has something
kept down the prices of Corn, by furnishing Sea Towns, and London, which
makes them I fear not so sensible of the poor Countries.

In many places great Farmers have scarce their seed again, and now that the
ways have been fair, Husbandmen, have little to do, and Rents, must be paid,
some Corn is brought to the Market, and the poor by help of their gleanings
have not been much hunger bitten, This first quarter but the rich Farmers that
thresh but little, the corn being well inned they expect better Markets, and if
they resolve to sell barley for 10. s a bushel they know the Maulster will buy
it, and the Aleman may well afford to give 12, s. a bushel for Malt, if he
may sell his Ale for a groat a quart as they begin to do, but what shall ^he
poor man do in this Case, that has his Wife and 5. or 6. small Children, that
gets but 3. s a week at the most, and some weeks not 12, d, he must beg,
steal, or starve, a great strait, something like David's case, for stealing
brings the sword of Justice, and begging does but prolong the Malady, the last
dear Year, barley was not above 6. s. a Bushel, and yet many were famished
in several places, and dyed for want of bread, yet Flesh and other Provisions
were cheaper then now they are, what will become of poor Prisoners? who must
Inevitably be starved to death, for three half pence will not buy a pound of
bread,

But I meet with two Rubbs 1. what says one, will you work a miracle to feed
many with a little Corn, if God send scarcity who can help it, if there be not
barley enough, the poor must pinch.

I Agree, that there is generally less Corn this year then the last, but were
it not for the hardness of some men's hearts; and the riotous excess and
Intemperance of others, we need not much fear a Dearth, it is a fond observation
that a famine follows the Sword, Unles the Husbandman cannot Labor, and be
disabled by the war, for when God gives victory to the truth, as blessed be his
Name he has done, If we be true to our first Principles and do not destroy our
selves.
it is a sign of his love, and he will accompany it with plenty, if the
faithful Magistrate do not neglect his duty, I am confident Englands glorious
days are approaching for peace and plenty, the next year is likely to be
fruit full, Quick and cheap, justice will make this Kingdom happy.

But without all question there is barley enough for all the poor in the
Kingdom at reasonable rates, if it be not converted into malt, it were better
there should not be one drop of strong beer or ale brewed in the Kingdom this
year, then that the poor should perish for want of bread; but neither is
there any such necessity; men of estates may keep good beer for there own
Families; and when Alehouses are suppressed in little villages, what a great
matter is it if the Lord of the Town, or the rich men would be pleased to
bestow a quart or two of Strong Beer, or Ale, upon a poor Neighbor, that is
sick or weak, many Honorable Gentlemen and rich men have begun a very
Laudable custom in their Families, to make but one set meal a day, and some
cursorie Collation at night, if need require; which in a great family, saves
much expense, but possibly the poor may suffer in point of broken meat, if
this Fashion was taken up out of a covetous and pennurious desire to save
Charges (as some conceive that not setting beer upon the table, proceeded from
covetousness to save drink, Strangers being loath to trouble the Servitors,
notice being taken what every man drinks) then it is unworthy the name of a
Gentile custom, possibly it began and proceeded partly for healthes sake, and
partly by the straightness of the times, occasioned by taxes, and non payment
of Rents, for one fruit of this War will be I hope, to teach men good
Husbandry, and frugality at their own Tables, that they may the better
remember them for whom nothing is provided, and if that which is saved by
sparing suppers were given to the poor, how many prayers would the rich man
have? as the Spanish beggar says, give me an alms for your own sake God will
repay you in Paradise; the corn is not the grounds but the sowers, the poor are
the best Debtors, what is given to them for Gods sake shall surely be repayed,
I profess I cannot tell how to Judge him a Christian that is not a merciful
man, he that has found mercy from Heaven to this poor soul, cannot but be a
good Samaritan.

But if there be no strong beer or Ale to be sold in common Alehouses, what
shall poor men do that are not able to brew it for themselves? will you turn
our English sack, and our Native wine into Water; our strong beer which breeds
good blood into small beer, that affords little nourishment, and Hop it so,
that if it hop one foot further It will hop into the Water, does not good
Liquor cherish the vital Spirits, and prove a restorative to weak mankind,
especially such as are oppressed with hard labor all the day to send for a
quart of Ale and a white loaf at night, how merry are they with it, as
Vitellius with all his Dainties,

God forbid that we should deny or diminish the virtue of any of Gods good
Creatures, but rather admire so great a mercy, that the same Corn should make
good bread, and such wholesome Liquor for so ungrateful a people, that have
abused his good creatures by bestiality, and excess; and far be it that sober
men should be deprived of comfortable refreshment of those good Creatures which
some have prodigally wasted in drunknes and excess.

good Liquor is no more to be discommended, then the Candle for burning bright,
or a woman for that which is the Privilege of her Sex Modest beauty, If wine be
a mocker, and strong drink raging, or a man thrust his finger into the Candle,
the fault was not in the wine or Ale, but in him that abuses it, from which
abuse the Creature in its kind groans to be delivered, nonest culpa vini sed
culpa bibentis.
and if it had a tongue to speak would curse the drunkard for so doing.

It is in several sorts of beer, as in pieces of Gold, of greater and les
values, he that commends a 22, s. piece does not undervalue a 20. and he that
preferres a Diamond to a piece of Gold, does the Gold no wrong, he that
commends one sort of beer, does not disgrace the rest, but certainly middle
beer not too strong nor too small is the best for most bodies, for it cooles a
hot body, and warmes a cold body, I will not argue whether strong Ale or beer
be necessary for health or strength, this is observable, that the greatest
drinkers are the least eaters, for the drink nourishes, and if they would
drink les, they might eat more, Now as Physicians observe, meat affords a far
better and more solid nourishment then drink does for drink is more properly
taken to distribute the meat and help concoction, rather then for nourishment,
many Germans and Italians which drink nothing but water have strong appetites,
and are generally the strongest men, besides the general abuse of strong Ale
and Beer which has so long continued in this Kingdom, worse then the sweating
sickness, has occasioned the wisdom of state to Enact that no beer or ale
should be sold for above a quart a penny, and barley was not then much dearer
then a years since, I would feign know why men should drink better drink at
Faires, and Markets or at Inns and Alehouses, when they lodge abroad, then they
do at home; it is but a vain custom which occasions much expense of time, and
Coin to make Bargains over a Cup of strong Liquor, whereby many honest people
come to be surprised and defrauded in barganing, though a man cannot stand upon
his legs when he contracts, yet as the Law stands he must stand to his bargain,
though it ^e to the utter undoing of himself, his Wife and Children, and some
Crafty strong brained Chapman will abuse 20 honest simple men by the help of an
Alehouse, I profess these things ought not to be suffered in a well governed
Kingdom, good wholesome drink of a quart for a 1 d. and no better for, there is
no degree beyond wholsomness will remedy and prevent one Thousand mischeifes
exorbitances and extreamities, which otherwise will fall out in this nation, If
strong beer be useful at any time it is a cup in the morning, to keep out the
cold, or at night coming out of the cold for a weak body, but that in Market
towns every house should, sell strong drinks, is but a snare to entrap weak
brains, and ministers daily occasions of Riot and excess.

The Hollanders call their Strong beer great Pharaoh, their middle beer
little Pharaoh, and their smallest beer Israel, finding by experience (which
is the best learning) that the Stronger-beere men generally drink, the more
they rebel against God and they that drink the smallest beer are the most
healthful men, and best Christians, and I believe our learned Physicians for
the most part, drink but little either strong beer or Ale, as being not good
friends to L^^ga vitie, it were the most innocent thing in the world but if it
once come^ to be a general greivance to the Kingdom, as Alehouses are at this
day, as they are used, are the most grievous nusances, and just offense to the
whole kingdom, Destroyers ^f poor people, Corrupte^s of good ma^ners the
rec^ptacle of all ^d sorderly and Law les persons: and the nurseries of all
sensualties and profaneness therefore they ought (...) all reason to be reduced
and reformed.

For the question is but whether strong drinks shall be made in abundance is
formerly or the poor to be pined for want of bread, oh bread, oh precious
bread how much more excellent art thou then strong drink, for the life and
service of man: thou maintain^st his being, strong drink at the best is but
for his well being one man writes of the Ve^t^^e of Noble Ale another of the
Virtue of Warm beer, and other things are highly commended, but who writes in
commendation of that which is worth all other things in the world that is food
for man, bread and fair water, and the Gospel is good cheer for a christian,
Venison and fair water, is not so good: a man may live better with bread alone,
without any other thing, then with all the flesh and dainties in the World and
want bread therefore is Jesus Christ the bread of believers, as being
absolutely necessary to salvation let us have bread at any rate, and part with
it at no rate, it is better for this Kingdom to have Bo^^e and Mutton at 10 s.
a ^^ou^ ^hen barley at ^0 s.

Bushel, but let us hope the best and fear the worst, for that put upon
Action to prevent it.

Here I must needs take notice of a late printed sheet called a Vindication of
strong beer and ale [to be sold in Licenced Alehouses,] written I am
persuaded by a sober man, for he declaimes against drunknes, and intemperance,
his principal drift being first ^o vindicate the Company of Brewers, which he
call^ a distressed ^ompany whose sad Condition groans for releife, who are
looked upon with an unkind aspect, as if they were guilty of the drunkards
sins, because they brew strong beer and Ale, which I conceive is to set up a
man of Clout^ and to shoot at him, or to fight with his own shadow for no man
that is but half sound in his Intelectuall, will blame the Brewer for selling
good Liquor ^o them that are Licenced to buy it, no more then the Cutler can be
blamed for making a Sword, wherewith another man is unjustly killed, the Brower
must be acq^^ted by the Law of God, and man, as be^^g neither principal, nor
accessory to the Prodigalls intemperance, I rather w^sh that the Brewer be not
blame worthy for making his Beer to small, for no pure Element can nourish, I
confess Immediately upon the Excize which concerned not the Brewer i^ point of
Damag^, being paid by the house-kee^^^, ^t was generally observed that the
brewers made their (...) Beer smaller then before, though Malt were at the
same ^at^^; and I have observed for this 20. year that a man might sensibly
cast the dearnesse of Malt in 6. s. Beer, but not the ^heapnes of it, Good my
Masters of the Company of Brewers these things ought not so to be: If you
cannot afford to make good beer when malt in very dear, you may make it
better then ordinary when Malt i^ very cheap; I will not be of Counsel
against you, for Matter of strong ^eere, let your customers look to it; I but
I profess in the words of sobriety, that if you do not make your 6. s. beer
this year as good as possibly you can afford it, for the sustenance of poor
people, you must expect to hear of it, you that have gained much in cheap
years, show your selves charitable men, and put in the other handful of Malt
for poor men's s^k^, you, and the Bakers, should now strive this hard year who
should deal the most honestly and kindly with poor people, you should not
think to increase your estates in a dear year, he that does so abuses his
calling, to an unworthy end, we have a cursed Proverb; every man for himself,
and God for us all, God will not be for that man that uses it, the end of your
Trades is not to gain riches to your selves, but to do good to your Neighbors,
the maine end of our lives is to serve God in serving of men in the works of
our callings, Col. 3.24.
and God allows us to gain moderately for ou^ Labors, but ^ot to gain great
estates, for there is neither precept nor e^ample in Scripture their ever any
man prayed that he might be rich, and get a great estate, more then what in the
Judgment of wise and godly men was sufficient to maintain himself, and
comfortably provide for those that depended upon him though it be got honestly
in regard of man's Law, yet it is against the mind of God, Give ^s this Day our
daily bread, and and give me neither poverty n^^ riches, He that prays not
according to the Lords prayer, says learned Austin, his prayer is sin, what
you may not pray for you may not labor after, Not one Godly man in Scripture
that ever got a great estate by his own industry, many were left rich by their
Ancestors, Abraham, Genesis 28.20. Pro. 30.8.
Solomon, and others, were rich by Gods sending but not by their seekinge,
Jacob ask't ^nt food and raiment.

He that Impl^ye^ his Talent only to get Honors, pleasures, of profits,
prophanes his calling, living to another end then God has appointed, and an
action will lie at the day of Judgment, against many rich men of all Trades
and professions, for abusing their riches, For God commands them that are rich
to be rich in good works, A contra formam colationis f^offamenti.
and releeve the poor, especially in a dear time as this is, and many that
put out their money to that unnatural act of Generation for 100. l. to beget
another and they will have the Interest, though the Creditor have lost the
principal, in these late calamities, a horrible shame that such things should
be suffered, honest men plundered of their estates to lie in Goal for
Interest, against the Law of God, and the Law of the Land, for all Interest
money is forfeited by statute, if but six pence be taken, against all reason
and humanity for the Irish Rebels had so much mercy to Ordain that no Usury
should incur in time of War, nor would the late Oxford party I am confident
have suffered any of their Adheerents to have fotted in Prison for principal
or Interest, that Vserers which have no lawful calling, but a thing permitted
for the hardness of men's hearts, should gain in a time of War? fie upon it;
fie for shame, but I trust our most Honorable Worthies will stop that torrent
of cruelty, and order a repayment to such from whom it had been extorted. And
others lock up their Gold or ^ather their God in an Iron Chest, and leave their
hearts there, as St. Anthony told a Usurer that his heart was in his coffer,
and the Legend says that so it was,

But is not abundance, the gift of God, and a great estate, a blessing and may
not every blessing be sought, I answer, A bless^ing may not be sought, unless
it be a blessing to every one that has it, as faith, Patience, Humility, etc.
riches in our Saviors time were of the nature of thorns and briars, they that
will be rich fall into many snares, may any man Labor for snares, they have
not changed their qualities, I know a rich Saint may do abundance of good this
dear year, and I would earnestly entreat all rich Believers for the Honor of
the Gospel this dear time to do good to all, and especially unto such as be of
the household of faith Alms are the best Sermon noates in a dear year, and
when rich men are liberal then the poor receive the Gospel, but yet a man may
not pray for a great estate, though he intend therewith to releeve the poor,
for he that is of a bountiful affection being poor, possibly being rich may be
of a covetous disposition, for one poor man to love another is but Narcissus
like to love himself, we see the love of money increases as the money comes
in, and for any man to think if he had a great estate, he would do much good
with it, savors of pride as if a man should brag that he could go upon
Mountains, and rough craggy places and tred upon thorns; how do thou know
but that thou may be Covetous if thou were rich, and no wise Saint will
desire more then is sufficient for him in the Judgment of Godly men, for being
liberal in affection, and resolution, God accepts the Will for the deed, as in
the Widows case, and it must needs be so for God works both the will and the
deed, Phil. 2 1^
whereas if he were rich in possessions he might be covetous at least he runs a
hazard which no wise man will do, when he may go upon certainties, I wish the
Saints would weigh this argument and tell me wherein it i^light, the case is
thus, a Christian that has for the purpose 100. l, per annum or 2000, l. in
personal estate, this man may live comfortably and make provision for
posterity, and do many good charitable offices for the poor, now if this man
can get another 1000. l. he resolves to give it away to the poor, for effecting
weereof he must engage himself in many troubles, rise early, go to bed late,
eat the bread of carfulness, and scarce take time for moderate refreshments;
much less can he afford to allow any time for the Excercises of Godliness, to
keep Religion alive in the power and purity of it, and nothing is more
deceitful then his own heart, whether it be wisdom for this man to imbarque
into an angery Sea when he may rest in a secure harbor, in a Condition
pleasing to God and good men; Is the question, which I conceive no wise
Christian but will dislike it, besides who knows whether it be not Gods will to
exercise a Christian impoverty, or a mean condition for the trial of his
Faith, and other glorious ends, best known to his divine Majesty; but then what
encouragement shall men have in their honest callings? much every way, if
heavenly commodities were more esteemed then earthly; what an excellent thing
is it for a man to do good to all men in his generation! I am ashamed to hear
men commended forgetting great Estates, there is a noble Gentleman, if all be
true that is reported of him, deserves more commendation for his Liberality
then many others, Sir Paul Pindar.
a wise man will make his own hands his Executors, and his eyes his overseers
for the surplusage of his estate, besides what is convenient for posterity.

But may not men get great estates honestly, I will not argue how great Estates
are got in this Kingdom, but this I observe, that the richest men, are not the
most liberal to the poor, the more shame for them, there are a Generation of
miserable wretches that like the Ancient Jews have engrossed a great part of
the public treasure, and have vast estates, but do no good to any living
creature, many of them are haters of their own flesh, and will dye Indebted to
their backs and bellies, sure it is that they might be thought to be very poor,
but Cardinal Richlieu would have told such a fellow, you spend little in
Clothes and diet, therefore sure you are full of money, tax him soundly, if a
rich man did wear good cloths, and fared well, Sir says he it is a sign by
your Clothes and diet that you are full of moneys, I hope these Cormoggians
will be met withal, one time or other, I am not a Jugde to name any man in
particular, but let them take it for a warncing; If I do not here of their
good deeds this deer year, (I do not mean their bonds, and specialties which
they so dearly love and count their good Deeds sealed and delivered) but if
they be not charitable to the poor, I will do my best to get a catalogue of
them, that if they shall persist in their baseness and cruelties they may be
published to the world and hooted at as Enemies, of humane society. I would not
be mistaken as if I were an enemy to great Estates, the God of order has
appointed several degrees of men, and set them in their several stations; the
rich to be liberal to the poor, and the poor to be serviceable to the rich,
the greatest Prince sometimes or other may have need of the poorest man living,
at least of his prayers, therefore he ought not to suffer that man to famish
for want of bread.

I am not of their opinion that drive at a parity to have all men a like, it is
but a Vtopian fiction, the Scripture holds forth no such thing; the poor ye
shall have always with you, but there ought not to be a Beggar in England, for
they live raher like beasts them men; Holland is a true Common wealth, where
none are so exceeding rich, nor any beggars permitted, yet different degrees
amongst them, Lords and others, but in Kingdoms and larger territories, there
will be a larger disproportion, corragious Noblemen are the walls of a
Kingdom, and a rich bountiful man is like a Sun E^^ll in the high way, every
man is the better for him; and though he^^ give much away, yet in realitie he
looses no more by his Charity, then the Sun does by comparting his beams upon
the earth, for it is but a sowing, he that casts his bread upon the waters
shall find it again, And that Kingdom is most flourishing where the best men
are the greatest men, and the greatest men, are the best men, at least morrally
good, for Justice, liberality, valor, and such noble virtues, unless a rich
man be liberal and bountiful, there is no more need of him in a Kingdom,
then of a Cross which the silly Papists put off their Hats too, least they
should be hurt in their Journey, poor people are feign to reverence many
cruel Ingrossers, as the Indians do the Devil least he should get them into
his claws, or like the Basilisk kill them with a frown, as for any hopes to
right themselves by Law, it is for a Lamb to contend with a Lion, but when a rich
man in place of authority is courteous to all, and liberal to the poor, the
Kingdom is preferred in that man's Honors, and such a man is a beautiful
prospect; I am no Advocate, for the poor further then to provide bread and
necessaries for them, without which, life cannot be maintained, let rich men
feast, and the poor make a hard meal, but let them have bread sufficient.

Kings and Potentates, Noblemen, and Gentlemen, may rejoice in their great
estates, left unto them, and look upon them as tokens of Gods love, if they be
bountifully minded, and give their bread to the hungry, and more then
ordinarily in such a dear year as this is likely to be, but they may not by
the Law of God make it the chief end and main study of their lives, to
multiply riches, nor so much as to Improve their estates, unles they have a
greater charge then their Ancestors had, men of Honorable professions as the
law Physic and arms, and of public Employments in the Kingdom, may gain a
competence to raise their families, being eminent for virtues and desert, yet
there is a mean in such a case to be used; but for Merchants and Tradesman,
and Usurers to gain such vast estates, as many have done It is neither
warrantable in religion nor policy, for men in selling their commodities ought
not to sell as dear as they can, but as others may live by them and as they can
afford it for a moderate gain. As put case there were 6. ships of several
owners laden with Sugars, Spices, Drugs, or any commodities to be Imported for
the service of this Kingdom, which all ariving safe the commodity would be
afforded at 20. d. a pound, but it pleases God that 5. of them suffer
shipwreck, now the 6th man sels his Comodity for 5. s. a pound, and by 3. or 4.
such providence he becomes rich I say this ought not to be permitted, he ought
in conscience to have sold his commodity as cheap as if the other ships had
arrived, the Kingdom is but one body politic, and every member ought to have
a care of the others preservation, this Kingdom Is so populous and there are
so many of a trade, that one man can scarce live by another, In the Infancy of
the world there was enough for every man, Genesis 30.
therefore that pretty policy which Jacob used to make himself rich with
Labans loss is no objection for Laban was willing to give him what he pleased,
the Scripture is clear in it, that every man is bound to do good according to
his ability, Deuteronomy. 17.16.17,
and that the King may not seek abundance nor accumulate treasure, and if not
Kings certainly not Subjects.

I have read that in some places there are Herculean Pillars set to men's
estates, that a Merchant shall get but 10000. l. another Tradesman 5000. l. and
so for others. and when they are worth so much, they must either trade for the
public good, or else give over their callings and give way to others,
betaking themselves to Gods immediate service, or taking pains for Orphans,
and Widows, that having small personal estates left them, if they should
live upon the principal, it would quickly consume and know not how to Improve
it themselves, therefore able experienced men bestow their pains freely for
them, for all Catholic Counsels have ever condemned Usury in point of
Conscience, by this means men would not be so covetous as now they are, for
now men's desires are infinite, the Covetous man is in a dropsy the more he
gets, the more he desires, the last thing that dies in him, is a desire of
having more he makes no will till he lies a dying and then dies to think he
must make his will, some says he, are wiser then others and puts gold in his
mouth because he will not give al away, he would fain keep some for another
world, as the old wretch that sent for a Priest to make his will, who bad him
pray, not I says he do you pray for me, or else why should I pay you tithes,
well says the Priest shall I Write, do as I bid you says Dives, First I
bequeath the soul of our Parish Priest to the Devil, what my soul says the
Scribe, no such matter, yes thy soul says he, for thou never reprovest me for
my covetousnes, whereas if there were a Law that no man should be worth above
so much, then no man would desire more, men's affections would not be so
infinitely set upon wealth, but their desires would be finite, and so much
sin would be prevented, now that is ever the most Angelical Law, which
prevents sin, and Politic, it must needs be, for one man cannot possibly be
so excessive rich, but it must be upon the ruins of others, you may observe,
that where there is one man so exceeding rich, those that live near him are
most of them poor, for he looks as eagerly after every small purchase to
join house to house, or rather to pluck down all the houses but his own, that
the poor may not live too near him, as a Hawke looks after the Partrige; I
like not alterations in government, when a Kingdom is well settlkd, but when
we are upon the wing of Reformation, I wish it might be to purpose, but my
desire is not to write any thing herein, but what may advance Liberality, and
advantage the poor these strait times.

He argues for the continuance of strong Beer and Ale, as being necessary for
poor people, a preservative of health, and a restorative in sickness, surely
the man is extremely mistaken, for poor people cannot afford to buy any strong
Liquor, whilst bread is so scarce, I mean principally the Country poor; who
begin to make lamentable complaints already, many of them being ready to die
for fear of being famished to death.

If the poor drink any Ale this year, it must be very sparingly, as some
Italians use Wine instead of Oil, or Butter, to get down breap (which ever
loves a Companion) in the way of Tosts, now a Tossed in Ale has 7. excellent
properties.

1. It satisfies hunger. 2. It quenches thirst. 3. It helps concoction, by
removing obstructions. 4. It causes sleep. 5. It exhilerates the Spirits. 6. It
gets a good Color, a lover of Tosts has ever a ruddy and a cheerful
countenance. 7. It keeps the to the fleame, therefore let no Tossed be lost, as
there has been too much abuse in that kind.
If I may have bread says one, I care not though I drink water all the winter.

In the last dear year, when Barley was about a Noble a Bushel, Pease, and
Oats, Flesh, Butter, Cheese, and other Provisions were plentiful; a poor man
might have bought him a pair of shoes for 2. s. which now cost him about 4.
s. Oh says a poor man last night, I would be content to go barefoot this
winter, if I were sure to get bread for my poor Wife and Children; I confess
it melted my heart to hear it: I remember that Sir Knevet being to loose one
of his hands for striking in the presence Chamber; he Petitioned King H. 8. to
vouchsafe him a pardon for his right hand, and he would willingly loose his
left, says King H. since he is so ingenuous let him keep both his hands, oh,
that the patient humility, and meek ingenuity of the poor, that would be well
contented with bread and Water might move the heart of the Kings most excellent
Majesty, the Nobles and Honorable Worthies in Parliament, the Noble General
Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Army under his Excellencies Command, the Assembly,
and every honest man of abilities in the Kingdom, to resolve as one man acting
in their several spears of Government, and subjection to find out some timely
expedient to prevent this eminent dearth and death of poor people, and to say
with that Noble King Henry since the poor will be content with bread and Water
without shoes; they shall have both Bread Beer and Clothes, to defend them
from hunger, and thirst and from the cold Winter,

But I hear the husbandmen cry out, that taxes and extraordinary charges are so
great that he cannot subsist unles corn be dear; mark the consequence, then
it seems the poor laboring man must pay for all, if there be barley enough
to be had at 5. or 6, s. a bushel, why may there not be some speedy way
thought upon to ease the Farmer, that he may afford to sell it for half a
crown, and 3. s. so as the poor may live, but whether barley be at 2 s, or 1.
s. a bushel it makes neither more nor less in the Kingdom, there is a
Mystery in it, which I hope the Wisdom of State will unfold, and prevent the
sad consequences, which are otherwise likely to ensue before another Harvest.

But it may be said, what need any such supplication since the worthy Justices
may in every County if they please, restrain malting, and consequently
Alehouses will fall with the weight of their own Luxuriance; I agree it, and
the Lord ^tirre up their Hearts to be faithful and Courageous, but I consider
that the worthy Justices, are otherwise burdened with Country affairs, many
weighty businesses Incumbent upon them, for the public good, therefore if
they were for the present disburdened, and exonerated of so great a charge, and
trouble, and that it were specially recommended to the Committees in every
Country or a Committee of moderation Accommodation, or provision, for the poor,
appointed in every County to license such only in every necessary place to
keep Victualling houses and to sell good wholesome drink for passengers, as are
the most sober and best affected persons to the Parliament, I suppose the price
of barley, and consequently all other g^aine and provision would deminish and
abate, such victuallers to be presented and commended to the said Committee by
the Minister of every parish, where one or more Alehouses are necessary if he
be a man well affected to the public, and such and some of the best affected
persons in every Parish to be by the Committee appointed Supervisors of such
Victualling houses, to look diligently and narrowly into all excessive and
exorbitant courses, that shall be acted there, and to bring offenders before
the said Committee, to receave such condign punishment, as the wisdom of
Parliament shall ordain drunkenesse and disorders to be punished five times
more severely then formerly, for the necessity of the Kingdom to provide bread
for the poor, does necessarily require it.

But says one, have not the Vintners given you a Fee to Plead against
Alehouses, that so Taverns may be more frequented? For good fellows will be
merry at any rate, and sack will make them madder then strong Ale or beer
Nothing les, if it should be so it is besides my intentions, I wish that Sack
might be sold again in Apothecaries shops as formerly, as being an occasion of
much sin and wickedness in this Kingdom, and if men of estates and sober men
find it healthful for them, let them keep it; in their own sellars, for
their private refreshments, but to sell it so publicly as it is, is but to
put a sword into a mad man's hand, every man that can borrow but 5. s may go and
be drunk with it, and then contemnes both divine and human authority; and
scorns to be reproved by any man living, it is not so in other Countries men
dare as well be hanged as be drunk, the Vintners, Drawers, and excessive
drinkers are all thrown into a Pond to cool themselves, but plucked out again
alive like drowned Rats and fined half their estates, and if they will not
take warning, such men ought not to live, It was but just to make a Law that
every Vintner, that suffers a man to drink drunk in his house should be fined
100. l. to the poor, and some corporal punishment, it is a fond objection that
some men will be drunk with a little, 3. or 4. Gallants come in and drink a
Gallon or more of Spanish wine at a meeting, and yet Mr. Vintner minces the
matter, and says they drunk but little in his house, they had it before. A
pint of Sack is a moderate refreshment for 3. or 4. men, if they drink a quart
upon business it may tollerably pass; but to carrouse healthes and call for
quart after quart, this ought to be seveerly punished, if any man's brain be so
weak, that a Glass or two distempers him, this may be given in evidence
without much difficulty and indoubtfull cases, let the Vintners be acquitted
consult with the best Physicians, and they will tell you that a Pint of Sack
is more then sufficient for any man to drink at one sitting, but I do not yet
conceive that the Taverns have any great influence upon the prices of Barley, I
believe the Taverns have made many poor, but now the Alehouses threaten to
destroy them: Nemo Athleta sine sudore coronatur difficile e^t sed tendit ad
ar^^a vi tus
I know it is hard to reform abuses, and exorbitances in every trade and
profession, but no wrastler or champion, is crowned without swearing, great
Reformations are for the greatest Courts, what mischeifes are not occasioned by
drunkenness, but what may not a Parliament do to prevent it?

A Parliament can do every thing for the public good of the Kingdom, and
certainly a greater good cannot be thought upon, then to prevent drunkenness,
and to provide bread for poor people, without which we shall put the Lord upon
a miracle for the preservation of this Kingdom; Quid non corietas etc. sed
quid non Parliamentum.
Therefore I s^^ll in the lowest degree of humility, Crave leave In forma
pauperis to move our most Honorable Worthies for all the poor people in this
Land, whose fears are very great, and their complaints and cries already in
many places most lamentable.

That Bread, Bread, Bread, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake bread, which we
hear at New gate, Ludgate, and other Prisons, is but a fancy in comparison, we
are a Company of poor Prisoners, almost starved and pined to death, if it be
so indeed, the more shame to the Government of the City, and others who must
answer for the blood of every man that is famish't in Prison for want of bread,
be his offense what it will, for no Offender may be poisoned or famished to
death by the Law of Nations, it being abhorred by the Law of Nature; there
needs no other sin to bring the Plague into the City, which the Lord in his
goodness remove, and make the higher powers wise as Angels of light, before
the wrath of the Lord break forth upon us, for suffering such unmercifull
domineering, over the bodies of poor creatures; possibly one old Usurer has
20. slaves rotting and famishing to death, in several Dungeons: that he may
make Dice of their Bones, as the Custom is when the Prisoner is dead in
Execution, the Creditor has Dice delivered him at the Office supposed in a
fiction of Law to be made of the Creditors bones, and that is all that he gets
by his cruelty, till he be delivered to those Infernal Goalers to be tormented
for ever, and if it were possible for ever after, Mat. 8.23.30.34.
because he had no pity of his fellow servant: If there be so much barbarous
cruelty used in all the world, as there is in this Kingdom concerning poor
Prisoners, I dare loose my life for it: the Turks and others beat their Galley
slaves for their pleasures, but they feed them that they may endure the blows,
but we cast men into a Dungeon; and suffer them to rot and famish, now I
hysitians will agree with me that a death by Famine, is most cruel and
painful of all other deaths, and the Law says that they must starve before
they come there, for the writ whereby they are imprisoned imports, forasmuch as
the Debtor has no estate, therefore take his body for satisfaction.

And here give me leave to put this Case, suppose (which God forbid) that
Barley this year, should be at 10. s. a bushel, or so excessive dear, that
the poor laboring man that has nothing but what he gets by his day labor,
can gain but 2 s. a week, as many already work hard for no more; every man now
striving to get work out of one another hands, as rich men contend for a good
bargain, this man having a wife, and 5. or 6. small children to maintain,
tells his Neighbors that he and his Family are ready to starve, and famish,
they have not their bellifull of bread once in a week, well says the Miser,
Corn is a precious commodity this year, I cannot help you, when corn is
cheap, every man will give an Alms to the poor, but now corn will make
money, oh this yeallow Earth, how does the Miser love that which has one Letter
more in it then the name of God? his beloved Gold.

This poor man to keep his Family alive, finding an opportunity takes away
some corn, from one of these misers Rickes, or stackes of corn, for his
Barnes will not hold half his Provisions, and he will not build greater
Barnes as Gods fool, but the worldlings wise man did, who thereby set the
poor on work, the Question is whether this be Felony by the Law of God, Luk
12.20
for which this poor man ought to suffer death by any just positive Law of man.

Certainly Christians ought to be more merciful then the Jews, and therefore
the judgment of the best Christian politicians, has ever been, that no
offense ought to be death under the Gospel, which was not death by Moses Law,
but many offenses which were death by that Law ought not to be death, under the
Gospel, because Christians ought to be more merciful then the Jews; who
being by nature, a cruel people: God gave them Laws accordingly, as the
Adulterer, Sabbath breaker, and the disobedient child were to be stoned,
certainly our Forefathers were either very covetous or cruel. to make it
felony to steal a Lamb, or a Pig, which by the Law of God was only punished
by restitution, but the Scripture puts a difference between a thief who steals
for necessity, men do not despise him that steals to satisfy his hunger
(says Solomon) and a presumptious Thief, who has no need to steal that does
it not for want but for wantonness, such a one was to dye, our law is exceeding
seveere, and never Inquires after the motive and impulsive cause, if a man that
is ready to starve or famish, take away from his Neighbor a suit of Clothes,
or a strike of Corn this man must dye the death, as if he had killed a man, I
know there is a culpable necessity, as my Lord Bacon calls it, if a man shall
wast his estate, and then pretend want, he deserves the les pity, and there is
alight necessity, a great necessity, and an extreme necessity, If a poor man
far from any Town, that is almost famisht, for want of food, meets with a
Baker, who will not be entreated to give him a loaf and he takes away by force
so much bread from him, as in the Judgment of wise men is necessary to keep
him alive, In this case I conceive he has not offended the Law of God; and
therefore ought not to be punished by any Law of man; because the Law of
property must not derogate from the Law of nature, much less abrogate it, I am
not of opinion that all things were at any time in Common, by the Law of
nature, for then the eighth Commandment would not have been morrall and the
very dictates of nature and right reason as Sir Walter Rawley -- most learnedly
evinces them to be, 2, Acts 44.
but those Authors which speak of all things being in common are to be
understood in the same sense as the Apostles are said to have all things in
common viz: they lived so lovingly and contributed so freely to the necessities
one of another, as if all things had been in common, howbeit, there was a law
of property, yet every man dispenst with his own right to preserve his
brother, the rich man's superfluities gave place to another convenience, his
conveniences to another man's necessities, his Necessities to another man's
extremities, one man's les Extremities to his Neighbors greater Extremities,
and so Mecanicall poor must releeve Mendicant poor, rather then they should
perish, out the true reason of State is this, In the beginning of all Kingdoms,
States, and societies, It was mutually a greed that so long as there was
sufficient to preserve all men alive in that Kingdom, one man should not
feast, and another man fast, and be starved, If thy barnes be full of Corn, and
thy neighbor almost starved, and famished, It is his bread which thou unjustly
detainest from him in thy barnes, Math. 13. Math 21.
and his clothes that lie a molding and moth eating in thy Trunkes, we see the
disciples being hungry plucked the ears of Corn, upon the Sabbath day, and the
question was not about the Corn, which was none of theirs, but being upon the
Sabbath day, Christ says I will have mercy and not sacrifice and his sending
for the Ass, though that example argues him to be Lord of all yet that reason,
For the Lord has need of him, is Emphaticall, For necessity, passengers might
enter into a Vineyard, and refresh themselves, so as they carried none away
with them, I would Christians were so merciful, to part with their
superfluities, without question, that which is excessively spent in apparel
and Diet would comfortably releeve all the poor in the Kingdom.

Consider you that be rich, God might have made you the tail and the poor the
head, when you have feasted at the upper end of the Table it is but good manners
to send down the dishes, that the Master of the Feast may be praised, Now for
a good Gains and a Marie to power forth ointments and liberalities, which will
not only cause thanks to be given to Almighty God, but procure blessings upon
the Donors and Benefactors for God is the poor man's surety, He that has Pity
on the poor, lends, Proverbs. the 19.17,
unto the Lord, and that which he has given, will he pay him again but let not
him that is poor say how liberal he would be if he had an estate, we little
know the temptation of that condition, we see by woeful experience, that riches
are of a dropsy nature but say thus; there is a rich man, how rich might he be
in good Works, what means has he to do good he might reach out his hands 20
ways to the poor (he that has made 100. poor, why should not he releeve 20.
In humane probability, nothing but Gods blessing upon the sublime wisdom of
State can prevent this growing evil, and epidemicall disease, and starving and
famishing the poor (which I had rather dye then then live to see, and I hope
every merciful man is of my oppinion) by taking speedily, and instantly some
such effectual opperative Course, as in their peircing Judgments and deepest
apprehensions in whom resides the public Judgment and reason of State, to
bring down the price of Barley, and consequently of all other grain and
commodities in the Kingdom, for if Gods good creatures be not abused, and
wastfully expended, there will be more plenty, and things must needs be
cheaper, for the poor have not much money, to keep up the price of any thing,
whereof, there is store.

And because I know, it is the general desire of all honest men that the poor
should be every where provided for, and I think there has been several
meetings in the City to restrain the Beggars, by providing for such as are
impotent, and not able to work, and forceing such as can take pains to get
their own bread, by the sweat of their brows, as the Law of God requires;
which I marvill why any man should demurre, and stick upon it in a matter so
easy, and so much concerning the Honor of the City which Gundamor said, was
like a continued: Hospital, where he was besieged with Begers, which a Crown
laid upon every house in Land. and Middlesex, to be paid by the Landlord would
do it abundantly, a course which was taken in Paris where the Streets were
covered with Beggars, and in a weeks space not a Beggar to be seen, but
because it will require time to settle this Kingdom in a better posture for
poor people, for if the Laws were diligently executed, the poor might rather
be said to languish then to live, we give a poor man a piece of bread upon his
knees lying by a wall, but we do not set him upon his legs, that he may help
himself, as they do in other places, I shall in the interim, make some
proposals and present some expediences to every true Samaritan, that has the
bowels of mercy, and compassion, and that is affectionatly sencible of want
and poverty, hoping that such a man will cordially concur with me, in all
just and reasonable demands, for me thinks no legal thing should be denied to
poor people in a hard time, and my Propositions are 12.

12. motions for the poor.
1. I shall humbly pray, not only that all just penal laws, where any part of
the forfeitures are given to the poor, may be carefully and speedily put in
Execution, and the poor imbursed without charge or diminution which is but
just, and if it might please the higher powers that the poor might have the
whole forfeitures upon all just penal Laws, some little to be allowed to the
Informer, for his encouragement, or rather that some Sollicitors for the poor
might be appointed in every County, to inquire after forfeitures and duties as
should belong unto them.

But in particular that the poor might but have the benefit of some few
Statutes, one whereof lies Dormant, and I marvill, noe man look^s after it,
it is the Statute of 39. Eliz. by which all interest money is forfeited, though
the Usurers take but 5.l. or 12.d. in the hundred, it is a most excellent Law,
and in effect the Law of God never to be repealed, the ordinary way to recover
this use money, is by information in some Court, but that is too tedious, and
circular, it is for a poor man to go 5. miles for a piece of bread, if there
were a Committee for the poor to examine all such forfeitures, that the rich
Usurers might quickly untrusse, and fetch out their Baggs, and make
restitution, or repayment to any that are in need, or to the poor that have
most need of it, this very Law being executed, according to the true and plain
meaning of the Law makers, would make provision for poor people; and what
reason can any man assign why this Proposition, should not take effect the Law
in it self is most just grounded upon the Law of God, and common honesty, 39.
E. l. 18.
the law of England does not allow Usury in point of conscience, the Stat. of
13. Eliz. and other Statutes do not allow the taking of 10. and 8. but
restrain the lender from taking more, but this Statute 39. Eliz. enacts that
whatsoever the lender takes above the Principal, it shall be taken from him,
and so the Law connives and winks at the Usurer with one Eye, suffering it so
to be, for the hardness of men's hearts, but yet tells him the danger of it,
that if any man will inform against him it must all be forfeited, like him
that with a Gun winks at the Bird with one Eye, and shoots it to death with
another: the Law of England calls Usury a detestable thing, aginst the Laws of
God, and Charity, and if any man says that the old Usurers, will lend no more
upon these Terms, I answer, let Justice be done, and fear nothing, let them
hang themselves in Chains of Gold: I hope the Magistrate knows how to order
them, I do not speak against Usury in point of Exchanges, nor in the Case of
Orphans, Widows, or a Generation of middle people that have but a little money
to live upon, and cannot find a faithful friend to employ it in some honest
trade, and if he should spend upon the principal, must quickly beg, not
knowing themselves how to make use of it; but I speak against such as make a
trade of usury, all their days, that have gained thousands by it, that have
sufficient to live upon without Usury, that will have money o^ the Debtors
Boues, whether he gain or loose, whereas a man may better take 15. l. from him
that gains 30.l. in the 100.l. then 5. l. from him that looses 15. l. that
will rather let a poor man starve then abate his Interest that accursed thing,
what vast estates have many men got by Usury; like him that sold a horse for a
penny a nail to double 34. nails, or the Butlers Box that gains all
incensibly which the Gamsters never think of, this Usury like a Canker eats out
many men's estates, 100. l. at 10. in the hundred in 70. years amounts to 100000
pounds. I am sure many poor Creatures have suffered extremely upon pae^ all
Laws, the Law is so says one, who can help it, if in many cases they have
been greived, why in this particular, should they not be releived.

1. Iac. 9. 4. Iac 5. 7. Iac. 10. ^1. Iac. 7.
The next is the statutes against Drunkenness, and tippling, he that is
convicted of Drunkenness before one Justice of peace, upon the oath of one
witness forfeits 5. s. to the use of the poor, and if the Officer be negligent
he looses 10. s. to the same use.

Brewers that sell any Ale or Beer, to unlicenced Victualling houses, more
then for necessary ho^shold provisions, forfeits after the rate of 6 s. 8. d.
for every Barrel, Alehouse keeper or Innkeeper; suffering any tippling
contrary to any Statutes, forfeits 10. s and every such tipler 3. s. 4. d.
selling of les then a quart of the best Beer or Ale for 1. d. and 2. quarts of
small, the penalty is 10. s. and whosoever tiples in any Inn or Alehouse where
his habitation is, forfeits 3. s. 4. d. and the Inne-keeper, Victualler or
Alehouse keeper, that suffers any to continue so tippling forfeits 10. s. If
these statutes were executed upon Offenders, it were both just and seasonable.

The third is the statute against swearing; He that swears or curses, is for
every such offense to forfeit 12. d. How many men are there and some of great
estates, that owe more to the poor then they are worth, and I doubt, make
little conscience either of the Laws of God, or man, for a good Law binds in
conscience, being the Law of God, put in execution by man, and they are as
really and conscionably indebted to the Poor 12. d. for every time that they
swear or curse, as if they had given Bond for it, for a debt by statute Is the
highest Bond of record that can be; the mad Roister that was convicted of 3.
oaths, threw down a twenty shillings piece, and said he would swear it out
before he was much elder; I wish heartily that all swearers and Curfers would
break of such prodigious sins by repentance, and their past Iniquities, not by
showing mercy but doing Justice to the poor, paying them but what they owe
them, for how many profane people, curse, and swear continually, and being
lovingly admonisht of it, Friend what hurt has God ever done you that you
should thus dishonor him, either swear that they did not swear, for they
void their excrements without taking notice of it, or else they rage at him who
asks them when they came from Hell, for one man knows another by his
language, and say their lips are their own, who is Lord over them, however I
would have them pay their Debts to the poor and so satisfy the Law of man,
though not the Laws of God, for they are but the poor man's Pursbearers, and
this is the first expedient to bring money into the poor man's Box. Only I
could heartily with that Commissions were freely granted and speedily executed
upon the statutes of Charitable uses, for I am confident there is a mass of
many thousand pounds due to the poor by gifts and Legacyes most unconscionably
detayned from them.

2ly. My second proposition for the benifit of poor people is that some way
may be devised to send poor people small sums of money upon security,
without paying any interest, until this Kingdom shall be so strong in Faith,
as to trust God with it is safety, and preservation in his own way without the
help of usury, sending that packing after the Bishops, who suffered it to take
such deep rooting in this Kingdom since the time of Reformation, for in times
of Popery it was an odious thing, and a Usurer as much detested, as one that
had the French Pocks, or a Leprosy, he was excommunicated as a Haeretique,
and by the Civil Law a notorious Usurer can make no will, in the interim I
wish that a poor man that would borrow 5. s. upon any household stuff or
pledge, might have it freely without such horrible extortion, as the poor in
this Kingdom, specially about London undergo, for put case a poor laboring
man has got 20. or 30. l. in household stuff, and some small Commodities in
his trade, if this man fall sick what a sad condition is he in, he knows not
where to borrow 20. s. without a pledge, and to the Broker he must go, the
Broker will have 12 d. a month for the 20. s. and 6. d. for the Bill which
comes to 18. s. a year for 20. s. which is 9. l. a year for 100. l. a poor
Creature for 12 d. must pay 2. d. a week which is 800. l. a year for 100. l.
to prevent such like cruelties, they have in many places banks of piety, that
the poor may bring a pledge or good security, and have 5. or 10. l. to begin a
trade, Montes Pietatis.
and by that means comes to get a stock; for what is the reason that so many
young tradsmen in this City and other plac^s miscarry, and are undone before
they understand themselves; they take up money at 8 per Cent. and if they come
to a bad market, they must sell though if be to loss, or the Interest will eat
them out, there is a great error in this Kingdom, that all charity is in
giving, and not in lending, he that lends a poor man (...) to follow his
trade, does a more charitable deed in the fight of God and good men, then he
that gives him 20. Alms to keep him in a consumption of beggary, neither dead
nor a live, as ^ias said of them that were at Sea; There are three sorts of
poor; the Mendicant Beggar; the poor that are maintained by Collections, and
receive Alms from the Parish, which sort of poor are intended in all our
Statutes, that provide for the poor, for the Law intend no Beggars, and there
is a needy laboring mecannicall man, that is oppressed with a great charge,
and many times does not make his wants known; wrastles with poverty, but it
comes like an armed man upon him, he cannot resist it; the tru^st charity is to
releeve such a man, to lend this man money to buy him a Cow, a Sheep, and a
Hog, or some such necessaryes, I know if the Kingdom were in a gospel frame
every man would quickly be provided for, in conscience and right reason; every
man ought to have a Cow and 2. or 3. sheep to give milk for his poor Children
and to cloth them. And what a great matter was it, if every poor man had a
piece of Beef every Sabbath day, to rejoice with his family that poor
Creatures tasting how gracious the Lord is to them in temporal blessings,
might be thereby encouraged to look after the Lord Jesus for eternal
salvation, and how cordial would their obedience be to the higher powers, who
might easily effect greater matters for honest poor people; How ridiculous is
it; that one man should have 3. or 4000. sheep, and sit Rent-free, and his next
Neighbor go all tattered, and not a Coat to put on; Is England famous for the
Golden Fleece, and must English men go up and down naked like beasts, no
clothing but their bare skins? has one man so many Ricks and Stacks and Barnes
full of Corn this dear time? and must his Neighbors be pyned for hunger? and
all this forsooth for fear of a paritie: Hell is in some Misers certainly;
(Pardon the expression) when I speak any thing about releeving the poor, what
says one; I see your aim is to have all men a like, because I entreat that
man that has 1000 sheep, and sits Rent-free, to give his poor, honest,
painful, thankful, and serviceable Neighbors as much Wool as will apparel
his Family once a year, or to let him have it at an easy rate, and work it
out for him by degrees; and because I earnestly desire all those men that have
store of corn this year, to let their poor Neighbors have it at a
reasonable rate, at 2. s. or rather then fail 2. s. 6. d. a Bushel, is this
to desire a parity, how does pride and Covetousness, fill Bedlam? but till the
poor man's cause can be better heard, I wish no poor man might be destroyed by
Usury, me thinks every honest man should lend freely that is sure to be
repayed, without troubling the supreme Justice, to make any such provision.

3. I propound on the Poores behalf, that all the earnest money in the
Kingdom, upon contracts, may be given to the poor, as it was originally, for
earnest money is Gods money, the earnest is that which secures the bargain, and
the usage was, that, when the buyer put earnest into the Sellers hand, the
Sellar prays to God to bless the bargain to him, Ar^ha dicitur Denarius Dei.
which we call strike him good luck, and the earnest money was to be given to
the poor, that God may bless the bargain to both parties, the money to the
sellar, and the Commodity to the buyer, and in some places the Papists make
conscience of giving the earnest money to the poor to this day, unless the
bargain be under 20. s. and then the Law was otherwise, because it was
presumed to be a bargain, made between poor people; now what if such a Law or
Custom was revived, such small matters would refresh the poor and not
prejudice the rich for few men, specially Tradesmen will sell to loss; If a
man for every Commodity that he sold should give 4. d. 6. d. or 12 d. to the
Poor according to the value of the thing, I am confident he would dye never
the poorer.

There are many poor Market Towns very populous where there are sold at some
Faires or Markets, it may be 100. Horse, 200. Beasts, and 500. sheep, with many
other bargains of great value.

Now if every man that has sold his Commodity, would give 2. d. 4. 6. or 12. d.
to the poor, how merrily would he rejoice over his brown Loaf, and some hot
Broth made of Oat-meal^ and water, and sleep more securely then hi^ rich
Neighbor.

4. My two next Propositions are by way of entreaty, first to all those pers^ns
of Honor, quality and estates that in stead of covering twice a day, make b^t
one set meal, and some sho^t refreshment at night, that what they shall really
save by such a provident frugility, they would nobly, and freely, give it to
the poor till things be Cheaper, possibly by this means there are not so many
^roken Baskets left for the poor, for Servants must needs have stronger
appetites, and make fewer Crusts where they eat but once a day; but I had
rather fetch a motive from their noble breasts, and charitable dispositions, It
may be there was a virtue mads of necessity in military times, and taxes, but
now that there is a mitigation, and no such necessity of parcimoney for them
that have this worlds substance, I would nor have them grow richer in a time of
scarcity, which yet they may do notwithstanding this happy conversion of
turning superfluous eating and drinking, (for their familyes are as healthful
and lusty as when they had large suppers) into a comfortable refreshment for
poor people, the French man says, he that is provident at his Table makes
money with his teeth, I am sure this course would acquire much honor and
esteem. He that is the most charitable man this year, shall be the most
Honorable man in my esteem, let his opinion be what it will, for Charity
belongs to men as they are men, not as Christians; He that shall give a Cup of
cold water to a Desciple in the name of a Disciple, argues himself to be a
good Christian; And he that will find out the poor this dear year in back
Lanes, and deal bountifully with them shall not loose his reward, for Gods
blessing shall attend him

5. Next, I would entreat for the preservation of Barley, that there may be no
drinking of Healths, and as little drinking to one another as possibly can be,
for I observe, that to drink to a man caryes a kind of necessity with it to
pledge him, at least it was an Invitation to make him drink when he is not a
dry, and consequently there is much more Beer wasted in the Kingdom then need
to be, It is but a groundles Ceremony of drinking to one another, for which
there can be no reason given, more then ancient custom, for why may not we
as well eat one to another, and say here is a bit to such a one, as well as
drink to one another, or to the remembrance of any friend.

If the fashion were taken up in the time of the Daines, or in Civil Wars,
that men were afraid to be killed as they were drinking, therefore desired one to
be their pledge, and surety to protect them from any hurt as they were
drinking, and he to do the like for him when he drank; which is something
Improbable that such desperate Enemies should dine together, yet grant it were
so, what reason is there, for the continuance of it, a Law is of force ^n an
Instant, and the life of a custom is time Immemoriall, and continuance without
Interruption, but neither of them ought to continue longer then the reason
lives, for reason is the life of all mortal and civil Actions, without
exception; I know Health drinking is now out of Fashion, and of evil report
amongst godly sober men, but this drinking to one another yet continues which
however it be not abused, by sober persons, yet their lives being exemplary,
the contrary is to be wished, for Pot Companions could object that the Puritans
would drink no healths, yet they would drink one to another; All things are
lawful, but all things are not expedient; I will not dispute the lawfullnesse
of it, but the convenience in point of abuse, the best things are not to be
disused for the abuse of them, when they are necessary; but when Indifferent
things are generally abused, then in good policy they ought to be removed; I
shall Instance in that which is divine and morrall; the Primitive Christians
were Commanded to salute one another with a holy kiss, a chaste salutation of
love, and Charity, which was accordingly practiced at their solemn Feast
meetings, but afterward Gods people perceiving a General abuse of it, that it
gave offense and matter of scandal, to the Heathens, and unbeleevers, that
came into the Assemblies, who thought to justify their uncleanenesse by the
Christians saluting each other, for say they, If those that profess Christ and
so much strictness may salute one another, why not we? and the best men
perceaving that they have not their own hearts under Lock and Key, and that
the first motions of the soul are not so in their own power, but that there
may be a titillation of the Concupiscible appetite the highest poinr of
Christian prudence being to avoid the first occasions of sin, and all apperance
of evil, they discontinued that injunction in the letter of it, A Christians
sincerity being principally discovered in avoiding all temptations to vanity,
for that the most holy man caryes about him the spawn and root of all
Enormityes, which will have a being in him, so long as he has a being in this
world; Not to condemn him (a believer must not fear that) but to humble him,
and show him the more want of a Savior; Job rhat durst talk with the Devil,
durst not look upon a Maid; and herein the Churches of Christ do not disobey
the mind of God, In forbearing the holy kiss, though in express words
commanded; because the thing Enjoined is love, and entirenes of affection,
which if it be expressed and demonstrated any other way, the Command is
satisfied, for the manner of expression of love to one another may alter,
Consuetudo pro more Loci est observanda.
but love is the ^nstinct of the new creature which must always continue; and
so it was a practice temporary, or Customary; as the Corinthians short hair,
and prophesying with the head uncovered, which the French Ministers preach with
their Hats on, as conceaving the Minister to be as good a man, as any in the
Congregation, and consequently to have as much right to be covered as any of
them.

Michael de Montaigne.
One of the gallantest men that ever France bred, who resolved never to marry if
he might have wisdom herself, but used the French Custom of saluting Women,
as we do, till at last he was much troubled about it, and said his affection
was for it, but his judgment strongly against it, as being a temptation to
incontinence, for says he, if the party be hansome, there is a natural
Cupidity that it might continue, if otherwise, it is don with a reluctance, and
many grave Matrons complained that they were constarined to kiss slubbery
fellows, least they should be counted uncivil and violaters of an ancient
custom, his Gentleman who was an Instrument of much good to his Country, and
counted it the most Honorable vocation to serve the public, was so far
possessed with the Inequity of that Ceremony as it was by the most abused, that
he prevailed with many juditious sober men and women to break it off, as being
an off^^ce to good men, and an Incentive to Lascivious spirits; and made it his
whole Study to Invent Arguments against it: The French Gentry argued stiffly for
the continuance of it, till he convinced them of the danger of it from the
sweet savor that causes a natural delectation, or a malevolent odoure that
makes a disgustfull relish, that lovers of virtue should not run so great a
hazard in turning their lips to one another, it carrying with it a natural
tendencie and uninforced proclivi^y to wanton coggitations, and he that loves
danger shall perish in it, that the Mounsieurs, had nothing to say for it but
this, that they would use it in France, because the Spaniard never used it in
Spain, for a French man is that which a Spaniard is not, and by his wisdom
there was an Edict about Bordeaux where he was borne, that men and women
should not salute by turning the lip to one another, as formerly to prevent the
first occasions of lost, which is the true ground why the Italians, and
Spaniards detest it, for my own part, I love all demonstrations of Amity and
affection that are not offensive, to grave godly men, and women, and against
which no solid reason can be proved; but I wish heartily that this presenting
of our loves and services to one another by the Cup, unless it be for the
better handing of the Cup or Glass, from one to another when there is but one
Glass, and every one ready to drink, was discontinued, as being an unnecessary
Complement, that may very well be spared; and though sober and temporate people
do not abuse it, yet the continuance of the Custom make s many to drink
excessively both in Alehouses, and in Noblemens, and Gentlemen's Sellars, where
there is much wast of that, which might be better given to the poor, much
Liquor abused and spilt in unnecessary ceremonies, which if godly sober people
would discontinue, it would come at last to be a thing detested, and I am
confident that this year very much might be saved by it, and therefore I hope
those that desire to be accounted temperate, will not any longer use it,
unless they drink to such, as they are sure will not drink any more, for being
drunk unto, then what is convenient, for certainly, If a divine sanction when
it comes to be abused may be omitted, much more all human Ceremonies in Civil
Actions, which have no foundation in solid reason, ought to be abandoned, and
specially when it is demonstrable that utility and advantage may thereby accrue
to the public, as in this case.

6. My next design to releeve the poor is an Impeachment drawn up against
Gamesters, in love to their poor souls, that they would restore what monyes
they have won at play to the looser, if he have any need of it, or else to the
poor, for the winner has no conscionable Evangelicall right, to the money
which he wins, however the Law may be defective, in not enjoining him to make
restitution, for I challenge all the wits in the world, to bring a reason why
the Law should suffer any man to undo himself by play, as many Familyes have
been utterly ruined thereby, Is there any sense why a man should loose that
which should buy his Family bread, because his Chance at Dice is, 1. 2. 3. 0.
and 4. and the other throws 4. sixes; As for the others adventure, that he
might as well have lost, that's nothing to the reality of a consideration,
because I might have 100. l. from you for nothing, therefore you shall have
100. l. from me for ^uthing; this is no real merit, but a Vtopian Imaginary
consideration; as if a man should have money because he dreams of it; it is but
a shadow, and a formality, nothing in essence and substance therefore it were
very fit that there were a Law made to enforce the redelivery of all such
monyes as have been lost at play within 10. years ^ast past; where the loss
has been great, and where the wager has been but small, and the sport rather
for victory then Covetousness; I wi^h the poor might have it, for let me tell
that man who ever he be, that has got another man's money by play which he
could nor well spare, he is in Gods account but that man's Pursbearer, and owes
him so much mon^y, for howbeit the Commo^es of it takes away the scandal, as
in matters of forfeiture, which is but a k nd of double dealing yet the sin is
not taken away until the money be restored; And if it be said that a man may
freely give away his Estate, I agree it, if his Wife and Children do not suffer
by it; but the winner scorns to take it a^ a gift, nor is it so Intended by
the looser, I have heard much of a fair horse and Land lost at a throw at
Dice, and the looser stabbed himself, and some of his blood falling upon the
Chimney piece, will not be wiped off, for my part I think the House ought in
Law and conscience to be no less the loosers heir then it was before for a
possessor by an evil faith cannot prescribe in Conscience, where continual
claim is made, there was one pretty case in France, a feme sole Merchant
promised her Apprentice to make him free if he would lie with her, who did so,
and was made free, but the Court unde^standing what the consideration was,
adjudged his freedom void, and him to serve another Apprenteship, upon the
reason of our Law, that no man shall take benefit of his own wrong, and if I
give Bond to I. S. in consideration, that he shall beat I. D. this Bond ought
not to stand, and so when there is no consideration, A Chancellor is not only
to reform and rectify matters of fraud and apparent deceit, but all over
reaching and circumvention being a sinful practice, ought also to be
redressed, but certainly the best way to quiet the Consciences of Gamesters,
that know not of whom they hev^ won money, is to be liberal to the poor, for
Goods ill gotten are like Children ill begotten, a disparagement to their
Parents, and if it be not given to the poor; It may be a means to consume the
rest of the Estate sensibly, And now all ye by what means or titles soever you
be distinguished th^^ cannot pass your time, without sportive Recreations,
[which indeed are r^ther lost times then past times, and you would think so if
your hearts were fully bent toward Heaven, and your souls inflamed with the
love of Jesus Christ.]

I am no enemy to those condements and saucies of life which are lawful o^
expedient, that have a divine stamp upon them to fit you for Gods service, as
Lead will go current if it have the Kings stamp upon it, upon this condition,
that what you win, you will faithfully and justly give it to the poor, and
abate nothing of your other intended Charity; If this be your resolution, and
your recreations be helps and furtherances to your Callings, and lawful as
Bowls, Chests, Shooting, and such gentile exercises, where the mind may have a
special working, and that more time be not allowed in playing, then in
praying, I have nothing to say against it, and why should not this request be
granted, for you say that little which you play for is not a mark of
Covetousness, but of victory, for the prise of your skill and Judgments,
therefore if there be no Covetousness in that which you pretend to be only
matter of recreation, I hope you will put your winnings in your eye, and the
money into the poor man's hand who will bless God for you;

7. I shall earnestly desire all those persons that have found, or hereafter
shall casually find any lost goods to b^stow them upon the poor, for they have
no property by finding, but until the owner be known, which if he never be,
then certainly it is the owners desire that the poor should both better for
what he lost, and therefore I could wish that all estrayes, and Fellons Goods
which no body can challenge might come into the poor man's Box, the reason why
such privileges have belonged to the Lords of the soise, where the goods are
found, was to make satisfaction for the keeping of the Cattle or hurt which
such goods did to the ground, which is but little in Comparison, to the value
of the thing lost; we have a rule in Law, that, that which no body can
challenge, is the Kings, as presuming the Kings Majesty to be most charitable,
and that he will give it away to the poor, by his Majesty's Almoner, and so if
there be any Mines discovered in the Kingdom; we have many learned Arguments
in our books to whom such extraordinary profits do of right belong; for my own
part I differ from all my Masters, and conceave that by the Laws of God, and
nature, such emergent profits and casualtyes do of right belong to the poor,
for nature provides for all, and would have every man to live, and when any
Mine is discovered and found out in the bowels of the earth in some barren
place (as most commonly they are where the superficies and outside of the earth
affords little or no profit for poor people,) that the benefit thereof
should wholly redound to a rich man to cast water into the Sea, how impolitique
is this in an ancient Kingdom: Is this to send our portions to the needy, and
to make provision for them for whom nothing is prepared, that one man should
have 1000. bushels, and another nothing, and if God send one Bushel
extraordinary this must be given to him that has the 1000. bushells and he
that has nothing may starve and famish. Is not the Law of England grounded upon
the Law of God, and nature? If 20. men should be at dinner together, and all
the meat should be laid upon one man's Trencher, how Ridiculous would it be? but
what the wisdom of our Forefathers did not reach our experience must amend,
In the interim what is negligently ^or casually lost and cannot be restored to
the owner, let it be given to the poor.

8. But as the charitable man said in making his will, that had bequeathed
bread to every poor man in the Parish, stay says he to the writer, put in
something for Drink and for Clothes, truly I fear the poor must drink but
little B^ere this year, God grant they may have bread enough, I confess it is
of l^s concernment, for Thirst is an appetite that will die of it self; I
conceave most men drink more then they need, in moist weather, and I am of
opinion that, that hatred which Christ requires, that his Members should bear
to their proper life, consists in this, that they take no more of the Creatures
then what is sufficient for their Corporal necessities, Not to live to eat,
but eat to live for health and strength? and if men would accustom themselves
to drink less, they might be more charitable, and not less healthful; one in
Spain by disusing himself from drinking could travail in the heat of Summer
some hundred miles between Lisbone and Madrid and never drink; but give me
leave to propound one thing to cover the poor men's backs which is thus.

If that which is yearly bestowed in mourning in this Kingdom, might be laid
out in strong course Cloth and Shoes for the poor; I dare say i^ would be
much more pleasing to God, and far more Christian like; for there is no solid
reason can be given for it, for thus I argue, either the mour^ers are very
sorrowful for the death of the party, and so mourn naturally, or else they
are only sorrowful in show, and so mourn artificially.

If the heart be oppressed with grief, mourning Apparel does but help to
aggravate, and continue it, and so makes it Immoderate, which ought not to be,
moderate lamentation for the Dead, becomes a Christian, but we may not sorrow
as those that have no hope, 1 These. 4.13. Navigare non naufragare Lach^mis.
in Thessalonica, and many places which are now under the Turk, they wore black
to testify their mourning for the Dead, which the Spirit of God reproved in
the Church of the Th^ssalonians, and the Heathens generally use it to this day,
but a Christian that grieves inwardly for the loss of a friend, should not in
reason wear that which is an occasion to keep the loss fresh in his memory,
who can put on a mourning Weed for a whole year, as it is used, but it must
daily renew his grief, and sorrow; but if they that wear black for mourning do
not mourn inwardly and in truth, but only in outward appearance, to make the
world believe so; Then certainly it must needs be gross dissimulation, and
Hypocrysie, to make men believe that to be, which is not, and dissimulation to
dissemble, that rejoicing, and Joviality; which really is is the heart and
spirit; for certainly the chief Mourners as we call them, are not always the
most sorrowful for the death of a party; we use to say that he mourn^ like an
heir which come^ to his Inheritance, and if it be to save charges, it is
Hypocryticall and Ignoble.

The Jews indeed made very solemn Mournings, and Lamentations for their
friends, but they were a people too frugall to bestow any unncessary Pomp, they
had not such clear apprehentions of the resurrection, only scripture
deductions, and consequences, I am the God of Abraham says the Lord, therefore
Abraham must be Immortal as God Is, was all they had for it, for one Relative
being granted, the other follows, And they were very curious and exact in
their Ointments, Embalments, and Interments, as the Egyptians are to this day,
but the longest mourning was but 70. days, and 7. days for others, and their
mournings were not so costly, as we make ours; but if any man shall argue for
the lawfulness and convenience of mourning Apparel from the Jews, we may
as well revive other Ceremonye^, and profits our selve^ to be rather Jews then
Christians; I wish we were really such as they are, inproviding for the poor,
they suffer not a Begga^ amongst them; by their Law, every male is to marry at
23. and Females at 18. if they be poor, the rich provide Marriages, which are
most eq^all, and give them an estate to begin the world withal, and if that
fail by Shipwreck: Ill Debtors, or such human casualties, they impute it not
to them, but renew their stock, and set them upon their Legs again, whereas we
in such a case count a man ^^famous for that which is no fault of his, for if
other^ br^^^ with him, how can he hold with his Creditors, and when Corn has
been at 12. and 16. s. a bushel in an extraordinary dear year, at Venice,
Rome, or Amsserdam, where Jews are permitted to live quietly, with the freedom
of their Consciences, in the exercise of their Religion, the poorest Jew has
not wanted his bellyfull, and though they are but few of them in comparison,
that's not the matter, for where there is sufficient by the Law of God, the
poorest Member in a Kingdom ought to be provided for; I confess this mourning
Apparel is used in France and other Civil Countries, with this difference,
that the Chancellor of France and the chief presidents in Iuditiall places,
must never mourn, no not upon the death or demise of the King, for Justice is
a divine thing, which must not resent any humane Infirmity, he that sirs in the
seat of Justice ought not to have his mind troubled with the death of his
Father, or dearest consort, And that money which is daily expended
unnecessarily, and improperly in Wine and sweetmeats at Funerals, would make
the poor leap for joy, and think themselves in Heaven, I say unnecessarily,
because it serves neither for Dinner nor Supper; and very improperly for the
Friends that come to accompany the Corpse to the Grave have more reason, to
bring Wine and Cordialls with them to comfort the Widow, and Children, who
have the greatest loss, and stand in most need of refreshing, I am not against
wearing a Ribben, or some such significant Ceremonies, to give notice to
others, that such a friend is dead; As in Paris, when any Citizen, or man of
quality is dead, there are 24. Cryers that go about with a Bell, to give notice
to all the City that such a man, or woeman is dead, and as the poor are either
joyful or sorrowful at the News, so you may conclude, that the man was
either merciful or miserable, for those are the best Elections into places of
authority, when the poor^ generally rejoice at such a man's preferment.

9. And now I shall make an humble request to all sorts of persons that desire
the prosperity of this Natinn (About which I have spent many serious thoughts,
and if God spare health, I intend with all possible speed to cast in a Students
Mite, and to publish my Conceptions by the name of Englands happiness, therein
declaring, what I conceive may by Gods blessing make this Kingdom the most
happy Kingdom in the world, that every man's moderation might be known this
dear year to help to bring down the dearness of Corn, and all other
Commodities, that the greatest gallants would be sencible of the poor men's
Condition this hard time, and a little strike the topsaile, and top-gallant of
al improvident wasting, that they may the more freely distribute to the poor
man's necessities, and that all rich men would now more then ever study the Art
of winning hearts, which of all Trades and professions is the most Noble, that
Landlords would strive to excel one another in winning and refreshing the
hearts of their poor Tennants, by the cherefull and continual drops of true
liberality, but my 9th. design is principally a request to Masters of Mills
and Millars, which I conceive to be a matter of great concernment, for poor
people; I have heard many sad complaints from poor people, of Millers for
taking excessive tole from them, it is a lamentable case when a poor man has
work't himself almost off his legs to get a peck or half a strike of Corn to
make 2. or 3. Loaves for his poor Children, that cry for bread (the saddest
cry that can be in any Kingdom, that a treacherous Miller sha^ ^iminish this
poor man's grist, and take out of it what pleases him, for he is upon the
matter, a Judge in his own Case, as for feitures make the Usurer his own
Judge, that he may take what he list when the poor Lamb falls into his
claws, so may the Miller take without control a dishfull, 2. 3. or 4. as it
pleases him, who can tell how much he takes, we call it Toll, from taking away;
by the Law of the Land, I conceive that the Miller is to take more or less^,
Toll a Tollendo.
according as the party owes suit to the Mill, from a Tennant at will, the Lord
in the beginning of Tennus took what he pleased, if the Corn grew upon his
Jnheritance afterward a 16th. part from a free Tennant a 20th. and from
strangers a 24th. part; and by the Law if the Tennant buy his Corn he may
have liberty to grind where he pleases, which is the case of most poor men,
and yet they are tied up to grind at the Kings Mills, and Lords Mills, and
there is a kind of Monopoly of Mills in this K^ngdome, which is a most grievous
oppression to the poor people; if all were free to erect Mills, a poor man
might have his Corn ground for a song in Comparison, but poor men are
enforced to grind at the Kings Mills as they call them, and the Lords Mills
from an ancient Custom [ J profess I marvel how the tenure in villinage
came to be taken away in this Kingdom, and if a third part be taken away, the
poor man dare not complain, for the remedy will be worse then the disease.

Dealing herein with poor men, as some that keep Victualling houses in hot
Countries, where they make but few Fires, 20. Neighbors will come to an Host,
and bring a piece of flesh of 2. or 3. pound to have them all boiled in a great
Caldron, one dishonest rascal, if the poor woemens backs were but turned,
used to mince, and pair the several pieces, and pretended that it shrunk and
grew less in the boiling, till at length it was discovered by the little
pieces which he cut of, and sold them in stewed meat, for which I hear he was
executed, and that but justly; I wish all such Millers that are too nimble in
poor men's Baggs might have some such severe punishment, for though it be hard
to hang a man for stealing a Ship or a Cow, yet domestical theft is punished
with death, by all Laws, because it is both Felony and Treason. The poor man
trusts the Miller with his bag, and works merrily in hope of a Cake, and the
Miller it may be takes as much as would make a cupple, but I wi^h some of them
were Indicted for example to terrify others, and that poor men might have
their Grists ground Toll free this dear year, or else that the owners of
Mill^ might take but very little? I know there are charges and casualities
Incident to Mills, but however they deal with the rich man's baggs, I would
have all kindness and tenderness exercised toward the poor.

10 My next request is to the Ministers, and specially to Impropriators in this
Kingdom, in two particulars; That they would be examples of Charity and
Hospitality to others, by the Cannon Laws, a Minister ought to give away to
the poor of the Parish at the least one tenth part of his Tithes, and
impropriations are by Statute for maintenance of the poor, we know the
Levites had a tenth from the Priests, and by the equity of that law, those that
receive Tithes should allow a Tith of their gains, as well as others, and who
such fit objects of Liberality as the poor, but truly the Avarice and
Covetousness, of many English Ministers, would make a man think that Religion
was but a policy, to keep men in subjection, for how improper is it, for a
covetous Earth-worme to tell others of the danger of riches, and the difficulty
for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, when this covetous
Earth-worme minds nothing but the Fleece and satisfies himself with a
toothlesse saplesse preaching in a customary formality, not falling out with
the richest Parishoners for their handfastednesse, and hard-heartednesse in not
releeving the poor, but wrangling and brangling with poor men, about an Egg
at Easter, I could find in my heart to publish it to the world, how one of them
vexes his poor Neighbors about small Tithes, for Milch Cowes, and sowes Piggs
and Poultry, putting 13. poor people into one bill, not charging them all to
the value of 5. l. which suit has or will in probability cost above 100. l.
Indeed if the grand Tithes had been detained, and he could not otherwise have
subsisted; It had been another matter, but for a man of peace to bring a
conserve of Westminster Hall Wormwood for every petty oblation. Is this to
feed men with the sincere Milk of the word; to torment 30. poor men about Tith
milk, methinks an Ingenious man should be ashamed of it.

Thou that say a man should not be covetous, (for a man's life consists not
in abundance of riches,) do thou heap up more then is sufficient for thee,
thou that sit to Judge according to Law dishonourest thou God? Luk 12.15
But secondly, let me entreat all those that are able Ministers of the Gospel
in this Iuncture of time to shoot out all the Arrows of Gods indignation
against Covetousness which is Idolatry, filthy Lucre, Mammon of
unrighteousness, deceitful riches, briars, and thorns, and the covetous whom
God abhors, and to preach nothing else to Covetous men, till they leave
their Covetousness, what should a Covetous man do with a merciful Savior; If
he had the graces of the spirit he would lock them up that none should be the
better for him.

If you expect to be called the English Clergy, every one of you now become an
Advocate for the poor of your Parish, as by example, so by doctrine, Trumpet
out that of Saint James, go to now ye rich men, weep, and howl for your misery
that shall come upon you, your riches are corrupted, and your Garments
Moth-eaten, your Gold and silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a
witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire, charge them that
be rich in this world, to be rich in good works; but do not only whisper it
into their Ears, but fall upon the Covetous and the Dunkards when they come
into the Congregation (for they come most commonly the last) when a Covetous
wretch comes in, bid the people look as if there was some African Monster; one
that can eat 10000. l. of Gold, and 10000. Quarter of Corn, 100. beasts, and
2000. sheep, and sits Rent-free, and no body must have a bit with him, and when
a notorious Drunkard comes in, tell them here comes one, that he and his
Companions devour as much every week as Bells Priests did, you must needs know
every Covetous wretch in your parish, fall upon him, as you would fall upon the
Devil, if he should come into the Congregation, tell him that he is like H^ll,
that is insatiable, and that it is impossible for him to be saved, so living
and dying; tell the Covetous and the Drunkard, that God abhors them, all honest
sober men will kick them out of their Companies, that unless they repent the
Devil will provide a place for them in Hell by themselves in the lowest
Dungeons (next unto the Jesuits) who yet are better Commonwealths-men) for
says he, these men never did good to any men in their lives, the Covetous
will hoard up all, and the Drunkard will devour all, let them fight Dog, fight
Bear together, they are now asleep in these gross enormities, thunder out Gods
Judgments against them; dart the very flashes of Hell fire from your Pulpits,
into their souls and consciences, Oh, that the Lord would teach the Ministers
how to preach to purpose to such miscreants, methinks 2. or 3 powerful Sermons
should either by Gods blessing work upon the Covetous miserable wretch to part
with his superfluities, or else make him forsake the Congregation, if it were
well set on, charge him home to give away so much to the poor the next week,
or to sell his Corn at a reasonable rate, and if it be not done tell him he
shall hear of it to his shame the next day, and I warrant you he will either
observe it, or come no more there to hear you, and if he go to hear another
Minister. I entreat every faithful watchman to stand ready for him with a
whole peale of Curses at the door when he comes in, and tell him, Oh, thou
Covetous wretch, thou run'st away from such a man, because thou will not
relieve thy hungry Brother, and sell thy Come at a reasonable rate, which God
commands thee to do; thou art cursed in the City, and cursed in the Field,
cursed shall be thy basket, and thy stoare, the Lord shall smite thee with the
Pestilence, Consumption, Fever, Inflammation and extreme burning, with the
Botch, the Emrods, the Scabs, and the Itch, thou shall grope at noone-dayes,
and thy Carcass shall be meat to all the Fowls of the Air, and no man shall
fray them away, thou shall become an Astonishment, a Proverb and a byword to
all people, tell him that this and all the Curses in the Book of God shall come
upon him, pursue him and overtake him, till he be destroyed, put him this case,
suppose a Prisoner was to stand a whole day together at the bar of Justice,
to hear the Judge pronounce Judgment, and several sorts of punishment against
him, you must go from hence to the Prison, to lie in Irons, eat moldy bread,
and drink puddle water, then be branded, next have thy flesh plucked of with
hot pinsers, then put into a barrel of nails, drawn in pieces with wild
Horses; or the most exquisite torments that cruel Tyrants could imagine, ask
him what he thinks of that Prisoners condition, I know he will say it is very
sad, then reply with Authority, and tell him this is thy Case, say as Nathan
did to David thou art the man, bid him read his condition in the glass of the
Scripture, and turn to those Curses in the 28. of Deuteronomy. and mark I pray you
how the spirit of God, having denounced a Catalogue of Curses against such as
will not obey his Commandments, in the 29. Chapter tells in particular, who it
is that shall be thus cursed; it is the man, that let the Minister say what he
will, blesses himself in his heart, and says I shall have peace, though I
walk in the Immaginations or stubbornness of my own heart, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
TO ADD DRVNKENNES TO THIRST, of the Drunken to the Thirsty; which in my
opinion comprehends both Drunkards, and covetous persons, for they are both
Hydroptique, the Drunkard heats himself till he be thirsty, and the Covetous
man drinks down all the broth of commodity, as the Fish drinks up water, but
tell them likewise that if they will reform themselves, there are blessings in
store for them, in that former part of the 28. of Deuteronomy. But me thinks I hear
an objection that Covetousness is none of those scandalous sins, for which by
the Ordinance, any man is to be debarred the Sacrament; We say in Statutes that
there are many Cases omitted, which are within the meaning of the Law, and to
be taken by equity, certainly to deny the poor bread to eat at reasonable
rates; if it be not near kin to murder, it is a horrible sin as visible, as
the green grass, therefore I pray you profess your selves implacable Enemies
to all Intemperance, and uncharitableness; for which not only the higher
powers, but every honest man in this Kingdom will thank you for it, believe
it, it is an Angelical thing to get the love of poor people.

11. A word to the Learned Physicians in this Kingdom (whereof God Increase
the number) pray deal kindly with poor people when they are sick, for a poor
man to give 10. s. for a visit, is as grievous many times as the Disease it
self; and yet life is sweet, Physic must be had at any rate; But some may
beeter afford to give 100. l. for a cure, then others to give 5. s. Methinks if
I had an old Usurer in cure, I would advise him to be very Charitable,
certainly the poor in this Kingdom suffer very much for want of a Physician
or two, in every Market Town, at the least.

The Doctors of Padova say that in Fevers and such violent diseases, the
Patient is in danger, if the Physician do not visit him three times a day, how
many people in this Kingdom dye yearly, that can never get any Physician to
visit them in their sickness; and how many poor people are there about Lendon
that had rather die then see an Appothicaries Bill; the thing I entreat of you
is that you would visit the poor without Fees, for why should not Physicians
be as well assign Jn forma Pauperis, as Lawyers, and Appothicaries as well as
Atturneys, and Chirurgians as well as Clarks.

But if you cannot be at leisure to prescribe to the poor Gratis, pray do not
hinder any man that would be the poor man's Doctor; And here give me leave
soberly and seriously to entreat you learned Gentlemen of the Corporation, not
to molest or interrupt Doctor Trigg [who has been so called to my knowledge
this 20. years, and three years is sufficient in Law, in point of
Appellation] in his practice any longer, I can assure you thousands of poor
people, in and about the City speak hardly of you for troubling him, and had it
not bin for somebody, there had bin before this a Petition with at least 30000.
hands humbly presented to the Parliament for his freedom to practice, though
he is not incorporated into your College; and so by a penal Law principally
intended against some Italian Mountebanks, and for the avoiding of Sorceries
and Witchcrafts for f^its, 5. l. for every mone^h that he practices in this
City without your leave, and you have got a judgment, and Execution as [I
heare] for 115. l. against him, and for what I beseech you? Why should he pay
you so much money? is it, because he has by Gods blessing cured some, which
some of you had left for desperate? as you know it was proved upon Oath at
Guild Hall, where you Indict^d and Impeached him of Ignorance, and ^busing the
people, endeavoring to prove that he had given unwholesome Physic to a Woman
about 17. years ago; who said upon her Oath that the Physic made her sick,
and work't strangly with her, but the Woeman has bin well ever since, and a
lusty merry old Woeman who possibly might, but for that Physic, have bin long
since in her Grave; another Evidencer said, that Doctor Trigg confessed himself
that he was a fool, which rather proved him to be a knowing man. For Saint
Paul says, ye are wise, J am a fool, that is, the Doctors thought him to be
one, 2 Cor. 11.19.
and Solomans fool was wise in his own conceit, but there was pregnant proof
for the Doctor, that since the Great Sickness (at which time he first grew
famous; for many of the Doctors being out of Town, he did abundance of cures
upon poor people, which are yet living.) He has cured every year many people
of all sorts of Fevers, Plague, Palsies, Agues, Gout, Consumptions, Dropcies,
Collicks, and all sorts of Diseases, and his manner of practice is, to take
little or nothing from the poor, and from the rich, 2. s. or 2. s. 6. d. at
the most for his advice and Physic, for he compounds all his Physic himself
which no ignorant man can do, and buys the best Drugg^ he can get, as the
Drugster a man of credit, testified. Now the Case stands thus; a man lies
desperately sick, and the College Doctors give him over for a dead man, a
friend of his tells him, that Doctor Trigg has cured many in his condition,
that have been as near death as himself, the man has a strong conceit that
Doctor Trigg may help him, (and truly a good conceit of the Physician is many
times half the Cure) if this man should recover by Gods blessing upon Doctor
Triggs Physic, is it not a hard case, that Doctor Trigg should pay 5. l. to
the College for curing this man without their License, will they neither give
Physic themselves nor suffer others to do it?

Worthy Gent. You know what offers, we that were Doctor Triggs Counsel have
several times made you; that if we do not prove that our Clyent has done good
to above 30000. Men, Women, and Children; in and about this City since the
year 1624. He will quit his practice without more a do; or if you can prove
that ever he did hurt to any man, Woman, of Child by his Phisicks; He will be
content to be your Bondslave; I know there were above 100. witnesses more then
those that gave evidence, which hearing that Doctor Trigg had a Trial about
his Nonsufficiency flocked in readily, to testify what Cures he had wrought
upon them, but the Honorable Judge thought it needless to hear any more, for
when a weight can be carried by four men to what purpose is it to employ 10.
but why will he not be admitted of the College? It may be he thinks it a
Monopoly, for by the Common Law every man may Administer Physic that has any
skill therein, and if we hurt any through Ignorance or negligence, an Action
upon the Case lies against him, and why are not Country men's healths and lives
as precious to them as Citizens? or why may not the Butchers, Cooks, Bakers,
and Brewers being Free-Tradesmen of the City of London, compel the Citizens to
buy all their Victuals of them, and nor to dress it in their Houses, why will
not some men have the line of Ordination stretched over them; because they
conceive themselves more free without i^, He says that those old Receipts which
agreed with English bodies. 500. years ago are not so proper for these times,
and therefore would make no further use of the Pharmatopia then he sees reason
of it, but he is of Age and Abilities to answer better for himself, for my
own part, I take him to be a rational man, and of Excellent parts, but in
Physic I prefer experience before reason and Authority, that is if there
were but two Physicians extant, the one counted an Ignoramus, which yet had
cured 1000. men of I^evers, and such dangerous diseases, the other a notable
Scholar, and of fluent discourse that never cured 20. of all diseases; I would
rather Entrust my self with the former; he was a famous Practiser in Aleppo
above 25. years since, and purchased much skill beyond Sea, and of great
practice and experience, with whom Sir Theodore Mayerne, Doctor Moore have
joined in advise, a man Hospitable and charitable to the poor, therefore my
subject leads me to commend him, he gives away as much Physic weekly to the
poor people, as costs him 30 or 40. s. and which some Appothycaries would sell
it, may be for five times as much; for I know not how it comes to pass, there
is more gotten by Drugs, Roots, Weeds and Herbs in this City yrarely, then the
Bakers, Brewers, Butchers, and many others get by their substantial
Commodities, let no man think I write this for my Fee; it is the poor man's Case
that I plead, should he be suppressed, I profess for any thing I can imagine
to the contrary, thousands of poor people must perish for want of means to
recover them, for where is there a man that will give his advise and Physic
for nothing as this man constantly does: If any Patient tell him that he is
poor and wants money, he takes not a penny from him; nor let any man say that
it is not usual for Council to print their Clyents Causes; for my part I know
no hurt in it, but so far as it concerns the poor this hard year, I would not
gladly omit any thing for their advantage; extraordinary diseases must have
extraordinary cures, for my own part, If I thought or credibly heard that the
man did practice upon men's bodies, and abuse poor people; I would be the first
that should him, and pluck his flesh in pieces, but so long as that man does
good in his practice, every honest man should take his part; for why should not
that be judged a good Tree that brings forth (not yearly but daily) good
fruit, his case stands thus, The College Doctors have obtained a Judgment of
115. l. against him, and by the Law a writ of Error lies before the Right
Honorable the Lords in Parliament, but the King being concerned in it; the
course was to procure his Majestyes hand for the writ of Error; and it has
pleased their Good Lordships for a supply thereof as Aequavalent thereunto in
Judgment of Law to grant an Order for a writ of Error; which is now obtained,
besides he stands Indicted by the name of William Trigg Shoo maker, al^as
William Trigg Heel maker, alias William Trigg Last maker, alias William
Trigg Gent. and one says he will take a Course with him for his short Cures,
another says this Trigg works by the Devil or else he could never do such
cures, and there are so many Actions against him, and such designs to ruin
him, that I fear whether there be not some Ingredient of malice or tincture of
Emulation in the violent prosecution of it? for though it be well known that
the worthy President of the College, and many of the Doctors are Godly
judicious and Learned men [for which I honor and highly esteem them] yet
whether the Prosecutors do really, sinceerely, and entirely aim at the health
and welfare of poor people, Mr. Dr. Clarke.
in putting him down from practice as is pretended; seems to me very
questionable; for I conceive a greater displeasure and prejudice cannot be done
to the poor people of this City then by his suppression. But though, by one
Statute. He may be greived I hope by another Statute, he will be releeved; [for
truly when a Clyent has an honest just cause and delights in doing good we
ought to lay his sufferings to heart as if it were in our own Cases) The
Statute of 34. H. 8. is to this effect; That it is well known that some will
do no cure to any person, but where they are sure to be rewarded with a
greater sum or reward then the Cure extends unto, 34. H. 88.
for in Case they would minister their cunning to poor people unrewarded,
there should not so many rot and perish to death for lack of Surgery as daily
do, for though the most part have small Cunning, yet they will take great
sums of money, and do little therefore, and by reason thereof do often
Impair and hurt their Patients rather then do them good, Therefore for ease,
comfort, succor, help releife, and health of the Kings poor Subjects, that
shall be pained or diseased, be it ordained and enacted, that every person
having knowledge and experience of the nature of Herbs, Roots, and Waters, or
of the opperation of the same by speculation or practice, may lawfully practice
Surgerie, or Administer any Drinks for the Stone, Strangerie, or Agues, which
by a former Statute they were prohibited to do by certain persons whom this
Statute brands with a noat of Infamy that they minded only their own Lucres,
and nothing the profit or ease of the diseased, or Patient, therefore sued,
troubled, and vexed diverse honest persons, whom God had endued with the
knowledge of the nature, kind, and opperation of Herbs, Roots, and Waters; I
shall not make any application, but hope that the Learned Doctors will upon
mature consultation, surcease all further prosecution against my Clyent, and
either undertake the care, and charge of all sick poor people in and about
this City, or else quietly permit and suffer others to practice, who as lesser
lights may do much good in their stations and places to poor People; though
they be not such good Linguists and great Scholars as themselves; for
certainly it was never the intent of any English Parliamentary Worthies to
punish any man for doing good to the poor.

And here I would make but some few quaeries.

1. What shall I poor people do in time of great mortality and sickness when
most of the College Doctors having houses in the Country have left the City
as in the late great sickness, if none may be permitted to Practice but
themselves, for it pleases God that the Plague most commonly inflicts and
visits the poorer sort of people such as live in Close Allies, and out places
of the City.

2. The Doctors not making their own Medicines, but sending poor people to
the Apothycaryes, where no penny, no Pater Noster, no money, no Medicine,
[though I speak not against the profession, every man must live by his Trade; I
believe many of them to be very honest and a most necessary Profession] and
consequently have no Medicines by them, for the speedy releife of the poor,
whether in probability those that compound their own Medicines, are not more
Charitable and helpful to poor people then such as keep no Medicines by them,
it being seldom seen that he that buyeth all his meat at the Cooks, serves
many Beggars at the Door.

3. Whether it be for the health and welfare of this Kingdom which is the
supreme Law that the Doctors Recepts and Art of Physic should be practiced in
such an unknown tongue, that no man knows what he buys, or what he pays for
it being wholly upon the Doctors and Appothycaries Consciences, what name and
price they please to give the Physic, so that at the best it is but a Pig in a
Poak as we say proverbially, contrary to the practice of all other Callings
where every man knows what he buys, and if they pleased, they might as well
set down in plain English words what they prescribe, and what they pay for.

Lastly, what shall we think of denying to teach ordinary Medicines to poor
people, as good Drinks and Possits made of Herbs, whereby the end for which
God made Medicinable H^arbs and Roots is frustrated and made void, and the
Common known use of Herbs grown out of use and knowledge of poor people in
this Kingdom, specially in this City of London, which if we knew how to make
use of Gods good Creatures, we might prevent many diseases, and maintain our
selves in bodily health and strength, much better then now we do, specially in
such places where there are neither Physicians nor Appothicaries.

12. But that I may be just and impartial, let me speak a word to my own
Profession; I would humbly beseech the Reverend Judges before they condemn any
man for stealing a Horse, a Cow, or a Sheep, from him that has 100. or 1000.
that they inquire whether the Prisoner was not necessitated to do it, to buy
bread for his family, or for milk or Clo^ths, for his poor Wife and Children?
or whether it were possible for him, by his best Industry and labor to keep
himself alive, and family, without stealing; for if so, then he is a
presumptious thief, that steals not for want, but for wantonness, and by the
Law of the Land, the Gallows is his just guerdon, but if the man be extremely
necessitated, and cannot live without a miracle, then that he may not suffer
but be put into such away and condition, that if he will take pains he might
live, and then if he steal any more, he is to be proceeded against as
Incorrigible, this is a sweet temper, both of Justice and mercy, those that
have acquired Honors, and great Estates by the Law, should be an Honor to the
Law; which cannot better show it self then by dispatching poor men's Causes
first, and speedy executing all Laws and Statutes, which give any provisionall
relief to the poor, in point of penalty; and as I do earnestly entreat every
man that has the substance of this world, and see's his brother to be in want;
not to shoot his bowels of Compassion, but to releeve his necessities, or else
the love of God cannot abide in him, so in a more especial manner, I would
entreat all that have got any considerable Estates, by the Law; to adorn their
Professions this dear Year, by their good works; for my part I shall count
him the Flower, Ornament, and Garland of his profession, that shall most
advantage the poor man's Cause, both by his Pen, by his Tongue, and by his
Purse, and the rather for that, I think the great Practisers get much money as
easily as any men do in the Kingdom, but my design is, that every 10th. Fee,
should be given to the poor; I find in some of our Hystorians, that in times
of Popery, the Priests challenged every tenth Fee, as a personal Tith, and
since some have continued the payment of it, and when men went to Confession
they durst not deceive the Priest, nor give him a light piece of Gold, and not
long since it was attempted to make us pay personal Tithes.

I wish all men were more fearful to displease God, then the Papists are to
offend their spiritual Fathers, (which have no Wives but many Children;) In
France the Advocates have a Palmary Fee in token of Victory after the
Judgment pronounced for their Client, and that is given to the poor; All Fees
which have been taken from the poor men that could not spare them, ought in
reason to be restored and no more to be taken, and certainly reason is the root
of our profession, and whatsoever is against the Law of true reason, let it be
disclaimed by all Ingenious men.

My learned Masters, and all ye that live by the Law, whom I may without
presumption call Brothers; I have a word concerns us all, pray mark it well,
the Kingdom is drawing up an Impeachment against us, for the Errors and
corruptions that are in the Law and Lawyers, every man complains of the
horrible delays in matters of Justice, that we, have an Action to our Clients
purses, and spin out Causes to an unreasonable length, as Covetous Surgeons
keep the wounds raw for their own profit, that there is so much expense of
Coin, and time, that the remidie is worse then the disease, that a man had
better loose his right, then go to Law for it, and that deles in Courts of
Justice are the greatest Nuisance, and grievance to this Kingdom: They think it
the greatest mystery in the world that a man cannot get a Causs ended in two
or three years, and yet Justice not delayed; that a man must spend above 10.
l. to recover 5. l. and yet Justice not sold; they think Magna Carta is
extremely violated, you may please to remember what occasioned me to write our
Vindication so far forth as Scripture and reason would plead for us, and if we
be cast at either of these Bars, I am sure no Court of Equity can relieve us;
and now I suppose you have met with the Lawyers bane, written by (...)
Nicholson who falls upon us with a Scriptury weapon. VVoe unto you Lawyers, for
ye load men with burdens greivious to be borne, and ye your selves touch not
the burdens with one of your fingers; Truly though the man discover a weak
Judgment, yet he manifests strong affections to the public, for all this
smoke is not without some fire; he that knows any thing in politiques may
easily foresee that there is a great storm arising in this Kingdom against
us; now what must we do to prevent it, the only way is to keep close to the
principles of right reason, and we are out of Gunshot to dispatch poor men's
Causes, gratis this hard year; In doubtful matters let us dissuade our
Clyents from going to Law, and tell them the danger of it, advising them to
do, as they would be done unto; let us contend earnestly for the truth, more
then for victory; and so soon as we discover the injustice of the Cause, let
us leave it, and advise our Clyents to make their peace, never speaking any
thing but what we believe to be true, if they tell us they have no money, let
us do their business for thanks; and I warrant you we are Parliament proof,
and Kingdom proof, the people will quickly find the usefullnesse of us; and
an honest Lawyer will be a necessary member in a Kingdom, for the wisdom of
the Common Law is highly to be admired and honored of all understending men
(without some Competent understanding wherein no man can possibly be a
Polititianist, being the best Judge, and Arbiter of life and death and all
things that are for the maintenance thereof, but if we make the disquiet and
trouble of poor people, the basis, and fuondation of our Grandor and Renown,
believe it, the Kingdom will be as weary of us, as ever they were of the
Bishops, or any Arbitrary Court, In a word (for I know your Judgments are so
mature you love not many, that which can only prevent the ruin of our
profession, is, That the Reverend Judges, Learned Lawyers, and experienced
Officers and Clerks of all Courts speedily consult and agree together to
propound some proper expedient to the High Court of Parliament, f^r cheap and
summary Justice, throughout the Kingdom; for the best policy is to prevent an
accusation; better the Fees of some Courts should be reduced, and regulated,
then the Court it self to be suppressed; It were better for the 6. Clerks
that poor men might pay but 4. d. a sheet, then 8. d. for moderate gainns last
long, we see the moderate estates of Widows last longer and prove better,
then some vast superfluous Estates, which make them but a prey for some young
Gallant; what a shame is it that Irregularities and obstructions in the
Administration of public Justice should not be discovered (and presented to
the highest Court for speedy redress) by the Professors of the Law, who should
stand as Sentinells for the security of men's persons and Estates, to discover
the least approaching danger, and all delays or rubs in Justice, but that the
Army should be enforced to make it one of their proposalls for the Kingdoms
good; And you my worthy Masters that under your good favors are so many
Ingrossers of all the Practice within the Statutes of pluralities and
Ingrosment of Corn, and Cattle (for the reason of all such Statutes, is, that
one man may live by another, that one should not feast, and another fast:) The
Harvest of great Causes, (much good may it do you) Is yours, we are content to
gleane after you, with a motion now and then, which coming like Summer fruits,
should not be rejected for variety sake, pray let us be heard when we have any
thing to say, I profes it is an intolerable injury that you daily offer to
young Practisers, and heavier then the shoulders of rational men can long
bear 10. or 20. of you to move every morning before or after the causes, and
there is no time for us, [though one of your motions spends more time then six
of ours] to be heard; If the Custom of the Court were as ancient as Adams
time, yet reason must be preferred before it; I assure you, there is all the
policy and self love in it, as you can imagine to let us be heard when we have
any thing to move for, if the practice be do not not distributed into more
hands, that every man may live by his profession; if you fall by your own wait;
I dare burn my Books, King James said it was a great cheat put upon the
Kingdom, for Gentlemen to maintain their Sons at the Inns of Court at a great
rate: And being called to the Bar, may expect 7.10. or it may be 20. years
before they be known in a Court of Justice, or can be heard to move above twice
or thrice in a Term, which will not quit the cost, nor pay for Commons; And
by this means the Subject spends at least 50. or 100000. l. a year in
superfluities, for if the Tearmers, and such Counsel as draw Bills and
Answers, and advise in the Country, might be heard at the Bar as often as
the Cause required, then would not many of the great Practisers be retained,
until the hearing of the Cause, or upon some special difficulty, but now the
Clyent is enforced to have one Counsel in the Country, in the Vacation, and
another in the Term to this double Charge, or else may chance to attend all
the Term before his Counsel can he heard, to his far greater expenses,
whereby the Honorable Courts of Justice, come to be dishonored and hardly
thought of.

And here I meet with my dear friend virtuous Mr. Hugh Peter's who for his
Active serviceablenesse to the public deserves much from all honest Men. In
his three words, I find much marrow and sweetness, Mercurius Evangelitus
virtus in fictione consistt.
and an excellent sperit tending to Unity, between all honest men, and that
which I hear has given much satisfaction to all sober men in the City, and
cured many discontents and distempers who now see their Error, and perceive
that they were violently plucking a ruinous house upon their own heads, and
pesting into a posture of slavery, whereas now by Gods blessing upon our noble
Worthies in Parliament and Army, they are likely to be in true esteem, the
most glorious Citizens in all the world; and therefore I thank him for saving
me that labor, having compiled a Students mite which I intended humbly to
present by the name of LONDONS HAPPINESS, or Counsel given without a Fee to the
Right Honorable the Lord Major, the Right Worshipful the Sherifes, and
Aldermen, the worthy Common Counsel men, the honest Common Hall, the hopeful
Apprentices, and every Freeman of that famous Incorporation, which shall not
now be cast into the Treasury, nor the Press oppressed with it; I must needs,
unles I will betray my own Judgment acknowledge it to be a most rational
piece, and many of his Cures, welbecoming the great Physicians of state, Magnum
in parvo.
and I hope the reasons will be weighed in the just balance of their most
sublime wisdom; and what an Angellicall Ordinance would it be that honest men
should never fall out, or at least that there might be fre ndmakers in every
Parish for matters of small concernment, that trench not upon men's inheritances
and utter undoings, and I would have this Golden sentence written in Capital
Letters over Westminster Doors, QVICK JUSTICE MAKES A QVIET KINGDOM. But
Truth is my nearest friend, therefore good Sir, I must be bold to take
exceptions, and that without any violation of the divine injunction, of telling
my Brother in private for a printed objection requires a printed Answer) to
part of your 10th. cure, where your words are I would say the etc.

I take your matter to be erroneous, for multitude of Lawyers, is not so much
an Argument of the slavery, as the wealth of a Kingdom; I confess it is a sad
thing, that after 80. years preaching the Gospel of peace; there should be so
many Suits in Law, but Rich men will be at variance, and who can help it, I wish
poor men that are not worth above 2. or 300. l. might not either be permitted
to wage Law, or to have Justice without paying any thing for it, and I wish
from my soul, that this Kingdom were in such a Gospel frame, that there were
nothing for us to do, but to settle men's Estates, it being better to get one
Fee to prevent differences and just quarrels, then 20. Incontentious
wranglings; but as matters stand, call us what you please, necessary evils, we
are as necessary in a Kingdom, as Women more necessary in a Kingdom, then
Ministers or Physicians which are but for the well being of a State, Kingdom,
and Commonwealths have and may subsist without them, but Justice is as
necessary as the Sun in the Firmament; suspend the Laws but one day, and the
Kingdom is undone, no man but has some Enemy that will kill him, and so long
as the Law is necessary, there must be Lawyers to contend for the Clyents
right, until the cure be perfected, that men can plead their own Causes which
I should much rejoice to see, for the end of the profession of the Law which is
peace, and of the professors ought to be the same, but if I were convinced that
my wearing of a Gown at Westminster, were any mark of, or tended to continue,
or countenance the slavery of this Nation in the least measure, I would hang it
up in Long-Lane, and burn all my Books but the Bible, which possibly some out
of a strong zeal and weak Judgment would have us to do; Acts 19.19.
like those curious Artists in the 19th. of the Acts; that burnt their
Conjuring Books, though I know Mr. Peter's is no enemy to learning, I wish the
Law being peoples guide and rule to walk by, were more plain and easy, and in
our English Tongue that the Normans might not understand them sooner then we.

But I am for a Reformation in Courts of Justice, and not an exterpation, it
must never come to Root and branch in point of Civil Government; this I had
not added but for pure necessity for I must either quit the profession or
Answer every objection that is made against it, though by my dear Father, and
at last I hope truth will get ground of Errors.

For my own part if any poor man want any assistance, I shall freely give him
my best advise as cordially without a Fee as with it.

And now I might conclude, having kept my promise, but being willing to give
the poor all possible advantage as I hope the Bakers will in every dozen, one
Loaf more then ordinary; I shall advise all honest poor men, without a Fee,
and that is to study Christ and good Husbandry, more then ever; truly it is a
dear year, poor hearts, you must be content to pinch, it will not loose many
words to tell you what inventions the Italians and the good Husbands at Naples
had in a dear year, to save charges, they were called the Company of
Lesinants, intruth rich Merchants, but what was vituperable in them, may be
commendable in you, their Motto was, be sober and frugall, and their
principalls such as these, never to to take any Physic in hopes to recover by
fasting, because every purge weakens the body, as washing does Linen, to wear
but one Glove at a time, Sobrius esto parsimonia magnum Vectigal.
and that being lost, another may be had for little, to eat roast meat but once
a year, not to break bread too small, for it crumbles away, tread nimbly to
save Shooe-Leather, to put 3. or 4. Soales on their shoes for duration, to
warm themselves in the Sun, never to send their Servants far in a morning for
fear of getting too good a stomach, nor to entertain Choleric servants, for
they are always hungery, but phlegmatic that eat little, and to take little
Prentices, that spend less in Clothes, and Bedding, not to trouble themselves
too much when a friend comes unexpectedly to see them; for if he be a friend he
will be content with such ae he finds, if an Enemy it is too good for him, to
make a new Garment of two old ones, for variety pleases, and from several
grafts comes new fruit, Semel in anno ridit Appollo, vis unita fortier Sol et
bomo generant heminem.
always keep an empty Pasty covered upon the Table, to offer a stranger, which
if it be accepted, a friend will conceal it, and he that wishes you ill, will
not be believed, when your servant goes to draw the best drink, make him sing
all the while, that so he may have no time to drink, sometimes an Egg must
dine a whole family, the Master and Mistress to have the Yelk, the Children the
white, and the Servants the shell in powder with Vinegar, spend always pigmey
Candells for they least hurt the sight, and make a little hole in thy Neigbours
wall to see by his Candell to go to Bed, never be without fingle money, for
that is a good groat that saves a 6. d. take heed when thou art at a Feast, for
Physic may cost more then three meals are worth, with two Faggots in a winter
to be continually hot, throw them out at thy Chamber Window into the back
yeard, and run down in thy old shoes, and bring them up again, and out with
them again till thou be hot, one had a great Judge with a narrow mouth,
whereinto he put a spong, and goes to an Oil shop for seven or eight pound of
Oil, which being filled, he offers counterfeit money, which the Shopkeeper
refuses, I have no other says he, then restore my Oil says the other, which
he powers out, but leaves a pound or more in the sponge, one divelish
principal is, to receive many courtesies, and then speak ill of the party, and
so he is requited, drink but thrice at a meal, for need, for pleasure, and for
sleep, that the hand is the Instrument of Instruments, which serves for a
Glass, the fingers for a knife, the nails for a Comb, and the palm for a
hankercheife, if a friend come in dinner time, tell him, oh Sir, if you had
come a little sooner, you had been most welcome to a Capon, and to make it good
there are some Feathers in the room, and one braggadochio having eaten an
Egg, some of it stuck upon his Beard, who used the same Complement; I belveeve
it Sir says he, for some of the Feathers stick upon your Mustachoes, lend a
poor man money at first, but never take it again, though he offer it, for
that is but a trap to borrow more, Prentices not to count the clock when it
strikes a 11 or 12. for it looses too much time, therefore the Duke of
Florences Secretary was commended for an invention that the Clock should never
strike more then six, his Master having Excise for every suit of Clothes that
was made, the Tailors lost time in counting the stroake^; and striking but to
6. made one suit more in a month then before, and it is an Irrevocable
Institution, to cut their hair at the decrease of ^he Moon, for that saves
charges to the Barber, in that it will not grow so fast, when one is cold and
dry, drink Vinegar and water, to quench thirst, heat the body, and so save
^ire, a Campstrial wild Salat is best, because it consists of pure naturalls,
and in a Salat put good store of Salt, and Vinegar, but little Oil, and if
there be any Vinegar left, keep it till the next time.

Necessitas docuit Psiticum suum (...)
Necessity was at first the mother of all inventions, and hunger taught the
Parrat to speak, but we have now too many Cormorants, that are of the Company
of the Lesinants, and not all virtuous, because we follow extremes too much,
one man is too prodigal, his mouth like a Sepulcher, his throat like a hot
Oven, that consumes all; the Drunkard and intemperat person, an other is so
extremely penurious, that he will not afford himself food, and raiment,
according to his quality, and between these two M^llstones, the poor
laboring man is squeesed to death, when I perceived that the greater part of
the Jtalian and Spanish Gentry studied nothing so much as Parsimonie, and
frugality to make a little, go far, seeing a Neapolitan Cavalier, marching out
of his Palace in State, in a morning with his basket on his rist, pretending
that he was going to buy flesh, and fish, observing him first to go into the
Herb market, and lay the foundation and ballast of his Vessel in roots, and
herbs, and coming by the butchery, it may be buys a pound of Flesh, and
smells to the Capons, Feasants, and beco^sich possibly may buy a Leg or a wing,
but fills it up with a peniworth of figs, and returns with as much gracae, and
state, as if he had conquered a City. I inquired a little into the reason of
it, and found it to be for necessity, let me express it thus, men that travile
to enrich their minds are not so exact and curious to behold the stately
Architectures, pleasant Gardens, artificial paintures, and contrivances, which
are but the inanimate parts of travail, but to study the constitution, and
frame of the government, and thereby to guess at the happiness or unhappines of
that state or Kingdom, in point of duration, and he that has but half an eye
in reason of state may easily foresee that Rome is now like a Candell, blazing
a little before the extinguishment, the whore is so proud, that she has no more
Trinkets to put on and a fatal blow, she will have suddenly, therefore it
conc^rns all Prorestants to agree, though of different judgments, and prepare
to fight with her, for the Pope will have an Army of 60. or. 70. thousand lusty
Monks, that at last Pinch shall sight for him the great battle near unto
Rome, without the City, upon Peter's Patrimony, which one way is reconed 1600.
furlongs, being 200. miles, and those lustful Monsters will ble^d hy a
P^otestant Army, commanded by saints, Rev. 14.20
such as are holy, faithful, and chosen; And as easily foresee, that the
Spaniard did so universally ^ax and oppress the Neopolitans, that they must of
necessity take up Arms to redeem^ their just liberties, which fire is new
kindled, and will not be quenched till the Spaniard be driven out of that
Kingdom, a pattern to all Princes to yield to the just int eaties of their
Subjects, before it be too late, for the Neopolitans said long since that the
voice Roy, and the Church took above half their Estates from them, but if he
did not give over taxing, they would give over paying, a just Guerdon for all
cruel Princes, and such as act by Tyrannical principles, of taxing the people
so excessively, that having work enough to do to live and maintain a being,
they may never think of a well being, and that it is a great favor that they
enjoy their lives, and keep out of prisons, as if it were a great Favor for a
Thief that steals a Goose, to leave some Feathers behind him; I find subjects
in many places beyond Sea, are feign to make a virtue of necessity, being like
those that sail between Scilla and Caribdis in danger to be spilt upon one of
those Rocks, which are immoderate taxations, and maintenance of many Thousand
Monks an unprofitable Generation of Abbey Lubbers that eat up the very fat and
Cream of the Kingdom, that the Bees must work to maintain such droanes is a
most abominable thing, to make poor people give their goods to priests,
Monastries, and Nunneries, (for they dare do no otherwise for fear of
damnation) 4. 5. or 600. of the Devils Ministers to be maintained in some one
convent; and have often in my thoughts resembled them to the Drunkards,
Gluttons, and Prodigalls of this Kingdom, that spend that in Luxury, Rioting,
Surfeiting, and excess, which would make poor people leap for joy, and the
other extremity in this Kingdom, is the cruelty and miserable baseness, and
nigardlinesse of many Avaritions, evil minded men, that get the poor into
their Dens, and grind their very backs and belly, base earth-wormes, that count
gain, godliness, that care not what become of the poor, so as they may fill
the other Bag, or buy the other purchase, that will hold with the hound, and
run with the Hare, and be of any opinion to get money, they laugh who ever
cries, and get money which side soever prevails, these are the Mystical
Wolves and Monks that destroy poor English Lambs, and these men I count to be
the Generation of Lesinants, that love none but such miserable Hucksters, and
Ingrossers as themselves, they will be sure to help one another; abusing
Scripture, that to him that has shall be given, and he that has little shall
have less, an old Usurer of the Fraternity, making his will, the Counsel
finding him inclined to give all his Estate to a rich Nephew, that had no
Issue, knowing that he had many poor kindred, entreated him to be mindful of
his own flesh and blood that were nearer allied unto him, then that rich
Cosen, no says he, I must do as I was do^ unto, my Estate came unto me by
fortune, and good luck, in barganing, and this Cosen is a fortunate man, I must
favor them whom fortune favors, Concell replied he has no child to leave it
unto, and is old, what would you have him to do with it; says he, let him
find out some rich man to make his heir that will improve it; but what shall
become then of the poor says he? says the old Usurer (that was going I will
not say whither, but I can never advance Gods mercy, nor free grace more then
when I think of a Pope, and a biting VSVRER) What do you tell me of the
poor, I never cared for a poor man in my life, Conscience sometimes speaks
out, there is not a greater Antipathie between a Spaniard and a Frenchman, or
the Hound and the Hare, then between a rich miserable, greedy Cormorant, and a
poor man; such cruel natures are no more moved with the cry of a poor man,
who tells them he is ready to be starved, then the Rocks are moved by the
waters, you shall see him flee from a poor man, as if he had the plague, as if
poverty were infectious. Like the old Churl that came twice a year for his
Rent, an Old woman prayed him for a Penny, away you Old Witch says he, I come
to receive money, not to give.

If a poor man petitions him, Oh, times are strait, he has no money, Stulte
hac nocte is the misers case.
if a rich man desire 2. 3. 4. or 5000. l. he shall have all possible
assistance to help him to it, speak aloud, thou covetous wretch had not
rather lend a rich man (that has no need of money then the sea has of waters
unles it be for the other purchase) 1000. l. then a poor man 10. l. to buy
bread for his family, and dare thou profes thy self to be a Christian, before
thou art a Morrall Man.

The Lord make our Nobles, and Worthies in Parliament, (those that be truly
Noble) whose Veins are full of Generous blood, that are merciful to the poor,
and contribute liberally to their Necessities, that hate this abominable
project of covetousness and oppression, worse 10000. times to the poor then
that of Ship Money or Brass money) wise as Angels of light, to discover these
bloody wolves, and crafty Foxes, which are yet many of them in Sheepe-skins,
not uncased, but hug themselves, in the contemplation of their riches; and
being found out to be divested and denuded of all public Employment in the
Kingdom, it being most unfit that they should be honored by the Kingdom who
are the greatest reproach and dishonor of it, though I rather pity, then envy
them, there case is, Thou fool this night etc. some of them which have
compounded, and quietly enjoy their estates; ah, what a sad thing is it to
think, that poor men should pay their Compositions; now poor Tennants, and
others are arrested, by scores for Old Debts, ands Rents upon extremities, when
they could keep no Cattle in the grounds, for fear of plundring, but says
the Old miser, I must pay many thousand pounds to the Parliament, and must get
it up again; I profes it melt's my very heart to think upon it, how happy a
thing had it been, if Old Usurers and griping Landlords, which have been
Delinquents had been Ordered upon their compositions, to have released and
discharged all poor men, which were not able to pay them, at least to have
provided that they should not presently cast such poor wretches imprison,
specially If a poor man have been well affected to the Parliament, and stands
any ways engaged to a Compounder, oh, says he I Will be sure to be revenged on
that Round head, just like the Devil, that because he cannot hurt the Divine
Majesty, he vents his malice against Gods people, because the Parliament is out
of his reach. Therefore the poor man that honors, and prays for them, shall
be sure to feel the smart of his displeasure how Cordial will poor men's
obedience be, to the supreme Justice of the Kingdom, and every other Court,
when they see that their miser^^le condition is taken into their speedy and
most serious consultation tell not me, the Kingdom is not yet settled to make
provision for all poor people that none be famished, is the first step to the
happiness and prosperity of this Kingdom. And the first thing to be done in
right reason.

Neither can the King, Parliament, nor any subject be truly happy without this,
he that can feast when his Neighbors want bread, is rather a De ill then a
man, he is no Politician that says there is any thing of such absolute
necessity, as to provide bread for the poor, without this we are undone, King,
Lords, Commons, Army, Assem-City, Country, Ministers, People, all undone every
Mothers Child of us will be undone, for if the poor be famished to Death, God
will never bless the rich in this Kingdom, but I am confident God will bless
this nation, and therefore the poor shall one way or other be provi^ed for, I
hope the work of reformation will be glorious in this Kingdom, it is now in
the hands of the noble reformers, and refiners, and when the reformers are
virtuous and religious men; all the Divills and their sollicitors cannot hinder
a blessed reformation, the sword is the most useful servant, that Lady justice
has, without which never was the yoke of oppression broken in any Kingdom,
and where the noble senators, Gown men and sword men, are good men, I mean
merciful men, for that expression in Scripture, that for a good man
paradventure one may dye, is meant, a charitable man that says what is mine is
thine, not the righteous man that says what is mine is mine, and what is thine
is thine, much less the covetous miser that says what is thine is mine, and
what is mine is my own, good Christians and eminent for cheap and speedy
justice, that Reformation must needs be glorious; In confidence whereof I shall
humble aquiesce, beseeching God to bless and prosper his own works (for
hitherto he has done all) in the hands and endeavors of those Noble trustees,
that every own in this Kingdom may have his due, and those that have
instrumentally saved the Kingdom, esteemed as elder brothers, with a double
portion; and every poor Man, Woman. and Child, to have bread and clothes to
preserve them from hunger, and sterving, in this dear year whereof there was
never so much danger, which God grant; no period -- better then prayer,
therefore here I cast Anchor* and subscribe my self my self:

The honest poormans faithful servant JOHN COOK.

FINIS.

