A Copy of a LETTER Sent to the most Illustrious and High borne Prince RUPERT
By the grace of God Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bavaria, etc.

Translated out of high Dutch.

Printed according to Order.

woodcut of portrait of man

London printed by Moses Bell, 12. Aug. 1644.

A Copy of a Letter to Prince RUPERTS Highness, translated out of high Dutch.
SIR,
THe love and honor which I owe and bear to the most Illustrious Palatine
Family, enforce me to address my self unto your Highness, a Branch of that
Princely Stem, of extraordinary expectation to restore by Resolution and Arms,
to their just Possessions and Dignities, Princes of an Electorall House of the
Roman Empire, and of the Blood Royal of Great Britain (made the scorn and
mockery of the House of Austria) which neither by Treatis nor Threatenings could
hitherto be effected. It is (Sir) to let you know that which none about you
will; or (if they would) dare tell you the truth, in that those Counsels and
Actions which now in England you so eagerly prosecute, tend extremely to your
dishonor and weakening. Persons which are much interessed in matters, may be
thought not altogether fit to be consulted touching the things in which they
are engaged, that I, who am of neither Partee, now in Arms, may hope to be
heard without prejudice, and that you will esteem those of your own side in
like or worse condition, who being Papists, they, and none but they, can by
killing of the servants of God, be meant to think they serve God; or
necessitous persons, whom Caesar tells you have no hope but in a Civil
War, are far the greatest number; the first undertakers, and most obstinate
prosecutors of all that side with you. And glad I am that this Paper will not
fear to tell you how much you dishonor your self by fighting, not only on
the side, but even for the cause of such men, who have been and still are in
the number of the greatest enemies of your House. Such are those very persons
which have been the Complotters, and are the Fomenters of that Civil War.
Those (I mean) who in the Breach of Bohemia instilled their venom into your
Grandfather King James his ears, That your Fathers most just Title by a
lawful Election to that Kingdom, was no other then by usurpation, and that
the Prince Elector was thereby the cause of the present troubles in Germany. In
the cause of the Palatinate, where no pretense of Usurpation could be fastened
(it being your Fathers birth right) they dealt more subtly, but as falsely as
in that of Bohemia, When it had been too open and palpable to have dissuaded
the King wholly from assisting his only Daughter in recovering her Dowry, and
her children their Patrimony. Your kind enemies one while by sending too
little aid, and that for the most part unseasonable, other times by wasting
opportunities in tedious Embassies, or setting on foot cross Designs, were
the cause that the Palatinate was rather betrayed then neglected. And what is
the end and scope you aim at, but the destruction of them who never assembled
since the first of your sufferings, but did highly resent and take to heart
your wrongs and sufferings and made such large offers for the redressing of
them, and so earnestly pressed the sudaine and serious taking the matter in
hand that the business of the Palatinate (what pretense soever could be made)
was the principal cause of dissolving the Parliament in the one and twentieth
year of that King. And although it cannot be said thereupon, that the Prince
Electors Cause was (for that of Bohemia was very odious) wholly laid by, yet
was it never committed (as was desired) to the managing of the Parliament, nor
their Counsel asked in it, lest it should have been put into their hands who
would have dealt in it Bona fide.

But how has the influence of the favor of your Royal Uncle the King of
great britain toward you, expressed clearly by the liberal aid sent into
Germany unto the King of Sweden, with respect and reference unto the sufferings
of his only Sister and Princely Nephews been stopped, by sending very little
supply of men or money after the first? How have Ambassadors dispatched from
the Protestant united Princes in Germany, which had regained a very
considerable part of that Country, sent unto the King for aid, to keep at least
what they had gotten, been sent away without effect? Nor could it be
otherwise, until by the Prince Electors an, your Personal repair to the
Court of England, and standing somewhat betwixt his Majesty your Uncle, and
your whispering enemies, you obtained some supply of both kinds. But lest you
should mistake, and think them some others then those which gave the counsel
in King James his time, or that you are not now fallen among those very
Counselors and men of their election, compare the practices of them in King
James his time with those which in the reign of King Charies even to this day
they have not diverted from, and you shall find still the same things. Which
of those men whom then you might suspect to be your enemy, has since this
Parliament been made your friend? and how was the reconciliation made? What
though some that were then Counselors are now dead? of them undoubtedly some
you suspect not, others were not the principal Agents, for since their death
the same Counsels notwithstanding. Some forces were sent at the beginning of
the troubles of the ^alatinater under the reign of your Royal Grandfather,
the like was sent in behalf of the Prince Elector to the Swede at his first
advancing into Germany. Very little supply went from England, yet some, both to
your Father from King James, and to Him also and your Brother from King
Charles. Ambassadors were often sent, and as often deluded in both times, And
as before, while a Fleet was rigged, and sot sail to Algier for the conquering
of the Pirates, the Emperor, Spaniard, and their Allies overran the
Palatinate. So lately, when it was feared by your enemies, that the Kings
patience toward the Emperor and Spaniard for his Sisters sufferings and her
Childrens, would shortly come to am end (for it was determined that, if Justice
were not done in the Prince Electors Cause before such a time, his Majesty
would endeavor by force of Arms himself to do it) a plot was contrived to
turn the edge of the Kings anger upon the Pirates of Sally with another Fleet,
that the great Pirate of Christendom might once more illude the Just and
Royal Indignation of King Charles conceived against the Emperor. Touching
this Parliament, I have heard that the consideration, or rather memory of your
great Cause, preoccupied the vehement resolution of the States then assembled.
Was not this preventing of the Houses undaunted constancy to appear in the
matter, an Art (which your Adversaries are not now to learn) to wring the
work from the Parliament, and mould it after their own fashion? Howsoever you
cannot doubt of the principal moving cause which wrought any thing in that
work, arose from that present assembling. In so much that neither your wrongs
had been in any more hope of redress then before (and yet hitherto it has
been only a war of many months, and two more joint Ambassadors) or your
Self (great Prince) of liberty, but for their sakes whom you seek to destroy.
What may it possibly be then which provokes you thus against that Kingdom? Is
it the Justice of the quarrel for which you fight? For your Religion, I
suspect it not, for had that been altered, questionless they had released you
before this time. Yet I know you have been often and craftily dealt withal
during your restraint to alter that. And this I cannot pass by, the providence
of God, who so appointed that you should not fall into the hands of your
enemies till you had actually leavied war against the Emperor, and that your
liberty could not be obtained until the assembling of the Parliament, that the
Kingdom of England might have therewith to stop your mouth touching the
Justice of their Cause, and to upbraid you with ingratitude toward them who
were the chief Instruments of your present freedom. For if to fight against
the forces of the Emperor be to fight against the Emperor, what does the
English Parliament to day, you did not in Germany yesterday? And to all intents
and purposes of that kind, your Royal Grandfather of blessed memory furnished
your Father, and so did King Charles the Prince Elector and your Self. Or is
Prince Rupert less subject to the Emperor then the Parliament of England to
their King, that they must even to the hazard of all obey his personal
commands, who may so err, that the Kingdom enwrapt in the safety of the
Parliament, may be destroyed? when if Prince Frederick and Prince Rupert
should fail, or be destroyed by the injustice of the Emperor Ferdinand,
Prince Maurice may succeed; and if he miscarry, a younger brother; so that
there is no such danger either of the common wealth of the Palatinate, or of
the Illustrious Family, if both the Prince Elector and your Self should (which
God avert) suffer much more then the loss of Patrimony. Let this be far from
the thoughts of any reasonable man. Why do I seek for any other inducement?
plainly that which drew you to that party could be no other then respect of
particular advantage, hoping by so strictly adhering to the King your Uncles
side, to wind your self so far into his favor, (...) now at last (if his
Majesty shall prevail) no let may hinder (...) from taking Arms for you, as
you for him. Yet give me (...) to tell your Highness, that so soon as th^^
(...) abroad of a grant of your liberty, I presently apprehended that the
Spaniard and their faction had some thing to do for you in the troubles of
England, which were then in conception, because they had never been so kind
unto you till that time and in your common Cause the two Ambassadors could
obtain nothing which was equal. So at length have your enemies, when they had
before hindered your Allies from arming to assist you, and afterward when with
much labor some appeared for you, disarmed them, and armed your self against
your self. Then which what can be more done to your dishonor and damage? But
in case victory shall be with the Parliment, it is much to be feared that the
sufferings of your House, more then twenty years neglected, will not easily be
taken into their thoughts; or if every Branch, besides your Self and Prince
Ma^rice, be thought worthy of the Kingdom of Englands help and charge,
notwithstanding their extreme burdens and late troubles, the Commons of England
will except against you both, as not willing to have new burdens laid upon
their shoulders, for their sakes by whom they have already groaned under so
many. If on the other side the Partee you sight for shall be victorious, it is
not to be hoped that those Counselors, and their creatures, who have dealt so
perfidiously by your Royal Father, by the Prince Elector your Brother, and
your whole Family (for now they have that Kings ear more obnoxious then ever
they had before, those noble Lords who were and are your friends, being retired
from the Court) will change their Religion, their Natures, or Dependencies,
being Persons in heart, if not in public profession, Papists. or Pensioners
unto the Spaniard, or dependents of the one or the other. Will those which now
fight for and with Papists in ^ritantie, undo what they have effected there by
fighting against Papists in Germany? And as Prince Rupert may not expect any
assistance by all reason of Religion and Conscience from the Catholics of
Britain (which now and in this Cause are his greatest friends) against the
Emperor and Catholic King; so neither from King Charles against them by the
law of Gratitude (forsooth) the one of which released the Prince out of prison
and sent him to his Uncle, the other protecteth the Kings Ships, though he
takes the Parliaments by reprize.

To the more indifferent party it will be sufficient to say, The French are too
potent; Protect the Spaniard in Artois and Flanders in point of State, or make
them believe the Palatinate not worth the recovering, although your enemies
account it well worth the keeping. But that the Prince may not think of
Germany, persuade him to the conquest of Madagascor, and entitle him to the
Duchy of Cumberland, which are seated far enough from his own Country.
Although your Highness could not but have taken it better, and with less
suspicion, to have a promise made you of restoring unto you that which is
properly your own. But I assure you (Sir) whatsoever your Self, or some of
you may intend, You all fight for the King of Spain. And that you may the
better know what these men are like to do for you in time to come, consider
with your Self what they have already done; They have drawn you either from
peaceable abiding with your Royal Mother and the Prince Elector at the Hage,
or from pursuing your Right and Patrimony in Germany, by joining with the
Princes of the Evangelical Union, to hazard your life in Battails, Sieges,
Skirmishes, in which if valiant Prince Rupert shall lose his life, the King of
Spain can be no loser. They have thrown the envy of all their Cruelties,
Spoils, and Villainies in Prince Ruperts face, in every troop almost (I hear)
pretending his Authority, and using his name to all their Outrages; and (what
in them lies) drawn the whole Electorall Family into hatred, and by these
things into fear of a helpless condition. For it is the Kingdom of England
(under God) which must perform for that House (if ever it be done) the great
work of Restoration. Lay down therefore now at length (High bo^^e Prince)
your Arms; and although the Kingdom of England for all it has done, or meant
to have done for you, deserve to be thus rewarded, be not cruel to your Self
and Princely Family. Sir, pardon me, I have told you the truth. God open your
eyes and heart also.

FINIS.

