The Copy of a LETTER To His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX:

Subscribed by the Justices of the Peace, and Committee of Devonshire,
concerning the SOLDIERS.

And the Generals Answer thereunto; With His Excellencies Propositions.

ALSO Heads of New Propositions sent from the Army to the Parliament.

Desiring that six weeks pay may be provided presently for the Army, or a
Months pay at least.

That their Arrears may be paid out of the remainder of Bishops lands, Deans,
and Chapters, two parts of Delinquents estates, yet uncompounded for, and
Forest Lands.

That if constant pay be provided for the Army, it shall be death to any who
shall take free quarter, or plunder; To which end they desire the 60000 li. per
mensum, may be made up 100000 li. a month.

November. 10. 1647.
Imprimatur

G. M.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, near the Queenes-head
Tavern, 1647.

The Copy of a LETTER FROM THE ARMY Dated at Putney, November. 10. 1647.
Right Honorable,
HIs Excellency by the advice of the General Council of the Army, has sent a
Letter to the Speaker of the House of Commons, to communicate the desires of
the said General Council to the Parliament, which Letter his Excellency
signed the 9th instant: The Heads where of are these:

I. Desiring that six weeks pay may be presently provided for the Army, or a
months pay at least.

II. That their Arreares may be paid out of the Reminder of Bishops Lands,
Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, two parts of Delinquents estates, yet uncompounded
for, and Forest Land.

III. That if constant pay be provided for the Army, it shall be death to any
who shall take free Quarter, or plunder; To which end they desire the 60000 li.
per mensum, may be made up 100000 li. a month.

The General Council, and the Agitators have concurred to adjourn sitting
until after the General Randezvouses, which will be next week. And then
something will be tendered, which I hope will settle all.

Putney the 10th of November. 1647.
THE Copy of a Letter from the Justices of the Peace, and Committee of
Devonshire.
To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Commander in Chief of the Parliaments
Forces.
SIR,
WE cannot but with all thankfulness acknowledge that our sitting in peace is
in a great part due to your Excellency, our sufferings being mo^^ then other
Counties, the sense of relief cannot but be, as more acceptable, so the more
obliging to those that receive it, the consideration hereof requires, in the
first place, our hearty acknowledgement, which we most humbly herewith tender
you, in confidence of your wonted goodness, crave leave to represent to you
some particulars, wherein (we conceive) your Excellency is abused, the
Parliaments Orders disobeyed, and this City exceedingly wronged.

About nine months since the House of Commons commanded the disbanding (among
several other Forces in this County) a Troop of Horse, under the Command of
Major Perkins, paying them a months pay, and the Committee of the West were to
signify to the Committee of this County, the pleasure of the House herein,
which was accordingly done the 4th of January last: And the Committee of this
County, knowing it to be a great service to the public, borrowed the money
being about 375 li. to pay them off. And the Major received five weeks pay
(which was 74 l. more then the Committee here had order to pay them,) and the
Order for disbanding, and paid his Troops with it, and promised to disband,
notwithstanding ever since (to the great oppression of this County) this Troop
has contrary to three several Orders, some months since issued, continued
together, exacted free Quarter from the County, and (as we are informed) have
levied diverse sums of money on several Parishes, and since they were
questioned for it, have produced an Order from your Excellency (procured as we
conceive, upon a misinformation) dated the 25 of September last, for the
quartering of the said Troop within this County, we being confident, as yet,
the state of this business has not been truly represented to your
Excellency* And f^nding this to be presented as a great grievance (by the Grand
Jury, at this our General Sessions thought it our duty to certify these
truths to you, beseeching you according to the Order of the House of Commons,
and that of the Committee of the West, they may not keep in a body, to the
terror of the people, and the absolute disabling us to levy the Grand
Assessements, for the pay of your Excellencies Army. The redress of these our
grievances will oblige us to remain.

Your Excellencies most humble servants John Bamfield John Northcote Edmond
Fowell John Davis Nich. Martin George Chudleigh Edward Davyes William Fry
Robert Dukes John Tyrling Edmond Prideaux William Putt.

Exeter at the general Sessions of the Peace for the County of Devon, the 9th
of October. 1647.
His Excellencies Answer to the Justices and Committee, of the County of Devon.
Gentlemen,
I Have received yours of October 9. wherein you are pleased to begin with
such acknowledgements, as I wish may always be directed to God the Author of
your peace and blessings, and not to my self otherwise then as a weak
Instrument in his hands, who shall expect or wish no return from you but that
(as I presume you are constant to the public interest, which God has so
owned, so) that you would be careful that these whom ye have likewise so
eminently owned to make them the chief Instruments of his work, to your
selves and the Kingdom, may meet with no unworthy requitals: As to the
business of Major Perkins his Troppe, I confess I did before understand what
you now write concerning the appointed disbanding thereof, and I thank you for
your friendly information.

I shall now leave it to be accordingly disbanded by you, desiring, only that
(if possible) they may have the encouragement of three weeks pay, and the
Certificates for what further Arreares (may be reasonable) due unto them, and
that you would use the same hand toward what other Troops of sallery Horse
you have belonging to your County to disband them likewise (since they can none
of them come within the establishment now resolved on by the Parliament) and so
doing, I assure you, that I shall not continue to any, any order or countenance
from me to keep longer in a body, to the terror or trouble of your Country,
but do hereby revoke what Orders they had from me for their quartering in your
County. I have one request to add in behalf of the Governor of Excester.
Castle with the other Officers and foot belonging thereunto that (they being to
be continued, and brought under the establishment of the 180000. now resolved
on by the Parliament, so as there will be very shortly order taken for their
constant pay) you would for the present take care and effectual order, that
they may be supplied for their present subsistence, with either moneys
provisions, or convenient Quarters, nearest to their place of duty, which you
will shortly have power to discharge, out of the Assesments of the County.

Vera Copia Examinat.
Putney the 10th. of. No. 1647. Yours to serve you T. FAIRFAX.

For my renowned friends Sir John Bamfeild and the rest of the Justices of
Peace and Committee for the County of Devon.
FINIS.

