THE COPY OF A Barbarous and Bloody DECLARATION BY THE IRISH REBELS, AGAINST
The Supreme COUNCIL of JRELAND. AND The Votes of the Popish Assembly at
Waterford against Peace. AND A Proclamation excommunicating the Clergy of
Kilkennie, from saying Maskes, or executing any other Church-Offices.

SEPTEMBER. the 28.
This Declaration and Proclamation is examined, printed and published according
to ORDER.

LONDON Printed for N. E. Anno Dom. 1646.

A DECLARATJON BY THE Ecclesiastical Congregation of both Clergies of Ireland,
assembled together in the Name of the Holy Ghost at Waterford.
Before the most Reverend Lord, the Archbishop Firmans, the Apostolical Legate
residing in Ireland.
COncerning the Question between us debated, and disputed on many days
together, whether they who accepted a Peace, contained in thirty Articles,
transmitted to us by the supreme Council, were to be declared perjured, and
consequently whether they should be excommunicated as perjured persons: The
Opinions and the Reasons of every one being first heard, and the Writings of
some Doctors of Divinity read.

It is ordered by one general consent, and voted by all (no man gain saying
it,) That all and singular confederate Catholics, who shall adhere to the
said Peace, or consent with the Favorers of it, or after any other manner,
shall entertain and embrace it, are absolutely to be accounted perjured,
especially, for this reason, Because in those Articles there is no mention made
of the Catholic Religion, and the security thereof, nor regard had of the
conservation of the privileges of the Country, as it was promised by the
Oath, But that all things are rather referred to the judgment of our most
renowned King (from whom in this present estate, we can have nothing settled,)
And in the mean time, the Armies, Weapons, and Fortifications, and the said
supreme Council of the confederate Catholics it self, are subjected to the
Authority and Command of the Council of the State, and the Protestant
Officers of his Majesty, from whom that he might be secure, we have taken
that Oath: From which, and many other causes moved only by our own Consciences,
and having God before our eyes, that it may be known to all and singular, as
well Irish as Stranger, That we have not, nor will give our consent to such
Peace, except safe conditions, as well for our Religion, as for the King, and
for the Country, according to our Oath be offered unto us, And that our
Flocks, and all our Ca holique People, with our confederate Friends, who in
these general meetings, have sometimes asked our advice in this Spiritual
business belonging only to a Spiritual Judge, may know certainly what has
been determined by us; to the end, that the godly and faithful Catholics,
obeying their Shepherds and Pastors, may concur in the same sentence.

We have commanded this Decree to be written, and published in all places in
the English and the Irish Tongue, which we have confirmed with our hands and
Seals. But the other Question concerning Excommunication, we have referred
until the next Sessions.

Given at Waterford the 12. day of August, 1646. John Baptista Arch Episcopus
Fermanus Nuntius Apostolicus. Frater. Thomas Dublin Thomas Cosselences
Arch-Episcopus. Frater. Boetious Elpham. Fr. Pr. Waterford and Lis. John
Laoneus Episcopus. Frater. John Claufortinsis Richara Ardfertensis, and Acadam
Episcopus. Franciscus Aladencis Episcopus. Emund Lemerecenciis. Fr. Edm.
Laghlen, Epis. Emerus Clog herencis. Frater. Nicholas Formensis. Frater.
Iacobus Conald Abbas Benehoram. Frater. Pr. Plunketus, Abbas B. M. Dublin.
Frater. Lorentius Fitz. Harris Abbas desunio. Frater. John Cantnell Abbas
desancto cruce. Iacobus Tobin Abbas de Kilcole. Robertus Barry Vicarus
Apostolicus Rossensis Donaldus; (...) Frater. Donaldus Agrippa Fuinburences
Frater. Gregorus offarel prior provincialis ord: Predicate Dionisius o-Briscoll
prior provincialis Eremitarum Sancti Augustini. Edmundo-Teg procurator
Illustriff: Armacha in Cornell. Gualter Lincheus Vicharius Apost: Tuamensis.
Gulielin: Bargat vicar. Apost: Immolacensis. James Dempshi: Vicar: Gener:
Kilder: Cornel. Gasneas Adensis: Vic. Gener. Oliverus Deise Vic: Gener
Midencis. Dominicus Roch Vic: Gener Gorcagiencis. Symono-Connory Vic: Gener
Cluonensis. Edmund Gerardius Vic: Gener Cluonensis. Carolus Cogham Vic: Gener
Cluonensis. Frater. Robertus Nugentius superior societatis Jesu Barnabas
Barnwal Commissarius Generalis Capucinorum.


A Proclamation from the Bishop of Ossory, excommunicating the Clergy of
Kilkennie, for adhering to the Peace concluded between the Council, and the
Marquess of Ormond.
WHereas we have in public and private meeting, at several times declared to
the supreme Council, and others whom it might concern, That it was and is
unlawful, and against Conscience; yea, implying perjurie (as it has been
designed by a special Act of the Convocation now at Waterford) to do or
concur to any Act tending to the approbation or countenancing of the
publication of this unconscionable and mischievous Peace so dangerous (as it is
now Articled) to both Commonwealths, Syirituall and Temporal, but more
particularly to the Spiritual.

And whereas, notwithstanding our Declaration of the whole Clergy of the
Kingdom to the contrary, the supreme Council and Commissioners have
actually proceeded to the Proclamation of it, yea, and forced on the City by
terror and threats, rather then by any free consent, or desire of the people.

We having duly considered, and taken to heart, as it becomes, how envious
this Fact both is, and appears in Catholics even against God himself, And
what public contempt of the holy Church it appears, besides the evils it is
like to draw on this poor Kingdom.

After mature deliberation, and consent of our Clergy (in detestation of this
heinous and scandalous disobedience of the supreme Council) and others who
adhere unto them in a matter of Conscience toward the holy Church, and in
hatred to so wilful an abominable an Act, do by these presents (according to
the prescription of sacred Canons) pronounce and command (from henceforth) a
general Cessation of divine Officers throughout all the City and Suburbs of
Kilkennie, in all Churches, Monasteries, and houses in them whatsoever.

Given at Our Palace of Nova Curia, the 18. day of August, 1646.
FINIS.

