: JERUSALEM Fatal to her Assailants. DISCOVERED In a Sermon before the
Honorable House of COMMONS August 29. 1649. At MARGARETS Westminster, Upon
their solemn day of thanksgiving for that signal Victory over the Lord
ORMOND, In routing his whole Army, and raising the Siege of Dublin in Ireland,
By the Garrison thereof under the Command of Lieutenant General JONES. By
WILLIAM COOPER M. A. Minister of the Gospel at OLAVES Southwark.

PSALM. 9.16. The Lord is known by the judgment that he executes: The wicked
is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion Selah.

Claud. lib. 1. in Eutrop. Sic opifex tauri, tormentorumque repertor,
Primus inexpertum, Siculo cogente tyranno;
Sensit opus, docetque suum mugire juvencum.
London Printed by J. C. for the Author, and are to be sold at the Crown in
Pope's Head Alley. 1649.

Die Iovis 30 Augusti 1649.
ORDERED by the Commons assembled in Parliament; that the thanks of this House
be given to M. Cooper for his great pains taken in his Sermon preached before
this House yesterday at Margarets Westminster; being a day set a part for a
public Thanksgiving: And that he be desired to print his Sermon; and have the
like privilege in printing as others usually have had in the like case. And it
is ordered that Sir Henry Mildmay do give him the thanks of this House
accordingly.

Henry Scobel Cler. Parliamenti.

To the Honorable House of Commons assembled in Parliament at Westminster.
Honorable Worthies,
THE Romans, what out of policy, or superstition, Pluc. and Macrob. Vide Casp.
Bart. ad Rutil. l. 2. v. 42.
made it heinous and capital to make known the name of their Cities tutelar
God, by whose favor Rome had attained to that height of grandor and glory; it
was religion to them to be silent and secret in this: But our silence would be
so far from being sacred, that it were a sin and high profaning the name of
our tutelar God, the great God and Lord of Hosts, not to publish and blaze his
Name unto the world, especially when himself declares, that he does his
wondrous works, that they may be had in everlasting remembrance. But when I
consider the sullen silence and ingratitude of many, notwithstanding so vast a
confluence of mercies upon us with measure pressed down and running over, me
thinks it calls to mind what an Hebrew Writer complains of in his time, that
the Fathers had plowed, R. Hag.
sown, reaped, fanned, and set bread upon the Table, but the children had not
a mouth to eat it. Surely that is a foolish and a froward child, that sees not
how his heavenly Father has provided for him, and yet wants a heart to value,
and a mouth to proclaim his goodness. The sense of which alone prevailed upon
my spirit, to attend the call of Divine Providence by you (Honorable Worthies)
both first to speak, and now to publish this ensuing homely discourse. I
believe, therefore have I spoken.

It was a noble acknowledgement in David when he said, Thine, O Lord, is the
greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the Majesty: All
things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee. How then can we
grudge to give God his homage and tribute, who hold all at the will of the
Lord? Our thankfulness what is it but the reflection of his own beams, and
the echo of his strokes? strokes laid on so home and heavy upon your
adversaries, as makes some of them with the Magicians, to confess the finger
of God.

You (right honorable) have declared your high sense of so transcendent a
deliverance, and I hope it will not soon die with you, being so rich a present,
and earnest of future happiness. Yet know, this does not pay all your debt,
Crescentibus donis, donorum crescunt rations, much is given you, and therefore
much shall be required of you. So then, it is proper for your souls now to ask
this question, What shall I render, and how shall I stand under this weight of
glory and mercy? A question so much the more proper and seasonable, as our
frailties are apt to expose us in prosperous successes, unto the power of
temptations; insomuch as a sage Heathen tells us this observation of his,
Cicero, lib. 4. Epist. 3. ad Lam.
that although war be full of calamities, yet nothing is more dangerous than
victory, which albeit it happen to the best men, yet it commonly renders them
fierce, and impotent in their excesses; yea, notwithstanding they are otherwise
by nature inclined, yet by a kind of fatality they are made such. The
consideration of this, I hope, will over-aw your hearts by a holy fear and
watchfulness, not only to shun these rocks of extremity, to which you see
men in such a case obnoxious, but also to study an improvement of your mercies
suitable to the greatness of them.

There is a memorable story of that grave Emperor Charles the fifth, a man cut
out for greatness and happiness, had he not dashed upon that rock which
commonly splits Royal Families, an endeavor to smother the Gospel by force, and
fraud; this man upon some successes, was flattered by Antonius Leva, and some
other of his officers, to make use of his victories for the advantage and
interest of his Imperial Majesty, their meaning was, that he should thereby
make himself great, after the example of Caesar and Alexander, not sparing any
that stood in his way. To whom he thus replied, The sole mark of Alexander and
J. Caesar's aim, Besold. Dissert. Philolog. etc.
was worldly glory; but it becomes me, and other Christian Princes, so to look
at honor, as to take heed lest while we hunt after that, we lose our souls;
and to use victory so, as we may be able to give God an account of our actions.
This answer from such a man at such a time, I confess made some impression
upon me, when I read it, my prayers are, it may do more upon you, whom for
your present capacity and transactions it more fitly suits.

Show thou your selves to God, as he has declared himself to you: Wot you
how? In righteousness and holiness, by these two the Lord makes himself glorious,
and these two will be as the two pillars Jachin and Boaz both to your own
honor, and the happiness of this people. For Religion, Bodin. val. in Res. Hac
velnti thyrso percutiuntur mentes humanae Lib. 2. cap. 18. de prin.
I know a name only of it is sufficient to some to maintain their own name, and
to preserve an interest. This has been esteemed by Princes sufficient to
charm and restrain the multitudes, forasmuch as Religion has the strongest
reason in it and for it, of all things. But if there be but a name, if there be
but a show, and singleness in this, the Lord will not be mocked: Yet if any
should tell me, that England has the same ground to complain of what France
did long ago, That too many of their Chiefes had learned that Maxim of the
Florentine Atheist, That as it was necessary for a Governor, so enough to seem
religious outwardly, though inwardly he were not so; I would not give credit
to him upon this ground, because it is impossible that those visible and
signal discoveries of God to us in all the ways of his dispensations, should
suffer us to impose upon his omniscience. Besides, methinks you often
signify, that religion is a tender Virgin, that must be as watchfully kept, as
warily approached: The first of these, will mind you, that men be not suffered
to run wild in the things of God: The other, that conscience be not imposed on
by one or the other hand The first is a Gallionisme, the other is
Antichristianisme. I know none shall ever have just cause to fasten either of
these upon your counsels or actions; for the one, who durst presume but that
the name of God shall be as tender to you, as your own: for the other, that of
Tertullian is observable, Hoc ad irreligiositatis elogium concurrit adimere
libertatem religionis, and interdicere opinionem divinitatis, ut non liceat
mihi colere quem velim, sed cogar colere quem nolim. In a word, therefore
endeavor by steering aright betwixt these two rocks, to preserve our vessel
from shipwreck; and let peace between brethren be so endeavored y you, which
does as it were pitch the ship within and without, that no leaks or chinks shall
sink it. Great Constantine did think it his duty and interest to persuade and
urge this by his personal presence, and authority. O you Fathers of your
Country, consider your children, some are stronger, some younger, some more
heavy and sullen, others more sprightly and wanton; there are not only
diversities, but divisions among them. Put forth your authority with wisdom and
tenderness effectually, that we may not always bite and devour one another.
I shall add this, Let interest of State sway nothing to the calculation of
religion to any point. Notable is that example of Scipio Ammiratus upon
Tacitus, Since there is no proportion between temporal things and spiritual,
when thou see Religion to oppose thy reason of State, presently betake thy
self to religion, and accommodate thy reason of State to that, and not the
contrary: for if you think to lay a yoke upon the consciences of men, and
thereby as a strong man endeavor to keep the House in peace, they will answer
you with that stout Praetor, O ye Romans we reverence you; and if you will have
more, we fear you too; yet know, we bear a greater reverence and fear to the
immortal Gods. Look therefore to this.

The other Pillar of your name, and of your safety, is Righteousness: Read
over those innumerable Petitions written and unwritten of a long time, and yet
daily presented; lay your ears to the sighs and tears of the oppressed that
have no comforter, take heed that none justly appeal to the day of judgment
from you, or against you; remember that your duty is by a Geometrical
proportion to give to every one his right according to his capacity and merit,
and to do as you would be done by: sometime to part with your plenty by
contribution, and to abate of your height by condescension, according to
exigence. Salvian persuading to this very thing, brings in the Fabii, Fabricii,
and Cincinnati, who refused the advantage of growing rich, Lib. 1. de Pro.
that if it were possible by their impoverishment they might raise the ruins
of a shattered Commonwealth. But that of Philo is notable, who says, Jupiter
had two Twins, to one of them he gave immortality, the other he made mortal:
the brother that was immortal considering his own life to be endless, and
that his brother should die, and so his grief for his brothers death would
consequently be eternal, devised this mavelous exchange, he communicated
immortality with his mortal brother, by which both had a mixture of both. This
he calls the fountain and ground of all Justice. Some will be ready to apply
this against the immortallity of your present Session, me thinks it clearly
tells all, whom God has for a turn lifted up above their brethren, that they
declare a communicablenesse with their brethren. My aim (Worthies) was but
this, that by the flourishing of Religion and Righteousness among you and us.
I may congratulate my Country with this acclamation, The Lord bless thee, O
habitation of justice, and mountain of holiness, Jer. 31.23.

This mean Sermon here again presented, together with the occasion, serves for
a comfortable encouragement in the premises, by showing the self-destroying
enterprises of your enemies, how fatal Jerusalem is to her assailants, how
faithful the Lord is in his engagements for his people. That emergency which
gave occasion to our solemnity, and this discourse, bears testimony to so
weighty a truth. Now that our hearts may come up to it in our respective places
and duties, is the prayer of

Your Honors daily Orator at the Throne of Grace, William Cooper

A Sermon Preached before the House of PARLIAMENT.
Zach. 12.2, 3, 4, 5. Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of poison unto all
the people round about: also with Judah will he be in the siege against
Jerusalem.

And in that day will I make Jerusalem an heavy stone for all people: all that
lift it up shall be torn, though all the people of the earth be gathered
together against it.

In that day, says the Lord, I will smite every horse with astonishment, and
his rider with madness, and I will open mine eyes upon the house of Judah, and
will smite every horse of the people with blindness.

And the Princes of Judah shall say in their hearts, The inhabitants of
Jerusalem shall be my strength in the Lord of hosts their God.


Right honorable and beloved,
TO day is this word fulfilled to us; this prophecy is but a narrative, or
representative of mercy, if our hearts do but answer unto both; and if our
thankfulness come but up to these words, and to these works of God, it will be a
pleasing harmony in Gods ears: Which that it may be, I am now here by your
Call, to contribute a little out of my penury, to what you had but now so
largely and so lively set before your eyes. God has this day turned our Fast
into a Feast, and this as solemn for praise and mirth, as that was solemn for
prayer and mourning; thus he alone can change the seasons and the occasions,
and calls to us answerably to change the key of our devotions: there is a time
to weep and a time to laugh; we have had both; and the first preparing for, and
changed into the latter, through the precious mercyes of our God, who is yet
good to our Israel, and has not left himself without witness to us, as at this
day. That I might further hold out God in his glory to you, and hold up your
hearts to take a full survey of it; I have endeavored to seek out a seasonble
and suitable word: for we may know, as there is nothing new under the Sun; so the
providence of God which has wrought hitherto, works yet still for his
Church; and so will do yet more gloriously, that ye all may marvel.

Observe then the parts and parralel together: You have here, first, a very
formal, and formidable laying a siege; secondly, We have a signal raising of
that siege: thirdly, we have the causes and consequents of both: In the first,
two things are considerable,

First, The besieged, secondly, the besiegers.

The Besieged is a City, no mean City; but a Mother in Israel, Jerusalem, the
metropolis of Judea, the glory of the earth; the City of God is invested, and
beleagured; the beloved City is surrounded and straightned by her adversaryes.

2. The Besiegers; a numerous Host, all the people round about; sundry Nations,
bad neighbors, such as bear evil will to Sion; all these come up against Juda
and against Jerusalem; this is clearly employed, v. 2. Nay its presupposed, that
all the people of the earth may design a siege, and sacking to Jerusalem, v 3.
Besides, they shall come up well provided with Horse and Foot, and all warlike
equipage, and they shall advance so far, as to attach it, they shall be lifting
at it, presuming to carry it, v. 2, 3, 4. compared together: Thus much of the
siege of Jerusalem.

2. The signal raising of the siege:

Wherein observe we first, the Causes: secondly, the consequents: The Causes
are twofold, Principal, and isntrumental: the principal cause of this work
of Deliverance and Victory, for its both, is the Lord Jehovah, who appears
chief in this action, in every verse to the eighth, and he is described by his
power and by his will, which are put forth to relieve and succor Jerusalem.
Particularly, the Lord comes forth armed with his Almighty creating power,
described in there eminent effects of it, stretching out the heavens, laying
the foundation of the earth, and forming the spirit of man within him: This is
to tell you how far the Lord Jehovah will engage for the rescuing of Jerusalem
in distress, his wonder-working, and world creating power.

2. The Isntrumental cause of Jerusalems relief, for the Lord makes use of
Instruments in it; and that is, Jerusalem it self shall be isntrumental in its
own deliverance; and the Lord thus working for Jerusalem by Jerusalem, puts
forth several acts in the manner of his working, here elegantly expressed, and
happily taking effect upon the enemy.

1. Infatuating of him, he would needs drink a cup, and he was intoxicated with
it, v. 2.

2. Worsting or breaking them; he would be lifting and heaving at Jerusalem,
and this stone fell upon him and brake him, v. 3.

3. By astonishing the Horse and his ryder, their most active powers, their
Cavalry and flower:

4. After this follows the enemies utter consumption; all of them shall be cut
in pieces, and consumed as straw with fire, v. 3, 6. Thus we have the Causes.
Hence,

3. Follow the effects and consequents.

1. Jerusalem is delivered and secured:

2. Hereupon follows the doxology, high and low, governors and inhabitants of
Jerusalem, speak hearty praise to the Lord of Hosts, acknowledging wherein
their strength lies, in the Lord and his people; and withal we have an act of
faith in the governors, resolving to make choice of the Lord of Hosts for
their protector, cleaving to him, and being assured of him upon this score and
interest, that they have the inhabitants of Jerusalem with them and for them,
i. e. Gods people, who have always Gods presence and power by which they are
invincible, v. 5. Thus you have the Lords doing, and our duty.

These are our parts, and the parallel is clear between Jerusalem case and this
occasion; it needs not further repetition or application: for as the words seem
literally meant of Jerusalem assaulted and distressed by Antiochus, defended
and relieved by the Maccabees; so is it mystically meant of the Christian
Church, or any part of it, persecuted by Antichrist and his powers of whom
Antiochus was no obscure type or forerunner. The interest of Gods people in
Dublin, and the enemies rage against it, together with the righteous in it, may
well entitle such another City, Jerusalem.


Now, oh that the other part of the Prophecy v. 8. were fulfilled upon us this
day as it was upon them; that in that day, i. e. when God puts forth his power
in and for his people; then the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble
among them shall be as David, and the house of David as God, and as the Angel
of God before him; they have been in power and valor: Oh let us be as David's,
and as Angels in praise and thanksgiving: Had we but David's heart and harp, we
might sing upon those parts of the text, a Psalm of Degrees.

I must crave leave to pass through the Porch and Entry, to my Text, the first
verse of the Chapter is but a preparatory preface to that I pitch upon for our
meditations; yet has it some influence and relation to that which follows.

The burden of the word of the Lord for Israel: Thus says the Lord that
stretched forth the heavens, that laid the foundations of the earth, that
forms the spirit of man within him (...), This Song or comfortable prophecy
begins with the burden first; a burden that does not pinch or press Gods
people at all, it is for Israel, for their sakes, for their safety, for their
comfort: but a burden indeed fallen heavy upon Ierusalems enemies, Ierusalems
besiegers; this burden is theirs.

Its a common metaphor among the Prophets, importing some judgment, or
prophetical threatening of judgment upon a people; such a contrariety is there
between Jerusalem and her enemies: that as the two scales of a balance, put
weight in one, it presses down, and lifts the other up: the rise of Sion is
the fall of Babylon; the death of the witnesses makes the inhabitants of the
earth merry, Revel. 11.10. When Jeremy and his people lamented in tears, their
enemies laughed, mocking at their Sabbaths. Again, the Saints have their turn
at last, they shall laugh last, Isa. 65.13, 14. Behold, my servants shall
rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed; my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but
ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of Spirit. Revel. Now
this is a special act of divine justice, to give every one his turn; and not
only so, but by the law of retaliation, to make his people shift their burdens
upon their oppressors shoulders: The burdens that oppressors lay on the back
of the righteous, shall fall heavy upon themselves, breaking their bones, and
pressing them down into the Pit. This they get by laying load on the Saints of
God: but of that afterward from the 3. v.

The burden of the word of the Lord. The word falls heavy upon sinners, though
they make light of it: this expression was so familiar among the Prophets, in
the degenerate time of the Church; that the obstinate Jews would come in scorn,
asking, Ier. 23.33, 14, etc.
what is the burden of the Lord? but they found it a burden to them indeed.
Pharaoh made light of Gods threats and plagues on him by Moses and Aaron; but
at last they sunck him as a stone to the bottom of the Sea. Ahab made light of
Michaiahs word, but it proved a heavy burden to Ahab, as Iehu calls it. 2 Kings
9.25.

The burden of the word of the Lord for Israel, i. e. This vengeance threatened
on the besiegers, is for Isreal's sake, in favor of Israel: All the havoc that
he makes of great persons, of families, of whole Cities, Armies, Nations, is
for Israel; the whole current of Gods judgments is but a comment and
confirmation of this; pertinent to this and very pregnant is that of the
Prophet; Isa. 43.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
when he tells Israel there, as here; that he was his maker, redeemer, and
preserver from all evils: he gives the reason of all, verse 3, 4. I am the Lord
thy God, the holy one of Israel, thy Savior: I gave Egypt for thy ransom,
Ethiopia and Seba for thee, since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have
been honorable, and I have loved thee; therefore will I give men for thee, and
people for thy sake. The Lord takes away multitudes of wicked men as dross,
and counts them but as the dung of the Earth for Israel. What a distinguishing
love is here in a gracious God, that puts so vaste a difference between men and
men; between party and party, accounting his own honorable, his enemies base;
his own precious, his enemies vile: The Lord like a Lion goes forth and tears
what ever he meets with, to feed his young, be it men or beasts. Thus the Lord
makes bloody sacrifices and slaughters his adversaries be they never so mighty
or many; Rev. 19.17, 18, 19.
as we have it notably described by John in the Revelations; Having armed and
mounted Jesus Christ with royal conquering power, brings in the Angel,
inviting all to a great feast, which he calls the supper of God; the provision
is flesh, costly flesh; to eat the flesh of Kings, the flesh of Captains, the
flesh of mighty men of hosts; and them that sit on them, etc. I do not take the
words literally of Birds feeding on the carcasses of the churches slaughtered
enemies lying unburied, though that may be too; but of warriors mingling
themselves with the Church for pay and prey; or of militant Saints, who being
married to Jesus Christ as conquerours; he sups them upon the spoils of their
enemies, Psalm. 74.14.
the mighty Behemoths and Leviathans that prey on Sea and Land; the insatiable
Potentates of the Earth, even they shall be meat for his people, as Joshua and
Caleb said, the mighty Anachs should be bread for Israel, Number. 14.9. Thus out
of the (...) comes forth meat, and out of the strong comes sweetness; the
Lord will make the Lion that wars against Sampson to fall by his hands, he
shall tear him as a Kid, and the carcass of him shall yield Sampson honey.

Says the Lord which stretches forth the Heavens, etc. Then the Lord comes
forth armed as a God, he puts on all his majesty, and all his might when he
engages for Jerusalem: then he awakes as a great Lion, and as a Giant refreshed
with Wine; Then the hills melt, and the earth trembles at his presence, when he
comes forth to aid Jerusalem; for then he comes forth like a God, that is,
like himself; the Lord will put forth no less grandour and glory in delivering
Jerusalem, then when he made the world: Let all, says God, be reduced to a
Chaos of confusion, such seemed once our condition, and now little better to
those that cannot or will not see; yet I will fetch order out of that, says
the Lord: Let all be covered over with darkness, and jumbled into rubbish;
nay, let all be shut up again, into the womb of nothing, at least that nothing
of inhability, improbability, and impossibility too, as to a created agent; yet
I will create deliverance, fetch out a cosmos, a beautiful pile, and face of
things: praise the Lord in this great last restoration of the world, which we
trust is now beginning. The Lord will make a new heaven and a new earth, Revel.
21.1. The Lord will make quite another world, and all this for Israel. Have you
not heard, has it not been told you, that it is I, and only I do this; that
I make nothing of my peoples enemies, be they many, a whole world of them, as
verse. 3. Yet I spread out the heavens while they besiege then Jerusalem, i will
overwing their multitudes, i will front them and flanck them; I will catch them
all in a Net, for I stretch out the heavens: and for their power, their mining,
their confidence; let them look to their ground, I lay the foundations of the
earth; let them dig as deep as hell to hide counsel, and to shake thy walls,
and cast thee down O Jerusalem: I will countermine them, I Will blow them quite
up, they shall be buried in their own rubbish, says the Lord: what if they
abound with courage and malice insomuch that my people are even afraid of them?
is it not I that form the spirit of man within him; I take and give courage, I
will make thee stout-hearted as women, but I will make them that are feeble
among my people, as David, for I form the spirit of man within him: And for the
Savage disposition of the enemy, I tame that says God; Daniel and the Lions
shall lodge quietly together, my Lambs shall feed safely among the Bears and
Wolves, my Children shall play with Aspes and Cockatrices, for I form the
spirit of man within.

Right honorable and beloved, Here Is matter of courage and confidence for us;
here is ground not of prayer only, but of praise this day. Was not the enemy
sweld with that height of arrogance and presumption upon his numbers and
advantages; had he not so near compassed and carried Dublin, as to say, it
could not be delivered out of his hands without a miracle: Lo! our Creator
has wrought this miracle, when he that stretches out the heavens, etc.
undertakes it; he can do it, and has done it; and did he ever appear like a
God for us yet more, then in this engagement: so few and feeble against so many
and mighty, 1200 Horse, and not the third part of 4000 Foot in the act on,
conquering 19000 and beyond their own purposes and thoughts to charge the whole
Army, yet carried on! Thus if the spirit of the Lord come on Sampson he shall
break his cords, and slay heaps upon heaps with an Asses jaw bone, but let us
not anticipate: Here have ye seen the Lord of Hosts armed like himself: now
hear the Herald sounding the trumpet before him in the next verse, Behold, I
will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling, etc. I thus armed, thus resolved, will
now show my glory at this great undertaking; come and see a famous spectacle,
your God engaging for Jerusalem: when the Lord once engages eminently for
Jerusalem to defend and deliver it, Note.
he summons all to be spectatour and observers of it. Before he showed his
power what he could do, here he declares his will, what he is resolved to do.
Behold, I will make, etc. a solemn summons.

This is worth noting, God looks to be observed and admired in his great
workings for a distressed people, he calls for it aloud. Revel. 6. When the Lamb
opened the first seal, John says, he heard a noise as of thunder, one of the
four beasts, saying, Come and see; and when he had opened the second seal, I
heard the second beast say, Come and see: And when he had opened the third
seal, I heard the voice of the third beast, say, Come and see: And when he had
opened the fourth seal, I heard the fourth beast, Come and see; Alloquitur
Ioannem sustinentem personam fidelis populi qui similiter per vocem ministrorum
excitarentur ad observandos hos mirabiles eventus. Exodus 14.13. Moses told
trembling Israel, Fear not stand still and see the salvation of God, which he
will show you this day; The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your
peace: yea, that is a glorious sight to see indeed, to see God taking a Pharaoh
in hand, of whom we said, For this cause have I raised thee up to show in thee
my power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth. This is
one main end, why the Lord fats and heightens an adversary, that he may try
mysteries with him, and spend his arrows on him; and all this, to be observed
and admired the more. Psalm. 111 2. The works of the Lord are great, sought out
of all that have pleasure therein: his work is honorable and glorious, he has
made his wonderful works to be remembered, that is their end: the Lord would
never appear upon the stage, if he had not some strange act to present; he
would never call inspectatours, if he would not provide somewhat worth seeing.

This has made the Saints in all ages curious in observing Gods works. Abraham
rejoiced in seeing Christ's day: Jacob waited for Gods salvation, Moses said, I
beseech thee show me thy glory; he had seen much of God before, all that did
but whet his appetite, he was still greedy after more. Daniel was a man of
desires in this sense, as you heard it glossed but now, and had a large
prospect, yet would fain have crowded to see more.

Right honorable, You set us to display God in his grandour this day, you
stand upon advantageous ground, and you see far and quick into Gods works;
for you have declared your sense of this and former mercies: yet you will
yield, you have not seen all, and that its worth reading, and turning over and
over this mavelous discovery and dispensation of God: Say then with Moses,
when the bush burned and was not consumed, when the Church was in a flame, and
yet flourished in the fire; I will now turn about and see what this great sight
means, Exodus 3.3. The Lord wonders and is very angry at the senlesnesse and
blindness of men, that will not see his hand lifted up: men that are quick
witted, and sharp sighted in other things, they can discern the face of the
skies, but will not know the signs of the times, when they are visible; but
let the wicked do wickedly, for none of them shall understand, but the wise
shall understand: the scripture makes the other a matter of folly and
brutishness, but these providentiall acts upon wicked men in their ruff, and
when they flourish, and are presumptuous, then to pull them down, this is too
deep for wicked men; yet are we solemnly called to observe it; See Dan. 12.10.
Hos. 14. ult. Psalm. 92 5, 6, 7. Psalm. 107.40, 41, 42, 43.

Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling to all the people round
about, when they shall be in the siege, both against Judah and Jerusalem.

Note, Jerusalem may be besieged by her enemies; the place and people of God
may be encompassed and distressed by their Adversaries; a truth so clear, both
of litterall and mystical Jerusalem, that it is but time waste to prove it.

Its observable, that our three grand enemies, are encompassing enemies, and
grow dangerous: For an enemy to encompasse, argues a fourfold danger. First, It
argues neernesse.

Secondly, Superiority in power, else he neither could or durst advance so
close.

Thirdly, Superiority in numbers, else he could not surround and encompasse;
for he that is without has the largest Line.

Fourthly, A distress and straitning from escape: all this is employed in a
siege.

1. The Devil, Job 1.7. Job 2.2. He compasses the earth; 1 Pet. 5.8. He is
said (...), to walk about, and to devour: There Is not a soul of a righteous
man, but he lays siege, making assaults and battery to that soul: as for the
hearts of wicked men, he is possessed of them already; and they are fortified
by him against God his Word, and judgments.

2. Sin is an increasing evil, its called sin that does easily beset, (...),
Hebr. 12. Psalm. 49.5. David speaks of the iniquity of his heels compassing him
about.

3. The world none will doubt but that is an encompassing enemy. Therefore the
poor Church is not only called a lilly among thorns, a speckled Bird amongst
the Birds, Lambs among Wolves, but expressly a besieged City, the Daughter of
Sion is left as a Cottage in a Vineyard, as a Lodge in a Garden of Cucumbers,
as a besieged City. Isaiah 1.8.
Solitary and surrounded, and not only invested at large, but closely
straightened and distressed; so as with Jehosaphat they know not what to do,
only their eyes, are upward toward God, restat iter coelo tantum.

The ground of this from God, is partly to give check, restraint to the
extravagancies of his people, and we know sometimes it is but need: the best
and most retired soul has his wanton flings, (...)
and its very hard to keep it from leering and hankering after some vanity: to
cure this the Lord will hedge us in with thorns, Chrysostom. Hos. 2.
that we shall not find our lovers. We are apt to turn our liberty into
licenciousnes, and the grace of God into wantonness, and to surfit upon mercy,
to grow fat and rank, to begin to gone and kick, and break fence: the Lord
sees good to pinch us for this, to reduce us to our measure and compass, by
driving us into corners. Sic deus cohibet and fraenat suos ne diffluant: Calvin.
thus the Lord will hamper his own; he will banck and bound them into their
right Channels, least they overflow their bancks; but this is chiefly to role
on a proud enemy to presumption, that while he thinks to try experiments, and
do exploits upon Jerusalem: the Lord will lay snares and ambushes for him, the
Lord will lead him on, and make his work seem facile and feisable to him: he
will give him some advantages, he shall begin to grow fat with some successes,
he will present him fair hopes of carrying the day, and glutting himself with
spoils: he will suffer the Lion to get his prey into his Chambers, and between
his teeth, playing with it securely, and gaping to devour: now all this is but
to get Pharaoh beyond retreat, and when I have him but in my net, then says
God, I Will draw: now is my time to stir and work: now i will look thorough the
Cloud and pillar of fire, upon the Egyptians, and trouble them; and there
Pharaoh flies, but it is too late, stretch out thy hand Moses, and let the
waters cover Pharaoh and all his Host, let him sink and be buried in the mighty
waves, the Lord will reduce his people beyond humane hopes of relief, and then
he will be glorified, let Lazarus be sick, and let him die, and let him be
buried, and let him stinck: now says Christ, my hour is come, I Will go to
Bethany and raise Lazarus: the Lord delivers a people out of the mouth of
danger, 1 Samuel 17.34. etc. 2 Samuel 21.16.17.
as David rescued the Lamb and Kid out of the mouth of the Lion and Bear; or
as Abishai succored David when IshbiBenob, a son of the Giant, lift up his
sword to have slain David, then Abishai flew him; or as when Saul had compassed
David round, that there was but a stop between him and death, and a Messenger
came and diverted Saul: thus will the Lord judge his people, when he sees
their strength is gone, Deuteronomy. 32.36.
when there is none shut up or left: when his people are full of mis-giving,
dis-maying fears, when their Anchor breaks, and their Faith fails, when every
countenance is cast down, and every corner is full of murmurings, when Ziglag
is burnt and all taken, and David weeps till there be no more strength, and his
men talk of stoning of him too, at that instant shall he march and God before
him, 1 Samuel 30.31. cap.
to recover what is lost, and spoil the spoyler, and moreover, then Saul his
capital enemy is destroyed Who so is wise will ponder this, etc.

And was it not thus with Ireland? how near was that whole Land lost, but two
places, and those ready to give up the Ghost, left? two little flocks of kids,
and those pent up too, while the enemy filled the Country? when all was bent
to revolting, and intended succors not ready; when wagers were laid, and books
out that Dublin was lost, and Ireland lost, and at the same time the people
striving and chiding with Moses? Now will I come forth and work, says God, now
will I appear most gloriously, had I begun before, it had been too soon, and
should I delay longer, it would be too late: the adversary is presumptuous and
secure, my people are low, and distressed enough. And how does God work? It
follows, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling, etc.

The spirit of God makes often use of this Metaphor of the cup, in the case of
affliction, Mat. 26.29.
punishment or judgment, our Savior himself dranck his Cup, a very bitter one,
wherein no creature could pledge him, i. e. in his measure; although every
Child of God has a portion of the cup of affliction, in conformity to our
head, not to expiate sin, or satisfy divine justice, yet oftentimes to prevent
and purge sin.

The Saints have also another cup, a delicious one given them of God; the cup
of blessing in the Eucharist, that soul-refreshing nectar, which the Lord Jesus
has broached out of his own side.

They have another delicious cup, which the Lord gives them into their mouths,
upon any great mercy and deliverance from their enemies, which is the cup of
Salvation: this was used in their sacrifices and feasts, and they were wont to
lift it up, Illyric.
and to pray and praise God with it, for victory and mercy, and it was a sign
of freedom; This cup has the Lord given us to drink, wherein we taste and see
how gracious he is to us, this he fills us to the brim, and makes it overflow
in the presence of our enemies, Psalm. 23.5. But as for the wicked it is not so
with them, the Lord has tempered another kind of cup for them, of which our
text speaks: of this mention is made in Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 23.33
where the Lord tells Aholibah, i. e. Judah, that because she walked after the
way of her Sister Aholah, i. e. Samaria: therefore says he, I will give her
cup into thy hands, thus says the Lord, thou shall drink of thy Sisters cup,
deep and large, thou shall be laughed to scorn, and had in derision, it
contains much, thou shall be filled with drunkenness and sorrow, with the cup
of astonishment and desolation, with the cup of thy Sister Samaria, thou shall
drink it, and suck it out, thou shall even break the sheards thereof, and pluck
off thy breasts, i. e. shall carry thy self as one that is mad drunck, who
breaks pots and glasses, abusing himself as one distracted: this is the sore
cup of judgment and devastation.

The like we have, Psalm. 75.8. Jer. 25.15.16. where the Lord tempered a cup of
fury, and makes Jeremie the modeperator to give every one his share, they shall
drinck, and be moved, and be mad, because of the sword which I will send among
them, v. 27.28. and if you search the causes why these Nations were punished:
comparing this with other Scriptures, we shall see the quarrel to be that in
the Text, they had plotted or laid hands against Jerusalem, and it is for
Jerusalems sake this cup is given him?

But what ground is there of this Metaphor, and usage of the cup thus applied

1. Some will have meant by cup, portion, or measure; every one at their seasts
was to take his dimensum, or proportion: according to these, the phrase
signifies but this, every sin shall have his degrees and share in punnishment,
for cup signifies portion, or lot in Scripture.

But this is too scanty for the question.

2. Others will have it derived from witches and sorcerers, which were wont to
mingle intoxicating cups, and to sophisticate their wines, and the word in the
text will bear it, for it signifies poison, (...)
and hence the latin word venesica.

3. Hierome and some others, think it taken from a medicinal potion of strong
Physic, which is ill to look on, and worse to swallow down, being bitter,
loathsome, and worse to some Patients, then the disease, causing them to feel
heart-qualmes, to stagger, and even swound away.

4. Besides all these, there are who think it taken from condemned malefactors,
whose friends were wont to temper them a cup of wine, for the reviving of their
spirits, against excessive sorrow and fear of death: Ier. 16.7.
of this the Prophet seems to speak, when among other funeral rights, he
says, men shall not give them the cup of consolation to drink for their Father
or Mother, Those that draw the Metaphor hence make it hold in this only, that
those that drank the cup of consolation, were such as were already condemned to
die; and therefore it was a sign of judgment; but that in the Text seems a
cup, that the friends of them that were dead already, drunck to comfort
themselves, and to make them less sensible of that loss: ours is not a cup of
consolation to our enemies, nor their friends; but a cup of trembling and
astonishment.

Prada on Ezekiel though he seemed to incline to the other Expositions for a
while, yet at last he closed with this as the most genuine, Namely, that there
was a sift sort of cup, or drinking, which was in use at their great
compotations, where the sons of Bacchus strove for Masteries, who should
drink most, and every one was forced to take off his cup to the bottom; which
was not so sweet and pleasant in the beginning, as it was loathsome afterward,
as being too heavy a load for his natural strength to bear, and therefore must
sink under it; This is the contention between divine Justice and the sinner. A
wicked man loves to drink the sweet wine of pleasure and lust, to satisfy
himself in his inordinate longings; but he refuses to drink out the bottom,
where judgment and punishment always lie, he loathes that; but oh says God,
its in vain to strive, thou shall have the bottom too, thou can not draw
off the Wine from the lees, Psalm. 75.8.
but thou shall drink both. The Psalmists expression seems to come home to
this. In the hand of the Lord there is a cup, the Wine red, Kimchi.
(the color of the most generous Wines in Palestine, with which color they
were most inamoured and tempted, Prove. 23.31.) it is full of mixture, and he
powers out of the same; but the dregs thereof, all the wicked of the earth
shall wring them out and drink them. Howbeit there seems somewhat more then
this exposition in that instance: The substance of the draught contains many
ingredients; which is, variety of Gods judgments and wrath; and therefore some
read for vinum, rubrum (red) turbidum (troubled Wine) thick, like, a confection
or medicinal potion; Take them altogether, we may draw out this, That the
enemies of Gods people who thirst to swallow them up, though this be sweet to
their palats; yet they shall have such a Potion through Gods just fury and
revenge, as shall make them sick, and carry themselves as drunken men, and they
shall perish in this their drunkenness.

The word (...) translatad by us trembling, in the text signifies luxury,
drunkenness, stupidity, poison, and so is variously tendered, and it makes the
sense full: the word (...) also translated cup, signifies a gate or threshold,
whence the vulgar renders it superliminarie crapulae, the threshold of surfeit,
the Syriac, the gate of trembling, Cor. the 70.
the Arabic, the gate of commotion, some, a cup of poison, this emphaticall
pregnancy of the words gives us this sum: The enemy shall come and besiege
Jerusalem, they shall advance to the very gates, they shall set their foot on
the threshold, but there they shall stumble and fall; they shall come up
greedily to swallow with open mouth, as a man hot and dry swallows down a cup
of refreshing liquor, they shall thirst for blood, treasure, and spoils,
Isaiah. 49. ult.
but I will make them drunk with their own blood, as with sweet wine, spoken of
the Churches oppressors: as Thomyris told Cyrus, whose head she cut off, and
cast into a vessel of blood, saying this, Thou have slain my Son, and did
thirst after my blood too; now satisfy thy self with that thou did thirst
after. Herodot. etc. The enemy that made so full account to swallow up
Jerusalem quick, when his wrath was kindled, is stupefied and astonished with
that draught, its poculum soporis, a cup of drowsines to him: Psalm. 76.5.6.
Thus the Psalmist expresses it, The stout-hearted are spoiled, they have
slept their sleep, and none of the men of might have found their hands: At thy
rebuke O God of Jacob, both the Chariot and horse are cast into a dead sleep:
as our Text has it verse 4. where the cup does astonish the horse and rider;
and where was it the Psalmist says, Ier 25.15.16
this confusion came on the enemy? at Salem, v. 3. there brake he the Arrows,
that made he such a cup, that is one effect.

Another is a cup of madness, which is another effect of this cup, they shall
drink, and be moved, and mad. It was said of the Sybill of Cuma, that as soon
as any stepped over her threshold they began to rave, Virg. 6. Eneid. (...)
such is Ierusalems threshold, it is, (...) it is superliminarie crapulae, aut
dementiae, a distracting cup, or a threshold of madness.

Alcazar out of Theodoret, expounds the word elegantly according to the effects
of drunkenness, a drunkard by reason of the dizzines of his head imagines the
house moves, and will surely fall, whereas the motion is in his own brain, the
reeling and falling in his own bulk, the drunkard tumbles down in the dirt,
while the house stands fast; thus Jerusalem that seems to totter only in the
enemies fancy, and to fall only in his presumption, shall stand fast when her
enemies lick the dirt, according to David's case, Psalm. 27.2.
When the wicked, even mine enemies came upon me, to eat up my flesh, they
stumbled and foll.

And for the trembling of the enemies, the Lord makes Jerusalem such a cup to
them; Dan. 5 3.
we have a notable instance of it, even to the letter in Belshazzer, who in the
midst of his jollity, must needs send for the Vessels and Cups of Jerusalem, to
drink wine with his Concubines; but mark, in the same hour came forth fingers
of a man's hand upon the wall against him, which made such an Earthquake in his
heart, that his countenance was changed, his thoughts were troubled, the joints
of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against the other: was not
here a cup of trembling? Thus was Jonathan and his Armor-bearer such a cup to
the Philistines, when he climed up the rock against them, there fell a trembling
in their Host, in the field, and among all the people, the Garrison and the
spoylers they also trembled, and the earth quaked, for there was a very great
trembling hebr. a trembling of God: God made this attempt, a cup of very great
trembling to them. Its said of the drunkards cup, that in praelia trudit
inermem, it adds courage to the feeble and fearful; but this cup of spiritual
drunkenness takes away courage, and adds fear and trembling, it is a hornet from
God that does chase and affright the enemies of God.

I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling: the Lord does often punish drunkards
in their kind: the enemies of the Church who commonly are bacchanalian and
debauched Epicures, the Lord makes their very sin and delight, their snare and
punishment. When the plundering Amalekites after some successes, 1 Samuel
30.16.17.
and outrages upon Ziglag and other places, they were drinking and dancing, in
the nick David comes upon them, and mingles their blood with the blood of the
grape, and destroyed them, so that they were feign to vomit up all the spoils
and preys they had taken; pertinent also is that of Benadad, who with a mighty
host besieged Samaria, 1 King. 20.11.16. etc,
even as he was drinking himself drunk in his pavilion, with the rest of his
Commanders, set his men in array against the City. But the Israelites came out
and slew his Army with a very great slaughter. Right Honorable, was it not thus
in our case with the enemy? He was carousing and playing in his Tent, when he
had sent his party against Dublin: he was so confident and insolent, that he
had already won the City in his presumption; for he fell a disposing of
prisoners before hand, drinking healths to their own successes, and your
confusion. Are not these the Acts of men drunk, not with Wine only; but with
wrath? Yes, they had then tasted the top of the cup, which was the sweeter, yet
intoxicating, and must now take of the bottom too: Mark it in the effects and
issue, a bloody issue to them; they staggtred in their Counsels, they roared
and raved in their purposes, they trembled in their undertakings, they stumbled
in their approaches, they fell down to the ground in their shameful
discomfiture: and lastly, they vomited up the greater part of the spoil they
had before swallowed, and fed themselves with. Hence it is said, Isaiah 28.7.
that Drunkards are said to be swallowed up of wine, they are swallowed up of
what they swallow: It Is true in the letter, and mystically so too, v. 16.
their own morsel poisons them. How does the Lord assure that? Behold (says
he) I lay a stone in Sion; v. 3.
this leads me to open to you the other Metaphor in the Text, in these words,
In that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people, all that
burden themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the
earth be gathered together against it. The 70. read it, A stone of treading
down, so also the Syriac, or a stone of subjection and casting down: thus the
Arabic and the Chaldee come near our Translation, A stone of offense, or
stumbling.

The ground of this Metaphor is taken from a custom in all the Cities and
Villages of Palestine, which held in use till Jeromes time, Hieronymus.
that for the exercise of their youth, they appointed great round stones: These
they were to lift, some to their knees, they that were stronger could lift them
to the navell, or higher; even to their shoulders, and the crown of their
heads, etc. yet it came to pass, that many in lifting of these massive stones,
by overreaching and over-straining, or by sinking under their weight, were so
strained, bruised, and sometimes their bones broken, that they became maimed by
this means: They were snared and broken by the work of their hands; thus says
the holy Ghost. Many a one boasting and presuming of his strength, shall be
lifting and heaving at Jerusalem, they shall endeavor to do feats upon it, and
take it into their hands, but it should prove too heavy, and too tough a piece
for them, they shall be over-reacht in it, and shall break their heads, their
necks, their hearts, in the enterprise. I do not wonder now, the Prophet begins
with, The burden of the word of the Lord

Thus the Lord who is a Sanctuary unto his people, is therein a stone of
stumbling, Isa. 8.14.15.
and a rock of offense unto his enemies, he is a gin and snare unto them, and
they shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and snared, and taken. How this
comes to pass, will presently appear in these two ensuing conclusions; both
which comprise the general mind of this Text, and hold forth a great truth
unto us, very worthy our meditations, very suitable to this day, and so as
comfortable to the people of God, as terrible to their adversaries, all sorts
of men.

1. Observe.
It is ever fatal to assault the Jerusalem of God. In their engaging against
Jerusalem, they do but march the nearest out to their own graves: It Is an
evident token the Lord intends to blast a Person, Family, or Nation, if he
permits them to advance and act hostility against his people: Jerusalem is a
cup of poison, and a burdensome stone unto her enemies.

2. As the Lord is often exactly just in his recompense and retaliation of
punishment upon malefactors, so he does frequently observe and execute it upon
his Churches enemies: both these are frequently taught in this Scripture; I
will not handle them singly, but wrap them up together, as near as I can, as
belonging both to one.

Prove. 20.25. (...) Prove. 1.12.
The wise man says, it is a snare for a man to devour that which is holy, or a
holy man, for the word bears either, and some read it in this latter. The word
to swallow, or to devour with open jaws, is attributed to persecuting men;
let us swallow them up alive as the grave, and whole as those that go down
into the pit, its meant of ravenous beasts, birds, or fishes, that cruelly and
greedily swallow their prey, wicked men in doing so, do but swallovv their own
banes, their own poison: the word here for snare signifies the snare of a
Hunter, or Fowler, persecuting Nimrods, that hunt the poor sheep of Christ
with bloodhounds, that lay snares, and make pits for them that lie in vvait
for innocent blood, and to catch men; vvretched Hunters, their own evils shall
hunt them out; the game they chase and lie in vvait for, shall turn against
them, their own dogs shall eat these Acteons, they shall be taken in their own
nets: as when the VVhale had swallowed Jonah, it was too hard a gobbet for him
to digest, or hold it in his paunch, he must give him up again: when
Chedorlaomer and his party had plundered the Cities of the plain, and carried
away righteous Lot among the rest: this one holy thing or holy man, was a
snare to Chedorlaomar, he was his ruin. For his sake only did Abraham
engage, pursue, and recover all again, to the utter overthrow of 4. Kings that
were Conquerors over five

That of the Psalmist is very full, when he would expres the abortive designs
of wicked men against the righteous, Psalm. 7.15.
he does it thus, he traveled with iniquity, conceived mischief, and brought
forth a lie, he made a pit, and is fallen into it. Thus wicked men's conceptions
are not like those of women, Chrysostom. Chrysologus. Cum in coelis insanitis,
non modo sacrilegium facitis, sed operam p^rditis.
but those of Vipers, which eat out their own bowels that bred them: therefore
our Savior calls wicked men Vipers, of whom they write that the female in
copulation bites off the males head, for this the young dig out the mothers
belly to revenge the sires death: Thus the Iewi^h Synagogue which had
persecuted and killed the Prophets, their own Children destroy that Synagogue,
their cruel Mother. I can but wonder that Heathen Seneca should ever have any
sense of this; for says he under the person of Soc^ates, against whom some in
his age inveighed, when you wax mad against Heaven, you do not only commit
sacr^ledge, but loose all your labor, and your selves also.

God tells the Prophet Ezekiel, that the people he had to deal with, were
obstinate, stiff necked, and brazen fore-headed, Ezekiel. 3.8.
and they should come and fight against him; but should not prevail against
him, why? Behold I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy
forehead strong against their foreheads; as an Adamant, harder then a flint,
have I made thy forehead: Prada. in Ezekiel.
thus in contending with thee, they shall but break themselves, indomabilis
adamantis duricies, etc. An Adamant is of invincible hardness, it breaks the
hammer, it dents the anvill, and overcomes the fire; so all our strokes, and
cruel expositions of persecutors, shall not hurt or break a true Saint of God,
but they shall break themselves upon them, as Dagon did upon the Arc, head and
hands, craft and powers, a little before Ezekiels enemies are called Scorpions,
Serpents of poisonous crooked stings; Cap. 2.
but as they commonly loose their stings, so by crushing and applying it to the
wounds, is the most effectual Antidote against its own poison; such are the
Churches virulent persecutors, upon whom they loose their malice and power, and
through the wise dispensation of God, become medicines and preservations by
their crushing, to the people of God whom they afflicted.

Thus, is that verifyed which Solomon speaks, When sinners entice thee saying,
come let us lay wait for blood, Prove. 1.11.
let us lurck privily for the innocent without cause: they do but lay wait for
their own blood, and lurk privily for their own lives: this is the issue of
such attempts (says he) take heed of confederating with them: Hereto accords
that of the Prophet; Woe to their soul, Isai. 3.9.10.11.
for they have rewarded evil to themselves: Woe to the wicked, it shall be ill
with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given him: the word elegantly
implies, that wicked men by their certain miscarriages in afflicting the
righteous, and therein afflicting themselves, are therein their own
pay-masters, in their own kind and coin.

Blind is that ignorance that sees not how it is armed against it self;
Athanasius.
much like one that takes a Serpent in his hand to throw at another, wherein he
cannot miss of being bitten with it himself, or as one that takes fire in his
hands to burn another, cannot avoid the scorching himself by it: thus malice
always fights against it self, wounding more the Subject where it breeds,
then the Object to which it would do mischief: was not Goliath beheaded with his
own Sword: thus wicked men do but show God a way (in persecuting the righteous)
and as it were, give him a president whereby his Justice shall proceed in their
own execution. This may be gathered out of that testimony of our Apostle, 2
These. 1.4.5, 6.
a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God to recompense tribulation
to them that trouble you, the word is, (...) a pattern, precedent or Copy, as
well as token, and is, as if God who by nature is meeknes and mercy it self,
and one who seems scarce to understand (with Honor to the sacred Majesty,
Velas. in Ep. ad Phil. c. 1. v. 28.
and in conformity to Scripture phrase) which way to go about the work of
punishment, seeming always awke and averse thereunto, he learnes the way of it
from wicked men's actions against the righteous.

Zach. 2.8.
Observe that phrase of the Prophet, He that touches you, touches the apple of
his eye: there are two things observable by us in these words. 1. the tender
love of God to his Church, how it is guarded and regarded by him: Corn. in locum.
the apple of the eye is called (...) a Daughter, to show the Lord is as chary
and tender of his people, as an indulgent Father or Mother is of a young
beautiful Virgin against hurt or defloration, in the apple of the eye
appears, a little Image of a man, which the Hebrews call (...) a little man
or Son: thus the Lord sees his own Image in his Children, and they are ever in
his eye: now who dare strike Gods eye. 2. But how comes the Lord to speak
immediately before, and after in the first person: why God, did he not say thus
here, he that touches you, touches the apple of mine eye, so it should run,
and not his eye, properly if we apply it to Gods eye, as before; what if it be
interpreted of the wicked man's eye: thus he that touches you, Cyrill. Vatab.
touches the apple of his own eye,: you see it agrees with the phrase, and its
a truth clear; for which I have named it, though I do not urge that exposition,
howbeit some interpreters are for it: sic semper Ecclesiae persecutoribus
conatus ipsorum in caput reciderunt, and tangunt suammet pupillam, even their
nearest and dearest contentments, wherein God will observe his own Law, an Eye
for an Eye, and a Son for a Son.

We cannot have a better instance then Pharaoh, so clear an illustration of
this truth, and every way so accomodate to our purpose. Thou shall say to
Pharao, Israel is my Son, my first born, Exodus 4.23.24.
say to him, let Israel my Son go to serve me, if not, I will slay thy Son, thy
first born: lock to it Pharaoh, the Lord touches the apple of thine eye
indeed, it was even so, Exodus 12.29.30.
the Lord destroyed Pharaohs first born, and all the first born of Egypt, upon
this Pharaoh and the Egyptians rise in the night, and there was a great cry,
God had put out all their lights, can you blame their cry that night, 1 King.
15.4
for so a Son and successor is called, 2 Chronicles. 21.7. etc. thus we see what it
cost Pharaoh for afflicting Israel, yet were there many reasons why the Lord
should punish him, besides the foremencioned he was a great Idolater, and
Magician, he worshipped the Cocrodile, and other abominable things; but the
Lord pleads with him for none of these, only for Israel. Exodus 3.7.
I have seen the affliction of my people, and have heard their cry, by reason
of their Taskmasters: this above all made God come down, and this proved
fatal unto Pharaoh. Come let us deal wisely said he, i. e. let us deal
cruelly and inslave Israel; but was not this Prince of Zoan a fool in this,
for that slavery was their increase, and their liberty, he would kill Isreal's
males, they were saved, he lost his own, their punishments are called plagues,
i. e. strokes, answering those strokes which the Taskmasters laid upon the
poor Israelites. Tertull.
Who would not even pity any person or parts in the world, engaged against
Gods Isralites, they are as forlorn, and such as are a lost Generation, so
fatal is Israel to her enemies: this was observed even by the enemies of the
Jews, and it must arise from observing how the Lord continually owned and
avenged them, when Hammons plot did not take, and he came home melancholy, Est.
6.13.
his wise men and Zeresh his wife told him, If Mordecai be of the seed of the
Jews, before whom thou have begun to fall thou shall not prevail against him,
but shall surely fall: An uncomfortable Omen. What an unfortunate seed was this
of the Jews? It was so to all their enemies: they knew it, and could tell that
Jerusalem had been hurtful unto Kings and Princes, a very bad City. Chald.
(...) Ezra. 4.12.15.
His meaning was, it had been very fatal, mischievous, and unlucky unto Kings
in their quarrels with it: it was seditious, and apt to insurrections: i. e. it
would not willingly endure the yoke of Tyrants, for that to them was sedition:
There was none of the Nations round about, but had their marks and maimes by
meddling with Jerusalem. So fares it with all the Churches adversaries in all
ages.

Lib. 1. ad Scap. c. 3.
God forbid (says Tertullian) that we should wish or work you any mischief:
yet we cannot but grieve that no City which has shed our blood, should go
unpunished, nor unrevenged.

The example of Ahab is not lightly to be passed by: Ahab had committed many
sins in marrying Jezabel a foul Idolatresse, and by her a practizer and
setter up of Idolatry: All this while Ahab lives: but mark where he dasheth,
and falls irrecoverably upon Naboth a righteousman, he coveted first, and
then killed, and got possession: By this unpolitick sin he brings upon himself
quick destruction, 1 Kings 21.19, 20, 21.
and a recompense in his kind.

Mark the Text: Thus says the LORD, In the place where Dogs licked the
blood of Naboth, shall Dogs lick thy blood, even thine. Which last words are
added for the greater certainty; also to show the law of retaliation, which God
observed in the punishment: and thirdly, that he would not spare him, 21
though a King: Thy blood, Ahab, even thine, shall go for Naboths. But this is
not all: But behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy
posterity, and I will take away thy House like the House of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, and like the House of Baasha the son of Ahijah, for the provocations
whereby thou have provoked me to anger, and made Israel to sin. By which
sin is meant Ahabs Idolatry: but what is that to Naboth? This injury against
Naboth makes Ahabs Idolatry to be remembered: the murdring of Naboth, and the
track of his blood, led God along to all Ahabs other sins against God, which
before seemed forgotten: but his falling upon a righteous man, made a sleepy
Lion to awake, and tear him with his family in pieces, at least 70. of them.

Mark, when Ahabs 70. sons were killed, they put their heads in Baskets, and
brought them to Jezreel. Behold here the recompense of the punishment answers
to the sin here also: In Jezreel Naboth was killed, the Baskets of grapes which
he lusted after, are repayed with Baskets of heads, even of his own childrtn in
the same place. Surely thou art righteous, O Lord, and just are thy judgments.
It is the note of Chrysostom on this Judgment.

Luke 7.37.
See another instance, Our Savior Christ coming to dine at the house of one
Simon a Pharisee, did not receive from him those civilities which were usually
bestowed in those times and Countries at entertainments. Simon should have
washed Christ's feet ere he sat down; he should have received him with a kiss
at his first coming in, he should have anointed his head with oil: all these
things were wont to be observed at Feasts, and entertainments, and were due to
our Savior in course as his invited guest, but were denied him by the proud
Pharisee; yet the Lord seems to pass them over in silence: But lo this
Pharisee does not rest there, but proceeds to find fault with a poor penitent
soul that came in love to Christ, to afford him what Simon had denied him; but
he not being able to bear it, falls out with her, calls her sinner, and taxes
her for old miscarriages. Mark, Mat 26.6. John 12. ubi vides Judae in Christu^
and ejus res familiares delicta, rapacitatem and furta non antea objurgata and
infamiae supplicio affecta quam ipse sanctae illi mulieri infensus fuerit, etc.
Velasq. in Ep. ad Phil. c. 1. Dan. 3 2a. Dan. 6.24.
the Lord Jesus that was silent till now, can hold no longer: Now thou abusest
this poor creature that loves me, and is beloved by me I cannot spare thee,
take therefore a gentle rebuke for thy omissions of duty to me, which else I
should have buried in silence, thank thy self Simon for this check; for thou
have showed me the way by thy quarrelling her that is my servant. The like
befalls Judas Iscariot for the same crime, who by his finding fault with the
pious act of a devout woman, brought his own sins to light, which till that
time had been hid and covered, and might have long so continued, had he not
awakened Divine justice, by grudging at Gods servant. When Abimelech took
Abraham's wife, was not his own wife struck with barrenness, and was not his
house plagued with great plagues for this cause, Genesis 12.17? Mark how God
threatened him. Genesis 20. When the Sodomites that vexed the righteous soul of
Lot from day to day, burned in the flames of unnatural lust at his door, they
were consumed by the fire of hell out of heaven, Genesis 18.19. See how the
punishment answers this sin. The same befell the enemies of Shadrach and his
two companions, their enemies that kindled a fire to burn them, were burnt by
the same flames. Daniels enemies were eaten by the Lions which they had cast
him amongst to be devoured.

Thus was Ammon recompensed by keeping Israel in bondage, Jer. 49.1.2.
by becoming bondmen unto Israel, they dwelt in Israel, as if Israel had no
Sons or Heirs, as if Israel were escheated; for this the Lord sent a sword
upon Ammon, and devoured him: Thus was Israel Heir to them that were his
Heirs, says the Lord.

The same befell them for their scoffing at Israel in her Calamity, Ezekiel. 25.3.
etc.
saying, aha, clapping their hands, and stamping with their feet, that the same
Judgment should befall them.

The King of Moab would needs curse Israel by a sorcerer, was cursed by him
with his people, Number. 22.23.24. cap. Jer. 48.26.27.
and the cursing Prophet slain with the Sword of Israel; but the Prophet
Jeremiah gives Moab a Cup of drunkenness to wallow in his vomit, and to become a
derision: what is the reason, because he had derided Israel, lo a cup of
trembling for Moab. Haman got a Commission to put the Jews to death, and built
a Gallows for Mordecai; Hester got a Commission to put Haman to death with his
Sons, and he was hanged on his own Gallows; Esther. Cap. 6.7, 8. Mat. 15.11.
lo the exact severity of divine justice upon his peoples adversaries; for
with what measure they meat to us, the Lord will measure to them again.

2 King. 18.19. Cap.
Zenacherib trusting in Nisroch his God, came up against Israel, and slew the
Children of God, he was slain by his own Children in the house of Nisroch his
God. Thus the Lord comfort Jacob, Jer. 30.16.
Behold, all that devour thee, shall be devoured, all that spoil thee, shall
be a spoil, and all that prey upon thee, I will give for a prey.

Prove. 22.17. Deuteronomy. 32.41.42. Psalm. 64.4.7, 8, 9.
Thus he that seeks evil and vengeance, evil and vengeance shall come upon
him: and this the Lord will recompense on his Churches adversaries, as he
solemnly professes: He will shoot suddenly with an Arrow against those wicked
Archers that shoot at his people, and will wound them: so shall they make their
own tongues to fall upon them, and all men shall fear, and shall declare his
doings. This has made me the more copious in this, That God having executed
the same acts of retaliating Justice upon your enemies, we may both wisely
consider his doings, and declare those works of God this day.



Its from that near union and interest that the Lord and his people have in
each other, whereby the Lord cannot but engage himself to be tender of them.

1 Cor. 3.17.
They are as so many sacred Temples unto God: Now If any man defile the Temple
of God, him will God destroy.

Ephesians. 5.
His people are his Body, and his Members, and his Flesh and Blood: Now no man
ever hated his own flesh, but nourished and cherished it. Therefore if any hurt
his body, members, or flesh, he will require eye for eye, tooth for tooth, limb
for limb, and life for life.

They are the Lords sons and children; he that wrongs them, Exodus 4.22, 23.
the Lord will slay their sons, their first born.

They are his Lambs, how tender is he of them, appears in his threefold
charge to Peter to feed them, and in bearing them in his Arms: will he see
them worried, and not avenge their blood?

They are his brethren, mother and sister; Mark. 3.35.
it were unnatural not to defend the lives and avenge the deaths of these?
Nay, observe this is one reason why he is called the Redeemer, or God; (...)
Numb. 35. Ruth. 3, 12, 13.
it is one of his Attributes, and he was properly a kinsman, and blood-friend,
and he was such a one which had jus vindiciarum: and shall we think this an
empty Title? I tell you he will avenge his kinreds blood, and that right
speedily.

They are the Lords crown and glory, Isai. 62.9. Nay, Isa. 62.3, 4.
and his very Jewels, will he suffer any to rifle his Cabinet; or pluck off the
Crown from his head? who will not tremble at the thought of such an attempt?

They are the Lords Freemen; can we think he will endure them to be made
slaves? How has he then triumphed, 1 Cor. 7.22.
and led captivity captive, if he has not made a perfect conquest?

They are pure Virgins of the Lord; 2 Cor. 11.2.
who durst attempt the chastity of his Virgins, or of his Spouse, to kindle the
fire of his jealousy?

They are all Kings and Priests to him through Jesus Christ: Rev. 1.6.
therefore all anointed: therefore all sacred, therefore he charges all the
world not to touch them under that notion, and reproves Kings for their sakes,
the height of which profaneness and Sacrilege in his account, is a daring and
provoking sin. Let us not think these Titles and Relations empty, they are
the highest engagements in the world.

Hence the Lord has clothed himself with all titles of defense and safety.
Take notice of one place where David in the day the Lord delivered him from all
his enemies, calls God his Rock, Psalm. 18.2.
his Fortress, his Deliverer, his God, his Strength, his Buckler, his high
Tower, and the Horn of his Salvation, and several attributes of defense: which
last also is a Horn of Salvation for his servants to push down their enemies.
So we have God both a defensive and an offensive weapon to his people against
their enemies, in that congratulation, Deuteronomy. 33.29.
Happy art thou O Israel, saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and the
sword of thine excellency: i. e. the most excellent sword that his people can
have, and that by which they excel and conquer their foes; Psa. 44.6.7. Zach.
2.5.
therefore said to be better then Bow or Sword, and more to be trusted unto.

But that of our Prophet is a very high expression, where the Lord says, He
will be a wall of fire about Jerusalem, he had said before, Jerusalem shall be
inhabited as Towns without Walls: Then they might object, How shall it be
defended if it has no Walls? Very well says God, I will be instead of Walls,
my salvation shall be Walls and Bulwarks, Isa. 26. v. 1.
this makes a strong City; but this is not all, they are no common Walls that
I will be to Jerusalem, Gladio ancipiti, flammeo et versatili.
he will be a Wall of sire about Jerusalem. Alluding, says Lactantius and
others, to Paradise which was guarded by Cherubims and a flaming Sword, burning
every way. Or perhaps alluding to such as travel through Deserts, where they
have no fence in the night from savage Beasts, but by making fires, which
affrights a far off the devouring creatures: thus the Lord is to Jerusalem. Oh
but will not this damnifie or endanger the Church within that fire? No, I will
be glory in the midst of her, fire without, and glory within. At the same time
as the furnace was in Daniel, fire without burnt the enemies, but glory within
to the three Worthies, Jer. 51.58.
for the Lord was there with them. Babylons wall is called a broad wall, it
being 50. foot, others say 50. cubits thick, and of an incredible height, yet
taken; we have a wall of water about us, Deuteronomy. 1.28.
and wooden walls, yet all this is nothing to a wall of fire. It was said of
the Canaanits Cities that they were walled up to heaven, they fell down before
Israel; but a wall of fire is more impregnable; Isa. 10.17.
This the Lord threatened against that grand Tyrant Nebucadnezzar. The light of
Israel shall be for a fire, and his holy One for a flame: and it shall burn and
devour his thorns and his briers in one day. Thus you see the enemy is
combustible stuff, as elsewhere tow, chaff, stubble and straw: Thus shall they
be to Jerusalem in their attempts, and she shall be fire unto them ver. v. 6.
after my text, Surely the Lord will make it a hot day to Jerusalems assailants.

This shows Gods people to be invincible, because all these titles of defense,
as Walls, Tower, etc. declare the Saints to be in God, that they dwell in, or
within him: So the Psalmist clearly, Psalm. 91.2 etc. 1 Ioh. 4.16.
He that dwells in the secret of the most high, shall abide under the shadow
of the Almighty. Now hence it follows, that those who will attach Jerusalem,
must first fight with God, and batter, storm and break thorough him, ere they
come at Gods people; think then that Jerusalems assailants have the hardest
pull of it of all others in the world. For who will set the briars and thorns
against him in battle, he will go through them and consume them together. Go,
Isa. 27.2, 3, 4.
sing unto Jerusalem a Vineyard of red wine. I the Lord do keep it, I will
water it every moment: lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. etc.
Mark Jerusalem is red wine, i. e. generous and delectable to God, but
poisonous and dreadful unto her enemies; and you hear the reason of it, I the
Lord do keep it.

Let us speak a word to this reason of the point, according to the metaphor, in
the third verse, viz. of a Stone. How comes the Church to be such a burdensome
and breaking Stone to her adversaries? Answ. Because the Lord Jesus is
incorporated into their Walls both in the foundation and corners, and they as
living Stones are cemented to him, and built upon him by his blood. This is
that Rock against which neither the storms, 1 Pet. 2.4.5, 6, 7.8.
winds and waters, no nor the gates of hell can prevail. This is that
precious corner Stone of God unto believers, but a Stone of stumbling and a
Rock of offense unto the wicked. Math. 21.44.
This is that Stone on which whosoever falls shall be broken, but on whomsoever
it shall fall it shall grind them to powder.

This is that little stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, Dan.
2.34.35, 45.
which brake in pieces the iron, brass, clay, silver and gold, and when it had
smote the Image, it filled the whole earth: This little Stone is Jesus Christ
in his word and members, little and despised in the eye of the world, as David's
pebble was to Goliath and his Arms, but yet that which felled that Giant to the
ground: Psalm. 2.
so this little Stone shall break Crowns, Swords and Scepters, even as
Potsheards, shall fill the earth and prevail; It is the Lord that makes
Jerusalem a burdensome Stone to her enemies.

Jerusalems enemies to attach her, and does the Lord punish such machinations
in their kind? Then let not Jerusalem feat her enemies in their highest ruff,
and threatenings. There be 4 things that render an enemy formidable.

Policy, For they are in their generation more subtle then the Saints, they
are Serpents and foxes, the Saints are Lambs and Doves. Yet fear not this,
this cup here shall astonish and infatuate them. What a fool did that grand
Oracle Achitophel become as soon as ever he engaged against David.

Courage, yec fear not that, this cup shall be a cup of trembling to them; and
shall make them shake as the leaves of a tree shaken with the wind.

Number, Fear not that neither, What says the text? though all the people of
the earth shall be gathered together against you, yet they shall be cut in
pieces. And have you not had trial hereof in all your conflicts, being still
over numbered by your adversaries; yet your Barley Cake tumbled down the Tents
of Midian?

Power, Be they a huge host of Cavalry and Infantry as the text has it, do
they glory in their strength? and therefore approach with contempt to your
strength; as Tobiah the Horonite, and Sanballat the Ammonite, What do these
feeble Jews? if a Fox go up, he shall break down their stone wall. Yet up it
went, and it became so strong, that all the strength they had could not
demolish, nor dismantle it.

Your adversaries had all these four advantages against you, Policy, Courage,
Numbers, Power, yet your God frustrated all before Jerusalem: which became a
cup of trembling, and a stone of stumbling to all these.

Eusebius. l. 2. c. 7.
we should not only find Pilate for condemning Jesus Christ to kill himself,
Herod and Herodias that slew John Baptist, ending their days in misery and
banishment: Besides the example of another Herod, who killed James, and
imprisoned Peter, Acts 12
and persecuted the Church, he was smitten of God, and eaten of worms in that
very chapter; But also among persecuting Emperors.

Domitius Nero, the first persecutor of Christians that was an Emperor, Justin.
proclaimed and condemned by the Senate to be whipped to death, and dragged
through the City: for fear of which he slew himself.

Flavius Domitian, the second Persecutor, was slain, Suet. in Domit. Speed.
Chron.
and his body disgracefully used by the Senate, his Scutcheons and Images
thrown down, and they forbad any remembrance of him. Thus was he recompensed in
his Body and members, that mangled the Image, Body and Members of Jesus Christ.

The like befell Septimius Severus, slain at York, Cassianus, Macrinus,
Antonius, Heliogabolus, Murderers and Monsters, all slain; Alexander Severus,
and Maximinus, likewise came to the same fatal ends. Behold the justice of God
against those murderers of Christ's innocent servants, punishing blood with
blood, according to the Law of retaliation. What shall I tell you of Decius,
who raised the seventh persecution, for which God suffered him to be assaulted
for his life; for fear of which he threw himself into a pit, and was never
found.

Gallus and Valusian treading in his steps, were both destroyed by Emilian, a
Captain. In those days God plagued the Empire with an Epidemicall pestilence,
and many other heavy calamities, which the Heathens laid to the Christians
charge: But Cyprian writes a confutation of that, and clearly proves it was
their contempt of the Gospel, and persecuting of the Saints, caused those evils.

These judgments fell also upon Valerian, who raised an eighth persecution
against Gods people: He was taken by Sapores King of Persia, who made a captive
of him, and his body a footstool, treading on his neck when he went on
horseback. A righteous judgment upon him who had trampled the truth, and
professors of it under his feet.

Aurelian, the ninth persecuting Emperor, was terrified by a Thunderbolt from
heaven, and afterward slain, though he seemed somewhat to relent of his cruelty.

Dioclesian and Maximilian raised the tenth persecution, both which quitted
their imperial dignity, and the latter of them slain by the command of
Constantine. Maximinus was smitten of God with rottenness and vermin, as
Herod was for wasting the body of Jesus Christ.

Famous is the death of Julian the Apostate, who first subtly, then openly
persecuted the Gospel: he asked counsel of the heathen Oracle which was
destroyed by fire from heaven to small powder; he encouraged the Jews to
rebuild the Temple, which was destroyed by an Earthquake, fire, and a mighty
wind, at last he was wounded and died, crying out, Thou Jesus of Galilee, thou
art too hard for me.

Many such instances may be added of the fatal ends of Arrian and Eutychean
Persecutors: But that of Phocas is very remarkable, who was the first that set
up Antichrist visibly, by making the Bishop of Rome Universal Bishop, and the
Church of Rome head of all other Churches. This Emperor was beheaded,
dismembered, and his body given to the Soldiers to be burnt with fire.

Notable is the example of Minerius, who being sent to destroy the poor
Christians called Waldenses, which he did by fire and sword, felt the just
vengeance of heaven by fire in his body, was consumed with rottenness, and
voided blood in stead of urine, and died with great torments.

Charles the fifth, a famous Emperor for wisdom and valor, yet dashed
against this rock of endeavoring to destroy Protestants, was himself driven
out of his Empire, that endeavored to drive out the Gospel thence.

To step but on the other side, we shall find Henry the second, and Francis
the second of France, taken away by death, who began persecutions there.
Likewise the Duke of Guise, a cruel persecutor, dying, gave breath to the
poor afflicted Saints.

And Charles the ninth, a most perfidious and bloody Prince, dyed with great
effusion of blood from sundry parts of his body. Anno 1574.
Thus will the Lord have blood for blood, not sparing the effusion of Royal
blood, to avenge the blood Royal of his children, whom he has made Kings and
Priests to himself through Christ Jesus, Rev. 1.8. and which cost the blood of
his dear son.

I cannot pass by Henry the third of France, who was killed by a Iacobine
Munke in that very chamber where the King had been chief in concluding the
massacre of Paris; which massacre was so bloody and barbarous, that the very
Spaniards at the treaty of Munster, told the States of the Low Countries, that
the Spanish Nation had never done such a Butchery against those of the
Religion, but abhorred such acts; and that it was sufficient to declare the
genius of the French.

I will not come down lower to instance in later times, they are so infinite
and so fresh, your own memories I hope are stored with them as so many Courts
of Records, and your meditations often read them over. If it be not so, give me
leave; as your remembrancer, to tell you, that you ought never to forget the
judgments of God written in blood, legible to all the world, that he will never
let a wickedness go unpuished which is acted against his people.

Dublin a cup of trembling, and a burdensome stone to her enemies in the siege.
The greatness of the mercy may be seen in these two particulars.

There was very much of God in it, and little of man: whether you regard
numbers the enemy had that advantage, whether his confidence, whether his
successes before: In a word, if you look on the besieged as the last that were
left to be eaten, that their adversaries had it in consultation to bind them
back to back, and throw them into the Sea, that their succors were delayed,
and many disheartning emissaries to persuade the beleagred that no relief
would come to them at all; that therefore they should secure the Governor, and
deliver the City; that then the Lord should deliver the City from the enemy,
arming a few beyond their own intentions, to destroy a huge Host, let the
Governors of Judah say, for this say the inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my
strength in the Lord of Hosts.

Nahum 3.12.
diverse other Forts and strong Holds followed, and come on still dropping, as
ripe Figs into the mouth of the eater. Many daughters attend the mother, or
Metropolis; this great mercy is but the first fruits, and the earnest of that
which follows,

Look on this mercy as that which reaches three Nations, and all the true
Israel of God, and the Generations to come; let us look on this mercy as one
deadly wound to the Beast, and the false Prophet: a mercy though in comparison
of many great ones, not so great, yet super-added to the quotient and
catalogue, adds very much to the bulk of them, and to Gods glory; yet let me
tell you, this victory and deliverance singly shines in its own luster,
without borrowing, and is able to speak its own greatness abstracted from
others: Ask the broken enemy, their frustrated hopes, their slaughtered
carcasses, their great loss speaks it our great gain. Ask the trembling
Citizens that were even in the paws of danger, and plunder, and death, and were
delivered, they will say it is a great mercy, Psalm 107.1, 2.
the redeemed of the Lord say so, That his mercy endures for ever. What need I
say more? your selves that stand upon advantageous and higher ground, that see
further and clearer then us, that know the times what Israel ought to do, that
weigh circumstances and consequences in a right balance, you have declared
your sense of it so high, that not a greater mercy on this side Egypt, has
been declared to Gods people. This mercy has made such an impression upon some
of your enemies, as was upon Saul when he told David, Blessed be thou my son
David, for thou shall do great things, and shall still prevail: or as was
upon Balaam, when hired to curse Israel, he blessed them, and said, they were
invincible, and should still do valiantly: or as was upon Hamans wife Zeresh,
who said, If Mordecai was of the seed of the Jews, those that began to fall
before him, should fall irrecoverably. This mercy to them is a owning by heaven
of your paesent power, your late changes and transactions which the world so
much disowned, and were startled at.

This mercy does eclipse and drown foregoing mercies, whereby the Lord does
not only keep on his course of mercy to his people, but in a higher and more
signal way; keeping the best wine till last, and the most excellent Arts and
Sciences till the conclusion. When the Trumpets sounded louder and louder, then
God came down. Exodus 19.19.
When Joshua compassed Jerico 7. days, the Rams horns sounding; the last
found had a shoot with it, and then Jericho walls fell down. Me thinks the Lord
speaking louder every day, his strokes being still greater, his discoveries
being more glorious continually then before, what can it bode, but Babylons
walls falling; the Lord coming down nearer unto us, even among us: See how the
enemy, yea the earth trembles at his presence. Shout therefore brethren his
praises aloud, many a poor soul prayed and cried aloud for this deliverance,
and is heard by this return. Let our praises sound as high, you know who got
the victory by praising God aloud, at which time the Lord set ambushes for his
enemies, 2 Chro. 20.21, 22. and who knows what he is doing for us at this
instant?

He turned the Sea into dry land, they went through the stoud on foot, there
did we rejoice in him. Psalm. 66.6.
Was not that deliverance far from David both in time and place; yet he says,
there did we rejoice. Much more let us rejoice now, as more nearly interessed
and related. Were not our hearts tuned to the notes of this Harp in the
doleful tunes of it? Let it be so now, in the joyful tidings that it brings
us.

Again, learn to trust thy God O Jerusalem, he will defend thee in a siege and
straight against all the world. Never distrust a Lord of Hosts more upon any
seeming dis-advantages whatsoever, they are but lures and snares to catch a
presumptuous dareing enemy: Rev. 20.9.10.
take an example yet to come after the thousand years, Satan shall be loosed,
and shall go out to deceive all the Nations of the four Quarters of the Earth,
Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle, whose number is as the sand
of the Sea, and they went up on the breadth of the earth, and compassed the
Camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City: never was there such a league
before Jerusalem, never did it sustain such a siege; but mark the end, fire
came down from God out of Heaven, and devoured them, and then the Devil is cast
into the lake of fire and brimstone, never look for war or sieges more after
that time: therefore trust God for ever, and know, if you will believe, you
shall see the glory of God yet daily, but I may not enlarge.

Again, learn we hence, to wait on God, notwithstanding some delays, though he
tarry wait for him, the adversary must have his hour of the power of darkness:
the waves must beat the ship, and fill it too while Jesus sleeps; yet know, he
does but seem to sleep, his providence ever waketh, he that watches and
keeps Israel does not slumber: what if Jerusalem be besieged, yet is it not
therefore taken and destroyed. How hard were the Inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead
put to it by Naash, 1. Sam. 11.
almost to the putting out of their right eyes, and loss of liberty, yet they
waited a little and were delivered: how greatly was Samaria distressed, even to
a great famine, so that the King said, why shall I wait any longer; yet had
they speedy deliverance and plenty. 2 King 6. ult. and cap. 7.1.

2 King. chap. 18.19.
How formidable was Zenacheribs numerous Host before Jerusalem, of well nigh two
hundred thousand, that had conquerred and wasted all Countries round about, and
by the blasphemies of that great Rhodomont Rabshakeh, all successors seemed
hopeles; yet Hezekiah waited, and Jerusalem was delivered, and Zenacheribs Army
destroyed, wait you on the Lord, wait I say on the Lord.

There is another consectary which the Text holds out to us in the 5. verse,
that the Inhabitants of Jerusalem under God are the strength of the Governors
of Judah, the people of God in any place, are the strongest Bul-wark to that
place, why? because the Lord of Hosts is their God. O ye Governors of Judah
think on this, how great have been your contests about the Militia of this
Nation: now you have it, there is as great a care to manage it with safety,
and to its proper ends; but know this Worthies, you have a better Militia then
the former, even Gods own people among you, this is your (...) say you in your
hearts, the Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the Lord of Hosts
their God: mark the Interest they have in God, is the Magazine and citadel of
their strength and safety.

Israel was called a Camp of Host as they came up from Egypt, and ask but
Balaam, what he thought of them, when with an evil eye he took a prospect of
them. How godly are thy truths O Jacob, the Lord is among them, he has as it
were the strength of an Unicorn, the people shall rise up as a great Lion, and
stir as a young Lion, he shall not lie down till he eat of the Prey, and drink
the blood of the slain. Numb. 23.21, 22, 23. mark that, the Lord is among
them, that is their strength, they are among you, there is your strength, these
are your artillery, 2 King. 13.14. Rev. 11.5, 6
your great Ordinance; these are your Chariots and your Horsemen, as he said of
the Prophet.

If any shall hurt these, fire goes out of their mouth, and consumes their
enemies, as was said of the witnesses, those have power to shut Heaven that it
rain not in the days of their Prophecy, and have power over waters to turn
them to blood, and to smite the earth with all Plagues as often as they will:
it was said of the Romans, nemo impune lacessivit populum Romanum, its more
truly applied to Gods people, none goes unpunished that sets himself against
them. Know therefore where your strength lies, in the holy people of God; be as
Fathers to them, and as Nurses, make much of them; do not think their or your
strength and safety lies in their divisions, it is both your weakness and
nakedness, theirs and yours: call your Children together, make peace among them,
favor them that do that work, and frown on them that divide: thus shall they
be when ordered and united as terrible as an Army with banners.



An able Patriot udon this very subject, and Country, Sr. I. Davies.
has this rule. A barbarous Country is like a field overgrown with weeds and
briars: which therefore must first be thoroughly broken up with the Plough, and
then immediately sown with good and profitable seed; namely, good Laws and
Discipline: in the going of the Plough of war and severity, whatever you do
with the principals, who not unlike great wasters overshadow, and destroy
others. I could desire mercy toward the multitude ingenerall, that there be a
rooting up rather of evil manners, then men; but that God may speed the
Plough, I beseech you forget not a good Ministry there, which in conjunction
with a good Magistracy, may effectually pluck up every bitter root that
bears gall and woormwood, as Popery and profaneness, and sow them with the
precious seed of truth, and righteousness: if you shall not only civilize, but
spiritualize their wild barbarism; if you shall endeavor to destroy the
venomous things out of their hearts and houses, as their land is said to be
free of them, if you labor to out them off, not only from foreign interests
abroad, but such as are foreign to Jesus Christ; then shall they know the Lord
Jesus a better Protector to them, and Savior then the Pope or Patricius.

Right honorable, the Lord has given you a City and a Nation, take heed you
make surrender of it to him that gave it you, not for your selves, but for
himself. Thus did Ioab when he won Rabba, he would not have it called after his
name, but sent to David to have the Crown set on his head, give you the Crown
of Ireland to Jesus Christ, much less let Jim and Ohim roost there. Send all the pack of Babylonish trash to Rome after the Nuncio. Let there be as much
care taken for the Lord as for the land; for The spiritual estate of the poor
people, as for the temporal estate of the rich: that they may look upon him
whom they have cruelly pierced, and murdered in his Members: forasmuch, as
many of them did it ignorantly. Thus shall your victory become theirs, or
rather the Lords; This will be a right improvement of so memorable and so great
a mercy.

And let not the great things done abroad, render you forgetful of what the
Lord has done for you at home, and what you ought to do for him reciprocally.
Two things were commended to us in Papers, to be recommended to your grave
considerations; the cries of the poor prisoners, and those many files of
Petitions that lie dormant in your hands, and were never read over. I do not
pretend to any such knowledge, or power, which takes cognizance of particulars
of those two kinds forementioned; yet I beseech you, let your ears be open to
those cries, both in the former and also in other kinds, which reach up into
Heaven, and beat loud Alarms in the Ears of Divine justice: Oh take care and
heed, that the oppressions in the land, may not be such as may cause the tears
of the oppressed to speak, They have no comforter, while on the oppressors side
there is power; Ecles. 4.1, 2.
some cry for bread to feed their bodies, others cry for bread to feed their
souls: some cry for justice, others for mercy: some sink under their burdens,
others play the Taskmasters upon their brethren, laying on them more load:
some grow rich upon others poverty, and some proud by others riches. Now, if
you according to the trust and power in your hands, unload heavy burdens, take
off every yoke, and let the oppressed go free; If you make up the breaches
between brethren, and not suffer them to smite one another with the fist, if
you countenance the truth setting it run and be glorified, and give check
unto conscience wasting eror; if every way you are tender of the name of God,
by righteousness and holiness, the Lord will be tender of you and yours, and
will build you a sure foundation.

And to end with the text; Take heed you do not dash upon that Rock of fighting
against God in any of his Members; Its your work to be tender of them, as its
theirs to be tender of you: It may be Abiathar has not carried himself well to
you in this great turn; yet remember they bear the Ark of the Lord God, 1
King. 2.26.
and have been afflicted in all wherein you were afflicted. Let Constantines
example be your pattern, to persuade, and even to enforce amity between
divided brethren.

I had many things to have added, but I would not abridge your other
expressions of joy suitable to such a time, nor impede your emergent
consultations, nor impose upon your judgments. Let us shut up all by
invocation and praise.

FINIS.
Reader, by reason of the Authors absence from the press, thou art desired to
correct with thy pen these faults which escaped the Corrector,

Title page, for docet read docuit. p. 1. r. our. p. 2, r. of. p. 3. r. the for
our. p. 4. l. 7. r. it. l. blot out Revel. p. 5. l. 8. r. of. l. 13. for hosts
r. horses. l. 21. r. Anakims. l. 23. for wars r. rose. p. 6, r. the. p. 7. l.
2. r. spectators. l 19 for we r. be. p. 8. p. 9. grow r. therefore. l. 38. for
increasing r. encompassing. p. 18. l. 25. r. Gods eye. p. 23. for God r. good.
p. 24. l. 20. r. turning. p. 25. for go r. therefore. p. 27. r. volusian. p.
29. blot out say in l. 24. p. 30. l. 36. for arts and sciences r. acts and
scenes. p. 31. l. 1. r. shout. p. 31. l. 36. for league r. league r. p. 32. l.
21. for successors r. succors p. 33. l. 2. for godly r. goodly, and for truths
r. tents. p. 33. l. 29. r. upon, p. 34. l. 7. for out r. out. p. 35. r. error.


