The Copy of A LETTER FROM An eminent Commander in Sir Thomas Fairfax Army, to
several worthy Members of the Honorable House of Commons assembled in
Parliament.

Dated at Marston, within a mile and little more of Oxford, May 24. 1645.

Wherein is fully related the return of Lieutenant Genesis Crumwell, and Major
Genesis Brown, and their joining with Sir Thomas Fairfax at Marston aforesaid.

The Lord Gorings return into Gloucestershire, the Kings forces advance into
Darbyshire, Secretary Nicholas his Letters intercepted, the taking of Philpet
the Kings Harrold at Arms, and fundry other Doctors. The taking of Wolvercote
house, which the enemy set on fire, but was quenched by our forces, and therein
the Deputy Governor, diverse other prisoners, and all their Arms and
Ammunition.

Published by Authority.

May 27 LONDON, Printed for Francis Coals in the Old Bailey. 1645.

Tudor rose surmounted by a crown Scottish thistle surmounted by a crown French
fleur-de-lis surmounted by a crown Irish harp surmounted by a crown
SIRS,
THe last night Sir Thomas Fairfax our General came to Marston, within a mile
and little more of Oxford, the 22 of May instant, where Lieutenant General
Crumwell and Major General Brown met him, the Foot were quartered in several
Towns about a mile and half from Oxford, our Horse-guards and Perdues within
twice Musket Shot of the Works. The enemy has drowned the meddowes as much as
they can, and fired the Suburbs, and have burnt a Cornmill the last night, and
this morning set on fire a Garrison at VVolvercoate which they had within a
mile, which is burning at the writing hereof. They intended to have burnt the
Town, and other Towns hereabouts, but our Forces being possessed thereof,
have prevented their evil intentions. Yesterday, as our General was on the
Bowling-greene viewing the works at Magdalen-Colledge, a Bullet weighing eight
pound was shot at him, but went over his head and did no hurt to any of the
rest, though he stood within twice Musket Shot of the Works; this day he
was within twice Pistoll-shot of the Works at the other end of the Town, but
they were sparing of Powder. The Soldiers are intrenching their head Quarters
and making a bridge over the water, to hold a correspondency with the other
Forces on the other side of the River. Goring is come into Glocestershire we
expect his Horse suddenly: yet if ye send Auxiliaries from London and other
Counties, we make no doubt to make short work of the business, either by
gaining of the Town, or by being Masters of the field, if the enemy advance to
fight with us.

This day, May the 24. we have intelligence that the Kings Forces are advanced
into Derbishire, and so Northward, as we conceive, if the besieging of Oxford
divert not their intentions; letters from Secretary Nicholas were this day
intercepted, the principallest matter they contained was intelligence of
passages in both Houses. The Lord Cottington, the Earl of Dorset, and all the
Lords and Gallants bear Arms in Oxford. We have taken Philpot the Harrold,
and some straggling Doctors that were fearful of a siege. As soon as the
bridges be made, (the want of boats much retarding the service) there will be
communication from one Quarter to another, and then fit for making approaches
nearer. We quenched the fire yesterday, and took the Deputy Governor and all
the Arms and Ammunition in the house at VVolvercoate before the fire got to it.

The General going to Burstall house to view the works, and to settle a guard
to keep the garrison Soldiers within, that the passage might be open between
Alisbury and the Army, and so to London, Captain Flemming Adjutant general of
Horse was shot in the belly, we think mortal, he adventured further then his
Commission, and the unrulinesse of his Horse brought him among the enemy
unawares, he was a very active and stout Gentleman.

Marston, May 24. 1645.
FINIS.

