A TRUE RELATION OF Mr. John Cook's Passage by Sea from Wexford to Kinsale in
that great Storm January 5. Wherein is Related the Strangeness of the Storm,
and the Frame of his Spirit in it.

ALSO The Vision that he saw in his sleep, and how it was Revealed that he
should be preserved, which came to pass very miraculously.

LIKEWISE A Relation of a Dream of a Protestant Lady in Poland, which is in
part come to pass, the Remainder being to begin this year 1650.

All written by himself.

Printed at Cork, and Reprinted at London, and are to be sold by T. Brewster
and G. Moule at the three Bibles in Paul's Churchyard near the West End of
Paul's, 1650.

A Relation of Mr, John Cooks passage by Sea from Wexford to Kinsale, being in
the great Storm on January the 5.
The Lord is then best praised, when we acknowledge him to be his own praise.
JAnuary the first 1649. We embarked from Wexford in the Hector for Cork,
sailed two or three leagues beyond Greenor-bay, but were driven back, the wind
turning upon us: upon the Saturday following the wind being fair we got within
sight of Dungarvan, that night proved very windy, and about four in the
morning, on the Lords day, a very tempestuous wind arose, and the storm was the
greatest that ever any of the Seamen knew (as they said) the wind was at
South-east very thick, we hoped to fetch Cork, being within a mile of the
shore, but could not possibly make land: in that distress we put to sea, hoping
by that way to save life, the wind continued all that Sabbath day at
South-east, South-east and by South, and south south-east, which if the wind
had held at south east as it was in the morning, we could not have doubled the
point about the land, but had been cast upon the rocks: we bore two courses to
keep off from the shore all the day, and being as we supposed about the pitch
of the Cape Clear, at nine on Sabbath day night we shipped a great Sea which
split and carried away our foresaile, and so were forced to bring to a fore-top
sail to keep from the shore, and so bore that fore-tope-saile till two in the
night, in which time we were forced to cut our Anchor from the bough to save
the ship from foundring, we having at that time five foot water in the hold.
The Monday morning we were ten leagues to leeward of the Cape Clear, and the
wind was up at South-west, then we made all the sail possible to fetch some
harbor, and it pleased God, we made the Cape, hoping to fetch Baltamore, but
the wind coming up at South-east and by east, we were forced to Sea again all
the night, the wind continuing at south-east, south-east and by south, and
south-south-east.

Tuesday we made the Misne head and could fetch no harbor the wind being still
at south-east. Wednesday the wind came up at west, and we made for shore again,
and came up as high as Gally-head hoping to fetch Kinsale; about three in the
afternoon the wind came up at east south-east, and then we hoped to recover
Castlehaven before night, and made for it, and in our running in, the wind
veared at south-east and blew very fresh, and we still hoping to gain the
harbor, ran in, knowing no other way to save life, the wind being so contrary,
it grew extraordinary thick, rained and blew much, we fired three or four
pieces of ordnance (for lights) and saw one light from the Castle, as we
supposed, and two other lights to the Eastward, which put us to an amazement,
not knowing whether they were friends or enemies, and could not possibly see
the going into the Harbor, but were in the very breach of the shore, the sight
whereof caused a great scrick in the ship, and thereupon brought our ship to,
hoping thereby to have come to an Anchor, which if we had done, we had been
past all hopes of life, the rock being so near would have cut our Anchor, but
God being most merciful in that nick of time, the seamen despairing of life,
the wind at an instant came up at East, which carried us into the sea, and yet
so great was the danger, that if the wind did not turn again to the West in
less then half an hour, we were dead men, by reason of the rocks called the
Staggs, so we came in a little time within sight of the rocks, the wind driving
us strongly upon them, and then seeing the rocks within a ships length of us,
we put our ship to stay, which she would not the sea being so extremely grown,
the Seamen being at their wits end, wishing us to prepare for death: the Lord
again at that very instant caused the wind to come up at South-west, which
carried us out into the Sea clear from the rocks where we had the wind
favorable that night, and blessed be God on Thursday we came into Kinsale, it
being the first Harbor that the Lord was pleased to give us, but that which is
most admirable is this, that so soon as the ship was come into Kinsale Harbor,
she leaked so very much, that the Seamen came the next morning and told us,
that they were almost drowned that night, and could scarce keep the ship alive
in the Harbor, and were forced the next tide to bring her to the Key, and at
the Ebb to repair her, and had much ado to keep her from sinking. This being
the method of Gods dealing with us in our passage,

Now concerning the work of God upon my spirit during the storm, thus it was.
Toward the evening of the Sabbath day January the 5. my heart was exceeding
sad and sorrowful even unto death, a nark night approaching, and the ship
taking in much water, my spirit fainted and my heart sunk within me, the
sorrows of death caught hold of me, much grieved I was for my poor dear heart
who did not express half so much fear as my self, many sweet expressions she
used in prayers, wishing me to call earnestly upon God: many words I could not
use, but my heart was praying; it almost broke my heart to think what my wives
friends would say in England, that I should bring her into Ireland to drown her
(though I bless God she never repined at it) troubled I was likewise for my
poor servants that came in love along with us; it almost split my heart to
think what the Malignants would say in England when they hear that we were
drowned (how they would abuse that passage of Paul, Acts 28.4.) That though
vengeance has not overtaken me at Land, yet I was met withal at Sea; much
troubled I was at the manner of the death, such extraordinary violent deaths
importing the nature of some heavy Judgment, as if the Lord had been
displeased with us, and had not sent us, and Jonahs storm was much in my
thoughts (I having spoken some words of Exhortation to the company out of that
Scripture before the storm began) for God sent that great storm, Jon. 1.4.
because Jonah went contrary to his Commands, where I observed, That when a
Christian is in Gods way, upon Gods errand sent to Sea, usually God makes the
Wind and the Seas favorable to him; upon such considerations, and many
objections made by flesh and blood, I had very much trouble with my unbelieving
heart, and could not bring my mind to be willing to die, earnest I had been in
secret prayer at the Throne of Grace before, for 16. or 18. hours together,
pleading with the Lord, that if it were possible this cup of his indignation
might pass over us, that in Judgments he would remember Mercy, however that we
might cheerfully submit to his sweet pleasure; the materials of my long
suggested prayers were meditations and applications of several Scriptures
which mention Gods power, wisdom and love in the Seas. God having put it into
my mind not long before to note most of the chief places in Scripture
concerning the Seas, as proper and useful for a Sea-voyage. I pressed my dear
Christ not to drown us, for said I, we fight for thy Kingly office, throw the
Egyptians and all thy implacable enemies into the midst of the Sea, but let us
be preserved that we may praise thy Name, Exodus 14.27, 30. and 15.1. Lord this
is a calamity too heavy for thy poor creatures to bear. Job 6.3. were it not
that thou have cast our sins into the depths of the Seas: Micha 7.19. Lord
suffer not the deeps to swallow us up: Psalm. 69.15. Let not all thy waves and
billows pass over us We have seen thy wonders in the deep: Psalm. 107.23. And
if thou save us we shall declare them to the children of men; but if thou make
our graves in the Sea, the dead cannot praise thee: Psalm. 115.17. thou Lord
which leadest thy servants through the deep, prepare dry Land for us: Lord, why
should not the Seas be as favorable to thy servants as the dry land? Thou
layest up the depth in storehouses. Psalm. 33.7. Thou Lord can still the noise
of the waves Psalm. 65.7. Ps. 68.22. was a comfortable place to me, that the
Lord promised to bring again his people from the depth of the Sea. Sweet
Christ do thy office and be a Savior to thy people both for souls and bodies,
thou layest the beams of thy Chambers in the waters 10.4. Psalm. 3. and rulest
the raging of the Seas. Psalm. 89.9. Now Lord the floods have lifted up their
voice and their waves: Psalm. 93.2. but thou art mightier then the mighty waves
of the Sea, The fishes of the Sea shall shrink at thy presence: but why art
thou so angry with thy servants who are sent in thy service? Lord cast the
great Dragon into the bottomless pit, that old Serpent called the Devil and
Satan. Revel. 12.9. but let thy people live to praise thee; thou Lord can
say to the Sea, Be dry: Esa. 44.27. Esa. 50.2. and can easily bring us safe
to land Lord, have not thou made the depths of the Sea a way for thy ransomed
ones to pass over? Esa. 51.10. Why must then thy servants be drowned as if they
were in this malefactors? Jonah ran away from thee and would not obey thee,
being unwilling to be the mouth and proclaimer of thy Justice upon Nineveh the
head of the Assyrian Empire: and thou sentest out a great wind, and there was
a mighty tempest in the Sea, Jonah. 4. which was no ordinary wind, but sent as
a punishment for his disobedince, yet because he was thy servant, and was not
selvish, nor displeased in thy showing mercy for fear of his being thought a
false prophet, but out of zeal for thy glory which he thought was wronged and
obscured by that change, and out of his ardent affectiton to thy people that
their enemies should live; and though he said, he did well to be angry, even
unto death, they being not words of express rebellion, but of a passionate
spirit blinded with anger, therefore when he prayed unto thee out of the belly
of Hell, he was mightily preserved. Now Lord, thou which wast a God so gracious
and merciful slow to anger, and of great kindness toward the Heathens in
Nineveh shall not we find thy mercy? if thou have any further work for us to do
in our generation, we shall. Lord, it is the wicked that is like the troubled
Sea, whose water casts up mire and dirt Isa. 57.20. Thy Justice was very
wonderful and glorious at Wexford, in drowning those Pirates and wicked men in
the Sea, that had done so much mischief to thy people in that Element, and what
will thy enemies say when the carcasses of thy people are given to be food for
the Fishes? Lord command this great wind into thy treasure, and bring forth
winds serviceable for us that we may have an auspicious gale, and an
expeditious sail into some Harbor where it shall please thy Majesty, for thy
poor creatures are at their wits end, and death appears in their faces; thou
only can shut up the Sea with doors, Job 38.8. Thou make the deep to boil
like a pot, and make the Sea like a pot of ointment, as if the Sea was hoary
by the long white frothy path, Job. 41.31, 32. Sweet Christ, thou have dominion
from sea to sea, Psalm. 72.8. and thou have given to the sea a decree, that the
waters pass not thy commands, Prove. 8.29. Therefore though the sea roar and
threaten to swallow us up, yet unless thou give it a commission to devour us
it cannot hurt us: sweet Christ, the sea is unto thee as the dry land, the
winds and seas will obey thee, dear Redeemer wilt not thou speak one word to
save the lives of thy own members? Matthew. 8.26, 27. and 14.27. Mark. 4.29.
Peace, Be still, will make a great calm. Lord assure some of thy poor servants
that all shall be well, as thou did to blessed Paul Acts 27.23. Give some
vision and manifestation of thy love, for it was for thy sake that we committed
our selves to the sea, let some of thy servants in the ship be assured from
heaven that we shall be safe, however Lord let thy will be our wills: with other
Scriptures, not now perfectly remembered. Now after long prayers and
meditations, it pleased God about six on the Sabbath day night that the Lord
Jesus Christ began to quiet my spirit in himself, and I was well persuaded to
die, and began to be ravished with the Consideration of the joys of Heaven, how
quickly I and my poor heart should be in our Masters joys, that expression of
entering into my Masters joy affected me much, that the joy was too big to enter
into me, I must be swallowed up in it, and that my Masters joy could be no
small joy; thereupon I spoke comfortably to my wife, desiring her to cheer up,
for that we should suddenly be in Heaven, if the Lord was pleased thus to take
us to himself, who resigned her soul to God, and we took our leaves solemnly of
each other, with our eyes full of tears, which I felt running down her cheeks
when I kissed them, saying that all tears shall suddenly be wiped from our eyes
in Heaven, and with a great fervor of spirit I thought several times to this
purpose, Sweet Jesus I come to thee, we come not only in this Sea of waters,
but Lord we come to thee in a Sea of blood if it shall please thee to call us;
the storm still increased, and I grew exceeding heavy and sleepy, but roused my
self up, and checked my heart, that I should Jonah like offer to sleep in such
a storm: what, be drowned in my sleep! my wife often begged at me not to sleep,
but I could not possibly forbear sleep, if it had been to have saved all our
lives; so it pleased God, that sitting as upright as I could, I fell into as
fast a sleep as ever I was in all my life.

And in my sleep I dreamed.
THat I was in an upper chamber with my sweet Redeemer Christ Jesus, and that
there were many Suitors attended to speak with him; to beseech him to save
their Ships and Barks that they might not perish by the storm, I thought it
was a large room, wherein there was a long table with an ordinary Carpet, and
two candles standing upon it, two trenchers of Tobacco, and Pipes, and one Man
walking up and down by the toble* of a middle staturs, about thirty years of
age, the hairs of his Head long and white as flax; but curling at the Ends, but
the hair of his upper lipp brown, in sad coulor'd clothes, and a cloth broad
brim'd hatt, I asked him who he was, who said he waited upon Jesus Christ; I
asked him where Jesus Christ was, he pointed to a Curtin, saying, there he is;
I beheld and saw a glorious shining but no person, and methought Jesus Christ
spoke to me, and asked me what I would have, I said the lives of all in the
Ship, said he in what ship said I in the Hector, it is a bad name said he, for
such as profess me. Castor and Pollux is for Heathens, I prayed him that we
might not dye in this manner, says he to me are not you safe? but good Lord
said I, I must return, and I beg life for all in the ship, who are they said
he? I answered that there was my dear Wife and three Servants. Lieutenant
Colonel Saunders, Major Be, Mr. Hewes, honest Abraham, and other passingers
thy Servants, (said Jesus Christ at my naming Lieu. Col. Saunders and some
others, its so much the better that they are there) the Captain and the
Seamen are serviceable to thy Cause, and they take wonderful pains to save
their own lives and ours, but unless thou speak the word, the Sea will
swallow us up. Then me thought Jesus Christ asked me why I was not willing to
dye? I told him that by this death I could not glorify him, thinking upon that
Scripture, John 21.19. and me thought I was something impatient that the Lord
should surprise us, getting us into a ship at his call for his Service, and
then to drown us, as if we were Parricides or heinous Malefactors, which by
Law were drowned: at that me thought Jesus Christ withdrew, as if he was
displeased, said I, Lord, if thou drownest those that love thee, what will thou
do to thine Enemies? but could get no answer, whereupon I was sensible of my
impatience, and thought that I fell down flat down on the ground, and cried
for Mercy, saying Lord, we kiss thy Rod, and turn our naked backs, strike as
much as thou please. Lord, I plead nothing but thy free grace; it may be many
of us have offended in excessive drinking, and now thou art punishing us in our
own Element, however our sins are more then the sands of the Seashore but
let pity move thee to save us; thou sweet Redeemer which have been at Sea in
storms, that art a merciful high Priest, like unto us in all things but
sin. Heb. 2.17. and 4.15. take pity upon thine own flesh and blood; what
Father but would save his Child from drewning if he could have thou no work
for any of us to do? I thought the answer was, but little to be done by some
of us; (my Wife tells me that but a little before I slept, I said, certainly
God had something for me, and others to do for his service, and therefore we
should not dye at this time, which I did not remember;) sweet Christ hear us as
thou did thy Disciples save us quickly or else we perish, and being earnest
in prayer, in my dream me thought that the man in the room came to me, and
told me that this was no natural storm of Gods sending, but an extraordinary
Tempest raised by Satan (by Gods permission) to destroy those which were coming
to fight against his Servants, and bad me use that argument to his Master.
Thereupon I instantly craved leave to speak, and said, sweet Savior* if this
Storm and Tempest be raised by Satan the Prince of the air as in Lapland and
many other places where winds are sold, he works in the Children of
disobedience, and has nothing to do with thy poor Servants, for though thou
may justly for our sins give Satan power over us* as thou did over thy dear
Servant Job. Yet where thou give a particular faith to be free from Satan's
storms and witchcrafts, thou art pleased to grant that which is believed, and
in great love it pleased Jesus Christ to give a gracious answer to my Spirit,
and said, be not afraid, your lives shall be saved; instantly replied Lord, let
it be for all the Persons in the Ship He said be it so, then I pressed for the
goods in the Ship Lord said I, there are my L. Gen goods, and M. Gn. goods; Let
them safe, but they are not there said Jesus Christ, no Lord said I, they are
fighting thy battles, Jesus Christ answered, the goods shall all be safe. And
the ship likewise, and nothing miscarry, then I gave humble thanks, and
departed, and as I was going out, I thought Jesus Christ said to me, it is
granted for half fifty, go no more to Sea in winter. I further dreamed that
the Devil and his Imps were very earnest with Jesus Christ to get leave to
destroy the Governor of Wexford, by the storm; but the Lord said, it should
not be; some there were that had Barks at Wezford, that attended to speak
with Jesus Christ, I could not tell what they said, they discoursed much about
the Governor, and all that I heard Christ say, was that winter was not yet
come for them at Wexford, then I thought I met with Captain Ha^rebottell, who
had very great respect shown to him, and I thought his prayers did us very
much good, and he was very much commended for his tenderness to the sick
Soldiers at Wexford, I thought there were other men from Wexford that came for
safe passages, and one Officer was very earnest for a Ship that he was to come
in, and I heard this expression concerning him, we must take special care of
his Ship; for he was very tender and kind to the poor sick Soldiers, and
much discourse I heard about sick Soldiers. Jesus Christ said, if storms will
not do, I have other afflictions to make them more tenderhearted and
pitiful, me thought the person that so walked in the room, spoke much to this
effect, that there would be many storms by reason of much hardheartednesse, to
break and melt their Spirits, since which (blessed be God) Captain Lucus is
come safe in the wild Bear, one whom I observed in Wexford to be very
liberal, tenderhearted, and compassionate to the poor Soldiers, whereupon I
awaked, this dream lasted about two hours, all which time the storm
increased, my Wife told me, that she jogged me above twenty times to waken me.
And wondered that I should sleep, seeing we were all so near the point of
death, said I to her, peace my dear heart, be quiet, we shall all be safe:
Jesus Christ has promised me our lives, be not afraid, and told her all my
dream, whereat she was much amazed, but could not believe any afety, and urged
me to prayer, being her self well resolved to dye, cheerfully submitting to
Gods good pleasure, but told me she had a strong impression upon her Spirit by
way of question, as if the Lord had spoken to her, that in case he should be
pleased to spare her life at this time, whether she could be content to suffer
for him, whereunto she found her heart most ready and willing, by the Lords
assistance, to lay ^owne her life for his glory; but my own heart was then
giving thanks and bran full of comfort.

I related my dream to Lieutenan Col. Saunders, Major Be, Ben. and the two
Maids that were in the Cabin. And sent in for Captain Stoakes, the Master the
Gunner, Bennet, and marshall and bad them be of good cheer, and plye their
business for we should be all safe, telling them what I had dreamed, they
admired at my confidence, and Captain Stoakes could not believe it, (said he)
I know God is very Merciful and can do much; but the Ship has five foot
water in the hold which the Pumpe could not reach being choked, and very
subject to leaks, being twenty years old, and then it was about nine at night,
the storm increasing, and they not knowing where about they were, I told them
that I was assured of safety, as if I were on Shore and one word more I had
dreamed, which I told them of said I to Jesus Christ, what if the Ship should
break asunder? He answered me, you shall be as safe as if you were in Codds
Boat (a Boat at Wexford that we went in toward the ship in the bay, and were
driven back several times) or as if you were in the Governors house in Wexford
what impression it had upon their Spirits I know not, but some that were in the
great Cabin told me that they did verily believe it, and that their hearts
were much quieted by what I said. The storm increased and a great noise was
made in the ship, the water came in at the great Cabbine windows, the ship
ready to overset and to founder; many skreaks and cries out now we are gone,
and yet my confidence and assurance increased, I bad them pray and bethankfull
for they were as safe as if they were on shore still my poor Wife said it
could not be I told her I was sure of it; she must lie still and see the
salvation of our God.

I confess I much marvelled at the change that was wrought in my own Spirit,
from a trembling fearfulness to a rejoicing assurance and considering it was
but a dream I thought I might presume too much in an over Confidence and was
jealous over my own heart least I should offend, begging the Lords
extraordinary assistance suitable to the present danger, but the more I checked
my heart of presumption; the more did my faith mount upon the wing as if I had
been upon dry ground, and had not so much fear as the thousand part of the
weight of a hair: the poor ship workt for her life, and the Seamen took
infinite pains, two parts being fallen sick and the other 30. were continually
at it, sometimes they were in a little hopes, sometimes their Souls ready to
faint about twelve at night, he that was at the Helm by my Cabin said all was
broken, the water came in there, a little before they cried out, that the
foresaile was split and carried away, and the Anchors thrown over board to
lighten the ship, yet all this while my Spirit was the same in a thankful
admiration, for so great a deliverance, and said, all shall be as well as heart
could wish, when they spoke of lightning the ship, my wife called to Capt. Stoaks
and bad him if he thought fit to throw over some Trunkes which we had in the
ship, which I like very well (as it was in Pauls-storm) in regard of others
that were in the ship, but for my own part, I said I would not have any thing
thrown over, for I knew all would be well and (so blessed be the Lord of Seas)
about four in the morning, the storm abated, my heart was in a very thankful
posture, and that Wednesday night after, when the Seamen said, we were in most
danger entering into Castle-Haven in the dark, that we must have the wind turn
twice in half an hour to save us, first to carry us from the breach of the
shore to the Staggs, and then to carry us off from them: when we were within a
Cables length of the shore, and the Seamen divided, not knowing what to do
Captain Stoakes bad let fall an Anchor, or else we are all dead-men others
saib, try to get off from shore, and there was a great skreak that all was
gone, I was not one jot afraid, but told them they were sure to get safe to
Land, and the ship to a Harbor, and the Lord showed himself kind to poor
sinners.

One thing though it seem to be of small importance, yet it runs much in my
mind, and I must needs relate it. I thought that Jesus Christ said to me that
the goods should be all safe, and nothing hurt or loft by the storm, but when
we came to look for our things we mist a looking-glass and a Pistol, the
glass case was all broke and shivered in many pieces by the rouling of the
ship, being in one of the Boxes or Cabin-chests in the great Cabin amongst
other things but the Glass it self was not so much as broken or cracked and
the case though in eight or ten pieces yet might easily be joined and glued
together, that it is not worse by a farthing, which seems to me very
admirable, I told Captain Stoakes of it, and desired him, if possible, to help
me to my Pistol, he examined them about it; but it could not be heard of, till
the very day the ship was going out of the Harbor, and then somebody that had
it could not be quiet till he brought it out, to let us see how weak our faith
and confidence is in the Lord and that he will perform with his poor servants
to a Title of his promise.

I know that usually dreams follow men's natural inclination or their daily
conversation, as in Pharaohs Butler and Baker, they dreamed of wine and baskets
of meat, matters about which they were ordinarily employed, Genesis 40. and I
having been in a continued meditation of Jesus Christ his love, power, bowels
of pity toward his members, it was most likely, that if I dreamed of any
thing I should dream of him as mary times upon the Sabboths nights: I have
dreamed that I was in the very same company and at the same exercises as I was
upon the day, and indeed the consideration of Christ's humanity his being at
Sea, and his experimental knowledge of our miseries much supported me, how
many prayers did we put up for a safe passage which though they do not move the
Lord by any eloquence, as an Orator moves his hearers, yet they move the Lord;
as the cries of children make the bowels of thelr Parents yearne toward them,
and we must distinguish between shadows and substances, dreams are but the
appearances of things which are not, natural dreams are either sinful,
deceitful and vain, as Isa. 29.8. the hungry thirsty man dreams, that he
eats and drinks, but he awakes and his soul is faint for food, or else they
are representations of things past which were really done or things to come
which falls out accordingly and the matter of the dream is principally to be
regarded, some Christians have had difficult places of Scripture expounded to
them in their dreams, as they have told me.

Therefore although dreams which are natural and ordinary be of little or no
account yet extraordinary dreams many times prove true, as if one cry in his
dream or be so fast aslcep that he feels not pinching when the Imagination is
so extraordinarily powerful, and that the party dreaming is confidently
persuaded that it will come to pass it commonly proves accordingly as that of
Katherin de Medicis Queen of France, who dreamed that Hen. the Second, should
be killed at the Tilt, and said she would venture her soul upon it. And so he
was killed by a Scots man, Montgomery as she dreamed; Petrarch in Padova
dreamed that a Scorpion stung him to death, that was in one of the Lions that
stand before a statue which they fondly call Sancta Iustina, the next morning
he told his dream, went thither and put in his hund into the hole and out came
a Scorpion which poisoned him, whereof he dyed, the great Soldier Farese the
night before he dyed; dreamed that he was drowned and that his Saint
Christopher could not carry him over the River and the next day the Ferry-boat
sunk and he was drowned.

In 1629. Christina a Protestant Marquesses Daughter in Poland, dreamed that
Jesus Christ had told her comfortable things for the Protestants, as the good
success of the King of Sweden, the death of the Emperors General Walston and
that it might be the better believed, she should dye four days and revive
again, one Minister Cotu^nius slighted it as a delusion and vain fancy, she
told him that God was angry with him, and such a day his only child should dye
and himself presently after, which both proved true, she likewise fell into a
Trance for eight and forty hours and then revived and foretold victories of
the King of Sweden, but that God would take him away, because the people began
to make a God of him and thought him to be invincible. She dreamed that she was
married to Jesus Christ, and that she had a Crown of Glory promised her if she
could persevere in the faith, and told her she would be mocked and scoft at by
many who would not believe but that such visions proceeded from imagination,
melancholy humors or weakness of brain, but bad her not be d scouraged,
showing her a cup of blood, which he said he would pour upon those that
persecute his servants, and that she prayed very earnestly for the salvation of
a deerfriend of hers who was in arms against the Protestants, but that she
could not prevail for the salvation of any of her friends, but only for her
s^fe and that night the same party d^ed, she likewise in ^er dream saw two
great persons coming to be judged one a Papist who had pray (...) much ^o his
St. Francis and desired to be admitted into Heaven, but Jesus Christ bad him go
to H^ll to ^aint Francis, (...) he was immediately dragged; and the other was a
Prow^^^^ who argued for his salvation, because he fought against the P^p^^^,
and the Ministers assured him of Heaver^ Jesus Christ said ^e will put out his
candle in Germany, for it gives a fa^^^ light, (...) without but it is full of
filth and self righteousness with (...) likewise saw a man upon a Tree adored
by many; and (...) Lions came to the Tree and plucked it down, and an Eagle was
flying away, which the Lions caught, and ^oare in pieces, and ^^king Jesus
Christ the meaning of that vision, he told, that that the man was that horrid
beast the Pope of Rome my capital enemy, not a Pastor, but a Woolfe, that
says, behold I am set aloft, who dare come to touch me? the Lions are the
French, English, Sweads, Hollanders, Venetians, and others that shall pluck
down the proud beast, and power out my wrath upon her and her adherents, and
tha it should begin about 1650. and be complete by 1666. in her sleep she was
heard to say; welcome Husband, and laughed heartily and as she awaked she
said farewell dear Husband, and she dreamed many thing more which fell out
accordingly, being a vertuos child naturally merry

In 1633. she was married in Lesno in Poland, and most of the Ministers in
Germany have subscribed to it, for they seriously consulted about it, and sent
into Holland and Geneva, for assistance and advise, and the result of the
conference (which Mr. Deodate showed me at Geneva) came to this; in Christinaes
dream, they did believe there was a divine light: for first the young Lady was
regenerate, and very zealous for the glory of God, so there was a good life in
the person dreaming: Secondly, there was a full persuasion of heart that it was
from God, and it would prove true: Thirdly, there was a certitude in the event,
the party was not deceived, for it proved so, and it was likewise their
judgments, that in a time of general persecution, or some extraordinary
eminent danger, God might and did many times speak comfortable things to his
people in dreams, as in the late Bohemian wars, many Calvinists were
admonisht in their dreams to go to places of security, which they attending
were safe from the enemy; as the Angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a
dream, and bad him flee with Jesus Christ into Egypt, Mat. 2.13. and others
that heglected such dreams have afterward repented it.

The Lord keep us all that were made partakers of so great a mercy in an humble
believing and thankful posture, that we may spend the remainder of our new
lives in the zeal of his service, as those that having their lives prolonged
so extraordinarily are exceedingly obliged more then othhers to walk answerably
to so great a mercy.

FINIS.

