October. 30. 1693.
WHEREAS it was witnessed against Shadrach Cook on Tuesday the 17th. of this
present Month, at the Old Bailey, That he did forge a Pasport to France in my
Lord Nottingham's Name.

I Shadrach Cook, Priest of the Church of ENGLAND, having utterly disowned the
Fact at the Time and Place aforesaid, do here Again, upon the Receiving the
Blessed Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, and as I hope for any Benefits by
my Savior's Death and Sufferings, solemnly declare that I am altogether
lgnorant and Innocent of this Matter, and that I know nothing directly or
indirectly relating thereunto, either as to my self, or any other; and that I
am not conscious of any thing in any sort or kind, nor ever was concerning the
Counterfeiting my Lord Nottingham's Hand or Seal. This I declare upon the
sincere Faith of a Christian, without any reserve, in the full and due Sense of
these Words, or any other, that can express or signify an undisguised entire
Innocence in this Case.

I do here also declare, That I do from the very bottom of my Heart, as
becomes a Christian in this most holy Duty, forgive such that raised this
great Scandal of me, or that occasioned my Suffering upon it.

SHA. COOK. Declared in the presence of us who did Communicate with him. Ralph
Tailor, D. D. Simon Lowth, D. D. William Carr. Rich. Hughes.


MAny having been led into a Mistake by, and some still cavelling and disputing
upon, these Words, [ Mr. Cook said that what he did was out of a Principle of
Conscience] published in a Paper entitled, The Proceedings, etc. printed for
Ric. Baldwin near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane, As if Mr. Cook had really
owned, and justified the Fact charged upon him by pleading Conscience for it.

I Ralph Tailor, D. D. out of a due regard to Truth and Peace, and out of a
sincere desire to satisfy all unprejudiced Enquirers after the same in this
particular, do declare, That being present at the Old Bailey on the 17th. of
this Month, when Mr. Cook was called to answer what was laid to his Charge, I
did then observe the said Mr. Cook most vehemently to deny, May all the
Judgments and Punishments, that God has in Store for Sinners, light upon my
head, if I am not altogether Ignorant of what I am charged with, in Thought,
Word and Deed.
even with an Imprecation, The Imprecation.
what was testified against him concerning his Counterfeiting my Lord
Nottingham's Hand and Seal; and did hear him very Solemnly and Zealously assert
his Innocence, as near as I can remember, in these Words; Upon my Salvation I
did not do it: As I hope for Mercy in Heaven I sealed no such Paper: Upon the
Word of a Priest I did no such thing. And what he said of Conscience was before
he spoke to the Fact wherewithal he was charged, and had reference not to what
was testified or done concerning that particular Fact, but to what he himself
had omitted, and not done, during the long time of his being in Custody, as the
means of procuring his Liberty: Nor was there any thing then said, that I could
perceive by Mr. Cook, that might give the least color or occasion, to any
there present, who heard and observed him, to apprehend that he owned the
Counterfeiting of my Lord Nottingham's Hand and Seal, or that he should say,
That he did it out of a Principle of Conscience.

Ralph Tailor.
October. 25. 1693.

