A COPPIE Of a LETTER, SENT FROM ONE OF THE AGITATORS In the Army, to an
Agitator IN THE CITY.

Published for satisfaction to the well affected party in the KINGDOM.

London, printed 1647.

A Letter from an Adiutator in the Army, to an Adiutator in the CITY, July 22.
1647.
BY your, and our friends indefatigable industry in the City, we gather
strength daily, which shall nourish your bodies as our own.

First for the King, he is a knotty inflexible piece; Yet we have as many
fine plots on him, as ever he had on his people.

To oblige him; we allow him his Chaplains, and have placed the great
Socinian, Our L. G. of the Ordinance own brother who is totally for
tolleration, which is ^^re though ^flow Engine to destroy Monarchy, and set up
our Republicke, which the Godly party thirst after; but they must have
patience, otherwise we shall spoil all. For the truth is, the people in the
Country, are generally for the King, and so we hear they are in the City;
Therefore at present we are forced to play our cards another way, though we are
confident to win the game though not so suddenly yet as surely.

The Romish Catholics are treating with us, (which is a considerable party,)
and they will yield a round sum of money to the Army for the present, and a
great Revenew for the future.

Our Noble ingenious Commissary of Horse his brother in Law, one Ford; A
Catholic, and a most able man is their Agent, they are to have a toleration in
their houses not to sing Mass p^^in the Churches, for this will give offense to
all.

The King and his party are to have the Book of Common Prayer, this will
devide and weaken them much in the City, and set the Prelaticall, and
Presbyterian Faction together by the ears, and render the King odious both to
the Presbyterian and those of the separation, and the scandal of which will
much increase the Godly party.

If we devide thoroughly in every family (as we are much advanced in the work)
we shall reign speedily, and hold it surely, and continually.

Besides this will please, and deceave the French Ambassador, (hoping we will
be in confusion) and consequently the Queen.

There are diverse obscure Persons treating for the Kings Party. We shall be
favorable to the Nobility and Gentry which have been in Arms, and some few
Citizens, but we are resolved to squeez the rich of all sides, those
save-stakes or Purse-Malignants. By compounding, by way of sequestrations, and
for the 5th and 20th part, and in calling them to account for abusing the State
in their several Committees, which will be popular; but we will have a
special care of the godly party every where, we have a List of them; We are
resolved to keep up our Army, which will be a Seminary and Sanctuary for the
Saints, and provide bravely for our poor Brethren, and exalt them, and humble
the rich and proud.

We make no question but in short time, that we shall be Masters of all the
Militia by Sea and Land, and in England, and Ireland, and consequently of all
the Treasure, and then we can impose what we please, and above all we are in a
fair and speedy way to Garrison London, under color of suppressing of tumults,
and liberating the Parliament from the Reformadoes, who stay in the City,
contray to the Ordinance of Parliament, and we can find witness for any thing
if there be occasion, as how they list themselves, and Soldiers daily to levev
a new War, this will make them odious in the City and Country: and we can
make the flegmaticke rich Common Council believe that the Reformadoes intend
to plunder the City; therefore we hope to persuade them to take two Regiments of
our Foot, and two Regiments of Horse to guard them and the Parliament, which
shall cost them nothing for the present.

And for your comfort the City Commissioners are all our own And I pray get
them as often changed as you can, by that means we shall be sure to engage the
whole Common Council; change the Militia, or at least join the old and new
together, and by this means we shall be masters of all, and get the Tower of
London into our friends hands.

We hear something of your Apprentices, Watermen, and Seamen, but they are a
body without a head, therefore we do not much regard them.

We are sorry we omitted the last opportunity in our marching up to London; the
salt was not ours, for our Brethren the Adjutators were unanimous, for
investing and summoning the city, which had done the work: but our General,
and Grandees, (except brave Magnanimous Cromwell were against it; for they were
assured after the 11. Members withdrew themselves, they would get passes and be
gone beyond the Sea: their stay (contrary to our friends undertaking above) was
the cause of our putting in our particular accusation, which is short of
promise and expectation, and has discovered and weakened our cause to the view
of the people, whom we held in a mist and blinded them as long as we laid our
charge in general.

This use we shall make of this Omission: First, we will displace our
General, and put Crumwell that brave Head-peece in his room, and we shall
remove diverse of the Grandees, and draw in our Brethren the Agitators, who have
more wit and courage then the rest. L. G. Hamond, Colonel Rich, and Colo.
Fleetwood are great scandalls to our Army, for they are covetous, and want both
wit and courage, and their pay will do well amongst us. And we must advance
Cornet Joyss, who has done half the work in possessing the King.

If you and we can remove one block out of the way the work is done, and all is
our own.

That is by any way or means to get the 11. Members to travel, which God be
praised we hear is now done, which has lifted up our hearts exceedingly.

Many of them are rich, assure them first by hope and promises that if they
go, they shall have the best security in England (which is an Act from the
General and Council of War) that they shall enjoy their estates exempt from
paying any taxes, or from quarter, this will go far with some of them.

If this will not do, (as I am ass^red from good hands it will) then use force
and threatenings, that they shall be served (as Point was) if they remain in the
Kingdom, them their estates shall be sequestered, Wife and Children ruined: and
if they shall dare to sit in the House, the Army will march up, and pull them
out by head and shoulders, and cut their throats, and all their party shall
suffer with them, the City shall be fired, and plundered, and plundered, and
all the blood and mischief will light on them.

But if this should sail, our Counsels will be divided, and our greatest and
surest designs will be obstructed if not ruined.

Our design is now for the West, who are so zealous for King and Parliament,
and Uniformity in Church Government.

We must make sure of Waymouth, Exeter, Plymouth, and Famouth, and alter those
Garrisons, and put in 6000. of our foot under our faithful Commanders there,
and leave 2000. Horse to awe these countyon. We intend to carry the King along
with us, for he grows worse and worse, though we will give out and print
daily, that all is agreed betwixt Him and Us. And to please the City and
Country, that we are to bring him up to his Parliament, and must have his hand
to every thing, to countenance our proceedings; and if we cannot do it by
flattery or force, we can do it another way, and it will pass for current.

We hear some of our friends are jealous, because we use the King so well, and
that we intend to hold up Monarchy, and get places about the King: Assure the
godly party we will not recead from our Principles, for that would be our
certain perpetual ruin. Have but patience, and give us a little leisure, you
shall see Monarchy will not be long lived.

But to leave digression, our eyesore is the 11. Members if they should sit in
the House' we know not what to resolve, we must march up to London, only to
scare them. But suppose London should defend themselves, declaring for the
King, and the Privilege of Parliament, what would become of Us? If we leave
the King behind, the people will murmur^^ if we bring him along with us;
suppose when the City is in this posture of defense, the King declare for the
Parliament and City. (as we suspect he will) and that which is worse, that be
is a Prisoner: I tell you in my opinion except we can bend the King and make
Him our bow to shoot at the Parliament, as I fear he is so quick sighted (that
He is prepossessed from the Queen, that we are Anti-monarchicall) we shall
have a Wolf by the ears. Then Joyce his Council had been best, for he would
have decolled him.

We hear that there are 10000. Auxiliaries listed, that the trained Bands are
perfected, that every house in London is full of Arms, that the Sailors and
Watermen offer to man the Works, and furnish 10000.

There are 600. Horse raised to defend the City, though we despise the number
in regard of our Horse, yet they anim^te the people, and prevent (...) chiefest
hope^, which is an insurrection of our party.

We like not the Reformadoes, they are thorns in our eyes, and we fear some
personage of quality may lead them; and it is reported they can make a 1000.
horse of their own, 2000. horse in the City will be still falling upon our
horse and foot quarters, and 5000. Horse cannot in^est the City, not 30000
foot: our men must be day and night on horseback, which duty, and want of pay,
will make our common men run away, because they will despair of Plunder, and
lying about the City will starve our Army.

If we tax the Country we shall loose the people; besides Londiners be an ill
President, for they will pay no taxes.

If we enter but the Line their Horse will destroy us, or if we enter the City,
being chayned and barrocaded up, our Army will be but a handful to them, for
they will have Carbines and Fouling-peices in their windows, Artillery in every
street, Pikes and Muskets invulnerable, Besides they will have Masye, Waller,
and all the chief Commanders in the Kingdom to order, design and execute.
Therefore the 11. Members must be destroyed either by Poison or Assassination.

We hear they have sent Senu^^ abroad, and therefore we cannot surprise them.

And last of all, if the King declares himself a Prisoner, and London stands
upon their guard, we are assured the Scots will come in, and this we shall soon
apprehend, the Countries being burdened with taxes and free quarter, will rise
as one man against us. Now Brother you may see in what condition we are, and
how far we have advanced our designs already: consider likewise the last
demands of our Army, made July 19. 1647. and sent up to the Parliament. Videli.

1. That we have a Bienniall Parliament, with the same limitations as the
Trienniall. 2. The Militia by Sea and Land. 3. A Council in Intervalls of
Parliament consisting of 21. 4. Paenall Statutes for going to Churches to
Common Prayer be taken off, but provisor still to give no latitude to the
Papist. 5. An ease for tender Consciences, 6. The number of exempted Persons to
be leastned, and their compositions to be easier: and more especially those
Members of the House on whom they lie most heavy.
In most of the rest of the Propositions, we agree, or very little differ, and
in short time we shall have these, and other of our demands, concerning the
Militia of London, and the Declaration for hindering foreign forces, and that
we get our money equally, with the disserters, and release out of Prison our
brave blades, Leift. Col. Lilburn, Mr. Musgrave, and Mr. Overton, etc. Judge
what is left to the Presbiterian party party. I have no more at present, but
that I am.

Your loving Brother etc.
July 22. 1647.
FINIS

