THE Copy of a Letter From a LINCOLN Shire Gentleman; Sent to his Friend in
the City of LONDON.

Printed 1660.

A Copy of a Letter from a Lincolnshire Gentleman, sent to his friend in the
City.
Section I.
Worthy Friend,
SInce my last (in a concurrence with the general, if not unanimous Vote of
this Nation) this County has sent up a Declaration (being awaked out of that
dull Lethargick stupifaction, that had long seized their Spirits to a quick
resentment of their own condition:) To solemnize the approaching Funerals of
the glory and happiness of this Nation, with their sad Complaints, if timely
remedies be not applied, which I shall not despair of (since as Physicians
tell me, the sense and knowledge of the disease is a great advance toward
health;) And that those hidden charms, that lay wrapped up in the prostitute name
of Parliament, to bewitch us, has lost its force; even with me and others,
that once adored that great Diana, the Craftsmen or Mechanics of our times,
set up even to the pulling down of Scepters, Laws, Religion nay Parliaments
themselves, considered in their original Rights and Constitutions; though my
design was no more at the taking up of Arms, then their pretenses, even a
pruning off of luxurious excrescences in Church and State, not a digging up of
the Vine; and in so much I am still the same, though not in my Actings any
longer, in Countenance of those that departed from themselves, Duties and
Oaths; yet am I resolved ever to oppose all exorbitances in State, Innovations
in the Church, and invasion of our Liberties I first engaged against; and in it
agree, I think with all truly wise and honest Englishmen.

. II. And I conceive, these Considerations, and the like, have animated these
parts into generous Resolutions, if they cannot Vindicate their Rights, no
longer to betray them by their silence and Compliances; daring to die their
Countries Martyrs, rather than not attempt their Duties, Resolving with the
Cantabrian to Augustus, though their goods of Fortune may by Tyranny and
Usurpation be taken from them, they will be their own and Gods; and having
discovered the great Impostures of the Mountebanks at Westminster) will no
longer be Cheated out of their dearest Interests; seeing their pretenses, how
specious so ever, are but a painted Flower upon a withered Stalk, a Devil in
Samuels mantle: When under pretense of Religion, they let in Athiesm; and by
abuse of our Liberty, lay snares to enslave us, turning our Laws and Charters
into Arbitrary Votes (the Negative Voices, and ballancing Interests of King and
Lords, being forced from us) yet by it they give us a holy advantage, in
showing us that in our present Condition, we enjoy rather an Aerie than real
being; when by a vapor, a breath, those Senators may take away (ours, our
Lives, Liberties and Religion at once.) And yet by it, they undermine, those
pillars that should support their own Houses to Posterity, and make Shackles
for their Children to wear.

. III. Nay, so highly insolent is their Cruelty, as they force us to be
isntrumental to our own ruins (by payments to support their Usurpation, and
to twist a Cord to hang our selves) and are not only acting, but enacting
mischief as Law, which ought to make Crimes not Virtue the object of its
punishment; and to stand (as the Pin in the Balance;) a middle thing between
Supreme Power and Common Right, which they yet deny us; in obstructing our
enjoyment of a Free Parliament, the only prudentiall Remedy (under God) to
compose our distractions, unite our Affections, and concenter all Interests in
a Conscientious submission and obedience to lawful Authority, the very Nerves,
and Sinews, and Ligaments that can keep the body Politic in a happy
combination at home, and make it both reverenced and feared abroad, open Trade,
and secure (under God) all other blessings.

. IV. And therefore as your Cities Declaration, gave the first Invitation to
other Counties to Declare; I hope you will still continue fixed (as the Center
in the Circumference; however things moves in their vicissitudes about you) in
your Resolves to stand for a Free and Full Parliament

. V Which implies Freedom in Sitting from all Force; Freedom in Elections, to
sit (where the known ancient Laws restrains not;) and Freedom from all
previous Oaths and Engagements, as the Essentials and Elements, out of which
it is Constituted, the Legislative Power (however it may regulate it self, in
its Actings) being never to be bound with humane Cords; Nay, not by it self, in
that it may (nay ought) to unloose the knois it ties; when public Interest and
utility requires it: And therefore should not be confined by any more high and
sacred bands; nor admit of discriminations of Persons in law eligible, which
are but the breasts, that feeds and nourish Divisions, Distractions and
Animosities amongst us.

. VI. However since all humane law obliges Conscience only in things, which in
their nature are indifferent and Arbitrary, and that by our Fundamental
Constitution, every man's Consent is therefore presumed to concur (actually or
virtually in his Proxies) in those laws he is to be submitted to (as may appear
by the Petition of Right.) We all unanimously Resolve no more Taxes, Excises,
Customs ought by the present Dictators to be laid upon us; and therefore not to
pay them, unless charged by a Free Parliament, which we desire may be
insinuated unto your Common Council; who have yet carried themselves with great
show of Gallantry, Prudence, and public affection to the Kingdoms Settlement
and Peace: That as we aim at one Port, we may steer by one Compass: And the
better to take in all Interests,

1. We shall desire Indemnity to all that oppose not a Full and Free Parliament.

2. Indulgence to all tender Consciences, that seek Peace not Faction, with the
Vindication of our Established Religion from all its Opposers.

3. The Soldiers satisfaction in relation to their Arreares, and for the
present, the Counties will resolve (if your City concur) voluntarily to raise
60000 l. a Month, and to pay it into the hands of their several Treasurers; by
them immediately to be paid to such Regiments as the General and Army shall
assign to each County; (and this to continue till a Free Parliament take
further care for them,) which will pay them fully for the future, and advance
something toward the Arreares, of those that shall in this way witness their
good affection to this Nation; and redeem the prey out of the hands of those
Land-Pirates at Westminster. Who all this while have made a gain of them and us;

. VII. In which we cannot doubt of my Lord General Monks concurrence, he is in
all opinions, a person of so entire a worth (Though yet abused by the specious
pretenses of a ruling faction) when he sindes the greatest part by much, (if
not all) of the Kingdom desire it as the only means to compose us at home,
and secure us from many, now united and powerful enemies abroad, especially if
he will but consider, how often this pretended Rump of a Parliament, that
poisons all with their Hellish Fumes has been dissolved, as

1. By the Kings death (as all great Lawyers will agree) who was the most
essential part of it; his assent only giving a being and animation to all
Laws.

2. As the Bill it self, (by which they pretend to disinherit the
Primo-Geniture of the Trienniall Act.) Referrs to the Parliament as then
composed of three Estates, when one dissentinge, no Act could pass.

3. By their several dissolutions and submissions to other called Parliaments,
and by most of their sittings as members in them.

4. By the Counties new Elections, which was an actual revocation of their
Trust, and Power

5. By the forfeiture of their rights to sit as a house of Commons in the
forcihle expulsion of the best part of their members.

6. By their breach of Trust, their Commissions (as delegated by their
elections) being only to advise with the King in (rebus arduis weighty
affairs, (not to destroy him) as appears by the Writts of Summons; And all
this, with the violation, of their faith both to God and man; Wilful breaches
of their Declarations, Oaths, and Covenant; So as a person of General Moncks
worth and honor can never, upon digested thoughts, espouse their cause and
crimes by his protecting them, however he is a person of too much Piety and
prudence; to engage us in a civil and foreign War at once (where so fair
and Just an expedient, as a Free and full Parliament to be called by the
Trienniall Act is proposed) for the skirts and ragg of an exspired Parliament,
which would botch up a garment only for their own wearing, leaving us stripped
and naked by depriving us of all our Rights, and all this for the maintaining
their guilt and interest, who care not to prevent, the rack of our ship of
state, wherein all are embarked, if they may but stand upon land themselves;
and therefore be not discouraged by what he has yet appeared, but let us do
our duties, and leave the event to God; which is the resolution of,

Your lately converted Servant.


