LONDON: Printed by T.P. and M.S. for SAMUEL MAN, dwelling in St. Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Swan. 1641.

THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT FROM THE LORD CHIEF JVSTICES AND PRIVY
Councillors in Ireland, to the Lords assembled in Parliament here in England,
bearing Date the 25. of October. 1641.

Together with a true Discovery of the Plot, and the manner thereof to have
been effected there.

fleur-de-lis

LONDON, Printed 1641.

The Copy of a Letter from the Lord chief Justices, and Privy Counselors
in Ireland, to the Lords now Assembled in Parliament here in England, bearing
Date the 27. of October. 1641.
ON Friday the 22. of October, Owen Ockanellee, servant to Sir John Clotworthy,
at nine of the clock in the night, came and discovered a plot for the seizing
the Castle of Dublin, and making themselves Masters thereby of the whole
Kingdom; We sat all night in debate, and the next morning we searched the
whole City of Dublin, and found many of the Conspirators there, and amongst
the rest one Hugh Mackmoen, and several others of the Family of Oneale.

The Lords of the Council caused all the parts of the City to be strongly
guarded; And in the morning we went to search for the Lord of Mackquere at his
lodging, from whence (when we came there) we found he was departed in the
morning before day (as was reported) but searching narrowly into his lodgings
and rooms, we found several Skaynes, headless Hatchets, and Hammers in
abundance, and in the end found him secretly hid in a Cockloft; And after he
was taken, being examined he denied all, but that he had heard of it before.

Great store of people were observed to be in the City that night more then
usual, and the Suburbs was so thronged with people and strangers, that they
put the City in a fright, wherefore we were forced to draw up a Proclamation
for all men and strangers whatsoever to depart the City, or else to show good
cause for their stay there; And that all men whatsoever that had any hand in
the Plot should have a general Pardon, if now they would come in and confess
their faults, and make any further discovery then was yet known.

The Discovery.
HVgh Occonnellee, who is servant to Sir John Clatworthy, came to Dublin to the
Lodging of Hugh Ogmackmahawne his very loving friend, and Occonnellee with his
friend going to the lodging of the Earl of Mackquere, understood there had
been great store of Noblemen and strangers, but they were all gone abroad,
whereupon they returned back again to the Lodging of the said Ogmackmahawne
where Occonnellee had not bin any long space, But Ogmackmahawne declares to him
a plot which was intended, swearing that Occonnellee should not go out of his
house till it had been executed (which was) that the Jesuits, popish Priests,
and other Papists, together with two sects of Irish, and amongst the rest the
said Hugh Ogmackmahawne and Bryan Oneale with others should have come and
seized upon the Castle at Dublin, and the Earl of Macquere should be Governor
thereof, which when they had attained unto, they should have shot at the
chimneys, and by that means have tried if they could have brought the City in
subjection; but if shooting at Chimneys could not prevail, then they should
have shot down their houses about their ears, and at one hour, and one
moment of time to have murdered all the English and Protestants in the
Kingdom of Ireland; and to have murdered the two Lord chief Justices, and
all the privy Council of Dublin, and at the same time to have seized on all
his Majesty's Castles, Forts, and Magazins throughout the whole Kingdom, and
all persons that should be refractory to have destroyed with the sword, which
Ockonnellee hearing, feigned an excuse to go into the yard to untrusse a point,
to which his friend Ogmackmahawne consented unto, but withal commanded his
servants to go along with him, and be careful of him, that he did not slip from
them, but Occonnellee finding his opportunity leaped over the pales in the yard
and made an escape and went to Sir John Burlacy, and Sir William Par^^^s and
discovered the whole matter.

FINIS.

