IRELANDS LAMENTATION For the late Destructive Cessation, OR, A Trap to catch
Protestants.

Written by Lieutenant Colonel Chidly Coote.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by R. C. for H. S. 1644. 1643

Irelands Lamentation, For the Destructive Cessation.
ALthough the sad face of Ireland has appeared often in sable colors to the
public view of the true hearted Protestants of England, whose doleful story
by patheticall expressions by men of eminence and others, has been already
most amply and lively described: Yet I presume (though no Mercurialist) being a
spectator of the prodigious Tragedies acted on the bloody Theater of that
Kingdom, to present unto your serious thoughts the deplorable condition, and
present state of the languishing Protestants there, which I conceive, I am many
ways bound to discover, as both in duty to Almighty God, so in zeal and
faithfulness to my Country.

And because I neither desire nor dare to adventure the enlarging my present
Relation with the flourishes of Rhetoric, having been bred a Soldier, and not
verst that way, I shall make the most plain, speedy, and true Demonstration
that I may, and shall enter into the particulars.

And first, I shall give a touch of one circumstance, that has been a great
occasion of the Protestants misery in that Kingdom; and that has happened
through the false, and treacherous government of those, who have lately been
set as Rulers and Governors over them. And in relation of this, it will not be
necessary for me, to use over much prolixity, for even since my repair to this
City, I well perceive my Lord Marquess of Ormond, and most of his Accomplices,
have been truly Characterized unto this whole Kingdom. Only I shall offer
this unto the consideration of all men, whether or no it can be justly
conceived, that the Protestants have been, or can be justly dealt withal, as
long as my Lord of Ormond, my Lord Chancellor Boulton, my Lord of Roscomon, my
Lord Lambert, Taaffe and Barry, obstinate Papists, the two Poores kinsmen to my
Lord Marquess, and Papists likewise, and those by whom he is most led and
^nled.
my Lord Brabazon, my Lord Taaffe, Sir Morris Eustance, Colonel Barrey, and
the two Poores have had, and still have, the sway of that Kingdom, and I doubt
not but that the true consideration of this, cannot but induce you to believe,
that the greatest Justice the Protestants can expect is injustice in the very
abstract, and the greatest mercy, most sudden, and inevitable cruelty, and
destruction, if not through Gods infinite mercy and care of the Honorable
Houses of Parliament, timely prevented.

For truly, this I will confidently affirm upon my own knowledge, and shall
by Gods gracious assistance never be afraid, Witness the choosing these above
named Papists for Rulers of the kingdom, and imprisoning Sir William Parsons
Sir Adam Loftus, Sir John Temple, and Sir Robert Merideth, Doctor Harding, and
diverse others that were imprisoned and have been enforced to fly.
to seal the Truth of my affirmation with my blood, that if countenancing the
Papists, discountenancing the Protestants, be justice, the Protestants have an
administration of justice, in this kind, to the very full. If countenancing
Jesuits, and setting up in the Pulpits, prattling Ministers, discountenancing
and imprisoning honest and zealous Preachers of the sacred Word of God, be
Justice, the Protestants of that Kingdom have no cause of complaint.

If looking with a gracious aspect on those who are rotten, and lukewarm, in
the service against the Rebels, and beholding those who were honest in the
service, with a threatening and malignant b^ow, be a sign of Justice, the
Protestants need not complain of the want of Justice. In a word, to end this
circumstance, I do hereby declare before God, and the whole world, that the
best justice distributed amongst the Protestants of Ireland, has been most
destructive, both to Church and Commonwealth, and shall heartily wish, that
the unjust Rulers of that Kingdom may be removed from among the poor
languishing souls, that lie groaning under their cruelty.

Now I must turn my discourse from the many miseries the Protestants of
Ireland have sustained, by those who should have been their best friends, and
will make as brief a Relation as I may, of the sudden destruction, our too
too well known enemies would fain bring upon us, and what ways they have
prepared to effect the same. The first way they fell upon, is by this time
notifyed to all Nations, which was to cut off man, woman, and child at one
blow, without distinction of either descent, age, or sex, and not only to kill
their bodies, but their souls also, as far as in them lay, forcing many weak
Christians to deny their Redeemer, and then telling them, they were in the
state of Grace, and that they could never dye in a better time, and so hanged
them up; and their raging malice was not sufficiently showed, as they supposed,
by killing the Souls of the Protestants, and murdering their bodies, This
kind of death the Relator can the better testify, because one Master Watson a
Divine and Chaplain unto his Father suffered in this kind.
but they must aggravate the malignity of their malice, by inflicting not only
death, but strange kinds of death upon them, as stabbing, hanging, drowning,
which is known unto all men, starving the English, until they forced them to
eat pieces of their own flesh, cut off and broiled on the coals, and many
such like horrid deaths as these. And because they did not abound enough in
malice, as yet, to the English Protestants, the Papists in Ireland must be
enforced to kill their own wives, The Relater is ready to affirm this upon oath.
that they had married of the English, great with child, because they had
English blood in them, as they said, and all those English allied unto them by
their wives.

Neither did their rage extend only to the living, but most inhumanely
conveyed it self to the dead; for it is a maxim in their diabolical
Divinity, that it is unlawful to say Mass, where Heretics have been buried:
upon which ground they have dis-interred the bodies of the innocent Protestants
sleeping in their graves, and have exposed them to be a prey either to beasts
or birds: witness their practice in this kind at Galway, Limerick, and in
diverse other places. As Doctor Web Bishop of Limerick, Master Lee, etc.


Again, their barbarous immanity ends not with the reasonable creature, but
diffuseth it self to the sensitive and vegetable, for they revenge themselves
on the very English Beasts, To wit because they had English blood in sheep.
commonly called by the name of English breed, for the same reason before
mentioned, and would not when they were designed for slaughter, kill them, as
they did the Irish breed, but the beasts being alive, cut off great pieces of
flesh out of them, skin and flesh together, and so broyling that flesh upon
the coals, eat the same; and if the beasts chanced either to roar or groan
for misery and pain, they would in detestation and mockery of the English, cry
out that they understood not their English language. But hitherto they have not
launced out far enough into the Sea of their malice, and cruelty, but they
must proceed further yet. They must be revenged of all manner of things, that
either pleased or belonged unto the English. Trees that the English planted
must be cut up, root and branch, there was too much of an English man in them;
All herbs, plants, odoriferous flowers, set and planted by the English, and
pleasing to them, must therefore no longer grow but be plucked up. All stately
houses, and all manner of costly Ornaments and furniture belonging to the
English, must be (out of the raging heat of their malice) consumed by the fire.

So that it may clearly appear, by the cruelty of these devouring Woolfes,
that their malice was so inveterate to the English, that they fully intended to
make such a destruction of them, as there should not appear so much as one
Monument of an English man in the whole kingdom of Ireland, nor any one thing
that should ever be a sign unto the succeeding Posterity of the Rebels there,
that ever there was an English man in that Kingdom: and this likely had come
to pass, had their hellish Plot taken effect, and had not God in his infinite
mercy and goodness prevented the same.

The Treachery of the Governors and Officers.
And although they have by their more then heathenish Cruelty, (with other
unexpected and unlawful helps which they had) very much advanced their
devilish defignes, yet it has pleased the All-powerfull God, in some measure
to frustrate their long expected hopes, and to show them they neither can nor
shall so far prevail over us by force, but that we shall be able to enjoy
the Inheritance which God Almighty has been pleased to bestow upon us in that
Kingdom, mangre all their power and malice.

And therefore now, what they see they are not able to do by force, they will
strive to do by devilish subtilty and craft: An inherent quality of that
Nation.

The means to effect this, is by a stratagem called by the name of a
Cessation, which some selfe-ended Counselors have obtained by their
insinuation into his Majesty, and by these false Informations that the only
way to save the Kingdom of Ireland, was by making a Cessation with the Rebels
there, which indeed may easily appear unto every wise man, is, and shall
prove, if not timely prevented, the very high way to lose it.

For how can it otherwise be? for before the Cessation was made, what food had
the English to subsist on, but what they forced from the Rebels? Now the
Cessation being concluded, and the Rebels having all the estates and livelihood
of the Protestants, and all the food of the Kingdom in their own hands, and
suffering none of the food to be sold, for any rates whatsoever, to the
English, of purpose to starve them out of the Kingdom, and so to get
possession of it themselves; how can it be thought, but that this cessation was
brought to pass by evil Counselors to the end the Papists should get
possession of the whole kingdom, as they have already the greatest part
thereof?

From all these places following, the Rebels have for the most part starved out
the English since this Cessation, and that merely by stopping provisions, and
suffering none to be sold unto them. The names of the places are these, and all
these places in the chiefest province of the kingdom, the province of Lemster,
viz. Carloe, Athy, the Fort of Lease, Nease, Trymm, and Dundalk, with many more
Castles and Garrisons. And the certainty of this plot they have in hand, will
prove the more apparent, by a Declaration of grievances, signed and attested by
all the Protestant Officers of the whole province of Conought, sent unto my
Lord Marquess of Ormond, some five weeks since. Wherein amongst sundry
grievances, they expressed, that there was an absolute plot amongst the Rebels to
starve them out of that province, for that the Papists would have no manner of
commerce, or buying, or selling with them, either victuals or any thing else.
And moreover the Protestants complained in that Declaration, that they found
that the County Councels (which were the head rebels of those Counties) had
issued out Warrants to seize on all men's goods and estates of their own
devilish Confederacy, that should offer to have any manner of buying or selling
with the English.

And therefore what other term can rightly be given to this Cessation, then a
trap for Protestants? which indeed all the Protestants of Ireland are most
sensible of, and how great a yoke of tyranny they are enforced to lie under.
And in that part of the kingdom (as in Ulster) where they were so powerful,
as not to fear the showing their true sense of what swist destruction was
plotted to be brought upon them; they have to the number of 30000. men united
themselves to resolutions of falling upon the Irish again, as soon as ever
supplies of victuals comes unto them, which I doubt not through the mercies
of God will redound much to the service of that kingdom and of this, for I
hope the united forces will be stronger ere long, and will give the Rebels so
much to do in Ireland, as they shall have either little time or mind of
imbrewing their wicked hands in the innocent blood of the Inhabitants of
England, which truly otherwise they will be most eager to do, and I shall
ever wish that this kingdom in general may truly discern how pleasing it
will be to Almighty God, that there may be assistance by them given unto the
Protestants of Ireland to prosecute the war in that kingdom, and to take a
just revenge of the heathenish Canibals there, for the many thousands of
Innocents they have murdered. And likewise how advantageous it will be for
the service of this kingdom, since I dare confidently affirm, that the malice
of the Irish Rebels points at all the Protestants, nay at all the English in
this kingdom likewise.

And that does appear by the great preparations there made both by Sea and
Land for the sending over a rebellious Army into this Kingdom, upon hopes and
conjectures that the Protestants here are in no condition of any ways enabling
the Protestants of that Kingdom to withstand them.

For I beseech you judge, if the Protestants there should for indigence and
want be enforced to desert that Kingdom, and that the Irish should swarm
here, what mercy could the English here expect from them, who have been so
bloody upon us, that had so many ties of friendship and gratitude upon them?
truly I know not how people may flatter themselves, but I am persuaded
murdering and massacres without mercy, rapes, and rapines, burnings,
devastations, and all manner of spoils will be the greatest mercy received
from them.

And by sufficient testimonies I am persuaded that if the Papists may once have
a concourse into this Kingdom, the very person of his Majesty would not be
free from the danger of being murdered by them, if their fuccesses here should
not meet with their hopes, or if his Majesty should any way decline at any
time, (which I hope in Gods due time he will) from an eager pursuit of the
mischievous designs they shall at all times seek to bring his Majesty unto.

And indeed, I have a strong argument to enforce me to this belief; for not
long before my departure from Dublin, certain news came to the City of my
Lord Duke Hammiltons flying out of Scotland to his Majesty, which news did
not a little deject some there, for that they did conjecture that there was no
party to be raifed in Scotland for the hindering the advance of the Scotch
Army into this Kingdom; many whispers and constructions were concerning his
coming away at that time and in that manner, among many others this was the
construction my Lord Taaffe made of it, who freely ripped up his mind to those
of so unblemished reputations (whom although for some causes I will not name at
this time, yet in due time I shall both name them, and prove by them, that he
expressed himself) in these words.

My Lord Duke Hammilton is reported to be fled out of Scotland to the King,
and pretends he fled from thence, because he could not raise a party for his
Majesty; But truly for my part, I take him to be as notorious a Traitor as
ever he was, and that he is fled to the King merely to try, whether or no,
with his great power, he can persuade the King to a peace, and by that means
destroy the good cause his Majesty has in hand. But for my part, I
ingenuously declare my self, that if the King be so weak as to be prevailed
upon by him, I think it is pity he should be suffered to live.

So that by this you may well perceive, what a high esteem such traytorous
Papists as these have of the cause disputed for by the Kings evil Counselors:
And by consequence, how little reason the Protestants have to conjecture, that
this good cause the Papists so much adore is the Protestant Religion, though 6.
or 700. of those who joining with the Protestants that came over to serve the
King, made oath in my hearing to maintain the Protestant Religion with their
lives and estates. As likewise, how much reason all honest men have to grieve
and mourn at the great danger his Majesty is in, when such threatners of his
life as these shall so nearly approach unto him; The truth of all which I do
hereby engage my self to prove, whenever called upon, and no sufferance or
death whatsoever, by Gods powerful assistance, shall ever make me deny any one
tittle of what I have here declared and subscribed unto.

Chidly Coote.

FINIS.

