A Copy of a LETTER Sent by the Agents of several Regiments of his
EXCELLENCIES Army, (that are resolved to the last drop of their blood, to stand
for the Liberties and Freedoms of the people of England,) to all the Soldiers
in the said Army.
November. 11. 1647. Gentlemen and fellow Soldiers;
WE esteem it our duty to render you an account of our present state of
affairs with us, and at the head Quarters: we have been consulting about the
most speedy and effectual settlement of your and all the peoples freedoms,
whereby the people may be disposed into a capacity and willingness to provide
constant pay, and secure our arreares: we find by sad experience that there
was no possibility of obtaining either, so long as the settlement of the
peoples freedoms was delaid; and therefore as well in love and real respects
to you, as to our dear Country, we were constrained to propound the
foundations of freedoms, to be forthwith established by a mutual agreement
between the people and you; and though we dare aver, that there is nothing
contained in that Agreement, nor in the case of the Army stated, which is
propounded to be insisted on, but what is at least the equitable sense, of our
sense, of our former Declarations and Remonstrances; yet we find many at the
head Quarters obstructing and opposing our proceedings: we sent some to them
to debate in love the matters and manners of the Argument. And the first
Article thereof being long debated, it was concluded by Vote in the
Affirmative; viz. That all Soldiers and others, if they be not servants or
beggars, ought to have voices in electing those which shall represent them in
Parliament, although they have not forty shillings in the year, by freehold
Land.

And there were but three voices against this your native freedom. After this
they would refer all to a Committee, and the next General Council our
friends obtained a general Randezvouz, and a Letter from the Council to
clear the Army from any desire or intent of constraining the Parliament to
send new Propositions to the King, whereby your indemnitie for fighting against
the King, should be begged of the King, and so the gilt of innocent blood laid
upon your own beads, and your enemies shall boast and insult over you, saying,
You were forced to ask them to save you harmless.

At the next meeting a Declaration was offered to the Council, wherein the
Kings corrupt interest was so intermixed, that in a short time, if he should so
come in, he would be in a capacity to destroy you, and the people; and assure
your selves, if any power be in the least given to him, he will improve it to
the utmost to inslave and ruin you that conquered him, and to advance your
enemies to trample upon you. Upon this we desired only a free debate of this
Question; Whether it were safe, either for the Army, or the people, to suffer
any power to be given to the King: and Lieutenant General Crumwell, and the
rest, professed as before God, they would freely debate it; and monday last, a
general Council was appointed for that purpose; but when they met they wholly
refused, and in stead of that spoke very reproachfully of us and our Actions,
and declared against that which was past the Council before, Concerning the
voices of those in Election, which have not forty shillings by the year
freehold, and against the Letter sent by the Council to the Parliament, and
the day before Commissary General Ireton withdrew and protested he would act
no more with them, unless they recalled the Letter, and to prevent any further
debate, they would have dissolved the Council for above a fortnight; and thus
our hopes of agreeing together to settle your and the peoples freedoms were
then frustrated, and though the chief of them had desired some of our friends,
not above three days before to go on in their actings, for they might come in
when they should do us more service then at that time, yet then they made
great outcries against us, and complaints of distempers in the Army, which
were nothing but endeavors after their rights and freedoms.

The next day they still waved and refused the free debate of the aforesaid
Question, and dissolved this Council for above a fortnight; and for a time
resolved they would only prepare some fair Propositions to the Army, and about
Arrears and pay, and sent to the Parliament for a months pay against a
Randezvourz; But they declared they would divide the Army into three parts, to
Randezvouz severally; and all this appears to be only to draw off the Army
from joining together, to settle those clear foundations of Freedom
propounded to you, and to procure your rights as you are Soldiers effectually,
without any more delusions. Thus you may observe the strange unconstancy of
those who would obstruct your ways, and the great matter wherein the
difference lies, and the candidness of our actings, but we hope it will be no
discouragement unto you, though your Officers, yea, the greatest Officers,
should apostatise from you; Its well known that the great Officers which now
oppose, did as much oppose secretly when we refused to disband according to
the Parliaments Order; and at last they confessed the Providence of God was the
more wonderful; because those resolutions to stand for Fredom and justice
began among the Soldiers only. And yet now they would affright you from such
actings, by telling you, its disobedience to the Generals commands, and
distempers, and mu^i^les: these were the words of those men in Parliament, and
which opposed you before; and you may consider that you had done as much
service for the people, by disobedience to the Parliament, as ever you did by
obedience; if you had fulfilled your Declarations and Engagements, which you
then passed, as for the months pay if it came, you may consider its but your
due, and yet we believe none had bin procured for you, unless we had thus
appeared. And if any Declarations or Propositions about Pay, or Arrears, be
offered to you, remember you have been fed with papers too long, we desire that
there may be a general Randezvouz, and no parting each from other till we be
fully assured we shall not return to burden the Country by free quarter,
until our Arrears be actually secured, and the foundations of our native
Freedom, Peace, and security in the Agreement established; and likewise till a
sure way be set (...) for calling all Committees, Sequestrators, and Parliament
men to account for the Countries money, that so the Country might know we
intend their good and freedom: we know some fair overtures will be made to
you about Pay, Arreares, seeming Freedom, and security: But we hope as you
formerly, rejected such overtures from the Parliament, knowing that without a
settlement of Freedom, no constant pay, or Arrears will be provided, so now we
are confident you will not be deceived, and hope you are all resolved of a
general Randezvouz; that we may all agree together in fulfilling our
Declarations, and Engagements to the people; that so, we may not become the
objects of scorn and hatred; We shall now only add we are

Yours and the peoples for common Rights, and Freedoms; Generals Regiment.
Edward Saxbee Edmund Bear
Life Guard. Commissarie Generals Regiment. William Michell George Hassall
William Perkins
Leut. Generals Regiment Robert Everard John Walter
Coll. Fleetwoods R. William Pryor
Coll. Oklies R. Humphery Daveis
Col. Wallers R. George Clark
Coll. Harrison R. Joseph Aleyn
Coll. Whalyes R. Richard Seal William Russell
Coll. Lilburnes R. Richard Hilyer Christopher Belsen Thomas George Andrew
Devell Michall Everard


London the 11th of Novem. 1647.
Postscript.
Gentlemen;
THe urgent necessity of one General Randezvouz, wherein we may so insist
upon our Rights as Soldiers, and the settlement of our Freedoms as
Englishmen, still appears more evident to us. This day the Parliament
considered the Proposition from the Army, that Deans and Chapters Lands should
be part of our security for Arreares, and they refused to grant it: we see no
good will be done but by a General Randezvouz, and remember the Parliament
would have brought us to several Randezvouz, when they would have divided and
disbanded us, therefore we wish that we may so remember our engagement, as we
may all resolve to meet, and not to part until the rights and freedoms of us
all, and of all our Countryman be settled and secured.

FINIS.

