AUGUST 3. 1642.
The Copy of a Letter sent from a special friend in COVENTRY, wherein is
related the several passages between the Right Honorable the Lord Brook and
the Earl of Northampton, three miles beyond Banbury, upon the conduct of
certain Pieces of Ordnance to VVarwick-Castle.
WE have had many and great troubles here, being never quiet night nor day,
but full of fears and dangers; but I praise God I am reasonable well and
cheerful. On Thusday last, the Earl of Northampton, and Lord of Dunsmore, with
many other Gentlemen of the greatest men in our Shire, having 3. or 400. Horse,
and 8. or 900. Foot, the first day at Southam, ten miles off Coventry, met to
put the Commission of Array in Execution; of which there came some out of
Gloucestershire, Worcestershire, Leicestershire, Northamptonshire, Oxfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, and other places. The Earl of Northampton is expected here
every day, but we do intend to oppose them when they come, and shall leave the
issue to Almighty God, who has wonderfully preserved us that there has been
no blood shed before this. The last night the Lo: Brook sent to me to desire
that I should send to him 10. Horsemen, with Muskets, well appointed, to wait
on him to Banbury. My Lord going himself, with many other Gentlemen, about 11.
aclock at night, they being of company about 140. that went from Warwick with
Horse, Pistols and Petronels, and Horsemen with Muskets, they coming to
Banbury in the morning, to conduct certain Pieces of Ordnance that were to
come to Warwick-castle, coming from Banbury about 8. or 9. aclock this
morning, with 350. well appointed, they had not come above 3. miles from
Banbury, but there appeared a great Company of Horse and Foot with the E. of
Northampton. My Lo: Brook commanded his company to light, and tie their Horses
one to the other in the Field, and every one to charge and make ready to stand
on their guard. His Lordship giving them great encouragement from the goodness
of the Cause, and that he would lead them, and come on in the first place, and
caused to be mounted 3. Pieces of Ordnance, and made them ready, both Companies
being within 10. or 12. paces shot of Musket, my Lo: Brook and the E. of
Northampton met seven or eight times, with three or four other Gentlemen of
each side to parley. The country sent to my Lo: Brook 6. load of Harrows to
keep off horses, and a Cart load of Bread and Cheese, and great store of Beer.
My Lords Company did so increase, that before he went out of the Field, his
350. were near 1000. The Companies stood so upon their Guard from 10. aclock
in the morning, till 5. in the afternoon, ever expecting when they should give
fire, which if they had, many would have lost their lives. Their agreement was,
that my Lo: Brook should return to Banbury with the Pieces of Ordnance, and
engaged his Honor to give the Lo: of Northampton three days notice before he
would remove them from thence toward Warwick, by reason of the imminent danger.
All the Arms of the City was delivered me this day. I was forced to sit up
till 3. aclock in the morning to write Letters.

Coventry, 30. July. 1642.
Printed for H. Overton, in Pope's Head Alley. 1642.


