A Fiery Flying Roll: A Word from the Lord to all the Great Ones of the Earth,
whom this may concern: Being the last WARNING PIECE at the dreadful day of
JUDGMENT.

For now the LORD is come to 1 Inform the Great Ones. 2 Advise and warn the
Great Ones. 3 Charge the Great Ones. 4 Judge and sentence the Great Ones.


As also most compassionately informing, and most lovingly and patheti^ally
advising and warning London.

With a terrible Word and fatal Blow from the LORD, upon the Gathered CHURCHES.

And all by his Most Excellent MAJESTY, dwelling in, and shining through
AUXILIUM PATRIS, alias, Coppe..

With another FLYING ROLL ensuing (to all the Inhabitants of the Earth.) The
Contents of both following.

Isa. 23. 9, The Lord of Hosts (is) staining the pride of all glory, and
bringing into contempt all the honorable (persons and things) of the Earth.

O London, London, how would I gather thee, as a hen gathers her chickens
under her wings, etc. Know thou (in this thy day) the things that belong to thy
Peace --

I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, but are
the Synagogue of Satan,

Rev. 2. 9. Imprinted at London, in the beginning of that notable day, wherein
the secrets of all hearts are laid open; and wherein the worst and foulest of
villainies, are discovered, under the best and fairest outsides. 1649.

THE PREFACE.
An inlet into the Land of Promise, the new Jerusalem, and a gate into the
ensuing Discourse, worthy of serious consideration.
MY Dear One.
All or None.
Every one under the Sun.
Mine own.
My most Excellent Majesty (in me) has strangely and variously transformed
this form.

And behold, by mine own Almightinesse (In me) I have been changed in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the sound of the Trump.

And now the Lord is d^scended from Heaven, with a shout, with the voice of the
Arch-angell, and with the Trump of God.

And the sea, the earth, yea all things are now giving up their dead. And all
things that ever were, are, or shall be visible -- are the Grave wherein the
King of Glory (the eternal, invisible Almightinesse, has lain as it were)
dead and buried.

But behold, behold, he is now risen with a witness, to save Zion with
vengeance, or to confound and plague all things into himself; who by his mighty
Angel is proclaiming (with a loud voice) That Sin and Transgression is
finished and ended; and everlasting righteousness brought in; and the
everlasting Gospel preaching; Which everlasting Gospel is brought in with
most terrible earthquakes, and heaven-quakes, and with signs and wonders
following. Amen.

And it has pleased my most Excellent Majesty, (who is universal love, and
whose service is perfect freedom) to set this form (the Writer of this Roll)
as no small sign and wonder in fleshly Israel; as you may partly see to the
ensuing Discourse.

And now (my dear ones!) every one under the Sun, I will only point at the
gate, through which I was led into that new City, new Hierulalem, and to the
Spirits of just men, made perfect* and to God the Judge of all.

First, all my strength, my forces were utterly routed, my house I dwelt in
fired, my father and mother forsook me* the wife of my bosom loathed me, mine
old name was rotted, perished; and I was utterly plagued, consumed, damned,
rammed, and sunk into nothing, into the bowels of the still Eternity (my
mothers womb) out of which I came naked, and whetherto I returned again naked*
And lying a while there, rapt up in silence, at length (the body or outward
form being aw^ke ^ll this while) I heard with my outward ear (to my
apprehension) a most terrible thunderclap, and after that a* second. And upon
the second thunderclap, which was exceeding terrible, I saw a great body of
light, like the light of the Sun, and red as fire, in the form of a drum (as
it were) whereupon with exceeding trembling and amazement on the flesh, and
with joy unspe^k^ble in the spirit, I clapped my hands, and cried out, Amen,
Halelujah, Halelujah, Amen. And so lay trembling, sweating, and smoking (for
the space of half an hour) at length with a loud voice (I inwardly) cried out,
Lord, what will thou do with me; my most excellent majesty and eternal glory
(in me) answered and said* Fear not, I will take thee up into mine everlasting
Kingdom. But thou shall (first) drink a bitter cup, a bitter cup, a bitter cup;
whereupon (being filled with exceeding amazement) I was thrown into the belly
of hell (and take what you can of it in these expressions, though the matter is
beyond expression) I was among all the Devils in hell, even in their most
hideous how.

And under all this terror, and amazement, there was a little spark of
transcendent, transplendent, unspeakable glory, which ^urvived, and sustained
it self, triumphing, exulting, and exalting it self above all the Fiends. And
confounding the very blackness of darkness (you must take it in these
terms, for it is infinitely beyond expression.) Upon this the life was taken
out of the body (for a season) and it was thus resembled, as if a man with a
great brush dipped in whiting, should with one stroke w^pe out, or sweep off a
picture upon a wall, etc. after a while, breath and life was recurned into the
form again; whereupon I saw various streams of light (in the night) which
appeared to the outward eye; and immediately I saw three hearts (or three
appearances) in the form of hearts, of exceeding brightness; and immediately
an innumerable company of hearts, filling each corner of the room where I was.
And me thoughts there was variety and distinction, as if there had been
several hearts, and yet most strangely and unexpressibly complicated or folded
up in unity. I clearly saw distinction, diversity, variety, and as clearly saw
all swallowed up into unity. And it has been my song many times since, within
and without, unity, universality, universality, unity, Eternal Majesty, etc.
And at this vision, a most strong, glorious voice uttered these words, The
spirits of just men made perfect* the spirits etc, with whom I had as absolut,
clear, full communion, and in a two fold more familiar way, then ever I had
outwardly with my dearest friends, and nearest relations. The visions and
revelations of God, and the strong hand of eternal invisible almightinesse,
was stretched out upon me, within me, for the space of four days and nights,
without intermission.

The time would fail if I would tell you all, but it is not the good will and
pleasure of my most excellent Majesty in me, to declare any more (as yet) then
thus much further: That amongst those various voices that were then uttered
within, these were some, Blood, blood, Where, where? upon the hypocritical
holy heart, etc. Another thus, Vengeance, vengeance, vengeance, Plagues,
plagues, upon the Inhabitants of the earth; Fire, fire, fire, Sword, sword,
etc. upon all that bow not down to eternal Majesty, universal love; I Will
recover, recover, my wool, my flax, my money. Declare, declare, fear thou not
the faces of any; I am (in thee) a munition of Rocks, etc.

Go up to London, It not being shown to me, what I should do, more then preach
and print something, etc. very little expecting I should be so strangely acted,
as to (my exceeding joy and delight) I have been, though to the utter cracking
of my credit, and to the rotting of my old name which is damned, and cast out
(as a toad to the dunghill) that I might have a new name, with me, upon me,
within me, which is, Iam --
to London, that great City, write, write, write. And behold I writ, and lo a
hand was sent to me, and a roll of a book was therein, which this fleshly hand
would have put wings to, before the time. Whereupon it was snatched out of my
hand, and the Roll thrust into my mouth; and I eat it up, and filled my bowels
with it, ( Eze. 2. 8. etc. cha. 3. 1, 2, 3.) where it was as bitter as
wormwood; and it lay broiling, and burning in my stomach, till I brought it
forth in this form.

And now I send it flying to thee, with my heart, And all

Per AUXILIUM PATRIS

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. 1. Several strange, yet true and seasonable informations to the great
ones, as also an apologeticall hint of the Authors principle, etc. CHAP. 2.
Several new, strange, yet seasonable and good advice, and wholesome
admonitions, and the last warning to the great ones, as from the Lord. CHAP. 3.
Several dismal, doleful cries, and out-crieo, which pierce the ears and
heart of his excellent Majesty, and how the King of Kings, the King of heaven
charges the great ones of the earth. CHAP. 4. How the Judge of heaven and
earth, who judges righteous* judgment, passes sentence against all those
great ones, who like sturdy O aches and tall Cedars will not bow, and how he
intends to break them, and blow them up by the roots* CHAP. 5. A most
compassionate information, and a most loving and patheticall warning and advice
to London. CHAP. 6. A terrible word and fatal blow from the Lord upon the
gathered Churches, who pretend most for God, yet defy the Almighty more then
the vilest.
The second Flying Roll.
CHAP. 1. The Authors commission to write. A terrible woe denounced against
those that flight the roll. The Lords claim to all things; Together with a hint
of a twofold recovery, where through the most hypocritical heart shall be
ripped up, etc. CHAP. 2. How the Lord will recover his outward things (things
of this life) as money, corn, wool, flax, etc. and for whom: And how they shall
be plagned that detain them as their own. Wherein also are some mistical
hints concerning St. Michaels day, and the Lords day following it this year;
as also of the dominicall letter D, etc. CHAP. 3. A strange, yet most true
story, under which is couch^d that lion, whose roaring shall make all the
beasts of the field to tremble, and all the kingdoms of the world quake.
Wherein also (in part) the subtility of the welfavour'd harlot is discovered,
and her flesh burnt with that fire which shall burn down all Churches, except
that of the first borne, etc. CHAP. 4. That the Author has been set as a sign
and wonder, etc. as well as most of the Prophets formerly; as also what strange
posturs that divine Majesty (that dwells in his form) has set the'forme in:
with the most strange and varions effects thereof upon the spectators. His
communion with the spirits of just men made perfect, and with God the judge of
all hinted at. CHAP. 5. The Authors strange and lofty carriage toward great
ones, and his most lowly carriage toward beggars, rogues, prisoners, gypsies,
etc. Together with a large Declaration what glory shall arise up from under all
these ashes. The most strange and most secret and terrible, yet most glorious
design of God, in choosing base things, to confound* things that are: And how,
A most terrible vial poured out upon the well-favoured harlot; and how the
Lord is bringing into contempt not only honorable persons (with a vengeance)
but all honorable holy things also. Wholesome advice, with a terrible threat to
the Formalists: And how BASE things have confounded base things: And how base
things have been a fiery chariot to mount the Author up into divine glory and
unspeakable Majesty: And how his wife is, and his life is in that beauty,
which makes visible beauty seem mere deformity. CHAP. 6. Great ones must bow
to the poorest peasants, or else they shall rue for it; No material sword or
humane power (whatsoever) but the pure spirit of universal love, who is the
eternal God, can break the neck of tyranny, oppr^ssion, and abominable
pride and cruel murder, etc. A catologue of several judgments recited, as so
many warning-pieces to approp^iators, impropriators, and ant^*free
communicants. CHAP. 7. A further discovery of the subtilty of the well favored
harlot, with a parley between her and the spirit. As also the hor^id villainy
that l^es hid under her smooth words, and sweet tongue (in pleading against the
letter and history, and for the spirit and mystery, and all for her own ends)
detected. Also upon what account the spirit is put, and upon what account the
letter, etc. And what the true communion, and what the true breaking of bread
is. CHAP. 8. The wel-favoured harlots clothes stripped off, her nakedness
discovered, her nose slit. Her ^unting after the young man void of
understanding, from corner to corner, from religion to religion: And the spirit
pursuing, overtaking, and destroying her, etc. With a terrible thunderclap
in the close.
A word from the Lord to all the Great Ones of the Earth (whom this may
concern) being the last Warning Piece, etc.
1 The word of the Lord came expressly to me, saying, Son of man write a
Roll, and these words, from my mouth, to the Great ones, saying, thus says
the Lord:

Slight not this Roll, neither laugh at it, least I slight you, and cause all
men to slight and scorn you; least I destroy you, and laugh at your
destruction, etc.

2 This is, (and with a witness, some of you shall find it, to be) an edged
tool; and there is no jesting with it, or laughing at it.

It Is a sharp sword, sharpened, and also fourbished --

No sleepy Dormouse shall dare to creep up the edge of it.

Thus says the Lord, You shall find with a witness, that I am now coming to

1 Inform you, O ye great ones. 2 Advise and warn you, O ye great ones. 3
Charge you, O ye great ones. 4 Judge and sentence you, O ye great ones.
CHAP. I. Containing several strange, yet true and seasonable Informations, to
the great ones. As also an apologeticall hint, of the Authors Principle,
standing in the front. --
1. THus says the Lord, I inform you, that I overturn, overturn, overturn. And
as the Bishops, Charles, and the Lords, have had their turn, overturn, so your
turn shall be next (ye surviving great ones) by what Name or Title soever
dignified or distinguished) who ever you are, that oppose me, the Eternal God,
who am UNIVERSAL Love, and whose service is perfect freedom, and pure
Libertinisme.

2 An Apologeticall hint concerning the Authors Principle, the re^ult -- is
negative; he speaks little in the affirmative because not one in a hundred,
yea even of his former acqu^intance, now know him, neither must they yet.
But before I proceed any further, be it known to you, That although that
excellent Majesty, which dwells in the Writer of this Roll, has reconciled ALL
THINGS to himself, yet this hand (which now writes) never drew sword, or shed
one drop of any man's blood. [I am free from the blood of all men] though (I
say) all things are reconciled to me, the eternal God (IN HIM) yet sword
levelling, or digging-levelling, are neither of them his principle.

Both are as far from his principle, as the East is from the West, or the
Heavens from the Earth, (though, I say, reconciled to both, as to all things
else) and though he has more justice, righteousness, truth, and sincerity,
shining in those low dunghils, (as they are esteemed) then in the Sun, Moon,
and all the Stars.

3 I come not forth (in him) either with material sword, or Mattock, but now
(in this my day --) I make him my Swordbearer, to brandish the Sword of the
Spirit, as he has done several days and nights together, through the streets
of the great City.

4 And now thus says the Lord:

Though you can as little endure the word LEVELLING, as could the lat-slaine or
dead Charles (your foretunner, who is gone before you --) and had as live hear
the Devil named, as hear of the Levellers (M^n-Levellers) which is, and who
(indeed) are but shadows of most terrible, yet great and glorious good things
to come.

5 Behold, behold, behold, I the eternal God, the Lord of Hosts* who am that
mighty Leveller, am coming (yea even at the doors) to Level in good earnest,
to Level to some purpose, to Level with a witness, to Level the Hills with
the Valleys, and to lay the Mountains low.

6 High Mountains! lofty Cedars! its high time for you to enter into the
Rocks, and to hide you in the dust, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of
his Majesty. For the lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness
of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord ALONE shall be exalted in that day;
For the day of the Lord of Hoasts, shall be upon every one that is proud, and
lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low. And
upon all the Cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon all the
Oaks of Bashan; and upon all the high Mountains; and upon all the Hills that
are lifted up, and upon every high Tower* and upon every fenced Wall; and upon
all the Ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant Pictures.

And the LOFTINESS of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men
shall be laid low. And the Lord ALONE shall be exalted in that day, and the
Idols he shall utterly abolish.

And they shall go into the holes of the Rocks, and into the Caves of the
Earth, for scare of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty, when he arises
to shake terribly the earth.

In that day a man shall cast his Idols of Silver, and Idols of Gold -- to the
bats, and to the Moles. To go into the Clefts of the Rocks and into the tops of
the ragged Rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty. For
the Lord is now RISEN to shake terribly the Earth, Isa. 2. 10. to the end of
the Chapter.

7 Hill! Mountains! Cedars! Mighty men! Your breath is in your nostrils.

Those that have admired, adored, idolized, magnified, set you up, fought for
you, ven^ured goods, and good name; limb and life for you, shall cease from
you.

You shall not (at all be accounted of (not one of you) ye sturdy Oak) who
bow not down before eternal Majesty: Universal Love, whose service is
perfect freedom, and who has put down the mighty (remember, remember your
forerunner) and who is putting down the mighty from their seats; and exalting
them of low degree.

8 Oh let not, (for your own sakes) let not the mother of Harlots in you, who
is very subtle of heart.

Nor the Beast (without you) what do you call 'em? The Ministers, fat parsons,
Vica^s, Lecturers, etc. who (for their own base ends, to maintain their
pride, and pomp, and to fill their own paunche^, and purses) have been the
chief instruments of all those horrid abominations, hellish, cruel, devilish
p^rsecutions, in this Nation which cry for vengeance. For your own sakes (I
say) let neither the one, nor the other bewitch you, or charm your ears, to
hear them say, these things shall not befall you, these Scriptures shall not
be fulfilled upon you, but upon the Pope, Turk, and Heathen Princes, etc.

9 Or if any of them should (through subtilty for their own base ends) creep
into the Mystery of that forementioned Isay 2*
Scripture.

And tell you, Those words are to be taken in the Mystery only; and they only
point out a spiritual, inward levelling (once more, for your own sakes, I
say) believe them not.

10 It Is true, the History, or Letter, (I speak comparatively) is but as it
were haire-cloth; the Mystery is fine Flax. My flax, says the Lord, and the
Thief and the Robber will steal from me my flax, to cover his nakedness, that
his filthiness may not appear.

But behold, I am (now) recovering my flax out of his hand, and discovering his
lewdness -- verbum sat --

11 It Is true, the Mystery is my joy, my delight, my life.

And the Prime levelling, is laying low the Mountains, and levelling the Hills
in man.

But this is not all.

For lo I come (says the Lord) with a vengeance, to level also your Honor,
Riches, etc. to stain the pride of all your glory, and to bring into contempt
all the Honorable (both persons and things) upon the earth, Isa. 23. 9.

12 For this Honor, Nobility, Gentility, Propriety, Superfluity, etc. has
(without contradiction) been the Father of hellish horrid pride, arrogance,
haughtiness, loftiness, murder, malice, of all manner of wickedness and
implety; yea the cause of all the blood that ever has been shed, from the
blood of righteous Abell, to the blood of the last-Levellers that were shot to
death. And now (as I live says the Lord) I am come to make inquisition for
blood; for murder and pride, etc.

13 I see the root of it all The Axe is laid to the root of the Tree (by the
Eternal God, My Self, says the Lord) I will hew (...) down. And as I live, I
will plague your Honor, Pomp, Greatness, Superfluity, and confound it into
parity, equality, community; that the neck of horrid pride, murder, malice, and
tyranny, etc. may be chopped off at one blow. And that my self, the Eternal
God, who am Universal Love, may fill the Earth with universal love,
universal peace, and perfect freedom; which can never be by humane sword or
strength accomplished.

14 Wherefore bow down, bow down, you sturdy Oaks, and tall Cedars; bow, or
by my self I Will break you.

I Will cause some of you (on whom I have compassion) to bow etc. and will
terribly plague the rest.

My little finger shall be heavier on them, then my whole loins were on
Pharaoh of old.

15 And maugre the subtilty, and sedulity, the craft and cruelty of hell, and
earth: this Levelling shall up.

Not by sword; we (holily) scorn to fight for any thing; we had as live be
dead drunk every day of the week, and lie with whores in the market place, and
account these as good actions as taking the poor abused, enslaved ploughmans
money from him (who is almost every where undone, and squeezed to death; and
not so much as that plaguey, unsupportable, hellish burden, and oppression, of
Tithes taken off his shoulders, notwithstanding all his honesty, fidelity,
Taxes, Freequarter, petitioning etc. for the same,) we had rather starve, I
say, then take away his money from him, for killing of men.

Nay, if we might have Captains pay, and a good fat Parsonage or two besides,
we would scorn to be swordsmen, or fight with those (mostly) carnal weapons,
for any thing, or against any one, or for our livings.

16 No, no, we will live in despite of our foes; and this levelling (to thy
torment, O mighty man) shall up, not by sword, not by might, etc. but by my
Spirit, says the Lord.

For I am risen, for I am risen, for I am risen, to shake terribly the earth,
and not the earth only, but the heavens also, etc.

But here I shall cease informing you.

You may for your further information (if you please) read my Roll to all the
rich Inhabitants of the earth.

Read it if you be wise, I shall now advice you.

CHAP. II. Containing several new, strange, yet seasonable Admonitions, and
good advice; as the last warning to the Great Ones of the Earth. from the Lord.
1 THus says the Lord: B: Sero sapiunt P^ryges, sed nunquam Sera est ad Bonos
mores via, 1 Admonition to great ones.
wise now therefore, O ye Rulers, etc. Be instructed, etc. Kiss the Sun,
etc. Yea, kiss Beggars, Prisoners, warm them, feed them, cloathe them, money
them, relieve them, release them, take them into your houses, don't serve them
as dogs, without door. etc.

Own them, they are flesh of your flesh, your own brothren, your own
Sisters, every whit as good (and if I should stand in competition with you) in
some degrees better then your selves.

2 Once more, I say, own them; they are your self, make them one with you, or
el^e go howling into hell; bowl for the miseries that are coming upon you,
soul.

The very shadow of levelling sword-levelling, man-levelling, frighted you,
(and who, li^e your selves, can blame you, because it shook your Kingdom?) but
now the substantiality of levelling is coming.

The Eternal God, the mighty Leveller is coming, yea come, even at the door;
and what will you do in that day.

Repent, repent, repent, Bow down, bow down, bow, or howl, refigne, or be
damned; Bow down, bow down, you stu^dy Oaks, and Cedars, bow down.

Veil too, and kiss the meaner shru^s. Bow, or else (by my self says the
Lord) I Will break you in pieces (some of you) others I will tear up by the
roots; I will suddenly deal with you all, some in one way; some in another.
Wherefore

Each Beggar that you meet
Eall down before him, kiss him in the street.
Once more, he is thy brother, thy fellow, flesh of thy flesh.

Turn not away thi^e eyes from thine own* FLESH, least I pull out thine eyes
and throw thee headlong into hell.

3 Mine ears are fill^d brim full with cries of poor prisoners, Newgate,
Ludgate cries (of late) are seldom out of mine ears. Those doleful cries,
Bread, bread, bread for the Lords sake, pierce mine ears, and heart, I can no
longer for^eare.

Werefore high you apace to all prisons in the Kingdom, 2 Admonition to great
ones.


4 Bow before those poor, nasty, lousie, ragged wretches, say to them, your
humble servants, Sirs* (without a complement) we let you go free, and serve
you, etc.

Do this (or as I live says the Lord) thine eyes (at least) shall be boared
out, and thou carried captive into a strange Land.

5 Give over, give over, thy od^ous, nasty, abominable fasting, 3 Admonition to
great ones
for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness. And instead
thereof, loose the bands of wickedness, undo the heavy burdens, let the
oppressed go free, and break every yoke. Deal thy bread to the hungry, and
bring the poor that are cast out (both of houses and Synagogues) to thy house.
Cover the raked: Hide not thy self from thine own flesh, from a creeple, a
rogue, a begg^r, he is thine own flesh. From a Whoremong^r, a thief, etc. he is
flesh of thy flesh, and his theft, and wheredome is flesh of thy flesh also,
thine own flesh. Thou may have ten, times more of each within thee, then he
that acts outwardly in either, Remember, turn not away thine eyes from thine
OWN FLESH.

6 Give over, give over thy midnight mischief. 4 Admonition to great ones


Let branding with the letter B* alone.

Be no longer so horridly, hellishly, impudently, arrogantly, wicked* as to
judge what is sin, what not, what evil, and what not, what bla^phemy, and
what not.

For thou and all thy reverend Divines, so called (who Divine for Tithes, hire,
and money, and serve the Lord Jesus Christ for their own bellyes) are ignorant
of this one thing.

7 That sin and transgression is finished, its a mere riddle, that they, with
all their humane learning can never read.

Neither can they understand what pure honor is wrapped up in the Kings Motto,
Honi Soit qui Mal. y. Pense. Evil to him that evil thinks.

Some there are (who are accounted the off scouring of all things) who are
Noble Knights of the Garter. Since which -- they could see no evil, think no
evil, do no evil, know no evil.

ALL is Religion that they speak, and honor that they do.

But all you that eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, and have not
your Evil eye Picked out, you call Good Evil, and Evil Good; Light Darkness,
and Darkness Light; Truth Blasphemy, and Blasphemy Truth.

And you are at this time of your Father the Devil, and of your brother the
Pharisee, who still say of Christ (who is now alive) say we not well that he
has a Devil.

9 Take heed, take heed, take heed.

Filthy blind Sodomites called Angels men, they seeing no further then the
forms of men.

10 There are Angels (now) come down from Heaven, in the shapes and forms of
men, who are full of the vengeance of the Lord; and are to pour out the
plagues of God upon the Earth, and to torment the Inhabitants thereof.

Some of these Angels I have been acquainted withal.

And I have looked upon them as Devils, accounting them Devils incarnate, and
have run from place to place, to hide my self from them, shunning their
company; and have been utterly ashamed when I have been seen with them.

But for my labor; I have been plagued and tormented beyond expression. So
that now I had rather behold one of these Angels Rev. 15, Judges 5, Revel. 10,
Neh. 13. 25,
pouring out the plagues of God, cursing; and teaching others to curse bitterly.

And had rather hear a mighty Angel (in man) swearing a full-mouthd Oath; and
see the spirit of Nehemiah (in any form of man, or woman) running upon an
unclean Jew (a pretended Saint) and tearing the hair of his head like a mad
man, cursing, and making others fall a swearing, then hear a zealous
Presbyterian, Independent, or This will come in request with you next; you may
remember that Independency, which is now so hugged, was counted blasphemy, and
banishment was too good for it.
spiritual Notionist, pray, preach, or exercis^.

11 Well*! To the pure all things are pure. God has so cleared cursing,
swearing, in some, that that which goes for swearing and cursing in them, is
more glorious then praying and preaching in others.

And what God has cleansed, call not thou unclean.

And if Peter prove a great transgressor of the Law, by doing that which was as
odious as killing a man; if he at length (though he be loath at first) eat that
which was common and unclean etc. (I give but a hint) blame him not, much less
lift up a finger against, or plant a hellish Ordinance -- against him, least
thou be plagu^d, and damned too, for thy zeal, blind Religion, and fleshly
holiness, which now stinks above ground, though formerly it had a good savor,

12 But O thou holy, zealous, devout, righteous, religious on^ (whoever thou
art) that see evil, or any thing unclean; do thou swear, if thou dare,
if it be but (l'faith) I Will throw thee to Hell for it (says the Lord) and
laugh at thy destruction.

While Angels (in the form of men) shall swear, Heart, Blood, Wounds, and by
the Eternal God, etc. in profound purity, and in high Honor, and Majesty.

13 Well! one hint more; there is swearing ignorantly, in the dark, vainly, and
there is swearing in the light, gloriously.

Well! man of the earth! Lord Esau! what have thou to do with those who swear
upon the former account?

Vengeance is mine, Judgment, Hell, Wrath, etc. all is mine (says the Lord)
dare not thou to set thy foot so impudently and arrogantly upon one step of my
Throne: I am Judge my self -- Be wise, give over, have done --

14 And as for the latter sort of swearing, thou know it not when thou
hear it. It Is no new thing for thee to call Christ Beel-zebub, and
Beel-zebub Christ; to call a holy Angel a Devil, and a Devil an Angel.

15 I charge thee (in the name of the Eternal God) meddle not with either, let
the Tares alone, least thou pull up the Wheat also, woe be to thee if thou
do. Let both alone (I say) least thou should happen of a holy swearing
Angel; and take a Lion by the paw to thine own destruction.

-- Never was there such a time since the world stood, as now is.

Thou know not the strange appearances of the Lord, now a days. Take heed,
know thou have been warned.

16 And whatever thou do, dip not thy little finger in blood 5 Admonition to
great ones
any more, thou art up to the elbowes already: Much soap, yea much nitre cannot
cleanse thee, etc.

Much more have I to say to thee (says the Lord) but I will do it secretly;
and dart a quiver full of arrows into thy heart; and I will now charge thee.

CHAP. III. Containing several dismal, doleful cries, and outcries. which
pierce the ears and heart of his Excellent Majesty, the King of Kings. And how
the King of Heaven charge the Great Ones of the Earth.
1 THus says the Lord, Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord; be silent; O
lofty, haughty, great ones of the Earth.

There are so many Bills of Indictment preferred against thee, that both heaven
and earth blush thereat.

How long shall I hear the sighs and groans, and see the tears of poor
widows; and hear curses in every corner; and all sorts of people crying out
oppression, oppression, tyranny, tyranny, the worst of tyranny, unheard of,
unna^urall tyranny.

-- O my back, my shoulders. O Tithes, Excize, Taxes, Pollings, etc. O Lord! O
Lord God Almighty!

What, a little finger heavier then former loins?

What have I engaged my goods, my life, etc. forsook my dearest relations, and
all for liberty and true freedom, for freedom from oppression, and more laid
on my back, etc.

2 Mine ears are filled brim full with confused noise, cries, and outcries; O
the innumerable complaints and groans that pierce my heart (through and through)
O astonishing complaints.

Was ever the like ingratitude heard of since the world stood? what! best
friends, surest friends, slighted, scorned, and that which comes from them (in
the basest manner) contemned, and some rewarded with prisons, some with death?

O the abominable persidiousnesse, falseheartednesse; self-seeking,
self-inriching, and Kingdome-depopulating, and devastating, etc.

These, and diverse of the same nature, are the cries of England.

And can I any longer for bear?

I have heard, I have heard, the groaning of my people. And now I come to
deliver them, says the Lord.

Woe be to Pharaoh King of Egypt.

You Great Ones that are not tackt nor tainted, you may laugh and sing, whom
this hitteth it hitteth. And it shall hit home.

And this which follows, all whom it concerns, by what name or title soever
dignified or distinguished.

3 You mostly hate those (called Levellers) who (for ought you know) acted as
they did, out of the sincerity, simplicity, and fidelity of their hearts;
fearing least they should come under the notion of Covenant-breakers, if they
did not so act.

Which if so, then were they most barbarously, unnaturally, bellishly murdered;
and they died Martyrs for God and their Country.

And their blood cries vengeance, vengeance, in mine ears, says the Lord.

4 Well! let it be how it will; these Once more know, that Sword-leveling is
not my principle; I only pronounce the righteous judgments of the Lord upon
Earth, as I durst.
Levellers (so called) you mostly hated, though in outward declarations you
owned their Tenants as your own Principle.

So you mostly hate me (says the Lord) though in outward declarations you
profess me, and seem to own me, more then a thousand whom you despise, and
account worse than your selves, who are nearer the Kingdom of Heaven then your
selve.

You have killed Levellers (so called) you also (with wicked hands) have slain
me the Lord of life, who am now risen, and risen indeed, (and you shall know,
and feel it with a witness) to Level you in good earnest. And to lay low all
high hills, and every mountain that is high, and lifted up, etc.

5 Well! once more, read Jam. 5, 1. to 7 -- Ye have killed the just -- Ye have
killed, ye have killed, ye have killed the just.

The blood cries in mine ears, Vengeance, vengeance, vengeance, vengeance is
mine, I will recompense.

Well! what will you do with Bray, and the poor prisoners elsewhere? You know
not what you do.

You little know what will become of you.

One of you had best remember your dream about your Fathers Moule --

6 Neither do I forget the one hundred spent in supersluous dishes (at your
late great London Feast, for I know what --) when hundreds of poor wretches
dyed with hunger*

I have heard a sound in mine ears, that no less then a hundred died in one
week, pined, and starved with hunger.

Howl you great ones, for all that feast days dole, etc. hear your doom.

CHAP. IV. How the Judge of Heaven and Earth, who judges righteous judgment,
passes sentence against all those Great Ones, who (like Oaks and tall Cedars)
will not bow. And how he intends to blow them up by the roots.
1 THus says the Lord: All you tall Cedars, and sturdy Oaks, who bow not
down, who bow not down -- This sentence is gone out of my mouth against you,
MEAN, MEAN, TEKEL.

Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.

God has numbered thy Kingdom, and finished it.

And thou, and all that join with thee, or are (in the least degree) accessory
to thy former, or like intended pranks, shall most terribly and most strangely
be plagued.

2 There is a little spark lies under (that huge heap of ashes) all thine
honor, pomp, pride, wealth, and riches, which shall utterly consume all that
is uppermost, as it is written.

The Lord, the Lord of Hosts, shall send among his fat ones, leanenesse; and
under his glory he shall kindle a burning, like the burning of a fire, and the
light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his holy one for a flame, and it shall
burn and devour his thorns, and his briers in one day.

And shall consume the glory of his Forest, and of his fruitful field, both
soul and body ( i. e. this shall be done inwardly and outwardly, and shall be
fulfilled both in the history and mystery) and the rest of the trees of his
Forest shall be few, that a child may write them.

And the Lord, the Lord of Hoasts, shall lop the bough with terror, and the
high ones of stature shall be hewn down, and the haughty shall be humbled, And
he shall cut down the thickets of the Forest with iron, and Lebanon shall fall
by a mighty one, Isa. 10.

3 Behold, behold, I have told you.

Take it to heart, else you will repent every vein of your heart.

For your own sakes take heed.

Its my last warning.

For the cries of the poor, for the oppression of the needy. For the horrid
insolency of proud man, who will dare to sit in my throne, and judge
unrighteous judgment.

Who will dare to touch mine Anointed, and do my Prophets harm.

For these things sake (now) am I arrisen, says the Lord,

In Auxilium Patris

CHAP. V.
1 O London, London, my bowels are rolled together (in me) for thee, and my
compassions within me, are kindled toward thee.

And now I only tell thee, that it was not in vain that this form has been
brought so far to thee, to proclaim the day of the Lord throughout thy
streets, day and night, for twelve or thirteen days together.

And that I have been made such a sign, and a wonder before many of thine
Inhabitants faces.

2 Many of them (among other strange exploits) beholding me, fall down flat at
the feet of creeples, beggars, lazars, kissing their feet, and resigning up my
money to them; being several times over-emptied of money, that I have not had
one penny left, and yet have recruited again --

3 And now my hearts! you have been forwardly in all the appearances of God,

There is a strange one (now on foot) judge it not, least you be judged with a
vengeance.

4 Turn not away your eyes from it, least you (to your torment) hear this
voice -- I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in.

Well! bow down before Eternal Majesty, who is universal love, bow down to
equality, or free community, that no more of your blood be split; that pride,
arrogance, covetuousnesse, malice, hypocrisy, self seeking, etc. may live no
longer. Else I tremble at what is coming upon you.

Remember you have been warned with a witness.

Dear hearts Farewell.
CHAP. VI. A terrible word, and fatal blow from the Lord, upon the gathered
Churches (so called) especially upon those that are styled Anabaptists.
1. HE that has an ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says against
the Churches.

Thus says the Lord: Woe be to thee The house of vanity.
Bethaven, who call) thy self by the name The house of God.
Bethel, it shall be more tolerable (now in the day of judgment, for Tire and
Sydon, for those whom thou accountest, and call Heathens, then for thee.

2 And thou proud Lu^ifer, who exaltest thy self above all the Stars of God in
heaven, shall be brought down into hell; it shall be more tolerable for Sodom
and Gomorrah, for drunkards and whoremongers, then for thee. Publicans and
Harlots shall, Publicans and Harlots do sooner enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, then you.

I Will give thee this fatal blow, and leave thee.

3 Thou have affronted, and defied the Almighty, more then the vilest of men
(upon the face of the earth) and that so much the more, by how much the more
thou take upon thee the name of Saint, and assumest it to thy self only,
damning all those that are not of thy S^ct.

4 Wherefore be it known to all Tongues, Kinreds, Nations, and languages upon
earth, That my most Excellent Majesty, the King of glory, the Eternal God, who
dwells in the form of the Writer of this Roll (among many other strange and
great exploits) has in the open streets, with his hand fiercely stretched out,
his hat cockt up, his eyes set as if they would sparkle out; and with a mighty
loud voice charged 100. of Coaches, 100. of men and women of the greater rank,
and many notorious, deboist, swearing, roystering roaring Cavalliers (so
called) and other wild sparks of the Gentry: And have proclaimed the notable
day of the Lord to them, and that through the streets of the great City, and
in Southwark; Many times great multitudes following him up and down, and this
for the space of 12. or 13. days: And yet (all this while) not one of them
lifting up one finger, not touching one hair of his head, or laying one hand
on his raiment.

But many, yea many notorious vile ones, in the esteem of men (yea of great
quality among men) trembling and bowing to the God of heaven, etc.

But when I came to proclaim (also) the great day of the Lord (among you) O ye
carnal Gospellers.

The Devil (in you) roared out, who was tormented to some purpose, though not
before his time.

He there showed both his phangs and paws, and would have torn me to pieces,
and have eaten me up. Thy pride, envy, malice, arrogance, etc. was powered out
like a river of Brimstone, crying out, a Blasphemer, a Blasphemer, away with
him: At length threatening me, and being at last raving mad, some took hold of
my Cloak on one side, some on another, endeavoring to throw me from the place
where I stood (to proclaim his Majesty's message) making a great uproar in a
great congregation of people: Till at length I wrapped up my self in silence (for
a season) for the welfavour'd harlots confusion, etc.

And to thine eternal shame and damnation (O mother of witchcrafts, who
dwell in gathered Churches) let this be told abroad: And let her FLESH be
burnt with FIRE.

Amen, Halelujah.
FINIS.

