The Copy of A LETTER FROM The Commissioners about the Propositions for PEACE:
DECLARED To the King, and his Majesty's Answer thereunto, Sent from Newcastle
to the Parliament, With other Papers from NEWCASTLE. AND His Majesty's Speech
spoken before the Commissioners of both Kingdoms. And the Earl of PEMBROKES
Answer.

These are Examined, and Printed and published according to ORDER,

August. 6, 1646.


London, Printed by Jane Coe, 1646.

A Copy of a Letter from the Commissioners (that delivered the Propositions of
both Kingdoms to the King for Peace) to the House of Commons, signed by Sir
Walter Earl, Sir John Hipsley, Mr. Robert Goodwin, and Mr. Luke Robinson.
WE are sorry we cannot acquaint you with so good success of our employment,
as we have faithfully endeavored in pursuance of our Instructions. This
morning we took our leave of the King; and (though our importunities have been
frequent and earnest) we cannot obtain his Majesty's consent nor answer, any
ways satisfactory.

His Majesty has given us a Paper (other then which we could not procure;
notwithstanding our much earnestness) containing offers to come to London,
which we thought not fit to send, because we know not whether the House will
be pleased to take notice of it, being no direct Answer to the Propositions.

We are hastening away with all speed to give you an Account of our whole
proceedings.

This we thought fit humbly to present, and take leave, being

Newcastle the 2 of August 1646. Your faithful Servants, Walter Earl. John
HIppisley. Robert Goodwyn. Luke Robinson.


SIR,
THe Propositions being delivered by the Commissionees of both Kingdoms his
Majesty answered to this effect*

Gentlemen, I hope you do not expect a speedy answer, because the business is
of high concernment: Whereupon the Earl of Pembroke answered they had but ten
days ^^^e to stay after their com^ng to Town: Unto which the King answered, He
would dispatch them in convenient ^ime and so they parted.

SIR,
THe Commissioners after long attentants, and frequent solicitations, have this
Sunday morning received from His Majesty a Paper (other then which they cannot
receive) with their Lordships. Sir, think no way satisfactory, or direct answer
to what the Parliament sent to him for his assent unto, it conceives a desire
of his Majesty to come to, or near London, to receive satisfaction in diverse
matters, wherein yet he is unsatisfied, and that he will then grant what shall
be desired or much to thi^ purpose. This Paper the Commissi^ners do not think
fit to send up to the Houses before their coming to London, intending (God
willing) to set forward from thence to morrow by fo^r in the morning
accompanied with the Marquess of Arguile, and the Earl of Dumferling.

SIR, Newcastle, August the 2. 1646. Your most humble Servant, to be commanded,
E. R. Papers

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
The humble Petition of the Provost, Bailiffs, and Common Council of Edinburg,
the Representative Body thereof convened in Council.

Whereas Your Majesty has been graciously pleased to cause publish a
Proclamation here, declaring Your Pious and Royal Resolutions for settling
Religion and Peace in these afflicted Kingdoms, the Petitioners bless God who
has put these thoughts into Your Majesty's Royal heart, and do still pray
the Almighty God to confirm them, and in his wisdom and power to assist Your
Majesty in the diligent and timous prosecution of the same. As for this City,
the Petitioners acknowledge it their duty to testify to Your Majesty, and all
the world, that according to their many Protestations and solemn Covenants,
they do still as they did, ever entertain the consciences of all Loyal and
Native duty to Your Majesty, from which they shall never depart.

And therefore from the like sense of duty, the Petitioners do humbly
supplicate Your Majesty in this jointure of time, at which they conceive both
Parliaments are to give in to Your Majesty, Propositions for a happy Peace,
that it would please your Royal Wisdom to take this opportunity to make use
of there wholesome counsel, for settling true Religion and Peace in all your
Kingdoms, and for strengthening the union of the two Nations with your Majesty
and betwixt themselves, whereby we are confident glory shall redound to God,
honor and happiness to your Majesty and Royal Posterity, and comfort to all
your Majesty's good Subjects,

Which we shall be instant in prayer to the Almighty God for, and (as in all
bound duty become,

Your Majesty's most humble most faithful and obedient Subjects.
Subscribed by the Provest and Bailiffs of Edenburg.

FINIS.

