THE Deputy Divinity OR, Inferior Deity AND Subordinate God in the World,
Conscience, I say, 1 Cor. 10.29. A Discourse of Conscience, Being the substance
of Two Sermons, delivered: One of them at the Temple-church in London: The
other in the Country. By HENRY CARPENTER, Minister of the Gospel at
Steeple-Ashton in Wilts.

London, Printed for N. Webb, and W. Grantham at the Bear over against the
little North-door in Paul's Churchyard, 1657.

To the Truly RELIGIOUS AND Right Noble Lady, THE LADY Dorothy Pakington: The
Promises of both lives.
Madam,
MY Grateful Purposes long since engaged to your Ladyships service, were never
yet so Advantaged by opportunity, as to make the World the witness of their
sincerity.

Difficult and perplexed times, occasion too much neglect of duty, and make
place for pardon. This little Book, and small Comment upon one of the greatest
Books in the world, (whereof I humbly present you with the Dedication) has
nothing to commend it up so high as your hands, but the weight of the Subject,
and the simple integrity of the Author, obliged not more to the memory of your
dear Father (my very good Lord and Patron, of undefiled hands) then to your own
merits and excellencies, whereof I had once the honor to be an unworthy
Servant, and have still the duty to be an observer and admirer.

As for my self I must know who I am, but for this thing here in hand, I may
wish it laid to heart, for a Jewel is a Jewel though wrapped up in plain leather,
or in brown paper.

Now that the God whom you serve in your spirit and Family, would in blessing
bless you in all your Relations; and that the same God who has so begun to
glorify you in those graces wherewith he has enriched your soul, (making you
an eminent and unfeigned example of Goodness, even in this Age) will also
Perfect and Crown these graces with Glory: Is the Prayer of,

Madam, Your Ladyships Humble, Faithful Servant, For Jesus and Conscience Sake.
H. CARPENTER.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THat which one spoke of his learned Tractates, Justus Lipsius Politics B.
King on Jonas. Nihil egisine Theseis. Et nihil nostrum and omnia.
and another (from him) of his rich Lectures, may the less mis-become me of
this plain poor piece of mine, That I have done little herein without good
guides. And though in one sense all may be mine own; yet in another, not much
more then nothing.] For where I liked the waters of other men's wells I drank
deep, and elsewhere I did but sip: And (as one observes of Ruth) I have sometime
but stood to glean, Rab. Solom.
and sometime sitten down.

Here it is (such as it is) presented to thy good acceptance; if here and there
it give thee any new lesson, bless God for thy Instructor; And where it does
but rub up the old, despise not thy Remembrancer: who hurts none by these but
himself, in the danger of the attempt, changing Tongue into Pen, and ears into
eyes; (The severer of the two.) But that which discourageth many provokes me,
of purpose to show how hardy I dare seem, rather then be ungrateful to those
my many friends, who have required this at my hands, for thy good, which if
thou find, remember God in thy praise, and me in thy prayers.

H. C.

THE Deputy-Divinity OR, Inferior Deity AND Subordinate God in the world.
1 Cor. 10.29. Conscience, I say.


WHAT one said well of Laws [That many good Laws were made, but there wanted
one Law to make us put all those Laws in execution] The like may we say of
Books and Sermons, [Many good Books are written, and many good Sermons
preached, but there wants one Book, one Sermon to make us put all the other
in practice, and that were good indeed, worthy of the reading and hearing.

And I know none more likely, through God, to do this thing, than upon this
subject of Conscience, (I may commend the Text, though not the Sermon) which
being good, (as one said of Justice) is a Synopsis and Epitomy of all virtues,
a medicine to cure all soul-diseases, and to deject all book-surfeitings.

Conscience it self is a Book, Rev. 20.12.
one of those Books to be opened at the last day, to which all men shall be put,
and by which they shall be tried and judged, (viz.)

The Book of the Creatures, The Book of the Scriptures, The Book of the
Conscience.
A Book of Books, for the Informing and Reforming whereof all other books
should be Printed, and Sermons Preached; for indeed what should all
Divinity-books, and Law Books be but glosses and Comments upon this Text?
Maledicta Glossa quae corrumpit Textum.
And cursed be that Gloss which does corrupt the Text, viz. Go against
Conscience. The wise man makes as if all other books and studies without this,
Eccle. 12.12, 13.
and in comparison of this were vain and endless [of making many books there
is no end] True (says the Gloss upon it) [Of books that are written to no end.]

There are great outcries made against places, times, and the World, for being
naught and bad: But alas! All places naturally are equal, being but several
parcels of the same common Earth and Air; and all times naturally are equal,
being distinguished by the same constant and uniforme motion of the Heavens;
what aile places, or times, or the world? They were all good, if men were so;
and men were all good, if their Consciences were so; nothing makes bad times,
but bad men; and nothing makes bad men but bad Consciences; Ill Consciences
are the springs and pipes from whence come all the evils that spoil places,
times, Mat. 15.18, 19.
and world.

And I know no remedy to that of Elisha's curing the naughty waters of Jerico,
for the cry there was for sound much the same [The waters are naught, 2 King.
2.19, 21, 22.
etc.] [He cast salt into the spring, and healed the waters.]

The water-spring of all our actions (good or evil) is Conscience; Prove. 4.23.
and as men's Consciences are, so are their actions; as the spring is, so is the
issue; [The issues of life and death are out of the heart and Conscience] The
spring of all, [O that God would cast salt into the spring] heal and mend
Conscience, and all will be mended; For good Consciences make good men; and
good men will make good places, times, and World: Conscience, I say.

Here I find Conscience as in common and in general, therefore shall not
trouble you with particular context here, where is intended no longer stay than
while we have to do with Conscience in general: [Conscience, I say.]

Wherein I propose unto my self and your attention (for order sake) this Method.

1. The Truth of it; That there is such a thing, Though the Text be not divided
by parts; Yet the Discourse should be limited by bounds.
which is so called.

2. The Nature of it, What this thing is which is so called.

3. The Original and condition, Whence and what manner of thing it is, so
called.

4. The place and Situation of it, Where this thing resides which is so called.

5. The subject of it, whose and with whom this thing it, which is so called.

6. The ground and reason, Why there is at all such a thing, which is so
called. Conscience, I say.

1. The Truth of it.
That there is such a thing in the general which is so called, 1. Quod sit.
seems past all question, not only by the writings of holy men of God,
inspired by the holy Ghost, Dr. Hammond.
both in the New Testament, two and thirty times under the particular express
term of Conscience, (so frequent among the Evangelists and Apostles) and in the
Old Testament (though but once by the Greek Translators under that notion,
Eccle. 10.20. Eccles. 7.22. Dan. 7.
yet) often under the general terms of Heart, Romans 2.15. Romans 8.16. 1 Cor.
2.11. 1 John 3.21.
Soul, Spirit, and Thought] and so the Hebrew ever; you can hardly find the
term Conscience with them, but commonly one of these: As St. John, who so much
abounded with Hebrewismes, [If our Heart condemn us, etc.] meaning our
Conscience. Thus not only upon sacred Record, but also by human writers, Their
Paedagogus, their Genius, their Guardant Angel, and the like, meaning
Conscience.

Yea, by very Heathen themselves, in whom this light of Law and Nature is
conserved; there being no People so barbarous, but that part of Conscience
which is called Synteresis, keeps in them some sparks of the knowledge of
good and evil, which the most profane man that ever was cannot (though he
would) get utterly extinct and suffocate.

The Dictates of Conscience have apparent impressions in the most Miscreants on
Earth, Dictamen Conscientiae.
in whom Nature it self shrinks and sighs when it has done ill; joys and
elevates it self when it has done well. And what is all this but the act of
Consc. their Master-Phylosophers make the soul a building, consisting of many
rooms, some higher, some lower, whereof the highest is the Understanding; and
this again is either Speculative, containing some general Notions and
Principles of Truth: Or Practical, containing the like Principles and Axioms
of good things, which at first were and still are (in part) left in the soul of
man; and this even in their judgment is called Conscience.

And now if the Testimony of an Adversary be strong for an Adversary, Why may
not this Theological Truth get some advantage by consent from Heathens, in whom
so much light of Nature and Law is reserved? Who shall question a Deity, if the
very Heathens acknowledge it? and who can deny a Conscience, if the very Pagans
confess it?

Nay by unreasonable creatures themselves; An irrational animal Conscience. Dr.
Hammond.
for there is some shadow of this in a beast, as there is of reason, (some
shadow I say) whose secret instinct of nature, (which answers to the Heathens
Dictamen, Jer. 8.7.
whereby [the Stork, Turtle, Crane, and Swallow, etc] are inclined to do that
which upbraids man) is to them in place of that which is called Conscience to
man; And thus for the Truth of it, That there is such a thing which is so
called.

2. 2. Quid sit.
The nature of it.
What in the general this thing is which is so called Conscience; for we may
with the Israelites ask [what is it?] Exodus 16.15.
being a kind of Manna too: But let no man ask here of Conscience, as Pilate
did there of Truth, John 18.38.
[what is it? and go out] but stay and attend a while.

For it is a word of great Latitude, and of Infinite Dispute; and it is a thing
much talked of, little known, and less practiced then understood; Mllaem ut me
reprehendant Grammtici, quam ut non intelligant populi.
Therefore herein the best learning is to be most plain; and so I may be
profitable, I care the less to seem artificial, in regard of that we have in
hand: Conscience, I say.

And note we now both Name and Thing.

For things as well as men should be known by their name.

The name of it; which according to the Etymology of the word, 1. Quid nominis.
both in Greek and Latin is A joint knowing or seeing together: Syneidesis
Conscientia.
Diversely to be taken- subjectively (if I may so speak) another knowledge
joined with ours; the joint knowledge of two persons together, two Secretaries,
Records and witnesses; one on Earth, the other in Heaven; Job's (witness in
Heaven, Job 16.19.
and Record on high) so that man can know nothing himself alone; there must be
another besides man's self, and this other is God: And therefore God and man
are so joined together in Conscience, 1 Cor. 2.11. 1 John 3.20. Romans 9.1.
which God has deputed to give witness and sentence with him and before him;
man's joint knowledge with God's: Conscience, I say. -- Objectively; of one
thing and another; the joint knowledge of two things together; A Rule and an
Act at once; Science is of one simple object; Conscience is of two laid
together, and then with one Act of the intellect apprehended jointly; whence
(likely) it came by the name of Conscience, I say.

-- Actively also, Scientia cum alia Bernard.
two joint knowledges together, both one and another, etc.

And thus for the name, Conscience, I say.

The thing and nature of it (though better felt than described, 2. Quid Rei.
yet) may be thus conceived: [Conscience is a Divine thing, a standing power in
the soul of Man; there set and appointed by God to take knowledge and give
notice of its spiritual state and condition, in what terms it stands with
God] Or thus, Conscience is the judgment of man upon himself as he is subject
to the judgment of God.

[Judge I pray betwixt me and my vineyard] [Judge our selves] that is, In our
Conscience. Isa. 5.3.
1 Cor. 11.31.
Divines do usually express it by a practical syllogism (as they call it) Pro
and Con: Whereof -- The Major and proposition is made by Synteresis; that is,
some knowledge of a Rule (what we should do) in the word. -- The Minor and
assumption, is made by Syneidesis; that is, the knowledge of some Act in life,
what we have done. -- The Conclusion by the act and office of Conscience, with
us or against us, excusing or accusing, absolving or condemning, comforting or
tormenting. As for instance. -- [To be carnally minded is death.] Romans 8.6.
-- But I am carnally minded.-Therefore I am in a state of death. And so on the
contrary; -- As many as are led by the Spirit of God, Romans 8.4.
they are the Sons of God: this is from knowledge of the word of God. -- But I
am led by the Spirit of God; this is from knowledge of a man's heart and life.
-- Therefore I am the child of God.


Thus Conscience is very rational and logical; it can hold and urge an argument
well in right mood and figure; though Scholars only are artificial, yet
Conscience enlightened is a good natural Logitian.

As the Apostle told the Christians at Rome (who were scarce ever at Athens)
that they had Logic enough to argue themselves [Dead unto sin, and alive unto
God, Romans 6.11.
through Jesus Christ our Lord] The original word means thus, [Exercise so much
Logic in your selves, and like good Logitians prove your selves, etc.] And
thus for the nature of it in general, what this thing is which is so called.

3. 3. Quale sit.
The original Quality and condition of it in general.
Whence and what manner of thing it is; Conscience is of God (and things only
excellent are so termed) of God, Psalm. 36.6. Psalm. 51.17.
I say; A spiritual thing, very sacred and divine, much like God, as in other
respects, so in this, not easily comprehended: A subordinate God.

Nay some good-natured Atheists have so Revered and Defined it, as the only
Deity in the world; and in proportion fancied nothing but God-like of it:
Nothing indeed more God like and Divine, as seeming to partake of the
Immensity, Infiniteness, and Omnipresence of God.

To illustrate the Quality and Condition of it, the Holy learned of old time as
well as new, have many sayings and similitudes: For transcendent things need
many words for their conveyance unto common apprehensions.

One calls Conscience [A just and impartial Vmpire betwixt God and man]
speaking the truth and right. Vmpire.


Another terms it [An Authentic and Divine Echo both of the Mercy and the
Judgement-seat] saying as God says [If it condemn, Echo.
1 John 3.20, 21.
much more will God who is greater; [And if not, neither does God.]

One of the Greek Fathers styls it [The Souls Lanthorn] by it to see her self
and her sins: Lanthorn.
But as spirits (say some) first make the lights to burn blew, and at the last
to go quite out; So the Devil with his blast would blow [this Candle of the
Lord in the belly] (as Solomon calls it) out, Prove. 20.27.
that the soul should see nothing by it.

Another calls it [The Stomach of the Soul] That whereas sin, Stomach.
like the book in the Revelation, which St. John was bid to eat [sweet in the
mouth, Rev. 10.10.
but bitter in the belly] goes glibly down, as smooth as Oil; Conscience
disdaineth and loatheth it, Fa^tum Infectum.
and fain would cast it up again, (but that a thing done, cannot be undone) yet
it yeoxeth and reaches, and exhaleth many loathsome savors; it upbraids the
sinner.

One calls it [A secondary Law or Bible, Book. Bernard Chrysostom. hodex animae.
a living and walking Book] annexed to the soul of man, consisting of two parts
or volumes; The Law-book of Statutes; And the Chronicle-booke of works; one for
Rule, the other for Acts.

Another calls it [A School-Master] Monitor and Corrector of the soul, Origin
Paedagogus animae.
mind, thoughts and ways; and indeed they fare much alike at the unworthy hands
of the misdeeming World; for though a good School Master be one of the best
members in Church and Commonwealth, Quem Jupiter odit, hunc Paedagogum facit.
yet hated and despised even to a Proverb, not caring to be troubled with them;
So with Conscience.

It is styled by one [The House of the Soul] because there, if anywhere, House.
men may be properly said to be at home; Pro. 23.7.
and at home men are (though not abroad) what they are; [As he thinks in his
heart and Conscience, so is he:] As when we receive Summons from Superiors, the
Messengers follow us not to our ideling places abroad, but come to our houses
(supposing every man to be at home) and there fasten their Scripts upon the
door: So God's Ministers and Messengers look for us with their Summons at the
houses of our Consciences; And oh how many Scripts have they fixed upon our
doors! And is it not pity that this our sumptuous house should lie waste,
ruined and decayed?

And by another [ God's Secretary and Apparater, His Commissary and Minister,
Preacher.
God's Preacher in our Bosoms: And it is a most certain Rule, That that man
that will not regard the Preacher in the Bosom, will hardly regard the
Preacher in the Pulpit: And the reason of the ones prositing so little, is
because the other is neglected so much.

And [The Souls Looking-glasse] clearer then Cristal, Glass.
Speculo Similis.
wherein by reflection we may see all of our selves; and therefore the
Conscience is called Anima reflexa, [The Soul reflecting and recoyling upon it
self] As St. 1 Cor. 4.4.
Paul did, [to know by it self] or, A reflexive Knowledge: Scientia Reflexiva.
First the mind thinks or knows a thing which is either good or bad -- Then
it reflecteth by thinking and knowing again, knowing that we know it to be
good or bad: As men say vulgarly [I know what I know.] 1 Kings 2.44.
And as the King to Shimei [Thou know all that thine heart knows, etc.]
And this is the Act of Conscience, this joining of the second knowledge to the
first, gives it the name of Conscience.

Resemblance of this we have in the eye, that can see all visible objects, all
things that are to be seen, and yet sees not it self but by reflection, and the
help of a Looking-glass: So the mind of man that can look upon and into all
creatures, yet cannot behold it self but by Conscience, which is [The whole
Soul with its eyes inward.] Forerunner of the last Judgment.


Another calls it [The Forerunner of the last Judgement] the private before
the public Judgment day, Praejudicium extremi Judicii.
as your Sessions before Assizes: even the truest Almanac in our own breasts
and bosoms, Tertullian.
foreshewing the weather of the future world, and what shall become of us at
the last day.

And thus for the quality of Conscience in general, whence and what manner of
thing it is.

4. 4. Vbi sit.
The proper Place and Seat of it.
And here as between Christ and two of John's Disciples [Master, John 1.38.
where dwell thou? Come and see] the habitation is not the Body, but the
Soul; not in the Face; 1 Cor. 2.11.
no other man can know it; not in the Speech; no hypocrisy or dissimulation of
man can thrall it, to justisie his words and deeds, although a thousand times
alleged.

It is the Deputy of God in the soul of man; Ames.
and yet here all do not accord about it: -- Some give it as belonging only to
the will, Barlow.
for the agent and working power of it, as only practick. -- Some to the Mind
for the understanding power of it, as only Theorick. Actus rationis applicans
scientiam ad opus. Aquin.
-- Some to Reason, for the discoursing power of it, driving to issue by
discourse.


Some call it an Habit; others an Act; others a Faculty; with their several
arguments Pro and Con: [This is that I told you before) Men hardly know what to
make of it, it is so divine.

But I decline the Casuists and Schoolmen (who speak most herein to men's
heads) of purpose to speak unto your Consciences; [Consciences, I say.]

Sure I am that the Apostle distinguishes it both from the Mind and from the
Will, Tit. 1.15. 1 Timothy 1.5.
as a different and distinct thing, and that for good Reasons.

1. Because the mind deals most in generals and universals; but Conscience
medleth all in a man's own particular proprieties, of thoughts, words and deeds.

2. Because Conscience is so far from being one of both, or both in one, that
it sits in the soul as a controler over them both, in their Acts of thoughts
and desires.

3. Because there is secret Jealousy, and open Hostility between them; the
other powers of the soul taking Conscience to be but a Spy, do what they can
to sculk, evade and hide from it; to delude and deceive it; to oppose or depose
it: Conscience on the other side, striveth to keep its ground, and to hold its
own, Self-reasonings, conferences, mutual Apologies and exceptions. Romans 2.
till it be blinded or bribed, proceeding in its office (in despite of all
opposition) cites all the powers of nature, sits upon them, examineth,
witnesses, and judges, even to execution.

So that the proper seat of Conscience is the whole Soul, there placed next
under God over all men. Their ground seems too weak, and their room too
narrow, that would confine Conscience to any part (one or other) of the soul.

It is in the soul of man, Anima est indivisa tota in tota.
not as a part of a part (for it is indivisible) but as whole in the whole, and
in every part. Not in the understanding alone, or will alone, or reason alone,
nor in memory or affections alone, but it has place, office and acts, in all
and every part of the soul, as the soul has in every part of the body;
exercising seeing in the eye, hearing in the ears, etc.

-- In the understanding it sits as Judge. -- In the Reason as Accuser. --
In the Memory, as Witness and Register. -- In the Will and Affections as Jailer
and Executioner, Accusing or Excusing, Absolving or Condemning; Comforting or
tormenting. And yet one of our Contrymen has appropriated unto each part of
the soul a distinct Court or Office; -- To the Sensitive part, The Court of
Common Pleas. -- To the Intellectual part, The Court of King's Bench. -- To the
spiritual part, The Court of Chancelry: In this Court all causes are handled,
but still with special reference to God; Here sits the Conscience as
Lord-Chanceller, and Synterests as Master of the Roles: To this Court all the
powers of man owe and pay homage, what ever it be, whether Act or Faculty;
whether of the practical understanding or judgment; it is placed in the soul
of most absolute power, next under God over all in man. And thus for the proper
place and seat of it.
5. The Subject of it. 5. Quibus sit.

Whose and with whom it is, which generally considered, is a general thing,
common to Angels, Devils, and Men.

-- To Angels, as appears by the Angel's speech to John, when he would have
worshipped him [See thou do it not] The Angel had something within him that
told him he was John's Fellow Servants; Rev. 19.10.
and therefore not to assume divine Worship to himself, and that was His
Conscience.

-- To Devils, by the Devils speech to our Savior dispossessing them, [Art
thou come to torment us before the time? Mat. 8.29.
] even they had something within them that told them, They had a time of
greater torment to come, and that was their Consciences.

-- To Men more properly, to all Men generally: There is in every man a
Conscience, such as it is, good or bad.

-- A Conscience in the very Heathens [bearing them witness, Romans 2.15.
accusing or excusing.]

-- A Conscience in Hypocrites, John 8.9.
Scribes and Pharisees [being convicted in their Consciences.]

-- A Conscience in good Men, 2 Cor. 1.12.
as Paul had [The testimony of his own Conscience.]

-- A Conscience in bad Men, Tit. 1.15.
[Their Minds and Conscience being defiled] Thus of the subject of it in
general, a common thing.

6. 6. Quare sit.
The Grounds and Reasons of it.
God has appointed this standing power in the soul of man, for two special
Reasons above many.

1. For the honor of his Justice; To show how righteous a Judge the Lord is;
Psalm. 51.4.
[That he might be justified when he speaks, and cleared when he judges.] He
commanded Earthly Judges not to judge without witness; and himself will not,
(though he might:) He does nothing without witness, Acts 25.16. Mat. 22.12.
but [brings the Accusers face to face] as Festus told Agrippa, which much
convinces, silenceth, and confounds, [To be judged out of its own mouth]
like the wicked servant; Job 15.6. Luke 19.22.
and as Eliphaz told Job: Therefore God for the honor of his righteousness in
all his judicial proceedings [hath not left himself without witnesse] in any
soul, Act. 14.17.
but placed a Conscience in every breast to bring in evidence, Pro or Con,
before God, so just clear and righteous a Judge is the Lord --

For the honor of his Mercy; to show how good and how gracious a Father our
God is; in matching us with so near a Friend, so true a Counselor; in not
leaving man's wonderful forgetfulness of God and himself, and his own soul,
without a secret Monitor and Remembrancer, a word and a voice behind him upon
all occasions. In all his omissions and commissions, he cannot omit a duty,
Isa. 30.21.
or commit a sin, but his Ear shall hear a word behind him, when his Eye does
not see his Teacher; Job 4.16.
He shall hear a voice in silence, his Conscience shall tell him of it;
remembering our mindlesness, and spurring up our dullness against sinful
omissions; and [Hedging up our way with thorns] putting some thorny threat or
other in every path of sin, Hos. 2.6.
against sinful commissions; making us say to Conscience, as David did to
Abigail, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33.
[Blessed be thou of the Lord, that thou have met me this day, and blessed be
thy advice, etc. And blessed be the Lord God who sent thee.]

For (believe it) it is not the severest and supreamest power of Magistrates,
and their highest Courts of Justice and Judgementseats; it is not Justices,
Judges, Kings, Parliaments; it is not all the saddest and bloodiest instruments
of execution, of death and vengeance, Swords, Guns, Blocks, Halters, nor any
nor all of these that can keep men in order, and the world in awe, were it not
for this mighty thing of God, Romans 13.5. [subject for Conscience sake.]
called Conscience, without which the whole world would tumble into disorder
and confusion, become a Chaos again, and lose the form of a world. [Conscience,
I say.]

And thus for the doctrinal part in the six points of Conscience in general.

Now because all Scripture given by Inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16.
is profitable not only for doctrine, but also for reproof, correction, and
instruction, etc. So let this be used.

1. For reproof. Of three Errors in opinion.
1. 1. Error.
That Conscience in general is not common to all, as if some men had no
Consciences; whereas it is as possible for fire to be without heat, as for any
man to be without a Conscience: The vulgar saying is, [Such a man has no
Conscience, etc.] But the meaning is, He has no good Conscience; for as good
none, as none good. But every man has a Conscience, one or other, such as it
is, good or bad: For it is a standing Power, created by God; and unmoveably set
in the soul of man, abiding for ever with him whether he be on Earth, in
Heaven, or Hell.

2. 2. Error.
That Conscience is nothing but a sad mood, or melancholy sit, or heavy damp
and dumps on the spirit of a man, etc. Erroneously mistaking the effect of the
cause: Whereas Conscience is a standard chained to man, ever remaining with
him, when all his moods and fits of heats and colds, of fears and joys, and
jollities, are over and gone. Let Hypocrites and Epicures slabber it with their
jollity, and daub it with their formality, yet their Consciences will be sure
one time or other, if not in the midst of their drunken carouses, and
riotousexcesses (like those singers of a man's hand on Belshazzar's wall) get in
the end and bottom) Dan 5.5.
to sadden, sour, and spoil all, Prove. 14.13.
yea even in their best services, (as in Cain's Sacrifice, when his countenance
was dijected) there will be something (if not in the midst, Genesis 4.5.
yet) in the end, to tell them That both their Acts and Persons are rejected.

That Conscience is hanged or drowned, 3. Error.
dead and gone a great while a go, etc. But alas, these are idle, addle
opinions, Atheistical Proverbs, and sottish imaginations; had it been no more
then this, That [Conscience has lain long bedrid and speechless, etc.] it had
been enough, yet it might be raised and recovered; But that he is dead, yea so
shamefully and accursedly dead, It Is petty Atheism to say and think so. No, no:

Ahitophel can tell you That though a man hang himself, 2 Samuel 17.23.
yet he cannot hang his Conscience.

Saul can tell you, 1 Samuel 31.4.
That though a man kill himself, yet he cannot kill his Conscience, which is as
immortal as his soul --

Judas could tell you, Mat. 27.4.
That no force or violence can suppress or curb it; for it made him carry back
the price, and decry his sin, saying, [I have sinned.]

Pharaoh could tell you, That no earthly might or majesty can bash or dash it,
but that one time or other it will stare and fly in the sinners face; for it
did in his, (as great a King as he was) and made him say [I have now sinned;
The Lord is righteous, Exodus 9.27.
but I and my people are wicked.]

Saul again could tell you, That no Mirth or Music can Charm or Conjure the
evil spirit of it; 1 Samuel 16.14, 16.
for his bad Conscience played the Devil with his wretched soul.

And Joseph's Brethren could tell you, That time and years cannot expunge the
writings, nor obliterate or eat out the ingravings of it; for twenty years
after (when there was no other Pursuer or Remembrancer) it accused them, Genesis
42.21, 22.
and made them look wistly upon one another, and accuse themselves of their
cruel unnatural usage of him, Nullum tempus occurrit Regi.
[And they said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our Brother,
etc. Therefore is this distress come upon us, and his blood required of us.]
And now having mentioned twenty years, it is the less notable to speak of
Pharaoh's Butler's Conscience remembering him about one year after, Genesis 40.23.
Genesis 41.9.
[I do now remember my faults this day.] And verily so it is, That as many in
youthful vanity and vainglory, do such violent wrongs in bulges and bruises to
their bodies, as forty or fifty years after they sadly remember in the Aches
and Ailings of pained old Age: So do many bear out insensibly for a time the
bulges and bruises they have given their souls, it may be thirty, forty, fifty
years, till the hand of the Lord be upon them, either in some heavy cross and
sharp affliction, or a Deathbed, and then commonly Conscience remembers them;
For Conscience will keep a grudge a long time, and is not so soon pacified as
offended; though it does not always show remorse, yet it always keeps
remembrance; though in many men it sleep in regard of motion, yet it never
sleeps in regard of notice and observation: And though not always speaking, yet
it is always writing, taking Notes, preparing Bills and Items against that day
to come.

Nay death it self, that dissolves all worldly knots, and parts the nearest on
Earth [Man and Wife] cannot part Conscience and Sinner; but it remains in him
as a worm that never dies; Mar. 9.44.
and as a fire that never goes out; Isa. 66.24.
not on Earth, no nor in Hell.

And thus for reproof of three errors and false opinions.

2. For Correction. Of three practical Errors and Misbehaviours of the World in
point of Conscience.
1. 1. Miscarriage.
In wrapping up Goliah's sword in a fair cloth behind the Ephod; In hiding the
monstrous miscarriages, prodigious impieties, and divelish practices of the
World, under that Religious name, and specious mask of Conscience.

One man is of an erroneous opinion, and Hetrodox judgment, holds some false
doctrine, by means either of the authority of the Teacher, or of the dignity of
some eminent follower (as having men's persons in admiration, Jam. 2.1. Jude 16.
and having the faith of Christ in respect of persons) or of prejudice and
prepossession, sticking to his first persuasion, pride and obstinacy, denying
place for retractation, or truer information, and this he calls his Conscience.

-- Another is of an irrefractory inclination, of an heady headstrong humor
and propension, his senses not exercised to discern between his natural and
spiritual disposition, Heb. 5.24.
the motion of his sensitive appetite, and his diviner principle, his lower and
his upper soul; and the former commonly is more obstreperous, importunate and
clamorous for satisfaction then the latter; whereby a man thinks himself bound
to do whatsoever he has a strong mind, will and humor to do; and this he
calls his Conscience.

-- Another is of a strong strange imagination and fantasy, which is a kind
of irrational animal conscience; having the same relation to sensitive
representations [those Laws in the members] which Conscience has to
intellectual (those Laws of the mind.) Romans 7.23. Aristotle.
And as fantasy supplieth the place of reason in unreasonable creatures; so
it does of Conscience in unconscionable, when a man is directed by his own
conceit; and this he calls his Conscience.

-- Another is abundant in passions, fears, and animosities, with all their
cross counsels and commands; yea and ignorant zeal, which (though of God) yet
may be ranked with passion, Romans 10.2.
if without knowledge; and this he calls his Conscience too.

-- Another is possessed with satanical suggestions, diabolical delusions,
enthusiasmes and infusions of that black infernal spirit, as upon trial of
spirits will appear, by the symptoms, 1 John 4.1.
fruits and products of flesh and Devil [Adulteries, Idolatries, Gal. 5.19, 20,
21.
Strifes, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders, etc.] And even these he
calls his Conscience also.

And thus, as Paul said of false gods in the world [For though there be that
are called gods (as there be gods many, 1 Cor. 8.5, 6.
and lords many) but unto us there is but one God:] So may we say of
Consciences, [There be that are called Consciences, many falsely so called.

But oh! that ever so sacred a thing, and so divine a name as Conscience, even
among Christians, should be prostituted and forced to yield favor, respect,
and shelter to the vilest things, as the errors, humors, fantasies, passions,
and satanical delusions of men; this is one of the worlds practical errors and
misbehaviours, which falls first under this correction.

And there is a second not inferior to it, 2. Miscarriage.
which the world is guilty of, in three degrees of ill behavior toward
Conscience.

1. One is by strange neglecting and slighting Conscience often in its offices
of rebukes and Counsels, and so estranging it, that it takes it unkindly,
neglects its office, and speaks faintly, or not at all, like that disregarded
Prophetess, This good Cassandra will speak no more.

Conscience one while may be heard speaking to a man, Judge. 9.7. Psalm. 34.11.
as Jotham to the men of Shechem [Hearken unto me, that God may hearken unto
you:] And as David to the little children [Come and hearken unto me, and I will
teach you, etc.] But if they will not come and hearken, then another while
conscience thus neglected, despised and estranged, will sit down as
discontented, see and hear all, and hold its peace, and for a long time speak
no more.

2. Another is by stubborn resisting and opposing Conscience, in all its
motions of persuasions, directions, and cautions, by cross contrary and
contradicting practices, still setting against Conscience, in every thing, at
every turn. And this Conscience takes very indignly; as Moses, when Pharaoh
resisted so obstinately all his motions and mediums, saying [Get thee from me,
take heed to thy self, see my face no more, Exodus 10.28, 29.
etc.] Moses then answered [Thou have spoken well, I will see thy face again no
more.] Sembleably men may so long resist and outface their Consciences by
obduracy impenitency, and custom in sin, that Conscience may sit down as
abused and opposed, look a long time on other way, as if it had vowed to see a
man's face again no more.

3. Another is by Malignant impudent baffling decrying, and beating down of
Conscience in all its offices, acts and operations of rebukes and admonitions,
by out ragious affronts and interruptions; that the voice of Conscience may be
drowned (be it never so shrill) by louder outcries, and sounds of Drums,
Trumpets, and Bells (as in those bloody sacrifices of Molech, to drown the
cries of the children) of vain pleasures, carnal company, worldly jollity, and
riotous excesses, wine and Music; whereby even an importunate loud-speaking
Conscience, may be for a time as put out of countenance unto silence; and this
Conscience takes most hainously to be thus affronted, abused and baffled, and
so seems to sit down as offended, and seeing and hearing all, and saying
nothing; 2 Cor. 2.11.
A divelish devise of Satan, and damnable practice of the world; and this is
another of the worlds practical errors and misbehaviours in those three degrees
which falls in the second place under this correction.

And a third which comes not far behind it, 3. Miscarriage.
is the worlds abominable and odious, mad and ridiculous practice of
misbehaviour against Conscience, endeavoring to suppress and banish, shut out
and shake off Conscience, as thinking to make away with it; But it is like that
Heathenrage against God's Son, Furious and vain: Psa 2.1, 3


A vain thing indeed in two respects: 1. Because it is a thing impossible to be
done totally and finally; though the acts may be intermitted, and the degrees
may be remitted for a time, as if [Conscience were put away] yet it sticks so
close, 1 Timothy 1.19.
that a man may as soon part with himself as his Conscience; 1 Cor. 11.13, 28.
for Conscience is a man's self in Scripture-sense; [Judge in your selves] that
is, In your Consciences: Men may shift clothes, places, companies, but not
Consciences; for a man's Conscience is most bold and familiar in his most
private retiredness; like Ehud to King Eglon; Judge. 3.20, 21.
it has often times a secret errand and message from God to a man, when silence
must be kept, and all that stand by must go out, and then it thrusts a dagger
into the belly (blade, haft and all) hardly plucked out again. Though
Conscience since the fall of man, be grieveously corrupted and obscured, yet it
cannot be quite ejected and destroyed: The vilest Atheists, basest Wretches,
and most hellish Miscreants in the world, 1 Timothy 4.2.
though they may seem to choke and smother, or blind, or bribe it, obdurate or
sear it, by vicious practices, and riotous outrages, as desirous to make away
with it; yet their fury is all vain: Be men as senseless and secure, as sleepy
and benumbed, as blinded and hardened in Conscience as the Devil and their own
corrupt hearts can possibly make them for the present; yet that Lion that lies
at the door will be rouzed, and that Sampson will be awakened, to break in, and
pull down first or last [in due time:] As it is said of evil men [Their feet
shall slide in due time] either here or hereafter Conscience will be known and
found, Deuteronomy. 32.35.
and the things that shall come upon them make haste. If not in the day of
life, then to be sure at the day of death, or of judgment, when the heavy
weights of sin shall be hung upon those lines, then I say shall the hammer of
Conscience strike thick and indistinctly with terror.

For as they say of Witches, That their familiar spirits leaves them at the
Gaol, and will serve them then no longer. So the Devil that has charmed the
Conscience, all the life time, that it could not do its office and perform its
function well, removes his spell at the approach of death, to drive the sinner
to despair, by speaking all at once; men were better hear Conscience when it
would speak now a little, and then a little, as they can bear, rather then by
misbehaviours toward it, to force it unto such long silence, that at last it
must speak all at once, which who can bear? Oh, it is heavy hearing all at once;
as falling all at once, once for all; when Conscience shall take up those words
in Isaiah [I have long Isa. 42.14.
time holden my peace, I have been still, and refrained my self; now will I cry
and destroy, and devour at once.] And as it was in the Fable of the blind
Woman and the Physician, coming often to her house to cure her, never departed
empty, but still carried away a portion of her best good; so that by that time
that her sight was recovered, all her choicest goods were gone. So this blinded
charmed Conscience sees not the ransacking of the soul, and spoiling of graces,
till it be left empty, and then it sees and cries (with Esau) too late for a
blessing: And therefore though some wretched men by their wicked commissions of
evils, omissions of good, and procrastinations of their repentance and
conversions to God, seem as destitute and void of Conscience, as the very
beasts that perish; yet Conscience will stand forth and appear in due time, and
show plainly that it was present with them every moment of their lives, and
privy to all their evil acts, Psa. 50.21.
thoughts and ways, by reproving and setting them in order before their eyes;
and making them say with David [O Lord, Conscience, Psalm. 139.1, 2, 3.
thou have searched me, and known me; thou know my down lying, and mine
uprising, and understandest my thoughts: Thou compassest or winnowest my paths,
and art acquainted with all my ways:] And as Jesus to Nathanael [before that
Philip called thee, John 1.48.
when thou wast under the figtree I saw thee:] So will Conscience at last say
to those ungodly men, [Before I now speak to you, I saw you;] At such and such
a time, in such and such a place, with such and such company, about such and
such ungodly deeds I saw you --

And all to show it an impossible, and therefore a vain thing, to attempt the
nulling or avoiding of Conscience.

2. Because it were a thing unprofitable and distructive to man, Hos. 4.17.
to be let alone without this Monitor and Corrector; Psalm. 81.11, 12. Prove.
20.27. Prove. 4.19.
to be given up to the treachery of a beloved sin, or to the tyranny of a
raging lust, without this controller; to have this candle of the Lord put out,
which should search all the hidden parts of the belly; to have a man's way as
darkness, and not to know whereat he stumbles; this were one of God's heaviest
judgments on man on this side Hell: Like a Body without a Pulse; a City
without Ward or Walls; and an Army without a Watch --

Such or worse were a man's case without Conscience, if it were possible; but
that divelish rage and practice is vain, because impossible and unprofitable:
And thus for correction of three evil practices.

3. For Instruction.
In a pure and precious point of righteousness about Conscience, Prove. 4.23.
[To keep it with all diligence] or with all keeping, as men would keep their
treasures, their honors, their lives. This prime Christian Jewel, (as Instar
omnium) is to be sought with all seeking, and to be kept with all keeping;
[That it may be good and void of offense, toward God and men] in all actions
spiritual, Act. 23.1. Act. 24.16.
moral, civil, natural, after St. Paul's example, making it our special
business, and daily exercise to have and to hold, and to use a good Conscience.

And that upon this consideration, because Conscience is a thing inseparably
annexed unto the soul of man, there set and appointed by God, never to leave
him.

And now here I crave leave for a little digression, to take some view of the
sundry kinds and sorts of Conscience, as of lines drawn from the center, to
declinate the several climates and regions of Conscience: Which of old were
thought to be wittily distributed into Four: Bernard.
-- 1. Good, but not Quiet. -- 2. Quiet, but not Good. -- 3. Both Good and
Quiet. -- 4. Neither Good nor Quiet.


1. An evil unquiet Conscience is bad, but hopeful, because some life is in it.

2. An evil quiet Conscience is worst of all; the most hopeless temper that
can be; better to have a tormenting Tophet in the soul, than a Fools paradise
there; It was better with Peter when he wept, Mat. 26.^5.
than when he presumed.

3. A good unquiet Conscience is good, (not simply, but) respectively, of
tenderness and fearfulness to offend God.

4. A good and quiet Conscience is best of all; a paradise upon Earth, a
pregustation and prelibation of Heaven, Heaven before the time; Juge convivium.
Prove. 15.15. Heb. 1.14. Rev. 3.20. Romans 14.17. Phil. 4.7.
A mansion for the blessed Trinity to dwell in; a continual feast, at which the
Servitors are Angels; the prime guest God himself: The cheer, joy in the holy
Ghost; the Music, peace with the creatures, with our Neighbors, and with our
selves; yea and such peace with God in Christ, as passes all understanding.

The two good Consciences belong properly to the godly; And the two bad to the
ungodly: Whose Consciences are

-Either too quiet, (being blinded or benumbed, or seared) and so like a
becalmed Ocean to famished Seamen, that kills with kindness, and destroys
with fair weather; Perituros lactans Judge. 5.25.
and like dissembling Jael, offering Milk and Butter (means of life) but
bringing Hammer and Nail (instruments of death.)

-Or too unquiet (being wounded, enraged, tormented) and so like the troubled
Sea that cannot rest. So that [Good and Bad] comprehend all Consciences,
without more words and terms; for rest and trouble are not essential, but
accidental to Conscience. Now in the general, a good Conscience is [The seeing
of an act according with the rule:] And in particular it is -either legal, -or
evangelical; according to the rules of each.

A legal good Conscience complete is [A seeing of all our actions, according
with all the rules of the Law exactly] And requires two things:

1. A distinct and universal knowledge of every branch of the Law.

2. A constant and universal obedience to every precept of the Law.

For he who is ignorant of the least tittle, Jam. 2.10.
and delinquent in any particle is guilty of all; and so consequently has not
a complete legal good Conscience.

But what is this to us? this is none of ours (as our case now stands)
therefore we may say and do with it, as did the Tribes with Rehoboam, 1 King.
12.16.
saying, [What portion have we in David? etc. And so departed.] For the
complete legal good Conscience is unto us, as Readiness Armor was unto David,
[Too heavy for him to bear:] and therefore our surest and safest way is
(denying and disclaiming all pretensions to complete legal good Conscience) to
depart unto the Evangelical, that we may be justified and saved: Gal. 2.16.
Heb. 7.19.
[these be your only Tents O Israel;] for if the Law, as the case now stands
with us) be sufficient to give life, then Christ's death was in vain.

Now therefore, Act. 25.12.
as Festus to Paul, about appealing to Caesar, so may I say to the Christian
appealing to the Gospel, [Hast thou appealed unto Gospel? unto Gospel shall
thou go.]

And an evangelicall good Conscience, is a seeing of an act according with the
rule of the Gospel.

And now since we have left the common rode of Conscience in general, and
betaken our selves to a good Conscience in particular; note we, that Conscience
is called good, for a twofold goodness.

1. An old natural and essential goodness of veracity; and so much good may be
in a bad man's Conscience, (notwithstanding his depravation and corruption by
the Fall) as to know something of the true rule, and to speak truth according
to its knowledge: The cursed Scribes and Pharisees, John 8.9.
Hypocrites even their Consciences were so good as to deal plainly and honestly
with them, and to tell them the truth of their state to their conviction
[convicted by their own Consciences.] It is indeed the best thing a wicked man
has, better then his Mind, Heart, Will or Affection; there is more goodness
in a wicked man's Conscience (I speak not of primitive spiritual but of
essential goodness) than in any other of the powers of his soul besides;
hardlier seduced then any part in man; his Conscience stands and speaks more
for God, his Servants, Truth, and Name, then himself does or will. And therefore
S. Paul durst appeal even unto their Consciences, though not unto their
speeches; [commending our selves to every man's Conscience in the sight of God;]
2 Cor. 4.2.
And this is one goodness for which Conscience is called good.

2. A renewed spiritual goodness of Conscience; for if a man be renewed all
the man is renewed, all his mind, Ephesians. 4.23.
the spirit of his mind, the most pure and spiritual part of his soul is
renewed also:

The mind and the Conscience go together, Tit. 1.15.
in their soylings and washings, in their corruptings and renewings.

And here might be distinguished again and again of this renewed good
Conscience,

-Either perfect, (not in degrees, but in parts) and conditions of goodness.

-Or defective, 1 Cor 8.7.
failing in some condition of goodness [weake and apt to be defiled and
seduced.]

The conditions of this goodness are principally two:

-One Formal, respecting its constitution.

-Another Effective, for execution, whereby it is fitted and qualified for its
proper acts and uses. As that Clock may be called good, which is made well, and
goes well.

Now to the constitution and execution of a good Conscience, Amesius.
Honest bona. Romans 14.17. Facate bona.
two specialties are required.

1. Integrity and uprightness.

2. Serenity and peace.

And here also might be discoursed of the several offices and properties, acts
and aspects of Conscience upon practice; but that I am in a digression, and
must return to my point of instruction; For the keeping of Conscience with all
keeping, that it may be good.

Therefore take we up and contract unto this evangelical good Conscience. Three
things are necessary.

1. Romans 2.15.
The light of knowledge -Of God, his will and rule, both Law and Gospel; what
is good, and bidden us; what bad and forbidden us, -of our selves, whether we
be such as God's rules require, yea or no:

Both David's and Achan's Conscience had this light to walk by; Psalm. 18.23.
Josh. 7.20.
some knowledge of God and of themselves; by this light is all the work cut out
that Conscience has to do: No being or working for Conscience, without
knowledge of God and our selves.

1. No work for Conscience without some knowledge of God's revealed will, (the
only rule and bond of Conscience) which makes it to be what it is, and to do
what it does: Men might swear, lie, kill, Romans 7.7.
steal, profane, blasphem remorslesly, without this light of knowledge.

2. No work for Conscience without some knowledge of our selves; for the
knowledge of the rule does but as tell Nathan's tale of two men and a sheep,
without the knowledge of our selves, which does as say [Thou art the man] Men
might crucify the Lord of glory, Luke 23.34. 1 Cor. 2.8.
and Conscience say and do nothing without this knowledge.

O say we then with Solomon [That the soul be without knowledge, Prove 19.2
it is not good;] The ignorant soul cannot have a good Conscience, for if
Conscience be not truly informed and rightly principled, it will be either idle
or ill employed (as working in the dark) either nothing, or all things lawful;
working falsely and erroneously; And oh! Isa. 5.20. Act. 26.9. Joh. 16.2.
what a potent instrument for Satan is an erroneous and misguided Conscience?
That will make a man even kill his Brother, his Father, nay God's dearest
Servants, and persuade him that he does God service.

Therefore beg we God the Father of lights, Jam. 1.17.
through the true Light, to lighten our darkness, and (being our own natural
lights are waxed dim, John 1.9.
and burn blew) to set up another, The light of his Word; and another, The
light of his Spirit: That the candle of the Lord within it may give light
enough to search the inward parts of the belly: Prove. 20.27.
For the world is fuller of dangerous downfals, than the valley of Siddim was
full of slime-pits, Genesis 14.10.
wherein the Kings of Sodom and Gomorah fled and fell; Here is desperate
fearful going in the dark [not knowing whither he goeth] especially near such
horrible Precipices. John 12.35.


Therefore pray, and again I say pray for enlightened Consciences; for though
some may go to Hell with it, yet none can go to Heaven without it; therefore
labor to get it, and be not without it for a world; beseech God as he has
given us Consciences, that we may not want guides; so that he would give our
consciences light, Mat. 15.14.
that our guides may not want eyes, lest the blind lead the blind, and both
fall into the ditch: Mat. 6.23.
For if the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness?

Another ingredient to this evangelical good Conscience. The life of new
obedience; no good Conscience without universal, constant and sincere
obedience; knowledge and obedience cannot be separated in a good Conscience;
therefore called The life of obedience: For what is knowledge without
obedience, but as a model without a building, Act. 24.16.
and a cipher without a figure, which stands for nothing? therefore the
Apostle, who is upon sacred record the pattern of a good Conscience, made it
his daily exercise to have and to hold, and to use a good Conscience in all
obedience; the lack whereof (in daring to act against God's rule, or without
God's warrant) causes [shipwrack of Faith, 1 Timothy 1.19.
and of all good Conscience;] As in Hymeneus and Alexander.

Who has more science than the Devil? yet none worse Consciences for lack of
obedience: And obedience in Christian ears should not sound as old and legal,
Romans 3.27. 2 These. 1.8.
but rather as new and evangelical: For there is [a law of Faith] and a
vengeance on the [disobedience to the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ;] Mat.
11.28, 29, 30.
yea there is [a yoke of Christ] and which is more admirable [a yoke that
eases: O mirus reficiendi modus. But whither run we out into particulars?
there is one comprehensive compendious thing, most eminently and transcendently
necessary to an evangelical good Conscience, as all in all. Namely

3. The Spirit of Faith in the blood of Jesus: 2 Cor. 4.13.
No good Conscience without Faith; as it seems by their fast frequent
conjunction together, 1 Timothy 1.4, 18, 19.
so obvious in holy Scripture [Faith and a good Conscience;] 1 Timothy 3.9.
yet not that poor livelesse, fruitless faith which may be found in apostate
men Jam. 2.15.
and Devils, Romans 1.17. Romans 5.1. Act. 15.9. 1 John 5.4. Ephesians. 2.8.
who are said [to believe and tremble.]

But that Faith which verisies and justifies, and purifies, and pacifies, and
conquereth, and saves: This, this is the Faith --

For the image of God wherein man was first created, was not more necessary to
the attaining of a legal good Conscience, than this Faith so invested, with
such gracious properties, is to the accomplishing of an evangelical. For what
avails the knowledge of Law and Gospel, and so much Faith as to give credence
to the truth of the precepts and promises, and threats, without that personal,
peculiar, proper Faith, whereby Christ is applied in particular, with all his
benefits to each believing soul.

So that without Faith no evangelical good Conscience. Whence here is the
difference betwixt the compleatnesse of a legal and evangelical good Conscience:

That requires many acts to perfect it, Deuteronomy. 26.27. Jam. 2.10.
one sinful commission or omission is enough to wrack and spoil it.

This requires but one only to complete it; one act of believing uniteth to
Christ, by which union man is made partaker of the all-sufficient obedience of
Christ, which is the sole and absolute object matter of an evangelical good
Conscience: For as one act of Adam brake the whole Decalogue; so one act of
faith in Christ, will perfectly fulfill it.

But not the habit without the act, nor the act without the object, makes an
evangelical good Conscience, and justifies: For the whole obedience of Christ,
typified by the whole Lamb to be eaten and accounted for, Exodus 12.4, 10.
is it that satisfies the justice of the Law, which (when by faith we are
conjoined to him) is made all ours?

And therefore Faith and Christ's blood, Christ's Blood.
are here conjoined in one, as to an evangelical good Conscience. -As no good
Conscience without faith: So No good Conscience without Christ's blood. A good
Conscience is most beholding unto the blood of Christ for its goodness, as the
only price of it, the material and meritorious cause of it; yea and of our
redemption, the graces forementioned are the means of application.

There sticks to the Conscience of every man naturally a great deal of guile
and filth, which defiles and obscureth, and hardens it; and it has contracted
so much guilt and foulness, that there is no room for peace, till it be
refined and cleansed, Heb. 9.14. Act. 15.9. Romans 5.1.
and mollified; which can no way be done without says in Christ's blood; Heb.
9.18, 22.
which is all in all. For as in the old Law, all dedications and purgings, and
remissions were by blood: So in the new Law of Faith, in the Gospel, no good
done about Conscience without blood: It is Purged, and Purified, and Pacified;
and all by this blood.

Conscience is 1. 1 John 1.7.
Purged and Cleansed.-From the corruption of sin, by the efficacy of Christ's
blood -- From the guilt of sin, by the merit of Christ's blood. 2 Timothy 1.3.
2. Purified and Sanctified from the stain of sin, 1 Pet. 3.21.
by the purity of Christ's blood 3. Pacified from the unquietness of sin, Col.
1.20.
by the atonement of Christ's blood.


In sin unrepented, Isa. 57.20, 21.
unpardoned, unpurged, unreformed, there is no peace, but like the troubled
Sea, it cannot rest: A good Conscience may be like the troubled Air, sometime
disquieted; but when the wind is still, the Air can rest; when the occasion is
over, the Conscience is quiet: But a bad Conscience is like the troubled Sea,
that cannot rest, through the inconstancy of its own natural motions, fluxing
and refluxing, and the restlesnesse of its own waves, as well as the
boysterousnesse of external storms and winds, so that the Sea remains unquiet,
when the storm is ended; so do evil men's bad Consciences, when the outward
occasion of affliction is ceased, and that trouble ended, yet they have that
within which denies their rest.

Such indeed is the guilt and filth of sin to the Conscience, as Jonah to the
Mariners, and Achan to the Soldiers, (a dangerous and accursed thing;) or like
an arrow-head, and corrupt coar in a wound, no safety or blessing, ease or
healing, till out and gone. And this can never be done but by the blood of
Jesus: Heb. 12.24.
Oh that purging, purifying, pacifying blood of his [that blood of sprinkling;]
so called in allusion to that blood in the basin of the Passover, Exodus 12.22.
wherewith the Lintel and the two sideposts were sprinkled, and whereby this
blood was prefigured: Now although about the two side-posts, some Interpreters
are but little divided; yet about the transome or lintel less, most applying
it to Conscience; For the resemblance, in ancient buildings of those Countries,
contriving in or just over the lintel, a place to look out at, for the
discovery of all that knock at door. And such a thing indeed is Conscience,
through which we should look out upon all occurrences and occasions, before we
admit or open: And this Lintel we must strike with the bunch of Hysop dipped in
the blood of the Basin; Conscience must be struck with faith in Christ's blood,
the blood of sprinkling, [which speaks better things then that of Abel] --
Better to God -- and better to Conscience; Mark 4.39.
and the voice which it speaks is [peace and be still;] and that not because
blood, but because his blood, who can quiet Consciences as well as Seas and
Winds, and that not without faith; for no goodness or purity or peace to the
Conscience without blood; and no such blood for the Conscience without faith:
Therefore the unbelieving Conscience, is a defiled Conscience; and the defiled
Conscience is a disturbed Conscience; and the disturbed Conscience, no complete
good Conscience; Tit. 1.15.
[defiled and unbelieving] are in conjunction, by the holy Ghost.

Therefore as we love to have and to hold, and to use a good Conscience, in all
our beggings beg we this faith of God in this blood: For what can a man do with
an old natural Conscience, without a new enlightened one? And what with an
enlightened one, without a purified and pacified one, without a sanctified and
saved one, by the blood of Jesus? O plead this blood, but first beg it with
more then Rachell's earnestness for children, Genesis 30.1.
[Lord give it me or else I die.]

And when we have gotten this good enlightened, purified and pacified
Conscience, we were best keep it with all diligence; keep the peace of it, and
not willingly offend it for a thousand worlds: And that upon these
considerations;

1. That to sin against the cry of an illightned Conscience, Isa. 65.3. Ezekiel.
2.4.
is [to provoke God to his face] (like impudent children) in the holy Prophets
account; for an illuminated Conscience, is as the face of God in the soul of
man, where a man even sees God looking upon him, commanding or forbidding.

2. That to sin against the cry of an illightned Conscience, is to draw upon a
man's soul the horrible guilt of Herod's aggravation and huge addition unto all
his sins and evils, Luke 3.20.
[He added yet this above all, that he shut up John in prison;] John 5.35.
[ John was a burning and a shining light:] And such is an illuminated
Conscience; therefore to go against the burning and shining light thereof, is
to add yet this above all other evils, to shut up our John in prison.

3. That to sin against the cry of an illightned Conscience, offends Gods
deputy in the soul, and provokes him often times to stab the heart, dead all
duty, discountenance faith and hope, and discourage confidence in prayer, [If
our heart condemn us not, 1 John 3.20, 21. Mat. 5.23.
then have we confidence toward God, and what we ask, we receive, etc.] But if
it does condemn us -- we may hold our peace; for it is of greater danger then
in case of an offended and irreconciled brother; [If thou bring thy prayer into
God's presence, and there remembrest that thine offended irreconciled
Conscience has ought against thee, first go and (by faith in Christ's blood,
and resolution of new obedience) be reconciled unto thy Conscience, and then
come and pray;] for an irreconciled Conscience does ever way-lay, undermine and
enter caveats against prayers; Psalm. 66.18.
no offering will be accepted till Conscience be satisfied; be it for our
selves or others, bad Consciences much hinder prayer; [If I have a bad
Conscience, God will not hear my prayers] says David; [ye have good
Consciences, Heb. 13.18.
therefore God will hear your prayers for us] said Paul.

4. That Conscience is ever to abide and dwell with us, never to leave a man;
therefore to be kept with all diligence, that it may be good and void of
offense: Two that were born and bred, and must inseparably live together,
should take heed of offending one the other; there is a parting time for all
but a man and his Conscience; there are none on Earth with whom we shall always
live, without any separation but our Consciences; not always with Husbands or
Wives, with Parents or Children, with Masters or Servants, etc. But with our
Consciences ever; therefore make you much of it.

In one of the Fathers we read a Parable to this purpose, Greg. Mor.
of a Man that had three friends, two of whom he loved very entirely, and the
third but indifferently; this Man being called in question for his life, craved
aid of his friends; -- The first would only accompany him some part of the way
and bring him going, and no more; -- The second would only lend him some
means, and accommodate him for his journey, and no more; -- But the third, whom
he least expected and regarded, would go all the way, abide and appear ever
with him, speak and plead for him, and never leave him.

Now we are the man; Flesh, World and Conscience, are our three friends:

And when death shall summon us to Judgment,

-- Our fleshly friends will bring us to our graves and decent burials, so far
going, and there leave us.

-- Our worldly goods may help us to Shrouds, Coffins, Tombs, (and at most)
Epitaphs, and there leave us.

-- But well fare a good Conscience; this will live and die with us, or rather
live when we are dead, awaiting our rising again, to appear with us, and stand
for us before God at his judgment seat.

And when neither of our other friends can do us good, then a good Conscience
will stand us in high and eternal stead.

Conscience, I say.
FINIS.

