SAVL SMITTEN FOR NOT SMITING AMALEK ACCORDING To the severity of the Command:
AND The Residue of the Spoil sentenced to Death, which SAVL preserved and
spared alive, (to wit) Man, Woman, Infant, Suckling, Ox, Sheep, Camel and Ass.
Being an Allegorical Allusion to the present passages of the Times, Delivered
in a Sermon at Somerset House, May 1. Upon the Dissolution of the late
Parliament. ALSO, A great and notable blow is given at the Serpent, the ruin
of the Whore and her Family determined; wherein is discovered what she was,
and is, and the several Husbands that have married her, deceased from her, and
been deceived by her; also the several Children which by her have been brought
forth and nursed up, with a dissolution of all unjust Government, Laws, Rules
and Worships exercised over Men's Lives, Liberties and Estates, and the
restoring of all Just Government, the Peoples Rights and Privileges by the
Lord Jesus, into its perfect State. As apprehended by RICHARD COPPIN.

For the Lord God will help me; therefore I shall not be confounded; therefore
have I set my Face like a Flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed.

Behold the Lord God will help me; who is he that shall condemn me? They all
shall wax old like a Garment, the Moth shall eat them up.

LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by William Larner at the Blackmores head at
Fleet-bridge, and by Richard Moon at the Seven Stars near the North door of
Paul's, 1653.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. THe Peoples great and last Captivity in the way as they came from
Egypt by the Amalekites, and the Lord leading them forth, and carrying them on
to the Land of rest, and how. fol. 1. Chap. 2. Concerning Amalek, and the many
stumbling blocks that he lays in the way of the People, how, and what they are.
4 Chap. 3. Saul is commanded to smite Amalek and his whole household, with all
that belongs to him; how he did it not, but David; what Amalek is, how in him
is Man, Woman, Infant, Suckling, Ox, Sheep, Camel and Ass, and what they are. 7
Chap. 4. How, though the man be smitten, the woman and her children are living,
and she like to marry again; of the several husbands she has buried, and the
end of her life determined; with a hint of the true woman and mother of us all
succeeding. 10 Chap. 5. Of the satness of the children sucked in from their
Parents, and they thereby made ready for the slaughter; that men are not to be
slain but to their power and corrupt interests, with the manner how, and the
time when. 12 Chap. 6. What is meant by the Kenites that were among the
Amalekites; how they are, and ought to be spared. 14 Chap. 7. What Is meant by
Agag the King, the best of the sheep and of the oxen which Saul spared alive,
and how they discovered themselves by Bleating and Lowing. 15 Chap. 8. Samuel
reproving Saul for not obeying the voice of the Lord, who excuses himself, and
lays it upon the people that were with him, whom he obeyed more then God; how
to obey is better then Sacrifice; what a true Sacrifice is, best accepted, and
who offers it. 17 Chap. 9 Of the Amalekites unjust possessing the Earth, both
of the Philistians, and of Judah, of their giving gifts one to another, and of
what. 19 Chap. 10. How men entrusted with the Civil power of the Nation, ought
not to be proud, and high-minded, but humble and meek before God and man; that
honor is the ready way to dishonor, and how. 20 Chap. 11. Of David's
possessing Saul's Kingdom, his recovering the spoil which Saul did not, and his
equal dividing it among the people. 22 Chap. 12. Of some that desire to have
the greater part of the spoil to themselves, and would not have it equally
divided; who and what they are; with David's answer to them; and how it alludes
to these times. 23 Chap. 13. A foresight of the Peoples oppression by the next
power; how none ought to be forced or compelled to any Form or way of worship,
but as they are persuaded in their own minds: That all Forms shall cease, and
when. 26 Chap. 14. How men in power are not to act only for the freedom of
themselves, or a few, but for the freedom of all, and to abase themselves to
exalt others; wherein is manifested, Christ doing and receiving for us, as for
himself. 27 Chap. 15. Christ the true Restorer and Establisher of the Peoples
Rights, and not men; God shaking, overturning, and destroying men, and all
things that are settling; how men have not power to settle any thing; and how we
in all changes and turnings are to eye the Lord, and rest only in him. 30
SAVL Smitten For not SMITING AMALEK ACCORDING To the severity of the Command.
1 SAMUEL 15.3. Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have,
and spare them not, but slay both Man and Woman, Infant and Suckling, Ox and
Sheep, Camel and Ass.


CHAP. I. The Peoples great and last Captivity io the way as they came from
Egypt by the Amalekites, and the Lord leading them forth, and carrying them on
to the land of Rest, and how.
WE read in the first verse of this Chapter, of Saul's being anointed King over
Israel, and how he was to go forth and fight against Amalek; but in all things
he was to harken to the voice of the Lord, and to obey it in all things that he
was commanded. Now in the 2 verse we read what Amalek did to Israel, how he
laid wait for him in the way as he came up out of Egypt, and in the 3. verse,
we find the Lord commanding Saul to smite Amalek for that which he had done
against Israel; Zech. 9.8.
I have seen, I have seen, with mine eyes says the Lord, how the Egyptians
have afflicted my people Israel in Egypt; and I remember also what the
Amalekites have done to them in the way as they came up out of Egypt, but
Pharaoh and all his host shall be plagued, and Amalek and all his shall be
smitten, and I will execute my fierce wrath upon all the enemies of my people.

The Lord sees the many enemies that rise up against his people, as they pass
along out of Egypt and spiritual bondage through forms, ordinances, and outward
observations, toward their rest, their heaven and happiness in the Lord Jesus,
as against those who are passed through all things already, and come to their
rest; all have enemies, and the Lord sees them, and beholds the opposition
that's made against them, Exodus 22.21, 22, 23.
the oppression that is laid upon them, and hears the cries that come up to him
from them, even of all people that are, Psalm. 12.5.
and ever have been subjected to any power appearing besides himself, that he
is now rising and coming forth with deliverance for them, 1 sal. 41.10, 11.
and bids them not to fear or be discouraged; for says he, as I beheld what
the Egyptians did unto you in Egypt, and delivered you from thence; so I
remember also what the Amalekites have done unto you, how they laid wait for
you in the way as you came up out of Egypt; therefore my design is to bring
them down and lay them low even to the ground, and so cause you peaceably and
quietly to pass along, through, by, and over all the ways, Isa 5.9. chapter 24.10.
Hag. 1.4.
laws, forms, and religions of men, and not suffer you to stay or rest in any
thing, to abide in any house or form, till you are come to that which is your
rest indeed, even him who is the stay and staff of all men, where and at which
time you shall rest in the Lord from all your labors, sorrows, troubles, and
fears, and from all the hard bondage wherein you have been made to serve, Isa.
14 3.
by the Egyptian taskmasters and the oppressive Amalekites. For no sooner are
we brought out of Egypt, as out of that dark carnal ignorant state which we are
in while under the Law, but we are ready to enter into the house of bondage, as
into some Church Fellowship or other, where we are tied up to Forms and
Ordinances, and are subject to the Amalekites, till the Lord takes us by the
hand, leads us forth, Psalm. 5.8.
and carries us on.

Now that most men in their several ways and forms say they are traveling,
passing, and pressing forward toward something that is before, pretending they
aim at God and his glory, Christ, Heaven and happiness, as that which is at a
distance from them, and shall one day be attained by them, when they are gone
out of this body, and not before, and cannot abide to hear of coming to it, and
living in it while they are in this body, and many there are that endeavor to
keep the people from the present enjoyment of this, and cry out against it as
blasphemy, and count them blasphemers that shall decare it, and all to keep up
a kingdom of their own in the place of Jesus Christ, and so to keep people
still in Egypt, as in a in a dark, ignorant, troubled, oppressed, burdned state
and condition, and not suffering them to go on comfortably, cheerfully and
peaceably toward their rest and peace out of Egypt into the land of Canaan, as
into a state of light, life and holiness in the Lord Jesus, a land flowing with
milk and honey, who would bring us into that holy and good land, the land of
rest which is himself, and who would now bring us from off all our own ways to
the ways of God, from off all our own works to the works of God, Psalm. 55.8.
and so from off all our own thoughts and affections, Ephesians. 3.1, 2.
and desires, to the thoughts, affections, and desires of God, to be taken with
the delight and embraces of himself in his own spirit, and no longer to be led
by the spirit of the Devil and false Prophet, into bondage and captivity, but
that we might be led by the Spirit and power of the Lord Jesus into peace and
liberty, which is the Kingdom of the Lord. Romans 8.14, 15, 16.


And now the Lord to make all this good in us and to us, which is to bring ut
into his kingdom, he first makes it good in and to himself for us, Rev. 15.
Romans 8.29, 32. Ioh. 17.13.
as the first begotten of the Father among many brethen, and so we come to
enjoy all in him, to have it fulfilled in us, and enjoyed by us, at it is now
fulfilled and enjoyed in him by the Father, to which he is now ascended.

Now wherefore did our head, the Lord Jesus, thus ascend and glorify himself,
Isa. 26.19.
but that we as his body, might also ascend and be glorified together with him?
and wherefore did he first descend into hell to us, Ephesians. 2.6.
but that he by his eternal power and strength might raise us up out of hell,
and so ascend into heaven with us, and there lead Captivity captive for us? and
thus does he work out man's redemption to bring managain to his Primitive rest,
wherein is man's salvation.

CHAP. II. Concerning Amalek and the many stumbling blocks that he lays in the
way of the people, how, and what they are.
NOw concerning this oppressive Amalek which is here spoken of in the text,
that does thus oppress the people, and endeavor to hinder their coming up to
their rest and salvation in the Lord Jesus, let us consider what and where he
is; and if we truly examine our selves, we shall find him to be within us, as
well as without us, and we never come to have a true knowledge of him without
us, till we have first had the knowledge of him within us; and those that have
him inwardly, do act with him outwardly; but he first appears within us, and
there discovers himself what he is; for as the spirit of a man is passing out
of Egypt as out of bondage and captivity, toward its rest and center in the
Lord Jesus, we see the devil in us sometimes let loose for a season carrying
our spirits, Rev. 22.7.
our minds, wills and desires away captive at his will, into some restless
unsatisfied condition or other, as from the Lord, where he has darkened all
the appearances of good things to us, 2 Cor. 4.4.
blinded the minds of them that believe not, that they might not see the glory
of God, and so lays many stumbling blocks in their way, to cause them to fall;
but I remember it says the Lord, and my design shall be to take them out of
the way, Isa. 40.4.
and to slay the devil that laid them, and all that belongs to him.

Now those several stumbling blocks which appear to be laid in the way of a
soul, which some stumble at, What Is meant by stumbling blocks.
and others go over, appears to be sin, sorrows, troubles, the fear of the
Devil, death, hell, and damnation, together with all unjust Laws and Acts made
by men contrary to the Law of God which is perfect Freedom; Psalm. 19.7.
all and whatsoever else that may appear to be laid in the way of a souls peace
and freedom, are these stumbling blocks; and he that lays them is the devil,
who is always seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.
and still waiting whom he may betray or catch in and with the snares and baits
that he has laid, and does still lay to that purpose; and though men may
appear in practice to do this, yet I know no other but the devil that is the
chief Agent in this Work under God, that lays them to hinder poor souls from
coming up to live in the pure and perfect enjoyment of their peace, rest, and
freedom in the Lord Jesus, or Kingdom of Heaven; and he that is appointed to
encounter with him, and that overcomes him, is the great Captain of our
Salvation, Rev. 12.7, 8. Zech. 9.8.
the Lord of Hosts, who is Captain General of all the forces that go forth in
battle against Antichrist the man of sin, and all Armies whatsoever that come
up against the Israel and People of God.

Now some all along in all Ages have still appeared to War against Israel in
the way as they have come up from Egypt, Luke 19.43.
casting up trenches about them to keep them in on every side, made Laws and
Acts against them contrary to the appearances of God in them, to subject their
persons, spirits, and consciences to the Laws, ways, forms, and limitations of
men, as we may see in the time of Christ and his Apostles, how Herod and
Pontius Pilate acted against him to destroy him; for first of all as soon as
Herod had heard that Christ was born, then he to destroy him, Mat. 2.7.8, 16
privily pretended to go and worship him, but being prevented of that, he sent
and slew all the children that were about his age in that Country where he
heard Christ was, that so he might slay him, but the Lord caused his mother to
escape away from thence with him into another country where he was preserved.

And how did the Jews, the Scribes and Pharisees, and all the chief of the
people, Luke 19.47, 48 Luke 23.9, 10.
under pretense of coming to hear him, seek to ensnare him in his own words,
wait to catch something from his mouth, provoking him to speak of many things,
that they might have something to accuse him; and was so it not with the
Apostles and Saints afterward? for how were they persecuted from place to
place? and how are men still persecuted, and have been to this day, both by the
Pope, Papists, Bishops, Prelates and Presbyterians, and now like to be by the
Independents and Anabaptists, all like those oppressive Amalekites still acting
against the appearance of the Lord Jesus in his People? for no sooner was there
any appearance of Christ risen up in any age or generation, but presently
Herod, as the wisdom of the flesh in some one or other, was acting against it,
seeking to quench every spiritual appearance of Christ that was but like
Christ, thereby to prevent his appearing, and would not suffer any thing to
break forth but what did appear in their own way, form or likeness; and that
they might still have something against those in whom Christ does spiritually
rise and appear, they will under pretense of coming to hear them (as Herod did
to worship Christ, and others to hear him) wait to catch something from them
that might come under their Law to accuse them; yea, Rev. 18.3.
and all that God brings up into a higher and more spiritual discovery of
himself to know the Lord, are by such that know not the Lord, and that serve
the Whore, and receive her wages, cried out against for heretics, seducers and
blasphemers; and thus we may see how they still lay wait for Christ and his
People.

The enemies of Christ which formerly sat in Authority have made and kept up
diverse Laws and Acts of diverse sorts against the People to keep them in bondage
and in subjection to themselves and their Laws, when they should be subject
only to Christ and his Law whose Law is perfect Freedom; Psalm. 19.7.
and if any man act or speak any thing contrary to such a Law or Act made
against such things called blasphemy by them, they presently go to apprehend
them as blasphemers, accuse and condemn them, seek their lives, banishment or
imprisonment, as Herod and others have done who get their living by the Whore;
and all that thus act may be said to be Amalekites, laying wait for the People
as they come up out of Egypt, or Spiritual darkness; But I remember, says the
Lord, what you have done, and I will assuredly reward you for it; you and all
that you have shall be smitten.

CHAP. III. Saul is commanded to smite Amalek and his whole household with all
that belongs to him; how he did it not, but David; what Amalek is; how in him
is man, woman, infant, suckling, ox, sheep, camel and ass, and what they are.
ANd now thus says the Lord, Go, and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all
that they have, and spare them not, but slay both man and woman, infant and
suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass.

Here is the word of the Lord by Samuel to Saul, King of Israel, Go, and smite
Amalek, etc. and this might be the word of the Lord to our General, Go smite
the Parliament, etc.

My beloved, this Scripture which I am now speaking from, is this day fulfilled
to me, and in my apprehension, and I know not how soon it may be fulfilled to
you, even this day for ought I know; therefore pray give me leave at this time
to speak my mind freely and plainly to you, as it is made known to me for you.

Those then who may sometime appear to have the power of the Nation in their
hands, may appear to act like Saul, and to act like David, who came in the room
of Saul; but I had rather they appeared to act as David, for he obeyed the
voice of the Lord in all that he was commanded, and so enjoyed his Kingdom: and
then if they so act, the power might the longer abide with them; but if they
should act like Saul, then they may expect to have the power taken from them by
the Lord, as it was from Saul; for the Lord is just, and will revenge for his
people.

Now Saul obeyed not the voice of the Lord, which was that he should utterly
destroy the Amalekites and all that they had, but he did it not, but fled upon
the spoil for himself, and so did evil in the sight of the Lord, 1 Samuel
15.19.28.
for which the Kingdom was rent from him, and given to David.

Now David who reigned in Saul's stead, obeyed the voice of the Lord, and
utterly destroyed and routed the Amalekites, and recovered again the rights and
privileges, the freedom and liberties of the People, 1 Samuel 30.18, 19.
which the Amalekites had carried away from them, and restored it equally into
their hands again, that there was no want of any thing to any among them,
wherein the voice of the Lord appeared to be obeyed by him, and his kingdom to
stand with him.

And now what says the Lord? Go, and smite Amalek, dissolve him, take the
power out of his hands, unbottom him of all his Laws and interests; Go, slay
both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass.

Amalek here may be said to be a whole household or family with all that belongs
to it, What is meant by Amalek, man and woman, infant and suckling.
and may relate to Kings houses, and houses of former Parliaments; and appears
to me at this time to have been that household of the late Parliament dissolved
with all that was in their hands and belonging to them; in which Parliament
with others before them (as in Amalek) there may be said to be a man and a
woman, or the husband and the wise. The man which is to be smitten, may be said
to be the Parliament in power ruling corruptly, Rev. 2.20. Chap. 17.
lately dissolved: the woman may be said to be the woman Jezabel, the mother of
Harlots, and Whore of Babylon that sits upon many Waters, Genesis 6.11, 12.
to wit, Peoples, Multitudes, Nations and Tongues, and is the corrupt Law and
lust, that first grew up and appeared to live in the fleshly, Genesis 6.4.
dark, earthly principle of man's fallen nature, out of which have sprung forth
many children, infants and sucklings, said in Scripture to be the daughters of
men, also brought forth many Laws Acts and Statutes, set up many particular
interests of men's inventions as so many infants and sucklings, Eccles. 7.29.
which may be known by the names of Priests, Lawyers, Sheriffs, Bailisss,
Oppressive-Tythe-mongers, Committee Men, Excise-men, Common-Councel-men, and
all sorts of Clerks, Courts and Offices, and whatsoever particulars else may
appear to have been set up by men, that have in any way been oppressive and in
opposition to the true peace and Freedom of the Peoples Rights and Privileges
in the Lord Jesus, together with all that have ever been hanging upon the
breast of this woman before mentioned, as the mother by which they were brought
forth, and at whose side they have been nursed up, Isal. 3.12.
and so have oppressed and ruled over the people together, but are now grown
ancient and ready for the grave, also fat and ready for the slaughter, or in
some measure to be slain to what they have been by another power, their father
in Law, one of the ensuing husbands of this woman their mother; and so much for
what is meant by man, woman, infant and suckling.

Next, the store belonging to this house or family, to wit, What is meant by
sheep and Oxen.
sheep, oxen, camels and asses; and this may be said to be the Peoples
Privileges, Lives, Liberties and Estates, with all the wealth, honor and
riches of the Land, which men by their power they had taken into their hands to
make themselves fat and rich, and which was carried captive by them from the
right owners of it, which Saul here in the Text was commanded to slay as to
them, and to restore again to the people (though he did not) even all, and not
to spare any, but to recover it again out of the hands of the Amalekites, and
no more to be found with them as in the hands of the merchants of the earth.

So the like command might come from the Lord to our General, to smite the late
Parliament, and to slay them to their oppressive power, laws and actions, rules
and private interests, and to spare none as to them, that is, leave no more in
their hands but what is and was their own before, and to recover all the rest,
to wit, the peoples interests, rights, and privileges which the late
Parliament with others before them had taken away and withheld from them, and
to restore the same again into the hands of those who are the right owners of
it, wherein the voice of the Lord would appear to be obeyed, and the actions of
David manifest.

CHAP. IV. How though the man be smitten, the woman and her children are
living, and she like to marry again; of the several husbands she has buried,
and the end of her life determined; with a hint of the true woman and mother of
us all succeeding.
WEll, this man we see is smitten; the Parliament is dissolved; but where is
the woman and her children with all their store and treasure? why we see they
with all they have are yet alive and remaining, and like to continue for a
time; but I pray God another man or power as oppressive as the former, do not
now appear to marry this woman, to live with her and get more children by her
to be heirs with the rest; or if they should dis-inherit some of the former
begotten by the other man so called, put down some men, laws and particular
interests, and state others in their places as bad as them, it were all one;
but sure some one or other will ere long be endued with power to marry this
woman, or obtain so much favor as to live and act with her; for she has many
suitors which she has drawn in and enticed, who will not suffer her to abide
long unmarried or single while she is living, Prove. 7.
for she would quickly die if she should abide long without a man of her own
bringing forth; but there will come one at last that must slay her.

Now observe, the man might be slain, and yet the woman preserved for another
husband; the Parliament may be dissolved, A word of advice not to make choice
of too many men for the government of this Nation, and to be careful what laws
they set up. Rev. 17.4.
and yet the Government may be put into the hands of some other for a time: but
look to her, you that have her, and may marry her, keep her in subjection,
suffer her not to play the Harlot with any, nor ramble too far into the hands
of too many men; neither let them that marry her divide themselves into many
bodies or parts; also be you careful what children she brings forth, and
maintain her not in such pomp and state as before, but suffer her highness to
be brought down, and her scatlet colored robes to be stripped off: for they do
but cause men to be in love with her, and desire after her, to marry her for
gain, or follow after for the loaves; and why are her husbands so often slain,
and men so often marry her, but that they are made rich by her, and for a time
come to great honor and preferment through her means? but sure her house is
the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death; for all are dead that
ever yet married her; Rev. 7.26, 27.
Kings, Queens and Parliaments have deceased from her, and been deceived by
her; and those that marry her next may not live long with her; nay she cannot
be now long lived her self, neither any of her children; for doomsday is at
hand for them all, and the hour of her Judgment is come, Rev. 18.7.
though she says she sits a Queen, is no widow, and shall see no sorrow; But
he that sheds man's blood, Genesis 9.6. Rev. 10.23, 24.
by man shall his blood be shed; but in her was found the blood of Prophets and
of Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth: therefore shall she be
slain also, and her craftsmen with her; and in her shall appear no more the
light of a candle, or of man's righteousness, the voice of the bridegroom and of
the bride; none shall marry or trade with her; and her merchants were the great
men of the earth, who shall wail, weep and lament for her, and well they may,
for no man buyeth their merchandise any more, Rev 18.9, 10.
and then will there be an end of the strange woman, and all that belong to
her; and that woman which first brought us forth, Rev. 21.2, 3.
and is the mother of us all, will come down, or appear among us as a bride
adorned for her husband; and we shall enjoy both her and her husband the Lord
himself; How we are to marry none but the Lord.
therefore let us in all things, and at all times wait for the appearing of
this Couple, the Lord and his Spouse, and be willing to die to any other
appearance whatsoever beside the Lord, and to marry no other but the Lord,
neither to give suck, preserve, or keep alive any children but what the Lord
himself does beget by his own Wife, and then shall we appear to live in, and
act by the life and power of the Lord Jesus, which he has begotten of his own
will, and brought forth by his Spirit to live in us, and which makes us then
appear to be the Wife of God, and mother of Jesus.

CHAP. V. Of the fatness of the children, sucked in from their Parents, and
they thereby made ready for the slaughter; that men are not to be slain but to
their power and corrupt interests, with the manner how, and the time when.
NOw these children, infants and sucklings that were before begotten, upheld
and maintained, by the late deceased Parliament, to wit, Priests, Lawyers,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Tythemongers, Committee Men, Excise-men, Common-councelmen,
Rev. 18.3.
and all Clerks whatsoever that have long time been nursed up at the side of
this man and woman, eating meat at their table, fed upon their dainties, hanged
upon their breasts, sucked so much sweetness, riches, honor and pleasure from
them, being authorized to live by the labor and oppression of other people,
that now they are become rich, made fat, and so both father, mother and
children, are all made ready for the slaughter; Rev 2.20, 21, 22, 23.
therefore now thus says the Lord, Go slay them all, and spare none, Slay both
man, woman, infant and suckling, or suffer them not to remain in that condition
so to oppress my people and live upon them as formerly they have done; but as
to all unrighteousness smite them, Isa. 26.19.
lay them low, even to the ground, Heb. 9.27.
yet suffer them to rise again in a new life and resurrection with Christ; for
as all men have sinned, so, It is appointed unto all men once to die, and so to
be judged; that is, die to what they have been, as living to any thing besides
God, or acting for any but God, and so come to live up wholly in God in all
their ways and actions.

And now thus faith the Lord, I remember how men have lived to themselves, and
not to me, acted for themselves and not for me, and how they have tyrannized
over my people by their unlawful dealing, exacting upon them, their persons,
goods, labors and purses, by their unjust Laws and Statutes in their unlawful
Offices, Courts, and Councels, making preys of them, serving themselves by
them; and if any that are oppressed by them complain of their oppression, they
will plead the Authority of Parliament for what they do, as that by which they
were brought forth, upheld and maintained, and say they have a law for what
they do, and a power that maintains them in it; but sure they abuse their law
and also their power, stretching it beyound its bounds, for which it is just
with God to take it from them, who ere long will take all into his own hands,
and leave them nothing, and so slay all, both man and woman, infant and
suckling, the great whore and her children, Isa. 3.12.
which have been the oppressors of the people.

I need not stand to instance the names of all the children that belonged to
this man and woman; for you your selves know of them; but this I will say, that
all whosoever or whatsoever has at any time been brought forth, upheld, and
maintained by late Kings and Parliaments, may be said to be their children,
also that have had any relyance or dependence in and upon them, and been
supported by them in their oppressive ways and actions, are their children, or
being not lawfully begotten may be said to be bastards, and ought all to be
slain or taken out of the way, and not any to be spared or left remaining as
before, to rule in any power or sit in the place of justice; Deuteronomy. 23.2.
for a bastard is not to enter into the Congregation of the Lord. But though
they appear not as yet to be slain or ended, which they do not so long as all
laws and acts whatsoever formerly made and kept up are still to remain in
force, as they did while the late Parliament the last husband of this woman was
living, though I know not how soon the Lord may come and make good this word
and command of his to the rulers of the people, whom he may set up as
instruments to do this work, and cause them to whom he speaks to obey his voice
in slaying all and sparing none; but I do not speak of taking away men's lives,
as formerly they have done by their law, How we are not to take away men's lives.
but of taking away that oppressive power, law, rule, and authority out of the
hands of cruel men by which they have lorded over men's lives, liberties and
estates, and to have it to be reduced again into the hands of God, whose right
it is, and not to man's, and who is able to rule all men in righteousness, joy
and peace according to his mighty power whereby he is able to subdue all all
things to himself, 1 Cor. 15.28.
that himself may be all in all.

Now for the time when this great work of Reformation shall be done, it is
known only to the Lord, whose time is the best time, and who will do all his
pleasure, and not all to all at once or in one age, Ecles. 3.1.
but to every thing there is a season for all things under the Sun, wherein all
things shall be done, that God in the end may appear to all to be al in all,
which he does not so long as man appears to be any thing, or that any thing of
man remains; therefore no particular private interest or opinion of man is to
be kept up, neither the good of some particular men only to be sought for, but
the good of all in general; and all this being done, it would appear to be
according to the Word, will and mind of God: but if any should say they have no
such command to do as is here spoken, then answer they may that have it as to
apprehend it in themselves; yet it is a command of the Lord that this work of
justice should be done; and who should we expect to have it done by but by
those that have the power in their hands, and that appear in the place of those
that profess to do it?

CHAP. VI. What is meant by the Kenites that were among the Israelites, how
they are and ought to be spared.
THere is another thing which to me is signified by these Amalekites, for which
they are thus to be slain, and that is a malicious people; for they did
maliciously set themselves against Israel to betray them; but among those
Amalekites there were some that were called Kenites which were to be spared
from that slaughter, and they signify to me a kind people; 1 Samuel 15.16.
For they showed kindeness to all the children of Israel in the way as they
came up out of Egypt; so in like manner I observed in this Parliament
dissolved, that though some were malicious against the people of God, yet there
were some among them that showed kindness, and that to their power stood for
the freedom and liberties of the people, though others were against it, and
such were to be spared, and not altogether so smitten as the others were; and
as Saul privately gave notice to the Kenites, which were among the Amalekites,
what he intended as touching the Amalekites that they might depart and escape;
so it it is probable that those that were found to be honest among the
Parliament were made acquainted of what was intended touching their
dissolution, that they might be aware of it: for some which were of the
Parliament did assist in the dissolution of the rest; and these may be said to
be Kenites, for that they showed kindness to the people of God, and for which
they were spared: for that power which appears to act in any people for the
good of all people, is to be spared and permitted to act, for that appears to
be the power of God which will suppress all that appears to act contrary to it,
in the time of its manifesting sorth it self.

CHAP. VII. What Is meant by Agag the King, the best of the sheep and of the
oxen, which Saul spared alive, and how they discovered themselves by bleating
and lowing.
BUt now Saul did not only spare the Kenites which he should have done, What is
meant by Agag the best of the sheep and of the oxen, and how they are, yet
ought not to be spared. 1 Samuel 15.9. verse. 15.
but he also spared Agag the King of the Amalekites alive, and the best of the
sheep and of the oxen, and of the fatlings and of the lambs, and all that he
thought was good, which he should not have done, and would not utterly destroy
them, but every thing that he thought was vile and refuse, that he destroyed
utterly; but the rest he reserved for himself, and said it was to sacrifice to
the Lord.

Now Saul spared Agag the King, and we may spare him also, which is more then
we ought to do, who is the chief of the Amalekites and head of that oppressive
power ruling in and by men, or of that man the husband of this woman before
mentioned, which first brought him forth as her son, and afterward became her
husband; for indeed her sons in time come to marry her: but this Agag being
once slain by the Lord, 1 Samuel 15.33.
as the other was by Samuel, then this woman Agags mother, and also wife,
becomes childless and husbandless to all but the Lord; so much for Agag which
Saul spared alive.

Next he spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, the fattest and
wel-favouredst of the cattle but flew the worst, the poorest, and il-favouredst
of them; which alludes to this in our times, even the sparing of the best of
men, Great men, Rich men, Church Members, or the best of their forms,
ordinances, ways and worships, together with the best of men's Honors, Laws
and Interests, and the slaying of the worst so called, to wit, Cavaleers and
Prelates or Presbyterian forms, which should all be slain as to man, and remain
living to none but to God, and no one of all accounted better then another, but
the best as the worst, and the worst as the best; he that is great should be
slain to his greatness, and he that is holy in himself or any thing but the
Lord, should be slain to that holiness, and no man should be great, neither
holy in themselves, but all in the Lord, with whom there is no respect of
persons or of things, 2 Samuel 14.14. Iam. 2.1. Psalm. 139.12.
but all are alike to him; for to him light and darkness, (the rich and to the
poor, the Saint and the Sinner) are both one, and should be so to us; but this
privilege we have lost for a time.

Now as the sheep and the oxen which Saul spared, discovered themselves by
bleating and lowing, so do some called Independents and Anabaptists now begin
to discover themselves of their intents and purposes, by lifting up their voice
in their meetings of preaching and praying, which I have heard with my own
ears, crying down al men and forms besides them selves, but crying up
themselves as the only men that should rule and reign next, and have the power
of Government in their hands, and that their forms, ways, worships and opinions
might still be kept up, as that which (they suppose) is best accepted with God,
all which may be said to be but the bleating of the sheep and the lowing of
oxen, as the fruit of the best and fairest, the fattest and wel-favouredst
cattle which feed upon many hills, Psalm. 50.9, 10, 11.
that is many Forms and Ordinances, the New Moons and Sabbaths, their calling
of Assemblies, solemn meetings, and their appointed Feasts, which the Lord
says he has no delight in, neither any need of, but is weary of them, and
says that when they spread their hands, or preach, he will hide his eyes; when
they make many prayers, Isa. 1.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
he will not hear; for their hands are full of blood, as sin, uncleanness,
cruelty, and covetousness, and in all that they do they do but discover
themselves what they are and would be, and that their design is to be great and
eminent in the world among men; but though men may spare one another, yet the
Lord will not spare them, but will bring them down together, with all their
laws, works, ways and religious forms, that they have set up in opposition to
the Lord Jesus; all shall fall, even to the ground, and men shall go over them,
pass by them, and live above them in the Lord.

CHAP. VIII. Samuel reproving Saul for not obeying the voice of the Lord, who
excuses himself, and lays it upon the people that were with him, whom he
obeyed more then God; how to obey is better then Sacrifice; what a true
Sacrifice is, best accepted, and who offers it.
NOw when the Lord saw that Saul had not obeyed his command, but had reserved
part of the spoil to himself, he acquainted Samuel with it, who was grieved at
it, and came to meet Saul, who presently began to justify himself, and Saul
said, Blessed be thou of the Lord, 1 Samuel 15.13, 14.
I have performed his command; then said Samuel, what means then the bleating
of the sheep in my ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear? as if he
might say, me thinks I see something still reserved which should not have been;
then Saul to excuse himself, said that the people (which were with him) spared
the best of the sheep and of the oxen to sacrifice; he did not; so now in these
times, verse. 15.
if any man, law, act, form, way, worship, or opinion which was formerly made,
set up, and maintained by any to keep the people in bondage, be still
preserved, kept up, and maintained (to please any one sort of people) which the
Lord would have put down, and then the Lord do acquaint any of his servants
with this, and they do acquaint him or them which should have put it down, then
may he or they excuse themselves, and say as Saul did, that the people or those
that were with us spared it themselves, or desired it of us, and therefore was
it spared, supposing in it to have done well, they who desired it appearing to
us a people walking in the ways of God, etc.

But let me tell any that should so do, that this were still but to act like
Saul, and to keep something of an old rotten interest, and to advance the
Kingdom of the World, wherein is hypocrisy, oppression and tribulation; and
this kingdom being still kept up and exalted in form and formality, where then
is the exaltation of Christ and his kingdom in Spirit and Power in the hearts
of his people, which is the Kingdom that ought to be set up, and will be set up
by the Lord of Lords in opposition to all other? and where is the work of
righteousness, peace, joy and freedom among men, while this work of oppression
and cruelty is carried on? therefore so long we may conclude, that in them the
work is not yet done; to them the Kingdom of Christ is not yet come; by them
the voice of the Lord is not yet obeyed, and with them the Kingdom of
Antichrist not yet destroyed.

But though Saul did thus neglect the command of the Lord, and please the
people, and then to excuse himself lay it upon the people; yet let it not be so
with us; let not us seek to please men, who would desire to have any thing
spared or reserved that should be destroyed; but in all things let us seek to
please the Lord and to obey his voice, and what his word of commands bids us to
do, that let us do, which is, that no oppressor or tyrant be lest in the land,
that there may be no more complaining in our streets, Isa. 33.24.
or that the Inhabitant there may not say he is sick.

Again, Saul farther to excuse himself, says, that what was kept, 1 Samuel
15.21, 22.
it was to sacrifice to the Lord: then said Samuel, has the Lord as great
delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices as in obeying his voice? behold, to
obey is better then sacrifice, Isai. 1.
and to harken then the fat of Rams; and who has required this at your hands
says the Lord, that you should reserve any thing for me, who am full and need
nothing? Psalm. 50.9, 10, 11, 12.
and what should the Lord now require of us who he knows has nothing, but to
offer unto him the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving? Isa. 51.16.
and that is not ours neither, but his; nor offered by us, but by him; it is not
we, nor all our fasts, prayers, forms and worships that he accepts of, but a
sacrifice of righteousness, the Lord Jesus, who has already offered up himself
once for all; Heb. 9.28.
and all that he looks for from us, and which he will make us to be, is to be a
still silent passive people, Psalm. 46.10.
and to know that he only is active, who will do all things himself, and cause
us to be silent; for a silent passive subjected condition to the Lord in all
men, is that which the Lord accepts of, and is the only sacrifice that can
be offered up unto him, whose design now is to subject all men and things to
himself, and he only appear and be made manifest in all, which is the Kingdom
of the Lord, where nothing of man is to be seen in any thing, but all of the
Lord; and this is the pure and perfect obedience and only sacrifice the Lord
calls for in us, and which in his own time he by his mighty power will bring to
pass with us.

CHAP. IX. Of the Amalekites unjust possessing the Earth, both of the
Philistians, and of Judah, of their giving gifts one to another, and of what.
WE read in the 30 chapter of this Book of Samuel, verse. 16. how the Amalekites
had spread themselves over all the Earth, eating, drinking, dancing, sporting
and delighting themselves, because of the great spoil that they had taken from
the people, both out of the land of the Philistians and out of the land of
Judah.

And were not the Governors of this land, together with their authority and
family, their infants and sucklings, so spread over this land and Nation,
eating and devouring the fat of the land, both of Cavaleers and Roundheads (so
called) enemies and friends, or all men of what judgment or opinion soever?
all were subjected to them, and they had the spoil of all in their hands, or at
their command to dispose of as they pleased, even their wealth, riches, honor,
peace, freedom, and all privileges whatsoever; they were Lords over it, and
could and did command it at their own will and pleasure.

And have we not seen for many ages, how they of this and other lands, have
continued eating, drinking, dancing, feasting, feeding and refreshing
themselves, making themselves rich and fat and merry by the peoples rights,
sending and giving gifts one to another of that which they had taken from the
people, Rev. 11.10.
rejoicing and delighting themselves in it, that they had made all men subject
to them and their ways, and had the spoil and command of all in their hands to
do with it as they would? this was the merriment of the Amalakites in their
cruelty toward the people of the Philistians and of Judah, whose spoil they
had got into their hands, and which Saul was commanded to recover from them,
and restore to the people again, but did not.

CHAP. X. How men entrusted with the Civil power of the Nation, ought not to be
proud, and high-minded, but humble and meek before God and man; that honor is
the ready way to dishonor, and how.
NOw observe, because Saul did not do the work he should, 1 Samuel 15.18, 19.
but did evil in the sight of the Lord, in that he spared any of that which he
should have destroyed, and recovered not the people, but suffered this
oppression still to abide upon the people, therefore his kingdom was divided
from him, verse. 28.
and given to another that was better then he.

A good caution for any who have the like power in their hands, not to act like
Saul; for if they do, they may expect the power to be again taken from them and
given to another, even to David, as Saul's was.

While Saul was humble, meek, and lowly in his own sight, and before all men,
he appeared to follow the Lords steps, Mat 5.5.11.29. 1 Samuel 15.17.
and was blessed, and then was this power given to him; but when he began to
exalt himself, and to become great and high, both in himself and before men,
that he was turned back from following the Lord to do as he commanded him, then
was his Kingdom rent from him.

And how should this teach Rulers and Governors now in these times, who sit in
Authority, to be humble, lowly and meek, both in themselves and before men, and
not to Lord it over the rest of their fellow-Brethren, farther then it shall be
for their Brethrens liberty, peace and freedom, whom they are to protect in all
good things? but there is so much of man, flesh and self remaining in all men,
that no sooner is any power put into their hands, but they are presently puffed
up, filled with pride and haughtiness of spirit, setting up themselves above
their Fellow Creatures, looking for honor from them, which immediately proves
their ruin, downfall and destruction, according as it is written, Psalm. 49.12.
Psalm. 37.11.
Man being in honor abides not, he is like the beasts that perish: but the
meek shall inherit the Earth, and delight themselves in the abundance of Peace.

Then, O that the Lord would be pleased to give such a power of himself into
our hearts and spirits that would make us to be silent, humble and meek before
him, and toward all men, that we might inherit this abundance of peace, and
not to exalt our selves above what we are or ought to be, Psalm. 147.6.
but to become one with all and to all in the Lord, and then should we stand
and not fall, be most exalted when we are most huble: yet we find that the way
which the Lord does take to bring down the haughtiness of a Peoples power or
interest, Amos 9.2.
is first to set it up, or suffer it to be set up above what it ought to be,
and then bring it down with a vengeance, as he will all men that are exalted in
themselves, and not in the Lord; and there can be no greater exaltation in the
Lord, then for a man to be humble in himself.

When thou wast little in thine own eyes said Samuel to Saul, 1 Samuel 15.17.
wast thou not then made King over Israel? But when thou begannest to be lifted
up in thy self, and to reject the word of the Lord, Ver. 26, 27, 28
then the Lord rejected thee from being King, rent thy kingdom from thee, took
the power out of thy hands, and gave it to David.

CHAP. XI. Of David's possessing Saul's Kingdom, his recovering the spoil which
Saul did not, and his equal dividing it among the people.
ANd now David comes, takes the Kingdom, possesses it, and does the work that
God commanded, he smites the Amalekites, and recovers all the spoil, the rights
and privileges of the people, which they had carried away, and restores it
again into their hands, That there was nothing wanting among them, neither
small nor great, neither sons nor daughters, 1 Samuel 30.18, 19, 20.
goods nor any thing that they had taken away; David recovered all, both of the
flocks, herds, lands, goods and cattels, it all became David's spoil.

And now it may please the Lord to put it into the hearts of those who are to
act for the Civil Right of the Nation, to act like David in this thing, to
recover all that the People have lost, and restore it again into their hands as
David did, that none might complain of any want, or lie under any oppression
any longer, neither say, One has too much, and another too little of any kind
whatsoever; but that every one may have that which is convenient for him, Prove.
30.8, 9.
to his own satisfaction and content, which is the Kingdom of the Lord.

And O what a pure, joyful, peaceable Kingdom should we then have, Isa. 9.6, 7.
when Christ shall thus take the Kingdom to himself, and reign in the place of
man, as David did in the place of Saul, and so restore the people unto their
rights again as in the beginning, where all men shall have an equal proportion
of satisfaction, and where he that has least shall know no want, and he that
has much shall have nothing over, but every one shall enjoy himself in all
things that himself has, and does possess in the Lord!

This will be the Kingdom that Christ ( David's Lord) will take to himself, and
for the People to establish them in, and this will be a joyful Kingdom, it
will be the Lords Kingdom.

And now if the Lord will yet be pleased in and by this power to work
righteousness, do Justice, and to show mercy, he is to recover us all our
rights and privileges from the hands of our enemies who have detained it from
us; he is to recover all that ever we have lost, and which those that have been
our Rulers have taken from us, and restore it again unto us, and not suffer
them to go away with any thing but what is their own, and was before given them
by the Lord, as to us; nothing of what was the Peoples (whose interest was as
great as theirs in any thing that is the Lords) are they to carry with them,
but to leave it behind them, and the people again to possess and enjoy it as
their own right and privilege.

CHAP. XII. Of some that desire to have the greater part of the spoil to
themselves, and would not have it equally divided, who and what they are, with
David's answer to them, and how it alludes to these times.
NOw when David had done this work upon the Amalekites, and recovered the spoil
of all into his hands, then before such time that he had given it the people,
those that were with him at the doing of it, 1 Samuel 30.22.
wicked men of Belial desired the whole spoil to be divided among them, and not
that others who tarried at home by the stuff, and went not to the battle,
should have any part, save every man his wife and his children; and so may some
called Independents and Anabaptists desire now, who did most assist the General
in the dissolution of this late Parliament; they may like those wicked men of
Belial, desire to have the power, the freedom and liberty of the Nation to
themselves, and not that others who assisted not and are not the same with
them, should have any part of it save only their wives and children, which they
indeed would not be troubled with, though they would be content to keep that
which should maintain them, and the freedom which they should walk in, when all
people should have the same liberty and freedom together with themselves, and
be masters of their own rights and privileges, the one as the other; and not
for some to say that because we have assisted and taken more pains and care in
the recovering of it then others have done, that therefore the spoil shall be
ours, and the Nation shall now be governed wholly by us, and according to our
wills, without the free choice and election of the free People; this were but a
wicked saying, and all wicked men of Belial that should desire it; but though
others might not personally appear to act with them in this work, Ephesians. 4.4,
5, 6.
yet the same spirit, life, and operating power which lived in others, acted it
self by them for that work being the same in all men; and they without that
spirit, life and power, (all without God) could not do it; therefore it is meet
that the same spirit and life in what form or body soever it be, should have
the same freedom granted it as others in the same work with others.

But now those who do not rightly know God, that would be all themselves, and
have all to themselves, and that do not love their neighbors as themselves,
Levit. 19.18.
will not agree that their neighbors (with them) shall have the same equal
share and proportion of the spoil which they have gained, that is their freedom
and liberty, but will deny them of it, and say, it is ours, we have gained it,
sought for it, and will have it; but I say, this were still but to set up (and
act like) another Power of Flesh, or more fleshy then ever, also to marry
another Woman, and so to beget more children which must also be slain with the
rest when ever they appear to be brought forth or set up.

But now see David's answer to these men of Belial that thus desired the spoil,
and would not yield to have it equally divided, Ye shall not do so (said he)
with that which the Lord has given us, who has preserved us, and delivered
the company that came against us into our hands; 1 Samuel 30.23, 24.
for who will harken to you in this matter? but as his part is that goes down
to the battle, so shall his part be that tarrieth by the stuff, they shall
part alike.

And now this answer may our General (if the Lord shall please to put it into
his heart) give to those of any one party, faction, or opinion, that should
desire to have all the power, rule and authority put into their hands, and they
only to have the greatest liberty and freedom to themselves, as now some have
done, and declared for in their Meetings of Preaching, Praying, etc. No, You
shall not do so my brethren with that which the Lord has given us, who has
hitherto preserved us, and delivered all that ever came against us, into our
hands; for who will harken to you in this thing? but as his part is that acted
with us in person, is of the Army, and does desire it; so shall his part be
that acted not with us in person, is not of the Army, neither does desire it;
they shall part alike, have their equal share in true freedom and liberty; for
has the Lord been pleased to give the rights and freedoms of the People into
our hands, for us with others to give it to them whose right it is as well as
ours, and that deserve as much of it in equity and reason as we do, and shall
we withhold it from them? no, we will not, but they shall all have their equal
share in it to use at their own wills and pleasures; every one shall have his
freedom in things that are not hurtful to the Peace, Liberty and Freedom one of
another; for it is theirs, and belongs to them as well as to us; and therefore
who will harken to you in this thing that you should keep it from them? surely
none but such as are of your own party, and that would maintain the same
interest with you; and this answer being given, it would be as an answer from
the Lord.

CHAP. XIII. A foresight of the peoples oppression by the next Power; how none
ought to be forced or compelled to any form or way of Worship, but as they are
persuaded in their own minds; that all Forms shall cease, and when.
ANd now should a number of men, either Independents or Anabaptists, or both,
be now chosen, and have the power of the Nation put into their hands, as I
believe they will, by whom I should he glad to see good things done; yet I
apprehend in my self that we shall find some of them in devouring to set up
themselves, and to subject all to themselves, their forms, ways, and opinions,
and to keep up an Interest of their own as others have done before, and be as
bitter and cruel in their spirits toward others as some ever were exercising
the same authority over those that are of a contrary judgment to them, as ever
Prelates or Presbyterians have been, and covet as much after riches and honor
as others have done: all which things have been signified already to me by some
of those parties in the several meetings both at Blackfriars in London and
elsewhere; and those things by them practiced I fear will at last prove their
ruin and destruction, as it has done to others before them, and will to all
that shall in like manner be set up, and so act.

And now that I would have none in point of Religion to be subjected, tied and
brought to any form of Religion by men, contrary to their wills, but as the Lord
shall bring them; for what ever their judgment be in the Worship of God, so
far as they do not injure others, let them enjoy a freedom and liberty in it,
and use their conscience in that way they are best persuaded of in God for the
peace of their own souls; Romans 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
let every one be persuaded in his own mind (says Paul) and let us not use
force and violence to turn any out of the way he walks in, wherein he is
persuaded he sees any thing of God, 1 Cor. 7.24. Luke 3.14. Cant. 3.5.
but let every one abide where he is, and be content with the wages he has
given him, and not stir or awake his beloved till he shall please to come and
manifest himself to him in a higher and brighter discovery of himself, and so
give him more of the knowledge of him: for it is not a laying any outward
restraint upon the people by the laws of men that can bring them in to believe
the Truth; 1 Tit. 2.11, 12. Psalm. 31.12.
but the Lord with his love must constrain them, and by his Spirit must direct
them; Uphold me with thy Spirit, says David; and as we use to say, better stay
at home then be forced to go to Church; so for a man to preach, pray, read,
hear, or any other thing of that nature, and not to do it but in submission to
the laws of men, he has no peace or comfort in it, and then better left
undone; therefore let all men act their freedom in point of Worship toward God
which way they please, and also in other things so far as it is not against the
peace and wellbeing one of another, and that which is not hurtful to body,
goods, and good name; he that will worship God in this or the other way may; he
that will have the Sacrament and be baptized, may; or he whose spirit is not
drawn forth to do any of all these, may choose, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. Romans 14. Gal. 6.1.
and let no man whatsoever be restrained from or to any Form of Worship that he
is not in himself persuaded in conscience to, but in things that may be hurtful
one to another; and such a one restore with the spirit of meekness, though all
Forms of Worship and outward External Ordinances shall cease, perish, and come
to nothing with the using of them, Col. 2.21.
as God shall please to give men a sight of the emptiness that is in them; and
in the mean time let all men have their freedom to use them, and not to use
them; and let not one man think that he should enjoy his right, liberty and
freedom in the way and things that seem best to him, and not that others
should also; No, it shall not be so with you; but every one shall have the like
freedom and liberty in all things that the Lord has made him free in,
according as I have said before.

CHAP. XIV. How men in Power are not to act only for the freedom of themselves
or a few, but for the freedom of all, and to abase themselves to exalt others;
wherein is manifested Christ doing and receiving for us as for himself.
ANd now let not those who are to act for the good of the People, and to settle
them again in their own rights and privileges, now appear to act for
themselves more then for the people, Mat. 23. from the 1 verse to the 12.
whose servants they ought to be, and not their masters; for let all men serve
one another in love (says Christ) and he that would be great, Gal. 5.13.
let him become your servant; and let them not endeavor to keep or reserve any
thing to themselves of that which is the peoples, but let them restore to every
man his own house, wealth, land, riches, honor, freedom and liberty, their
Sheep, and their Oxen, their Camels and Asses; Psalm. 115.16.
or give them freedom in all that is the Lords, and which the Lord has given
to them, to wit, the whole Earth, and all things therein; and if this be not
done according to the severity of the Lords command, then you of the Nations
that dwell upon the face of the Earth, whose right and privilege all things
are in the Lord Jesus, demand it, call for it, and suffer not them in whose
hands the Power is, to rest till you have it, are settled in it, and possessed
with it; Psalm. 2.8.
for it is your own inheritance, and you with that are all the Lords.

And this would be the peaceable and joyful kingdom of Jesus Christ, when we
are made to act all for the good one of another, and not only for our selves
and our own interests, maliciously endeavoring to set up our selves one above
another; but that we should love one another, continue saying and doing as
Christ our Elder Brother said and did before us, Luke 2.14.
Glory be to God in the highest, Peace and good will toward men on Earth, and
let all men do to others as they would others should do to them, for this is
the Law and the Prophets, and the rule of Christ and his Apostles, Love your
Neighbor as your self.

And now has the Lord been pleased to give the Power of the Nation into the
hands of one, or some men? and has he or they recovered (as to themselves) all
that the people had lost, which was their Native rights and privileges, also
their freedom in spiritual things, a Kingdom of righteousness, joy and peace? O
then that they would endeavor to act for the good of all people, to settle
them again in that which is their own, the establishment of this Kingdom in all
its Fundamental Laws, Rights, and Liberties, and that no man may be suffered to
act for the setting up of himself, or any particular private interest, to
inslave the People; but rather let them abase themselves one for another, and
do as they have the Lord for an example, who was sent to redeem the People; and
what would he not undergo for them that he might redeem them? Isa. 10. Phil.
2.7, 8, 9.
He humbled himself and became obedient unto the death of the Cross, turned not
away his face from shame and spitting; he became of no reputation with men, but
cast himself down to them, that they might be exalted with him to God, and
whatsoever the Father gave him, he freely gave it them; Joh. 17.21, 22
so should you do who now appear to be sent to redeem the people from all
outward oppression and tyranny, to their former rights and privileges; The
same mind should be in you as was in Christ Jesus; Phil. 2.5.
and what should you not undergo for them? you should be cast down, abased and
humbled in your selves, become of no reputation, and then with the people you
should rise again, be exalted and made honorable, and so come to enjoy your
rights together, one as far forth as another, and you freely to give to the
people that which now is given to you without partiality, which is for every
man to enjoy his freedom in all things that belong to him in the Lord, and this
would be to act like Jesus Christ, and to follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21.
which most men profess they do, but do not.

Jesus Christ suffered all men in their several ways and opinions, and forced
no man to any way, form or opinion of things, by any outward Law, Rule, or
Inforcement, but by the operation or working of his own and mighty power within
them, Hos. 11.4. Joh. 6.44. Rev. 19.11.
he drew them to him and after him, who is the King and Captain of our
salvation, who is gone forth upon a white Horse, conquering and to conquer, to
redeem his people Israel out of darkness and ignorance, from men, sin, death,
hell, and the devil, and to recover all freedom, liberty, peace and eternal
salvation for them; and he will not receive or do any thing for himself
distinctly from us, but what he has he freely gives unto us, he himself being
the same with us: 1 John 4.17. John 17.22.
For as he is, so are we in this world; and the glory that thou have given me
(says Christ) I have given them, that they may be one as we are one; and all
that is mine is theirs, and they with all that they have are mine, being
members of my body, of my flesh, and of my bones; Ephesians. 5.30. Romans 8.17.
bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, and so joynt-heirs with me in all
things that I am heir to in the Father; and then as Christ and we are
fellow-heirs, so in like manner let us be fellow-heirs one with another in all
things that each other do possess and enjoy in the Lord, being all brethren of
one and the same family, and members of one and the same body; for we are
members one of another. Ephesians. 4.25.


Christ says, that the Father has given him power, glory, peace, freedom
liberty, life, light and salvation, yea, Romans 8.29. John 17.21, 22, 23, 24.
all that the Father was, is, and had, that he should give it all unto us his
people; and we come to enjoy it all in him, as the same with him; then when the
Lord Jesus has given unto us and to our knowledge all that the Father has
given him, then as the Father was free to give unto Christ, and as Christ was
free to give unto us, 1 Cor. 7.21, 22.
so shall we be then free to give one unto another, being all the Lords
Freemen.

And now, has the Lord Jesus made any of us free, in this pure and perfect
freedom of his love and freedom? then let us not use it to the satisfying of
the flesh, as of our selves or any other in particular, to the prejudice of
others, but for the good and safety, the preservation and wel-being of our
selves and all men whatsoever; Let us in love serve one another, and then it
will appear to be perfect freedom, 1 Cor. 7.22.
the freedom of the Lord, and we the Lords Freemen; but if we should appear to
act otherways then this, we act not like Christ, John 8.36.
or as such that are made free by Christ, but still as bondmen and not
freemen, when we withhold from any people or thing, any thing that is the
Lords, and given to us for them by the Lord.

And now, has the Lord given into our hands the Liberty, Peace, Freedom and
whole trust of the Nation at this time? O then let us be just in our places, to
restore it to the rest of our fellow-brethren whose it is, and unto whom it
belongs, and let us not so act as to keep it in our own hands, or to lock it up
in a chest, or under a Law from them, and they not to enjoy it, but let them
have it and be possessed with it, and in all things let us see the Lord acting
by, in, and to himself in us, for the good of all people.

CHAP. XV. Christ the true Restorer and Establisher of the Peoples Rights, and
not men; God shaking, overturning and destroying men, and all things that are
settling; how men have not power to settle any thing; and how we in all changes
and turnings, are to eye the Lord, and rest only in him.
Jesus Christ is he that must recover again all that is lost, Ezekiel. 34.16.
and bring back all that is driven away, and restore into our hands again all
our Freedoms, Liberties and Estates, both temporal and spiritual; all shall be
brought home to us by the Captain of our salvation, the Lord Jesus Christ; and
in whatsoever person or persons he may act in or by for the accomplishment of
this work, as also in all that is acted, let us behold the Lord in it, and say
it is he who works all things according to the Counsel of his own Will, whose
Counsel shall stand, and who will do all his pleasure; Isa 46.10. Exodus 14.3.
and let our eyes be upon the Lord continually to behold his salvation, and
then shall we appear to have all, peace, content and satisfaction, in all
things that are acted and done by the Lord, and so see all things whatsoever
freely to be bestowed upon us of the Lord; and though there may be a people or
party of any one Faction whatsoever that would endeavor to keep the rights of
the people in their own hands, Psalm. 18.46.
yet let us wait upon the Lord, trust only in him who is the God of our
salvation; and though we may for a time see it to be withheld from us, yet let
us peaceably and quietly wait upon the Lord for the restoring of it to us; Heb.
10.37.
for certainly the time is at hand wherein he that shall come will come, and
restore the Kingdom to Israel, and will not tarry or neglect the doing of it,
but a short and a quick work will he make upon the earth, he will cut it short
in righteousness, and so take the Kingdom to himself, and himself will rule and
ragin in his own Kingdom, which consists not in meats and drinks, in observing
times, Romans 14.17, 18.
places, forms, ordinances, ways and worships, but in righteousness, joy and
peace in the holy Spirit; and this is the Kingdom of the Father which we all
wait for, expect and pray for, when we say Thy Kingdom come. Matthew. 6.10.


But if there be a time wherein men or the enemies of Christ must yet reign
with their Kingdom in opposition to the Lord and his Kingdom, let us be content
with it, and patiently undergo the suffering of it; only let us tell them, that
it is no continuing city for them wherein they shall abide or reign ever; for
it is now even the last time, and the higher we see them to be advanced in
themselves, the nearer is the time of their dissolution, or coming down; for a
short and a quick work will the Lord now make with all flesh; and every one
that is appointed to have his time, his turn, and his overturn, his beginning
and his end, shall have it, which many we see have already had. And no party
that now appears to be set up and endued with power below God shall stand long,
no not long enough to settle or accomplish any thing but their own shame, Phil.
3.19. Psalm. 83.16, 17, 18. Heb. 12.27.
which shall befall all men that now go about to settle any thing when the Lord
is shaking all things that may be shaken, that those things which cannot be
shaken may remain; and all things besides himself are in a mutiny, a movable
and unsettled condition, still rolling about, like so many clouds from East to
West, or from one interest to another, that it will settle no more till it
settles and centers in the Lord, where it can move no more.

And then shall we say, Luke 1.68. Isai. 3.12, 13.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has visited and redeemed his people
from out of the hands of cruel men, Children that have been their oppressors,
and women that have ruled over them and caused them to err; and so brings all
men forth of captivity and bondage, ignorance and darkness, out of all mutable,
changeable and unsettled conditions that we have been in and under; and so leads
captivity captive for us, Ephesians. 4.8.
and gives gifts to us, which is perfect freedom, love, joy, peace,
satisfaction and content in all things with the Lord Jesus, which is the
Kingdom of the Lord, and will be also our Kingdom when it is thus brought home
to us, and made manifest in us by the Lord.

In the mean time it matters not much how variously soever we see men act in
darkness, seeing it is not long before the Lord will appear to act all things
himself in light, and we shall then appear to act all things with him in the
same light, and so have joy, peace and comfort in all things with him: till the
accomplishment of which work, John. 15.1.
let every one patiently sit down under his own Vine, the Lord Jesus, till the
grapes be through ripe, and then wait upon the Lord for the bringing in of his
own Kingdom, to restore to us the full fruition of those graces of
righteousness, Romans 14.
peace, and joy in the holy Spirit, which is the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus.

Thus I could not but declare my apprehensions in these words at this time to
you, as they are and were comprehended in me, and made known to me for you.

FINIS.

