A VINDICATION OF THE ROMAN CATHOLICS OF THE English Nation. FROM Some
aspersions lately cast upon them.

IN A Letter from a Protestant Gentleman in the Country, to a CITIZEN of
LONDON.

Levitic. 19.13. Thou shall not calumniate thy Neighbor, nor oppress him by
violence. LONDON, Printed in the year, 1660.

Dear Cousin,
I Received your Letter, together with the acceptable Present of the Kings
Character, for which I return you many Cordial thanks. I cannot sufficiently
express the great joy and contentment I had, to behold such an Excellent and
Lively piece; which speaks clearly the hand of Apelles, who is only fit to
paint Alexander. But my joy was more then redoubled, by the assured hopes you
give me of our approaching happiness, to see shortly the Original himself, and
to taste the sweetness of his just Government; which will be the more
pleasant, after the sour herbs we have eaten these many years, under the
Tyranny of our late Usurpers. Yea, I am confident that after a little
Experience, we shall say of his Majesty, what the Queen of Sheba confessed of
Solomon, that his wisdom and works exceed his fame. And as we see the present
Generation blesses and magnifies that Eminent Instrument of our unexpected
happiness, his excellency the Lord General Monck; so without any question, all
future Generations will extol his memory and honor his Posterity.

But there was one thing in your Letter that startled me a little, and that was
concerning the Roman Catholics, of whom you write, that they are generally
reputed Enemies to the King; that they obstruct what in them lies, his Return;
and that they are Favorers of the Phanaticks. For all which you bring no other
ground, but a general report, and that you were told so by a person of public
employment, and of good Intelligence.

I will not question what the Principles of their Religion may drive them to,
for I have often heard, that they are not so sound concerning the Civil
Magistrate as those of the Church of England, though they themselves strongly
deny it. But that de facto they have done any thing against the Kings Interest,
and much more that they are guilty of the aforesaid crimes, seemed very
improbable to me, by reason of my experience in affairs since the beginning of
the troubles, and of the knowledge I have had of their faithful deportments to
the late King. Yet I suspended my judgment, till I spoke with a Catholic
Gentleman my Neighbor and Acquaintance, a very moderate and intelligent
person, who will rather confess than excuse a fault in any of his professision.

After some few days I made him a visit, and showed him both the Kings
Character and your letter; but he no sooner read that part of it that touched
those of his profession, but he fell a smyling, and said he admired much where
such deep malice could be found, to invent such notorious calumnies, but much
more how any prudence could credit them: Whereupon I took occasion to tell him
that if the R. Catholics were so innocent of this and other aspersions, as he
pretended, they ought to vindicate themselves by some public apology, putting
their accusers to the proof; wherein if they failed, they would be esteemed by
all the World, mear Calumniators, whereunto he answered that Innocency's best
buckler against gross calumny, is profound silence, after the example of our
blessed Savior, and of chaste Susanna: For writing or speaking in such a case,
is not only for the most part lost labor, but also it is a weakening of truth,
and the endeavor to wipe away groundless calumny, is in some measure a
contaminating of Innocence; for what had bin more incongruous for the
Catholics, who were branded with that detestable crime of cutting off the
Kings head, with many such forgeries, than to have written an apology to clear
themselves from that foul aspersion. Certainly by so doing, they had soyl'd the
candor of their integrity. For as something ever sticks after a bold calumny,
so there ordinarily remains some suspicion of guilt after a needless apology;
Excusatio non petita, Accusatio manifesta est. Therefore it is best in some
cases to slight without any vindication or confutation, what is said without
any probability or proof; lies can never last long, and Truth ever at last
prevails; every man's works will bear better testimony of him, than other men's
words can do against him.

But because I perceive, said he, that this calumny is more easily believed
than many others, and that by some sober and discreet men, such as I conceive
your Cousin to be, I will bring some reasons that may clear both you and him in
this matter, or any other moderate man that has left any room in his breast
for truth, or has the least spark of Christian charity in his heart.

It Is a common axiom established both by Law and Reason; Catholic Gentlemen
should have been seen laughing and fleering in Westminster Hall, at the Kings
trial; which as it is frivolous in it self, (though it were true) to cast such
a foul aspersion upon all others of that profession, as if they either plotted
or desired the Kings death; so it is false, since the persons accused of that
insolency, were known to be out of England, in that hour of darkness; and yet
this trifling and false presumption is the strongest proof of that high
aspersion, that has hitherto appeared in print: If such accusations and proofs
were sufficient, who would be innocent. This reason alone would serve to clear
the Catholics from the aforesaid aspersion, before any just and reasonable
Judge, Pagan or Mahumetan: How much more ought it to serve among Christians,
who profess not only Truth, but Charity, which is the life of Religion, and
bond of perfection; this was his first reason, the second he proposed after
this manner.

Though both in justice and reason it be incumbent only to the accuser to prove
his accusation, who having had experience of their faithful services in his
great straits, speaks thus of them in that Excellent book of his Meditations.
I am sorry the Papists should have a greater sense of their Allegiance than
many Protestant Professors, who seem to have learned the worst principles of
the worst Papists, With much more to this purpose. I hope all old Royalists
will credit this Royal testimony. Then for the new Royal-Converts, they may be
pleased to remember by whom the King was branded with the name of Papist, and
his Army with the Title of Popish; and this small refreshment of their memory,
will soon clear their understanding, that the Papists were neither Enemies to
the King or to the ancient settled Government.

Lastly, I suppose the Anti-Royalists now ordinarily called Phanaticks, to be
in this point so ingenious, that they will not question it; or if they do,
they may easily have recourse to the Records of Habberdashers Hall, and those
will soon open their eyes. But if they would make a shorter cut, Let them
believe the irrefragable testimony of Mr. Nedham their old paper-Patron, who
affirms often in his Book Entitled Interest will not lie, that the Papists
adhered generally to the late King; and that it is only their Interest to bring
in his Son. Thus we see how evident a truth this is, that is confessed both by
friends and foes. But I will add further for the more abundant justification of
the English Catholics, that they can say two things for themselves that no
other profession in England can pretend to: which is, That no person of Honor
and Estate among them, ever bore arms against the King during the whole time
of the troubles: but upon the contrary, there was hardly any of them so
qualified that did not assist the King either with his person or purse, and
most of them with both. I speak not this for the present out of any design to
exalt the Catholics for their adhering to the late King: or to depresse the
Presbyterians and others who opposed him; but merely to manifest the truth in
a matter of fact, that we may the better penetrate into the depth of Calumny.

This then being a truth so clear and palpable, attested by the King himself,
known by his old and new friends, and acknowledged by his open and constant
Enemies, and generally by the whole Nation; who would think that any but mad
men or fools would question it? And yet there be some, who would be loath to be
ranged in either of these Categories, that have not only questioned, but
denied it, and affirmed the contrary; and which is worst of all, have oftener
then once published in print, that the cutting off of the late Kings head was
the plot and work of the Papists: though never one of them appeared against
him, and so many of them lost their lives and Estates to keep his head upon his
shoulders, and the Crown upon his head. If this be not a deep Calumny,
proceeding from the very gall of bitterness, let any indifferent man judge.
And therefore I admire how it could fall from the pens of two such Eminent
persons as Mr. Pryn and Mr. Baxter, who are in other matters justly esteemed
prudent and rational men, great lovers of Truth, and of their Countries good. I
will not be so uncharitable as to impute this defect in them to any malice; but
rather will ascribe it to an old hatred radicated in them against the
Catholics, which so obfuscates their understanding, that they cannot see such
a clear Truth; but speak in this matter like men in a fit of fury: tra impedit
animum ne possit cernere verum. Howsoever, we may extract hence this seasonable
observation, that if so deep a Calumny was cast upon the Catholics in relation
to the la^e King; notwithstanding the eminent and evident services they did
him, and the great losses they suffered for him; It Is the less wonder to see
now the like aspersions put upon them in relation to his Son; whose
Government never being as yet established in the Nation, they never were in a
capacity, nor could find occasions to show him such real signs of their
affections, as they had done to his Father. But let us proceed to the third
Reason.

As the English Catholics asserted and defended to their power, served, they
did him all service within their power, and never moved upon any particular
score of their own, but for the public good to assert with other good Patriots
the freedom of the Nation. The first part is well enough known to all impartial
men, and needs no proof. The Second is efficaciously proved. For were not they
Catholics, who after that unfortunate battle of Worcester concealed and
preserved, the King for the good of these Nations, from that Tygar, who was
every where searching to devour the Son, as he had destroyed the Father?
Again, did not the Catholics lay hold on all accasions to vindicate their
Countries liberty; as they did lately at the rising of Cheshire, 12. hundred of
their number in Lancashire and thereabouts, ready in arms, having offered to
join with Sir George Booth and his party, for obtaining of a Free-Parliament,
and freeing of the Nation from slavery? but were rejected, proclamations being
posted upon the walls and gates of Chester against them and all others of that
profession, forbidding them to approach their Camp. Wherein, notwithstanding
the aforesaid Catholics manifested a signal mark of singular affection to the
freedom of their Country, preferring it is good to their own; by offering to
join with their greatest Enemies, who breath nothing more than persecution
against them; and from whose Victory they could expect no other fruits, but
increase of their Misery. Moreover, have not the Catholics ever suffered since
the Kings death, under Cromwell and his pretended Parliaments which made most
severe laws against them; and that principally upon this score, that they
esteemed them as affectionate to the Royal Family and ancient Government; as
they were constant in the old Religion? Did not the Rump and what ever else
started up to power, Enemies to Monarchy, ever prosecute the Catholics, giving
them always the first place above other Cavaliers, in all their banishing
Proclamations, as being in their judgment the greatest and most engrain'd
Royalists. Therefore the Catholics having had no hand in the change of the
ancient Government, nor in raising of the new models that succeeded, and having
done nothing against the King or his interest, but rather showing him all real
proofs of devotion within their power, by preserving him at home in his
greatest danger, as their brethren have maintained him abroad in his greatest
necessity, and suffering these many years upon that score; It Is a groundless,
if not a malicious calumny, to say they are Enemies to the King, or any ways
obstruct his return.

Moreover the Catholics have no interest to keep out the King; their hands
died in the Fathers blood, are the greatest pretenses brought for keeping out
the Son. But as the Catholics have none of the Kings or other aforesaid Lands;
So they are not conscious to themselves of having had any hand in shedding of
the late Kings sacred blood; and so are free both of that horrid iniquity and
the Wages thereof. Therefore having neither of those interests, but clear
consciences, they are not afraid by the Kings happy return to suffer any
detriment in their Estates, or punishment in their persons; at least, for any
misdemeanour done by them, either to himself or his Father, and consequently,
they will not oppose or obstruct his Restitution. Neither can there any other
interest be pretended; unless peradventure this one, that the King is not of
their Religion. But though this would be a great interest even to the greatest
Royalists of another profession, to make them bend the contrary way, seeing
many of them have been heard to say often, and publicly, that if the King
turned Papist; they would turn his Enemies, and oppose him; yet it is of no
value for that intent, with the Catholics. For besides that they cannot
probably expect a King of their Religion, it carries not the least resemblance
of truth with it, that they who labored and suffered so much to keep the
Father in, though of another Religion, will ever endeavor to keep out the Son
though he be not of theirs. Hence may appear to any impartial man, that the
English Catholics are not inferior in their allegiance to the greatest
Royalists, and are much superior to their calumniators, who would oppose the
Kings return, if he were not of their Religion, which the others would not, and
actually do not, because their Religion and conscience tells them, that
Caesar's due ought not to be kept from him, be he of what Religion he pleases.
This we see the Catholics have no interest to keep out the King, and therefore
will not do it, but if we will follow the judgment of the ingenious Author of
the book entitled The interest of England truly stated, they have not only no
interest against the Kings return, but they have great interest to promote it;
and if we will credit the forging Pamphleter Nedham, in his answer to the
aforesaid book, it is only their interest to bring in the Son, who labored so
much to keep up the Father.

But I will bring you another reason: Cromwell and the Rump: For it is
impossible such a business that concerned them, should escape both; who had so
many friends and great intelligence, and yet be known to Pettifoggers: But we
are so confident of our innocence in this point, that we dare with all dutiful
submission appeal to the King himself, if in all these discoveries of the
Treacheries done against him here, ever any constant Catholic of quality and
estate in England was found accessory to the least of them; and we may and do
make the same appeal and challenge to Cromwells most intimate Favorites and
prime Counselors, yea, and to the whole Rumpists, to discover, if they can,
any of our number, with the aforesaid qualifications, that ever concurred with
them in any Plot, design or action against the King, either to pull him down
and set them up, or to keep him out; and them in which we are confident, or
rather assured they are not able to do. Where by may appear how much the
Catholics are wronged and calumniated, which will be seen more clearly, if
the black Catalogue of all Cromwells Intelligencers, and Trappanners, both at
home and abroad, with their tricks and deceits, for which he wasted great
sums, come to public view, as is shortly expected.

Lastly, to overthrow to the very foundation all aspersions of this nature cast
upon us, I desire all impartial men to consider. 1. That these calumnies
proceed originally from Enemies, and those not the fairest in the world, who
being often pressed to justify their accusations, could never do it; and hardly
durst show their faces. Now it is certain in all justice, that the accusations,
or bare Testimonies of enemies, especially such as cannot be seen, though they
be felt to sting, are no ways to be regarded: all parties in England ought to
be sensible of this truth; for there is none of them, that besides their own
proper guilt, has not had some dirt thrown upon them by enemies: Yea, the late
King himself could not escape this insolency; for he was first stabbed by
calumny in his reputation, before he was murdered by injustice in his person:
Therefore all parties knowing by experience how unjust it is to credit the
reports of enemies against themselves, ought to slight the calumnies of such
men against others. Secondly, these aspersions are to be slighted also for
another reason, because they do not hang together, and are full of lies and
contradictions: For in the Kings prosperity the Catholics were accused for
being the Kings enemies; and yet in his adversity, which is the proper Test of
true friendship, they were found among his best friends; but when Kings were
turned out, and new Governments crept in, then they were charged with a
contrary crime of being friends to the King, and enemies to Commonwealths and
Protectors. Now again, when there appears a probability, or rather certainty of
the Kings happy return; the accusers turn their tongue, and say, that they are
the Kings enemies, and favorers of the Phanaticks; so that according to those
men, whosoever become Masters, the Catholics must still be Traitors; but what
man in his right senses can believe such calumnies so full of lies and
contradictions, that they spoil the Authors of all credit, with others, as they
are void of all ingenuity in themselves. It may be truly said of them, Mentita
est iniquitus sibi. 3. As all their Calumnies are groundless, so some of them
are evidently false against the sense, reason and experience of all impartial
men. Such for example is, that the late Kings death was the plot and work of
the Papists; whereof we have spoke already. Another of the like nature is, That
many or some Tub-Preachers amongst the Sectaries are disguised Priests and
Jesuits, which is known to be a manifest untruth, by all understanding
Catholics; since such wicked dissimulation, is clearly against the principles
of their Religion, damnable in it self and by all humane power, upon
whatsoever pretense indispensable. 2. The same is known also to the Sectaries
themselves, who are well acquainted with their Preachers, Education, Trade, and
former profession; which have no affinity with Popish Priesthood or Jesuitisme.
Lastly, the same falsehood may be discovered by all indifferent men, since none
of those pretended disguised Preachers after so many years could ever be
detected. But, whosoever is acquainted with Antiquity, will find that our
Accusers in those two points, do imitate the old Heathen's; who imputed the
evils done by, or amongst themselves, to the Primitive Christians. So, when
Nero burnt Rome, and not daring or being ashamed to own it, he imposed it upon
the innocent Christians, and punished them most cruelly for his own crime;
turning the night into day, by making huge bonefires of many hundreds of their
bodies. The Authors of such Calumnies may pretend much conscience and Religion,
but surely they have little or none, since S. James assures us, that whosoever
would seem religious, and tempers not his tongue, that man's Religion is vain.
Fourthly and lastly, The reasons, whereon their Accusations that have any
grounds are founded, are so pedantick and insipide, that they seem to choke
reason it self: Whereof I will bring two examples 1. Because two or three
necessitous and loose Catholics (for no other and hardly any more can be
named) have been found fidling a little for the Commonwealths interest, they
presently infer that all others of the same profession are of the same stamp.
But do not all rational men see that this inference is irrational; and that
it may be much better retorted against the Authors, or against any other
profession in England than against the Catholics? 2. Because some Catholic
Gentlemen, who were in danger to loose their Estates did court Cromwell and
Lambert, whilst they were in power, the Accusers conclude, that not only these
Gentlemen but also all others of the same faith, are the Kings Enemies and
favorers of the Usurpers. But what can be more irrational than this Reason?
and what can be more uncharitable than this Conclusion? For is there any thing
more ordinary throughout the world, than for persons that are lying under the
lash of Usurpation and Tyranny, or under the severity of Laws, to cour those
that are in power, to divert the stroke from themselves? And if this can be
done by a civil respect, or visit, or by any such fair means, who can be so
irrational as to blame it? Do not the best Princes and States in the World,
and most virtuous and Religious persons practice it? Were not the Venetians
accustomed to court the great Turk and his Bashaes, to hold off the great
storm of war that has fallen since heavily upon them? Does not the Roman
Emperor the same to preserve his part of Hungary, out of that Barbarians
clutches? But yet what Turk or Barbarian would be so irrational, as to infer
from thence, that the Emperor and Venetians are friends to Turks and Enemies
to Christians? Do not some Eminent Protestants in France court Cardinal
Mazarine, as they did formerly his predecessor Richilieu? Are they therefore
become friends of Papists and Enemies of Protestants? Did not the sequestered
Cavaliers make all the friendship they could with the late Usurping powers to
find more easy compositions? should they therefore, and all Cavaliers be
esteemed the Kings Enemies, and favorers of Usurpers? If it was lawful for
the Protestant Cavaliers to use such means for self-preservation; it was no
less lawful, but much more necessary for the Catholics, who were ready to
sink not only for their Allegiance but also for their Religion, to grasp at any
Plank or Logg, that could save them from drowning. It can never be shown that
these Gentlemen ever favored Cromwell or Lambert's cause, or did any thing to
uphold their Tyranny; all they did was that they mearly courted them, (as the
Indians worship the Devil) to be free of their Evil. Therefore as it is both
unreasonable and uncharitable to infer from thence that they were the Kings
Enemies, and friends of Usurpers, and Phanaticks: So it is the height both of
nonsense and malice, to derive from it the same imputation upon all other
Catholics. To this purpose spoke the aforesaid Roman Catholic.

Now dear Cousin, I must confess ingeniously that those Reasons, proceeding
from a person of known ingenuity, and of good understanding in the matters of
his Religion, and being uttered with so great confidence and moderation, did so
fully convince me of the injury done to the Roman Catholics by the aforesaid
aspersions, that I did not only acknowledge my full satisfaction thereby; but
also I tied my self by promise, as I was obliged in charity to communicate them
to you; and being confident that these reasons will produce the like effect in
you: I doubt not but you will have the same charity to impart them to others of
your acquaintance, Yea, I wish they were known to all the good Protestants in
England, and then I do not question, but they would raze out of their minds,
all the bad impressions, that either false calumnies, or vain suspicions had
stamped in them. For who is he that loves Truth, who will not acknowledge it,
when clearly represented, and who can pretend any Charity, that will harbor
detected Calumny? We know it is against the divine Commandment, to bear false
witness against our Neighbor, or to caluminate our Brother. It Is also against
the luster of our Religion, which as it should shine by Truth and Charity; so
it is eclipsed by falsehood and calumny. It Is against the good we intend, of
gaining the Papists; for it renders them more averse from our Religion, and
make them frame such opinions of us; nay worse too, then we have of the
Phanaticks: for these are thought to err only out of simplicity and
ignorance; but we out of knowledge and malice. It Is against the peace and happy
settlement of those Nations, which must be founded in, and conserved by mutual
concord and unity of affection.

Therefore I heartily wish that all vain jealousies, idle suspicious, and much
more forged calumnies may be laid aside, as well against the Roman Catholics,
as against all others of different persuasions, that though we differ a little
in Faith, we may all agree in sincere Charity; which will much tend to the
honor of God, the service of the Kings Majesty, the good of our Country, and
the happiness of our Posterity. So having exceeded the bounds of an ordinary
Epistle, I will add no more but my best wishes for your prosperity, and my
earnest desire to be esteemed by you what I constantly am,

DEAR COUSIN, Your most affectionate and humble Servant. J. A.
Yorkshire, Apr. 22. 1660.
FINIS.

