THE COPY OF A LETTER FROM THE Commissioners with the King; concerning the
manner of the Soldiers fetching his Majesty to the ARMY.

And a Copy of a Paper delivered by the said Soldiers, declaring their
reasons why they did it.

decorative element incorporating crown and Tudor rose.

London Printed for R. Simps^^, 1647.

MORE NEVVES FROM THE ARMY
My Lord,
YEsterday we got first uncertain intelligence of some parties of horse upon
their march near Stony-stratford.

Toward night other reports came to us, of an intention to surprise this
place, whereupon Col. Graves doubled the guards, by such as ha had most
confidence in. At length a Scout of our own brought word of a party of horse
randezvouzing upon Harleston Heath, not two miles off, about ten of the clock
at night; and withal, we were secretly informed, that their intentions were
to seize Col. Graves, and to possess themselves of this House.

Hereupon we began to prepare for defense, but forced upon advice with Colonel
Graves, the guards were to little to be relied upon, that we thought it
requisite, he should withdraw himself, lest he should be taken by force from us
there being no means le^^ us to secure our selves, to which necessity he was
contented to submit, and we purposely caus^d it to be divulged, that he was
gone, hoping thereby to divert the Horse from falling on us, But about one of
the clock, we had certain knowledge of their being drawn into the Park and
Meadows adjoining, and that we were surrounded by them, which caused us to
send for all the Officers of our Guard, who with one consent declared to us,
that they found no disposition in their soldiers to fight with any of the
Generals army, with whom they had so often adventured themselves against the
common Enemy.

While this discourse held with them, it passing two of the clock, about break
of day we discovered a party of horse drawn up before the great gates, and
immediately at the back yard, where our Horse and Dragoanes stood; their horse
with many of ours amongst them, entered without any resistance at all, being
quietly let in, and embraced by the soldiers.

We presently sent to speak with their chief Officer: it was answered, there
was none that commanded: But soon after, Mr, Joyce Cornet to the Generals
Lifeguard came into us, and being demanded the cause of their coming in this
manner, he answered, that they came with authority from the Soldiery to
Collonell Graves that he might be tried by a Council of War, for having
scandalized the Army, whereby a Plot also (which was contriving to convey the
King to London without directions of the Parliament) would be prevented.

We desired he would put the same into writing, and they delivered us the
enclosed accordingly where in you will not find Colonel Graves mentioned by
name, though intended.

This is the condition we are in* with much sorrow to our selves, that we can
give you no better acompt though our endeavors have not been wanting. Our
humble suit is, that by this Bearer Captain Titus, you will please to send us
speedy directions, the want whereof has been no small discouragement to us
hitherto, in a service of this length and importance.

My Lord, Your Lordships humble Servant, Edw. Mountague.
Holmby June 3.
A Copy of the Paper delivered by Cornet Joyce to the Commissioners.
May it please the Honorable Commissioners of Parliament,
WE Soldiers now under his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax his command, have
by the general consent of the Soldiery, manifested our true love to the
Parliament and Kingdom, by endeavoring to prevent a second war, discovered
by the designment of some men privately to take away the King, to the end, he
might side with that intended Army to be raised, which if effected, would be to
the utter undoing of the Kingdom. We shall be able and willing to bring our
testimony, when called for, who were the Plotters and Contrivers therein. This
being the only way and means to prevent all those forementioned dangers, that
might unhappily have come upon us, and this whole Kingdom, whose weal we have
always endeavored, with the hazard of our lives, and the blood of many of our
dear friends, and fellow soldiers. This being the only thing presented to
us, which puts us on our late action, for the preservation of the Kings person,
and furthering of the Parliaments proceedings, together with the Commissioners
great care to effect the same, and to discharge the trust imposed on them.

The last News from the Army.
WE have from the Army further intelligence, to this effect; That the Committee
of Troops that secured his Majesty, brought him to Huntington, Colonel
Whalley is sent to command in chief, and to stay His majesty that he march not
nearer the Army; His majesty is used with all civility, but kept with a Guard
as formerly. The Army stiil continues at their General Rendevouz near
Newmarket; the soldiers both Horse and foot are very unanimous, and overjoyed
at the sight of their General, whom they received with great joy and
acclamations, whose presence has brought a great subjection in the soldiers
to the Officers.

FINIS.

