The Copy of a LETTER Printed at New Castle, July the 6, 1647.

SENT From the Adjutators of the Army under His Excellence Sir Thomas Fairfax,
unto their Fellow Soldiers in the Garrisons of New Castle and Tinmouth.

Advising them 1. That they will not suffer themselves to be broken in pieces
by any discouragements, but perform the Trust reposed in them in those places
of Strength and Confidence wherein they are. 2. That they will not upon any
pretended Order whatsoever, betray their Trust, or deliver up their Garrison
into the hands of any, until they shall receive commands from the General,
whose Warrant only is able to bear them out in it. 3. That they would
endeavor to hold correspondence with them, by appointing some faithful men,
who may at all times acquaint them with their condition.


With diverse other matters of remarkable consequence.

London, Printed for Tho. Vere at the upper end of the Old-Bailey.

A Letter from the Adjutators of the Army under his Excellence Sir Tho.
Fairfax, etc.
Gentlemen and Fellow Soldiers,
YOu being Members of the same body with us, it cannot be supposed that we
should be altogether insensible of your sad sufferings, and pressing
grievances, or distrustful of your Fidelity and constant Resolutions, to stick
unanimously to us in pursuance of our just and lawful designs, tending to our
and your timely relief, and the peace and welfare of the Kingdom: We are not
ignorant of the temptations whereunto you are liable, having so many
discouragements, by reason of your want of pay, and distance from us, as also
the misrepresentation of us and our proceedings, whereby you may be in danger
either to leave your station, and seek redress elsewhere, or to desert us
and our just Cause through misinformation; we have therefore thought sit to
present our selves to you, thus: Viz. We feeing our selves and the whole
Kingdom laid open to oppression and injury, through the malice and wicked
contrivances of unjust men, have been necessitated to put on man-like
Resolutions, and accordingly to act for our lives, and the lives of our fellow
Soldiers, who have faithfully served the State, which were wickedly sold into
the jaws of Tyranny, and unheard of Cruelty, to satisfy the unlimited lusts
of perverse men, and finding no other remedy left us but with our swords in our
hands to prosecute the enemies of our peace, and endeavor to bring them to
condign punishment; We have solemnly engaged our selves not to disband until
we have obtained some security of our lives and just Liberties, and settled this
distracted Nation in peace and quiet.

But lest our intentions should be presented to you in a false Glass, we have
thought good to let you see the inside of our undertakings, and the sincere
intentions of our hearts in our present proceedings: It is not our own
Interests, or setting up of our own advantages, or the feeding of our own
Lusts that is in our Eye or Aim; but it is the Glory of GOD, the just
preservation and safety of the Kings person, the just Privileges of
Parliament, the redeeming of the Lives and Liberties of the free People of
England from Tyranny, Oppression, and Injustice, the maintenance of just
Laws, and the necessary support and defense of this Kingdom, together with
the free and impartial distribution of Justice to all, which we have made our
Aim; and when these our Ends shall be obtained, and Means (for the
continuance thereof established, we shall acquiesse and be ready either to
lay down Arms, or otherwise to be employed for the Service of the
Commonwealth. And that you may be not only willing (as we believe you are)
but also able to prosecute effectually the same things with us, we shall offer
this advice to you.

I. That you will not suffer your selves to be broken in pieces by any
discouragements, but unite your selves in Love, and strengthen one another in
Resolution, to keep your standing, and perform the trust reposed in you, in
that place of Strength and Consequence wherein you are.

II. That you would not (upon any pretended Order whatsoever) betray your
trust, or deliver up your Garrison into the hands of any, until you shall
receive Commands from our General, whose Warrant only is able to bear you
out in it.

III. That you would endeavor to hold Correspondence with us, by appointing
some faithful men, who may at all times acquaint us with your Condition, and
receive such Information from us, as may concern you.

And be you assured, that we shall at all times faithfully stand by you, in
all just and lawful proceedings, and make all your sufferings our own, and
endeavor to the utmost of our abilities to manifest our selves the earnest
seekers of your, our own, and the Kingdoms welfare, subscribing our selves

Vxbridge, 25. June, 1647. Yours, and the Kingdoms faithful friends and
servants, chosen to Agitate in behalf of the Army. James Berry Captains. John
Clerk Captains. Edmund Rolph Captains. Henry Prittie Captains. Waldine
Lagee Captains. Ed. Sexdy Generals Regiment. John Tailor Generals Regiment.
William Allin Lieut. Genesis Iam. Tirtorington Lieut. Genesis John Braman Col. Rich.
Anthony Wickson Col. Rich. Tho. Shippard Col. Rich. Philip Eyton Colonel
Whaley John Young Colonel Whaley Barth. Willock Col. Thomlinsons Rich. Clarke
Col. Thomlinsons John Willoughby Col. Hortons Tobias Box Col. Hortons Not.
Foxgill Col. Hamonds Regiment. Will. Bridgman Col. Hamonds Regiment. Rob. Mason
Colonel Waller. Hen. Anderton Colonel Waller.

Haste at present prevents us of giving a m^^^ large and full account of our
proceedings, ^^^ving formerly sent both Letters and Mes^^^^ to you, which we
hope are come to your hands and shall by the next opportunity inform you
further.



FINIS.

