THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT FROM The Roaring Boys in ELYSIUM; To the two
arrant Knights of the Grape, in Limbo, Alderman Abel and M. Kilvert, the two
great Projector^ for wine: And to the rest of the worshipful Brotherhood of
that Patent.

Brought over lately by Quart-pot, an ancient servant to Bacchus, whom for a
long time they had most cruelly Rackt, but hope shortly to be restored to his
ancient liberties.

Whereunto is added, the Oration which Bacchus made to his subjects, in the
lower World: published for the satisfaction and benefit of his subjects here.



Brought over by the same Messenger 1641.

A LETTER etc.
BAcchus into Elysium took his way,
And to his crew proclaym'd a holy day
And taking up his Horn that held a Tonne
Of right Canary, drunk't off, and begun
To wind it so loud that Elysium
Rang with the Noyes, and every Blade did come:
First came the Poets, of each land, and took
Their place in order, learned Virgill struck
In for the first, Ben Johnson cast a glout,
And swore a mighty oath he would pluck him out,
And wallowing toward him, with a cup of Wine,
He did so rattle him with Catiline,
That had not Horace him appeased, it is said
He had thrown great Sejanus at his head.
Next to these marched a band of corpulent ghosts
In scarlet faces furred with blew, brave hosts,
With each his sign, and but they were so swarmy
They might have been ghest ancients of the Army.
Next after these in wrathful have did puff
A band in scarlet hose, and coats of buffe,
With bastinadoes waving with their plumes
And stay they cried; that Rascal that presumes
To stir a foot Dies, Damme us shall we be thus
Abused when we do carry Bacchus with us?
In this troop Bacchus was; and none need doubt him,
Because they never went to the field without him.
Then strutted forward men of lofty gates,
And gallant, trayling after em, their estates
Like broken pikes, which they in tossing had
Made shorter, and in handling them grew mad.
From these, a pretty distance, sneaking followed
Some of the Clergy, not so truly hallowed
But that they might entreated be to take
A small refection for their learnings sake,
And lest they should be brought (for due contrition
Of their faults) unto that Low-high-Commission
They cast away their coats lest any gull
Should find holes in em, cause they were so full:
But then lep't in a noble City crew
That spent all one day what they got in two,
Who having ask't so long what do you lack
Had lost their words, and had received a crack.
The last that came of all these warlike Soemen
Was a huge band of sargeants with their Yoemen,
But a mad Poet did begin to rail
That they would bring Mace when there was no Ale;
And were condemned as most pernicious stinkers
Cause in their lives they were but taplash drinkers,
They stormed; but one of them (being a mounter
Told them they cared not for em of a counter;
At which great Bacchus laughed; and bad the sinner
He and his fellows should go fetch up dinner.
Neates tongues by thousands came; but most were taken
With a salt gamon of Westphalia baken:
The Poets and the Soldiers flashing stood,
And great Ben: Johnson swore that it was good,
Anchovies swom in oil; but to be brief
Most of the Soldiers fell to powder'd-beefe
And (as an Host was talking like a Parrat)
One snatched his beard, and eat it for carret:
Bacchus drank round a health, and each one pledged it
And after, with another cup he wedged it
Until their brains, by their cups often chiming
Left off their sack and forthwith fell to ryming,
And one amongst the rest, amidst his mirth
Talked of the dearth of wines upon the earth,
A sargeant that was thither late departed
For grief, for alas they ever were kind hearted,
Told them, that now amongst the worlds great vices
Its authors were shroud scared with their accomplices
And certifi'd em all, with good assurance
Two of the greatest of them were in durance,
At which there such a shout arose, for joy
That on a sudden it awakened N^y;
Who coming thither, in amongst 'em crammed
And asked if the Shipmoney were damned,
They answer no, but those that did w^are Satin
And stood on Pantofles have lost their Patten,
Whereat he laugh't, and his old jests did use
Why then, quoth he, they will be over shoes,
Then at the board there grew a disputation
If they should send a letter of consolation,
Unto these two late Prisoners, 'twas agreed
And thus with matur^ judgment they proceed.
THE SVPERSCRIPTION.
TO him whose name (I now directed am)
Has the first Letter of an Alderman,
Which is A -- what you please, I craved to be
Unto that hand delivered speedily,
Whom all do hope has hither been preserved
To be delivered to what 'has deserved,
And to his brother likewise I would be
Because he has as great a share as he.
THE LETTER.
MOst worthy Sirs to be what you deserve
Our ancient loves to you cannot so swerve,
From you, but that we joyous should be it see
Your sudden coming to our company,
We have good Sack here for you where, you may
Drink a full Quart, and when you come to pay,
Not break two shillings, but alas we know
You Have swallowed Wine so long you cannot go,
And it is said, by some who wish your pain
You Will never stand on your own legs again.
Indeed we stagger at it, for it is pity
That two such worthy members of the City,
Are so near gelding of so many pounds
Of your estate, for sure it much confounds,
U^ here below; that that should be a crime
You did t'abate the Luxury of the Time,
For when wine is pulled down, sure youth will rage
And then no doubt 'twill prove a drunken age.
Indeed you in our pints of Sack did strip's
And made our purses serve apprentiships,
Of sev'n pence to the Drawer, which yet bred
This care and thrift to keep't unforfeited,
When often we would have venturd, and truly
This smells of Cardinal Wolsye's policy.
But Sirs we pray you in great Bacchus name
Be careful of your selves, and to your name,
Add mettle; for if you should suffer in this train
It would be but much wine cast up again,
And let it come, it is better it were out
Then choke you, and let silly people flout,
Yet good Physicians of the state have s^'d
Casting of coin does cure the pain ith head,
And take my word; Empson and Dudley here
Say such a Purge had saved their lives then cheer,
Your drooping spirits, we speak this to confirm
Your fortitude which since the Candel-mas term,
Has been assaulted, and you have borne it out
Courageously, and like tall men and stout,
Yet one thing, as your friends, (and we could wish
We could not lay it now within your dish,)
It was not well done of you to undo
So many poor men, of your own trade too.
And yet some might deserved; for they might be
(As we do very well know) saucy as we,
And then (our worthy Citizen) we hope ye
Might very well undo them by your copy,
And make em free of Beggers-Hall. This may
Be true; yet you do not hear me say,
(...) It is; No; we, that here do fear no score,
Have found your Citizens honesty heretofore,
And will not now suspect it. It Is our prayers
That we may hear sometimes of your affairs
We heard how ready all your brethren were
To lay their Patents down when they did hear
O'th Parliament, and some, in time agreed
With those the had injured, ere they did proceed,
And we admire to see you so are shot
To think your caskes would hold when theirs would not.
Your former courses, questioned now, may be
Compared to Sack, which when at liberty,
Stirs not; but being stopped as you are now
It bursts the caske, as your own wine, has you.
And one thing we will advise you; that you feed
As happily as you can, and sleep at need;
For you are so much hated here by those
That died for grief when prices of Wines rose,
That they do swear it ever as they drink
You shall not eat a bit? nor sleep a winck,
When you come hither; this upon our oath
They often protested have against you both.
This is All that time gives us leave to write
Which we conjecture is no warning slight
And therefore think of it, and use as they
That wish your welfare; and do lastly pray
These Letters may be read to inform you all,
That we below rejoice at no man's fall;
And therefore tell those fellows that employ
Their idle quills for to belly our joy,
They do amiss in laying of their tricks
On Charons boat, and Acheron and Stixs,
And so we bid farewell, and see you do
Make much of Justice, she will make much of you.
Given at our Rendevous in Bacchus Palace in Elysium.
This sea'd, was straight delivered to Quart-pot
To bear away; when Bacchus with a hot,
And fiery look gap't thrice, and gave two knocks
Made 'em all shake and stand like senseles stocks
Whilst with a gravity he did rehearse,
This short Oration (as it is) in verse.
THE ORATION.
ANd yet, my Prudent Council, let me tell 'ee
I see my bounty here does too much swell ye,
It Is strange that you should favor such a cause
And men that have so deep transgress't my laws,
As these have; and to gives 'em such kind words
In their just punishment, their crime affords,
No mercy; for the naked truth to tell
I well could wish there were a whip at Abel,
To jerke em, and to firke em, and to raise
Their memory as they raised wine of late days,
When like to Bakers (they the world to cozen
Did sift wine, making foureteen pence to th'dozen,
Which is an innovation, for their good
To hoist up wine above the price of blood;
For their ten pence; you know, throughout all ages
Has ever been, and is, the Hangman's wages.
Consider of it: England, some of you
Nay I my self have been abused too,
How many of my subjects have refrained
The Tavern, my dear temple, cause 'twas stained,
With such extorsion? and were feign
For want of two pence to go home again?
Two pence? why I will tell you, it is no less
Then half a groat, and boldly I profess,
For two pence more, a man might fully dine
Or purchase three parts of a pint of Wine,
Claret I mean^ white: how many here
Now in this place have killed themselves with Beer,
Even for this cause? Besides we well may gather
That men often times gave o^e, when they had rather,
Have served me still, I speak it from my heart
In seven pints they are cheated of a quart,
O injury! and ye^ you wish these men
Here, that they might revive their trade again,
That by their cunning having wronged you too
You then might curse em as the City do,
Write me a letter that may fully crush em
And not such tickling lines as only brush em,
Can you that are the Poets think upon
This sad restraint upon your Helicon,
And not revenge it? can you stay
And see a weeks pay drunk out in a day,
By superarogation? you that are
The lusty cap and feather-men of war?
Can you my worthy hosts fit and see those
That make you wear od money in your nose,
Under your nose triumphing? can you men
You little lecturers that have but ten,
A year endure it; no, it shall not be
Weel have 'em down, and now me thinks I see,
Your mind bent to it, drink deep my subjects all
That wines in faith shall with a ding-dong fall.
FINIS.

