A SERMON Preached at the Assizes in Salisbury Upon Saturday, July 23. 1653. By
HENRY CARPENTER, Vicar of Steeple-Ashton in Wiltshire.

Uprightness has Boldness. ROMANS 16.20. The God of Peace shall tread Satan
under your feet Shortly. REVEL. 12.12. Having great Wrath, because he knows
that he has but a short time. LONDON, Printed by John Macock for Octavian
Pullen, and are to be sold at the sign of the Rose in Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

To My Christian Reader.
ALL that I crave of thee, is, that thou make good this Title that I have given
thee; For [Reader] and [Christian] thou may be, though This never come nigh
thee; but [Mine] thou can not be, unless I am so far Thine, as that thou read
me Christianly: And although I dare not (as Mine) commend it to thy Reading,
because I know not whether thy Reading can commend it, yet being overcome to
expose it, I dare advise thee, If I have written evil, to bear witness of the
evil; but if well, Joh. 18.23.
to take heed how thou smite me uncharitably in judgment, for the coming of the
Lord draws nigh, and we shall all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ.

And if my Charity must call Thee Christian though unknown, surely Thine should
so call the ends and motives of this Publication though unseen; well imagining
that he whom so often entreaties could never yet get aboard in a Calm, would
not now without some kind of constraint launch forth on so thin a bottom in a
Storm: A Storm beyond that in Paul's voyage to Rome, Act. 27.14
by how much the Winds and Seas are more cross and contrary and a more
tempestuous Euroclydon That Seamans plague.
; Yet I am bid be of good cheer in hopes of Gods saying the word, that even on
This Board and broken piece (by his grace) some Soul may escape safe to Land.

I know the Eye is a severer Judge then the Ear, and so much the worse for the
weakness that is in it; but the Eye is a wiser and truer Judge then the Ear, and
so much the better for the sincerity and simplicity of it. Here is all (without
the least witting omisssion) of what was then delivered, with the addition of
some expressions here and there, which were intended, but for fear of
trespassing upon that Patience omitted, whereby some passages happily were
obscured in the Delivery.

As for the Text, If my Choice offend thee (and yet not mine) let me advertise
thee, That if I had consulted with my self when Providence called me to this
Service (by his Desires, which to me were virtual Commands) I had probably
singled out some other Subject, that might have seemed more suitable, and
proved more plausible: But asking counsel of God, (though this Text in all the
parts of it had lately been my matter of diverse Sermons at home and abroad,
yet) I found this particular press so hard upon my spirit (an Apology which too
many in our times have used to worse ends) that no room for other thoughts
could be granted: If this excuse not, abstract the Occasion, and take thou to
the Sermon, and much good may it do thee, Toll quod tuum est and vade, Cui nil
ipse dabas is Tibi verba dedit.

It is (like the Author) a Plain one; 1 Pet. 3.4.
For the plain Song to that which S. Peter calls [the hidden man of the heart]
makes the best Music; The plain way makes the best speed; as Ahimaaz did
outrun Cushi, 2 Samuel 18.
per viam plani, by the way of the Plain: No affected strains or quaint
expressions, lest the Auditor should hominem olere, smell man in it, and so
turn his back upon it; No gaudy, garish, cheap dressings of unnecessary
Quotations, enlarging my marginal Borders with such deep Fringes and broad
Phylacteries, telling the people how many Authors (if not more then) I have
read: Those few of our learned Countrymens Names and Terms (being Authentic in
their Generation) that I have made bold with (and that I hope without offense)
had been spared, but for my necessary Vindication from proud Singularity,
uncharitable Error, and Presumption.

It is (like the Author) something a Rough-hewn one; Ezekiel. 13.22.
yet loath to gall the spirit, or make sad the heart of any righteous man, whom
God does not make sad, never loving to grieve any man's Soul in the Pulpit for
harm; yet I have known ulcerous men to shriek out at the least suspicion of
being touched, when nothing that way has been intended: And besides, in
distempered times of violent and various Occurrences, it is hard to speak
pertinently to any Text, and acceptably to All Hearers, especially when there
are so many Counter-parties, tuning their ears to the key of their own
interests and fancies. This repugnant Composition in Congregational Bodies
(like that in Natural, which is styled Medicorum opprobrium) discourages and
straitens all Ministrations; As suppose the Liver be hot, and yet the Stomach
cold, that which helps in respect of the one, may hurt in regard of the other:
So that I scarce know any unsilent Minister that lies not under this difficulty
and prejudice at some time or other, unless he do (as Balak would have it)
Neither curse them at all, Numb 23.25 Job 6.6.
nor bless them at all; and serve in some Nothing (as Job has it,) like the
white of an Eg, that has no taste at all. But for my part, Here is no
Traducing of Superiors, Judge. 5 15.
No raising of mutinous or tumultuous great thoughts of heart against
Government, No disturbing of Peace either in Church or State, (too much of that
already God help it;) No Exasperating, but rather Accommodating (rightly
understood) of The Godly, truly so called, (God increase their Number, Graces
and Comforts.) There are that are called [Godly,] Act. 13.50
as there were that were called and counted [Devout,] whom yet the Jews stirred
up to raise Persecution against Paul and Barnabas, the Apostles of the Lord
Jesus, (a Godly and Devout Party indeed;) 2 Pet. 2.1. 1 Timothy 4.1.
If the Devil can get such but to hold his Cards, he thinks the Gane his own.
This of mine is wholly bent and aimed against Damnable Heresies, Cursed
Blasphemies, Impious Doctrines and Works of Devils; I hope it will Anger only
those whom I fear to Please, Prophaners, Blasphemers, Witches, Sorcerers,
Devils, and their Followers; It is only by way of Exclamation, Lamentation, and
Direction upon the Devils great Wrath in these last Days and perilous Times,
because he knows his Time is short: And can this be opprobrious and unpleasing
to any sound Christian, high or low? I have less fear and more charity then to
think so: No, no, my greater fear is, that the cowardly Peace of those Tongues,
that ought to speak, Isai 58.1.
yea cry aloud and spare not, has cast us (in Gods just Judgment) under the
ungodly strife of those Tongues that ought to hold their Peace. Psalm. 31.20
The Lord in mercy forgive our humane fears and neglects of Duty in our
difficult and perplexed Times.

It is a Naked one without Dedication, (like the Author now without a Patron;)
Now no Patron but God, and therefore no Dedicatory Epistle but Prayer, To be
hid in the secret of his Presence from the Pride of Men, Psa. 22.12 Psa. 68.30
and to be kept secretly in his Pavilion from that strife of Tongues; To be
delivered, by the Grace of his Power, from David's Beasts, Calves and Bulls of
the people, 2 The 3.2.
and from Paul's unreasonable and wicked men, (for all men have not Faith;)
That God would, by the Power of his Grace, bless and prosper even This Plain,
This Rough-hewn, This Naked Piece unto Thee, and Thee unto thy self and Me, who
am,

Thine in Him, who is ours if we be His, even the Lord Jesus Christ,
To whom be All the Honor of his Grace and Power now and ever. Amen.
MARK 9.29. This Kind can come forth by nothing, but by Prayer and Fasting.


ALthough Coherence make much for the understanding of Scripture-Texts, yet
Copiousness of Matter, and Scantness of Time, may forbid to insist thereon: An
easy Reflection on the foregoing Argument would clear the Connection, and show
the Dependence: But I am loath to lead your Attention so far back as the 14th
Verse, where our Context begins, lest I detain you too long in the Porch of a
Preface, having but one hour to stay with you in the House of this Discourse.

This Story here, as it stands upon sacred Record, is very obvious; The sum
whereof is this:

1. Here is a Poor Son miserably possessed with the worst kind of Devils;
Wheresoever he takes him, he teereth him, Verse 18, 20, 22.
that he walloweth, fometh, gnasheth with his teeth, and consumes away,
casts him into the fire and into the water to destroy him, etc. A poor Son.

2. Here is a Sad Father grievously perplexed, solicitous how to cure him, and
happily hearing of a Society of men in the world that had even evil Spirits
subject unto them, brings him to Christ's Disciples that they might cast this
evil Spirit out, And they could not, says the Text. A sad Father.

Verse 18.
3. Here is a Sound Doctor, Christ, who hearing of it, readily undertakes it,
Verse 19 26, 27.
Bring him to me, and really effects it, etc.

4. Hereupon the Disciples as unsatisfied (so soon as they can for shame)
desire to be resolved why they could not do it: Verse 28
Christ tells them, that this was no such petty common easy kind of Devil, as
to be turned out at their mere word-bidding, as by slight Spells or Charms; But
here was need not only of Faith and Prayer, Verse 29
but also of Fasting and extraordinary Humiliation, as by an holy and more set
and solemn Conjuration, to cast such a kind of Devil as This out of his old
possession.

Which leads your Attentions to this Text: And when he was come into the house,
his Disclples asked him privately, Why could not we cast him out?

And He said unto them, This kind can come forth by nothing but by Prayer and
Fasting.

I need not open the door of this Text with the key of any acurate Division:
The words do easily and plainly open and divide themselves into three parts;
viz.

The Malady, The Recovery, The Remedy. 1. The Malady and Disease pointed at in
the terms of [This Kind.]

2. The Recovery and Cure intimated in the terms of [Coming forth.]

3. The Remedy and Medicine expressed in the two Ingredients of [Prayer and
Fasting.]

This Kind can come forth by nothing but by Prayer and Fasting. But before I
come to speak of the particulars, give me leave to deliver this Note in general
from the Connection of these words with the former; wherein is propounded a
Question by the Disciples, Why they could not cast this evil Spirit out, [Why
could not we, etc.] In which I observe,

Though some godly people in former Ages were furnished at diverse times with an
extraordinary Power of working strange Miracles; yet they had not this Power
Absolute, could not put it forth of themselves, but as they were still helped
by Divine Dispensation: It Is not Absolute in Man, but still Arbitrary in God.
And therefore Joseph's answer to Pharaoh was, Gen 41.16
It is not in me; God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace. But why not in
thee, good Joseph? Thou had that gift of God; Genesis 40.12, 19.
Thou could give the Butler and the Baker an answer of their dreams; was not
That in thee? why not the King then an answer of his dream? No, not in me,
neither That nor This absolutely, Genesis 40.8
but as God was still pleased to dispense and go along with me; Do not
Interpretations belong to God?

And Moses that mighty man of God, who at one time was so powerful with God,
when God called out unto him, Exo. 32.10
Let me alone, that I may consume them, etc. and seemed to stop the mouth of
his importunity by saying, I will make of thee a great Nation; as if Heaven had
suffered violence indeed, and God could not do as he would, as if tied by the
spiritual force of Moses's faithful and zealous prayers, etc. Yet at another
time he makes question of his prevalency with God, And now I will go up, Verse
30.
peradventure I shall make an atonement for you, etc. to show us, that it is
not the absolute excellency or faculty of prayer that prevails with God, but
Gods own condescending goodness in providing and accepting such a means as
prayer, in designing and singling out such a thing as prayer unto such an
effect as prevailing with him, through his own Condescension. And thus the God
of strength, like Sampson the strong, shows us a way how to bind his own hands,
but still at his own power and pleasure, Joel 2.14.
Who can tell if he will return? etc. says the Prophet. Dan. 2.16, 19


And Daniel could not give answer to Nebuchadnezzar's dream, till he craved
some time, and had the secret revealed unto him by God; Verse 30.
humbly acknowledging as it were with Joseph, It is not in me, for any wisdom
that is in me, etc. it is still with God.

And in the New Testament, Luke 10.17 Acts 6.8. Act. 19.11, 12 ^ Cor. 12.10.
the Apostles and Disciples of the Lord Jesus were wonderfully endowed with
strange power of effecting great Miracles, in curing Diseases, and casting out
of Devils as subject unto them; yet not so absolute, but as it was given them
by divine Dispensation and Limitation, Disoipulerum opprobrium.
as here in this case is seen; they were non-plust and at a stand, Why could
not we cast him out?

And now what shall we say to this? or rather, what will this say to us?

1. Opprobrium Romanorum.
For Confutation of our Enemies at Rome (and would God we had fewer of them at
home) who would cast contempt on us and our Religion, because we confirm not
our Doctrine by Miracles (as they pretend to do:) But if we should go about to
make credulous men believe, that a house flies in the air: as that of Loretto;
That there was a Temple and an Altar in it made by Bees in a Bee-hive; That
Wasps were driven away from that Bee-hive by excommunication; That a Mule fell
down and worshipped the consecrated Host passing by, etc. If we should fill our
peoples heads with such Fopperies as these, we should but make our selves
ridiculous, our Doctrines unprofitable and frivolous. But leaving them to their
Judgment, etc.

2. For Reflection upon our selves at home; as not to be exalted above measure
upon gifts and endowments, 1 Cor. 4.7
whereby God has made any of us to differ from others, because he can enervate
our endowments, spoil our abilities, and blast our gifts in his Power: so not
to open the mouth of wonder and murmur upon Gods additions, extensions and
limitations of our gifts, whereby God makes us differ from our selves, doing
things at one time with that faculty and facility we do not at another: If we
preach better at one time then at another, if you hear or pray and meditate
better at one time then at another, we must all stop the mouths of murmur and
wonder, not think it strange, because God can make the thigh of our abilities
(like Jacob's) to be sinew-shrunk, Genesis 32 25 1 Kin. 13 4
and the hand of our endowments (like Jeroboam's) to be withered at his
pleasure.

And so much for that matter, in reference to the former Question, Why could
not we cast him out?

And now for the Text it self: This kind can come forth by nothing, but by
Prayer and Fasting.

And yet before we can well come at any part, answer should be made to two or
three Questions about the whole:

As, first, Why God --

But let the Potsheards question the Potsheards of the Earth; Shall man
expostulate with his Maker? Yes, Isai. 45.9.
That glorious Creature the Sun strikes not with his beams the poor
Mathematician dead, who assays by his Instruments on his Molehill to take its
Dimensions: Yea the Glorious Creator, the great God, permits men his
Creatures to enquire into his incomprehensible Perfections, and to search into
his providential and judicial proceedings, so it be with holy amazedness, and
awful wonder: With Reverence then be it spoken and heard, questioned and
resolved,

This Question may be resolved by the way of (...).

First, For the Truth of it, That it is so: (...).
Questionless God may and does give up his own Children (as well as others)
into the hands of the Devil for a time, and permit him to tempt them; By vexing
and smiting their Bodies, Job 2 6. Luke 13.16 John 13.2 1 Samuel 16 14 2 Cor. 12 7
as he did Job's, and that Daughters of Abraham for eighteen years: By
troubling and buffetting their spirits, as he did David's, even as well as
Ahab's, Paul's as well as Judas's or Readiness: Often tempting them To sin, then
terrifying them For sin (like himself.) All which being resisted, add more to
the sorrows then to the sins of Gods Children; the sin of them remaining not so
much upon theirs, as upon the Devils score: And in that temptation to David's
sin of numbering the people, 1 Chr. 21.1 (...)
though it be imputed not only to the Devil and his malice in one place, but
also to God and his anger in another; yet God does no way help Satan with any
further power then first he gave him as his Angelical Creature; and the Devil
thinks he has enough in that, with Gods permission.

Well, You see here the Truth of it, that it is so; That God does permit Satan
for a time to make bold with Gods own, as well as others.

Now for the Manner and Occasions, (...).
How it comes to be so; and by the way let us note, that Though the evil one
has power and ability enough Natural to do this, as an Angel; yea will and
desire enough Habitual to do this, as an Adversary and Devil: As some English
Divines observe, Mr Downame, Mr Rogers, Mr Goodwin. Job 2.3.
yet he must further have power, which they call Moral, that is, leave and
commission from God, or he cannot do this; for he is in Chains everlasting that
he cannot break. And God seems to grant him leave and commission upon a
Threefold Occasion.

1. Upon the Devils own motion and petition; As in the case of Job, God
ascribed it to the Devils motion, [Thou movedst me against him, etc.] And in
the case of Peter and the rest, Luke 22.31
to the Devils petition, [Satan has desired to have the sifting of you, etc.]



Job, the Disciples, 2 Cor. 12.7
and the Apostle Paul: In plain terms, the Devil challenges them, and God
gives leave, (which is so accepted as an Answer to the Challenge,) his
Accusation of Job was a Challenge: And yet, not to satisfy the Devils
importunity, but to stop the mouth of his calumny and reproach, not to please
or gratify the Devil, but to shame and torment him as it were before the time:
Mat. 8.29
And of purpose so ordained by God, that if we prosper in the fight and win the
day, we may have the honor, and he the shame of the foyl: If not, being worsted
in the assault for a time, that yet he may fail in his expectation of an entire
Conquest, and even then when he thinks to make a spoil of us, he be forced to
give over his prey, grate and gall himself that he was so fair for it and mist
it. The lot of every true Christian is like that of Gad, as his father Jacob in
blessing said, Genesis 49.19
A Troop or Host shall overcome him, but he shall overcome at last. And though
he may complain that Gods arrows, Psalm. 38.2.
dipped in the cup of trembling, stick fast in him, like Job and David; yet these
were not for destruction, but for trial; as Bullets shot against armor of
proof, not to hurt it, but to praise it; In which case Christians are brought
forth not as Malefactors to suffer, but as Champions to triumph: So that the
Devil may thank his own motion and petition for his own overthrow and shame.
The first Occasion.

2. Upon the Churches just sentence of Excommunication, Clave non errante.
rightly and duly administered for some crying sins and scandalous offenses: An
heavy Ordinance, which casts men out of the Church into ghostly torments and
spiritual agonies in Conscience by Satan. St Paul may well say, 2 Cor. 2 6.
Sufficient is this Punishment, etc. which cutteth men off from communion with
the Saints of God: Sufficient] indeed which cutteth men off from communion with
God himself, the God and all the Good of the Saints: Sufficient] indeed for
dismal Consequences, the hiding and withdrawing of the light of his
Countenance, the witness of his Spirit, and the comforts of his gracious
Presence. Sufficient to such a one, etc.] He needs no more punishment to be
sure, created Nature being capable of no greater here.

This is the Case of the incestuous Corinthian; and it admits of two heavy
Aggravations in that very Text, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5
both from the Judge and Executioner.

1. In the Name and with the Power of the Lord Jesus Christ,] Verse 4
That is, by a Commission from Christ, which issuing out in his Name, when the
Church proclaims it on Earth, Christ signs it in Heaven: And this is an heavy
case, to be cut off and cast out by Christ the Redeemer, by Jesus the Savior:
It is not a small cloud that will hide this Sun, Rev. 6 16
not a light matter that will anger this Lamb.

2. Verse. 5. 1 Pet. 5.8 Rev. 12.9 Psa. 27.12
To deliver such an one unto Satan] the grand Adversary of Mankind the Devil;
And this also is an heavy case: David deprecates it as a fearful evil To be
given over unto the will of his enemies, though but corporal and temporal; Of
how much deeper deprecation may it be thought worthy to be delivered up unto
the will of The Enemy spiritual and immortal, who is big with Malice, never
satisfied but with blood and death. 1 Samuel 22.18.
Fall upon him Doeg, was an hard saying of Saul; Fall upon him Devil, a harder
saying of God.

And yet that same Text affords as many Extenuations, both from the Restraint
and End.

1. For the destruction of the flesh.] Lo! Satan is restrained in destroying;
Ps. 104, 26 Job 38.11
That Leviathan has bounds set him, as well as that Element he plays in,
[Hitherto shall thou come and no further, Job 1.12
and here shall thy proud waves be stayed:] As there in Job's case, first
restrained to his Goods and Children [Hitherto and no further,] Job. 2.6.
then to his Body only [Hitherto and no further.] So here in the Corinthians
case, the Destroyer is restrained to the flesh, [For the destraction of the
Flesh;] Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, and here shall thy proud
waves be stayed.

2. For the destruction of the flesh, That the spirit may be saved in the day
of the Lord Jesus.] Lo! Satan is ordered and overruled to another End then he
intends; not to accomplish, 1 Timothy 1.19 2 Timothy 3.13 2 Pet. 2.20
but to spoil his own works, (however he get his own end with Hypocrites,
carrying them on to more sin, waxing worse and worse, their latter end worse
then their beginning;) but with Gods own he is compelled to Gods end; 2 Cor.
12.7
As there in Paul's case, That he might be humbled, to that end and no other: So
here in the Corinthians case. That his flesh might be destroyed, and his spirit
saved; to this end, Romans 6.6. Rev. 3 2.
and no other; That sin might decrease, and grace increase; That the old man
might be crucified, and the new enlarged in him.

Thus by the Devils Commission upon the Churches Censure for scandalous Crimes,
which is the second Occasion.

3. Upon Gods own Excommunication, by Divine Desertion, (the Church neglecting
her office in that kind:) God himself sometimes does cut off and cast out (as
it were) excommunicate men's spirits from his gracious Presence, and deliver
them up to the Devil, by terrors, to fright them back, and whip them home to
himself again; As in the cases of Job and David, giving them occasion to say of
such terrors preventing sin, as David to Abigail preventing blood, Blessed be
thou of the Lord, that thou have met me this day; 1 Samuel 25.32.
and blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me,
etc. God often sets the Devil to hedge up the way of Christians with his
Terrors, and evil men with Afflictions and Persecutions, as it were with
thorns, as was threatened or promised the Church of old, Hosea 2.6
[I will hedge up thy way with thorns, etc.] And blessed thorns which hide and
stop every path to sin.

Upon all these Occasions God grants the Devil some power in commission in
common (as it were) over Good and Bad, but with great difference. Over the Bad,
Ephe. 6.12 Ephesians. 2.2 2 Timothy 2.26 1 Cor 12 2 2 Cor 4.4.
as their Ruler, [The Rulers of darkness of this world;] as their Head,
[Working in the Children of Disobedience;] as their Conqueror, [Taken captive
by him, etc.] as their God, [The God of this world has blinded their minds,
etc.] Over the Good only as a Jailer over his Prisoners: For a righteous Judge
may commit his own son that is a Malefactor into the hands of a Jailer, not at
his absolute arbitrary power to kill, or rack, or whip at his will and
pleasure, but according to warrant and commission: And thus God commits some of
his own into the hands of this Jailer, as by the particular warrant appears;
This Warrant is recorded, by which the Jailer is in greater Chains then the
Prisoners; Rev. 2.10.
Behold, the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, that ye may be Tried,
And ye shall have Tribulation Ten days. The Church of Smyrna (whom it
concerned) is bid, Behold; Behold their Jailer as well as themselves his
Prisoners; Behold their Jailer in Chains of Three Limitations, Limitations in
all the Circumstances of Persons, Time, and Place of Affliction. 1. In the
Persons and Number of the Afflicted; The Devil would have All in his hands, but
he is there in Chains, [Not All, but some of you.] 2. In the Place and Nature
of the Affliction; The Devil would have it Hell and Destruction, but he is
there also in Chains, [Not so, but into Prison and Tribulation, that ye may be
Tried.] 3. In the Time and Duration; The Devil would have it like his own
Chains, Everlasting, but he is here too in Chains of Limitation, [Not so, but
for Ten days:] And then shall be heard the saying that was prophesied,
Prisoners go ye forth, and ye that are in darkness show your selves: Isai. 49.9.
Therefore Fear none of these things which thou shall suffer; but be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life.

And thus for the Manner and Occasions of Gods granting the Devil such Power
over the sons of men, viz. The Devils Petition, The Churches Excommunication,
and Divine Desertion.

Now for the Reasons Why, and Grounds whereon it is so; (...).
Wherein my Brevity shall redeem the time of my former Prolixity; And in this
regard, it is well that I speak to so many, who can conceive faster, and see
further then I can speak.

God gives way to the Devils Rage and Tyranny over the sons of men,

1. For the greater Honor of his Providential and Judicial Dispensations, both
of Mercy and Judgment: Of Mercy to the Good to prevent their sin, in
uncollering Satan (as the Shepherd does his Dog) to fetch them in when they
offer to stray: Of Judgment to the Bad, to punish their sin, setting evil
spirits against evil men, Isa. 19.2.
as he did the Egyptians against the Egyptians.

2. For the greater Detestation of Sin, and secret heart-rising against it;
That men might learn to hate it with the most perfect hatred, as the most
perfect pernicious evil; worse indeed then either Hell or Devil, because it
made them so: And were it not for sin and its lusts in the world, the Devil
might spare his pains, as having nothing to do in the world, confine himself to
his own Hell, and keep his breath to cool his own torments: Therefore as the
Worm bred in the Tree devoureth the Tree, so the Rage and Tyranny of Satan
brought in by Sin (by the Almighty Mercy) carries Sin out again, by teaching
men to abhor and eschew it, because of the cursed Plagues and dismal
Consequences that attend it, (as in this case of our Text,) which being so
Terrible in this life, 1 Timothy 1.20
must needs be Intolerable in the life to come: Hymeneus and Alexander were
delivered unto Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme.

3. For the greater addition to the Devils own evil; to heap unquenchable coals
of fire upon his own head; to aggravate his Doom, to increase his own
Condemnation for continuing his tyrannous hate and malice against man, even
though he prevail not: And if he do prosper in his malicious Tyranny and
Temptations, and prevail, what does the Devil but carry firebrands to his own
Hell, and fuel to his own eternal flames? For, As the Joys of Heaven and
Salvation are nothing diminished, Luke 15.7 10.
but rather increased with the Number of the Saved, There being joy among the
Angels in Heaven for the Repentance and Conversion of Sinners, and joy among
the Saints in Heaven for the perfect Salvation of Sinners, Heb. 11 40
welcoming their Accessions with their glorious Greetings: So are the Torments
of Damnation nothing abated, but rather augmented by the Multitudes of the
Damned; else what meant that man in Hell tormented, to desire that his five
Brethren might be warned, lest they also come into this place of Torment? Luke
16.27, 28. Be this a Parable, and serve not for our Conclusion, yet it may for
our Illustration. Acts 23.8.
Was it his Charity to his Fathers house? No, there is no such thing in Hell;
It might be his self-love unto himself, to prevent this addition to his own
Torments by his Brethrens Condemnation.

4. For the greater Conviction of incredulous men, that ever were and still are
in the world, who are Sadduces in their Judgments, who say, There is neither
Angel nor Spirit, scarce believe there is any Devil: Therefore God, to convince
their Incredulity by apparent demonstration to Sense and Reason, permits the
Devil to play his Reaks with them, that they may know there is a Devil. Thus
the proud ambitious man knows not whether there be any Devil or no, but when
this evil Spirit has gilt the way (like the Snail) by which he climbs and
falls to his own ruin and shame, then he cries out, The Devil was in it. The
malicious wrathful man knows not whether there be any Devil or no; but when
injuries have so over-heat his blood, that his anger is boiled up and ripened
to murder, and murder to the Halter, then he cries out, The Devil is in it.
The earthly covetous man knows not whether there be any Devil or no; but when
he has so long panted after the dust of the Earth, and admired a piece of red
clay, till he has buried his heart in his own dunghill, 1 Timothy 6.9.
and fallen into that snare, then he cries out, The Devil is in it.

These are the Reasons that answer to the first Question, Why God suffers Satan
thus to rage, etc.

But why was the Devil more Tyrannous and Outrageous in Christ's Time, then in
Former Ages? As appeared in this and other Cases. It might be (for I love not
to be peremptory in such Points of Causality) for three Reasons; I say, it
might be,

1. Because this strong man armed met then with a stronger then he, Luke 11.21,
22.
able to bind him, overcome him, and take from him both his arms and spoils;
one whose main business of coming into the world was To destroy the works of
the Devil;] 1 John 3.8.
And this was enough to make him so desperately

2. Because of Occasion to be ministered, Mat. 12.28
by the Devils tyrannous possession, of Christ's manifesting himself to be the
Son of God by his Divine Ejection: If the Devil had not entered in, there had
been no occasion for Christ to cast him out; Therefore the Devils Rage and
Tyranny then might be much to the same purpose, John 9.3.
as was that man's being born blind, That the Works of God might be made
manifest, etc.

3. Because the Devil knew his Time was short; Rev. 12.12 Romans 6.20
To be trod under foot shortly (as the Spirit said to St John,) imputing his
great wrath to his knowledge of his short time; Having great wrath, because he
knows that he has but a short time. Like some spiteful Tenant, that fells
the Trees, racks the Grounds, burns the Gates, ruins the House, spoils and
wastes all that he can, because he knows his Lease nigh expired, not to be
renewed, but himself and all his shortly to be outed: So in our case, the Devil
did the more madly ruffle and rant it in Christ's time, because he knew his time
was short, 1 Ioh. 3.8.
and that there was one then in the world that would make short work with him
and all his works; And therefore the Devil would make short work on it, Rev.
22.11
that they who are profane, unjust and filthy, may be so still, and more then
so, that they may be damned. Romans 9.2^
And therefore God will make short work too upon Earth, that they who are
righteous and holy may be so still, and more then so, may persist and increase
therein, that they may be saved: And were it not for this short work of Gods,
wherein he out-does the Devil, 1 Pet. 4.18.
the Righteous and Elect would more scarcely be saved; Therefore for their
sakes is this as well as that short work of God upon Earth, Mat. 24 22
in making haste to convert, and to sanctify, and to save all that will be
converted, sanctified and saved, quickly, before it be too late; for, Rev. 22.12
Behold I come quickly, and my Reward is with me, etc.

Now consider, If the Devils time were short then, how much shorter is it now,
when sixteen hundred years of that short time are already gone? If St John's
time might be truly called, 1 John 2 18
as it was, The last time; If in St Peter's time it might be truly said, 1 Pet.
4.7. Phil. 4 5. Heb. 10 37 1 Cor. 7 29 Heb. 10.25
as it was, The end of all things is at hand; If in St Paul's time it might be
proclaimed, as it was, The Lord is at hand, and But a little while, The time is
short: Then surely after so long tract of time, must it needs be more true when
so many hundred years of that last time, of that end at hand, of that quickly
and little while, are already spent and passed by? Out of doubt the Devils time
is much shorter Now, and consequently his Wrath must needs be greater Now:
Enough to stop the mouth of wonder, to see him bestir himself to his utmost, 2
Cor. 4.4. Ioh. 12 31.
as if he were mad; to play his pranks and reaks in the world more then ever,
like a God and Prince As secured by his [Circuivi] Job 1 7. More principum
loquitur. 2 Cor. 12.20.
of this world, because he must needs know now his time is shorter: Now no
marvel to see him labor, and lay about him, to stir up in the world all that
St Paul feared among the Corinthians, Debates, envyings, wraths, strifes,
backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults: And more then that, to raise up
amongst men Fears, Jealousies, Plots, Conspiracies, James 4.1.
Tumults, Wars, Fightings, Lusts, and what not? To bring all sorts of sins into
fashion if he could, and to convert the whole world into Heathenism, Epicurism
and Atheism if he might; as if with Circe's Charm he would turn all men into
Swine. Now no marvel to see him strive (if it were possible) to pull down all
True Lights that God has put up, Rev. 2 5.
by throwing at the Candlestick to strike it down, or to remove it, that
thereby the Truth of God might not have that Eminence and Evidence as it ought,
but that some faint shadow, Job 6 6 Humane Laws, humane Examples, are both
false lights because imperfect. The Devil and Sin w^ll evade for all
some corner-disguize, some modification, some temporizing must serve the turn;
serving in something, like the white of an Eg (as in Job) that has no taste at
all. Thus the Devil would have it in the world, if he could but compass his
ends of taking away, or shutting out the true Lights of God, and of setting up
false Lights of his own, thereby to put the fairer gloss upon his wares of sin
(like deceitful Tradesmen,) and to counterfeit and disguize most things to men,
and most men to themselves; so that few things or persons are well known by
their names, calling evil good, and good evil; darkness light, Isai. 5.20.
and light darkness, as in Isaiah. Thus, and worse then thus, would the Devil
in his great wrath make it in the world, if he might; and all, because he knows
that his time is short.

Men and Brethren, let me speak unto you freely; Though I raise no mutinous or
tumultuous thoughts against present Government; though I make not the Pulpit a
priviledg'd place to traduce Superiors, and to preach my Self, (two things that
I never did, never will,) Not daring to ascend into it without leaving Self at
the feet and lowest step of it; as knowing that it never speeds better either
with Pastor or People within, then when Self is left without the Church-doors,
with Abraham's Ass and Servants, farthest off from the place of Worship, (for
it is Self that clogs or strikes off our Chariot wheels that we draw heavily,
it is Self that makes the Chariot of our best desires so long in coming:) Yet
seeing I speak to so knowing an Assembly, and where there is most knowledge,
there is (or should be) the most charity, I shall presume here to be taken
heartily, and crave the privilege of my Function and of this Place, to speak
plainly without Calumniation or Flattery.

There are two notable Signs of the Devils short time, and of Christ's quick
coming to end and judge the World: The one is, That general dead sleep of deep
Security, like that of the old world in the days of Noah, Mat. 24 38
They were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, and knew not,
etc. The other is, That fearful Deluge of overflowing Impiety, wherein the
Apostle was a Prophet to Timothy: This know also, that in the last days
Perilous Times shall come; 2 Timothy 3.1 2 3, 4, 5.
For men shall be Lovers of their own selves, Covetous, Boasters, Proud,
Blasphemers, Disobedient to Parents, Unthankful, Unholy, without natural
Affection, Truce Breakers, false-Accusers, Incontinent, Fierce, Despisers of
those that are good, Traitors, Heady, High-minded, Lovers of Pleasures more
then Lovers of God, Having a form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof,
From such turn away. I have not omitted nor added one word in the reading: Put
now your fingers in the print of these words, and be not faithless, but
believe, that Christ and his Apostle were true Prophets indeed by the
fulfilling of their Prophecies in the world, Mat. 24.3.
in sign of Christ's coming and of the worlds ending in very short time, whereby
the Devils time is short: Ecclus. 37.14
For stand but up in the watch-towers of each your minds, let loose your
thoughts and look abroad in the world, and say, If ever any Age since the world
was created did sleep and snort More securely in a Calm, then ours now in a
Storm? More senseless and fearless of the Wrath of God? (Tell some men of a
Judge, and they say, Quis, who is he? Of a Judgment, and they cry, Quando, when
is it? Or of Hell, and they cry, Ubi, where is it?) More Erroneous and
Heterodox about the Works of God; mis-interpreting his Dispensations, and
cross-construing most of his Proceedings, Judgments for Mercies, and Mercies
for Judgments; most men tuning all both their inward and outward senses to the
key of their own interests and affections, presuming God must needs be well
pleased or displeased when they are so. But believe me (Christians and
Brethren) believe me, The strange Stupidity and desperate Obstinacy of a People
are more fearful then the Punishment: For when a Nation grows stupid and
senseless at Gods Chastisements, and does not or will not see Gods meaning in
them, Hosea 9 1. Isaiah 1.5. Eze. 16.42 Auferam Zelum.
with them in Hosea, there goes out a speech from the highest, Why should they
be smitten any more? which comes near to the worst that God does say, I will be
no more angry; God being most angry when he lets us not see that he is so.

And ask you, What of this? Why I say nothing but that, The Devils time is
short, and therefore has such great wrath.

Say again, If ever any generation of men in the world did attempt More
monstrous Babels, More prodigious Projects of Bedlam Ranting Outrages, let
loose More Reins to Heaven-affronting desperate Impieties, Cloud-brushing
Villainies, and cursed Prophanenesses, then Ours Now: If ever there were More
Pride rushling and rattling, More Envy snarling, More Hypocrisy fawning and
deceiving, and (though I say not More Oaths ringing, Whoredom, Incest, and
incestuous Marriages.
and Drunkenness reeling, yet) More Uncleanness impudently jetting in the
streets, then in Ours Now.

Say, If ever the Gospel in the sincere and powerful Preaching thereof was
exposed to more scorn; Or Piety in the true practice thereof more disdainfully
trampled on both by Scums and great Ones; Or the Lords Day more irreligiously
dashed out of countenance by profane Libertinism and countenanced dishonors,
then Now it is: Horresco referens, I speak it with bitterness, would God I had
nothing whereof to accuse my dear distracted Nation: I know there are some good
Laws in this kind, but where is the execution to be found? How it is with
Superior Magistrates above, I know not; But with Inferior Officers here below
(for the most part) I know it is so faint and cold, as if they were but half
persuaded against others Impieties, or of their own Authorities; whereby it
comes to pass that such heinous Crimes are so slightly punished, if not rather
provoked.

And ask you again, What of this? Why I say nothing, but that, It is the Devils
great wrath, because he knows his time is short, and the Coming of the Lord
draws nigh, Iame 5 8.
to cut down this luxuriant Crop of the Worlds Profaneness by his instant
approach to Judgment.

Verily, I think, since Israel arrived Canaan, scarce one Generation ever saw
such stupendous Mixtures of Mercies and Judgments ushered in and adorned with
Miracles; Miranda etiamsi non miracula.
such interweavings of Miraculous Mercies and Miraculous Judgments, as ours
have seen; Like those Rhetorical Elegancies so frequent among the Prophets, as
that in Hosea, Hos. 2.1^.
I will allure her, and bring her into the Wilderness, and speak comfortably
unto her; as this of God with us, Bringing us as into a Wilderness, handling us
as with Esau's hands, and yet speaking comfortably unto us, as with Jacob's
voice: And if this heavenly strain of Divine Eloquence allure us not, I know
not what will. Verily this time of ours seems like that of diseased people,
which Physicians call [The Critical Time,] wherein the main conjecture lies,
whether they be Mending or Ending, according to the effects and successes of
such utmost means.

And this I take (under favor of better sights) to be our Vertical Point, and
Critical Time one way or other, for our Mending or Ending: For by sinning at
all times we provoke God; but by sinning at such a time as This, we dare God to
punish us, Isai. 1.24. Ierem 5.9.
and to ease and avenge himself of us: And shall not his Soul be avenged on
such a Nation as This? A Nation overflown with such a Flood of Spiritual
Wickednesses, 1 Timothy 4 1.
of Abominable Heresies, of Damnable Doctrines, and Doctrines of Devils: Not
whispered and muttered in Corners only by those that mouch up and down to creep
into houses, 2 Timothy 3 6.
but declared and proclaimed on house-tops, openly in the streets of the City,
and in public Meetings through this Land: Mr Case in one of his Sermons
before the House of Commons. Rev. 12 15
So that most of former Errors (as one uses the words of Calvin) may seem but
Tolerabiles ineptiae, as pardonable toys and trifles in comparison.

And ask you again, What of this? I say no more but that, This is part of The
Flood of Water which the Serpent cast out of his mouth in his great wrath,
because his time is short.

There are some printed Books and Treatises that will give you large Catalogues
of these horrid Evils: There are some black Bills of these sad particulars,
where you that can may read them; my heart and tongue will not serve me to
speak them in this Congregation, Ephesians. 5.3. Mr Obadiah Sedgwick, Mr Vines, Mr
Ho^ges, against Heresies and Blasphe^^^^.
Things not to be once named among us as becomes Christians.

There are some printed Sermons preached before the Parliament, wherein these
accursed things are spread and measured before them, their dimensions taken and
found; For Height, amounting to no less then execrable Blasphemies,
ignominious, contemptuous, disgraceful Reproaches of God, of Christ, and of the
holy Scriptures, etc. This is a huge daring Height: For Breadth, spreading to no
less then destructive Confusion, That they will leave us neither Church nor
State, neither Ministry nor Magistracy, nor Ordinances, neither Duties nor
Worship, (these words are not mine own:) And where are we then? Why, Near the
worst Idolatry of all.
Then a man's Lust shall be his Law, a man's Opinion his Bible, and a man's Self
his God.

And ask you here again, What of This? As they there in the burden of Dumah,
called to the Watchman, Is. 21.11, 12
What of the night? etc. the Watchman said, The morning comes, and also the
night, etc. So may your Watchman say, [As sure as the night succeeds the day,
so sure is a National Calamity to be the end of such daring Impieties
unrepented, unlamented, unreformed.] In suffering Times under incumbent or
impendent Evils, men deal about the Causality, as they were wont in the case of
Bastarday, when no father could be found, none that would own it, to lay it at
the Church door; And who is sufficient by any Apology for the total aversion of
it? I dare not undertake it: This was long ago in print, and I cannot deny it,
[The greatest Traitor to the Clergy is the Clergy:] (Two things God much
abominates, A Partial Judge, and a Profane Priest;) Mat. 10 36
The greatest Foes are still Those of the same House: Truth Lord; As was said
of Israel after that their shameful Idolatry, [Not a Judgment for a long time
inflicted on it, but had an Ounce of the Calf in it:] So of every person,
quality or condition of men afflicted and punished, Hos. 13 9.
there is a pound of Self in it; Destruction is of Self. Fit therefore that we
with others lie down in our shame, give God the glory of his Justice, beg
Mercy, bear the Punishment with Thankfulness and Patience, with the Church in
Micah, I will bear the wrath of the Lord because I have sinned against him,
until he plead my Cause, etc. Micah 7.9.


This may be called the Chancel-door; but there is another, which might be more
truly called (in this respect) the Church-porch-door, at which that Brat of our
Evil will be laid, unless by serious and seasonable Repentance and Reformation
it be averted and avoided. The open impudent professed Blasphemies, Reproaches,
Despights, Contempts of a People Against their God, (making him as Man, that he
should sin, and be the Author not only of the act, but also of the sinfulness
of it;) Against his Holy Son Jesus, (some denying his Divinity, as No God;
others disgracing his Humanity, calling him Bastard;) Against his holy Word the
Scriptures, (accounting them but an humane Invention, a mere Shadow, a false
feigned History, a Scarcrow to keep fools in awe;) Against his holy Ordinances,
with all their vital Circumstances of public Persons, Places, Times of
Worship; some by their hypocritical formal frequenting, others by their
ignominious contemptuous neglecting, aspersing and vilifying of them, etc.
These spiritual Wickednesses and Church sins so rife in the Land, may be called
the Church-door, at which our Evils lie: These (whilst remaining) will prove
the Achan and accursed thing to trouble the whole Host of Israel, Josh. 7 25
the Jonah to trouble all the Mariners, until it be cast (if not with That,
into the fire of some fit and just punishments In peccatas evidentiam in poenis
edificationem. Jonah 1.15
, or at least) with This, into the Water and Sea of repentant Tears and
Lamentations. There have been great thoughts of heart amongst us about
Malignant Parties; But These, These are the Edomites that are most like to make
a short Cut in our Peace, a long Crack in our Hope, and give our whole State a
blow that will hardly be healed: These, These are the Enemies that are most
likely to ring our Knells, and to proclaim our Funerals.

My meaning is not, that All Differences in Judgment should make breach in
Charity and Affections among men; Nor that All Errors in Opinions should be
punished by Men; But rather by Christian means of prayer and endeavor, 2 Timothy
2.25, 26.
provided if God will open the eyes of our Dissenting Brethren, and give them
Repentance to the Acknowledgment of the Truth, that they may Recover out of the
Snares of the Devil, and be saved; Phil. 3.15.
patiently waiting for Gods days of Revealing, either in This their day, when
God shall reveal even This unto them; or in That his Day of Revelation and
Appearing, 2 Cor. 5.10
when All both persons and things shall appear as they are; for get we holiness
to come but once safe to Heaven, and we shall clearly look through all doubts
and difficulties in a moment.

And yet I can tell you what some Divines of no small note have publicly
preached, and by Order printed: Mr Vines, Mr Obad. Sedgwick.
[That Liberty of All Opinions and Religions may be justly called the Golden
Calf of these Times, whereunto many are not unwilling to contribute their
strength and policy, and whose Birthday they would call Festum Jehovae, an
Acceptable Day unto the Lord: Are not the Errors, which are rife amongst us,
either by infecting Persons of Place and Quality, grown into that Boldness? Or
by carrying away Barnabas also, crept into that credit? Or by spreading far and
wide, risen to that strength, that they do face, if not put into danger of
routing, our common Faith, public Worship, authorized Ministry, long and much
expected and promised Reformation, as hoping to be able to bid fair for a
Toleration? Whereby we at home may wonder at our selves, and our sympathizing
Brethren abroad do wonder also at us, That we should be made the common Sewre
to receive the Garbage of other Churches, and that their stinking Snuffs should
be allowed Candlesticks here in England: That Flood-begetting Maxim, viz. a
Catholic Liberty and Toleration of all Opinions, is to be abhorred and
crushed. There was a Religion (as one once spoke before you) Omnium Deorum, of
all Gods amongst the old Romans; And there is a Religion Omnium Sanctorum, of
all Saints now amongst the Papists: And if the Serpent could but wriggle in a
Religion Omnium Opinionum, of all Opinions amongst the English, the Devil
himself needs to desire no more; as knowing that if men can step from one
Religion to All, they will soon fall from All Religion to None.] But let this
pass.

And let be that Question, Whether any men should be punished for their
Religion, and suffer for their Opinions, though never so erroneous? I say, let
that Question be made, stated, qualified and resolved how it will: Shall it be
a Question also, Whether men shall suffer, in any kind or measure, for their
open, professed and practiced Irreligion, though never so Devilish and
Blasphemous? Against a most holy God, his holy Christ, his holy Spirit, Word
and Ordinances? etc. If an unhapyy Boy shall foul, or spoil, or lose his
clothes, the rod shall whip him; and if he curse and spit in the face of his
father, stab the heart and rend the bowels of his mother, shall there be none
to correct him, but many to smile upon him? If one man sin against another, the
Judge shall judge him: 1 Samuel 2 25
And if a man thus sin against God to the highest, shall there be none to
condemn him, but many to entreat for him? Can Christian Magistrates be such
unchristian Gallio's, Act. 18.17
as to care for none of these things? Will godly Rulers be such ungodly
Tiberius's as to say, That the Gods alone must remedy the Injuries offered unto
themselves? Surely if Christian, if Godly, such they cannot, such they will not
be; nay if men fearing God, such they dare not be, for the danger of Gods
coming himself in anger, Eccl. 3 17. Ezekiel. 34.5, 11.
and snatching his Work out of his Servants hands in wrathful displeasure,
saying, I will judge the righteous and the wicked; Shall God bid his servants,
and be put to do it himself? Then his whole house shall rue and ring on it.
Christian Magistrates and People too were best look to it, The one to Rule
well, the other to be Ruled well, lest God suffering by us in his Honor, be
provoked to dash us in pieces one against another. We have been told of a witty
piece of Justice done in the Camp by the fire of an hot Iron through a tongue
that was set on fire of Hell, Iam. 3 6
for casting forth of his mouth sulphurous sparks of Blasphemies. Luke 3.14.
The Soldiers in Luke came After all (both people and Publicans) with their
Religious Question, What shall we do? And have been censured as the lothest,
because there the latest and slowest in that pious motion: But some Soldiers
now it seems have gone before All in their zealous and holy Indignation: And
shall the Godliness and Righteousness of an Army exceed the Godliness and
Righteousness of Court, City and Country? I say again, Christian Magistrates
and People all were best look to it, consider, and do it, Psalm. 82.8.
lest God come yet in heavier Judgments, saying, I will do it my self.

Why, what should the People do?

Pray for All in Authority, 1 Timothy 2 2.
that they may have in their Heads and Hearts, as well as in their Hands to do
it, to do it quickly, before the Decree be sealed, and the Nation prepared for
universal Desolation: Ezekiel 9.4.
And what we cannot Prevent, be we sure to Lament, that the Man with the Pen
and Ink-horn may mark us from destruction. Hezekiah rent his clothes, and
covered himself with sackcloth, etc. Isai. 37.1, 2, 3, 14.
when he heard the Blasphemies of Rabshekah; That day of Blasphemy was a day of
Trouble and vexation to him, though the Blasphemy was from an Assyrian; And
shall the days of greater Blasphemies be days of less trouble and grief to us,
not from professed Assyrians, but from professing Christians? What Christian
heart that has any true blood of Christianity running in the veins of it, can
choose but be deeply affected and afflicted with it?

I fear we do not generally, not cordially enough sigh and cry for all the
Abominations that be done in the Land, That the Man clothed in Linen with the
Writers Ink-horn by his side may set a mark upon our foreheads from a National
Destruction; which the suggestions of my fear make me bold to prophecy, wherein
my love to my Nation would make me glad to be found a false Prophet.

And now I beseech you to consider with me, the wonderful Patience and
compassionate Forbearance of our God with us, who though his Soul abhor sin
infinitely; though he cannot go out of sight and hearing (as we may) but must
see and hear all the unpunished blasphemous impious Dishonors done to the Three
Dearest to him in all this world, more to him then all the world, [His Name and
Worship, His Word and Truth, His Saints and Children,] Though Heaven and Earth
even sweat again under these Provocations; yet has God Patience to see and
hear all.

Oh! Then come you my Brethren in Christianity; Who are we that we must not be
crossed in the least Toy or Trifle, that does occur, of Body, Goods or Name, but
we must run presently to the hard hasty Arguments of Steel and Iron? Not only
as Zedekiah pleaded with the Prophet, [a word and a blow,] 1 King. 22.29. 2 Samuel 13.22. Cap 20.10
but as Absalom with Amnon, [a blow without a word, strike and say nothing;]
Our sword (like Joabs) dropping forth upon all occasions, discoursing with a
neighbor as he did with Amasa [in the fifth rib,] speaking Daggers points unto
him. Who are we, that we cannot put up any Illations of wrongs and injuries
with quiet minds? Are we Christians? Nay are we Men? that we will not, we
cannot bear with men, as God bears? With men as God, did I say? Nay with God
himself? He must shower and shine when we will have him; strike and stroke when
we will have him; else we question sometimes his Power, sometimes his Truth,
sometimes his Providence: Oh shame! Be we more patient, as our Father which is
in Heaven is patient; Be we Followers of God as dear Children: Who are we?

Oh! Then come you my Brethren in the Ministry; Is God so wounded with
Blasphemous Reproaches in his Word, in his Name, and bears it, and must not we
be touched in ours? Mat. 10 25
Shall the Master of the House be called Beelzebub, and must not we of the
Household be miscalled? Remember Uriah's words, 2 Samuel 11.1
The Ark, and Israel, and Judah dwell in Tents, and my Lord Joah and his
servants abide in the open fields, and shall I then go into mine house to eat
and drink? etc. And say we every one, Shall my Lord Jesus in his Ordinances
(the Tokens of his Presence) be threatened with Tents, and exposed to all the
Injuries incident to the open field, and shall we then go secure to our houses
and enjoyments from all threats of violence and disturbance? Lord, who are we?
Men we are as they are, and that is for their sakes, because they cannot hear
the voice of God himself and live; Sinful we are as they are, and that is
because we are men; Mortal we are as they are, and that is because we are
sinful; Yet still though men, sinful and mortal, 2 Cor. 5.2.
we are the Messengers of God, and Ambassadors of Christ: Now in that we suffer
as men, sinful and mortal, Mic. 7.9. Lam. 3.22.
we should bear it patiently, and give God his Glory; the Glory of his Justice,
that we are Afflicted; and the Glory of his Mercy too, that we are not
Consumed: But in that we suffer as Ministers, eo nomine as Ministers, If our
Adversaries should write a Book against us, we might with holy Job, Take it
upon our shoulders, and bind it to our heads as a Crown; Job 31.35, 36
we should bear it gladly, Rejoicing with the beaten and abused Apostles, That
we are counted worthy to suffer shame for his Name. Acts 5.41.
For (alas!) the worst is not Ours, but Theirs, whilst Christ himself suffers
in our wrongs as his Ministers: Exodus 16 8
And what are we? (said Moses and Aaron,) Your murmurings are not against us,
but against the Lord: [He that rejects Me, Joh. 12 48.
and receives not my Word,] There Christ interested himself in the quarrels of
his Word: [He that despises you, despises me,] Luke 10.16
There Christ interested himself in the quarrels of his Ministers as his
Ministers.

The mighty Nimrods of our Times deal with us, as Hunters do with Hedges, leap
over them, or tread them down in the pursuit of their Pleasure and Game, and
run to them for shelter in a Storm: When God shall restore them to their right
minds, his Word and Ministers shall be restored to their Honors again: Then
they will glorify God, and honor his Word and Ministers in the day of
Visitation; 1 Per. 2 12
And till then my Brethren, let it be accounted scandalous to receive Honor at
their hands or tongues, by whom Gods holy Name is blasphemed, his holy Son
dishonored, his holy Spirit resisted, his holy Word and Ordinances despised. 1 Timothy 5 17
Should such ungodly Miscreants present us with their double or single Honor,
it were not a proud, but an holy disdain to fling it back into their faces
again, as unworthy of the honor, 1 Samuel 2.30
to honor the servants of Christ whom God does honor.

Now no more of this Question; Will you bear but one Question more?

As Examples show in other Circuits abroad, and would there had been none in
ours here at home.
Shall we say, it is because of Reformation, that the Devil so bestirs him
beyond former wont? Reformation is a good word, yea glorious, both name and
thing, such as would rather provoke the Devil unto his most outrageous Tyranny,
then invite him unto Familiarity. Oh that we were an universally, thoroughly,
really Reformed People as we ought; Then how Prosperous and Victorious might
our Nation be? how flourishing our Church and State? yea how terrible to Satan?
Zech. 2.5.
as armed with terror, and walled with fire round about, so that he durst not
come so near us as to insinuate for Familiarity with us: As that most
Artificial Painter, having painted a Boy with a Basket of Grapes in his hand,
Zeuxes.
and seeing the Birds flying in flocks to peck at the Grapes (as if true and
natural) to the silly peoples admiration, he was sore displeased with himself,
disclaimed his Art, saying, Had I painted the Boy (which was the chief part of
my Picture) as well as I have done the Grapes (which were but a by accident and
ornament) the Birds durst never have been so bold. Your thoughts may forerun me
in this Application: Were we indeed as careful and Conscientious in the
Substantials and Essentials of true Religion and Devotion, for Faith, Life and
Worship, as in show Curious in the Circumstances, Accidents and Ceremonies
thereof, the Devil and this kind of Fowls, Mat. 13.4, 19
these ravenous Birds of prey durst never have been so bold. Therefore I impute
not the Causality of Witchcraft unto Reformation, for this will not make the
Devil familiar, but mad rather. 2 Cor. 1 24 1 Cor 7.25
But (if I may give my Judgment, not as having dominion over your Faith, yet as
one that has obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful, with submission to
better Judgments) I conceive, It is because of the proud, profane, blasphemous
Rejections and Aspersions of the holy Word of God by so many of the people, as
imperfect and deficient to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.17 Job. 20.31. and 5.39. Acts 8 9
nay as a mere Shadow and humane Invention, (let St Paul, and St John, and
Christ himself say what they will of its Sufficiency, and Perfection, and holy
Inspiration;) Some giving out that themselves are such great ones, as to be
Above Ordinances, above Rules, above Scriptures, and all that is written;
pretending to the sole guidance of the Spirit of God, as he that said, I am for
Christ, 1 Cor. 1 12.
meaning [I am for none of you all:] What? For the Spirit of God and of Christ,
even against their Word and their Will revealed, with Despite unto it? O God!
That ever the Devil should get so much Advantage for his subtle Insinuations
with Man! by his despising that same Word of God, Ioh. 12 48 2 Cor. 11.14. 1 John 4.1.
that shall judge him at the last Day: For the Devil is a Spirit, though an evil
one, and a transforming one; God is a Spirit, the only Good one; And we are bid
to try the Spirits, and forbid to believe every Spirit: And how shall we try
them? but by that which ennobled the Bereans above others, viz. Act. 17.11
Searching the Scriptures daily whether those things were so. But where the
Touchstone and Rule of Trial is rejected and exploded, the evil Spirit and any
Error may be admitted: As a Goldsmith or Lapidary without a Touchstone may be
easily deceived with counterfeits, and undone.

Therefore if any be minded to be familiar with Devils, let them slight, or
scorn, or burn their Bible; And this is vendere animam lucro, selling of a Soul
for a little profit; Mat. 16.26
or rather perdere animam nihilo, cast it away for nothing; As he said that
sold his Bible, [Now have I sold that which should teach me to sell all to buy
it,] meaning the Truth of it, Pro. 23 23
which may (for all the strangeness) and must be bought, and not sold.

But as many as desire to be acquainted with God, 2 Pet. 5 9.
and to resist the Devil, Thank God that your Bibles speak Engglish; Wipe off
the Dust of Neglect, and the Dirt of Contempt from them; Let not this Rule and
Touchstone so great and good, Hos. 8.12.
given us of God, be accounted of us as a strange thing; strange to our
Judgments by Ignorance, to our Thoughts by earthly-mindedness, to our
Affections by Indisposedness, to our Mouths by rotten and profane speeches:
But receive the Word of God as it is in truth the Word, 1 The. 2.13 Joh. 12 48
Jam. 1 21
not of Man, but of God, which shall Judge, and may save your Souls: Receive it
as it is indeed our best friend, next God, yea the very friendship of God:
Receive it therefore not as a stranger, with a few cold Complements at the Door,
or to come in only for an hour; Col. 3.16.
but entertain it as a friend, [Let it dwell in you;] And because it brings
with it Rich Treasures of the best store, [Let it dwell in you Richly;] And
because it may be abused by Ignorance, Indiscretion, Folly, Affectation,
Unprofitableness, Vainglory, and Hypocrisy, [Let it dwell in you Richly in
all Wisdom;] Speak and preach it in Wisdom; hear, read and meditate of it in
Wisdom: not only in some, but [in All Wisdom;] So Let the Word of God dwell in
you richly in all Wisdom: Not using it as a Spell or Charm against the Devil,
by laying the Bible at the Beds head, or in the Chamber window only, that is not
in wisdom; or by naked quoting of Scripture only, Luke 4.10. Psa 91.11, 12
that is not in wisdom, (for the Devil himself can do so, and gloss upon it
too,) but by So quoting it as by Faith, Affection, and Obedience to cleave unto
it; This is the right using of the Sword of the Spirit in Wisdom. Ephe 6.17
Let it so dwell in us, Not only sub ratione very, as Truth in the general
while it only pleads it self; but also (as the Schools distinguish) sub ratione
contrarii, as Reproof in the particular when it presses upon our selves; and
not as the Friar wittily told the people, that the Truth he preached was like
holy water, which every one called apace for, yet when it came to be cast on
them, they would turn aside their faces: Some that call fastest for Truth,
cannot abide to have it cast into their faces; could like Truth if it would
only show it self, and yet can mislike it when it comes thus to show them
themselves; Could find in their hearts to love Truth Lucentem, Shining, Jer 13
15. Obevi equasi Obaudire. Judge. 9.7.
but not Retarguentem, Reproving, etc. [Hear ye, give ear, be not proud, the
Lord has spoken;] He is proud that will not harken unto God against himself
and all the world. [Harken unto me ye men of Shechem, That God may harken unto
you,] said Jotham.] Secret things belong unto the Lord our God, Deu. 29 29
but revealed things unto us and our children,] said Moses. It Is not Secret
Purpose of God, but Revealed Precept must be Man's Rule: Take we heed of
pretending to the Spirit of God against the Word of God; For there is no
Promise of Gods Spirit being a Guide, where his Word is not a Rule; Therefore
make we the Word of God to be our Rule, and then hopefully may we beg the
Spirit of God to be our Guide; and hold we there, if we be wise.

Now by this I hope you are Resolved in part, About the Devils Rage with Man,
About his Greatest Rage in Christ's Time, With Application to Ours; Wherein if I
have seemed in any thing too uncharitable or peremptory, I humbly crave but two
things of you in my Apology: That such only may be my Judges who have sadly
considered the state of the Times and of their own Souls; at their Judgment I
am content to stand or fall. That such candor may be showed me as was due unto
the Prophets of old, Ier. 5.1. Ier. 9.2. Psalm. 12.1. Isaial. 1.6.
speaking thus largely, [There is not a man to be found that executes
Judgment, and seeks the Truth: They be All Adulterers, An Assembly of Rebels,
There is not one godly man left; From the sole of the foot unto the head, etc.
From the least of them even to the greatest, etc.] They would in all be
understood as lamenting at the generality of Corruption, not as besoting every
particular person of Magistracy, Ministry and Commonalty without exception; and
so would I; Not loving the froward wont of wayward men, so to bemoan what we
want, as not to bless God for what we have. There are some Christian hearts (I
hope) amongst us in all our Ranks, God increase their Number, their Graces, and
their Comforts; For I fear me, it is but as the shaking of an Olive Tree, Isai.
17.6. Ier. 3.14. Isai. 24.13
in Isaiah, Two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough, four or
five in the utmost branches: One of a City, two of a Tribe: Or As the gleaning
of Grapes when the Vintage is done; Yet with this comfort, That God is dealt
and prevailed with by his Servants more in their Weight, then in their Numbers;
Genesis 18.
Ten righteous Souls would in Gods Balance outweigh all the Godless ones in
Sodom; One Christian all the Christless ones in Jerusalem: Ier. 5.1.
For, as he said, Judge. 8.2.
The gleanings of Ephraim are better then the vintage of Abiezer.

By this Measure here set by me, I see room little enough left me in time and
patience for this short Application.

First, Instruction.
For Instruction in two particulars.

1. Of Man's vain Credulity, which does him most injury, in trusting his Enemy
too far; not taking him to be so much our Adversary as Gods Word does make him
to be, nor believing that he seeks our Destruction so much as Gods Ministers
declare him to do: 1 Pet. 5.8. Mat. 24 22 Genesis 3.1.
But we may be persuaded that the Devil is not called our Adversary, nor
compared to a Roaring Lion, and to a subtle Serpent, for nothing; feeding upon
our Corruptions, as the Serpent does upon dust.

2. Of the Devils Tyranny, which if so malicious to our Bodies (though he least
minds them) as to dismember them, whereof are diverse Examples besides this in
the Gospel; How great may we suspect his Malice toward our Souls? seeking to
dismember them, by making us blind when we should see Gods Works, and deaf when
we should hear Gods Word, and dumb when we should confess our sins, or bless
his Name: Isa. 33 14 Mat 9 43.44.
And if his Cruelty be so terrible in this life, how tormenting will it be in
the life to come? in those everlasting burnings in Hell fire?

Next, For Exhortation, Exhortations.
to praise God for not giving us over as a prey into his Teeth, but that our
Souls are escaped as Birds out of the snare of this Fowler: Psalm 24.6, 7, 8.
For he is a poor experienced Christian that does not daily find the Power of
God in preserving him from Satan's Temptations and Terrors, 2 Timothy 4 8
which are the Paws and Jaws of that Roaring Lion that would devour him. Common
Prose is too low and dull to express the due thanks for such a Deliverance: The
Soul in this should be advanced to the height and courage of a Song; Not a
Christian Soul but has matter enough given it of God to make Songs of his
Praise, being thus (like David's Soul) compassed about with Songs of
Deliverance. Psalm. 32 7. and 28 7.


What now the Importance of your Affairs, which occasion this Concourse, will
not permit me to express, I crave leave only to intimate in few words touching
The Disease and Cure in our Text, and so conclude.

The Malady or Disease, [This Kind.] 1. Mat 9 33.
The dumb Devil was always held the worst kind of Devils; and therefore we find
that upon the effecting of this Miracle, the people were all amazed, and
marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel, because it was such an
extraordinary Cure to heal one possessed with a dumb Devil.

Here were occasion of a Discourse about the Nature, Order, Malignity, and
Diversity of Evil Angels; wherewith I might fill your heads sooner then warm
your hearts, which makes me the less sorry for being taken off from speaking
any more: Now therefore no more but this; As there are Diversities of Devils,
so are there Diversities of Sins, their name is Legion too, for they are many.
Mark 5.9


Sins are Diversified,

1. In respect of the Cause, which may be Voluntary or Involuntary, such as are
either of Ignorance or of Presumption: But know we that voluntary and
presumptuous sins are the worst kind; Psa. 19.13
[Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins, etc.]

2. In respect of the Act, either of Commission or of Omission; Is. 65.2 3.
Ezekiel. 2.4.
Commissive sins are the worst kind, Sins in deed are held more provoking and
impudent.

3. In respect of the Subject thereof; The same sin for the matter is capable
of aggravation from the person that commits it, be he Prince or Subject, Master
or Servant, Minister or People, etc. Sin may proceed and commence, take an
higher degree, according to the height and degree of the person that acts it;
the higher, the worse kind.

4. In respect of the Object; So Blasphemy against God, is a worse kind then
Calumny against a Neighbor. 1 Samuel 2.25


5. In respect of the Matter; So detracting from the Word of God, is a worse
kind then clipping the Kings Coin.

6. In respect of the Manner or Measure; So reiterated, multiplied, continued
sins, are a worse kind then single sins but once committed.

This might be serviceable for diverse Uses:

1. As for their Confutation who make no difference of sins, but judge All
alike, because that Sin is nothing but a Privation, and Privation (say they)
admits of no Degrees: But by their leaves they may be told (if not taught) that
Privations are not all equal, some are more mere and simple Privations then
others. But I cannot stay to teach them now.

2. So for their Confutation also who spitefully accuse us of equalling and
levelling all sins, because we allow not of their vain Distinction of Venial
and Mortal Sins (especially in their sense.)

Truth indeed, we account no sin simply little, and in its own nature small:
Because,

No little God to sin against; the least sin, minimum spirituale, is against an
infinite Majesty.

No little Price paid for little sins; the least sin pardoned cost the
invaluable Blood of Christ.

No little disobedience in little sins; As much Treason in false coining of
pence of Silver, as of pieces of Gold.

No little unthankfulness in little sins; the less the matter and occasion is
wherein we offend, the greater is our unthankfulness in offending God for so
small a matter and advantage, which shows the greater Corruption by how much
the less was the Temptation.

No little pollution by little sins; A small Puddle may defile a man as much as
a muddy Pond.

No little punishment for little sins (so called; Romans 6.23
) The wages of sin as sin is eternal death.

It Is known that the Plagues of Lice and of Flies did trouble the Land of Egypt
as much (if not more) then some of the greater Plagues: (The Magicians were
first baffled in the Lice, and made to acknowledge the finger of God; Exodus 8.9
and Pharaoh first heart-struck in the Flies without a Rod to yield the
Israelites to sacrifice to their God; Ver. 24.25
The smalness of the Instruments adds unto the horror of the Judgments, Maximus
in minimis.
Gods hand being most palpable and sensible in the smallest and vilest things:
Pharaoh might take it in as much scorn to perish by the basest and vilest
creatures, Judge. 9.54
as Abimelech to be killed by the weakest vessel, a woman.) Therefore though we
extenuate no sin, saying of it, as Lot of Zoar, Genesis 19 20
[Is it not a little one?] because we know all sin of it self mortal, yet let
us make a difference in degrees of sin; and remember, that to be possessed with
a Dumb Spirit, is to be possessed with a Great Sin indeed. When a man is so
Dumb, that he cannot confess his sins to God; and so Dumb, that he cannot crave
the mercy of God to forgive his sins; and so Dumb, as he cannot praise God for
his Bounty and Goodness; and so Dumb, that he can rebuke or exhort his Brother;
Then indeed he is possessed with a Dumb Spirit, and a Great Sin.

But no more of the Malady, [This Kind.]

And as little of the Recovery, [ Coming forth.] It is so remarkable, 2. Mat.
12.24 28.
that Christ never healed any possessed, but he still cast the Devil out, that
the Ancient learned sought for Reasons, and found Four, why Casting out is the
only note of Cure, why only by Coming forth.

1. Because the Devil like a cunning Cheater does always cozen and out-reach
men in his Bargain; Luke 4.6 Mat. 4 8 2 Pet 2 14
deluding of feeble senses, and beguiling of unstable Souls; never giving any
valuable Consideration for any thing that he had: Primae Actiones sunt regulae.
As appears by his Cheat put upon our first Parents, who for an Apple sold
Paradise; the Price was indeed so little, as the Spirit of God would never yet
acquaint us what it was. And consider I pray what does he give the Ambitious
man for his Soul, but Smoke? And what the Covetous man, but Muck? And what the
Adulterous Libidinous man, but Rottenness? In which respect there is Ejectio
firma against him, as the Law provides in like cases; he must be cast out.

2. Because like a false juggling Dealer he never performed or made good his
Bargain. He promised our first Parents, Genesis 3.4, 5
They should not dye, but live, and be as Gods; But alas, though some of their
posterity might be said to live as Gods, Psalm. 82 7. Romans 6.23
yet to be sure they shall all dye like men. Right Legerdemain, taking from us
what he seems to give us: He is ever lavish in his tempting promises of things
not his own, Mat. 4 9. Luke 4.6.
as he was to Christ; But universal experience has found him false, and
therefore he is justly Cast out.

3. Because the Devil like a sharking Jobber chaffer'd with those that had no
power to sell; Psalm. 10^.3 Mal. 2.10.
as children and servants that have no power to sell that which is not their
own, but their Parents and Masters: Men's Bodies are not their own, 1 Co. 6.19
much less their Souls; And in this Case again the Law says, Caveat emptor, let
the Buyer look to it, and therefore is he Justly Cast out.

4. Because the Devil never pays the quit-rent, that is, Thanks and Praise to
God, which he never renders willingly as an end of Agents Intention, but only
as an end of Passive Compulsion. This Quit-rent of Honor and Glory, God always
(as Creator) reserved to himself in his most general Grant of all things to his
Creatures: But this the Devil never pays, and therefore is he justly cast out,
and the great Landlord has reason to re-enter.

Let us add but two more:

5. Because he lets all go to decay, and loves to ruin where he comes; Lands
and Buildings, both the outward and the inward parts of the Dwellings: He
ruins the Body (as well as the Estate) of a Drunkard, Glutton, and Leacher,
and intemperate Liver, with Rottenness and Consumptions; He lets also the
inward parts run to wrack, as the Foundation to fall, which is Faith; the Walls
to decay, which are Charity; and all the other inward Virtues to run to Ruin;
and therefore is he justly Cast out for not maintaining Reparations.

6. Lastly, Because God himself means to re-enter, 1 Cor. 6.19 Cap. 10.21
and dwell there, where must be no Inmate; No room for Belials, Mammons, Idols,
2 Cor. 6.15
Devils in the Temple of the Holy Ghost: Therefore in Justice and Necessity is
the Devil cast out of doors.

1 Pet. 5.^^ 2 Cor. 11.14 Ephe. 6.12
yet he is transcendently a subtle Serpent, a malicious Dragon, a roaring Lion;
And though he transform himself into an Angel of Light, yet he is a Spirit of
Darkness. He is fitly resembled to Hazael, who being told by the Prophet that
he should do such and such desperate things, and prodigious acts, answers, [Is
thy servant a Dog, that he should do such great things?] 2 Kin. 8 13
As if Elisha had been mistaken in the man; but the event showed the truth of
that Prophecy. Judge. 4 18 21. Cap. 5.25.
And for all the world like Jael crying to Sisera, [Come in my lord, come in,
fear not, etc.] First give him milk and butter in a lordly dish, till he
sleeps; and then nothing but the hammer and the nail till he dies. So the
Devil, disclaim he what Cruelties, and profess he what Kindnesses he will, be
we sure of this, He never seeks to possess any man but to tyrannize over him,
to ruin him and spiritually undo him if he can. Whosoever credits a Liar is
deceived, but he that will credit the known Father of Lies, John 8 44
loves to be deceived and undone.

Iam. 2.17, 18
1. To See him by Faith. 2. To bolt the Door against him by Works of Obedience.


1. To See him: Some Rules should be borrowed from the Optics, for the seeing
things exactly with our bodily eyes, That it is requisite that the Object be
rightly placed, that is, In a direct Opposition, and not too near us: We cannot
see a thing in its complete proportion, on the same side we are, neither behind
us, nor if it be placed just beside us. If a man would plainly and perfectly in
each Dimension behold one in this side of the Room, he must step over to the
other side: So he that would see the Devil in his Pride, shall never perceive
him, so long as he is proud himself, for so long he stands on the same side the
Devil does; But if he go over unto the other side of Humility, then he shall
plainly see the Devil in his Pride, so in his Malice and Hypocrisy, etc. The
reason why so few discern him in his Slights and Deformities, is because so
many stand on the same side. Then be sure we stand not too near, for if the
Organ be too near the Object, the beams of the sight will be confounded; There
must be a Mediocrity of distance, the Eye not too near, nor too far off, for if
a man would perceive the Art of a prospective Picture, he must go a distance
from it, and look on it not with Natural eyes only, but with the help of
Artificial eyes or Spectacles fitted for the purpose, else no discerning of the
Mystery in it: Semblably, if a man would plainly see this mysterious Prospect
of the Devil, with all his deep Shadows, and profound Devices and Deceits, he
must endeavor to go from him, that he may perceive him; and then look not with
the eyes of Nature or Reason which hardly or never discern him, 1 Ioh 2 20.
but with the eye of Faith cleared with Gods Word, and anointed with Gods
Spirit, which will plainly discover him.

The next Means to keep the Devil out of Possession, is to shut the Door
against him, by good Works of holy Obedience for Conscience sake: Christian
diligence in lawful Callings, even in the lowest places of hewing wood, and
drawing water (especially if the heart be fortified with the spirit of Grace
and Prayer) is no small means to keep out the working Devil, who has Idleness
for his Anvil. Genesis 2.15.
Adam was set by God to work in Paradise, Hieronimus ad Rusticum. ut quando
Diabolus venit inveniat occupatum.
but was idle when the Devil was at work with him by Temptations: And therefore
let me advise you, as He did his Friend, To be always doing of some good thing,
that when the Devil comes he may find you busy; The Door shut against him, and
you not at leisure to give him entertainment.

quid genus Daemonum, what kind of evil Spirit it is that does most strongly
beset (if not possess) it: For as there are Diversities of Devils, and
Diversities of Sins, so are there Differences in Casting out of Sins: Though in
respect of Gods absolute Power, all are alike easy; yet in regard of man's
capacity or incapacity, some sins are cast out, and some Souls cured, with the
less, and some with the greater difficulty. Take heed lest there be in any of
you an evil spirit of Unbelief, Heb. 3.12. Joh. 20.25, 27
Incredulity, Vainglory, and Hypocrisy, this kind cannot come forth easily;
Bribery, Perjury, Cruelty, this kind is cured hardly; And of like kind are
Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Covetousness, Rebellion, Witchcraft; And especially
beware of any customary and presumptuous sins, this is a kind not to be cast
out ordinarily: For as there was no little ado to restore to life Jairus his
daughter dead in the house; Mark 5 41
Luke 7.14
More about the Widows son, carried out dead in the gate; but Most of all about
Lazarus, buried dead in the grave so long till he stank; Ioh. 11.44.
for Martha wept, and Mary wept, and the Jews wept, yea Jesus himself wept and
groaned in his spirit: Semblably, There goes Much besides private Admonition to
Raise the secret shame-fac'd Sinner, Mat. 18.15
that with Jairus his daughter is but dead as in the house and within doors;
Mat. 18.16 17 Ezekiel. 2.4.
And More besides public Reprehension to Raise the open impudent Sinner, that
with the Widows son is as dead in the gate without doors like Absalom in the
face of the Sun; But Most of all, besides weeping and groaning, and with Mary
lamenting [Lord, Ioh. 11 21.
if thou had been here, my Brother had not dyed] to Raise the customary
stinking Sinner, that with Lazarus is as dead and buried in the grave of
Custom; for this is the worst kind pleading Custom, and most hard to be cast
out: It were good to pray David's prayer with David's spirit, Psalm. 19.12 13.
[Cleanse thou me from secret sins,] for even this is an evil kind, not easily
cast out: But it were good to heat the furnace of our Devotions yet seven times
more then it was wont to be heat (if possible) when we come to this, [Keep back
thy servant also from presumptuous sins, let them not have dominion over me,
Then shall I be upright and innocent from the great (or much) Transgression;]
For this is the worst kind, very hard to be cast out. Take we heed therefore of
giving Dispensations of witting or willing Allowance and Indulgence to any sin;
for (believe it) the least sin committed presumptuously will weigh too heavy in
the balance of the Sanctuary.

Mark 9.18
(as Christ's Disciples here in this kind could not,) Then be sure to remember
the words of the Lord Jesus, Verse. 19.
[Bring him unto me;] If neither Word nor Sacrament will do it, try what Prayer
will do; Present thy heart (as that father did his son) to Christ, and say,
[Lord, here is my heart, possessed with an evil spirit of Infidelity, or of
Obduracy, or of Pride, or any other Impiety, etc. I have often carried it to
the Word, and to the Sacrament, and to other of thine Ordinances, that they
should cast him out, and yet They could not: Now since thou have said [Bring him
unto me,] behold Lord, in Obedience to thy Command, and in Confidence of thy
Promise, I here present it naked and prostrate before thee, Strike where thou will so thou cure, Handle it how thou please so thou cast it not out of thy
hands; Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief; Speak thou but the word, and my
heart shall be dispossessed, mollified, humbled and sanctified, etc.] Pray, I
say, and I say again, Pray; who can tell what Prayer may do? Oh the Wonders of
Salvation wrought by Prayer in all the Elements from the highest Heaven to the
lowest Hell! Aug. Deo sacrificium, Homini subsidium, Daemonib^^ flagellam.
as a Sacrifice to God, Help to Man, and Scourge to Satan. And indeed if the
Spirit of Grace and Adoption beget it, if the Spirit of Grace and Regeneration
conceive it, and if the wings of Faith and Fervency do carry it through the
Angels hand, etc. what can hinder it? Iam. 5.16. Rev. 8.4.
Not for the mere excellency that is in it self, nor for the bare Faculty of
it, but for Gods Institution and Appointment of it to this end, singling of it
out to this purpose in his own Acceptance: This is it that does it, whereby
Prayer rightly Rooted, and rightly Regulated, can do Miracles when nothing else
can do it, even cast out Devils, as here in the present Case of our Text, This
Kind can come forth by nothing, but by Prayer and Fasting: Which might be
easily brought up, but that the Well is deep, and I doubt here is no Bucket to
draw. Therefore so much shall serve for this time of this thing.

2 Timothy 2.7
Consider what is said, and God give you understanding in all things. Amen.
FINIS.

