A Copy of a LETTER Sent from a GENTLEMAN In Carisbrooke-Castle to an
Honorable Person at WESTMINSTER Concerning His Majesty's Intentions, and
their expectations of the PERSONAL TREATY.

Printed at London, 1648.

A Copy of a Letter sent from a Gentleman in Carisbrooke Castle to an
Honorable person at Westminster.
Honored Sir,
I Received yours of the 15th. and return you all thanks for your
Intelligence, which imports the hastening, if not the precipitation of a Treaty,
to which I wishes good an end as is expected from it by the common voice of the
People, who being not the best Judges of things, hastily embrace and declare,
and countenance that which first makes it self obvious and pleasing to the
fancy.

But indeed Sir, (for you are one with whom I dare be free) Men of the most
honesty and judgment can by no means give way to any such expectation, but
rather conceive, nay fear that the drift of a Personal Treaty, is one of the
designs of the old Serpent among us, and that which if obtained, is merely
to put the KING in a capacity to Ast for Himself; or in case that fail, to
make way for His escape. And verily Sir, if you thoroughly consider it, the
former is not wholly free from Jealousy. Eor if you please to remember a part
of one of the KINGS Letters which He intended to have sent into Scotland by
Haliburton: He there desires Duke Hamilton to PROMOTE the business for a
PERSONAL TREATY as fast as He can, and when that is done He will play His
part Himself.

Now I beseech you Sir, if the KING really intended a Treaty, and a fair
correspondency with His People, what needed all these packings and shufflings,
and why may He not Fairly and Honorably comply with His PARLIAMENT without
any further Delusions. Not to say any thing of the Bragges of many of His own
Party (who pretend to be deeply acquainted with His Interest) that that is the
best and hopefullest Project that ever they had, and that which has also
thriven the best. Nay they stick not to say that if they once come to a
Treaty, they have done the Business, and that They will never be able to
look him in the face, as who should say, standing for our Laws and Liberties,
was so great and unpardonable an error.

But indeed we have justly cause to fear an Escape; For not to mention the
old Attempt, the Engines whereof should have been those base and unworthy
fellows, Osborn and Dowcet, who thought by the false translation of the guilt
to another, to have becom'd innocent. It is also known how Ashburnham and
Leg lurked in secret places near the Isle, and were once taken, which
doubtless was not without some expectation of a Design, which now seems to
be more fairly carried on; For these very persons He demands for Attendants,
as also Titus and Firebrace, men as experimented in these occasions, and such
as he was, by no means forced to nominate, since he might have had the choice
of many other more unblemished and unspotted reputations. Nay among these there
may be Dowcet too, an Alien noted with breach of Trust, and one that was so
nearly concerned in his former intended Escape.

And truly it is a wonder that Dowcet (one whom he had formerly so much
trusted) was not summoned to this employment: But I wonder what the King means
by sending for so many riding suits, and so many horses sent to him, unless
thete were strong hints of such a Design. But they will object that He has
passed. His Royal word not to depart within twenty days after the Treaty: But
I pray why may not He do here as He did at Hampton Court, slip away, or else
make a pretense of a new Design upon Him, as that was feigned about Rolph, when
He was to escape from the Isle of Wight. But methinks all true Englishmen
should take heed of being lulled with this Plot; For otherwise why should the
Malignants have driven at it all this time? which may argue there is a deeper
plot in it then we yet know, or else it is to make the Parliament odious, in
case that His Majesty be stubborn and break off the Treaty, and all that
odium be cast on the Parliament, and new Tumults be prepared against next
Summer, as they may well expect them, if they continue this indiscreet lenity
they have formerly used. But it is hoped they will now grow somewhat wifer, for
by that wholesome severity exercised upon Lucas and Lisle, the Parliament begin
to declare, that they will make use of their justice as well as their mercy. I
desire you Sir remember my business concerning etc. For at this pressing
opportunity speed is very needful. I kissed the hands of your sweet Lady, to
whom with your self I wish the consummation of your own wishes, and rest,

Your real Servant.
Carisbrooke, Aug. 30.
FINIS.

