A COOL CONFERENCE Between the Scottish Commissioners Cleared Reformation, and
the Holland Ministers Apologeticall Narration, brought together by a
well-willer to both. 1644.
REformat. Whilst we the meanest of many, etc. wait for uniformity in
Religion, so much desired by all the Godly in the three Kingdoms; unto which an
entrance is made by a solemn League, and Covenant.

Apologet. We approve (worthy brethren) your expectation as just, and confess
our own desires of it, so as Reformation be not taken indebite in a strict
stinted sense, but according to your latitude expressed page 15. We are (say
you) neither so ignorant, nor so arrogant as to ascribe to the Church of
Scotland (its your own phrase) such absolute purity and perfection, as has not
need, or cannot admit of further Reformation. So you. A golden peace signifying
speech as if dropped from the mouth of some Chrysostom, or conceived by some
Ireneus; pluck you that end, and we the other likewise, and we shall be fastened
with a Cordian knot. Of which our endeavor you have a full testimony in our
League and Covenant, wherein we swear to endeavor the preservation of the
reformed Religion in Scotland; we say of Religion and Reformed; is, or shall
be; and till further reformation, we will preserve it against our common
enemy, that you be not made to retreat from that you have won. And that we
will endeavor the reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland in doctrine, worship, discipline and government, according to the Word
of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches. So far the Covenant.
Wherein it is as evident as if written with a Sun beam, that the Churches of
England have not engaged themselves to come down to you, or do bind you to come
to us, but the common rendevous where we must all meet is the best ref^^^ed
Churches: and that according to the word of God, which is that Standard of
perfection that must weigh and measure out unto us our uniformity.

Reformat. We find our selves bound against the prejudices, and mistakings of
some who in the dark are afraid of that which they know not, and suffer their
affections of love and hatred to run before their understanding; and against
the mis-representations and indirect aspersions of others who do so commend
their own way, that the reformed Churches thereby suffer disparagement; to give
that testimony unto the order and government of the reformed Churches, and
particularly of the Church of Scotland, which they do well deserve.

Apologet. Ah dear brethren, why would ye speak thus? Do these expressions (in
the judgment of candor) suit with your profession, page 2. where you promise
that you endeavor nothing but a simple and innocent manifestation and defense,
without desire or intention to give the smallest offense to any who fear God,
love the truth, and, etc. So you. Let an impartial Angel speak, whether
multitudes of gracious hearts are not justly offended at this bitterness so
unseasonably administered, and applied too, to wrong parties? Ah, how easy is
it by our self-mistasting hearts (like the sorry Artificer that makes two
cracks, whiles he is patching and hammering up one) rather to cause prejudices,
then cure them. You may be confident (let all the world look upon the Apology
and judge) that the five Members of the Assembly cast no prejudices upon you,
to whom you have so hastily replied. And for private barkings of inconsiderate
and inconsiderable men, they are either unknown or un-owned (as is supposed) by
men of your gravitie. All wise men generally are silently intentive, expecting
not paper replies, but disputed Positions from the Assembly, grounded on
Scripture. And therefore this paper comes abroad only to beseech that on
either side there may be committed no more breaches of the peace Ecclesiastic,
and to leave the Apology (if it may be) under the same candid opinion that
rayed forth upon it before this cloud came and interposed. Sure if the Houses of
So the Ordinance for the Assembly. p. 5.
Parliament allow any of the Assembly differing in opinion touching the matters
proposed to them (whereof Discipline is one) to present their judgments with
their reasons unto the said Houses; you cannot judge it a crime to send forth a
prodromum presented to the Parliament to tell them and you how far they close
with you and other reformed Churches, and dissent from the Separation and
Brownists. And therefore have not deserved to be whipped with a reply. Pardon the
phrase, for indeed it is a smart stroke upon the spirits of understanding men,
and standing forth in and for a public Ecclesiastical cause to be taxed for
those who in the dark are afraid of that which they know not, and to suffer
their affections, etc. to run before their understanding, etc. Sweet brethren
do you call your books (frequent among us) the government of the Church of
Scotland the Assertion of your government, the peaceable Plea darkness? Or do
you think that the Elders of the Quinque Ecclesiae, or others that study
Discipline to be dark? Are we not moral men ( voluntas vult ut intellectus
intelligit) to understand first, and affect after? Or wherein has appeared
this preposterousnesse toward you, whiles the Apology smiles upon you, and
sweetly calls you and Holland by name the more reformed Churches, Apol p 6.
do you give them one such a kind word in all your Reply? And more then that,
you call not your selves, confessing a need of further Reformation as we noted,
and quoted before. If then they have commended your Churches according to your
own judgments of your selves, how has their commendation of other Churches
appeared to discommend yours? especially whiles they commend not their own for
so perfect, but that they found a necessity of holding this for one of their
three rules by which they walked, in these words; Not to make our present
judgment and practice a Apol. p. 10. 11.
binding law unto our selves for future, which we likewise made continual
profession of upon all occasions. We had too great an instance of our own
frailty in the former way of conformity; and therefore in a jealousy of our
selves, we kept this reserve (which we made open and constant professions of)
to alter and retract (though not lightly) what ever should be discovered to be
taken up out of a misunderstanding of the rule. So far the Apolog. There is yet
one thing more that makes the Apologists more confident of their candor, in
that it received so great an approbation from so pious and learned a man of
your judgment, and a Member of the Assembly: As on the other side, though the
Assembly voted you thanks, yet was it only for the books you gave them, not
for the Reply, as it was express (to that effect) in the vote, if observation
fail not.

Reformat. page 2. Our ways since our coming into this Kingdom have been, and
(so far as the truth will suffer us) ever shall be, to unite, and not to
divide; to compose rather then to create differences; the principal end of the
Assembly of Divines.

Apol. Yet so contrary a face and voice to that, did this paper seem to have at
first blush and sound thereof, that some thoughts and throbs of heart began to
doubt whether this blow (intended for a second) upon an imagination of a first,
were not given by some to carry on the design of utter dis-uniting the
Presbyterians from others; or at least to put them into a capacity to be
challenged and contended with; till the Title appeared By the Commissi^ners of
the Assembly of Scotland; and then all thoughts were turned to wonder, that
such grave personages should onc^ think that this their paper could in the
least, tend to composall, or prove pacificatorie; especially seeing it did
carry a show of taking ^he business out of the hands of the Assembly (which
you here mention) if the Apology in any thing had been to be blamed. But
however notwithstanding this extrajudiciall and excentricall act thus
happening, we trust, and shall endeavor that there may not be the least
mis-contending in any kind about it, though many godly hearts may be grieved at
it, and none can help it. These lines we now pen are rather to entreat all not
to mistake the Apology, then to take you up.

Reformat. page 3. The order and government of the reformed Churches in the
beauty and strength thereof, as it is not hid in a corner, wrapped up in a
mystery, or covered under a cloud of darkness, but is known to the Nations and
kingdoms of the earth, openly professed and practiced in the eyes of the world,
etc. so it is commended and already confirmed by a long tract of time.

Apol. Yet we presume you will join issue with us in this against the Papists,
that neither visibilitie, nor succession are essential notes of a true Church.
The holy Ghost prophesied that the true Church, Revel. 12. should be hid in the
wilderness for a long time; as yours and ours were many years before Luthers
time. You your selves confess, page 16. That the usurpation and tyranny of
Prelates and Prelaticall party, did a time so reign and rage in your Kingdom,
vexing the godly Ministry and people, that those that went to New England
durst not venture to come to you to find a visible Church liberty. And page 11.
That you long time could but intend and design the government of the Church by
Assemblies and Presbyteries. So you. How visible soever the Churches be, the
eyes of the world (of which you speak) will take but little cognizance; or if
they do, will give but a slender testimony to them; whiles one Church
differing but in some pieces of Discipline, will so dis-favour others that jump
not with them. Blessed be God (brethren) that God has made a Rehoboth for you,
that you are not now kept up in a corner. Genesis 26. 22.
Though other Churches have not yet attained that enlargement of place and
peace, yet they keep not up their minds in a mystery if Narrations, Apologies
and Disputes may make men understand. And as for the clouds of darkness which
may cover them; who can hinder the winds if they blow and bring black weather
out of the North, or West, to obscure them that love not to sit out of the
Sun beams; much less to be wrapped up in black sheets. But they desire with
patience and peace to bear all; waiting till that great Question be resolved,
which Discipline be the t^uly ancientest, and of longest tract of time (hic
labor, hoc opus) and not to beg the question.

Reformat. p. 4. The instruments which the Lord used in the blessed work of
Reformation of the Church of Scotland, were not only learned and holy men, but
had somewhat in their callings, and gifts, and zeal to the glory of God, more
then ordinary. Some of them had a prophetical spirit; and some of them were
honored to be Martyrs.

Apologet. Nor has the Lord (blessed be his name) left us without such.
Persecuted Brightman (whom p. 15. you name with honor) had those gifts of
learning, zeal, and spirit of prophecy you mention; compare the late events
both in (...) Kingdom and ours with his Comment on the Revel. who though he
did justly prefer your Churches in his time before some others, yet not a
Classical Presbytery before a Congregationall government, for ought that we
have read or heard. And what less then a spirit of prophecy was in that holy
Martyr persecuted to death by the Bp. that said, that the Lord would bring in
his own discipline in 1 Samuel 3. 11.
his time in that way as would make all their ears to tingle: Which Scripture
phrase, was construed to be treason, though since like a prophecy it is
fulfilled. For martyrdom unto a civil death we can say somewhat more, though
we do but mention Cartwrit, and Parker, whom you justly mention with honor in
your Peaceable Plea. But we list not to enlarge; therefore we omit our brethren
in New England. Because though martyrdom be a kind of seal, yet being a broad
seal to all the truths in the Scripture, it does not distinguish ad apicem, to
put a greater impression on one truth then on another. For in all ages some
Saints have by suffering chiefly sealed to some present truth: as the Apostles
against 2 Pet. 1. 12.
Judaisme, the Saints in the ten persecutions against Hethenisme, Athanas^^s
against Arrianisme, Luther against Papisme, You against Prelacy. And others
against an Ecclesiastical coactive power where Christ has not settled it.

Reformat. page 7. As the Church of Scotland agreed in some things with the
reformed Churches, so it cannot be satisfactory that any Church should only
practice some things universally received in the reformed Churches.

Apol. A bare relation of the words of the Apology is a sufficient answer to
this, which are these. 1 The supreme rule without us was the primitive pattern
and example of the Churches erected by the Apostles. 2 Not to make our present
judgment and practice a binding law unto our selves for future. 3 That in
matters of greatest moment and controversy we still chose to practice safely,
and so as we had reason to judge that all sorts, or the most of all Churches
did acknowledge warrantable. So the Apolog. By which words it is apparent that
their intent and endeavor was not only to practice some things universally
received in the reformed Churches; but to go full as far forth, as the Churches
founded by the Apostles. But for matters of greatest moment and controversy,
in what particulars the reformed Churches (in their best judgments) left the
pattern of the Apostolical Churches, ther^ they suspended their assent and
practice, but joining with them in the rest. Keeping this for a reserve, that
when further light should come in, that they might do more lawfully, then
formerly they durst do; then to do it, and be disingaged from their former
judgment and practice, which in effect you profess, page 15. saying, that the
Church of Scotland may admit of further reformation. Therefore it is supposed
that for the present you only practice some things of reformation; and that
for future when you have more light and power, you will advance from your
present practice to a further.

Reformat. page 6. They did honor Luther and Calvin, etc. who had an heart or
band, etc. in the blessed work of Reformation, etc. But for this to call us
Calvinians, and the reformed Churches Calvinian reformed Churches, is to
disgrace the true Churches of Christ, and to symbolize with the Papists, who
call themselves the Catholic Church, etc. The Separation may be well allowed
to be called Brownists.

Apologet. Ah brethren, from what spirit comes all this? The whole design of
framing a confutation of a plain, simple, modest, single hearted narration,
relished bitter upon multitudes of godly and judicious palates. But here we
have met (if we mistake not the drug) with the Coloquintida, or if it be
intended for a better Recipe, it is scalding hot, if our taste fails us not.
Can the Apology possibly be conceived in the word Calvinian to intend the
least grain of disgrace to any? Is it not the term used in all the true
Christian Churches for distinctions sake from the more corrupt Lutheran? Is it
not in opposition to them (more corrupt) a term of honor? Was it not used of
purpose to decline the word Presbiterian, that less offense might be taken
whiles the terms now in controversy were waved? Does not the Apology deeply
profess that multitudes of Churches in England were true Churches; and yet for
honor of you, calls the Churches of Scotland more reformed? But you object,
that this is to symbolize with the Papist, who call themselves the Catholic
Church: we take your objection to be our full answer. As sure as the Papists do
not intend to disgrace themselves in calling themselves Catholics; so sure is
it believed that the Apologists who are Calvinians in Doctrine at least (if not
more) did not intend to disgrace themselves and the brethren (holding the same
doctrine and truth) with the term Clavinian. Yet, as if in revenge, you ding
Apol. p. 5.
the words Separation, and Brownists against the Apologists, who had so clearly
renounced that rigid opinion and way in their Apology. As if you had
forgotten, or did intend to mis-apply what you had said but the next line before
quoted out of Hierom. viz. If any where we find men professing Christianity,
called by the particular names of men, know them to be the synagogue of
Antichrist, and not the Church of Christ. Oh unhappie conjunction; oh heavy
application, oh coal-black terms; Quod ego -- Sed motos praestat componere
fluctus. Were it not for patience, nay that would hardly do it; were it not for
reverence of you and your Nation; an home answer would be shaped, to such a
misshapen misprision. But to love is to live. The Kingdom is on fire, we need
not hold coals to one another. Peace be upon the sons of peace; But let not
that imputation fall upon us, to set our houses on fire to roast our own eggs.

Reformat. page 10. Nothing was farrer from their thoughts and intentions then
to frame in their own forge a lesbian rule answerable to any particular form of
civil policy, or compliable with State ends.

Apolog. Whether these words in the Apology, page 3. (for you tread upon the
heels of the Apology step after step) We had no n^w Commonwealths to rear,
to frame Church government unto, do provoke to any such answer, let all
indifferent men judge. For who does not know that you had no new Commonwealths
to rear? This might far easier been understood of New England, and yet
without surmise of any blame laid upon them, who had the Kings Patent for what
they did in policy, as Gods Word for Church government, which they have
followed close with a great deal of judgment.

Reformat. page 11. Nor do we know any reason why education in s^und doctrine,
and true worship should be accounted a matter of thankesgiving to God, and yet
should glory in this, that we are not by education engaged i^ any one form of
Discipline, and Church government, but left to our selves to be molded by our
own private thoughts.

Apolog. There is no such doxologie in the Apology, as to thank God for their
disengagednesse from, or non education in true reformed Churches. They express
their sorrow, that the defilement of the Churches of England, caused their
exilement o^t of the Churches of England. Their naked words are only these. We
were not engaged by education, or otherwise, to any other of the Apol. p. 4.
reformed Churches. And for your intimated charge of being left to themselves
to be m^ulded by their own private thoughts, touching Church government, their
own words do most transparently clear them. W^ were not engaged (say they) by
education, etc. to other of the reformed Apol. p. 4.
Churches; yet we consulted with reverence what they hold forth both in
writings and practice. We had the advantage of all that light which the
c^^flicts of our Divines (the good old No conformists) had struck forth in
their times; and the d^^ughts of Discipline, which they had drawn. We had
likewise the fatal miscarriages and shipwracks of the Separation (whom ye call
Brownists) as landmarks to forewarne us of those rocks and (...) they ran
upon, and t^ enquire into the principles that might be the c^^ses ^f their
divisions. Last of all, we had the recent and later examples of the ways, and
practices (and those improved to a better edition and greater re^^^ement, etc.)
of those multi^udes of godly men of our own Nati^^, (...) to the number of
mother Nation, and among them some as holy and judi^i^us Divi^es as this
Kingdom has bred. All which we looked upon nakedly according to the Word of
God. Thus the Apology. Out of which words the venomous spider of envy cannot
(much less you brethren that are men of a better spirit) extract and draw
justly this conclusion, That the Apologists intended to mould a government in
and by their own private thoughts. They were not so left to themselves by the
oppositions of the times, but that they carried with them the golden measuring
reed of the Word of God; and did with all the judgment and divine assistance
they had, measure and square every inch as they built. Nor does it yet appear
to some that wishly look after these things, in what material things their
buildings differ from others, unless about the general and common roof,
whether it shall be the monstrous Arches of Episcopacy, or the cemented vault
of a classical Presbytery, or of Jerusalem work of an Apostolical Council.
And this maine question is now among them, Quos penes arbitrium est, and vis,
and norma loquendi.

Reformat. page 11. The Churches planted by the Apostles, if not at first, yet
afterward were of greater number in one City, then did, or could ordinarily
assemble in one place for the worship of God, and therefore had a plurality of
Pastors, and Officers, which made a common Presbytery for governing the whole.

Apologet. These words makes a speech of a Judge at an Assizes touching
Lent-fastings to come to mind. Who said, that he could prove that Lent-fastings
were of Apostolical institution for the last six hundred years. Whereupon one
standing by said to another of his friends, That all the craft and cunning lay
in this, for the Judge to prove it to be Apostolical for the first six hundred
years, or the first hundred or first f^urty years. But to return to the
Apology; whose words are mild, and soft, but as wooll-packs deadning Cannon
shot, that the bullets can do no hurt, can make no battery. We could not Apol.
p. 13.
(says the Apology) but imagine that the first Churches planted by the
Apostles, were ordinarily, of no more in one City at first, then might make
Observe that the same argument that is urged to prove a Presbytery, was
formerly urged by the Bishops to prove an Episcopacy.
up one entire congregation, ruled by their own Elders, that also preached to
them: For that in every City where they came, the number of converts did, or
should arise to such a multitude as to make several and sundry Congregations,
or that the Apostles should stay the setting up of any Churches at all, until
they rose to such a numerous multiplication as might make such a Presbyteri^ll
combination, we did not imagine. We found also the Nonconformists in their
answer to the arguments used for Episcopal government over many Churches,
brought from the instances of the multitudes of believers at Jerusalem, and
other places and Cities mentioned in the New Testament, to assert, that it
could not be infallibly proved that any of those we read of in the Acts, or
elsewhere, were yet so numerous, as necessarily to exceed the limits of one
particular Congregation in those first times. So the Apology. The word
afterward has a large extent, and therefore d^^h no^ punctually tell us
whether you mean after the Apostles ti^es or when, and therefore does nothing
weaken the Apo^^^^i^, and so you and we must leave it as we found it
unblemished in this, as the rest; which is the only design in this paper,
leaving it to disputation to be discussed out.

Reformat. page 13. To a^^uch when we are not challenged, that we (...) to the
Magistrate then the reformed Churches do, they being (...) their own principles
of Ecclesiastical government, may suffer a (...) ^^^st^uction then we our
selves would willingly undergo, or put upon the intentions of men, who seek not
their own things, but the things of Jesus Christ.

Apolog. Let the world judge whether the Apologizers and those of their
judgments were not challenged, when the Peaceable Plea calls them, not only in
the book, but in the title of the book in the face of the world, Independents.
Which the Apology could not but upon just grounds, count as a proud and
insolent title (for any Apol p 23.
to assume) and as a trumpet of defiance against what ever power, Spiritual or
Civil; from them that should be conceived to own it; and therefore do in
express words there abhor it, and detest it: that Churches, and Magistrates
should not loose the true face of their judgment in such a swelling title. For
if upon a gross error of Ref^rm. p. 23. C^^^ule Bez^m de Haereticis a civili
Magistr pu^^^ndis.
an another Church they dare exercise only a non communion with it, which
after you call no authority; then there is more left for the Magistrate to do,
then when you have excommunicated it, which you call there, your power. So
likewise when a classical Presbytery, of many Ministers and laymen, and
those of great place and power in the Commonwealth, shall authoritatively rule
all matters of sixty or an hundred Parishes that are but mixtly
Ecclesiastical but partly secular or civil, if some of them not so
altogether, one would think now that here were left less to the Magistrate,
then when every one of those several Parishes regularly gathered into a Church
way do meddle with nothing, as Churches, but things purely Ecclesiastical;
leaving the rest to the Magistrate who is the civil power over them all. We
give for the present some small instance to take off the prejudices of us that
may be instilled into the minds of civil power by the abhorred name of
Independancy; and not to bring any or their way into an odium with any; as we
hope they in their books that have so often up the names of Separation,
Brownisme, Independancy, Popular Anarchie, etc. do not intend to render us
odious. For till Church government be clearly discussed according to the
Scriptures, the scale is even which side (to use your own words) does most
imitate the Pagans and Infidels of old, the Papists, Prelates, and Arminians
Reform. p. 13.
of late to make the way of Christ hateful to Princes and Magistrates. And
till it does appear whose principles are closest to the rule of the Word, all
will say (in your phrase) that they give fully as much as any, to the
Magistrate as God in his Word gives them; and so cannot be more or less. And
for our own parts, to wash our own hearts from finister intentions, we wish a
curse upon those designs, that shall flatter men to facilitate a forming, and
winding in of a Discipline that shall not be the closest to the Scriptures.

Reformat. page 17. No sooner is the Prelaticall party by the power and
blessing of God begun to be subdued in this Island, but arises unexpectedly
the opposition on the other hand, waiting the opportunity, stronger then it was
before, which moved some of our Divines of late to write on this hand in
defense of the government of the reformed Churches, as others had done before
them in other Churches. In France Beza against Morelius Sadeel. Two National
Synods also of the reformed Churches in France, the one at Orleans, 1561.
Another at Rochel, 1571.

Apolog. It should seem by your own quotations here that long before your No
sooner, etc. not staying to wait this opportunity, learned and godly men have
written, near an hundred years since against Classical Presbyteries, and for
Congregationall Churches. Besides those many worthy famous men which you quote
with honor in your Peaceable Plea. As for Mr. Beza against Morelius Sadeel,
his Tract is not at hand, and therefore we cannot now speak to it particularly,
But this ^ou know, that an honest Aeriu^ a Presbyter is condemned by a pi^^s
and learned Epiph^nius as guilty of heresy, for saying that a B^^hop did not
differ from a Presbyter, but that a Presbyter was as high in dignity and order
as the Bishop Quid est Episcopus ad Presbyterum? Nihil hic differt ab illo,
unus enim est ordo, and unus (inquit) honor, and una dig^itas. Imponit manus
Episcopus? ita etiam Presbyter, etc. Epip. contra haeres. li. 3. To. 1. ca. 75.
. That to celebrate the Passover was Jewish. That the pray^rs of the l^ving
did not pr^fit the dead. That their ordained set F^^sts Q^^rta and pro Sabbato
were not to be observed. Yet the same Epiphanius (who flourished about the year
365. after Christ, so long since) confesses, that Aerius was not alone in this
opinion, but multitudes more, keeping Magnum m^ltitu^i^ent virorum a^ muli^^um
allexit. (...) a^ fibrii (...)
together (inform of a particular Church) with the said Aerius, their Teacher,
all of them living very soberly. For the two Synods you mention, for want of
copies of them (nor do we in this business desire much to turn over books, but
take what is ready at hand, unless hereafter we shall be forced thereunto) we
shall speak but a word in general; that as one of the best of our English
Articles t^ll us, (...) have and may err, therefore Synods. If Paphnutius were
alive, he could tell us by experience. Christ's enlightening and leading presence
is much according to the orderly gathering and managing of Synods. And for the
Protestant Churches in Fran^e; If we may believe our ears hearing the reports
of some of the Ministers of the French Churches here in England (considerable
too as the Dutch) or our eyes in reading the Ecclesiastical Discipline of the
reformed Churches in France, many material particulars, and passages are for
us; which we omit here, as not intending a dispute or largeness in any thing.
So that if things be weighed we are not so alone, or heterogeneall, as that we
deserve the opinion that we should not be for the Reformed Churches so far
forth as they be reformed, at least as much as the Presbyterians.

To those intimations of Reform. page 19. that the Apologizers exile was
volun^ary: they carried away Churches with them, and left the ^ther Church^s,
that stayed behind, exposed to the enemy; The Apol. has no more to say at
this time, but this. That their exile at most was but as volunta^y, as the
Seamens Voluntate ^^xta semiplena, with an unwilling will.
casting their lading into the Sea, to save themselves from drowning. They took
no more then Christ gave them: when they persecute you in one place, fly into
another, as Christ and his parents did. And they did no more expose the Church
to the enemy, then as in all ages other godly Colonies of Saints have done in
departing to Francfort, Holland, and New England, lest they themselves also had
been swallowed up too, and the other Churches never an iota relieved by it; but
kept themselves for a reserve, to assist the Church at their return. Hoping
that if they were blamed for their voluntary departing, they shall not for
their voluntary return; to unexpose the Church to the least claw, or shadow of
Prelacy.

Reformat. p. 21. T^ limit the con^iere of excommunication, in matter of
opinion to the common and uncontroverted principles, and in The true copy of
the Apology is thus. Excommunication we judge should be put in execution for no
other kind of sins, th^n may evidently b^ presumed to be perpetrated against
the parties known light, as whither it be a si^ in manners and conversa^^n,
such as is c^mmitted ag^n^t the light of nature, or the common rece^ved
practices of Christianity professed in the Church of Christ. Or if in opinion,
then such as are likewise contrary to the received principles of Christianity,
and the power of godliness professed by the p^rty himself, and universally
acknowledged in all the rest of the Churches, and ^^ ^th^r sins to be the
subject of that dreadful s^ntence.
the matter of manners to the common and universal practices of Christianity,
and in both to the parties known light, is the danger^us doctrine of the
Arminians, and Socinians, opens a wide door, and proclaims liberty to all
other practices and errors which are not fundamental, (...) u^iversally
abhorred by all Christians, and tends to the overth^^w of the Reformed
Religion, which we wish all sound and sober spi^its t^ abstain from, lest it
render them and their profession suspected of some su^^ ^^^panions (...) and
practices, as in chari^ie we judge to be fa^ from their minds and (...).

Ap^l^g. If Pagans and Infidels do not practice, and Papists, Prelates,
S^^inians, A^minians, B^ownists, Separatists, etc. do not hold some common
truths with Christians (as sense is common to men and be but condoll our
condition, that when we assert (against mis-opinion of us) that we give to
Magistrates as much as the Presbyterians do, we are compared to Pagans,
Infidels, Prelates, etc. as bringing the way of Christ into hate with Princes:
when we speak for a conforming of Church government to the closest agreement
with the Scriptures, we are compared to Brown^sts, S^paratists, Independents,
and Popular Anarchie. When we judge that excommunication should not be but of
persons presumed to sin against their own light, etc. we are compared to
S^cinians and Arminians, if not semi-suspected to be such, though not by any
English heart. If these be right forms of confutation, the common people will
begin to pride up themselves as to have said somewhat to the Question now in
controversy, whiles they assert (instead of better arguments) that a Bishop is
a Presbytery contracted; and a Presbytery is a Bishop diffused. The former is
as a president; the other as a Commission exercised by many. Does not this very
particular of excommunication testify for us that the Congregational way does
leave more to the Magistrate, then the Presbytery do? Many offenses are to be
punished bodily, by the Civil Magistrate, that are not to be censured with
that spiritual highest censure of Excommunication. Which being a shutting out
of heaven, and a giving up to Satan, had need of better grounds then men's
sinning of simplicity, or ignorance. The very Prelates, at least pretended
wilful obstinacy for their Excommunications. And the great punishment of
Excommunication inflicted for small faults, will make the punishment at last
small in the eyes of men. But if it be restrained to great faults against the
parties light, men will think the punishment to be like the sin. And yet no
doare set open to other vices; which Civil power may punish externally for the
fact; whiles Churches look upon faults spiritually in relation to the mind,
with what will they were committed.

Reformat. page 23. Two maine objections are made against the principles and
practice of the order and government of the Reformed Churches. One is that
there is no need of authoritative power of Presbyteries, and Synods, and that
the exhortation of particular Churches one to another, the Protestati no^ one
against another, and the withdrawing of communion one from another, may be a
sufficient remedy, and no less effectual against all offenses then
Excommunication it self; especially if the Magistrate shall vouchsafe his
assistance, and interpose his authority, for strengthening the sentence of Non
communion.

Apolog. There is not one word in the Apologies discourse of this point to
extenuate the power of Synods; which being according to the Scriptures, they
hold them in the highest esteem that ever the Scripture advanced them to. And
on the other side, they there give us an express, that besides the said
exhortations, protestations, and Non communion, that they profess themselves
ever to submit, and also to be most willing to have recourse to the civil
Magistrate interposing a power of another nature, upon his particular
cognizance, and examination of such causes.

Reformat. page 21. 22. To the said objection we answer, 1 (for there are 5
answers by way of direct confutation) that this objection supposes a case,
which has not been found in the Church of Scotland for the space of eighty
years, and believe was never heard of in any of the Reformed Churches, except
those of the Separation: the pronouncing of Non communion or Excommunication
against a whole Church. Our Excommunication has been executed but seldom
against particular members, never against a whole Church, and we think never
shall be; and therefore this imaginary fear of that which never falls out,
is not considerable, rules are made for ordinary, and usual cases.

Apolog. Who that have seriously read and weighed the Apology, and therein
their disclaiming of the Separation properly so called, their owning the
Churches of Scotland and many in England for true Churches, their just account
of their practice in Holland, and their proceedings toward the Church
mistaking, would after all this call the Apologizers Churches, Churches of the
Separation; unless withal they expressed they meant Separation from the
Prelates ways, as Scotland and England now do. But what ever true Churches be
named, we see no reason (though others believe quod factum non est, nec fieri
potest; that which never has been, never shall be) but that they may be
incident and liable to fall into that case of having to do with a whole
particular Church erring; especially till those swarms of Anabaptists,
Antinomians, etc. which have been so often intimated and sounded in our ears, be
allayd. You (brethren your selves) suppose more, and therefore you may suppose
the less. For in your second answer to this objection (as you call it) you
suppose that two, or more Churches may mutually protest and pronounce the
sentence of non communi^^ one against another. In which case, say you,
pronouncing of non com^^^ion would prove rather a mean of division, then of
union, and there wou^d be no remedy (where the censure is mutual) to compose
this difference, unless there be a common Presbytery, or Synod made up of the
whole. To which we answer, that this case has befallen Provinces, and National
prelaticall Churches, in matter of Excommunication too, each of them having a
several Pope in them have excommunicated one another. And we see not that
antidote in one of the ways you mention, namely, a Classical Provincial
Presbytery, but that one provincial Presbytery may protest against and
excommunicate the other. For the other way (for you propound two, and we are
willing to take the best) namely, a National Synod, gathered and guided
according to the Scriptures, we willingly embrace. And they that will not take
the judgment of such a Synod, having no Scripture to allege justly, against
their resolutions, let them fall into the hands of the Magistrate, the
Preserver of the public peace. This same reply serves to your third and fourth
answer. We need add but a word in reply to your fifth answer, wherein you
demand by what probability it can be made to appear to any rational man, and
indifferent mind, that no authority shall be as valid as authority against
the obstinate, that Via admonitionis and requisitionis is equal with Via
citationis, and publicae authoritatis? To which we answer, that if it be stated
that that is authority, which is Scripture authority (and not else) and that
to be most valid that convinces and conquers actus elicitos, the mind, rather
then that which does only manacle and constrain, actus imperat^s, the outward
carriage; the demand is soon answered. Is the way of admonition, protestation,
and non communion, no authority? Is that no authority that tells us we must
give no offense, Better a millstone were hanged about ones neck, and he cast
into the Sea, then to offend a weaker brother. That we were better not eat
flesh then to offend, etc. Or is it no authority, when a whole Church after
fasting and prayer, and clear disputation, shall tell the obstinate erring,
that upon those grounds they will withdraw from them as from Heathens and
Publicans? The truth is, that the prelaticall men have made much use of this
your case alleged to plead for Bishops, as most necessary to keep Churches in
union. But Gods authority held forth to us in the judgments of National
Synods according to the Word, will prove more effectual then any humane
instituted way whatsoever, to unite Churches.

Reformat. page 24. The other objection is; that by this authority and order
of government, one Church has power over another: which is contrary to that
liberty and equality Christ has endewed his Churches with, and is no other
but a n^w prelaticall dominion set over the Churches of Christ. To this (say
you) we answer. 1 That we are far from imposing any such c^ll^terall power. The
power which we maintain is aggregative of the Offi^ers of many Congregations
over the particular members; in which (as in the natural and politic body)
one member is not subject to another, but is to the whole. 2 It is (say you) a
miserable mistake to compare Presbyteries and Prelates together. For the Courts
of Prelates are altogether f^rrain and extrinsecall in the Congregations, over
which they rule. But the power of Presbyteries is intrinsecall and natural,
they being constitute of the Pastors and Elders of the particular Congregations
^ver which they are set. So that another without themselves does not bear rule
over them, but all of them by common consent do rule over every one; which is
no more then ^^r a memb^^ ^f a particular Congregation, to be ruled by his own
particular Eld^^ship. F^r they dis^ern no sentence of excommunication of any
member without the knowledge, and consent of the particular Congregation that
is particularly concerned therein.

Apolog. You say you impose not a collateral power. Sure your laws do impose
that one congregation shall be subject to the Elders (suppose) of twenty
congregations. And the authority of 19 of them is as ^^llaterall. The
congregations every one chose their own officers to rule over themselves in the
Lord. But we hear not you say that they chose their Officers to rule over
themselves and others; though we hear you say that the Officers themselves are
ready enough to consent so to rule: which is as extrinsecall as Episcopacie,
if Episcopacie be as intrinsecall as Presbytery. For are not Bishops chosen by
the people at their instalment; where customarily people are allowed to make
any just exception; and has in part been practiced in England, though with
little success in their domineering times? Just as anciently, (as Hieronimus
tells us) Vnus eligebatur qui caeteris preponoretur, etc. To av^id schism, one
of the class^^all Presbytery was chosen to be as Chai^-man over them all in
their Consistory, who from being so annually, at last became so for his life
time, and so hence was born Episcopacy. Besides we know that the Bishop and his
Chaplains, Chancellor, Archdeacon, Register, etc. were parishioners within
their own Diocese; if not Elders or Officers in their several congregations.
And people formerly have been as willing they should reign, as ever any people
were in your Kingdom to have the Presbytery over them. And the Bishops on the
other side did as cunningly comply with the Congregations; they grounding their
Court proceedings upon the Churchwardens or Parish Elders presentiments upon
the peoples complaints and testimony, and did not pass an Excommunication
without the subscription of the hand of a Minister or two of that
Archdeaconrie, or Countie-Presbyterie; and last of all, the Excommunication was
not pronounced without the consent of the Minister of the particular
Congregation. So that it is clear, it is not peoples consent only, but if
according to the Word, that makes a government lawful. God has chalked out to
us patterns of people choosing Officers for the congregation. And congregations
choosing men for Synods or Councels, but not (as we conceive) of choosing men to
make a middle classical Presbytery. What ever plausible shows of reason may
seem to commend a way, yet only Gods way shall have the blessing of God upon
it. And if it cannot be resolved on all hands as yet, clearly which is it, let
that your golden speech be written upon all your actions. That th^se that are
m^st averse to Reform. p. 26.
Presbytery if they allow no material difference in doctrine, worship, or
practice, might inj^y their peace, and all comforts of their Ministry, and
profession under it, without controlment of that authoritative power which they
so much apprehend. We have been of late made to fear the contrary, by the
reports of some (not of meanest rank) of your own Nation, but now we desire
rather to hope upon your words here given under your own hands, then fear by
reason of theirs. Trusting also that as you were kindly invited to our
Assembly, so you will be as helpful to our poor Churches as your Armies by
God^ blessing are like to be the Commonwealth; according as both Nations have
vowed to endeavor the reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, according to the Word
of God. (...) p. 26.


We crave leave to conclude with your own words, hoping we may as confidently
speak them as you did; namely, That so much for the present have we said, not
for confutation, but merely for justifying our own and other reformed Churches
against such mis-representings and mistakings, as in matters of Religion are
too frequent in this place, a^ this time, etc.

FINIS.

