THE COPYHOLDERS PLEA Against the Excess of Fines, Uncertain Exacted of them
by THEIR LORDS Upon their ADMITTANCE.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil near the Royal Exchange. 165^. 1654

The Coppyholders Plea against the excess of Fines uncertain Exacted of them by
their Lords upon their Admittance.
IT is agreed of al hands, That Cook upon Littl. f. 60. Cook 11. Report, 44.
al excessiveness is abhorred in Law; and that Cook upon Lit. f. 59. b Cook 4
Rep. 27. b.
where the Fine is uncertain, yet it must be reasonable: and so does the
Pleading of the Custom whereby such a Fine is Alleged to be due to the Lord
plainly show. As may be seen in the New Book of Entries, f. 646. b. in the
Title to Trespass: Whether then 3 years Value, 2 years Value, a year and a
half, or a years Value at a rack Rent, or those Fines exacted by Lords in those
latter Ages, may be thought to be reasonable, is now to be discussed. For the
true understanding of which, this Difference is to be well Observed, viz.
Between voluntary Grants of Coppyhold Estates forfeited, or Escheated and
Granted again de nono by the Lord, and Admittances upon Surrender to the use of
another; or of the Hei^ upon a Descent. In the first Case the Lord may take
what Fine he pleases upon Admittance, being both Donor and Instrument to
perfect his own Grant; for there it is truly said, Arbitrio Dominires aestimari
debet, That the thing is to be estimated at the Lords or Owners Will. But in
the other Case, the Lord is but an Instrument to perfect the Surrender, or the
Heirs Estate Descended to him, the Lord Grants nor does nothing, But what he
is compelable to do by the Purchaser or Heir, who are in by him which makes
the Surrender, or the Ancester respectively after admittance, and not by the
Lord; and therefore shall not be subject to the Charge or Encumbrances of the
Lord, and also the admittance of a Disseisor or other Lord which has no good
but a defeasible Estate and Interest in the Manor, Cooks 4 Rep. 27 b. Taverner
and Cromwels Case, and 28. b. in Westwicks and Wyers Case.
shall bind him which has Right after that he has recontinued the Ma^nor by
Action or Entry in such case, otherwise it is of voluntary Grants made by a
Desseisor or Tenant by Sufferance of a Manor, Cook 4. Rep. 24. Rous and Arters
Case.
as may be seen in Chudleighs Case, Cook's 1 Rep. 140. b. And in Clarks and
Penifathers Case, Cook. 4. Rep. f. 23. b. and 24. where the Earl of Arundels
Case T. 17. El. Die. 343. is cited, and several good Cases put upon this
Difference, Omitting therefore voluntary Grants upon Escheate or Forfeiture,
and to speak only of Admittances upon surrender, and descent, where the Lord
gives nothing, nothing passes from him, he is only an Instrument, and
compellable to admit, and the Party admitted is not in by him, but by him which
made the Surrender, or his Ancestor, How can a full years rack Rent, or those
Fines now exacted, and taken upon such Admittance in latter ages be deemed or
thought to be equal or reasonable? In the new Book of Entries, in the title
before cited, p. 3. fol. 644. b. you shall find that famous Case adjudged in the
Common Pleas, p. 6. Jacob Rot. 1468. upon a Demurrer as is said there, fol.
617. b. The Case was between Stallon Plaintiff, and Brady Servant of Thomas
Willows, Lord of the Manor of Fendi^ton in the County of Cambridge Defendant,
in which the Fine of Five pounds six shillings and eight pence, demanded by the
Lord of the Plaintiff, who was Purchasor, for his Admittance to a Coppyhold
Cottage and an Acre of Pasture let at Two pounds Thirteen shillings and four
pence (which was two years value at a rack Rent) was adjudged an unreasonable
Fine; And in the Report of that Case it is to be seen that the Lord Cook (being
then Chief Justice) said, That for the Lord of a Manor to demand of his
Coppyholders Two years Profits for his Fine for his Admittance, it was a
damnable thing: And Justice Walmsely said, That it was worse than Extortion:
and Warberton, That it was a lamentable case: Daniel and Foster, Justices,
said, If mean Lords might take such unreasonable Fines, it would overthrow all
the Estates of Coppyholders, which are a great part of the Realm; and that upon
deliberation they al agreed in one, That Copyholders are to be compared unto
Land that is holden in Capite, upon sale whereof, if a License of Alienation be
sued forth, there was paid to the King but a Third Part of one years Profit,
and said, They could see no Reason that a mean Lord should have any more for an
Admittance to any Copyhold, for the Lord does but give a Breath for his Money,
and does neither add nor diminish any thing, to, or from himself: But in Case
where a Third Part of One years Profit had not been paid for a Fine, then they
held the greatest Fine that had been paid, to be a reasonable Fine, and no
more: This Case is Observable, and very worthy of our notice, as coming nearest
to the Ancient Presidents of Fines taken in former ages, appearing in the Court
Rolls of Manors, where they be truly kept, and not imbeziled (as in too many
places they are) to the great injury of Copyholders, who either by the wilful,
or negligent keeping of those Rolls, are many times deprived of those
Advantages and Remedies which otherwise they might have against the Exaction
and Usurpations of their Lords, both of Fines and Herriots, and otherwise: For
before these hundred years last past, or therabouts, there never did arise any
Questions or Controversies about the reasonableness of Copyholders Fines, which
do appear (so moderate were they before) That the Copyholders had then no Cause
to Complain in that Particular, and the Cases and Controversies upon that
Question in our Books, or Reports are but of late times: Actions upon the Case
for Words, are not so Rare in our year Books, as this Question about the
Reasonableness of Copyholders Fines: The Fines anciently taken, were indeed but
very small and inconsiderable, rather Gratuities and Acknowledgments given to
the Lords for their Stewards Wages, and Charges in keeping of those Courts at
which the Copyholders had their Admittances, than out of any reference or
respect had to the rack Rent of the Copyhold; the improvement whereof by
Building, or good Husbandry, and by the Industry and Charges of the Tenant,
could in no reason be thought to be a good consideration for the Lord to ask a
higher Fine; the Lord bearing no share at all either in the Costs or Pains in
the improvement: And therefore that vulgar Objection made for the Justification
of Excessive Fines taken in these days, because of the yearly value of those
Lands being now much more and greater than in former times, is of no moment or
regard at al, for where no consideration is of the Lords part, who is only an
instrument, and compelable to admit as is before showed, and all his Charge and
Costs is in keeping of his Courts and his Stewards stipend: The Fine ought to
be set with reference to that only, and not to the value of the Copihold Estate
which moves not from the Lord; but where he makes a voluntary Grant as
aforesaid: The ancient Presidents therefore of those Court Rolls where they have
been, and are well kept, are the best Presidents for Fines in such Cases; and
where they are lost or concealed, the Rule given in Stallon and Willowes Case
before mentioned by the Judges there named, seems most agreeable to Reason
and Equity: Or if neither like you, and that the Fines must needs be with
reference to the value of the Land, why should not that Rate by the Stat. of
West. 1. c. 36. allowed for reasonable aid (which before the Statute was
uncertain) to be taken by Lords for the making of their eldest Sons Knights, or
for the Marriage of their eldest Daughters be thought sufficient? Before that
Statute they were both near a Kin, both reasonable, and yet uncertain at the
Will of the Lord: Pity it is that no Statute has redressed the uncertainty of
Copiholders Fines, which being redressed in the other Case, it is observed by
Sir Edward Cook, That Certainty the Mother of Quiet and Concord was established
therein, which see in his Comment upon the same Statute, Page 232. But
Copiholders they are still left to their Suits with their Lords, to avoid these
outrageous and excessive Fines wherein they may find by experience those old
verses (cited there) true:

Cum pare Luctari dubium, cum procere stultum,
Cum puero-poena, cum muliere pudor.
In English. With Equals strife's not sure, with great ones, vain;
Shame with a Woman, with a Child it is pain.


They may find the Remedy by Law also no better than the Disease, when the
Chancellor or Judges (before whom the reasonableness depends to be
determined) are themselves Lords of such Copiholders, and biassed with their
own interest and concernment; and cannot be taken for such Saints, as that Pope
was (of whom 8. H. 6.20. b. Rolfe tells the tale, but names him not) that
having committed a great offense, and being told by the Cardinals that he had
sinned, he bad them Judge him, who (saying they could not, because he was head
of the Church) bad him Judge himself; who accordingly adjudged himself to be
burnt; and was burnt, and afterward Sainted: Indeed it cannot be thought that
they will give Judgment against their own proper Interests and concernment. And
therefore where any modern Presidents, or Reports approving, or allowing
excessive Fines (and consequently oppression) shall be produced, it may justly
detract from their weight and Credit, if the Judges were upon the matter
concerned as in their own case. The Rule put by Sir Edward Cook in his Comment
upon Lit. and in his 4 Report, f. 27. b. before cited (and in Godfreyes Case in
his 11 Report, f. 44. said by him to be adjudged in Stallon and Willowes Case
aforesaid) which is Quam rationabilis debet esse finis non desinitur sed
omnibus circumstantiis inspectis pendet ex Justiciariorum discrecone: How
reasonable the Fine ought to be is not defined, but all circumstances
considered, it depends upon the descretion of the Justices, is framed by Sir
Edward Cook himself and grounded by him upon another Rule in Bracton. b. 2. f.
3^. ^. c. 22. touching time of prescription, which is Quam longum debet esse
tempus non definitur in jure sed ex Justiciariorum discrecone, How long the
time ought to be is not defined by Law, but depends upon the discretion of
the Justices and mutatis mutandis applied to this Case, and as to this point
owneth him for the sole Author, but whether aptly applied in this Case may
worthily be questioned; for where the Judge is directly, or indirectly
concerned in another man's Case depending in Judgment before him, you may well
imagine which way the biass will carry him: Upon Reading the 2d Chap. Stat. 25.
Edw. 3. of Treasons.
of Sir Edward Cook his Pleas of the Crown, Page 22. upon the Word [specifie]
in the Statute of 25. Edw. 3. of Treasons, which he would have to be specially
observed, and to signify perticularized and set down particulary, and that
nothing is left to the construction of the Judge what shall be said to be
Treason, if it be not specified and particularized by that Act, which he
further notes to be a happy Sanctuary or place of Refuge for Judges to fly
unto that no man's blood and ruin of his Family do lie upon their Consciences
against Law; and that if constructions by Arguments a simili, or a minori ad
majus had been left to the Judge, the mischief before that Statute would have
remained, viz diversity of Opinions what should be Treason, and what not, which
that Statute takes away by express words; may be gathered what an
inconveniency it is to leave things to the construction and discretion of
Judges, which very inconvenience falls out by leaving it to their discretions
upon Demurrers, or upon Evidence to a Jury upon the confession or Proof of the
yearly value of the Land to determine whether the Fines demanded of Copiholders
be reasonable or not; and a hard Case it is for Copiholders if they must be
fined according to the rack values of their Copihold Estates at the Lords Will
or the Judges (who for the most part are themselves Lords of Manors) since the
Lords give nothing but their breath for their Money as is said before, and
seeing of late years their Fines have been raised to such an excessive height,
whereby the saying of Hill in the great Case of the Honor of Gloucester, 14. H.
4.9. cited upon this occasion in Godfreyes Case, Cook's 11. Report sol. 44.
That a Fine at the Will of the Lord is an Oppression to the People, is fully
verified. The vulgar Objections that Copiholders are but Tenants at Will, and
that they had their Estates Originally upon that condition to be fineable at
the Lords Will, and that the value of the Land being higher now than in ancient
times when their Estates were first granted to their Ancestors, are no good
Reasons to warrant such excessive Fines as have been exacted these last Ages,
for custom and continuance has sixed an inheritance in their Estates, Cooks 4
Report 21. Cooks 9 Report 76. b.
and made the same Discendable to their Heirs, so as they are not bare Tenants
at Will, Cooks 1 Report 22 21.21. Edw. 4.80. b. Brian Cook upon Lit. f. 61.
but have Estates of inheritance and actionr of Trospass are maintainable
against their Lords by them: And if their Estates were Originally granted upon
any such pretended Condition (which is denied) and that the Fine ought to be
Assessed according to the present value, and not according to the Ancient
value, and presidents; yet we see time and custom which has fixed their
Estates has taken away that Condition and has made the Justices to be Judges
of those Fines and not the Lords according to those Cases before remembered: And
if the Justices shall make the present value material to increase his Fine who
has been at no cost or pains in the improvement, and is but an instrument
compelable to admit, and gives nothing but his breath: This (under correction)
seems very unreasonable, and against equity and conscience, and so are all
modern Reports grounded upon that strain, not regarding the Reasons herin
before set forth and especially that Report of Stallon and Willowes Case, for
as the Custom which establishes their Estates is to be favorably construed, so
that custom which savoreth of Oppression, and tends to the overthrow of
their Estates, is, and deserves to be rejected: In Fran^i^ Case, Cooks 8 Rep
f. 90. b. it is said, That a benificial Condition which makes or builds up
an Estate, is to be construed favorably; but that is odious which destroys an
Estate, and is to be taken strictly: The same Rule holds in Customs, and
therefore odious is that custom which by Oppression overthrows the Copiholders
estates, and as, or more worthily to be abhorred and abolished as Tenures in
Capite and by Knights Service have been (which had for their countenance Law and
the defense of the Realm) by reason of the Slavery and Oppression incident to
those Tenures, whereas the pretended Custom of uncertain Fines respects only
the private interest of mean Lords of Manors, and tends to the destruction
of a multitude of Copyhold Tenants, who are in all things equally rated with
Freeholders of Inheritance for the Public Service of the Commonwealth,
without any consideration, or deduction at all, in respect of the grievous
burden of excessive Fines, by which they are disabled to settle their Estates
(as other Freeholders do) toward payment of their Debts, the preferment of
their Wives and Children, or other just and urgent occasions, which may happen
frequently; and so they should be oppressed not by the excess alone, but by the
multitude of Fines: All which considered together, with the comfortable
experience of many other Oppressions abolished, and promises of Redress of all;
why may not the Copiholders now expect Relief if they shall Petition for the
same? The biass of Self-interest is we hope dissolved with the last Parliament;
and that in this, there are not so many Lords of Manors to hinder so good and
acceptable a Service to their Country: The Freehold of all Copyholds is the
Lords, and the Copyhold in Cases of Treason forfeited to him, whereas formerly
Forfeitures of any Freehold holden of a common person in Case of high Treason,
were to the Crown: The Copyholder without special Custom cannot fell Trees, nor
make Leases for above One year; and diverse other Privileges the Lord has as
Herriots etc. in many places: Are not these sufficient, but must they take
Fines at will too? Assuredly it were better for Copyholders, might they be
admitted to buy out at once their Fines, Herriots, and destructive Customs
paying for the same such a valuable Consideration (to be divided one Moiety
thereof for the Service of the Commonwealth, and the other Moiety to their
Lords) as to this present Parliament shall seem fitting and reasonable: This is
Written for the general Good of the Copyholders of England, who if they shall
neglect the present happy Opportunity for their Freedom, will hardly ever meet
with the like again.

FINIS.

