THE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN By MERCVRIVS BRITANICVS To MERCVRVS CIVICVS.
BRother Civicus, conform to your desire, I thought good to write to you of
the estate of Britannia, with its adjacent Irelandia. But in regard the
greatest matters are yet in fiery; And because of the wonderful confusion
which every where appears, I cannot write as I would: For the PARLIAMENT
cries, Law, Law; the KING cries, Aw, Aw; the QVEENE cries Ave, Ave, and the
COVNTRIE cries, W^e, W^e, but always thus much for your satisfaction I
perceive there are three parties in their Kingdoms, which for brevitie I will
express in abstracto, to wit; Piety, Policy, and Popery: Each one of these
has a Bastard-brother; Piety has Independency, a Bastard which Singularity
begat upon Nouelty: Policy has Atheism, a Bastard which Superstition begat
upon Ignorance: And Popery has Prelacy, a Bastard which the man of sin in his
full strength, begat upon one of the d^ughtres of Mammon. These three parties I
find diversely ranked in these Kingdoms: For England puts Policy first
then* Piety* and then Popery. Scotland puts Piety first, next Po, licy,
and then Popery. Ireland puts Popery first, then Policy, and last Piety.
In each of these Kingdoms there is a pryme patron to which these foresaid
parties address themselves, Hence it is that in England Policy runs to the
King, Popery to the Qeene, Piety to the Parliament. In Scotland Piety runs
to a Covanant, whence some are called Covenanters, Policy runs to a Band,
whence some are called Banders and Baberders: And Ppoerie runs to
Fortifications, or else is forced to leave the Country. In Ireland these
partis have a contrary current; For thire Popery runs to fire and sword,
Policy to a Cessasion, and Piety to a Posture of defense The Policy of
England, and Popery of Ireland have put all these Kingdoms in blood, and are
greived that they cannot meet together as they would for mutual supply; And
unless the Piety of Scotland disappoint their designs, by all likelihood
they will work our ruin. For Policy will never lay down Arms so long as
that question of Thine and Mine is undiscussed: Popery will never lay down
Arms, so long as the Name of Israel is heard of under the Heaven. And as for
their Soldiers, who serve any of them for money, they will never lay down
Arms so long as there is either pay or plundering to be gotten. The sturring
of these Malignants has put each godly hearted Scots man into a Military
condition. And therefore to the confusion of all the powers of hell be it
known, that Scotlands Piety, now marching in the fields, is resolved never to
lay down Arms, tell it has rectified Englands policy, and extirpated
Irelands Popery, which that it may be speedily accomplished by the power of
heaven, is the humble and daily prayers of.

Your loving Brother. M B


