THE LAST, AND HIGHEST APPEAL. OR, An Appeal to God, Against the
New-Religion-Makers, Dresters, Menders, or Venders amongst us.

Wherein is evidenced, amongst other things, That they have not true Faith,
true Repentance, or true Charity.

LIKEWISE, That the seven Heads of Sin, commonly called, The seven deadly Sins,
are manifestly apparent in the Life's of their Preachers.

By Richard Carpenter.

1 John 2. 18. Little Children, it is the last time: and as ye have heard that
Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we know
that it is the last time.

London, Printed for the Author, 16^6.

To the Reader.
Reader,
EXpect here no School-Depths, or vain Ostentation of Learning, no laborious,
or curious enquiry into the various Closets of Language: no highrais'd Phrases,
or, delicious effluences of the Tongue: nor yet, the sallies or out-walkings of
any thing like unto Passion. I have purposely gone besides all these.

I now only pour out my Soul, by way 1 Samuel 1. 15.
of Appeal, at the feet of the great God, before wbom I must appear at the last
day: when my Works shall follow me. Revel. 14. 13.
And this is All. Farewell. And well observe, how they fare hereafter, against
whom I appeal.

Thy friend in Christ, R. C.

Genesis 3. 8.
ANd they heard the Voice of the Lord God, walking in the garden in the cool of
the day.

Almighty God coming forth to Judgment, first Voices it a while, and walks a
little in Eden, that is, (as the Septuagint) in the Garden of Pleasure, (a
place apt to divert our Vehement, and more intense Thoughts;) lento pede, with
a slow foot; and this, in a time of cooling: to make known to us, that his
Anger is not a rash Passion, as ours is. But afterward, he quickly gives
Sentence, and quickly proceeds to execution,

THE LAST AND HIGHEST APPEAL.
CHAPTER I.
The Appeal, with an Eye upon the Judge, unto whom the Appeal is made.

ALl regular Appeals, have a regular motion: by the which, we move our Cause
from the judgment of the inferior Judge or Court, to the judgment of the
Superior Court or Judge: as the Doctor of the Gentiles, appealed from Acts 25,
11.
Festus unto Caesar.

And that our Appeal may be altogether just, and regular: it must likewise
occasionally proceed from a known defect or emptiness (with respect unto the
Cause) in the judgment of the Inferior Judge or Court.

Now therefore, when humane Helps are deficient, (or, not acknowledged,) divine
Helps may be lawfully and regularly implored: and the All-seeing God, who is
also the highest Judge, (beyond whom there is no Appeal) may be, as it were,
violently awaked with our last and highest Appeal.

Wherefore unto Thee I most humbly make my Appeal, O most righteous Judge Genesis
18. 25.
of all the Earth, which art in Heaven, and have revealed thy Self upon Earth:
as thou art the Knower of all Hearts, and Secrets; and the Supreme Judge of all
Causes. And my Glory now is: that all things are naked and opened unto the eyes
of him with whom we have to do. Heb. 4. 13.


CHAP. II.
The Appeal, with reflection upon the Person appealing.

THe Person appellant, or appealing, is my self. And I am a Man. Indeed, in a
Scripture-Sense, I am a Worm, and no Man. For, I have lived, as if I had Psalm.
22. 6.
no Sense, but the last and lowest of all, (the touching Sense,) as the Worm
has. Verily, I have lived, as the Worm lives, a creeping life, devoted to mire
and Earth. Moreover, In my self, I am a naked Creature, as the Worm is; and am
skinn'd like the Worm. Naked came I out of my Mothers womb, and naked shall I
Job 1. 21.
depart hence. And lastly, when Death shall tread upon me, I shall quickly
evidence to the World, that I am Dirt; as the Worm does, when trod upon.

But notwithstanding all this: Being a Worm, I am a reasonable Worm; For, I
have an erected Body, and a reasonable Soul: which the common Worm has not.
And I humbly hope, that I am one of those, for whom Christ died. And 1 Cor. 8.
11.
therefore, above all the plea of Nature, I am a Christian worm; and
consequently, was not made by our great Maker, to be trod upon every day by
Men, Women, or Beasts: but have a just and true Title to the true worship of
God the Father of Christ: (which is our reasonable Service: Romans 12 1.
) and to such Rights and Privileges, whereunto I was created, and which I have
not forfeited.

Now therefore, I humble my self before thy most sacred Majesty, O Almighty
Lord God. I confess, that I am but Genesis 18. 27.
dust and ashes! dust, with respect unto the formation of our first Parent:
(And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the Genesis 2. 7.
ground:) and ashes, if thou shall deal with me according to the rigorous pull
of thy Justice, as thou did with Sodom, which gave the first occasion to this
actual confession. I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a
people of unclean lips. Is. 6. 5.
But O my God, I am very weary of my old Self, and of my new Company: of my
unclean Self, and of my unclean Company. Assuredly, I will arise, and go to my
Father. Luke 15. 18.


O my Father, my Father: By the permissive Disposition of thy sweet Providence,
the Slaves and Servants use me roughly, unchristianly, cruelly; to the end, I
may return crying to thee my most loving Father, and lodge my Self in thy close
and warm embraces. O righteous God, I most heartily desire to execute thy
Justice, according to the Letter of thy Law, upon my Self: And for the present,
I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes: and Job. 42. 6.
I most humbly require Justice of thee against my most unjust, and most cruel
Persecutors.

CHAP. III.
The Appeal, with Relation to the Persons against whom the Appeal is.

THe Persons against whom I appeal, are the new-religion'd and factious people
of this Nation: and some of these under a new and special consideration: that
is; as having, agreeably to my great and grievous experience, a heart and a
heart, Psalm. 12. 2. Secundum Septuag. and alios.
and many double and most false tongues.

Certainly, where is a Delinquency or deficiency in the Profession or
Confession of Christian Faith, there is likewise a deficiency or Delinquency in
Christian work, Practice, or Manners. Because our Operation, Work, or Practice,
depends upon the Being in us, which is congenerous and proportionable to it:
and in spiritual things, by Faith, (as it is written of Grace,) we are what we
are. And yet, because Religion is newly taken 1 Cor. 15. 10.
up, and all new Things that have heat in them, are most hot in their first
newness; there will be a glorious and great show of zeal and religion in these
new Lights, these foolish Fires, these blazing Meteors; although the
performance fall greatly short, because there is great want of a sound
Principle.

But as the wise Physician, coming to a sick-man, first examines his Tongue:
because the Evil of the Body, there quickly discovers it self: so the corrupt
souls of these Night-born Mushroms in Religion, these Glow-worm-Lights, soon
appear in their foul tongues; with the which they lash and beat down all that
walk besides their new Adder-haunted paths, with a purpose to set up
themselves and their most impure pretended Purity. Yea, with these their Evil
Tongues, which are set on fire of Hell, they set on fire the course of Nature;
and James 3. 6.
moving all Things which are in the World, being the Theater of Nature, out of
their natural and proper Courses, render the World the very Suburbs of Hell.

Against these I appeal to Thee, O Thou who art the living God, and the natural
Matthew. 16. 16. Coloss. 2 3.
Father of him, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. For
his dear sake, Arise, and in thy Wisdom, and according to thy Knowledge, Plead
my cause. I (poor Man) know, that we may not call thee to witness, in a false
Matter; much less, in such a Matter, appeal to thee as a Judge. Concerning the
Matters of Faith; all Antiquity, thy present Church, and thy own Word witness
for me: With reference to the Matters of Fact; speak thou for me, or against
me; and relieve my Conscience, which cannot speak beyond my hearing. And here I
will boldly stand-up, and with a Christian confidence, and in the Power which I
received from thee, pronounce the sacred Verses, with which they used in the
Primitive Church, to chase away the Noonday Devils: Let Psalm. 68. 1. ver. 2.
God arise, let his enemies be scattered, let them also that hate him flee
before him. As smoke is driven away, so drive them away: as wax melts before
the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.

CHAP. IV.
The Appeal, with a finger directed to the first Matter in Question.

THe first Matter of the Appeal, is. I affirm, That these our New Lights, and
walking Lanthorns, are a notable part of the Wandering and Separating people of
the last days: concerning whom the Scripture is so various, and so wonderfully
admonishing. These bold people deny it. My Reason is: If these be no part of
those people, we shall never sufficiently know where, when, or how to discover
such a people: and all the Scripture-Lessons handed to us for that purpose,
shall vainly fall to the Ground; and a foul aspersion be cast upon God, the
Author of Scripture, as insufficient in his admonishments.

And that which animates my Reason, is the most exact Conformity which these
people have with the many Discoveries and characters made and given of
Wanderers and Seducers in holy Scripture. Here it is excellently worthy our
Observation, that Scripture is scarcely so various and wonderful in any
Matter, as in this.

For first, Scripture commands, Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and
see, Jerem. 6. 16.
and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye
shall find rest for your Souls. The old Latin Bible reads, Vetus Interpres
State super vias: Stand ye upon, or over and above the ways: that is, take a
view and survey of all ways; that ye may discern between the old ways and the
new: but amongst the old paths, ye shall find the good way, wherein ye must
walk, that your Souls may rest in God, as in their proper center.

Secondly, Scripture entreats. Now I Romans 16 17.
beseech you brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary
to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. For they that are such,
serve not our v. 18.
Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good words and fair speeches
deceive the hearts of the simple. Mark them: that is, observe them, to avoid
them: or, if ye please, mark them nigro carbone, with a black coal; or, know
them for black Sheep.

Thirdly, Scripture exclames, and makes an outcry; O Timothy, keep that which
is committed to thy trust, avoiding 1 Timothy 6. 20.
profane and vain bablings, and oppositions of Science, falsely so called:
which some v. 21.
professing have erred concerning the faith. The Apostle cries out, as men do
when they warn a Friend, that is near the mouth of a deep pit, or in some other
great danger of Destruction.

Fourthly, Scripture gives warning concerning future Times, and Prophesies. In
the last days perilous times shall 2 Timothy 3. 1. v. 2. v. 3. v. 4.
come: For men shall be lovers of their own selves, -- boasters, proud,
blasphemers, -- Without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, -- O
the divine Truth of sacred Scripture! heady, high-minded, --: Having a form of
godliness, but denying the v. 5.
power thereof: from such turn away: For v. 6.
of this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women
laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, ever learning, and never able to
come to the knowledge of v. 7.
the truth. Behold a most lively Picture of our
captive-silly-sin-laden-led-away-lustful-everlearning-ignorant women. Again,
For the time will come, when they will 2 Timothy 4. 3.
not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap to
themselves teachers, having itching ears: And they shall v. 4.
turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables. This
Prophecy is made History amongst us. Also S. Jude, Jude, v. 17.
But, beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the Apostles
of our Lord Jesus Christ: How that they told you v. 18.
there should be mockers in the last time, who should walk after their own
ungodly lusts. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, v. 19.
having not the Spirit. These mockers and Separates, pretend that they have the
Spirit; but St. Jude declares, that they are sensual, and have it not.

Fifthly, The Scripture exhorts: Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these 2
Pet. 3. 17.
things before, beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of the
wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. But grow in v. 18.
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: to him be
glory both now and for ever, Amen. The Apostles commonly end their Epistles
with this Matter; that they may imprint it the more into the Hearts of those
unto whom they write. And St. Jude, But Jude, v. 20.
ye, beloved, building up your selves on your most holy faith, praying in the
Holy Ghost, Keep your selves in the love of God, looking v. 21.
for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal life. This Faith must be
the first, and most ancient in it is Order, or it cannot be the most holy Faith.

Sixthly, The Scripture awakes our memory, which applies it self to past
Things. Remember therefore how thou have Revelat. 3. 3.
received, and heard, and hold fast. Saint John writes here unto the angel of
the Church in Sardis.

And the Reason why Scripture is so various, and uses all these Helps, Ways,
and Weapons, is: Because if we do not abide in the most ancient Doctrine, we do
not abide in the ancient of Days, who is God. Which is easily deduced from
these holy words. Let that therefore abide 1 John 2. 24.
in you, which ye have heard from the beginning: if that which ye have heard
from the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and
in the Father.

Here is my Plea: To thee, O only wise God, I appeal.

CHAP. V.
The Second Matter in Question.

THe second Matter of the Appeal, is. These prodigious Christians call
themselves Saints, and the only-Believers. I avouch, That they have not Faith,
much less any kind of Saintship: And I am steered hereunto, by this
Description of Faith, answerable to thy Word, and accepted by the whole
truly-Christian world.

Faith, with respect unto the Giver, is of God; with relation to the manner of
giving, is an infused Grace; and in the Exercise of it, is a firm and immovable
Adhesion or Assent of the Understanding, to the Truths revealed by God, and
proposed by the Church of God, as the Spouse of his only-begotten Son Christ
Jesus.

First, Faith differs from Opinion; which is a pendulous or wavering Assent,
and easily movable.

Secondly, Faith is a Virtue of the Understanding; and by the Power of God,
infused into it; the Understanding being the first Faculty of the Soul, or
Spirit; and Faith being a Spiritual Grace, yea, the Basis and Foundation of all
other true Virtues, and Graces. Yet, Faith works not, but adjuncta Voluntate,
our Will concurring and moving, appliably to the working of Grace.

Thirdly, The Truths believed, must be revealed; Because the Power that gives a
supernatural Grace or Virtue, must likewise present the Matter or Object, that
these may be proportionable, and stated in the same Order: and because we
cannot, in any kind, please God in order to Glory, without God, and without
Faith: the Apostle plainly teaching, Without Faith it is impossible to please
God: Heb. 11. 6.
and Faith has necessary reference to it is Object.

Fourthly, (Here these religious Juglers are plainly discovered to the Sense:
and this was the regulated and orthodox Divinity of honest and quiet
Old-England:) The true Church, and Spouse of Christ, which has from God the
promise of divine assistance, and is actually assisted by the holy Ghost, and
guided into all Truth; must propose the Truths: otherwise, Jo. 16. 13
how shall we know in any Church, or, how shall it be certain to us,
certitudine Fidei, by the certainty of Faith; that our Translators, being
fallible Men, have done us right in their Translation of the Scriptures, which
we receive and believe as the word of God? Selah! O Meditation!

For, Whatsoever was promised to the Apostles, as principal Members of the
Church; must it self pertain to the Church, for whose cause and sake it was
promised. And there is always the same need of divine guidance or assistance;
because the holy Scriptures cannot be rightly Understood, but by the assistance
of the same Spirit, according to whose Dictates they were first written. And
the Scriptures being publicly given, and to all; the direction likewise for
the right Understanding of them, must be proportionaeble: that is, be public,
and uuiversally proposed, even in the view of all, to all. Moreover,
Interpretation is a Gift given for the good of the Church, as also all such
Graces are: and is not a Gift ending in the good of the Person, to whom it is
given.

Hence it stands upright, that Faith is divine in the Cause or Author; divine
in the Infusion; divine in the Adhesion; and lastly, divine in the reason of
the Adhesion, For, therefore we must firmly assent, and inviolably adhere unto
the Truths of God, because they were revealed by God, who can not err in
himself, or directly cause others to err, and proposed by his Church, to the
which he has given and promised the Holy Ghost, and which he certainly
assisteth according to his gracious Promise: all ordinate Proceedings being
always conformable to their Beginnings: And moreover, the Gospel of St Matthew
ending thus; And lo, I am Matthew. 28. 20.
with you always, even unto the end of the World: also, this promise being then
made, when our Lord Christ commanded his Disciples in the same Verse, that they
should teach all Nations to observe all Things commanded by him. Which
evidences, that his efficacious assistance was promised, as necessary to the
observation of all those Things.

My Appeal is at thy Bar, O God: give Sentence.

CHAP. VI.
The Third Matter in Question.

THe third Matter of the Appeal, is. I maintain, That as these disfigur'd-fac'd
and unlucky-look't Hypocrites, neither Preach nor have true Faith, so they
neither have nor Preach true Repentance. And I am so tongued and faith'd:
Because these devout Mountebanks have not the least knowledge of, or
acquaintance with true Evangelical Repentance, or with the true Conditions and
Properties of it: as it is manifest by the Consideration of Repentance, thus
represented in it is own and proper Colors.

Repentance is a gracious Gift of God, being a most hearty sorrow for our Sins
past: which has for it is motive the pure love of God, and is joined with a
firm Purpose of not sinning hereafter. The Sorrow Repentance has, a se and ex
sua natura, as it is Repentance: and the purpose Repentance has, as Repentance
is connexed with Prudence, whose genuine and proper work is, to beware of Evils
which may come hereafter.

The Sorrow discovers it self, inwardly and outwardly: inwardly, to the Person
in whom it is; and outwardly, to all people, scandalized, or farther injured,
by our Sins: that our Repentance may, in some sort, adequately answer to, and
even our Transgressions.

The Sorrow discovers it self inwardly, first, by a most hearty Wish, that we
never had sinned against our most good God, (whereby, as far as in us lies, we
unravel and cancel our Sin, yea revoke, and, in a manner, render undone the Act
of it; this being the most eminent reason, that Repentance is accepted and
required as the reconciling Virtue;) and secondly, the Sorrow discovers it self
inwardly, by a most vehement Hatred and abomination of sin; according to the
Scripture-Psalmist, Psa. 119. 163. Text Hebr.
I hate and abhor lying: but thy Law do I love. The Original word here
translated lying* is aven, and signifies lying, not as such a sin,
distinguished from others by that name, but as Sin in common, and as all kinds
of Sin are a kind of lying against God, who is Primum Ens, prima Veritas, prima
Bonitas, the first Thing, the first Truth, the first Goodness. And therefore,
the Vulgar Latin unsheaths it: Edit. Lat.
Iniquitatem odio habui, and abominatus sum, I hated, and abominated iniquity.
And as a man abominates a Toad, as contrary to his natural constitution and
propension: so (but in a more high measure) we must abominate Sin, as the
only-Contrary to the Nature, Holiness, and most excellent Goodness of God.

The Sorrow discovers it self outwardly, by newness of Life, and by
Satisfactien for injuries committed in Word or Work; in Goods, Body, or
Good-Name. For, he that repents, ought to undo the Work of Sin to his utmost
ability; that is, as far as he is able, to make up the rents and breaches
caused by Sin. Verily, he ought not to endure, that there should remain any
shape, color, or foot-step of his sins. If he does, he being able to remove
them; his Wish, Abomination, and Sorrow or Displicence, are all idle, vain, and
void. Wherefore this was the godly practice of Zacheus, and it was graciously
entered and answered by Christ: And Zacheus stood up, and said unto the Lord,
Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to Luke 19. ^.
the poor; and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I
restore him fourfold. And Jesus said unto him, This ^. 9.
day is salvation come to this house, for so much as he also is the Son of
Abraham. The Person injured suffers in the taking; in the detaining of Things
properly his; in his troubled mind and body; in his name dishonored, and
stained. Which is the reason, say the Casuists, of a fourfold Restitution.

The Purpose involves an exclusion of two Wills, the Explicit will of sinning,
and the Implicit will of sinning. That will is an open will which stands up,
and awakes, yea, calls up occasions of sinning: This will is a close will, that
lies, as it were, asleep, in the bottom of the Heart, and is called up and
awaked by occasions. The pious King with a Kingly Resolution resolves against,
and excludes both: I said, Ps. 39. 1.
I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: I will keep my
mouth with a bridle. The old Latin Bibles have, ut Vetus Interp.
non delinquam in lingua mea, that I slip not with my tongue. For, Delicta are
those faults which the Septuagint call (...), defects, slips, or slidings.
Posui Sept.
ori meo custodiam: so the Latin: I have set a guard at the Door of my mouth.
His Purpose is firm, strong, and of a large extent: and, as wisely and readily
undertaken, so resolutely and wisely maintained.

These Novellists are so great Strangers to Satisfaction, that they neither own
it nor know it: yea, when they should satisfy for old Wrongs, in lieu thereof
they administer and multiply new Injuries. Give judgment, O King of Men and
Angels.

CHAP. VII.
The fourth Matter in Question.

THe fourth Matter of the Appeal comes forth. My constant Maxim is, These
newfound wild people, although they continually take in vain the sacred Name
of the most holy Spirit of God, (who is Love or Charity,) yet have not 1 John 4
16.
true Charity.

True Charity is the Virtue by which we love God above all Things, for himself,
and for the infinite Excellencies in him; and by the which also, we love our
neighbors for God, and with relation to the divine Commands. Now we find in
the large Volume of our own long Experience, that since this Generation of
Vipers has crept out of darkness into the light, true Charity, has been
almost quite extinct, and there has come, by a certain contagion, a kind of
the flowing of the Gaul amongst all sorts of people. No mortal*Eye ever saw, no
Ear heard of, from the first entrance of Christian Faith into this Nation, less
operations and expressions of true Charity amongst us, than at this present. We
find some men to love as connexed in blood, in neighborhood, in good
fellowship as they call it, as obliged by benefits, as being of the same Sect
or Faction: but who loves from a supernatural Principle, or, as inflamed by
true charity? If such were obvious, we should know them Matt. 7. 16.
by their fruits.

Therefore, whereas the Things which we know by experience, thou, O God, must
needs know in thine infinite Light, and there must of necessity be a most
excellent conformity betwixt the Truth of Things and the Truth of the divine
Understanding: To thee, as the Supreme Rule and Measure of all Things, I appeal.

And yet, we all know, that true Faith is manifested by true Charity: and that
the Apostle requires of us, Faith which works by love. The Textual Word, is
Galat. 5. 6.
(...), Charity. Yea, It is as strange for Faith to be, without the motions and
workings of Charity; as for Fire to give light, and not to burn. Which was the
reason why John the Baptist was called by our ever-blessed Savior, a burning
Jo. 5. 3*
and a shining light, lamp, or candle: whenas to give light, and to burn (in
fire) have the same moment of beginning, and according to nature the same
continuance.

Charity is our evidence that we live spiritually. Indeed, The just shall live
by Romans 1. 17.
faith. But as life is discovered by some kind of motion: so the life of Faith
is known by the necessary motions of Charity. Wherefore, if we have not
Charity, we are as tinkling cymbals; and have (as the Church in Sardis) a name
that we 1 Cor. 13. 1. Rev. 3. 1.
live, but are dead.

Charity is the Virtue directing and guiding moral Virtues to their End, and
spiritualizing them. Which Virtues would otherwise be meerly-moral and
heathenish. It is the Virtue causing that excellent concatenation and
connection, which is betwixt Virtues thus-perfected, guided, and directed:
conformably to St. Paul: And above all these things Coloss. 3. 14.
put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness.

Charity is the end of all God's Commandments. It is the language of St. Paul:
Now the end of the Commandment 1 Timothy 1. 5.
is charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith
unfeigned. The word in the Apostolical Tongue, for unfeigned, is (...),
unhypocritical. And he says, Faith being without Charity, which is the end of
the Commandment, is hypocritical.

CHAP. VIII.
The fifth Matter in Question.

THe fifth Matter of the Appeal, succeeds. These little Baby-Christians, these
Pygmie-Saints, these Fairy blew cap't Night-Dancers, do style themselves the
Disciples of Christ, and the Servants of God; yea impudently say, that they are
the only holy-ones that truly glorify God, or, that give glory (glaury they
call it) unto their dear Father. I deny, that they are God's Servants, or
Christ's Disciples, or, that they glorify God: except that by their leaving,
and withdrawing themselves from the Order of his Grace and Mercy, they glorify
him by their falling under the Order of his Justice. And I appeal unto the
Master, whom they pretend to serve and follow, and who knows his own
Servants, and 2 Timothy 2 19.
them that are his.

My Denial stands upon this Ground. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye
bear Jo. 15. 8.
much fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples.

(What corrupted and miserable fruit these dirty Saints bear, God knows; and
those who have eyes to see, see; and they that have ears to hear, hear.)

And I build upon this Ground, first: God is more glorified by our being more
his according to his Will: but we are thus more his, by our keeping his
commandments: not by the making of uncomely faces, or the fashioning our waxen
and pliable mouths to the misdiscerning ears of the People, in a whining and
fantastical Tone. To this excellent purpose, God himself says: Now therefore
if ye will obey my Exodus 19. 5.
voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto
me above all People. A Prince is glorified in the multitude of his obedient and
faithful Servants; and in the riches and fullness of his Treasure.

I build, secondly: God is then truly glorified, when we do that which he truly
requires of us, but he truly requires of us to bear much fruit: not to spend
our sap in idle and vain shows, and blossoms of specious Words and Professions.
So speaks God again. And now, Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy
God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, To keep the commandments v. 13.
of the Lord and his Statutes, which I command thee this day, for thy good? And
a master is glorified in the due and ready performance of what he requires and
commands.

I build, thirdly: God is most glorified by that which he prefers before all
other Things; but God prefers solid obedience before other Things: (and Faith
is made acceptable in adult persons, by the working of it.) Thus the Scripture,
on God's behalf. And Samuel said, Has the Lord 1 Samuel 15. 22.
as great delight in burnt-offerings, and sacrifices, as in obeying the Voice
of the Lord? behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken, than the
fat of rams. The words were spoken to Saul, because he had reserved the fat
beasts of the Amalekites for sacrifices, in opposition to the divine preference
and command. Obedience pertains to the moral Law; Sacrifice, to the ceremonial:
and the moral Law is of all, the most deeply rooted. Now this apish behavior
of our blind-soul'd Hypocrites, is a most wretched piece of low-born Ceremony,
and the sacrifice of pure Fools.

I build, fourthly: God is most especially glorified by those things, which he
most presses to the Heart: but he most presses to the heart, the serious and
earnest keeping of his commandments. My Son, Pro. 3. 1.
forget not my Law: but let thine heart keep my commandments. Let not mercy
and v. 3.
truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck: write them upon the table of
thine Heart. Trust in the Lord with all thine v. 5.
Heart. Kings are greatly glorified by their having the surest and strongest
Holds, Forts, or Cittadels: and having the Tower or Castle of a City, we
command the whole City.

I build, lastly: God is most glorified by that which is the end of other
Duties: (because the end, as the End, is more perfect, noble and worthy than
the Means:) as the end of Prayer, Fasting, Hearing of Sermons, Receiving of
Sacraments, and the like; is our bearing of much holy fruit, and our walking
more and more agreeably to God's commandments. Let the Scripture speak, Is not
this the fast that I have chosen, Is. 58. 6.
to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the
oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to
the hungry, and v. 7.
that thou bring the poor that are cast out, to thy house? When thou see the
naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own
flesh? It spoke first of hypocritical Fasts, destitute of agreeable and
subsequent Practice.

Now that these Ghosts of the ancient Heretics, are a dull, stupid, and most
block-and-beetle-headed Rout, drinking horrible Sin like water, and yet
faintingly straining, in the sight of Men, at the little Gnats of Prohibition:
is to me and my Sense, most clear, most evident.

CHAP. IX.
The Sixth Matter in Question.

THe sixth Matter of the Appeal, takes place. I object, That the seven great
Heads of Sin recounted by the Ancients, are wondrously apparent in the
preaching Leaders of these Factions, which have risen since the first beginning
of our unhappy Differences. We see, but let God judge.

The seven great Heads, are Pride, Anger, Envy, Lust or Luxury, Covetousness,
Gluttony, and Sloth, when the dangerous and painful Works of sound Religion
are to be strongly and valiantly performed. These the Ancients have, upon
excellent Grounds, set in opposition to the seven Gifts of the Holy Ghost; and
have found first, adumbrated in the Old Testament, by the seven dippings of
Naaman; and afterward, 2 Kings 5. 14. Luke 8. 2. Mar. 16. 9.
expressed in the New, by our Savior his casting seven Devils out of Mary
Magdalene.

In evident Things, Proof Ceases. Was ever Pride more swelling and triumphant
in any of those who never learned Christ, than it is now in these seven-headed
Monsters? This Evil travels with the Nation, Witness the Cloak-bagg-Religion'd
House-Preachers, superstitiously called Doctor, at the Cloth market in Germany:
Also, the blazing-ey'd, and high-tongu'd Speaker in private not Black-well, or
black in a good sense, but as false and black as Hell. Was Anger ever more
furious, See Rev. 12. 3. 17. 3.
more fierce and cruel, more restless, more full of Strange Pretenses, Devices,
and Stratagems, more damnably lying, than in these, when their Evil Spirits are
raised or molested? Was ever Envy more mischievous than in these, when they see
they are outdone in the judgment of the People, upon whose lips and trenchers
they depend? Do not these Lions most furiously roar, when the Cock (the Bird of
the Day) crows near them? Was Lust ever more lustful, and luxurious? What
manifold Examples we have had of it? And now, O thou new-religion'd Sin, so
like unto Rape, I remember who committed thee, and the very Place. Was ever
covetousness more exacting? Go, and ask All People on English Earth do dwell.
Was Gluttony ever more desiring, and gaping after varieties of meats and
sawcies? And yet, they preach to the lamentable people denial of the World, and
Pleasures. Was ever Sloth more slothful, when God's work requires Christian
boldness, courage and Fortitude? For, the Nature of Heretical Spirits is such,
that, their Understandings being drawn into the faction of their Wills, thy
confidently and easily adhere to that from which their Livelihood arises, and
soon after, (their Understandings and Wills, as it were, growing together,)
verily believe it as the Truth of God.

And to touch a little upon the first Head, that the Reader may in like manner
comment upon the rest. These last-Ag'd Prophets profess themselves to be the
Teachers of Christian Religion. And Christ proposing himself as an Example,
invites us by his Example to Humility, as to the most proper badge of
Christians. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of Matthew. 11. 29.
me, for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest into your Souls.
It is in the Latin Bible, humilis cord, humble in heart. And having washed his
Disciples Vetus Interp.
feet, which was an Act of profound Humility, he speaks thus: I have given you
an example, that ye should do as I have done to Jo. 13. 15.
you. An humble man will throw himself at the very feet, even of the lowest and
humblest of People.

And the Degrees of Christ's Humility, and of his descending still beneath
himself, are superlatively admirable. He first descends from Heaven into the
womb of a Virgin: our Mothers womb being the place of Men. Then is he born in a
Stable, being the place of Beasts: (because he came to seek men changed into
Beasts.) Afterward, he humbled himself, Philip. 2. 8.
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross: and the Cross was
the place of wicked men, as being worse than beasts. After this, he is put into
a Sepulcher, being the place of dead men, yet still worse if they die wicked,
because they cannot repent. Lastly, he descends into Hell, which the Apostle
calls the lower parts of the earth. Ephesians. 4. 9.


The Truth is. Heathens and Heretics are altogether incapable of true Charity,
and of true Humility: as all Ages have testified, the one after the other.

CHAP. X.
The seventh Matter in Question.

THe seventh Matter of the Appeal, calls for entrance. I charge upon these
new-vaumpt Walkers: That they are the most High and Mighty Scandalizers of
others, and the greatest Blasphemers and Blemishers of Reputation, that were
ever known amongst Men. Others are very sensible of it, and know it. But I have
had a large portion of Experience in this kind.

Witness a Cursed Paper, which these false-mouth'd and rabid Preachers have
dispatched after me in all places wheresoever I desired to sit down; and which
contains most horrible Slanders: Some whereof they have at last withdrawn, for
their apparent and most devilish falsehood; others they keep on foot. As, that I
owned and hid a Box of Crucifixes: whereas, I appeal to God my King and Judge,
I have not been the owner of a Crucifix these twenty years; neither have I had
a Crucifix in my hands or possession. And (which is a most deplorable Business,
and a sadding-Heart Ulcer of these Times) I am demonstratively certain, that
the two persons whom they suborned to swear to it, (whereof the first Mover was
the troubled Husband of my Child's Nurse, which She had most unchristianly
abused, and almost starved: and was therefore taken from her: for, their
Accusations are the lamentable Effects of blind, mad, and unrighteous Passion;
the wrath of man working not the righteonsness James 1. 20.
of God:) know not what a Crucifix is. Likewise, that I used fordid words with
an Oath, concerning a near Friend of mine; which, I appeal to God, I never did:
(and suchlike:) And all my Friends know, that my mouth is not set or tuned to
Oaths.

Now again, Certain Relics of this Viperous Brood, have taken from the mouth
of a Water-man's discontented Wise, having been (by the Report of the People
where she lives, high and low) a lewd-liv'd woman, (it is well known where her
Heart was:) and having an impudent face, and a rotten Heart and Body; That I
never say my Prayers. And this now, stands up to face me.

I am heartily sorry, that I must give a public Account of my Prayers, and
private Devotions. But the present Business importunes it. Wherefore, that
these conceited, fantastical, blockish, stock and block-retaining,
beetle-headed, wooden-brow'd, Busy-bodies in Reliligion, may know that our
appealing to God, and our calling of God to witness, in these circumstances; is
not unholy (nor deserves their affected composing of their mouths, and crying
fie, fie,) but Apostolical: I shall begin with St. Paul: The God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 31.
which is blessed for evermore, knows that I lie not. I never miss to pray,
at the least, twice a Day; likewise, to exercise Acts of Sorrow for Sin,
seconded with the Wish, Abomination, and Purpose beforementioned; and of the
Love of God, as often: likewise, to unfold before God, in manner of
Thanksgiving, a Catalogue of the chief Blessings and Deliverances, wherewith he
has most graciously assisted me, both by Sea and Land: Also, to sacrifice my
self to God, and to sing Scripture-hymns of his Praises. Moreover, I endeavor
every day, to pray continually, or without ceasing, by using Aspirations 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
(thus Mystical Divinity names them) upon emergent or occurrent occasions:
Which I shall here deposit for the use of others.

As, when I awake from sleep in the morning, My voice shall thou hear in the
Psalm. 5. 3.
morning, O Lord, in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will
look up. For thou art not a God that has pleasure in v. 4.
wickedness. In the beginning of a good work: I delight to do thy will, O my
God: Psalm. 40. 8.
yea, thy law is within my Heart. After I am subdued by a Sin: Hide thy face
from Psalm. 51. 9.
my sins, and blot out all mine inquities. Create in me a clean heart, O God:
and renew v. 10.
a right Spirit within me. Cast me not v. 11.
away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me, Restore unto me
the joy v. 12.
of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. In my entrance into the
house of God: How amiable are thy Tabernacles, o Psalm. 84. 1. Psalm. 27. 4.
Lord of Hosts! Or: One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek
after: that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to
behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple. Before the reading
of Scripture, or any other pious Book: Speak, Lord, for thy servant 1 Samuel: 3.
9. Ps. 119. 18.
hears. Or: Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy
law. At the sight of meat: The eyes of all wait Ps. 145. 15.
upon thee, and thou give them their meat in due season. Thou openest thy
hand and v: 16.
satisfiest the desire of every living thing. In Prosperity: If I do not
remember thee, let Psalm. 137. 6
my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if prefer not Jerusalem above my
chief joy. In Adversity: The Lord kills, and makes alive; 1 Samuel 2, 6*
he brings down to the grave, and brings up. The Lord makes poor, and
makes v. 7.
rich: he brings low, and lifts up. Or: What? Shall we receive good at the
Job 2. 10.
hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? When I am reproached by men for
the doing of good: Do I seek to please men? Gal. 1. 10
for if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ. In the
hearing of praises: Not unto us, o Lord, not unto us, but Psa. 115. 1.
unto thy Name give glory: for thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake. In the heat
of a Temptation: Yea, though I walk through Psalm. 23. 4.
the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me,
thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. When I look upwards, The Heavens
declare the glory Psalm. 19. 1.
of God: and the Firmament shows his handy work. Or: Clouds they are without
water, Jude v. 12.
carried about of winds; he means false teachers. When I behold the Earth: One
Eccles. 1. 4.
generation passes away, and another generation comes: but the Earth abides
for ever. At the sight of a Tree: Trees whose fruit withers, without fruit,
twice dead, Jude v. 12
plucked up by the roots. Seeing a Flower: The flowers appear on the Earth, the
time of Cant. 2. 12.
the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in our
land. Or: I am the rose of Sharon, and the Lilie of the valleys. v. 1.
When I am on the way in a journey: I am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life:
Jo. 14. 6.
no man comes to the Father, but by me. Or: Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make his Mat. 3. 3.
paths straight. When I hear of a Lion: Be sober, be vigilant; because your
adversary 1 Pet. 5. 8
the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he may devour. When a
Bear is in the Discourse: And there came forth two she-bears out of the Wood,
and 2 Kings 2. 24:
tare forty and two children of them. The shebear licketh her young into right
shape, and order of parts. When the Cock croweth: And immediately the Cock
crew. Mat. 26. 74. v. 75.
And Peter remembered the words of Jesus, which said unto him: Before the Cock
crow thou shall deny me thrice, and he went out and wept bitterly. When the Sea
is before me: Raging waves of the Sea, foming out Jude v. 13. Psalm. 4. 8.
their own shame. When I lay me down to sleep: I will both lay me down in peace
and sleep: for thou, Lord, only make me dwell in safety.

I have many more in my Quiver. But I will not glut my Reader. It is granted,
that I use no Prayers of my own composure: my experience does so daily confute
the common use of them. For example, The other day I came into a Church, where
the Minister wearying his Auditory with his long Prayer before his Sermon, and
seeing me in my entrance, threw down the blessed Name of God, took it up again
and again, and yet again; then varied the Name, (as Boys do phrases;) then went
backward to his past Matter, and caught here and there; after, stood mute
awhile: and lastly, being unable to go forward, changed the whole Business, and
prayed God to deliver him from Jesuitical plots.

These Vile Dirt-flingers have defiled and besmeared me with many other
slanders, (with which I shall not here cumber my self, and over which my Soul
stands and looks with an incomparable cheerfulness:) but with two especially;
which I set apart for the two next Chapters.

CHAP. XI.
The eighth Matter in Question.

THe eighth Matter of the Appeal, is admitted. These Babylonish Satyrs Is. 13.
21.
that dance upon the Ruins of good Report: report, that I begot a Bastard: the
second Edition says three: the third, five: and thus, the Devil's market rises
(although the Devil's Crier in the market, did only pass when he cried the
News; and is himself cried after with a loud cry of his near Acquaintance, by
the Names of a Common Liar, a Fool, a Knave, a Beggar, and a vicious person:) I
shall conceal their Names, because some of them are in Office, and in
State-service: though, I believe, it is expected that they should be otherwise
busied. Yet I cannot suppress the Name of Davis Fry, a Twinchild.

To thee, O Lord Jehovah, I appeal. My Children begot, after Matrimony
perfectly agreeable to the Laws of England, of my Wife; I set aside. And if
ever I had other child or children, I deserve to feel the weight of thy Justice
without Mercy, in all Eternity, both in regard of that foul wickedness, and of
this presumptuous Appeal. But if no such Thing ever was, nor any the least
Appearance: (and thou know there was not:) To thee I cry aloud for Justice:
O thou that dwell in the Heavens, send thy Angels to execute Psa. 123. 1.
it. Behold they stand with much obstinacy in their Credulity, and have not
made me any kind of Satisfaction. Of Thee I require it, according to the
Rights of my creation, which were given by Thee and in which Thou have bound
thy self to conserve me, answerably to thy Mercy or Justice. They cry out: Of
what worth is all this Preaching of the Bastard-begetter? They curiously,
seekingly, and joyfully heard it; they proudly maintain it; and they triumph
and tripudiate in their wickedness. To Thee, the sole Fountain of all Power, I
hold up the Hand which thou have enabled: Answer them out of Job 38. 1
the Whirlwinde.

I have learned in thy word: If any man 1 Cor. 3. 17.
defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy: for the Temple of God is
holy, which Temple ye are. One of the Ancients expounds it; If any man shall
vitiate by unchastity. And the Greek Text consents. Text. Gr. Genesis 1. 26.


I know, that thou made us after thy likeness; and thy Son, according to his
human Nature, in our likeness. St. Paul speaks it of him; and was made in the
likeness of Philip. 2. 7.
men. I know, that, Men and Angels having fallen; he took upon him, only our
nature and body: For verily he took not on Heb. 2. 16:
him the nature of Angels: but he took on him the seed of Abraham. I know, that
the Son of God in the flesh, was made a most pure and acceptable Holocaust for
us: He spared not his own Son, but delivered him up Romans 8. 32.
for us all. And consequently, I know, that our Sins of the flesh, after the
Incarnation and passion of Christ, are much more heinous than before. And shall
any impure Woman come near my Body, to the begetting of a Bastard? God forbid.

I confess before God and the World, I am so very far from bastard-begetting,
that I am deeply sorry I ever touched a woman beyond the Modesty of a
Batchelour. And now, I smite upon my breast, and Luke 18. 13.
say, God be merciful to me a Sinner.

Thou know, O God, that I was stabbed with a Dagger in the face, because I
privately reproved another for Adultery. And shall I my self commit the same,
or the like Sin? How then could I do this great wickedness, and sin against
God? Genesis 39. 9.


And (which is transcendently wicked) they commissionated a very Child of
Belial, who was publicly known guilty of bastard-begetting; to debase and
vilify me under this Title. And furthermore, one of the chief Actors in this
Villainy, had been formerly seen and sound --. Not a word more at this Time;
upon a Friendly consideration.

CHAP. XII.
The Ninth Matter in Question.

THe Ninth Matter of the Appeal, breaks forth. These Children of the Serpent
which cast out of his mouth water as a flood, after the woman, in the Revel.
12. 15.
Revelation: that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood: Spew out
of their filthy mouths, that I am a Drunkard. I appeal to God. And I humbly
desire all that know me, to consider of this most known Slander; and if they be
so pleased, to weigh the other not-so-much appearing Slanders by the most
apparent lightness and falsehood of this.

Of a truth, if I be a Drunkard, or any way inclinable to be so; I must needs
be the vilest of Hypocrites. For, no Man has Preached more earnestly against
Drunkenness, than my self. Yea, I am so far transported, and bended the other
way, that I can hardly fasten my affection upon a man, after I have seen him
drunk

I have preached, that a Man drunk, is not a man, but a vile Beast, yea, worse
than a Beast, yea, worse than the wosst of Beasts; yea, that no Creature is so
much removed and placed out of the circle and capacity of all Good, no not the
Devil. For, the Devils believe and tremble. James 2. 19. Psalm. 148 10.
And Beasts and all Cattle: creeping things, and flying fowl, are invited to
praise God. The Ass, Toad, Owl, Woodcock, praise God: but the drunk Woodcock,
Owl, Toad, Ass, cannot praise him. Men are drunk also, with Anger, Malice,
Heresy, etc.

I have preached, that a Drunkard is the most horrid Profaner of the best of
Cups; and that every Cup which he receives above measure, reflects dishonor
upon that sacred Cup, whereof the Apostle; The cup of blessing which we bless,
is 1 Cor. 10 16.
it not the communion of the blood of Christ? For, according to the Logical
Rule, Primum in unoquoque genere est mensura reliquorum, The first and most
noble in every kind is the measure of the rest; and if it measures not, it is
rejected and dishonored as an appointed measure.

I have preached, that He who delightfully makes others drunk, knowing moreover
that a man dying in Drunkenness is irrecoverable; Some way participates of the
Sin against the holy Ghost, who, for his 1 Timothy 2 4.
abundant goodness, will have all men to be saved. At which time I declared,
that a Sin of Infirmity is against the Father, because Power is his proper
Attribute; that a Sin of Ignorance is against the Son, because his proper
Attribute is Wisdom: and that a Sin of Malice is against the holy Ghost,
because Goodness is his proper Attribute: and yet, not a Sin of every malice,
but of a certain malice, by the which we desiringly contrive the destruction of
Souls.

I yield without pulling, that many Preachers contradict their Preaching by
their Practice. But this is a Sin which cannot be committed, except in the view
of Men: and they who know me, must free me. And therefore, I have often
ruminated in my thoughts, that these ditch-and-dunghil Saints, could not so
much harden their faces and consciences, unless they were actually possessed
or obsessed with Devils; especially, our Savior saying to the Jews and
Pharisees, Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts Jo. 8. 44.
of your Father ye will do: he was a murderer from the beginning. And while I
am full of these thoughts, and cite other circumstances to make their
appearance, I cannot but judge it a singular and peerless piece of heroical
charity to command and disengage these Swinish and Dirt-loving Devils from
these dirty-throated People; though God has in his Justice suffered their
entrance, as Christ suffered the devils to enter into the herd of Swine. Matt.
8. 31.


The good women that joined their Charity in the giving of a Pig, cried out
afterward upon sad experience of wildehoggishnesse, that the Devil entered with
the Pig; and why might not I charitably shape the dispossession or ejectio^ of
him?

Now let these impious Professors know, that Sin is either such as presently
discovers it is malice in the very Act; of which foul stamp is Drunkenness,
Swearing, Murder: or such as discovers not its malice, presently, of which kind
is Lying, Deceit, Slander: these being not discovered ordinarily, but after a
Turn of Time, and as it were, at the second rebound, and perhaps never. And
that he who refrains himself only from the first, desires to please man; those
being exposed to the Sense: but he that abstains from all, studies to please
God, and is conformed to him. O thou Searcher of Searchers, Search these
dark-hearted, and fearless, though trembling Liars with candles; and punish
these Zeph. 1. 12.
proud, yet ignorant contemners of Truth and Learning, that are settled on the
lees of Herefie and Passion.

The Conclusion.
REader, I have lived here, to hear the most sacred Trinity, denied; the
Incarnation of Christ, most sordidly vilified; the holy Ghost, rejected; the
holy Scriptures, trod upon as fabulous; the Immortality of the Soul, abandoned;
Heaven and Hell, thrust out of the world; little innocent Infants, exiled from
the Covenant; and almost all helps of divine Worship, like the Goods of the
House called the Agrigentine Gally, ejected.

I have heard it asserted by some, that all Things come by Nature; and by
others, that when they, being Saints, pray for a supply of their wants, money is
presently brought by a miraculous Hand, and found by them on their Tables.
These are Seekers.

I have seen the Turkish Alcoran, Englished; and a Book which is called
Prae-Adamitae, and affirms that there were many Generations of people before
our Adam, though burned at Paris, yet here taught to speak English, and held
forth to the People.

I have had some conference with a Man in white, that pretended he came down
from Heaven, and spoke the Language used there. I have met with two
Womens-taylors, who professed themselves to be the two witnesses in the
Revelation. Rev. 11. 3.


I have heard most contradictory Untruths preached, in every place, against
other Churches: and the proceedings have been agreeable, and of purpose
contradictory. And I have found the Ministers most childishly, and most grossly
ignorant of transmarine ways, and Doctrines.

I have beheld a most horrible Inundation of Hell it self, vomiting up all the
old loathed and abominable heresies amongst us: the Devil not fighting singly
now, as in the Days before us, against the sacred Articles of the Creed* in
order as they have place; but acting a most doleful Tragedy of Confusion, and
making a most fierce Assault and a most terrible Onset, upon all the said
Articles together; and in one bold Adventure, heaving at the whole Fabric of
Christ's blessed Name and Religion: as if the Plot of Hell were, wholly to
divest the Royal and Celestial Maid of her Dowry.

I have seen even the very firstborn of all the rest, and the truly-masculine
Spirits, smothered in these Waters of Affliction. And I fear, that all the
Plagues of Egypt are coming.

My desire and appetite is great, and I am hungry beyond expression. But I
cannot fill my belly with these hogs-husks. Luk: 15. 16.


I have born the shock of a thousand slanders, thrown upon me by the Dregs of
People, even such as were lately broken, and are in the confusion of these
Times, newly souldred and set up again. I have been miserably wrought upon as a
mere Scholar, and fallaciously entangled in obligations against my self, by a
Brother; who presents a godly show to the people, and builds upon my Blood and
Ruins.

Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for Psalm. 133 1.
Brethren to dwell together in Unity. This is the first part of the last
Gradual Psalm, or Song of Degrees, saving one. The last sings thus, Behold,
bless ye the Lord, all ye servants Psalm. 134 1. v. 2.
of the Lord: which by night stand in the house of the Lord. Lift up your hands
in the Sanctuary, and bless the Lord. This is the last and highest perfection
upon earth; (wherewith I would be gladly perfected, that my last, and highest
Appeal may be freely and fully answered from heaven:) these Gradual Psalms, as
they keep their ranks and Order, teaching more and more perfection.

My last English words in this Treatise, shall be the text of my first Sermon
preached in England. Come out of her, my People, Rev. 18. 3.
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

Vivat Dominus PROTECTOR noster.
FINIS.

