CORDIAL COUNCIL, IN A PATHETICALL EPISTLE: First written to an Eminent
Professor of Religion, for the seasonable preventing of a RELAPS. WHICH PROVING
EFFICACIOVS, IS AGAIN REUISED, ENLARGED, and published for the good of others.
As being applyable to many thousands, whose practice is neither answerable to
the Gospel, their Christian profession, nor the millions of mercies they have
received. By R. Junius.

The back-slider in heart shall be filled with his own ways. PRO. 14. 14. As
they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to a
reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient. ROMANS 1. 28. Thy
wisdom and thy knowledge has perverted thee. ISA. 47. 10. Ye looked for
much and lo it came to little, and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon
it, etc. HAG. 1. 6. 9. My son if sinners intise thee, consent thou not, walk
not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their path. PRO. 1. 10.
15. London, Printed by Tho. Pain, and are to be sold by James Crump, in little
Bartholomewes Well-yard. 164^.

CORDIAL COUNCIL IN A PATHETICALL Epistle, written to an Eminent Professor of
Religion: For the seasonable preventing of a Relaps.
Courteous Sir,
IF you ask why I take this pains, turn to Levit: 19. 17. Heb. 3. 13. If for
a president take that of Photion, who when a friend of his would have cast
himself away, suffered him not saying, I was made thy friend to this purpose.
And he that loves not such a friend, hates himself: Or is a fool, for he that
is a friend to our faults, is no friend to our selves. I confess, one maine
motive to induce me was: I called to remembrance the invaluable good, which
redowned to my soul: by means of a poor man's plain, full, free, faithful,
and timely admonishing of me.

And is there not a cause of my uttmost endeavor? when you that have known
the way of righteousness, and had for some time escaped the polutions of the
world: through the knowledge of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ: Do again
seem to be entangled therein, and turn from the holy commandment.

If you demand wherein, I answer, what is it other when you will be drawn to
the Tavern by every idle Solisiter; and there be detained whole hours, yea
many hours in drinking; even against your stommake, and constitution of body,
against your judgment, the checks of your own conscience, the motions of Gods
spirit, the earnest dehortation of your godly friends and many vows to the
contrary: though you much abhor and condemn it. To the spending of your money,
wasting of your precious time, abusing the creatures, (which thousands better
then you want) wounding of your good name, impayring of your health, prejudice
of your peace, discredit of the Gospel and Professors thereof: the stumbling of
weak ones, the encouraging of indifferent and unresolved ones, the forestaling
and hardening of your Asociates, and all other enemies who know or hear of it.

Is this according to the Apostles rule. 1 These. 5. 22. Abstain from all
appearance of evil? Is this to hate even the garment that is spotted by the
flesh? Jude 23. Is this becoming one, who is so strict touching Ceremonies;
one who out of tenderness, separates from our public Assemblies? Yea, to
speak plainly, is not this to strain out a Gnat, and swallow a Cammell?
Admit men term you an Hypocrite, (for so they will do) what can be said in
your defense? Is not this to resemble the Priests, Scribes and Elders; who
intending to murder the Son of God; yet fear to be defiled, with the touch
of Pilates pavement?

Consider of it seriously, and tell me if you can, where, or in what part of
Gods word, you find a warrant for your so doing, for where is no precept, there
is no promise. If we want Gods word, in vain do we look for his aid. We may
trust him, we may not tempt him.

Our heavenly father has promised, to give his Angels charge over us, to keep
us in all our waye^. Psalm 91. 11. That is, in the ways of obedience, or the
ways of his commandments; but this is one of the Devils ways, a way of sin
and disobedience; and therefore has no assurance of protection And miserable
is that man, who in unwarrantable actions is left to his own keeping, for wests
and strayes, are properly due to the Lord of the soil, even the God of this
world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. So long as we hold the tenure of obedience, we are the
Lords subjects; and if we serve him, he will preserve us. Neither need we vex
our selves with cares, as if we lived at our own cost, or trusted to our own
strength; but when a man is fallen to the state of an our-law, or rebel, the
Law dispenses with them that kill him, because the Prince has excluded him
from the benefit of his protection. And indeed why do we pray not (...) be led
into temptation? if we lead our selves into it. If we will not keep our selves
from the occasion God will not keep us from the sin; and if God do not
keep us, we cannot be keept, we cannot, we will not choose but fall.

Ob. But you have set bounds to your self, beyond which you will not pass.

Ans. It is hard for the best man to say, how far he will be tempted. If one
will put himself into lewd company, he cannot promise to come forth innocent.
How many have fallen into a fashion of swearing, scoffing, drinking, out of the
usual practice of others. Yea, when once a man gives himself over to be the
companion of vice, in the end he becomes the very slave of vice. And little do
you know or consider, the insinuative power of evil, or the treachery of your
own heart in receiving it, or the importunity of wicked deceivers in obtruding
it, you will be the worse for their society, and perceive it not: for no man
proves extremely evil on the sudden; but through many insensible
declinations, do we fall from virtue.

Satan works men by degrees, (and not all at once) to the height of impiety.
David at first was so tender of conscience, that the lap of Saul's garment
greived him to the heart, but giving way to his own corruptions, and Satan's
temptations; to what a height of sin was he risen? At first he only loosed the
raines to idleness, from idleness he proceeds to lust, from lust to
drunkenness, from drunkenness to murder, etc. And how many have declined,
from a vigorous heat of zeal, to a temper of lukewarm indifferency? and
then from a careless mediocritie, to all extremity of debauchednes? and so of
hopefnll beginnings, have ended in incarnate Devils.

Frequencie in sin, takes away the sense of sin; as a man may look so long
upon the Sun, that he shall become blind, and not sensible of any light it
has. Oh how the soul that gives way to sin is gained upon by custom? and
when once crusted over with custom, no hope of returning, And what do those
agents for the Devil drunkards aim at? or practice more then the art of
debauching men? as what will they not do or spend; to make a sober man a
drunkard. Yea, let but a religious man fall into their company, as a purse of
money may fall into a stinking privy: how will they wind him in to drink by
little and little? How will they conspire to provoke his unwilling appetite?
with drunken healthes. And in case they can never so little prevail, O then
they will sing and rejoice, as in the division of a spoil, and brag that they
have drenched sobriety, and blinded the light, and ever after be a snuffing of
this Taper. Psalm. 13. 4.

And is it not a fair credit, for you and the Gospel? that they should boast
when you are gone, that you make great scruple of praying with them, but none of
being drunk with them? That you have a good mind to please God, but a greater
to please the world? Good sir remember your vow in baptism confirmed again at
your first conversion, and often renewed at the Lords table and in time of
affliction, Remember what Christ has done for your soul, and whether you were
not divorc't from the world when married to him.

It is not for such as have given up their names to Christ, and wear his
Livory to consort with, or conform to, the fashions of the world: much less
to her leude customs. Or if they do, the more emminent the person, the more
notorious the corruption: both in respect of others, and themselves. For,

In regard of others; better many Israelites commit Adultery, or Idolatry, then
one David or Solomon. For many Jews to deny Christ, was not so much as for one
Peter. Yea, if all the Cities of the world had done filthily, it were short of
this wonder: The Virgin daughter of Sion, is become an harlot. Isay 1. 21. And
likewise in respect of themselves. For their sin is, and their punishment
shall be greater. The more glorious the Angels excellency, the more damnable
their Apostacy. If Judas prove a villain, how mischeivous is his villainy. If
the light become darkness how great is that darkness? Yea, if that we call
virtue turn into vice, the shame is triple.

And as the sin of such is greater, so shall their punishment be if they
apostatize, Julian, and Lucifer had been less damned, if the one had not
been a Christian, and the other an Angel of light. However men live or dye,
without the pale of the Church, a wicked professor, shall be sure of plagues.

Ob, But I was never yet distempered with drinking, nor I hope ever shall be;
neither are those drunkards which you tax me with* but loving friends and
customers.

Ans. They that tarry long at the wine, are drunkards in Solomon's dialect.
Pro. 23. 30. He that drinks to much for his purse, too much for his calling
and occasions, too much for his health and quiet, of body or mind; he that
drinks more for lusty or pride, or coveteousnesse, or fear, or good
fellowship, or to drive away time; or to still conscience, then for thirst; is
a drunkard in Gods account, whose law extends even to the heart and affections
Mat. 5. 28. And know this that you shall give an account, for every Idle penny,
and hour you spend; and for every cup of drink, you spoil, or wast.

Besides, little do you know what will be the event; for of all other sins
this sin, (and coveteousnesse, which I take to be the maine root, or cause
of it in you) increases with age. Nor did I ever know one once fallen into it,
ever get out of it. Which makes St. Austine compare it to the pit of Hell; out
of which there is no hope of redemption. I confess, a drunkard may have many
good purposes to forsake his sin; as I have known some both purpose and strive
against the same, yea detest, and bewail it; yea indent with himself, and his
friends to relinquish it; but never knew one get the mastery of it. For let him
but meet a companion that holds but up his finger, he follows him as a fool
to the stocks, and as an Ox to the slaughter house; having no power to
withstand the temptation. Oh the difficulty of disposessing, a drunken devil.

And no marvel; for (besides, that by a long, and desperate custom, they
turn delight, and infirmity into necessity; (so that without wine, they are
sick, having by a kind of frequency made other men's physic their natural
food) And bring upon themselves such an insatiable thirst; that they will as
willingly leave to live, as leave their excessive drinking.) Wine takes away
the heart, Hosea 4. 11. Yea, drunkenness beastiates the soul, and spoils the
brain, overthrowes the faculties and organs of repentance. Again, by it the
spirit is quenched, Ephesians. 5. 18. and the body of sin with its lusts
strengthened. If the Devil comes in, the Holy Ghost will go out; and then
what should hinder a man from running head long to hell?

When the belly is filled with wine, Satan may stamp in that heart, the fowlest
sin. But lust will admit no denial Pro. 23. 29 to 35. You shall rarely see a
man continent, that is not abstinent. I need not tell you, how Satan, and those
two ungracious daughters prevailed with righteous Lot when he was drunk;
though he never intended either drunkenness, or incest. Nor how your
predecessor fell into that sin of adultery; for I dare say, (and you will not
deny it) that his drinking, was the maine and only cause of his drabbing; which
has been the case of many noted professors that I could name.

And take heed, (for I fear it exceedingly) least God give you over to
adultery, as you give your self over to drunkenness* Nay, has he not told
you already what he will do (if you continue to provoke him) by what he has
done? As why has he given you over to this sottish and sordid custom, of
resorting to, and consorting with these base places and persons, for seldom or
never does God give any of his over, to this more then brutish sin: but some
particular provoaking cause went before it. 2 Samuel 21. 1. Shall I guess what
that cause is, from what I have observed in others of your temper? mind it
seriously, for I shall go near to strike that vein, from whence arises all
your distemper. God has endowed you with strength of brain, sweetness of
nature, and other eminent parts (great blessings I grant being well used, but
if the mind do not answer, they were better mist: for these (especially the
first) not seldom prove by accident, strong bars to keep the owners out of
heaven. 1 Cor. 1. 18. to 30.) and this has made you proud, even to the
dispising of others. Yea, parhaps to depend more upon your gifts then the
givers aid. And to stand more upon the praise of men, then the favor of God. 1 Samuel 15. 30 John 12. 42. 43. Whereupon he has left you in some measure, that
so you may see your nothingnesse, and your need of him: And be forced to
confess, that self confidence, is pride without wit. And indeed experience
has taught all humble christians, that confidence in God does only support us:
and that without him; we are like Vines unpropt, which on the earth do craule.

And this has ever been Gods manor of dealing, even with his own. Witness
Adam, Sampson, Salloman, Asa, Hezekiah, James and John. Yea if Saint Paul begin
to be exalted some such messenger of Satan shall soon be sent to take him
down again, 2 Cor. 12. 7. Of if Peter but once dream, that he is not as
other men; Christ will soon humble him with the shame of his misdoing. Mat. 26
33. 34. 72. 74. And seldom does pride speed better. Neither can there be a
worse sign, of ensuing evil, then for a man in a carnal presumption, to be
puffed up with an opinion of his own abilities. And how justly does God suffer
that man to be foiled; purposely that he may be ashamed of his own vain,
self confidence.

But thus has God dealt with you, yet your eyes are not opened, your heart is
not humbled. Yea, he ^ath gone further with you, for whereas your reputation
has been more cared for then your God; and ^ll was well, while you were well
esteemed; is not your good name at the stake, and your former fame, ^ost
woefully blasted by keeping such company? (in which religion also suffers) yea,
have you not irre^^verably lost your credit? for an evil report, (like an
unruly spirit) once raised, is hard to be conjured ^^wne again. And a man's
good name, is much easier kept then recovered. And has not your pride,
ori^^nally procured it also; I mean from God, though your conforming to this
leude and scandalus custom, has occasioned it from men. Has not self
conceitednesse broken your credit? for as our heavenly Physician knows there
is no Plaster like this to pull down proud flesh: So he has accordingly
decreed, that while we think well of our selves, others shall never think
well of us.

And the same method he uses himself, for the more lowly we are in our own
eyes, the more lovely we are in Gods; and the more despiseable in our selves,
the more acceptable in him. Oh that we could be but as lowly, as we are
unworthy.

Thus the Lord has spoken to you once, twice, and that in an easy, and
familiar Scripture phraise. Yea, he has pulled away his hand from you, and let
you fallen two stories from what you were not many years since. Yet you neither
hear him, nor take notice of his departure. What are you turned fool, is
wisdom departed from you? Or would you have Jezabels fare? be dashed in
pieces, and that for ever, would you be let run on like Absalom; whose chief
pride lay in his hair, and that became his haulter. Look to it for God will
first or last, make you know your self if you belong to him. And at the next
bout, cast you down to the very ground, and if that will not serve, one foot
shall slip into Hell; that it may be a means through his blessing, to further,
and forward you in the way to Heaven, as it fared with the insestious
Corinthian; Cor 5 5. 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7, 8. I mean he will either lay upon you
some sore affliction, or let you fall into some other foul sin, viz.
Adultery, Murder or the like, though none so likely as adultery Remember what
I say, for besides the near affinity betwixt drunkenness and whoredom, how
many proud men have been healed by the shame of their uncleanness; how many
drunkards by a rash blood shed, etc. So one Devil being used, for the ejection
of another, for God can (and not seldom does so) make of the foulest Scorpion,
a Medisen against the sting of the Scorpion. Neither do proud men says Saint
Austin, loose so much by their falling: as they get by being down: their
repentance being true and sound. As the examples of David, and Peter prove, for
of the two, to be a Pharise, is worse then to be a Publican.

But as there is no rule so general, which admitts not of some acceptions: so
this does not always hold good, for whereas thousands have been brought to
repentance, by their sin and the shame of it: as not seldom does the
Gallows it self, produce this blessed fruit; you have rarely seen a strong
brained Ioab, or cunning A^hittophell one jot bettered thereby. As what one
states man or pollititian, such as the Earl of Strafford, the Arch Bishop of
Canterbury and the like, can you nominate: that (when God has culd them out,
to make them public examples of his justice here) have been truly humbled by
the Axe or Haulter? I confess, I have in such a case strong hopes, that God in
great mercy has brought them to the bar here, that their souls might be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 5. 5. But having studied the point,
I find more in it then so: for should such men glorify God, in acknowledging
their clear sight, and wisdom which they and others have so magnified for
cleerenesse, to be mere blindness, and darkness, and ignorance ^their
Religion, Superstition, etc. they should loose the reputation of wisdom, and
of brave men be reputed base. And rather then they will stoop so low, they
will hazard what shall follow: for to them even Heaven and Hell, are but
uncertainties.

And what is the cause of this their folly? but their wisdom (As the act of
seeing is as well hindered by too much light, as by no light at all) Thy
wisdom and thy knowledge they have perverted thee says the Prophet Isaiah
Chap. 47. 10. And how should it other? for the wisdom of the flesh is enmity
against God. Romans 8. 7, 8.

But least this should not satisfy, observe further who they were that
believed our Saviors preaching: that were converted, and saved by him. Not the
Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees: who were matchless for their wisdom and
knowledge, and that in the letter of the Scriptures; but the common people whom
those great Clerks despised, and held accursed. Alas they were too wise to
go to Heaven, or to believe in a crucified Savior, so verifying that of the
Apostle, Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools. Romans 1. 22. And
making good that charge of our Savior, who called them four times in one
chapter blind, and twice Fools. Mat 23. 17. 19, 24. 26.

And as it faired with them, so Saint Paul found it to fair with the wise
Sages among the Gentiles; whom the preaching of the Cross, was mere
foolishnes; 1 Cor. 1. 23. And the same in Saint Austin time, for Julian the
Pelagian could deride that holy Father: that he had not the wise Sages nor the
Learned Senate of Philosephers on his side: but only a company of mean trades
men, and handy crafts men, of the vulgar sort, that took part with him.

And wherein does our times differ? How many worldly wise men have you known
sinceerly religious or to submit to the simplicity of the Gospel, in conforming
their lives thereunto. How many that have forsaken Lands, Liberty, Livings,
creadit, or other their worldly immunities to follow Christ? Or that have been
any whit zealous for Gods glory? in promoting the best things, and opposing the
contrary? very few I dare say, in comparison of meaner judgments. No, they
scorn to be singular, or counted presize: Or indeed so simple as Abraham, who
believed God upon his bare word, thought it were against reason, and obeyed his
voice in sacrifysing that son, wherein lay all his hopes, without disputing
the matter. Or Saint Paul, who when God sent him on an unlikely, and unwellcome
errand: did not communicate with flesh and blood, but yielded obedience without
further dispute. Gal. 1. 16. No, God must give them a reason of the case,
before they will yield to him their ascent. And were it not so, Why should the
same Saint Paul say? Not many wise men after the flesh are called, but God has
chosen the foolish things of this world to confound the wise, etc. 1 Cor. 1.
26, 27, 29. Or why should our Savior say? I thank thee O father, Lord of
heaven and earth: because thou have hid these things from the wise, and men of
understanding, and have revealed them unto babes. Mat. 11. 25. Luke 10. 21. So
that lay all together, and it amounts to this: More hope of a fools being
reformed, then of theirs that are so exceeding wise. John 9. 39. Pro 26. 12. I
confess there is a possibility of their being as wise for heaven, as they are
for this world: but then they must submit to Saint Paul's council. 1 Cor. 3.
Let no man deceive himself, if any man among you seems to be wise in this
world: let him become a fool, that he may be wise: for the wisdom of this
world is foolishness with God. verse 18. 19. Let him deny his own carnal
reason, submit his wisdom to Gods, and esteem nothing folly but
disobedience, nothing silly that is not sinful, nothing true wisdom, but
that which is done according to the rule of Gods word, and tends to his
glory* our neighbors well fair, and the furthering of our own salvation, and
then he shall be wise indeed. Deuteronomy. 4. 5, 6. Even as that which is on our left
hand, will be on our right, let us but turn our selves.

Nor is it more the cause of Lust, then of all other sins: as history, and
daily experience proves. For drunkenness as one fitly terms it, is the root
of all evil, the rott of all good.

Wherefore not only hate it, as the most prodigious, foul, and filthy feind:
but shun the company of all such, who in any measure, are adicted to it.

Neither account them friends: for who so will be the friends of such, make
themselves the enemies of God. James 4. 4. And of all enemies, they are the
deadliest; as being traitors to the soul who endeavor, as much as in them
lies to slay the best part eternally.

As for their kindness, those cunning Hypocrites, never intend so ill; as when
they speak fairest. Nor can you keep too far from their flattering, and
Syren-like-aluerments. For by their kind words, they will so work upon your
yielding nature; that you will not be able to deny, until they alimulat you to
their own customs. And their company is so infectious, that they will work a
consumption of your virtues; and wast them from an ounce to a dram, from a dram
to a scruple, to a grain to nothing; before you be aware of it. You know how
it faired with Peter, falling but once into the company of Christ's enemies; and
if such a Cedar as he fell, the very first time; what probability is there of
your standing? when you are daily conversant with such, yea worse; for this let
me asure you.

Temptations on the right hand, have commonly so much more strength in them
above the other; as the right hand has above the left. Satan wins not so much
by battery, as by treachery. When all the Philistems could not with their
strength bind Sampson: Dalilab did it with her subtilty The Devil did not
appear to Christ with threats, but with fair promises of honor, pleasure,
profit: whence the Italian thinks himself, upon the point of being bought
and sold; when he is better used then he was wont to be, without manifest cause.

Satan and his instruments, like a flattering Host; may promise good cheer, but
the reckoning paies for all; and he that compares the welcome with the
farewell, shall find he had better have fasted; for if we swallow the bait, the
hook will choke us.

But to escape their aluerments, requires courage to deny the requests of a
seeming friend. For what but a proud, ignorant, and timmorus bashfullnesse.
makes men thus miserably sin against God, and wrong their own souls. It is
nothing but want of courage, that makes many a drunkard One principal means
to fill Hell, is loathnesse to displease; whence it is that the fearful, are
placed in the forefront of that damned crew: who shall be cast into the lake
of fire and brimstone Revel. 21. 8.

I confess bashfullnesse and modesty in some cases, are very commendable: but
it is an ill modesty, that hinders a man in the way to bliss. And a great
indiscression, to fear more the blasts of men's breath, then the fire of Gods
wrath, For what is this other, then with the fool, to leap into the water,
for fear of being drowned in the boat? And he that has either wit or grace,
will rather fall out with all the world* then with his maker, then with his
conscience. Yea, a magnanimous Christian, will loose his life, rather then the
peace of a good conscience. And indeed, it is pity that ever the water of
Baptism, was spilt upon his face; that cares more to discontent the world,
then to wrong God.

But as touching their dislike, who may you thank for it but your self? in
beginning such a custom; for if you had denied them at first, they would never
have expected it afterward. Yea, they would have honored you the more, for
your refusing; as my self and many others can witness, out of grounded
experience. But since you have proceeded thus far, there is only one way to
avoid it; Resolve to drink with none, and then none can take acceptions.

But to resolve is nothing, except you pray (and that earnestly) for divine
assistance; wresting wholly, and only, upon God for strength and success.
Neither is that enough, except you also use the means; that is, as Joseph no
sooner heard his mistress say, come let us lie together, but he left her, and
fled away: so if you but hear them say, come let us drink together; be sure
to leave them though without taking your leave of them. Entertain no parlie
with such, for there is no disputing with Satan or his deputies: When Castles
come once to a parley, there is great fear they will yield. Satan desires no
more then to be heard speak. As what think you? If that old Serpent and
Sophister, did so easily persuade Eve by himself, and Adam by her; to believe
what he spoke, though they had heard God himself say the contrary immediately
before: what hope have we to stand out, being so extremely degenerated? If
they in the state of innocence, when they had wit at will, and their reason at
command; found him too hard for them, when they fell once to argue the case
with him, how much more too weak shall we find our selves? that are as we are,
and when our own flesh is become our enemy, and his cunning Soliciter. It is
not safe to commit a little Wherry to the Seas violence, much less to put flax
to fire, or a match to dry powder. A stick that has once been in the fire,
much more a Torch newly extinguished; being forthwith put to the flame, will
soon be kindled again.

Ob. But by slighting them, I shall lose all my customers; and others will be
glad to humor them, for all trades men do the like, both in City and country,
would you have me undo my self, that have nothing but my trade to live by?
this were to make my self scorned, and derided of all.

Ans. Are you convinced in your conscience, that to drink without thirst, to
loose your time, to spend your money, to wast the good creatures, to disgrace
Religion, to harden them in their wicked practices, etc, is evil, and
displeasing to God? (for I hope you deny not the Law to be a rule for us to
walk by, and square all our actions; as do some Antinomians; who take the
ready way to pluck up all holiness and piety by the roots.) If so, it is
easy to determine; for as this only evidences a good conscience, when the
maine weight which setts the wheels of our hearts on work, is the conscience
of Gods commandment, so that which is absolutely evil, can by no
circumstances be made good. Neither is the least evil to be adventured one,
for the greatest good which comes by accident. Neither say that it is a small
sin, for admit it were so comparatively, yet even the least sin in its own
nature is not only mortal, but rests unpardonable: so long as it is willingly
committed, and excused or defended. And such have no good consciences, that
dare gratify Satan in committing the least sin, or neglect God in the
smallest precept. Will any eat poison, because there is but a little of it?
And what says our Savior? He that is faithful in that which is least, is
faithfnll also in much: and he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in
much, Luke 16. 10. He that will corrupt his conscience for a pound, what would
he do for a thousand. And one sin (were it but one,) keeps posession for
Satan as well as twenty. Neither will God allow those things in his own
children, which he may permit in strangers.

As for that common, and sottish excuse of others, or every one does so,
therefore of necessity I must now and then drink with them: least they count
me rude and uncivil. It savors so much of ignorance, and unbeleife, that I
hope none who are conversant in the word, will offer to aleadge it; Well may it
become blind worldlings, who have no other rule but custom, example, and their
own will to walk by* but its very unbeseeming a beleiver. Yet least this
plea, should find place in your thoughts, (for the heart of man is deceitful
above all things.)

I answer; Gods precepts, must be our only presidents. Yea, if your heart be
not wicked, custom and example will no more sway you, then it does others of
Gods people; who shine as lights in the midst of a crooked generation. Yea, you
will redeem the time, because the days are evil. Ephesians. 5. 15. 16. If grace
do bare sway in your heart and not the love of the world: you will not make
the badnes of the times and your calling, a cloak to excuse your conformity in
drinking, and wasting your precious hours wickedly; but rather a spurr to
incite you, to be so much the more careful not to be swayed with the common
stream.

And as for their good, or evil report, were your eyes open to see this
deepnesse of Satan, whose Agents they are, and what their aim and endeavor
is; you would count their dispraise an honor, their praise a dishonor.

Lastly, As touching the loss of your customers, and undoing your self if you
should not be sociable with, and pleasing to them: I would feign know? whether
you believe Gods word? If you do, read the 28. chapter of Deuteronomie Mat. 6.
25. Psalm. 37. Mark 10. 30. Acts 17. 25. 1 Pet. 5. 7. together with that of
Paul to Timothy; Bodily exercise profits little, but Godliness is profitable
unto all things; having the promises of the life that now is, and of that which
is to come. 1 Timothy 4. 8. If you do indeed believe these and many the like
scriptures to be Gods word, take his word: at least try whether he be worth the
trusting. Who has said I will not fail thee neither forsake thee. Heb. 13. 5.
6. Shall I (for your better encouragement, the honor of my Lord and Master, to
justify the truth in this behalf, to discharge my duty, etc. though I hazard
the imputation of a fool) speak what I have experimentally found? Yes, I will
become a fool in this my present boasting, for ye have compelled me. Time was
that in serving the Common wealth, I gained in a lawful, and laudable way five
hundredth pounds, per Annum if not a thousand, all losses, and expenses
defraied; but being unthankful and becoming vain in my imaginations; not
once intending (by reason of a foolish and dark heart) to glorify God with my
substance: what I earned, God did blow upon, and it was put into a bag with
holes, Hag. 1. 6. 9 For my estate rather lessened then increased; and thrice
happy for me, that it fell out so: for I had utterly perished in my soul: if
I had prospered in my estate, for this brought me on my knees, and humbled me
to the very ground: made me reform what so ever I conceived might displease
God, (as touching the Sabbath and the like) and make vows, of new and better
obedience: so far as he should give me grace, and likewise indent with him,
that in case he should bless me with a conveniencie, that I might not be a
scorn to the world: I would return to him the tith of all mine increase; as
he should be pleased to direct. Whereupon for sundery years after, though my
means of getting failed, and to the eye of reason my necessary expenses, were
far more then my gettings: God did so bless and prosper me: that I purst up
two or three hundredth pounds a year. Which to me appeared miraculous: for no
reason could be given of this his mercy, but his mercy: and O the depth. I
speak it before God in Christ, who knows that I lie not, my conscience also
bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost; that I speak it only to Gods glory,
whose goodness constraines me, though I could have spoken as much, of that
reverend Divine Mr. Wheatly; and many others that I have converst with. And why
all this? but to verify what the Lord speaks by the Prophet Haggai 1 and 2
Chapters -- Which I pray read at your leisure. So that when all is done, giving
and loosing, rather then sinning, is the way to grow rich. Pro. 19. 17. and 22.
9. and 28. 27. Mat. 19 29.

And in reason; If rising ^early, going to bed late, and eating the bread of
carefulnes will not make rich, without Gods blessing upon it Psalm. 127. 1, 2.
much less will drinking do it. And what a base, and unworthy thing is it to
think, that God will let us be loosers by our serving of him. Indeed an
ancient acquaintance of mine, working to Gentlemen (who would have their Boots
brought home on Sabbath day mornings) for some years together durst not break
that no less wicked then common custom; though it was much against his
judgment: for fear of loosing them, and undoing himself. But at length he
gathers courage, and resolves rather to displease them all, then anger God and
his conscience as he had formerly done. Whereupon, no less then threescore of
his best customers forsook him; which in all probability would prove his
undoing. But he lost nothing by it; for contrarily from that day, he began to
thrive in his estate; which he could never do before. As his wife, friends,
and servants did averr after his death, and are still alive to witness.

(...) you should not only loose your customers, but undo your self by
refusing to drink with (...); what then? will you therefore with Demas,
forsake Christ to embrace this present world?

(...) then possible, that if God should give you riches, they would do you
hurt, and prove your (...): That it would prove like the putting of a sword
into a mad man's hand, for not seldom, as we grow (...) in temporalls, we grow
poor in spiritualls. Well might this ad to your content, but it would endanger
(...) soul. You are Gods Patient, prescribe not your Physician; be not wiser
th^n he.

^he Nurse knows better then the Child, what is good and fit for it. and
indeed no man would be more miserable, (...) and pity upon the gross
misopinions, and misprisions of others. Romans 9. 3. John 4. 28. 29. And what
know thou O man, whether thou shall save thy brother. 1 Cor. 7. 16. 2 Timothy
2. 24. 25. For a word seasonably spoken, (God blessing it) like a rudder
sometimes steeres a man quite into another course. Yea, how many have I known
to bless the time, that ever they were plainly dealt withal. And certainly
there could never be such bowsing, and quaffing, and whiffing, and healthing,
such reeling, and staggering, and stabbing, (both with tongue and hand) where
the Gospel is so gloriously taught: if men were but so happy, as to meet with
timely and faithful admonition. But this is the misery, that which worldly men
call discretion, has eat up all true wisdom, and devotion.

Imprimatur.

John Downame.

FJNJS.

