A Copy of Quaeries, OR, A Comment upon the Life, and Actions of the Grand
Tyrant and his Accomplices; OLIVER the First and last of that Name, not unfit,
nor unworthy of thy perusal.
COURTEOUS READER, J presume to present thee with some Quaeries come to my
hands not long since, which were Intended to be presented to the Parliam^nt (in
1657 then Sitting; but the time then being so malevolent and the chief subject
of them, being then in his full power and Tyranny, that neither the Author nor
Printer durst publish then, unless they minded wilfully to cast themselves
upon his Mercy, which all men knows what that was. There have come forth
several papers of Quaerees of late; but not any of them in this kind. If these
which J now publish do not please thee (in a kind) sacrifice them to the Fire,
and seek out some better Wit to mend them; and both the Author, and Printer,
will give thee thanks.

Vale.
PRIMO, I.

WHether this present Parliament which is to do nothing but what OP shall
appoint, is to sit any longer then he pleases.

2. Whether all Votes must not pass in the House acc^rding as OP will have
them, whose will is to be the Law of this Parliament.

3. Whether the Lord Protector his going with the Tide to the House, do betoken
any good tidings, we shall hear from thence.

4. Whether his returning at high water back again, do not portend, that his
Prosperities are near their Ebb.

5. Wheither OP did not seem to Bugger the house, when he went into it the
Back way.

6. Whether such must not hear with OP his Ears, and see with OP his Eyes,
who can fancy those Nations to be happy, or believe any word he says.

7. Whether OP his short Speech to the Houses, were not on purpose, to
insinuate that (if his Friends) it would become them likewise to use but few
words; If his Foes, That he would yet be shorter with them.

8. Whether what the Lord Fines, who supplied what OP left unsaid, spoke with
his own, or the L. Protector's mouth.

9. Whether what the L. Fines (spoke with OP his mouth) He may not one day be
made to eat his own words.

10. Whether the L. Fines his Speech which began in Genesis, If the Game go on
(Par le Roy) will not end in the Book of the Kings.

11. Whether the Houses Snarling at their first greeting one another, may not
agree like Dogs at last.

12. Whether not Praying together (but Severally) they may be said to be of the
same Communion.

13. Or, God (for certain) not being amongst them, nor ever likely to be
(unless in Vengeance) howsoever they may pretend to seek him in mercy; in whose
Name is this Parliament met.

14. Whether OP doing all things with a Fiat, ought to have had Divine worship
given him; but that beholding all his works when they were done, he could not
say that any of them were Good.

15. Whether the bold Black smith, that does so Roundly Clinch the Lord OP and
his Parliament, would not also give him and them a remove, if he durst.

16. Whether those Parliament men's Wives, who lie languishing for want of their
Husbands, may not sue the Lord Protector for Delapidations, who has foreeably
taken their Members from them.

17. Whether those Members of the House of Commons, who questioned the Peerage
of the other House, may not also scruple at the Kingship.

18. Whether the Tears which OP wept, when the Protectorship was forced upon
him, were not like those of the Crocadile.

19. Whether Weeping at his Coronation, he will not be judged to shed the very
selfsame Tears.

20. Whether OP his Hat seemed too light for his Head; whether may not the
Crown be too heavy for it.

21. And should the Crown prove too heavy for his Head, whether may not his
head prove too light for his Shoulders.

22. Whether this Parliament though it met in the Metropolis will not sit upon
the skirts of the Nation.

23. Whether (like that of most Weddings) the first joyful day of this present
Parliament, will not be the forerunner of a great many years of Sorrows.

24. Whether the House ought not to Petition for some other Name, then that of
Parliament to be called by; since it is resolved by OP that no body in it must
dare to speak Freely.

25. Whether this present Parliament have not fair warning to sit close, who
have seen one Precedent to them, so foully thrown out of the Saddle.

26. Whether OP did not more then make good the old Saying, In throwing the
House out at the Windows, when with one blast of his Mouth, he blew Two whole
houses of Parliament out of Doors.

27. Whether OP his Godfather, and Godmother did not foresee that he would
love Mutton well, when they Christened him OLIVE-R.

28. Whether the Cuckolds Crest ought not to be quartered hence-forward with
the Lion and Unicorn; since the Royal Arms are now to descend upon the
Town-Bull of Ely.

29. As the Offspring of such a monstrous Parent, what are we to expect,
whiles that Line shall sway these Nations; but the Tyranny, Rapine, and
Oppressions of a blood Disloyal.

30. Whether are we not to Expect an Earthquake in England, when at the same
time, and in One person, both a King, a Tyrant, and a Traitor, shall Infest the
Throne.

31. Whether his Prognostics be true, who says, we shall have two Kings in
England before the 24.th of June.

32. Whether he that from a Copper has Raised himself to a Crown, has not
Brewed fairly.

33. Whether OP and Col. Pride, having been Brothers of the Sling, would not
Handsomely hang together.

34. Whether having been Brothers all along in Evil, and never likely to mend;
any Good may or ought to be expected from them. If every one had his right, and
the Devil his due --

35. Whether would CR, or OP, be the Elder Brother.

36. Whether it would not have been a considerable advantage to Col. Pride, and
Col. Baxster, had OP Knighting them, called the one Sir Thomas Slingsby, and
the other Sir John Thimbleby; for then they might have been Gentlemen as well
as Knights.

37. Whether Hell ought not to be removed out of Westminster into the City,
during this present Sessions of Parliament, since so many Devils from all parts
meeting in the House, It were to much to have two Hells in one place.

38. Whether all these Parliament men who frequent Heaven in the old Palace,
for the love of Plum-broath, and afterward upon a full Stomach, and against
their Consciences, vote down their Countries Liberty believe there is any
other heaven but that.

39. Whether Sir Thomas Pride's wife were Dubbis a Lady at the very pronouncing
of these words; Rise up Sir Thomas -- or not till after he had lain with her.

40. Whether a man might not cry Rub to him, who should say, that OP were an
Honest man, Though he has proved himself a very good Bowler.

41. Whether all Iourney-men, and Apprentices of the Gentle Craft should not
have Monday hence-forward, made a perpetual Holiday, Now that Cobbler Hewson,
is of the House of Lords.

42. Whether Cobbler Hewsons wife have not a considerable advantage of other
men's, whose Husband has one blind side.

43. Whether OP from the Hogswash of his Grain-tub, highly feeding now, upon
the Fat of three Kingdoms, have not picked up his Crumbs well.

44. Whether of such an Egg as OP, was ever likely to hatch a better Bird.

45. Whether Mardike, as the case now stands, be an English or French Garrison?

46. Whether Rainolds, White, and the rest did not wilfully Drown themselves
to escape Hanging.

47. Whether (if the Peace go on) Jamaica, or Mardike, is like to prove the
dearer Market.

48. Whether it shall not be Treason against the new Queen (though at middle
Noone day) to say, Jo^ne is as good as my Lady.

49. Whether the Ballat (of Jones Placket is tore out) be not to be burnt by
the public Hangman, when OP shall be proclaimed King.

50. Whether Contributions, Sequestrations, Excise, Imposts, etc. ought not in
some measure to be hereafter qualified now that so many Ioynters are lately
fallen to his Highness by the Death of his Mother.

51. Whether when the Fire raged so, in the Lord Faconbridge his Britch, for
the Love of the Lady Mary, the Devil did not blow the Bellasses.

52. Whether Her Grace of Richmond, ought not to be out of Countenance, as
often as she eats Pigge; for saying, That Mary Cromwell was the Foulest sow
in England.

53. Whether the Lady Frances in the choice of her Husband did not make a
Pockey Rich Bargain.

54. Whether the Lord Rich, having so Soundly Pepperd his wives Porke, may not
keep it as a Standing Dish for his own Table.

55. Whether he that should give his Pains to the Lady aforesaid, would not
be well paid for them.

56. Whether the said Lady did not intend to lie at Large and stretch her
Legs for it, who laid 200. Else of Linen upon her Nuptial Bed, in one pair
of Holland Sheets.

57. Whether, the said Lady will not prove a Chargeable piece, as to the rest
of her Appurtenances, who laid out 5 ^/^ 100 in only twelve Smockes.

58. Whether the Lady Claypold, managing the Master of the Horse, ought to have
admitted the Lord H. W. into his Saddle.

59. Whether it may be thought a disparagement to the Lord Claypolds
Horsmanship, That his Lady should still have Iadish Tricks.

60. Whether, Cromwell had he lived in Henry the Eights days, would not have
given him A Hem, for His Hate, and perhaps his Dog to Hold.

61. Whether this Cromwell and Henry aforesaid, when they have compared their
Notes in the other world, will not be good Company in Hell together.

62. Whether we shall not now, have Halcion days, when OP is turning King
Fisher.

63. Whether it may not be hoped, that the Lord OP will at last turn
Cavileere, who grows more and more Kingly Affected.

64. Whether Kingship ought not to be beneath the Lord OP his Aims, the
proportion of whose Nose is more Imperial.

65. Whether the old Saying, That the Welcsh and the Irish are Brethren, will
not then more then ever be made good, when the Lord Richard Cromwell shall be
Prince of Wales, and Ireland, under the Stepter of his Brother.

66. Whether the Nations are to expect any Good from OP, who was never Good to
any body but himself.

67. Whether the House of Lords, be not therefore called the Other House, and
not the Upper House; because there is not one right Gentleman of it.

68. Whether most of the Members of the former Parliament, having been Cuckold
(according to Harry Martins sense) The Lord OP has not called now -- just such
an other House.

69. Whether if all those must be Lords, who are called to Sit in the other
House, we may not without offense to OP, say, The Devil shit Lords.

70. Whether, we may not now justly hope the world will mend, when so many
Cobblers and Tailors are of the two Houes of Parliament.

71. Whether, by way of Subsedy, or Loan moneys, are not to be forthwith
Raised to discharge the bills of Fare at Whitehall, since OP having lately
Increased his Family, by the Accession of the other House.

72. Whether OP seizing all men's Estates, may not give Flourishing Liveries to
his Varlets.

73. Whether, when Charles Stewart comes home again, Sir Robert Tichbeurne
will not be a true Lord Non-such.

74. Whether Sir John Bacster the Thimble-maker, who can hardly write his own
Name, be of any fitting Capacity, to be made Earl of Cambridge.

75. Whether, when the Lion Advances Sir Thomas Pride who is playing the Calfe
(in aspiring to the Title of Essex) may not be called in Question, for killing
the Kings Bears.

76. Whether, when his Horses ran away with him in Hide Park, to have been out
of the Coach-box, did not wish himself in Alderman Atkins Breeches.

77. Whether, Phaetons Fate together with that Great Deliverance, ought not to
have been a fair admonishment to OP to desist from his Rash undertakings.

78. Whether, the Roman Catholic and old Protestant, being both cried down,
we shall have any, All, or no Religion here in England.

79. Had his Name been Simon, and not Hugh; whether might not OP have been
Highly suspected for Popery, who is wholly of Peeters Religion.

80. Whether to be in Heaven it self (admitting he believed there were a GOD)
Hugh Peter's would change Masters with his Brother Simon, or rather indeed --

81. Whether Hugh Peeters Master would not Crucify, Simons again, should he
come as man within the verge of his Power, who not only persecutes his Church,
but is himself, a Tiberius Nero, -- and wants not Bradshawes, worse then
Pontius Pilate.

82. Whether OP, Securing and Imprisoning so many Honest men, and good
Christians, do not intend, to let Hell loose and Reign Devil himself.

83. Whether these pitiful over-ridden Nations will ever dare to say, A Turd
in OP his Teeth, till he has made them Shit as small as a Mouse.

84. Whether it shall bear an Action, to say. That any one, or all the Members
of the Houses are Knaves, since OP, has called them so before Us, -- or rather
--

85. Whether OP calling them by Writ to Discern and betray their Country, have
not given it, under his Hand they are no less.

86. Whether this present Parliament, though through Paced ought not to take
heed of Stumbling, since it has so Collerick a Rider.

87. Whether those that light OP to Bed, do not hold a Candle to the Devil.

88. Whether he that Portraied the Earl of Essex at Shit, with this Motto
over his Head; You Fight, you Shite, had not a right Opinion of his Valor.

89. Whether those Castles which OP began to build in the Air, when he
Designed first to take St. Domingo, will be finished by this present Parliament.

90. Whether, if OP (as he has long since boasted he would* should pull
down the Pope, He would not set up Hue Peeters in his Place.

91. Whether OP his Lease being almost out at White Hall, it is not time for
him, to set a Bill upon his Door. And whether those, who have lately entered
upon the Parliament houses are to be only Tenants at will, or have taken it
for any certain Term.

92. Whether all, or such only of this present Parliament, as are not Lawfully
begotten into the houses, by the Voices of their respective Counties do not
sit there, as OP his Bastards.

93. Whether by way of Admonition to this present Parliament, not to prate
themselves into a second Proemonire, should not cause that old Adage to be
fairly written over the Door of the houses.

Stultos ac Turdos sibe malum cheer: Or, Emblematically thus, to Animadvertize
them. That the Nose of this present Parliament, confronting the mouth, --
Whether it is not an Ominous Representative of the Ugly face the House must
needs have, whilst OP shall quite out-Nose the Speaker.

94. Whether the Nose of this present Parliament being too big for the Mouth,
all the Members are not in a snotty condition, since the old Saying is, that
Seldom comes a Better, when OP is gone, whether will not the Devil come in
his Room.

95 Whether, the Heir of OP, his Successor, if the General peace go on, may
not turn Ward to Charles Steward in his Fathers life time.

96. Whether, he that writ upon the Door of an house of Office; Here are
Fartes to be let, would have let them for nothing, or would he have sold them.

97 Whether an Jrish man would not sooner have shit in his Trowses, then come
near to the Door of that house on which was written --

Here are Farts to be let. 98. Whether a Welsh hand Granado, that is to say a
Cockledemoy in fitrup, or an English Bumcrack, will more startle an Irish man.

99. Whether, the Julian and Gregorian Accounts are not to submit to the
Olivarian, whose Arithmatick takes 17. or 18. months Contribution from us out
12. in the Year.

100. Whether, the Premises considered, we do not Live in precious times.

101. Whether, upon the Account aforesaid, does he give us Large measure, or
make us pay for more then we have.

102. Whether, since the Mountains brought forth, was there any thing hatched
so Ridiculous, as this other House.

103. Whether, the first day of OP his Kingship, may not be the last of his
Prosperity.

104. Whether from OP who was always a Tempest in his Life, we are to expect
any thing, but Inundations at his Death.

105. Whether, when OP is Crowned King, we ought not to have Copper money
again.

106. Whether, when OP his Coin comes abroad, every body that hates him in his
Place, will not be glad to have his Picture in their Pockets.

107. Whether, OP forbidding Gaming, at the Ordinaries, did not fore see that
they would play with his Nose which every chance of the Dice would set at Stake.

108. Whether, the fairest Cedar of Great Britain, having been cut down at
the Root, by OP, some Branches thereof, may not yet spring out, to choke the
Glory of so Barbarous a Triumph, by putting a Spoake into the wheels of his
Chariot.

109. Whether, OP for these Nine years past and upwards, having blown the
Coals of Rebellion and Sedition, not only at home (but in all Parts abroad)
may not see some Sparkles, then, by the turning of the wind, set fire on his
proper House; when the Germane Eagle shall build her Nest upon the English
Oak; Whether will OP with all his Dawes and Pyes betake themselves.

110. Though Van was forced to fall to the Rere, when Blake became Trumpe at
Sea.

Whether yet, the Hogin Mogins, may not shuffle the Cards again, and play a
latter Game, at Logerheads with us, is the question.

111. Whether, the Pope also through his Influence on the Peace, which will
spoil all our Markets in Flaunders (though threatened long since, by OP) may
not have the first Fling at his Plum-tree.

112. When all that are truly Generous Englishmen, shall be awaked out of the
Letargie they have lain in (under the slavery of a long continued Tyranny) by
the Apparition of CHARLES STEVVART their lawful King --

Whether like Shadows before the advanced Sun, or light Chafe before the
Winds impelling it; will not OP, and all his Followers Retrograde Seek out
corners, where to avoid his Radiant eyes, and even for fear of his just
Vengeance hang themselves.

The End.
Printed in Vtopia, that shall be 1659. To be sold by the Haukers at St.
Magnus, and Pye-Corner.


