A COPY Of two vvritings sent to the PARLIAMENT. The one entitled Motions
for reforming of the Church of England in this present PARLIAMENT: Most taken
out of Irenaeus Philadelphus. THE OTHER A Humble PETITION unto the PARLIAMENT,
for reforming of the Church of England: All taken out of the holy Scriptures.

NEHEMIAH 13.14. Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my
good deeds that I have done for the House of my God, and for the Offices
thereof.

PSALM. 137, 8, 9. O Daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed: Blessed shall
he be that repayeth unto thee thy reward, which thou have rewarded unto us.

O blessed shall he be, that takes and dasheth in-peeces thy Babe against the
Rock.

Printed in the Year MDC.XLI.

The humbly Supplication of sundry of his Majesty's Faithful Subjects, who
have now along time been constrained to live as exiles abroad, or to endure
other greevious Persecutions at home, for bearing witness to the truth of
Christ, against the corruptions of Antichrist, yet remaining in the Church of
England.
To the Honorable and High Court of Parliament:
CRaving pardon upon our knees for our boldness, we most humbly beseech you
to hear us a little with patience.

What DAVID spoke in his own defense, when his elder brother charged him with
Pride and haughtiness of heart: 1 Samuel 17 28,
Is our answer now unto all such as shall lay upon us the like accusation:
what have we now done? Js there not a cause? Sundry CAUSES there are which
have moved us in all duetifull manner to become instant suitors to his
Highness, and to you in the Cause of Jesus Christ.

1. 1: Cause of our Petition.
The great hope which his Majesty has given of much good to be done through
the mercy of God, by your means in Church and Commonwealth.

2. We take our selves bound in conscience to speak at this present: Fearing
least otherwise through our silence, 2: Cause.
the Motions which some have made, might prove hurtful and perilous both to
Church and State. How far the Motioners are from speaking according to the
law and to the testimony, and seeking to have things reformed in the Church of
England, Esa: 8, 20
agreeable to the Pattern of the new Testament. We shall show in our next
Petition. Only two things we desire, may be here considered, as being the
special drift and maine of their Motions. First, in the whole there is much
self-seeking: For to what end is it motioned to have the Parish-ministers
raised up to an equal height (as it were) of power and authority with the
Bishops? But that they and the Bishops together (keeping from the people their
Rights and Liberties in the Gospel) may equally LORD it, and do what they
please, without control. But our hope is that the PARLIAMENT, Psalm: 122.8.
being men in whom the Lord has putt wisdom and understanding, will for
their Brethren and Companions sake, yea and for their own souls sake too,
prudently foresee the evil, and prevent the Motion, and not put authority
into their hands, who will be (if they have it) as great persecutors of the
Saints, as the Prelates formerly have been; and so instead of one Lordly and
Domineering Bishop in a Diocese, we shall then have one in every Parish, and
in some more, to oppress and suppress all such as walk up to their light,
more closely and conscionably in all Gods ways then themselves: We know what
we speak, and we speak no more then what we have had woeful experience off,
and can make good by proof.

The next is their mixing of Heaven and Earth together: Motioning for a
discipline, which is a very hotchpotch, a gallemowfry; compounded of Episcopie,
Presbytery, and Popery, thinking (in likelihood) to please all sides, by
framing (like the Samaritants) a worship of sundry religions. But the Lord
sees their halting, Mal. 1, 14.
and will one day reward them for it, in their own bosom as they have
deserved. Cursed is the deceiver, which has in his flock a male, and voweth
and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing.

3. Cause.
A third CAUSE moving us to Petition, is in regard of you who are our
PARLIAMENT MEN, What Paul said to Agrippa, we say to you; we think our selves
happy, because we shall answer for our selves this day before you, whom we
know to be expert in all customs and questions that are amongst us. In what a
forlorn and desperate State our Kingdom was come unto, before you came
together, we are all very senceable off. And howsoever many true Causes
thereof, have been already discovered by your deep wisdom and diligence:
Notwithstanding give us leave to add this unto the rest: That because the
glorious Scepter of the Lord Jesus, has not been hitherto advanced in our
Land as it should have been; our blessings have been the fewer, 1 Samuel 2, 30.
and our crosses the more. Them that honor me (says the Lord) I will honor;
and them that despise me shall be ligh^ly esteemed.

And how far it shall please God to go forth now in the work of reformation
by you, we know not; But this we know, if you altogether hold your peace at
this time, yet shall enlargement and deliverance arise unto the Kingdom of
Christ from some other place. And truly just it will be with the Lord, to purge
away such dross and filth of the scarlet whore, with the blood of the Nation,
which through your neglect shall be left in the Land. Zach. 1, 14. Psalm. 2.
For thus says the Lord of Hosts, I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Sion
with great jealousy; and the Nations which will not kiss the Son, and come
under the sweet and easy Yoke of the Gospel, he will break them in pieces
with a red of Iron. Oh that you would look but to former PARLIAMENTS, and
consider how their Statutes and Acts made about Religion, have occasioned
afterward sore troubles in the Land. And why? But because they were not made
conformable to the will and Testament of Jesus Christ. And what better success
may we now expect, unless looking beyond State Policy, and carnal reason,
there be a full closing with God in the truths of the Gospel. Prove. 21, 30.
There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord.

We therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels,
beseech you to mind the necessity of a right and full reformation. For if your
care and strivings tend this way, then shall the Earth yield her increase, and
God, even our God, shall bless us.

4: Cause.
Our 4. and last CAUSE of Petitioning, is, for Sions sake the Mount of the Lords
holiness, and the place where his Honor dwells. That which we desire
herein, is, that removing the Hierarchy and devised Leiturgie, Christ true
Ministry, Worship, and Government, may be by Act established. But if it be
doutfull to you whether our request be lawful. Then our humble supplication is
that it will please his majesty and the PARLIAMENT to have the difference on
both sides tried and examined. as either that our Propositions and reasons may
be given to our opposites to answer, and their arguments (if they will set down
any) to us, to answer by the word of God. Or that a conference may be had in
writing, and the questions being first agreed upon, and the arguments and
answers advisedly set down till both parties have fully said, (laying aside
all by-matters) and so the whole exhibited to the PARLIAMEMT, to judge off. Or
any other course which by you shall be thought meetest, for the finding out of
the truth by the sacred Scriptures.

And if this may not be granted us, then our last request is, for our return
out of exile, and releasement out of bands, and that we may be suffered in
peace under his majestiss government within his dominions (which we had rather
then under any other whatsoever) to walk in the faith of the Gospel,
according to the testimony of Christ: we carrying our selves in all loyalty
peace and godliness as becomes the faithful subjects of the Lord. And this we
hope will not be denied, seeing strangers are suffered which differ (as well as
we) from the Hierarchy and worship there established, we being his majesty's
natural subjects.

But howsoever it be, we will not cease to pray for you. And that the Lord
will be favorable to the land, and take away his wrath from it.

Motions for Reforming of the Church of England in this present PARLIAMENT:
most taken out of Irenaeus Quae. 1, ^^ether ^renaeus be a fit man to be
followed in the point of discipline; seeing none of the Fathers in his time
^rote (...) more corruptly in the thing then he.
Philadelphus.
MOTIONERS.
1. THat since the first reformation in King Edwards days was rather of the
doctrine the of the discipline, and of the rites that were palpable gross,
which yet were retained with a purpose they should be removed afterward, and
for to unloose by degrees the fast hold to the Romish Church: now since every
Protestant is well informed of the change made in religion, that whatsoever in
the religion or tending to the disturbing of the peace of the Church and the
maintayning of heretical doctrines be redressed.

2. That in that great work of Reformation, which is of moment and consequence
far beyond the settling of civil affairs, there be appointed by both the
Houses a Committee or Convocation, or meeting of 40 or 50 English Divines; Men
that were not of the late Convocation, and such as be unpartiall, learned, and
incorrupt in their lives and Doctrines, such as Dr. Usher, Arch. B. of Armach,
Dr. Williams Quae. 2, Archb. and Bb. and men conformable to the Popish
Ceremonies be fit to have special hand in framing a settled platform of Church
government.
B. of Lincoln, Dr. Precheaux, Dr. Twisse, and the like. With 10 Scots
Divines, to which be called 8 Foreign Divines, of the most learned and famous,
Such as Rivetus, Primrose, Moulin, and the like, who may treat and agree upon a
settled plat-forme of Church Government,, suitable to the Monarchy of Great
Britain, which ought to be ratified and enacted by Parliament.

3. That the Churches Discipline being established, a National Synod be
convocate that may frame a Confession of Faith, and reform if need be Quae. 3,
whether such as doubt, whether it be needful to have the English Letturgie
reformed, be not corrupt men, and unfit to motion for reformation
the English Leiturgie, that without exception it be received through out the
K. Dominions; to which Synod may be called a competent number of Foreign
Divines. However, since so many have been so earnest of late to be in Charity
with the Roman Church, that they have been uncharitable to the Reformed
Churches.

Let Cannons be made in the Synod, and an act of Parliament for Union with
other Protestant Churches in matter of Doctrine. And all the firebrarnds of
these late innovations in the Church, that have made us a laughing stock to
the neighbour-Churches, be sharply censured, if not cut of as banes of the
Church; Especially the first raysers of Altars. Such as Heylen, Pocklington,
and the like. Qu 4, ^hether (...) B^, ^ting ^em (...) ^rke, de^^t ^ot m^^
^eater ^ith^ent.


4. That the pleasures of our late Sovereign King James, of blessed memory,
be executed, who sent his Divines to the Synod of Dort. That the Church of
England afterward should be bound by the decisions made there, and that
Cannons be made conformable to the determinations of the Divines in that Sinod.

5. If Bishops be retained Quae. 5 whether men wishing the Bb. to be retained,
are not herein enemies to the State, and seek to hinder reformation
(as it is to be wished) there be no more distance between a Bishopp and an
ordinary minister; and that Bishops be no more called Lords, and that they be
enjoined to preach dilligently as the duty of their place and office is.

6. That if some sit in Parliament, It must be upon woll Sackes and have no
more priveledge by their office, and places then the Judges the Lord Keepers
and Treasurers, and that a certain number of deputies from the national Sinod,
Quae. 6, whether ministers more then other private men, ought to have either
place or voice in Parliament.
whether Bishops or others be assisting both in the higher and the lower house,
for delivering their advises upon any claws of acts that may entrench upon the
Churches privileges, or are contrary to doctrine or good manners.

7: That the principal defect of our dicipline and the spring of all errors in
doctrine and practice which is the want of Synods, be amended, and herafter all
vissitations of Bishops be Synods, as by right they ought to be and according
to the Ancient constitutions: as it appears by the Quae. 7. Whether Ministers
in the Apostles time used to pay any such thing.
Synodals which ministers pay at every visitation, and that at Synods al Parish
ministers, be sitting and covered and have their voice and the discussing of
all the affairs of the diosesse, and making orders which may not afterward be
altered by the Bishops, but only by the national Metropoliticall Synods, which
for the the public union; is to be kept once every two years, neither was the
Church of la^^ without Synods but in ENGLAND. Quae. 8. Whither Synods as (...)
are ^w, have ^n any ^here but ^l^e, that (...) since the ^postles (...).


8. That Bishops be Censurable by the Synod whether it be provintiall or
national. Quae. 9. ^f the me^^s of a ^tionall provin^l Synod corrupt (...),
and ^ke Ca^^ a^inst the ^ith, who (...) cen^re them ^r it.


9. That an other course be taken for maintaining ministers and Bish: then that
by tithes, Qu. 10. Whether it ^^more ^cessary, ^at there ^t some ^rse ta^ to
have ^full and ^d mini^rs, then (...) the ^tena^ce ^he un^full and (...) me^ in
(...).
which still causes suites between the parishers and ministers, the patron and
incumbent keeps the minister from his Church while he follows suit to London.

And bring the holy ministers into obloquie and contempe, but an honorable
Competent proportion, be appointed for the maintaining of each parish. Minister
by the parishioners, and rated by the Parliament or Synod. And that the
distinction of Deanes, Archdeacons, Parsons, Curates, Vicars, and Readers, be
taken away, but let them be co^q^^ls and more or less in number in one parish,
according to the greatness or wealth of the parrish.

10. That as Bishops in height of Jurisdiction and place by act are to be
shortened, so an act be made from henceforth that all ordinary ministers which
are too much villified, Quae. 11 Whither many of the ordinary Ministers, are
not so vile as that there is no honor nor respect due to them.
shall have more respect and honor then heretofore given to them, and that the
ministers sons be preferred to the fellowship of Colleges

11 That the power Qu. 12. Whither it ^e not meet that they should first show
by whose authority the keys belong unto them before the Parliament do grant
such a thing.
of the ecclesiastical keys such as belongs to the Bishops and ministers be
restored to them according to the ancient constitutions of the primitive
Churches, and that there be no Censure past upon the Clergy or people from
Synods, Bishops or p^esbiteryes, but such as is spiritual, and that usual
penalty of imprisonment and fines be rendered again to be righ^ owner, viz: to
the C^vill M gist^ate, and the abuse of excommunications and the Oath
Ex-Officio abolished. Qu. 13. W^^her other abuses as vile a^ these should not
be abolished also.


Qu. 14 Whither it be not better that the Parliament should present to the
King, all the Bishoprics in the land, and he take them into his own hands.
12 That the Clergy of the Diocese shall choose their own bishops, or
present to the Kings Majesty two, who may choose of them whom he pleases, and
that every parish be patron of us parish, and have the presentations of as many
ministers as the floocke requires, to the Synod or Bishop.

13. That instead of chancellours Officials, Apparators, Registors, and such
like grasshoppers, there be some Qu. 15. Whither it be not fit that these
Motioners do prove the thing to be lawful, before the Parliament do grant it.
lay Elders that may sit in provintial Synods, and have their voice in matter
of Discipline and Church government, and that in a national Synod: there be
some Laymen likewise appointed by the Parliament.

14. That a better course be taken for the providing for the poor, and that
both ministers Qu. 16. Whither their motion be not against the Word of God, Act.
6.2.4.
and the chief of the Parish shall oversee how Churchwardens do dispose of
the Churches Treasury, and that they be not permitted under crime of Sacriledg
to spend it upon themselves, and that every month they give account of
whatsoever is received and laid out.

Quae. 17. Whither it ^e imagi^able that ^y Mini^ters, if ^alled of God, as ^as
Aa^on, would propound ^o rain a thing to a Parliament
15. That the griping of Church duties and burial Costs, exacted oftener more
rigerously of the poor then the rich, be restrained, and that the ministers be
contented with his yearly sallary, performing all the branches of his Calling,
as Baptism, Burying visiting the sick, without any further recompense but such
as is tendered to him.

Quae. 18. Who must ^resent the Parish Minister, ^f he be a delinquent (...)
most are
16. That hereafter none be cited by the Synod Presbitery or spiritual Court,
without the knowledge of the parish minister, who ought to present the
delinquent and have his voice in the Censure.

Quae. 19. Whither it be meet that such men as complain against the rigor of
Bb. should be suffered to impose what they please upon others.
17. That it be not more in the power of Bishops to impose what they please
upon the Clergy, with such Rigurous penalties as they have lately used for
the oath of the sixth Cannon.

18. That the fountains of learning, Cambridg and Oxford be purged from
superstitious rites and Popish Doctrines; and Orthodox Readers be provided.

A humble Petition unto the PARLIAMENT, for the Reforming of the Church of
England: all taken out of the holy Scriptures.
PETITIONERS,
1. HOwsoever it cannot be denied, but some things in King Edwards days were
well reformed. Nevertheles many gross corruptions were still retained, both in
the Church-lyturgy, discipline, ministry, and the very constitution of the
Church it self. The which errors and evils have been by sun dry learned
Cartwright, Brightman, Parker, Vdal, Baines, Bates, Gilbie. Fenner, Ames
Bastwick, Laiton, and others.
and Godly men so plainly discovered, as that every sincere professor of the
gospel, is now fully informed of the necessity of a chang: And are humble
PETITIONERS that whatsoever shall appear to be antichristian and unlawful,
may by thus present Parliament, be suppressed, and the ordinances of the
Gospel set up, to the honor of Jesus Christ, and the perpetual peace both of
Church and common wealth.

2. whereas Jesus Christ Lord and King of his Church, has set down unto us in
the new testament a settled platform of Church governm: M^ 18, 15, 16, Ephesians. 11,
12, Hebr. 3, 2, 3, 4, 1 Timothy ^ 15, Esa. 9, Act. ^ 40.
which is unchangable, best, perpetual and common to all Churches, Mat. 2^ 18,
20, 1 Timothy 1^ 16, A^ 1, 3, G^ 1, 8, 9, Iud. 3, Rev. 14, 9 12, and 2^ 18, 19.
and to which all churches and people must be subject, and not to any other
devised by man whatsoever: And in this respect suitable (howsoever some
otherwise untruly insinuate) to the Monarchy of great Britain, and to all
kinds of Civil estates in the world. It is therefore again desired, that the
same be ratified and enacted by this present Parliament.

But if it be thought fit by both houses that there shall be a committee or
convocation and meeting of some divines to treat of the thing: Then our request
is, that some zealous and godly ministers who have bee^ forced to fly out of
the Realm, by reason of the Prelates persecution, may be called home. Such as
are known to be impartial learned and vncorrupt in life and doctrine. Men that
have not maintained the open profanation of the Lords day, neither are ignorant
or unsound in the point of Church government, as are our poopishly ceremonious
divines,

3. We hold that there is not only need, but that it is of absolute
necessity, that the English Liturgy be taken away because the same is a devised
service Ex: 20 4, 5, Ioh. ^ 24, Rom^ 8, 26, 27^ Iud. 24, Mal. 1, 14. Col. 2.8,
27, Gal. 3, 18.
. Romish stuff and termed by King James the English Mass, and fitly so
because it was culled and wicked out of the popish danghill, the por^^is and
vile Mass Book full of all abominations; and peaced and patched together
without reason or order of edefication.

And this being abolished, our further request is, that this present PARLIAMENT
will take such order as that no stinted or devised forms of prayer be by any
national Sinod imposed (specially upon the ministers of the Gospel) in any
part of the Kings Dominions: but as the Lord has furnished them with spiritual
gifts Act. 1, 24, 28, 1 These. 5, 17, Romans 8, 26, 27, 1 Timothy 7, 17, Neh. 2, 4,
Exo: 14, 15, 1 Pet. 2, 5
, even so according to their present need and occasions; they may have their
freedom always to pray in the spirit, through the help of the holy Ghost.
For if it had seemed good to the Apostles the last Penmen of the holy
Scriptures that any stinted forms or number of words should be repeated or
read out of a prayer book, they would certainly have given commandment for
the practice thereof but we find no prescript Liturgy in their writings nor had
the primitive churches any such thing, what ever the Jews fable of Ezra and
the Papists of St. James and St. Peter.

And as we like it well, that this PARLIAMENT should seek for union with other
Protestant Churches in matters of true doctrine; so also to accord with them in
all acts of their lawful discipline: and chiefly in this, that they do not
force and compel people to become members of the Church, but let every
congregation consist of a free and voluntary people, and as for such as are
profane worldly and wicked, let them be kept out of the Church, until they be
called of God unto repentance and faith in his promise.

4. Howsoever we agree unto the Articles of the Synod of Dort, in all points
there treated and concluded against the Aruntians, yet we se not (by any
warrant from the word of God) that it is lawful for the ecclesiastical
officers of many churches to meet together, and by joint authority to make
constitutions and laws and to impose them upon all churches. 1 Pet. 5 2, 3, 2
Col. 5, Iam. 3, 1, Rev. 14 9, 10, 11,


This tyranie and usurpation we beseech the Parliament to prevent, and not to
grant any liberty to convocations or Synods to make Ecclesiastical Cannons for all Churches, but let every particular congregation (as a special prerogative
wherewith she is endued by Christ) be free from such bondag and burden.

5. Howsoever some wish that Bishops be retained in their places, yet sure we
are, that this PARLIAMENT shall very much glorify the son of God, if as
plants which the Father never planted they now root them up: For since the
Prophets Apostles and Evangelists were taken away from this world, there are
not any other lawful Bishops or Church Governors then Bishops or O-verseers
of particular Churches. Act. (...) 28, P^ 1, 1.


6. And seeing they are no Ministers at all in the Church of God: but have and
do usurp the name and seat of the ministry. Their calling being
Antichristian and contrary to the word of God, 2 T^ 2, 3, 4^ 1 Pet. 1, 4, I^
22, 25 26, Ep^ 8, 11, ^ 13, R^ 9, 3, and 11, 17, ^ 14, 9, ^
we therefore most humbly beseech this present PARLIAMENT: not only to take
from them (as they justly deserve) all Civil authority: but also to do to
them as our Savior dealt ( Ioh. 2.) in whipping out the buyers and sellers and
money-changer. For of a certayntie, they might better come into the Temple,
then any Metropolitan or Diocesan Bishopp into the Church of God: yea and had
more necessary use, but they had abused holy things and made it a den of
thieves.

7. The principal defect of discipline and the spring of all errors in
doctrine and practice is not the want of Synods but rather of the knowledge of
the Scriptures, For the testament of Christ shows us no Provintiall,
national, imperial and mother like Church having sundry meetings or
assemblies and special Pastors over the same. Neither has Christ Jesus
subjected any Church or Congregation of his, to any other Superior
Ecclesiastical jurisdictinn then unto that which is with in it self: So that
if a whole Church or congregation shall err in any matter of Faith and
Religion, no other Convocations, Societies, Combinations, or Assemblies
whatsoever have (by any Commandment from the Lord) power to censure, punish,
or control the same; but are only to admonish them in a brotherly way, and so
to leave them to the immediate judgment of Christ. For Bishops therefore and
Parish Ministers to come together to discuss of the affairs of the Diocese,
make orders, and decide and determine among themselves the cases and
controverses of sundry congregations. It is a practice which the Apostles never
knew, Syon has not heard of it, Jerusalem which is above will not acknowledge
it, but as it began with the oppressing the only lawful polity of the Church,
so the use of it hitherto has been the cruelst and most ambitious tyranny in
the world. And therefore the Parliament is humbly desired not to countenance so
injurious and unjust a course: but to stand earnestly zealous for the precious
liberty and privilege of the Saints, the which Christ has purchased for them
with his own blood.

8. As the Scriptures Act. 20 28. Romans 12.8.7. Phil. 1.1.
acknowledge no other for lawful Bishops, but such only as stand ministers to
some particular Congregation, so neither do they acknowledge any
Ecclesiastical censure rightly pronounced against them, unless it be done by
that Church, of which they are members, Mat. 18 17.18. 1 Cor. 4.5.12.13. 2
These. 3.6. with Lev. 24.14.15.16 23. Josh. 7 11.25.
and by which they were elected into Office.

As for deposition, excommunicaton, and the like, done by Synods, whether
Provincial or National, it is but of the Earth, newly devised, an addition,
an institution, an ordinance of Kings and Princes. And this needs must be so,
because Christ has not placed this power any other where, but in a true
visible Church. Now there is no true visible Church, but a particular
Congregation, Company, or Assembly of men, ordinarily joining together in the
true Worship of God. As for other Convocations, Synods, Societies,
Combinations, etc. the Title of a visible Church is improperly, and untruely
attributed unto them. Of this judgment are our English best Divines. D. Ames
Eng. puritne. Baines Dioces. p 12. repl. to Down. Offer for conference, p. 2.


9. The right course for the due maintenance of ministers, is by the free and
voluntary Contribution of the Church: 1 Cor. 9 7.14. Gal. 6.6. 1 These. 5.13. 1 Timothy 5.15. with Pro. 3.9.10. Number. 18.8.32.
Not that Parliaments or Synods should impose any certain rate or sum upon
any man, how much he should pay, but this is to be left unto the Church, for
every one to give according to the blessing which he has received of the
Lord. And so Christ has ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel, and not by Popish Lordships and Livings, or Jewish Tithes
and Offerings: As for the Law of Tithes, it did cease with the change of the
Leviticall Preisthood. Heb. 11.
It is therefore humbly desired that the Land and revenewes of the Prelates and
Clergy yet remaining, may now by this Parliament 2 Co^ 31. D^ 17.1^ 19.20.
Esa. 19 23. Ps. 3.4. Ez 20.4, 5 Pro. 3 10. Rev 17.1^
be taken away and converted to better use. As those of the Abbyes and
Nunneries have been by former Parliaments: Their original being one and the
same.

And further it is desired, that not the distinction alone of Deanes,
Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars, and Readers be taken away, but their offices and
places also: Rev 11.18.14.8.^ 10.12 16.10 and 17.18. and Chap. 2 The 3.8.
in regard they are not elected, called, or ordained, according to Gods Word;
but their entrance into the Ministry is by a Popish and unlawful vocation,
strange from the Scriptures, and never heard off in the primitive Church.

10. No doubt but it is the office and duty of this present Parliament, to
cherish and protect the true ministers of Christ; Esa. 23. and 3 10.12. D^
17.14 19, 20 Ps, 2, 11.12 72, and
and on the other hand to suppress and root out by their authority all false
Ministers, and unlawful Ecclesiastical functions whatsoever. 2 C^ 29, and
chap,


Therefore our humble Request is, that all Popish Offices, entrance,
administration, and maintenance, with their Names, Titles, and Privileges, may
be now abolished, and that every Christian Congregation may have freedom to
enjoy the public ordinary ministry of Pastors, Act. 17. 2^ Rom, ^ 7, 8 and
Teachers, Elders, Deacons, and Helpers; as those only which Christ has
appointed in his Testament, for the feeding, governing, and building up of his
Church. And as every Congregation has power Act. 5. and 23. and 22.2 with 1.15.
in Christ to take unto themselves meet and sufficient men into those offices,
so (the Hierarchy, and their dependant Offices being all unlawful and
Antichristian, in the height of jurisdiction and place be taken away,) an act
of Parliament be made, that from henceforth these true Ministers which are too
much vilified, shall have more honor and respect then heretofore.

11. Howsoever the Papists do place the power of the Keys in the Pope, the
Protestants in the Bishops, and the Reformed Churches in the Presbytery,
Classes, and Synods: notwithstanding according to the Apostolic institution,
every particular Congregation 1 Co 5.4.11.12, 13. and Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 16.3,
2 Cor. 8.19. Act. 18.23. and 15.23. and 18.22.
has power in and for it self immediately from Christ, to exercise
Ecclesiastical government, and all other religions Ordinances: So that the
power of Excommunication is in the body of the Church, whereof the parties that
are to be cast out, are members. And so far is the power of Ecclesiastical
K^yes from belonging solelie to Bishops and Ministers, as that they themselves
stand under it. For the Congregation, which did elect and ordain them, may (if
the cause so require) depose them from the M nistery they exercise; 1 Timothy 3,
10. and 5, 22. Romans 16.16. Phil. 3, 2. 1 Timothy 6.3, 5. Eze. 44, 12.13 Mat. 18.16.
and if they remain obstinate and impenitent, orderly cut them off by
Excommunication. And this is a truth, so clear and manifest, viz. that
according to the ancient constitution of the primitive Church, the power of he
ecclesiastical Keys is given to the whole body of every Christian
Congregation, Ps. 122.3. Act. 2.47. Romans 16.2. Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.4. etc.
(and not to any member apart,, or to more members sequestered from the whole,
or to any other Congregation to do it for them.) As that the learned on all
sides, as Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists, Conformists, Non-Conformists, ancient
Writers, with the public Confession of all the Reformed Churches (what ever
their practice be) give Testimony hereto, as we have it in our hands to show,
if the Parliament be pleased to call for it.

12. That there ought to be no National, Provintiall, or Diocesian Bishops,
we have showed before: neither are Churches to be made by the bounds and
limits of Parishes, (for that is an ordinance of man, even the man of sin, and
contrary to the faith and order of the Gospel) but to consist of a company of
people called and separated from the world by the Word of God, Act. 2.39. and
19.9. Romans 1.6.7. and 10 14, etc.
and joined together by voluntary profession of the faith of Christ in the
fellowship and practice of the Gospel: and therefore no drunkards, no
whoremongers, no profane persons: at least, which are known, may be received,
retained or compelled to be members in the Church of Christ, Mat. 3.7. 2 Cor.
6.14. Rev. 21. ult. number. 15, 27, and 22, 15. Esa. 35.8 9, etc.
which is his body, whereof he is head, and his temple wherein he dwells by
his Spirit: but the House of God must be kept as near as it is possible, free
and clean from all polutions and prophanations whatsoever. And to this Church
Christ has given his power to choose and call into office among themselves,
such as are fit, without going to Synods or Bishops, with Presentations of any,
for that is but a humane device, and therefore by the Parliament not to be
tolerated.

13. That in stead of Lay Elders to sit in National and Provintiall Synods,
(an office that has no root in Christ's Testament) let it be appointed by the
Parliament, that every Christian Congregation shall have free liberty to elect
and ordain (as the Word requires) Governors, or ruling Elders: Act. ^ 28. R^
12.8. Phil. 1. 1 Timothy 17. Ep^ 11.12. 1 Cor. 28. n^ 12.24, 2^ Exodus 3^ 42. De^
1.13.
being men of life unreproveable, sober, gentle, loving, temperate: men of
wisdom, knowledge, and sound judgment: that may sit in the Church, to see
the Congregation holily and quietly ordered, discern between cause and cause,
plea and plea, and accordingly prevent and redress evils.

14. A better course cannot be taken for providing for the poor, then that the
Ordinance of the Gospel be observed: which is, that Deacons be chosen in every
Congregation Act. 6. 1 Timothy, 8.9. Ro^ 12.8. 1 Cor. ^ 28. Ph^ 1.1.
being men of honest report, grave, temperate, not given to excess, nor to
filthy lucre; let these gather and collect by the ordinance of the Church, the
goods and benevolence of the faithful, and faithfully distribute the same
according to the necessity of the Saints,

For Churchwardens, Sidemen, and Collectours, their offices are unlawful and
hurtful: unlawful because they are counterfeits of Gods true Officers,
namely, Elders and Deacons, also retain the mark of the Beast in part, as
fictions devised by men, and coming from Rome; hurtful, because they are
bound to most unlawful conditions, for necessarily either they must be
perjured, or sin grossly; as to present both Minister and people, if they be not
superstitious and profane: and thus they serve the tyranny of the Hierarchy,
and minister matter of filthy lucre to the Harpies of the Prelates Courts, in
so much that the more honest and better sort, avoid such places, as knowing
they cannot exspect any blessing or protection from God therein.

15 Touching burial of the dead, Gen, 23, 3, 4, 5, 9, 17, 18, 9, and 29, 21,
22, and 44 45. Luke 9, 60.
it is no branch of a Ministers calling, nor does any Church duty belong unto
it. For all prayers, either over, or for the dead, are superstitious and vain
no such thing was used in the Apostles time: neither do the Reformed Churches
practice the same. The like may be said of the celebration of marriage; Gen, 2,
2 23. Ruth 4, 1, 2, 9, 10, 12, 13. Ioh, 2, 1, 2, 3. Heb, 13.14.
it is no Ecclesiastical action appertaining to the Ministry, but civil, and
so to be performed. For Baptism as it is an ordinance of God: so it is humbly
desired that it may be purged from all childish and superstitious toys: and
that no infant be admitted unto Baptism, whose Parents (one at least) are not
members of some particular Church. For the visiting of the sick, seeing the
prescript service of it is taken out of the Masse-booke, we trust the
Parliament will take course to have the same suppressed. That so as it is Gods
will we should visit the sick, so we may do both his will, and work in his own
way.

16. For spiritual Courts so called, they are humane devises, Matthew, 28, 20.
with 6, 24 Ioh, 3, 35, 36, and 10, 4, 5, and 15 14, Rom, 6, 16. 2 These, 2, 3,
4, 8, Gal, 1, 8, Rev, 14, 4 2, 12.
presumptuous insolences, such as were never planted by the Apostles in the
Primitive Churches, but long after erected by Antichrist against God, and his
Christ, to the great prejudice and hurt of his Church, and the lawful
jurisdiction thereof. And therefore it is humbly petitioned, that as must
profane things, they may be by this present Parliament all rooted out, and
utterly overthrown, without hope of restitution.

Touching Citations by Synods and Presbyteries, with the knowledge of the
Parish-minister, and his presenting the delinquents, and having a voice in the
Censure, etc, This neither is to be found in the Word of God, and therefore no
Christian man or woman is bound to submit and yield obedience unto it. The rule
of Christ for censuring delinquents, is (as we have declared) that the sentence
and judgment of Christ be given by the whole Church, whereof the parties are
members, provided it be executed in a due manner; namely for sin, and that also
duly convicted, and obstinately stood in.

17. Our humble suit is, that it would please his Majesty, and this present
Parliament, that we may be suffered to live here in peace Ps. 41^ 1. Pro, 3 8,
9. Ez^ 6, 7. M^ 6, 10, ^ 2 Chronicles 19, 10. Psalm, 82 3, 4.
, professing and practicing the truth of the Gospel, without molestation,
either of Bishops, or any other, to impose what they please upon our
consciences, with such rigorous penalties, as they have lately used: we
carrying our selves as loyal Subjects, and leaving the suppressing,
abolishing, or reforming of the abuses that we witness against, to his
Majesty's and your discretion.

18. As it is very meet that all Schools and Academies be purged from
superstitious rites, Ps, 11^ 9, 99, 10^ 1 Samuel, 1^ 9, 10, 2 Kin, ^ 3, 4, 5. Mat,
1^ 51, 52.
and Popish doctrines, and Orthodox Readers be provided: so in special, that
Popish degrees in Theology, inforcement to single life Heb, 1^ 4, 1 Timothy, ^ 2.
in Colleges, abuse of the study of profane Heathen Writers, with other like
corruptions should be removed and redressed, that so they may be the Wel-spring
and Nurseries of true learning and godliness.

POSTSCRIPT.
THat we be not mis-understood touching Provintiall and National Synods; As if
we should condemn all use thereof: we have thought good to speak a word or
two, more fully in the thing. As to show out of Antiquity how ancient they are:
and what were the causes and grounds of their erection at the first: how far
they are lawful and necessary in the Churches of Christ. And when and how they
came to be abused. And this we will do in a very brief way: leaving a larger
discourse till a more convenient time. That there were no Synods (according to
the acceptance of the Word now amongst us) all the time that the Apostles
lived here upon the earth, but every particular Congregation practiced in, and
for it self all the ordinances of God: It cannot be denied without loss of
credit both to person and cause of the denyer, in the eyes of all reasonable
men Whitgift against T. C. p. 180. 181. Bilson perpet. gover. cap. 15, p. 361.
Sculting hier. anar. l. 11. p. 134 Sutclif. discipl. c. 8. p. 353.
. If we come down from thence to Trajans time, which was about a 100. years
after Christ's Assention: we shall not find in any approved Author, Centur.
Meydenb. cont. 1. c. 4 cent. 6. 7. col. 591.
so much as the name of any such thing.

From Trajan pass we to Severus reign, Cent, 2, c, 7, p 137 135, Brig, o^
R^c, 12
which was about the year 195. and let the approved Auhours of that age be
read, and it will appear (as clear as the Sun at noone day) that the order of
government was still popular^ Neither was there any superior Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, above the independent power which every particular Church had in
it self.

Indeed between Severus and Constantines time, we read in Eusebius, Lib. 3. c.
22, and 5. c. 16.
Irenaeus. l. 3. c. 1. 2, 3,
Nicephorus, l. 4, c. 23
and other:: that neighbor Ministers came often together to confer of things
serving for the general good. But here let it be noted: 1. This they did of
liberty, and not of d^tie^, as if obliedged thereunto by any law of God.
Zipperus, l. 3. c. 7,
.2 It was a free for any of the brethren to be present, as for the officers.
Cyp. i, 1 Epist. 4.
3. Whatsoever they did at such meetings, the same was of no force at all, as
to be counted a Church ^ct or sentence, until the whole Congregation first
knew of it, and gave their free consent unto the same. Gregor, Nazia. in orat.
fun. de Patr.


This ancient coming together of Ministers and Brethren (call ye it a Synod or
Convocation, or what you will) we hold both lawful and necessary, the better
to pre^erve peace Parker Eccl. pol. pu. 329. 330.
with holiness, and when any dangerous errors are broached, for to ^uppresse
them. But at these meetings of Ministers of sundry Churches, they meddled ^ot
with Excommunication, Ignat. ad Philad. ad mag. Tral, Tertu. Apol. c. 20. Atha.
Ep, in pers. ad orthod. and Ep. ad Soli. vit, degrees. and Ep. con. Nicae. c. 9
Eccl. hist, Bas. Epi. 58 ad Elitiu^. Theo. l. 1. c. 19,
election, and ordination of Church officers: for all such things they left as
peculiar administrations to every particular Church: only if there were
Heresies broached, Cent. 2. c. 9, p. 159 160. 161
or some weighty point to be determined, every one ^ave his judgment and
advice, and afterward signified what was done to the Chur^hes, who had still
their liberty to receive, or reject what was before concluded.

And thus for the space of 200 or 300 years (as Brightman on Rev. cha. 12. p.
505. 506. edit. 3.
, Jacob neces. Resor. p. 57, etc.
, and others, have well observed) the Primitive purity of Church government was
not destroyed: neither had Satan as yet brought in Prelaticall and Synod^ll
pride into the Sheepfold of the Lord: but every Congregation was free, and
subject to no other Ecclesiasti^all jurisdiction, then unto that which was
within it self.

Indeed about Constantines time, and after; as Cyprian Epist. de lapsis, l. 4,
c. 4.
, Eusaebius l. 8. ^. 1.
, and Am^rose Com. in 1 Timothy 5.
testify: and which is also affirmed by Casaubon ad Card. Peron, obs. 4. p.
30. 31.
, Whitaker de Romans pont. cont. 4. p. 5.
, Mornaeus H^^. ^op, p. 37. 38.
, Brightman, Apoc. c, 2, p, 67.
and others. Men began to devise a new order and manner of gover^ing Churches,
as they thought fittest to agree with the times, and took away by little and
little, the independent power and government of particular Churches. And had
now their Councils and Synods to make what Canons and Laws they listed,
imposing the same (nolens volens) upon all Congregations, not permitting the
people to have a^y hand in the election of Ministers, excommunication, and the
like See Beza in res. ad tract. de minst. Evan. de grad. c. 22. f. 154. 155.
Synod, Laod. can, 13.
. And how^oever the government left by the Apostles to the Churches, was
rejected, under pretense to preserve the unity and peace of the Church
Duaraen. did. 8.
, and for the avoiding of schisms Field of the Church, l. 3. p. 157. 158. and
de visib. non. l. 5. c, 4.
, factions, and for the unrulinesse of the people Scvlting hierarch, anar, l,
11, p, 134.
, and to prevent other evils; yet whosoever will juditiously read the
impartial Writers of that age, he shall find that the corrupting at first of
Church government, was principally through the pride Greg, l, 4, Epi, 38.
and ambition of the Ministers, for beginning now to have some outward state
and means in the world, thought it a disparagement, that the Brethren should
be equal with them in the affairs of the Church: Chrysostom. in Mat, hom, ^4,
Hieron, in Epi, ad Gal, cvp, 4.
Much less could they any longer endure to be under their admonitions and
censures, how disorderly soe^ they walked.

Add to this another cause: viz. the negligence Hieron. n Esa. l. 6 c. 30.
and idleness of the people, also the number of unfit members which were daily
received, such as Chrysostom. in opere imperfect. hom. 44.
knew (...) what their liberty in the Gospel was: besides about this time the
civil Magistrat^ joins with the Innovatours and corrupters of Church
government, and under diverse threatenings, and severe penalties, commands
every one to yield and conform themselves to the sinful devices of their NEW
MASTERS.

Having thus briefly declared, what was the discipline planted by the Apostoli^
institution, See Cen. 5. ca. 9. de Synodis.
in all Christian Congregations at first, we have now only a word more to
speak to the Parliament, being in hand at this present time, with the
reforming of (...) Church of England.

Wise Politicians in their institutions of Government, do hold for an
infallible m^ime, that for to reform abuses and corruptions in States, a
better course cannot be ^ken, then to reduce things to their primitive
original. For as one truly says, Field of the Church l, 2. p. 49.
(...) first in any kind or sort of things is truest and best,

Now our humble request is, that leaving the MOTIONS of men's brain, you w^
look back to the Churches of the Apostolic institution, and from them take
yo^ pattern and platform to walk by, for so God teaches Mat. 28 20. Act. 1
3. 2 Timothy 1.13. Heb. 3.5.
you to do. And it is i^deed the golden reed, Rev, 11. 1. Eze. 41
which Christ now puts into your hands: saying unto y^ Rise, and measure the
Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship therein.

The authority of the Primitive Churches (says Gerson De vit, spirit,
) is above all Churches; (...) therefore it is not in the power of Pope,
Council, or Church, to change the doctrines and ^ditions delivered by the
Apostles.

Brightman Cha. 2. page 65. edit. 3.
on the Revelation has a singular passage to the same effect: T^ first
Government of the Church (says he) is common to all times and places: and it
is (...) permitted to be at the arbitriment of men to follow what way they
list, but that always i^forming a Church, we must have recourse to the first
beginnings: to the which as our only (...) we must call back whatsoever
strayeth from it: and that they are not to be turned and (...) according to the
crookedness and jarring sound of succeeding Churches.

Parker, Pol. eccl. l, 1, ca. 23. p. 59. and l. 3, page, 95, and 30.
in effect uses the very same expression. So Cartwright, Repl. to Whitg, l, 1
p, 25, 26.
and ^nolds, Confer. with Heart page, 195. 459.
yea and some Bishops too, as Jewel Defenc, Apol, par. 6, chap, 16, divis, 2,
p, 762,
and Bilson. Perpet, Govern, p, 3.
And Hooker Eccles, pol, l, 4, p, 1 Cont, Mart, lib, 4, cap, 5.
gi^ reason for it thus: the first state of things was best, and therefore it
must needs follow, customs, laws and ordinances, devised since, are not so
good for the Church of Christ: b^ best way is to cut off later inventions, and
to reduce things to the ancient state wherein at (...) they were. And this
agrees with Tertullians saying of old (with which we will end (...) Petition)
That is truest which is first, that is first which is from the beginning, that
is from beginning which is from the Apostles.

FINIS.

