A COPPIE OF THE BILL Against the xiij. Bishops, presented to to the Lords, by
the Commons, October. 25. 1641.

ENTITLED An Act for dissolving all persons in holy Orders to exercise
temporal Jurisdiction and Authority.

With the Names of the XIII. Bishops lately Impeached.

Whereunto is added the substance of a Letter presented to Mr. PYM, containing
very wicked and bloody Expressions.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN THOMAS, 1641.

portrait

Reader behold and pity the decay
Of this late great man, who the other day
Lived great and gracious in his Princes eyes,
But being fallen all people him despise;
Deplore his sad sat, pray that he may prove
As once on Earth, so great in Heaven above.
A Copy of the Bill against the Xiij. Bishops, presented to the Lords by the
Commons, October. 25. 1641.
Being entitled an Act for dissolving all persons in holy Orders to exercise
any Temporal Jurisdiction or Authority.
WHereas Bishops and other persons in holy orders, ought not to be entangled
with secular Jurisdiction, the offices of the ministry being of such great
importance that it will take up the whole man, And for that it is found by long
experience that their Intermedling with secular Jurisdiction has occasioned
great mischief and scandals both to Church and state, his Majesty out of his
Religious Care of the Church and the souls of his people is graciously
pleased, that it may be enacted, and by the authority of these presents, Be it
enacted that Archbishops or Bishops or any other person, that now is or
hereafter shall be in the holy orders; shall at any time after the tenth day of
November in the Year of our Lord God, 1641. have any suffrage or vote or use,
or execute any power or authority in the Parliament of this Realm.

Nor shall be of the Privy Council of his Majesty, his heirs or successors,
or Justices of the Peace of Oyre or Terminor, or Goal delivery, or execute any
temporal authority by virtue of any Commission, but shall be wholly disabled
and be incapable to have, receive, use, or execute any of the said Offices,
places, powers, authorities, and things aforesaid, and be it further enacted by
the authority aforesaid; that all Acts from and after the said 10. day of
November, which shall be done by any Archbishops, or Bishops, or other persons
whatsoever in holy Order, and all and every sufferage or vote given or
delivered by them, or any other thing done by them, or any of them, contrary to
the purport or true meaning of this present Act, shall be uterly void to all
intents, Constructions and purposes.

The Namet of the xiij. Bishops lately Impeached.
Walter Bishop of Winchester. Robert Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield. Godfrey
Bishop of Gloucester. Joseph Bishop of Excester. John Bishop of Asaph, William
Bishop of Bath and Wells. George Bishop of Hereford. Matthew Bishop of Ely.
William Bishop of Bangor. Robert Bishop of Bristoll. John Bishop of Rochester.
John Bishop of Peterborough. Morgan Bishop of Landaffe.
Together with William Archbishop of Canterbury, and others of the Clergy of
that Province, at a Convocation or Synod for the same Province, begun at
London, 1640. who contrived and made, and promulged, several Constitutions and
Canons, Ecclesiastical, containing in them diverse matters, contrary to the
Kings Prerogative, to the fundamental Laws and Statutes of the Realm, to the
Rights of Parliament, to the propriety and liberty of the Subjects, and matters
tending to Sedition, and of dangerous consequence.

The Substance of a Letter presented to Mr. Pym, on the 26. of October, 1641.
contai^ing very bloody and wicked expressions.
O Traiterous PYM, that betrayest thy King and Country, and subvertest the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom take this for thy reward, which if it does
not end thee, when God shall enable me to come abroad; without prejudice to
honester men then thy self, my dagger shall dispatch.

FINIS.

