TWO QVERIES worthy of serious Consideration, concerning the Gospel Faith of
the LORD JESUS the CHRIST once given unto the Saints, Matthew. 16.16. 1 Ioh. 5.1.
1 Qu. WHether that ministry, that preaches freely the Gospel faith, that the
Lord Jesus is the Christ; as the Apostle Peter did: Act. 2.36. Be not truly
orthodox.

I that am a loyal Covenanter for a pure Reformation in England, and Jreland,
according to the Word of God: maintain that they are truly Orthodox for these
reasons. The Word of Christ being the Judge of the controversy: John 12.48.

1. Because Jesus the Christ is the Rock; the foundation of the spiritual
house: 1 Peter 2.4.5. Which house are we: Heb. 3.6. vid. believers in Jesus the
Christ baptized, that continue in the Doctrine of the Apostles Ephesians: 2.20: and
in breaking of bred and prayer. Acts 2.42. Seeing other foundations no man can
lay save that is laid Jesus Christ: 1 Cor. 3.11. For their salvation in none
other: Acts 4.11.12. 1. Pet. 2.6. Esa. 28.16.

2. Because this is the primative faith; or confession that Peter made (upon
the rehearsal of the diverse opinions that went of Christ; Matthew. 16.13.14.) thou
art the Christ the Son of the living God upon which confession, Christ
pronounces Peter blessed. Blessed art thou Simon Barjona; flesh and blood has
not revealed this unto thee: but my father in Heaven.

To this Gospel faith that Jesus was the Christ whom Peter confessed; the power
of the keys were given: Matthew. 16.19. I will give unto thee the keys of the
Kingdom and what thou binds on earth shall be bound in Heaven etc.

And Peter communicated it to the whole Church, that had obtained like precious
faith in Jesus the Christ with him: 2 Pet. 1.1. Then they had the like precious
privilege to bind and looses as appears Matthew. 18.17, 18.

3. Because the confession of this Gospel faith that Jesus is the Christ, does
manifest and declare to the (...) that ask them. Whether they be males or
females; that they are borne from above of the holy Spirit: John 5.1. Whosoever
believes that Jesus is the Christ is borne of God. John 1.12.13.

Yea and taught of the holy Spirit: 1 Cor. 12.3. For no man can say (that is
confess as Peter did) that Jesus is the Lord and Christ, but by the holy
Spirit.

4. Because they that confess, that Jesus is the Christ (as the En^ did to
Philip) and are baptized manifest that they are borne of water and of the holy
Spirit, and are fit spiritual matt^r (liv^^y stones, that have received life
from Jesus the Christ living stone) to be received into the spiritual kingdom
of the Lord Jesus; John 5.5. Except a man be borne of water and the holy Spirit
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And as many as are baptized into
Christ have put on Christ. Gal. 3, 27. ( vidilicet by a visible profession)
that all the world may know whose disciples they are: Here it is said; John
4.1. The Pharisees heard that Jesus made; and baptized more Disciples, then
John: (he made them, that is he manifested, that they were his disciples) hear
baptism manifested Jesus to Jsrael at Jordan to be the Son of God: John 1.31.
compared with Matthew. 3.16.17:

5. Because it is the Gospel faith, that Jesus commanded his Disciples to
preach after his resurrection unto all Nations: Luke 24.46. Thus it behooves
the Christ to suffer, and to rise again the third day, 47. And that
repentance; and remission of sins, should be preached in his name amongst all
Nations beginning at Jerusalem 48: And ye are witnesses of these things.

6. Because there was no way revealed, for the poor trembling Jews, that were
pricked in their hearts at the preaching of Peter, for crucifying the Christ
Act: 21.36. to save themselves from that froward generation (who had killed the
Lord Jesus and their own Prophets) upon whom the wrath of God was coming to the
uttermost: 1 These. 2.14, 15, 16. When they cried out, what shall we do? until
they yield obedience to the voice of the everlasting Gospel; that the holy
Spirit speak to them, by the mouth of Peter; Repent and be baptized every one
of you in the name of Jesus the Christ for the remission of sins; And ye shall
receive the gift of the holy Spirit: For the promise is to you, and to your
Children, and to them that are a far off even so many us the Lord our God shall
call. And with many such other words he said; save your souls from this
froward generation. Then they which gladly received his word were baptized and
added to them three thousand souls: Act. 2.38, 39, ^0, 41.

And the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. Act. 2.47.

7. Neither is there any other way revealed by the holy Spirit in the
Scriptures for them who have lived in Idolatrous and superstitious times
amongst them; that have denied that Jesus is the Christ (whom the holy Spirit
of God calls liars, and Antichristians) that denies the Father and the
Son: 1 John 2:22: For in denying the Sons authority to be the eternal King
^n^ Prophet of his Church in all his outward administrations according to his
royal Commission: Matthew. 28:18, 19, 20. Mark. 16, 15, 16. Luke 24:46:47: in
admitting of members into his spiritual Kingdom; (though they own him their
eternal Priest that ever lives to make intercession to God for them: Heb.
7.25.) Because Christ divided, becomes no Christ to the divider. They (in so
doing) deny the Father, that sanctifies the Son, and sent him into the world:
John 10 36. and raised him from the dead, and exalted him to be Lord and
Christ. Act. 2:36: Eternal King and Prophet of his Church as well as Priest:
now when they through the Gospel ministry (which God that cannot lie has
promised to raise up again to prophesy before many people, and Nations, and
Tongues, and Kings, Revel. 10.11. Compared with Revel. 14.6. shall through the
inward work of the holy spirit be pricked in their hearts: (that they have been
in the number of them, that have persecuted Jesus the Christ in his members,
that have contended for the Gospel faith of Jesus the Christ: Matthew. 16:16:
Luke 24.46.47. 1 John 5, 1. once given unto the Saints: And for which cause,
the wrath of God is coming on all those false states (whom the holy Spirit of
God calls Liars and Antichristians, that deny the Father; and the Son; as I
have showed you before in a few words 1 John 2:22. Because in them is found the
blood of Prophets and Saints, and all that were slain upon the earth: Revel:
18:24: as once was of old in the Jewish state, which the Apostle Peter calls
a froward generation (which that Apostle exhorted the trembling Jews that were
pricked in their hearts crying out; What shall we do? to save themselves from:
and the Apostle Paul rendereth this reason: Because they had both killed the
Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and they have persecuted as (believers
baptized) and they please not God; and are contrary to all men: For bidding us
speak unto the Gentiles that they might be saved: to fill up their sins always
[For the wrath of God is] come on them unto the uttermost. 1 These. 2:15.16.

Qu. Matthew. 23.33, 34, 35, 36. So that the trembling cry out, How shall we
escape the wrath of God that is coming on us for consenting to shed the blood
of the Saints, and prophets that contend for the Gospel faith; namely, that
Jesus, who was crucified, dead, and risen, is the Christ; Act. 2:36:

Answ. Must not the Gospel minister (to whom is committed the word of
reconciliation; 2 Cor. 5.18.) preach unto them the everlasting Gospel; As
Peter, did to the inquiring Jews: Act. 2.38: Repent and be baptized every one
of you in the name of Jesus Christ for remission of sins: And ye shall receive
the gift of the holy spirit; For the promise is to you; and to your Children;
viz. to the Jews first; Act. 3.36: unto you first, God has raised up his Son
Jesus Christ sent him to bless you in turning away every one of you from your
iniquiries; Secondly, sent him to bless you first; in fulfilling the Prophesy
of Joel: Joel 2:28: In powering out his spirit upon your Sons, and Daughters:
And to all viz. flesh afar off; the remotest Gentiles, and even so many as the
Lord our God shall call: 39. v: And with many other words he must testify, and
exhort, saying; Save your selves from this untoward generation: 40: Seeing the
Gospel of Jesus the Christ is eternal: 1 Pet: 1.25. And whatsoever things were
written aforetime, were written for our learning; that we through patience, and
comforts of the Scriptures might have hope: Rom: 15.4.

Now so many as shall gladly receive (that is believe John 1.12:) this Gospel
of Salvation and arise and be baptized; shall be saved from the wrath that is
coming on them;

As Noah and his family were by faith saved in the arc from perishing by
water. Heb: 11:7: seeing the Apostle says: the like figure whereunto even
baptism, does also save us, ( viz. that believe) by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ: So. the Lord added daly to his Church such as should be saved: Act.
2:47.

8. Because none of what rank or degrees soever; can prove themselves Saints
by calling, and that intruth, they have a visible right to be admitted into the
spiritual house, even to the fellowship of Saints, in breaking of bread and
prayer.

1. Namely, until they have manifested their repentance from dead works; by
saving or seperating of themselves from those false states (whom the spirit of
God calls liars, and Antichristians that deny the Father and the Son: 1 John
2:23:) that persecute the members of Christ for contending for the Gospel faith
of Jesus the Christ: Math. 16:16: Luke 24:46: 47. 1 John 51 1. Once given unto
the Saints: (...) Saul, Act. 9. and Jaylour once did: Act: 16:24.

2. Until they manifect (to them that demand in) a reason of the hopes that is
in them by a belief of the heart; and a confession of their lips, that the
Lord Jesus, who was crucified dead; and risen, is exalted to be the Christ as
the Enuch did to Philip Acts 8.37.

3. Until they yield obedience unto the Gospel Commandment: Be baptized every
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins. Act: 2:38.
because it is written; He that says I know him (that is Jesus the Christ) and
keeps not his Commandments is a liar; and there is no truth in him, 1 John
2.4. Seeing these three principles of the doctrine of Christ; Are the way for
all that truly believe in Jesus the Christ, to take up, and walk in (as the
members of the Churches of Judea; which were in Christ once did, Heb. 6.1. 2.
before they were added unto the Church, to continue in the Apostles doctrine,
and fellowship, in breaking of bread, and prayer, Act. 2, 41, 42.

9. Because; there is no promise of salvation for any (whether they be males or
females) but for them only, that believe in Jesus the Christ, Act. 4.10, 11,
12. For there is salvation in none other.

10. Because there is no promise of pardon of sin for any persons: save only
for them that believe in the blood of Jesus the Christ, 1 John 1.7. the blood
of Jesus Christ his Son which cleanses from all sin.

11. Because no manner of persons whatsoever have aright to all; or any of the
promises, until they believe in Jesus the Christ, 2 Cor. 3.20. For all the
promises in him (that is in Jesus the Christ are ye: And in him Amen: Knowing
that till we are made one with Jesus the Christ by faith, Gal. 3.28.29. ye are
all one in Christ, if Christ then Abraham seed, then heirs according to
promise, v. 29. We are but strangers from the Covenant of promise; and without
hope in the world Ephesians. 1.12. verse 1.

12. Because no Son of the first Adam, has a spiritual right to any of the
creatures to be sanctified for his life: But as their life, and spiritual
intrest is restored to them through faith in Jesus the Christ, 1 Cor. 3.21. All
things are yours 22. Whether Paul or Apollos: or Caephas, or the world, or
life, or death; or things present; or things to come; all are yours; And ye are
Christ; And Christ is Gods; 1 Cor. 3.23.

13. Because there is no hope of the resurrection of the dead; nor of an
assurance of the eternal inheritance in glory; but through Faith in Jesus the
Christ; 1 Cor. 15.22. Ioh. 11.^5. Jes^^ said, I am the Resurrection and the
Life; he that beleiveth in the though he were dead, yet shall he live; And he
that lives and beleiveth in me shall not dye for ever, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5 verse.

14. I affirm, that no man (by what name, or title soever he be called) can
prove himself a faithful Teacher sent of God; unless he believe with all his
heart, and confess with his lips, that the Lord Jesus is the Christ, vid. the
eternal King and Prophet, and Priest of his Church, in things appertaining
unto his conscience.

First, I do conceive; that in this (all the learned and loyal Covenantors in
the Nation do agree with me) that Jesus the Christ, is anointed of God, to be
our eternal High Priest, that ever lives to reconcile us unto God, Heb. 7.25.
But the difference is whether the same Jesus the Christ is anointed, and
appointed of God to be our Prophet, Mat. 17.5. This is my beloved Son hear him;
And that in all things whatsoever he shall say unto us, Act. 3.22. So Moses,
and the Apostle Peter testifies, Deuteronomy. 18.18. the danger follows, if we hear
him not, our souls must perish. Act. 3.23.

Now Jesus the Christ says in the Scriptures of the New Testament, that
professing Faith and Repentance shall be baptized, Heb. 6.12. Act. 8.36, 37,
38. Act. 2.41. They which gladly received his Word were baptized.

But where does Christ say; that the Infant of a Beleiver, or the Seed of
Beleivers shall be baptized.

1. If any Teacher affirm they may, and have not a word from Jesus the Christ
to warrant what he says; he is a false Teacher, and by the Law h^ is accursed,
Deuteronomy. 18 20. But the Prophet which shall presume to speak a word in my Name,
which I have not commanded him to speak; even that Prophet shall die.

2. He is a lying Teacher; for he adds to the word Seed, or Infant of a
Beleiver; ^^at God has not added, Prove. 30.6. Add not thou to his word lest he
reprove thee, and thou be found a liar ye shall not add unto the Word which I
have commanded you, Deuteronomy. 4.2. If any shall add to these words, God will add
unto him all the Plagues written in this Book, Rev. 22.18.

3. He is a lying Teacher that comes in his own name, Ioh. 5.43. and God has
not sent him, Ier. 23.25. they cause my people to forget my Name by their
dreams; as their Father has forgotten my Name for Baal, 2.7. the Prophet that
has a dream, let him tell a dream; And he that has my Word, let him speak my
Word faithfully; what is Chaff to the Wheat, says the Lord, verse. 28.

4. (...) says; th^ugh it were himself, or an Angel from Heaven, that should
preach any other Gospel unto you, then that we have preached (that Jesus, who
was crucified, dead, and risen; through whom we that believe in his Name shall
have remission of sins, whom God has exalted to be the Christ) let him be
accursed, Gal. 18, 9.

Thirdly, the same Jesus, the Christ is anointed and appointed of God to be
our eternal King, and that his Commission shall be eternal, Matthew. 28.18, 19,
20. Mar. 16.15, 16. Luke 24.46, 47, 48. Now the Commission of King Jesus says;
such as believe the Gospel Faith of Jesus the Christ shall be baptized: but
Infidels, and unbeleivers are not to be baptized.

Now says Christ, these mine Enemies that would not I should reign (King and
Prophet in all my outward administrations, according to my Royal Commission
given me of my Father when he raised me from the dead, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. in
admitting of members into my spiritual Kingdom) bring them hither, and slay
them before me, Luke 19.27.

Hence it is, that Christ's sheep refuse to hear the voice of those false
Teachers, that refuse to obey the voice of Jesus the Christ, their King and
Prophet, Ioh. 10.4, 5.

1. Because they in denying the Sons authority to the eternal King and
Prophet of the Church, they deny the Father that sanctified his Son, and sent
him into the world, John 10 36. and raised him from the dead, and exalted him
to be Lord Christ, Act. 2.36.

2. He that honors not the Son as King and Prophet, honors not the Father
that sent him, Josh. 5.23.

3. They refuse to hear the voice of those Teachers, that preach for Doctrine
the commandment of men; because in so doing they make the Commission of Jesus
the Christ (their King and Prophet, Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20.) of none effect that
they may keep their own traditions, Matthew. 15.3, 6.

4. They are commanded to mark and avoid all ^uch as cause division contrary to
the Doctrine of Christ, that they have learned of him, Romans 16.16, 17, 18.

5. Yea to withdraw from them that teach otherwise; and consent not to the
wholesome words, even the words of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Doctrine
which is according to godliness, (...) 6, 3, 4, 5.

6. Yea from all such, as transgress, and abide not in the do^^rine of Christ;
they are commanded not to bid God-speed: For he that bids them God-speed is
partakers of their evil deeds, 2 Job. 9.10, 11.

If these things be so (as the holy Scripture hears record that they are,)
Resolve me then, I pray; And beseech, any that are truly godly, and learned,
judicious, loyal Covenanters, this following Quaere.

Qu. Whether it be agreeable to the Word of God contained in the inspired
Scriptures to silence, or inhibite any Ministers of Jesus the Christ for
preaching the Gospel Faith freely; Namely, that Jesus Christ, who was
crucified, dead, and risen is the Christ, Act. 2.36. Through whose Name all
that believe shall receive remission of sins, Act. 10.43. and maintaining
publicly with Apollo against all opposers; that the Lord Jesus is the Christ,
Act. 18.28. As the Jews of old cast the blind man out of their Synagogue, for
confessing, that Jesus was the Christ, Ioh. 9.22, 34.

Yours who refuses not to bear any Orthodox Ministry, that does believe with
all their hearts, and confess with their lips, that the Lord Jesus is the
Christ, 1 Ioh. 5.1. FRANCIS CORNVVEL.
Orpington in Kent, Feb. 14. 1645.
A Postscript.
NOw I know that the English Ministry, Tit. 1.16. profess that the Lord Jesus
is the Christ.

I do eanestly desire, that they would resolve me then, these two Quaeres.

Qu. 1. What is the everlasting Gospel; that Jesus the Christ commanded his
Disciples to preach to all Nations beginning at Jerusalem.

Qu. 2. Whether they preach now the everlasting Gospel in the same manner to
them, that inquire after it: As Peter did to the troubling Jews, Act. 2.3^.

Yours that waits for your answer, resolving to be one with you; so far, as
you are one with JESUS the CHRIST. FRANCIS CORNVVEL.
Februar. 17. 1645.

