(...) V. Answ. No doubt but they will do what they can to keep out all such as
adhere to the one side, and we humbly beseech them, that they endeavor
likewise to keep out them that adhere to the otherside: there is no Heretic
that will hazard his life for the truth, nor any outlandish Soldier will
sight principally for the good of England.

VI. Answ. We cannot by any means agree to this submission. 1 For we are not by
any sound argument convinced in our consciences that such a submission may
stand with our Allegiance to our Sovereign. 2 By this submission we shall give
His Majesty just cause to reject our Petition, which we intend to present unto
him, and shall image him, and his Army against us to our utter ruin. 3 By this
submission we shall give up our Liberties and Estates to an arbitrary
Government, which is one of our greatest grievances; We shall submit our selves
to the weekly pay, excise, twentieth part, and the fifth part of our Estates,
all which are already required by ordinance of Parliament; and if they require
all the rest, we are bound to yield it by this submission. 4 By this submission
we give up our understandings and consciences too (possibly) to an error, for
it is possible that a Parliament may err (and that foully) as well as a
general Council, add yet what error soever this Parliament shall commit in
Church or State (be it never so foul and horrid) we, by this Article must
promise to submit unto it.


VII. Answ. If we go on ready and ^^ce^tly according to our Articles for making
of Peace, there are none but Enemies to Peace, self-seckers, and Plunderers
will oppose us, and against such we are confident, all honest men in either
Army will assist us, if not, we hope God will enable us to defend our selves,
and give us liberty to move according to our own directions.

VIII. Answ. As we were thankful unto Sir Richard Grenvile for the good
government of his Army, so are we no less thankful to Sir Thomas Fairfax for
his good government, and we will continue Colonel Welden, and Colonel
Vandrosse.
our thanks, as most due to him, if he continue his good government, and do
not, after a strict discipline for a while, let loofe his Army to plunder, as
some have done before him.

By the Peacemaking Army in the West of Sommerset and Devon, who have refused
faires Propositions from the other side; and are resolved to stand to their
first articles for Peace, and to assist one another in the prosecution of them.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of your Majesty's most loyal Subjects of the County of
Sommerset.
Most humbly shows,
THat for the space of these three years last past, we have miserably suffered
under the Calamities of Civil War; and the Miseries Greaten so extremely
upon us, that without a speedy Accommodation we can expect nothing but utter
ruin and desolation; In a deep sense whereof, being large sharers in the
miseries, we do in the anguish of our souls, most humbly beg your Majesty once
more, according to your former Princely compassion to your People, to invite
the Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster, to the composures of these
unhappy differences by a Treaty; for which purpose we also intend to petition
the Lords and Commons, hoping, by Gods blessing upon your Majesty's pious
endeavors herein, we may again enjoy a happy Peace; For which, together with
the preservation of your Sacred Person, we shall heartily pray, etc.

To the right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of the poor, miserable, and wasted People of the County of
Sommerset.
Humbly shows,
THat we have a long time groaned under the burden of a Civil Sword, which
has brought this Country to extreme misery, and threatens both it and the
whole Nation with speedy ruin and destruction, it being the unavoidable Fate
of a divided Kingdom: for the prevention whereof we humbly pray you to be
pleased to be Suitors to His Majesty, that the late Treaty, so hopefully begun,
may be renewed: And in pursuance of that great trust reposed in you, you will
vouchsafe your utmost ^ndeavour for a settlement of a happy Peace, that we may
enjoy our Religion, our Laws, and Liberties; And we shall, etc.

The particulars which the Peacemaking Army stands for in the East; and thus
far we in the West are with them.
1 IMprimis, We stand for the true Protestant Religion as it was observed and
used in Queen Elizabeth's time. 2 We are for to defend and maintain the King,
and all the Prerogatives belonging to the Crown of England. 3 We are for all
the Privileges of Parliament, with earnest desire to see the Kings Majesty and
the Parliament united, as in former time. 4 We are for the Laws of the Realm,
and liberties of the Subject. 5 To keep our Houses from burning, our Goods from
plundering, and to take up all straggling and abusive Soldiers, of either side,
and to give them the Law they deserve.
Be it ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, that all and
every person of what degree and quality soever, that has lived, or shall live
within the Kings Quarters, or been aiding, assisting, or adhering unto the
Forces raised against the Parliament, or has, or shall come to inhabit, or
reside under the power or protection of the Parliament, shall Swear upon the
Evangelists in manner following.

I A. B. Do Swear from my Heart, that I will not directly nor indirectly adhere
unto, or willingly assist the King in this War, or in this Cause against the
Parliament, or any Forces raised without the consent of the two Houses of
Parliament, in this cause or war. And I do likewise swear, That my coming,
and submitting my self under the power and protection of the Parliament, is
without any manner of design whatsoever, to the prejudice of the proceedings
of the two Houses of this present Parliament, and without the direction,
privity, or advice of the King, or any of his Council, or Officers, other then
what I have now made known; So help me God, and the Contents of this Book.

ANd now let any reasonable and i^ent ^an but compare this Oath now enjoined by
the two Houses, either with the Oath of Allegiance enjoined by Law, and taken
by every one of the Members of both Houses respectively before they were
admitted to sit as Members, or with that first Protestation made and taken by
themselves, and by them Ordered to be taken by all the Subjects of this
Kingdom, and then let him judge whether these desperate men, having so often
forsworn themselves, have not by this, and other Oaths and Covenants devised
and imposed by them since, endeavored to involve as many others as they can in
the same crime of Perjury; which, together with Rebellion, is already the Great
Burden, and crying sin of this Nation.

FINIS.

