THE COPIES OF PAPERS FROM THE ARMY DELIVERED By the Officers and Soldiers to
his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.

Also, how they have set a Guard upon the King, and their civil usage to the
Commissioners, and Captain Titus the Kings M jesties Querrie sent up to the
Parliament with a Letter.

London Printed for R. Simpson, 1667.

NEVVES FROM THE ARMY
Worthy Sir,
I Have sent you here enclosed a Copy of the Votes of the Officers at a
Council of War, and the Petition of the common Soldiers, delivered by their
Adjutants from the Regiments to the General, since which, the grand Committee
of Soldiers have received some further Propo^^tions, which when they are
perfected, I will advertise you further of.

There were a party of Soldiers sent from hence to Holmby, who had
Instructions for setting of a a Guard about Holmby, to secure his Majesty's
Person; and we have received advertisements of their performing the same with
much modesty, and offering nothing but what becomes loyal Subjects to His
Majesty, and they carry t^emselves very civilly to the Commissioners, who are
there by order of both Houses of Parliament with the King, we here that the
Commissioners have sent up C^ptaine Titus, one of his Majesty's Que^ries, with
Letters to the Parliament, to acquaint them therewith. Colonel Graves some say
is gone, but of that you will be better satisfied from Captain Titus, who can
acqu^int you with the small matter of hurt which was at the fray there, which
perhaps some ill affected personr will make a great matter of.

The Sold ers are in great expectation what the Parliament will do; some
things they have to propound, for ought I see, they will wave part t^ll they
here from the Parliament. This is all at present from

Your servant, R. CORBET.
Edmonds Bury, 3 of June, 1647.
To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Commander in Chief of the
Parliaments Forces.
The Opinion and humble Advise of the Council of War, convened at Bury,
Saturday 29. May. 1647. In relation to the Votes of Parliament, communicated to
us by your Excellency and the desirs of our advice thereof.
Humbly Shows,
1. THat upon the reports come to all quarters of the Army concerning the Votes
and proceedings of the House May 21. As also of those on Tuesday, May 25. we
find the generallity of the Army (as we are our selves) much unsatisfied in the
one, and something amazed and startled at the other. the first Votes (of
Friday) coming much short of satisfaction as to the grievances of the Army
then reported to the House, and not taking any notice at all of some that were
most material, and the latter (of Tuesday) importing a resolution suddenly to
disband the Army by peace-meale, before equal satisfaction be given ^o the
who^e in any of the grievances, or so much as any consideration had of some
others most material: And also before any effectual performance of that
satisfaction with the Votes of Friday seemed to promise as to some of the
grievances, all which we shall be ready (upon a little time given us) to
represent to your Excellency, more distinctly and in particular.

2. That the said distraction, and the iealousies occasioned upon the same
proceeding, as we f^are, and some effects already appearing do find, may
unhappily produce dangerous disturbanc^s and tumultuous actings amongst
several p^rts of the Army, as they now lie dispersed and remote from the Head
quarters, esp^cially amongst those Regiments whose principal Officers, by
neglecting or disserting their Soldiers in in their necessary concernments or
just grievances, have disobleiged their Soldiers, and lost their interest with
them, in so much a^ such Officers are in some sort forced to withdraw from
their charges, and can scarce with safety come at them, and to prevent the
inconveniences or ill cons^quences which such disturbed or tumul^uous ^ctings
might produce either to the countries where the Army quarters or to the kingdom,

We humbly advise your Excellency without delay, to draw the Army unto a
closer posture of quarters, till upon further satisfaction the Army may be
quietly and orderly disbanded.

II.
That upon the same dissatisfaction and jealousy we find an extreme
earnestness, and violent propensity among the Soldiers to a general
Randezvouze and we verily believe, that the first attempt to disband any one
Regiment, before equal satisfaction to all, and assurance against those things
they have cause to fear, will occasion them all to draw together, and
Kandevouze of themselves, as it were upon an Allarm etc.

III.
Since that course of disbanding the Army by piece meal, before the
satisfaction intended be performed equally to the whle, seems something strange
and unusual.

IIII.
That they would be pleased to resume the things voted on Tuesday last, as also
to resume the grievances of the Army, together with the things proposed in the
Narrative from the Officers, and to give satisfaction, or at least some
resolution to each of them, and that they would not think it fit to put that
temtation, those jealousies, and that dishonor upon the Army, as to take it
disbanded in scattered pieces, before satisfaction be equally given to the
whole.

To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Knight, Captain, General of the forces
raised by the Authority of Parliament. The humble Petition of the Soldiers of
the Army, presented to his Excellency at a Council of War, held at St.
Edmunsburye on Saturday 29 May 1647.
Humbly Shows,
THat we your Petitioners considering the late Orders for disbanding the Army
without redresing our grievances, vindicating the Army, or calling to account
such persons who have been intenders contrivers, and promoters of our
destruction which (being b^^ reasonable) we humbly conceive we may justly
expect and should not be denied before our disbanding, considering also the
strange unheard of and unusual way of disbanding us a part one Regiment from
another, contrary to the examples of other Armies disbanding in this kingdom:
which posture renders (...) ^ous to the kingdom, to whom for some of our
Accounts (though humble and just) we have already been ^^clared enemies, and to
whom (for ought we know) the rest of our doing, may be presented with the same
constructions.

We your Petitioners humbly beseech your Excellency, you would be pleased to
appoint a Randezvouze speedily for the Army, and also to use your utmost
e^eavours that it be not disbanded before our sad and pressing grievances be
heard, and fully redressed; which if not done before disbanding, we humbly
conceive we shall be enforced upon many inconveniences which will (of
necessity) arise, when we (though unwilling) shall be necessitated (for
avoiding of destruction like to fall on the whole Army, if not prevented) to do
such things ourselvess which if your Excellency (out of your wisdom and
prudence), shall prevent, by granting our just desires in a way of Order, we
shall abundantly rejoice in it, and be (with cheerfulness) enabled by it, to
subscribe our selves,

Your Excellencies, and the Kingdoms innocent and faithful servants, whose
names are hereunto annexed, being Agitators in behalf of the several
Regiment^. Adjutators of the Generals Regiment of Horse.
Edward Sexby. Edward Tailor.
Lieutenant Generals Regiment.
VVi^liam A^len Sam: whiting
Commissary Generals Regiment.
Tho: Shepherd Anth. Nickson,
Colonel Fleetwoods Regiment.
Edward Twig, Thomas Jones,
Colonel Whaleyes Regiment.
Thomas Kendall, William Young,
Colonel Sheffields Regiment,
Edward Star, Edward Gethings
Colonel Butlers Regiment
John Willoughby, Tobias Box,
Colonel Sir Robert Pyes Reg^m^nt
Thomas Brown, Barth. W^llock.
Colonel Grave^ his Re^^ment
George Steuson, Richard Salter.
Colonel Riches Regiment.
Nicholas Lockyer, John Braman,
O^ the ^enerals Reg^ment of Foot.
Edward Vaughan, Joh^ Newson,
^olone^l Wa^^ers Regiment
Robert Mason, Henry Anderton,
Colonel^ Harowes Regim^^t.
Nicholas Andrews Ralph Prentice,
Colonel L^^^urnes Regiment.
Herbert Field Thomas Walston,
Colonel Hewsons Regiment.
Edward Garn, Daniel Hincksman
Colonel Lambarts Regiment.
William Baker,




