Roman Catholic PRINCIPLES, In Reference to GOD and the KING, Explained in a
LETTER to a Friend, And now made Public, to show the Connection between the
said PRINCIPLES, and the Late, POPISH PLOT.

By a Well-wisher of his Country.

Mat. 22. v. 21. Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, and unto God
the things that are Gods. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1680.

SIR
I Find your last as full of Doubts and Inquietudes, as your former was o^ Heat
and Zeal: whether mere Compassion has altered your judgment, or that you fear
your own Turn may be next, I cannot tell; but I easily perceive you and the
greatest part of honest thinking Protestants, as well as you, begin, though
late, to suspect, Miseries inflicted on Catholics
That Catholics have wrongfully suffered the loss of their Fame, their Goods,
their Fortunes, and many their Lives Nor do I wonder to see you touched with
some Concern at our Miseries; for besides the sad spectacles of Bloodshed,
(which I mention without any Resentment, or Disrespect to the Government) the
Prisons have been filled with us, whole Families ruined and exiled, poor Widows
and innocent Orphans have perished through distress, the very Woods and Deserts
have not wanted men dying with cold and hunger, and all this upon account of a
Plot, horrid indeed, and detestable in it self, but which could never yet be
proved against us by any one credible Witness, or probable Circumstance
evincing the Crime.

Through the Perjuries
True it is, Dr. Oats, Captain Bedloe and others of debauched Lives and
desperate Fortunes, allured by Gain and encouraged by Indempnities, have
positively sworn, (if bare positive Swearing, without any other probability of
truth, Of wicked Men
may stand for good Evidence) to a multiplicity of Particulars. But these men
have been and are, so notoriously stigmatized with all sorts of Vice and
Infamy; their Oaths have been confronted with so many self-Contradictions;
their Forgeries accompanied with such incredible, such impossible
Circumstances; their Lies and Fables so stuffed with Absurdities, Non-fence,
and Follies; the Crime of Perjury so often, so palpably proved against them: in
short both their past and present Villainies are now become so apparent and
perspicuous, that the greatest part of the Nation has an abhorrence of them.

But you tell me, (and you are in the right) That the thing which has rendered
credible the Testimony of otherwise incredible Witnesses against us, Evil
Principles wrongfully imputed.
and which has invalidated all contrary Evidence given in our behalf, is a
Persuasion many Protestants have; that the Catholic Religion is made up of
traitorous Principles destructive to Peace and Government. You say you have
been informed by common Report by printed Books, nay by some Ministers in their
very Pulpits. That Catholics hold it an Article of Faith to believe. That the
Pope can depose Kings, absolve their Subjects from their Allegiance, and
dispose of Kingdoms to whom he please. That to murder Protestants and destroy
the Nation by Fire and Sword, for prop^gation of the Catholic Faith, are Works
of Piety, and meritorious of Heaven. These and the like horrid Aspersions,
together with I know not what feigned Idolatries, Superstitions and Abuses, are
(as you have rightly intimated) laid to the charge of Roman Catholics, whereby
to render both their Faith and Persons odious to many otherwise well-meaning
People, who not sufficiently examining the truth of things, but taking all for
granted, judge nothing ill enough can be said or done against men so principled.

And is it not strange and severe, And always disowned by Catholick^
That Principles, and those p^etended of Faith too, should be imposed upon men,
which they themselves renounce and detaste? ^f the Turk's Alcoran should in
like manner be urged upon us, and we hanged up for Mahumetans, all we could do
or say in such a Case, would be patiently to die, with Protestation of our own
Innocence. And this is the posture of our present condition, we abhor, we
renounce, we abominat such Principles; we protest against them, and seal our
Protestation with our dying Breaths. What shall we say? What can we do more? To
accuse men as guilty in Matters of Faith which they never owned is the same
thing as to condemn them for Matters of Fact, which they never did.

You press the Question, and say, Some of our general Councils, several Papal
Decrees, and many of our Doctors and Divines, assert the fore mentioned
Principles. Sir, I have been instructed in the Articles of my Faith, and I
acknowledge the lawful Authority of general Councils, yet I profess I never
learnt, or found asserted in any of them, such Principles. And I propose unto
you, this plain and short Dilemma, Either the abovenamed Principles are
esteemed by us Matters of Faith, or not. If they be, What farther can be
required of us, then to deny and forsake such a Faith? And this we constantly
do. But if they be not Matters of Catholic Faith nor owned by us as such, Why
are Catholics as Catholics punished for them? Why is our Religion persecuted
on that account? Let these in Gods name, if any there be of what Religion
soever, who hold such Tenants suffer for them. Why should the Innocent be
involved with the Guilty? There is neither Reason nor Justice in it.

An Objection
Hereunto some Persons (I hope out of zeal and misinformation, rather then
Malice) stick not to say; That Dispensations, and I know not what Indulgencies
and Pardons, whereby to legitimate the Crimes of Lying and Forswearing, when
the Interest of our Church requires, is a main Part of our Religion; And by
consequence the Denial of our Principles, is no sufficient Justification of our
Innocence, Answered.
I answer, First, It is in the highest measure censorious in any one, to impose
upon all our Ancestors, and the greatest Part of Mankind, who are, or have been
Members of our Religion, such an excess of Folly and Wickedness; as must needs
have perverted all Humane Society Secondly, If we could lawfully deny the
Principles of our Faith, when interest requires, why have we lost our Estates,
our Liberties, our Lives, for the Profession of it? To what purposes are Oaths
and Tests devised, to entangle us? How impertinently is the frequenting the
Protestant Church, and receiving the Communion, proposed unto us, and refused
by us? Thirdly, Though many Men may be induced to Lie, and forswer, when they
have some hopes or prospect, thereby of Temporal advantage, yet that Persons
Dying for their Conscience and Religion (as diverse have done, and those no
Fools even by the Confession of our Adversaries) should be so stupendiously
Sottish and Mad, either to imagine that Lies and Perjuries, for Concealment of
Treason, Murder, Massacre, and Destruction of others by Fire and Sword, should
be Acts of Virtue, pleasing to God, Dispensable by the Pope, and Meritorious of
Heaven; Or that, on the contrary, knowing and believing, as needs they must,
such Monsters and Horrors to be Odious and Detestable in the sight both of God
and Man, they should nevertheless, upon the very brink of Eternity, Wittingly
and Willingly cast themselves Headlong into an assured Damnation, and this at
a time when they might have saved both Bodies and Souls, by merely discharging
a good Conscience in acknowledging the Truth, and becoming honest Men, This I
say is Inhumane, and contradictory to all sense and reason to believe.

Now therefore I am come to what you so often and so earnestly press me to
(viZ) to satisfy the world, The intent of this Epistle.
and clear my self, my Fellow Sufferers, and my Religion from the Imputation
laid upon us, on pretense of such Principles, by a true and candid Explanation
of my Belief and Judgment, in the main points of Faith and Loyalty,
controverted between Catholics and Protestants, as they severally Relate to
God and the King.

PARAGRAPH I. Of the Catholic Faith, and Church in General.
Redemption in Christ
1. THe Fruition of God, and Remission of Sin is not attainable by Man,
otherwise then Ephesians. 2.8. 1 Cor. 15.22
in and by the Merits of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who gratis Purchased it
for us.

Applicable by faith,
2. These Merits of Christ are not applied to us, otherwise then by a Right Mark
16.16. Heb. 11.6.
Faith in Christ.

3. This Faith is but Ephesians. 4.4.
one, entire and conformable to its Object, which is but one
being Divine Revelations, to Jam. 2.10
all which Faith gives at undoubted assent.

Supernatural,
4. These Revelations contain many Mysteries 1 Cor. 1.20. Mat. 16.17.
transcending the Natural Reach of Humain Wit or industry. Wherefore,

By the Divine providence to be Learnt,
5. It became the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, to provide Man of some Isa. 35.8
Way or Means whereby he might Arrive to the knowledge of these Mysteries;
Means Ioh. 9 40.
Visible and apparent to all, Means Mat. 11.25
Proportionable to the Capacityes of all; Means Ioh. 15.22.
Sure and Certain to all.

Not from private interpretation of Scripture,
6. This way, or means, is not the Reading of Scripturs, Interpreted according
to the Private 2 Pet. 3.16. Pro. 14.12. Mat 22.29.
Reason or 1 Ep. Ioh. 4.1. and 6. Pro. 14.12.
Spirit of every Disjunctive Person, or Nation in Particular. But

7. It is an attention and Mat. 18 17 Luke 10.16.
submission to the Doctrine of the Catholic or Universal Church, But from the
Universal Church, Dilated, Continued, and guided by the holy Ghost for that end.
established by Christ for the instruction of all, Psalm 2.8. Isa. 2.2. and cap.
49.6. Mat. 5.14.
spread for that end throughout all Nations, and visibly continued in a
Succession of Pastors and People throughout all Ages: From which Church Isa.
59.21 Jo 16.13. Eze. 37 26. Ephesians. 5.25. 1 Timothy 3 15. Mat 16.18.
guided in Truth, and secured from Error in Matters of Faith by the Mat 28 20
John 14.16.
promised assistance of the holy Ghost, every one may and ought to Deuteronomy. 17.8
etc. Mat. 23.2.
learn both the right Sense of Scripture, and all other Christian Mysteries and
Duties respectively necessary to Salvation.

8. This Church, thus spread, thus guided, thus visibly continued, This Church
is the same with the Roman Catholic.
Cant 6.8. Jo. 10.16. Rom 15.5. Jo. 17.22. Phil. 2.2.
in one uniform Faith, and subordination of Government, is that self-same which
is termed the Roman Catholic Church, the Qualifications abovementioned, being
applicable to no other Church or Assembly whatsoever.

From the Testimony of which we believe the Scripture to be God's Word.
9. From the Testimony and Authority of this Church it is, that we Receive and
Believe the Scripture to be God's Word. And as she can Mat. 16.18 1 Timothy 3.15
Mat. 18.17.
assuredly tell us, This or That Book is God's Word, so can she with the like
assurance, tell us also the true Sense and meaning of it in controverted Points
of Faith; the same Spirit that writ the Scripture, Isa. 59.21. Ioh. 24 16.
enlightening her to understand both it, and all other Matters necessary to
Salvation, From these Grounds it follows.

Divine Revelations only matters of Faith
10 All and only divine Revelations delivered by God to the Church, and proposed
by her to be believed as such, are and ought to be esteemed Articles of Faith,
and the contrary Opinions, Heresy, And

What Heresy, and what Schism.
11. As an obstinate separation from the Unity of the Church, in known declared
Matters of Faith, is formal 1. Co. 11 19. Mat. 18.17.
Heresy: so a wilful separation from the visible Unity of the same Church, in
Matters of Subordination and Government is formal Tit. 3.10 1 Cor. 1.10 cap.
12.25.
Schism.

How Matters of Faith are proposed by the Church.
12. The Church proposes unto us Matters of Faith: First and chiefly, By the
Io. 5.39.
holy Scripture, in points plain and intelligible in it. Secondly, By Act. 15.
per tot.
Definitions of General Councils, in points not sufficiently explained in
Scripture. Thirdly, By 2 These. 2 15. cap. 3.6. 2 Timothy 2.2
Apostolical Traditions, derived from Christ and his Apostles, to all succeding
Ages. Fourthly, By her Jam. 2.1^
Practice, Worship and Ceremonies, confirming her Doctrine.

PARAGRAPH, II. Of Spiritual and Temporal Authority.
What is the Authority of general Councils.
2. GEneral Councils (which are the Church of God, representative) have no
Commission from Christ to fraime new Matters of Faith, Gal. 1 7.^
(these being sole divine Revelations) but only to Deu. 17 ^ Mat. 18.1^ Act.
15. per tot. Luke 10.1^ Heb. 13.^ 17.
explain and ascertain unto us, what anciently was, and is received and
retained as of Faith in the Church, upon arising Debates or Controversies about
them. The Definitions of which, general Councils in Matters of Faith only and
proposed as such, oblige, under pain of Heresy, all the Faithful, to a
submission of Judgment. But

An Explanation of the same Authority.
2. It is no Article of Faith to believe, That general Councils cannot Err,
either in Matters of Fact or Discipline, alterable by Circumstances of Time and
Place; or in Matters of Speculation or civil Policy, depending on mere humane
Judgment or Testimony. Neither of these being divine Revelations 1 Timothy 5.20
deposited in the Catholic Church; in regard to which alone, she has the Joh.
14.16
promised assistance of the Holy Ghost. Hence it is deduced:

A Deduction from thence concerning Allegiance.
3. If a general Council (much less a Papal Consistory) should undertake to
depose a King, and absolve his Subjects from their Allegiance, no Catholic as
Catholic is bound to submit to such a Decree. Hence also it follows:

A second Deduction concerning the same.
4. The Subjects of the King of England lawfully may, without the least breach
of any Catholic Principle, renounce even upon Oath, the Doctrine of deposing
Kings excommunicated for Heresy, by any Authority whatsoever, 1. Pet. 2.13.
etc.
as repugnant to the fundamental Laws of the Nation, injurious to Sovereign
Power, destructive to the Peace and Government, and by consequence, in his
Majesty's Subjects, impious and damnable. Yet not properly Heretical, taking
the word Heretical in that connatural genuine sense, it is usually understood
in the Catholic Church; Of the Oath of Allegiance.
on which account chiefly it is, that many Catholics of tender Consciences
refuse the Oath, commonly called, The Oath of Allegiance.

The Bishop of Rome supreme Head of the Church But not Infallible.
5. Catholics believe, That the Bishop of Rome is the Successor of St. Peter,
Mat. 16.17. Luke 22.31. Joh. 21.15.
Vicar of Jesus Christ upon Earth, and Head of the whole Catholic Church,
which Church is therefore fitly styled Roman Catholic, being an universal Body
Ephesians. 4.11.
united under one visible Heed. Nevertheless.

6. It is no Matter of Faith to believe, That the Pope is in himself Infallible
separated from a general Council, even in expounding the Faith: By consequence,
Papal Definitions or Decrees, though ex Cathedra, as they term them oblige none
under Pain of Heresy, to an interior assent.

Nor has any temporal Authority over Princes.
7. Nor do Catholics as Catholics believe that the Pope has any direct, or
indirect Authority over the Temporal Power and Jurisdiction of Princes. Hence,
if the Pope should pretend to Absolve or Dispense with his Majesty's Subjects
from their Allegiance, upon account of Heresy or Schism such Dispensation
would be vain and null: and all Catholic Subjects, notwithstanding such
Dispensation, or Absolution, would be still bound in Conscience to defend their
King and Country, at the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes even against the
Pope himself, in case he should invade the Nation.

The Church not responsible for the Errors of particular Divines.
8. And as for Problematical Disputes or Errors of particular Divines, in this
or any other matter whatsoever, the Catholic Church is no wise responsible for
them: Nor, are Catholics as Catholics justly punishable on their account. But:

9. As for the King-Killing Doctrine, Conc. Constable. Sess. 15.
or Murder of Princes, King-killing Doctrine Damnable Heresy.
excommunicated for Heresy; It is an Article of Faith in the Catholic Church,
and expressly declared in the General Council of Constance, that such Doctrine
is Damnable and Heretical, being contrary to the known Laws of God and Nature.

Personal misdemenours not to be imputed to the Church.
10. Personal Misdemeanors of what nature soever, ought not to be imputed to the
Catholic Church when not justifyable by the Tenants of her Faith and Doctrine;
For which Reason, though the Stories of the Paris Massacre; the Irish
Cruelties, Or Powder Plot had been true, (which yet for the most part are
notoriously misrelated) nevertheless Catholics as Catholics ought not to
suffer for such Offenses, any more then the eleven Apostles ought to have
suffered for Judah's Treachery.

11. It is an Article of the Catholic Faith to believe, that no Power on Earth
can license Men to Lie, No Power on Earth can authorize Men to Lie, Foreswear,
Murder, etc.
to Foreswear, and Perjure themselves, to Massacre their Neighbors, or destroy
their Native Country, on pretense of promoting the Catholic Cause or
Religion; Furthermore, all Pardons and dispensations granted or pretended to be
granted, in order to any such ends or designs, have no other validity or
effect, then to add Sacrilege and Blasphemy to the abovementioned Crimes.

Equivocation not allowed in the Church
12. The Doctrine of Equivocation or mental Reservation, however wrongfully
imposed on the Catholic Religion, is notwithstanding neither taught, 2 Cor
1.12.
nor approved by the Church, as any part of her Belief. On the contrary,
Simplicity and godly sincerity are constantly recommended by her as truly
Christian Virtues, necessary to the Conversation of Justice, Truth, and Common
Society.

PARAGRAPH III. Of some Particular controverted Points of Faith.
Of Sacramental Absolution.
1. EVery Catholic is oblidged to believe, that when a Sinner Ez. 18.21. 2 Cor.
7.10
repeateth him of his Sins from the bottom of his Heart and Psa. 32.5. Pro.
28.13.
acknowledges his transgressions to God and his Act. 19.18. 1 Cor. 4.1. Jam.
5.16.
Ministers, the Dispencers of the Mysteries of Christ, resolving to turn from
his evil ways, Luke 3 8.
and bring forth Fruits worthy of Penance, there is (then and no otherwise) an
Authority left by Christ to Absolve such a penitent Sinner from his Sins; which
Authority Christ gave to his Joh. 20.21 etc. Mat. 18.18.
Apostles, and their Successors, the Bishops and Priests of the Catholic
Church, in those words, when he said. Receive ye the Holy Ghost, whose Sins you
shall forgive, Of Satisfaction by penitential Works.
they are forgiven unto them, etc.

2. Though no Creature whatsoever can make Tit. 3.5.
condign satisfaction either for the guilt of Sin, or the Pain eternal due to
it 2 Cor. 3.5.
this satisfaction being proper to Christ our Savior only, yet penitent
Sinners redeemed by Christ may as members of Christ in some measure Act. 26.20.
Jona 2.5. etc. Psalm. 102.9. etc. Psa. 109.23. Dan. 9 3. Joel 2.11. Luke 11.41.
Act. 10.4.
satisfy by Prayer, Fasting, Alms, Deeds, and other works of Piety, for the
Temporal Pain, which by order of Divine Justice sometimes remains due after the
guilt of Sin, and Pains Eternal are (gratis) remitted. These penitential Works
are notwithstanding satisfactory no otherwise then as joined and applied to
that satisfaction, which Jesus made upon the Cross, in virtue of which alone,
all our good works find a grateful 1 Pet 2.5.
acceptance in God's Sight.

3. The guilt of Sin or Pain eternal due to it, is never remitted by
Indulgencies, Indulgences are not Remission of Sins, but only of Canonical
Penances. Abuses herein not to be charg^d on the Church.
but only such 1 Cor. 5.3. etc. 2 Cor. 2.6.10. etc.
Temporal punishments as remain due after the guilt is remitted; These
Indulgencies being nothing else then a Mitigation or Relaxation upon just
causes, of Canonical Penances, enjoined by the Pastors of the Church on
Penitent Sinners, according to their several degrees of demerit. And if any
abuses or mistakes be sometimes committed, in point either of granting or
gaining Indulgencies, through the remissness or ignorance of particular
Persons, contrary to the ancient Custom and Discipline of the Church; such
Abuses or Mistakes cannot rationally be charged on the Church, nor rendered
matter of Derision, in prejudice to her Faith and Doctrine.

There is a Purgatory or state, where Souls departing this Life with some
blemish are purified.
4. Catholics hold there is a Purgatory, that is to say, a Place or State,
where Souls departing this Life, with remission of their sins, as to the
eternal guilt or pain, yet Number. 14.20. etc. 2 Samuel 12.13. etc.
obnoxious to some temporal Punishment still remaining due, or not perfectly
freed from the blemish of some Pro. 24.16. Mat. 12.36.
venial Defects, or Deordinations, (as idle words, etc. not liable to
damnation) are Cap. 5.22.26. 1 Cor. 3.15.
purged before their admittance into Heaven, where nothing that is Rev. 21.27.
defiled can enter. Furthermore:

Prayers for the Dead, available to them
5. Catholics also hold, That such Souls, so detained in Purgatory, being the
living Members of Christ Jesus, are 1 Cor. 15.29. Col. 1.24. 1 Jo. 5.16. 2 Mac.
12.43. etc.
relieved by the Prayers and Suffrages of their fellow- Members here on Earth:
Superfluous Questions about Purgatory.
But where this Place is? Of what nature or quality the Pains are? How long
each Soul is detained there? After what manner the Suffrages made in their
behalf are applied? Whether by way of Satisfaction or Intercession? etc. are
Questions superfluous, and impertinent as to Faith.

Of the merit of good Works through the merits of Christ.
6. No man though just, Jo. 15.5.16.
can merit either an increase of Sanctity or Happiness in this Life, or eternal
Glory in the next, independent on the Merits and Passion of Christ;
nevertheless in and by the Merits of Christ Jesus, Mat. 16.27 Cap. 15.12. Cap.
10.41. 2 Cor. 5.10. 2 Timothy 4.8.
the good Works of a just man proceeding from Grace and Charity, are acceptable
to God, so far forth as to be, through his Goodness and sacred Promise, truly
meritorious of eternal Life.

Christ really present in the Sacrament of the Eucharist.
7. It is an Article of the Catholic Faith, That in the most holy Sacrament of
the Eucharist, there is truly and really contained the Mat. 26.26 Mar. 14.22.
Luke 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.23 etc. Cap. 10.16.
Body of Christ, which was delivered for us, and his Blood, which was shed for
the remission of sins; the substance of Bread and Wine, being by the powerful
Words of Christ, changed into the substance of his blessed Body and Blood, the
Species or Accidents of Bread and Wine still remaining. Thus:

8. Christ is not present in this Sacrament, according to his natural way of
Existence; But after a supernatural manner.
that is, with extension of Parts, in order to Place, etc. but after a
supernatural manner, one and the same in many Places, and whole in every part
of the Symbols. This therefore is a real, substantial, yet Sacramental presence
of Christ's Body and Blood, not exposed to the external Senses, nor obnoxious to
corporeal Contingences.

9 Neither is the Body of Christ in this holy Sacrament separated from his
Blood, Whole Christ in either species.
or his Blood from his Body, or either of both disjoined from his Soul and
Divinity, but all and whole a living Jesus is entirely contained under either
Species, so that wholoever receives under one kind, is truly partaker of the
whole Sacrament and no wise deprived either of the Body or Blood of Christ.
True it is:

Hence Communicants under one kind no wise deprived either of the Body or Blood
of Christ.
10. Our Savior Jesus Christ left unto us his Body and Blood, under two
distinct Species or Kinds; in doing of which, he instituted not only a
Sacrament, but also a Sacrifice; Lu. 22.19. etc.
a commemorative Sacrifice distinctly 1 Cor. 11.26.
showing his Death or bloody Passion, until he come. For as the Sacrifice of
the Cross was performed by a distinct effusion of Blood, so is the same
Sacrifice commemorated in that of the Heb 13 10
Altar, by a distinction of the Symbols. Jesus therefore is here given not only
to us, but Lu 22.19
for us; and the Church thereby enriched with a true, Of the Sacrifice of the
Mass.
proper, and propitiatory Mal. 1.11.
Sacrifice, usually termed Mass.

Worship of Images wrongfully imposed on Catholics.
11. Catholics renounce all divine Worship and adoration of Images or Pictures.
Luke 4.8
God alone we Worship and Adore; nevertheless we make use of Pictures, and
place them in Exodus 25.18. 1 Kings 6.35. Luke 3.22. Number. 21.8. Acts. 5.5.
Churches and Oratries, to reduce our wandering thoughts, and enliven our
Memories toward Heavenly things. Yet there is some Veneration due both to
Pictures
And further we allow a certain Honor and Veneration to the Picture of Christ,
of the Virgin Mary, etc. beyond what is due to every profane Figure; not that
we believe any Divinity or Virtue in the Picturs themselves for which they
ought to be honored, but because the Honor given to the Pictures is referred
to the Prototype, or things represented. In like manner:

And other Sacred things
12. There is a kind of Honor and Veneration respectively due to the Bible, to
the Cross, to the Name of Jesus, to Churches, to the Sacraments, etc. as Jos.
7.6. Exodus 3.5. Psalm. 99 5. phil. 2.10. Luke 3.16. Acts 19.12.
things peculiarly appertaining to God; also to the Jo. 12.26.
glorified Saints in Heaven as domestic Friends of God; yea, 1 pet. 2.17. Romans
13.7.
to Kings Magistrates and Superiors on Earth, as the Vicegerants of God. To whom
Honor is due. Honor may be given without any derogation to the Majesty of
God, or that divine Worship appropriate to him. Furthermore:

Prayers to Saints lawful.
13. Catholics believe, That the blessed Saints in Heaven, replinished with
Charity, Rev. 5.8.
pray for us their fellow Members here on Earth; that they Luke 15.7.
rejoice at our Conversion; that seeing God, they 1 Cor. 13.13.
see and know in him all things suitable to their happy state, that God is
inclinable to hear their Requests made in our behalf, Exodus 32.13. 2 Chronicles.
6.42.
and for their sakes grants us many Favors; that therefore it is good and
profitable to desire their Intercession; and that this manner of Invocation is
no more injurious to Christ our Mediator, nor superabundant in it self, then it
is for one Christian to beg the Prayers and Assistance of To. 15.30.
another in this World. Yet so as not to neglect our other duties.
Notwithstanding all which, Catholics are taught not so to rely on the Prayers
of others, as to neglect their own Jam. 2.17 etc.
Duty to God; in imploring his divine Mercy and Goodness; Romans 13.14.
in mortifying the Deeds of the Flesh; in Romans 11.2
despising the World; in loving Gal. 5.6.
and serving God and their Neighbor; in following the Footsteeps of Christ our
Lord, who is the Jo. 14.6.
Way the Truth, and the Life: To whom be Honor and Glory for ever and ever,
Amen.

A Conclusion from the premises.
THese are the Principles, these the Treasons, these the Idolatries, and
Superstitions, which though no other than what we have received from our
Forefathers, and what the greatest part of the Christian World now professes,
yet has drawn upon us poor Catholics in England such dreadful Punishments. I
beseech you, Sir, consider our Cause, without Passion or Prejudice, and I am
confident you will see, we are not such Monsters as our Adversaries represent
us to be, nor entertain such Principles as are inconsistent with our duty to
God and the King.

An Objection answered.
You seem to say, This very Plot with which we are charged, proves us guilty of
wicked Principles. But, under favor, you here commit a vicious Circle in way
of arguing; For first, here are wicked Principles alleged, to make good the
proof of a Plot; and these being denied, the Plot is introduced to make out the
wicked Principles; as if a man should say a thing, because he thought so, and
give no Reason why he thought so, but only because he said so, which in stead
of Proof, is to beg the Question. Certain I am, Catholics both taught and
practiced Principles of Loyalty, at a time when the King and Kingdom felt the
dire Effects of contrary Persuasions.

A second Objection answered
You add, The two Houses of Parliament, the Judges, and in a manner, the whole
Nation, seemed to believe, and cry up the Evidence given of a Plot. I answer,
The most upright Persons, and those even of supreme Authority, may sometimes be
misinformed, and consequently abused, by the Perjury and Malice of wicked Men.
Especially when once Minds are exasperated, jealousies heightened, and
forgeries abetted and multiplied, by the clandestine endeavors of a malignant
Party, who love to fish in troubled Waters; and who by raising Feuds, and
fomenting disorders, make their way to sinister Ends. You your self are
sensible, there are a sort of People, who under a colorable zeal against
Popery, (as they term it) strick at Monarchy, and undermine the Government. I
shall not need to dilate on this Subject; our Nation has once had a sad
experience of this zeal, and I heartily wish the same Tragedy may not be Acted
over again.

Catholics suffer for their Religion. Their sufferings not unlike to those of
Christ our Lord.
In Fine, whatsoever is pretended against us, it is manifest we suffer for our
Religion, and for our Religion wrongfully traduced. It is farther a comfort to
us, that our sufferings (God be praised) are in some measure, not unlike to
those of Christ our Lord; For it was laid to his charge, as it is to ours, Luke
23.2. Io. 11.48. Ma. 26 60. Romans 8.29. ver. 17.
that he was a Traitor to Caesar. That he perverted the People, and
endeavored the destruction of Church and State, Nor were there wanting then,
as now, an Oats and Bedloe, two false witnesses to Swear all this.

Thus God, I hope has predestined us (as the Apostle says) to be conform to
the Image of his Son; to the end that suffering with him, we may (through his
Mercy) be Glorified together with him.

Sweet Jesus bless our Sovereign, Pardon our Enemies; Grant us Patience; and
establish Peace and Charity in our Nation.

This is the daily Prayer of,

SIR, Your faithful, though distressed Friend M. B.

Psalm. 35. v 11. False Witnesses did rise up; they laid to my Charge things
that I knew not.

Mat. 5. v. 11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you,
and shall say all manner of Evil against you Falsely, for my sake. Rejoice and
be glade, for great is your Reward in Heaven.



