A Copy of two Letters, SENT FROM DIVERSE OFFICERS OF THE ARMY IN THE NORTH,
TO HIS EXCELlency THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX; Concerning the late Large Petition,
presented to the Parliament upon the eleventh of Sept. 1648.
TOGETHER WITH A LETTER GRATVLATORY FROM DIVERSE OFFICERS OF THE ARMY, at the
Leagure before Barwick, to the Presenters of the foresaid Petition of Sept. 11.
A Copy of a Letter to his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, from the Garrison of
New castle and Tinmouth.
May it please your Excellency,
WE make bold being pressed in spirit, to represent to you, as the ground of our
fears, so the matter of our desires. It has pleased God after much plottings
and endeavors of the old and New Malignants, to Crown the Army under your
conduct with great success; and although God by that calls for justice, little
or none is done, to the great grief as to the Kingdom in general, so unto us in
particular; and less is like to be done, unless your Excellency presently
appear to do something, and the Army with you, to be a leading cause to us; we
wait for it. Instead of Justice, behold a Treaty with them for Peace, that God
speaks no Peace to: and instead of owning just Petitions, they are laid aside,
and not countenanced; some employed in the Treaty not long since voted the Army
Rebels; what that prognosticates in the future, when they have power, we leave
to your Excellency to judge. We can hardly forbear but Petition the
Parliament, (remembering our engagement at New Market Heath,) but we are very
unwilling to do any thing without your Excellencies pleasure, being desirous in
all good things to be led by you: and being confident (as formerly, so still)
you will stand by the Kingdom and the Army in their just Rights. So hoping you
will so far honor us, as to make a favorable construction of our expressions,
and give an answer to encourage us to join with the well-affected, in their
Petitions, for their just Rights and Privileges, We subscribe our selves in
the behalf of the Officers and Soldiers of this Garrison and Tinmouth.

Your Excellencies humble Servants Lievt. Col. Paul Hobson. Major Cobbett. Cap.
Clark. Cap. Hutton. etc.

Newcastle 22. Sept. 1648.
To His Excellency, THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX, General of all the Forces raised by
the Parliament for the Commonwealth of England.
May it please Your Excellency,
Seeing it has pleased God to exalt you into a place of Eminency and Trust in
the Commonwealth of England, for the Redemption thereof from Captivity and
Bondage, and to that End God having also blessed You and us with prosperous
Success and Conquests, (beyond the ey of humane sense) both in the late and
present Wars, over Yours and the Peoples most inveterate Enemies; and seeing
that we and all the well-affected of the Land ventured our lives, and all that
was deer unto us, not sparing cheerfully and faithfully to pass through all
dangers and difficulties with you attending that Engagement; we are emboldened
now at last (having looked round about us, and finding neither Your Excellency,
the Army, nor the People yet answered as to those ends) to make our humble
Address unto Your Excellency in this Juncture of time, wherein we apprehend,
that the blood that has bin spilt, the Conquests that God has crowned us
withal, the treasure and wealth of the People expended, is all upon the point
of being rendered in vain and of none effect: For, to the sorrow of our hearts,
we find that even those particulars of Common Right and Freedom, for which we
took up Arms and still continue them, are not regarded, though by way of humble
Petition lately presented to the House of Commons by the well-affected in and
about London; and instead of answering those their just Desires of Freedom and
Safety to the People, we find a Treaty with our conquered Enemy (who has not
so much as himself to Treat for, and on whom we must, and that of right, lay
the guilt of all the blood that has bin spilt in these wars) is now chosen,
and vigorously pursued; and Compositions at easy rates made with the new
Delinquents for their late Rebellions and Treasons against the Commonwealth;
though we justly expected that their Lands should be made over to us; and the
whole Soldiery for our Arrears: and no Justice likely to be done to perfideous
Hambleton, or to his Adherents, who invaded our Land, and made war upon us; nor
yet upon those Lords and Commons, Aldermen, and Common Council men of London,
whom that Invador professed to invite him in: Nor yet upon the Earl of Holland,
whom the House of Lords lately and most unjustly voted out of his Imprisonment
in Warwick Castle: nor yet upon the Lord Goring, Lord Capel, Lord Louthbury,
Laughorne, Powel, Poyer, etc. Neither any thing done to those insolent Common
Council men of London, that durst join with the Prince, while in Arms against
the Parliament and People, in his Desires; and petition the Parliament for a
Cessation of Arms, even with Hambleton himself, after the House of Commons had
voted him and his Army Enemies, and those Englishmen that invited them into
England, Rebels and Traitors, and notwithstanding the same, the House of Lords
abetted and joined with him and his Army, by publishing his poisonous
Declaration by a special Order of their own House, to seduce the People into
his Rebellion against our Commonwealth: yet all these wickednesses must be
salved up with a Personal Treaty, putting our Capital and Bloody Enemy into an
equal Balance with all the People and their Representatives, which is more
then ever he had from his Coronation, as appears by his Oath, which the
Parliament has often publicly declared to the Commonwealth; so that of
necessity our Indemnity, our Lives and Freedoms are left at his mercy, and
what mercy when our Enemy is received, and the Adverse Party advanced can be
expected, we leave to your Excellency to judge. Wherefore, May it please your
Excellency, we having seriously weighed the foresaid Petition, Entitled the
humble Petition of Thousands Well-affected Persons inhabiting the City of
London, Westminster, the Borough of Southwark, Hamblets, and places Adjacent,
Presented to the Parliament Sept, 11. 1648. Together with a second Petition
endeavored to be presented Sept. 13. Entitled, The humble Petition of the
Presenters of the late large Petition, etc. As also a letter from our deer
friends of the Garrisons of Newcastle and Tinmouth, and finding the common
safety of us all wrapped up in those desires; we cannot in duty to God, to our
own Native Country, and in honor to your Excellencies safety, and all that
have adhered unto you, but resent the said Desires as our own; and humbly
implore, That your Excellency will be pleased so to appear before us in the
cause of the People, even in the midst of these our dangers and fears, that we
and all the People, with the Generations after us, by your Excellencies happy
conduct, may have just cause to bless God on your behalf: And that the same may
come to pass, shall ever be the faithful prayers and endeavors of

SIR, Your Excellencies most humble servants, wholly Devoted to live and by with
You therein.

A Gratulatory Letter from diverse Officers of the Army, at the Leagure before
Barwick, to the late presenters of the Large Petition, of September. 11. 1648.
Gentlemen, and Fellow Commoners,
AS we all languish and groan under the insupportable weight of the Public
oppression of the Land, so is it our duty to struggle and strive jointly
together for the relief of each other; for to our neighbor we are bound as to
our selves; and we are all the sons of one Nation, and brethren by Nature,
whose several weal and woe is included and wrapped up in the fold of one Common
wealth; that we must even stand or fall together. We (though we have our swords
in our hands) cannot be without you, nor you without us, in this day of public
calamity, and of this (we do not question, but) as we with you, so you with us
are sufficiently sensible, which to all conscientious and judicious men may be
sufficient to tie us firmly together in one Common bond of unity against all
our oppressors, and opposers of freedom whatsoever, but in this we give you the
pre-eminence; for though we are with you in heart and affection for the
principles of Common Right and freedom to the Land: yet we must give you the
right hand of fellowship in appearing and going before us therein. For to the
great refreshments of our spirits we find, that God has preserved yet
thousands for us, that have not bowed their knee to Baal, and are yet (after
all these afflictions and trials) firm and untainted with the poisonous
principles of Oppression and Tyranny, as by your two late Petitions appears:
for which as we are bound in duty to render the glory thereof unto God, so in
all humane and Civil obligation, we cannot choose but render our grateful and
cordial respects unto you for the same, and must profess it our duty to attest
the same with our Swords, in and for those just principles (in your Petition
contained) to live and die with you, and for you. And as you have been an
encouragement unto us, to raise up our spirits, and put us upon action, so let
us be an encouragement unto you to pursue with the utmost vigor and might
those happy beginnings of yours, and we shall by Gods assistance second you
with our utmost power and might in your greatest straits and difficulties
against all opposers whatsoever: And as a testimony of our real intentions
therein, we have sent you the copies of some Papers, which we have intended in
pursuance of your Petitions: And we shall say no more at present, but that we
are,

Gentlemen, Your most affectionate Friends and Servants.
From the Leagure before Barwick, Sept. 30. 1648.

