The PROTESTANT's Warning-Piece: Or, The humble Remonstrance of Ieffery Corbet
Citizen and Grocer of London, composed for the view of his Highness, the
Parliament, and all the good People in England, Scotland and Jreland; and
published to frustrate the Designs of the Incendiaries employed by the Pope,
and the King of Spain, who have several years contrived to fire the City of
London in a 100 places at once, and then proceed to their long intended
Massacre.
Shows,
THat about the year, 1639. The Pope and his Council sent William Oconner, an
Irish Jesuit unto the King of Spain and the rest of the Catholic Princes for
their contribution of Money, Arms and Ammunition to carry on the Massacre of all
the Protestants in the 3. Nations. And for that end the said Oconner came over
into England about July, 1640. And went daily in the garb of a Courtier
attending upon the Queen Mother. About 1. September. 1640. the said Oconnee did
boast unto an Jrish convert that he was the chief contriver of that intended
Massacre, and that there were 7000. men in private pay for the Massacre in
London. And that the L. Cottington was to be Lieutenant of the Tower, and had
500. Irish Papists sent out of Flanders to guard the Tower under him. And that
the Queen was to go beyond Sea, and pawn the jewels of the Crown for that
purpose. And that the Money, Arms, and Ammunition which the King of Spain had
sent over was secured at the Spanish Ambassadors house in London, and was
disposed of amongst the Papists by one Garrat Dillon an Irish Jesuit, who had
his Residence at the Spanish Ambassadors.

That upon discovery of the Massacre the said O conner was apprehended, and
committed to the Gate-hoase, 3. September. 1640. But diverse persons in and about
the City of London, and West minster, caused the said O conner to be protected
from Justice above 4. years and then to be released, contrary to the Law of
God, and the laws of the Land. And though the said O conner was so timely
apprehended that the Massacre was prevented here, yet because Justice was not
speedily executed upon him that others might hear and fear, and do no more so
wickedly. Therefore the hearts of his Confederates were fully set in them to do
evil. Insomuch that above 100000 Protestants in Ireland were barbarously
murdered in cold blood several months after the said O conner was
apprehended. Moreover those persons did not only prevail, that the bloody
Massacre was not at all discovered to the Protestants in Ireland to fore-warn
and arm them to fight for their lives; but they improved such an Interest
here, that the Popish party who had a hand in the Massacre intended in England
were never searched out. Yea those persons wittingly and wilfully suffered the
Queen to go beyond Sea to pawn the Jewels of the Crown for laying the
foundation of the late wars here to carry on the Popes hellish Interest.

That those Persons have from time to time, Protected the Popes Agents from
Justice, when they were apprehended by his Highness, and others during the
wars, and sent to the Parliament, to be tried for their lives as Traiterous
Incendiaries. Insomuch, that the Pope and his Conclave finding such
encouragement they sent over 300 chosen Jesuits into England to make factions,
and parties amongst Professors, and so preach us into Confusion as they have
boasted. Moreover the Pope caused his Bulls to be hanged up on the Church doors
at Antwerp and other places, in 1643. and 1644. giving dispensations to all
Priests, and Jesuits to come into England and to transform themselves into the
various forms of Religion amongst us, the better to divide the People and
carry on their bloody Designs under a form of Godliness. And by that stratagem
they have all along exasperated the spirits of Professors differing in
Judgment and made them bite, and endeavor to devour one another. Mean while
the Popes interest has gone on unsuspected. And under this color they have
conspired diverse years to set the City of London on fire in a hundred places
at once, and then fall to Massacre, and cut off the root and branch of all the
Protestants in these Nations. Yea, they have boasted that they are in constant
readiness, and watch only for the remove of the Army as they did in 1648. upon
the Scots Invasion, and the Insurrection in Kent Wales, etc. And the Captain
General for that bloody work had his constant resident at the Spanish
Ambassadors house till he removed from London.

That the aforesaid Persons have from time to time dammed up Justice against
the Discoverers of those horrid Conspiracies, and all others who have appeared
on their behalf. And have caused them and their friends to be defrauded of
Estates above 40000. pounds in value. Mean while they have caused diverse
friends to those discoverers to go with sorrow to their Graves, and others to
lead languishing lives in disgrace and repreach. Upon which account the
foresaid Persons being subtle secret Enemies did improve such an Interest in
the three last Parliaments, that no Law was made to remedy such abominable
obstructions of Justice whereby the Agents for the Pope, and the King of
Spain, and the King of Scots have been encouraged, and protected in their
barbarous Conspiracies, and the friends of the Commonwealth exposed to ruin.
Only the good hand of Providence has preserved those Discoverers, and many of
their friends even to Admiration for to make good the foregoing particulars on
behalf of this divided, and wel-nigh distracted Commonwealth.

That the King of Scots has many years since engaged to the Pope to set up
Popery in these Nations upon the Popes engagement to improve his Interest to
settle him in his Throne. And from that mutual Engagement, The Presbyterians
in Scotland, and here may gather that their making a party to bring in the K.
of Scots for the Establishing of Presbytery was to strengthen the hands of the
Popes party to murder them, and their posterities. And the Protestant Cavalier
may likewise observe that if they should have conquered the Parliaments party,
yet all the advantage they would have gained thereby would have been only this
to have been last destroyed. For the Popes bloody Monsters would have given
them no more quarter then they did the 100000. in Ireland, which they murdered
in cold blood.

That the Spine says. No Prophecy of Scripture is of any private
Interpretation. And because thou have let go out of thy hand a man whom I
appointed to utter destruction, thy life shall go for his life, and thy People
for his People. And neglect to strengthen the hands of the poor and needy, was
one of the sins of Sodom, And God abhorres solemn Fasts, and other duties
where Judgment and Righteousness are neglected, (2 Pet. 1. 20. 1 King. 20. 42.
Ezekiel. 16. 49. Isa 1. 11. to 18. Amos, 5. 21.) From whence it does appear that
the unparalleled mercies which God has bestowed upon these Nations have been
hitherto intermixed with dreadful Judgments threatening utter desolation.
Because! The Popes bloody Monsters have been let go from time to time by the
aforesaid secret Enemies. And, because men of known Integrity, fearing God,
and of a good conversation are not appointed for Commissioners to bring these
secret Enemies unto speedy public Justice, and to break the heavy yoke of
oppression by delivering the spoiled from their oppressors and strengthen the
hands of the poor and needy, which is the faft that God has chosen, and
promised a special blessing unto.

In tender consideration of the premises J do earnestly beseech all
Protestants under what form whatsoever, specially in, and about the City of
London, and West minster (as they will answer it at the great day of Account,
and desire to be free from the blood of themselves, and their Wives, Children
and friends.) That they would unite as one man, and improve their utmost
Interest in the Parliament by Petition and otherwise, for the obtaining of such
Commisioners, to the end the Innocent blood which has been spilt by the
Treachery of those secret Enemies may be expiated, and the Pope's bloody
Designs now on foot may be defeated. And that the complainings in our Streets
may cease by setting the oppressed free from the obstructions of Justice which
they have long groaned under. And I do hereby engage my Life to make good the
aforesaid particulars before such Commissioners, and do profess before God and
men that J am moved to declare these things out of no self-end or by-respect
whatsoever, but out of a desire to discharge a good Conscience and a zeal to
promote the good and welfare of these Nations; being fully convinced that the
appointment of such Commissioners would soon root out the Popes Incendiaries,
and undeceive many thousands of deluded dissenters, and reconcile this divided
People and open an effectual door for judgment, and righteousness to run
down like a mighty stream, and would give the People cause to bless the
Lord, for raising and Spiriting his Highness, and this Parliament, to be
Repairers of our Breaches, and the Restorers of paths to dwell in.

Prove. 14. 34. Isa. 32. 17. Justice exalts a Nation. And the work of
Righteousness shall be Peace.

Prove. 3. 27. Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the
Power of thy hand to do it.

Judges, 5 23. Curse ye Meroz because they came not to the help of the Lord
against the Mighty.

8. November. 1656. JEFFERY CORBET.


