A COPY of a PAPER Concerning Three Propositions Presented by the Commissioners
to the Kings Majesty on Monday last, October 9. 1648.

With His Majesty's Final Answer, returned on Wednesday the 11 of October,
concerning Ireland.

And His Majesty's Propositions for the nomination of a Deputy and other
Officers for 20 years.

Presented to the Parliament this present Friday, October. 13. 1648

October. 13. 1648.
THis is a true Copy examined. And His Majesty's Paper, Subscribed

CHARLES REX.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

London printed by Robert Ibbitson. 1648.

A Copy of the Commissioners PAPER Presented to the KING October 9. 1648.
I.
THat An Act of Parliament be passed, To Declare and make Void the Cessation
of Ireland, and all Treaties and Conclusion of Peace, or any Articles thereupon
with the Rebels, without consent of both Houses of Parliament. And to settle
the Prosecution of the War in Ireland in both Houses, of the Parliament of
England; to be managed by them: And the King to assist, and to do no Act to
discountenance or molest them therein.

II.
That Reformation of Religion according to the Covenant be settled in the
Kingdom of Ireland by Act of Parliament, in such manner as both Houses of
Parliament of England, have agreed, or shall agree upon, after Consultation had
with the Assembly of Divines here.

III.
That the Deputy or chief Governor, or other Governors of Ireland, and the
Presidents of the several Provinces of that Kingdom be nominated by both the
Houses of the Parliament of England, or in the intervalls of Parliament, by
such Committees of both Houses of Parliament, as both Houses of the Parliament
of England shall nominate and appoint for that purpose. And that the
Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer, Commissioners of the great Seal or
Treasury, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Chancellor of the Exchequer and
Duchy; Secretaries of State, Master of the Rolls, Judges of both Benches, and
Barrons of the Exchequer of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Vice
Treasurer, and Treasurers at VVarres of(...) Kingdom of Ireland be nominated
by both Houses of the Parliament of England, to continue Quem diu se been
gesserint, and in the Intervals of Parliament by the aforementioned
Committees, to be approved, or disallowed by both Houses at their next sitting.

A Copy of His Majesty's Paper, Delivered to the Commissioners at the Treaty
with His Majesty, at Newport in the Isle of WIGHT.
The eleventh day of October 1648.
CHARLES R.

FOr a Final Answer to you, to your Proposition of the ninth of October,
concerning Ireland.

His Majesty does give His Consent thereunto as is desired, the time for
nomination of the Deputy, and other Officers being limited for Twenty years
from the first of July, 1648.

Newport 11 October. 1648.
FINIS.

