The Copy OF A MOST PITHY AND PIOUS LETTER, Written by a faithful Subject of
this Kingdom, to JAMES USHER Archbishop of ARMAGH, to persuade our KING to
return with speed in Peace to His PARLIAMENT.

Published by Authority.

July 10th LONDON, Printed by Robert White.

My Lord:
SO often as I call to mind and consider what evident demonstrations you have
formerly given to the truly Godly and Religious party in these Kingdoms (both
by your life and doctrine) that you are one of them: I cannot but admire that
you have of late gone out from them, 1 Jo. 2.19.
and have not continued with them; especially if you should be a means (as
some do fear you are) of keeping our King from them. But truly (my Lord) for
mine own part, though I do conclude that you have grossly failed in this
particular act, yet do I still look upon you as a second Mnason, Act. 21.16
an old Disciple: Nevertheless I say, Rev. 2.45.
I have somewhat against you, because you have lost your first love. Remember
therefore from whence you are fallen, and repent, and do your first works.

My Lord, I hope you know, and if you do not, I pray you give me leave to tell
you (yea, and I beseech you also to tell our King) that the Members of His two
Houses of Parliament assembled at Westminster, together with such as do truly
adhere unto them, are for the major part of them regenerate men, such as truly
know Christ, and believe on his name, men fearing God, and eschewing evil,
Job. 1.1. Mal. 3.17.
who stand for Gods cause, and seek to advance his glory, and therefore they
are his Jewels, who do for Conscience sake love and honor their King in their
hearts: witness their humble and hearty Petitions to His Majesty for his
return to them in Peace; And their many and fervent Prayers which they have
and do put up unto God both in Pulpits, Houses, and private Closets, for his
welfare both in soul and body, and for his happy return to them in peace and
safety: Yea, and witness their expending of their estates, and adventuring of
their lives, not against his Majesty, but for him, viz. for the subduing of
his evil Counselors, who have seduced him, and withdrawn and kept him so long
from them, that so they might rescue him out of their hands, and bring him home
to themselves in peace and safety.

And again (my Lord) I hope you are not ignorant (being as it were amongst
them, though I hope none of them) that those who are about His Majesty,
together with such as set themselves against His Parliament, are to the grief
of your heart (for the major part of them) unregenerate men, such as neither
truly know Christ, nor believe on his name, and the fear of God is not before
their eyes. Romans 3.18.
Are you such a stranger to His Majesty's Army (as they by some are styled)
that you do not know that it is almost, if not altogether made up of professed
Papists, superstitious, ignorant, and profane persons, as Swearers,
Blasphemers, Liers, Whoremongers, and as it were, all the wicked of the land,
who fight for nothing but Popery, Superstition, Profaneness, Carnal liberty,
Worldly commodity, and whatsoever tends to the dishonor of God. And though I
have the fame hopes of some of them, that I have of you, viz. that you love and
honor His Majesty for conscience sake: Yet I fear me the number of such are
very few. And as for the rest, if the worldly wiser sort of them do show any
love and honor to their King, it is but to the end He might love and honor
them, and so indeed it is themselves they love and honor, and not their King.
And if the simpler sort of them do love and honor him, alas it is but merely
out of an instinct in nature; and indeed such as these do love and honor their
King, more than they do their God, and so indeed they make a God, or rather an
Idol of their King.

My Lord, 2 Pet. 2.17
you know the Apostle Peter bids; First fear God, and then honor the King.
Implying, that the man that does not truly fear God, cannot sincerely honor
the King. And though they say many a time, God save your Majesty, and God
bless our King, or read a prayer for him upon a book, yet these are but a
form of words, and no true prayer, For how can they call on him in whom they
have not believed. Romans 10.14.

Wherefore (my Lord) I pray you open your eyes and discern between the
Righteous and the wicked, Mal. 3.8.
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not, and go out to
meet the King, 2 Chro. 19.2.
and say unto him as Iehu the son of Hanani the Seer said unto King
Iehoshaphat, Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord?
and beseech His Majesty rather to say with godly King David, Psalm. 139.21.22.
Do not I hate them O Lord that hate thee, and am not I grieved with those that
rise up against thee? I hate them with perfect hatred, and count them mine
enemies: Psalm. 119.115.
wherefore depart from me ye evil doers, for I will keep the Commandments of
my God: A froward heart shall depart from me; I will not know a wicked person,
mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, Psalm. 101.4.6.
that they may dwell with me; he that walks in a perfect way shall serve me,
Psalm. 16.2.3.
for my goodness extends unto the Saints that are in the earth, in whom is
all my delight. And put His Majesty in mind how godly King Josiah, in going out
to war against the mind of God, was slain in the Valley of Megiddo; 2 Chro.
35.21.22. Dan. 4.27.
and then say unto him, Wherefore O King let my Council be acceptable unto
you, break off thy sins by Righteousness, and return in Peace with speed
to your Parliament: And that he may be the more willing so to do, I beseech you
assure His Majesty, that it would be very well pleasing to God, and very
comfortable to his two Houses of Parliament, and very joyful news to all his
Subjects, except such as have deserved to feel the hand of Justice: And who
can devise a surer and speedier way for the putting an end to these miserable
wars, and settling a firm and happy peace, and preventing the shedding of
more innocent blood, then His Majesty's return would be; nay can any man find
out a more speedy and surer way to His Majesty's own Honor and safety, then
this would be, judge in your self my Lord) whether this will not redound much
to the Honor of our King, when it shall be said for the present, and written
for the future, that Charles the first King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland etc. being seduced by evil Counsel, did for a time make war against
his Parliament, but then afterward pitying the lamentable condition that his
good Subjects were thereby brought into, did of his own accord, against the
mind of the same evil Counsel, return unto His Parliament in Peace, and so
put an end unto it. And how can the head be more in safety, then when the arms
and hands of the body are nearest to defend it: And O what abundance of love
would His Majesty gain from all his faithful and true hearted subjects by
such a return to his Parliament! And truly (my Lord) if you should be a means
of it, we should love you dearly, wherefore alludeing to the words of Mordecai
to Hester, I say unto you my Lord, Est. 4.8.14.
Go in unto the King to make supplication unto him, and to make request before
him for his people: And who knows whether you went to the Kings quartes for
such a time as this. And if His Majesty, through the seducement of evil
Counsel, object, that the Members of the two Houses of Parliament, with such
as do adhere unto them, are a company, of Scismaticall, Factious, Rebellious,
Traitorous persons, such as seek to take away his life, subvert his Laws, and
alter his Religion. Then my Lord, I hope you know how to make answer, if you do
not, then I pray you suffer an Aquilla to give unto an Apollo, a word of
advice; put His Majesty in mind, that it is neither a new, nor a strange
course for wicked and ungodly men, to render the dear servants of God unto
their Kings and Princes, under these or the like opprobrious titles: witness
the testimony of Holy Writ; for did not wicked Rehum the Chancellor, Esra 4.15.
and Shimshai the Scribe write unto the King in Nehemiahs time, That the people
of God were arebellious people, hurtful to Kings and Provinces, and movers of
sedition. And did not wicked Haman tell the King, that Religious Mordecai, and
the rest of Gods people had Laws diverse from all people, and kept not the
Kings Laws, Est. 3.8.
and that therefore it was not for the Kings profit to suffer them? Dan. 3.12.
and 6.13.
And did not the wicked and ungodly men in Daniels time accuse him, and the
other three dear servants of God, That they neither regarded the King, nor his
Decree? Act. 24.5. Act. 16.20.21. Act. 17.6.
And was not Paul, and the rest of the holy Apostles accused before the
Governors, to be pestilent fellows, movers of sedition, troublers of Cities,
teachers of Customs which are not lawful, and such as turned the World
up-side down?

Wherefore (my Lord) I beseech you give His Majesty to understand, that they
are no such men as he is informed they are, Dan. 4.22.
forasmuch as before God innocence is found in them, and also before their
King they have done no hurt, they desire no other King to Rule and Govern
these Kingdoms, then His Majesty, nor no other Laws then are, and what he
shall confirm: And as for Religion, they neither have nor yet intend to alter
the substance of it at all, for though They have, and shall desire His Majesty,
to put down Episcopacy and Service Book, yet (my Lord. I hope you know (if not,
I beseech you give me leave to tell you) that neither Bishop nor Service Book,
are any part of the substance of the true Protestant Religion. Nay let me tell
your Lordship more, though there be too much discord amongst the truly godly,
yet is it but about some circumstantiall points, and I doubt not but God will
reconcile them in due time.

Wherefore, beseech His Majesty, Act. 5.35.38.
to take heed what he intends to do as touching these men; nay, let him refrain
from these men, and let them alone, for their Counsel and their work is of
God, and therefore it cannot be overthrown, so that although for the trial of
their faith and patience, and the hardening of their enemies, the Lord suffer
them now and then to be put to the worst in battle, yet shall they at last be
more then Conquerers through Christ that loves them, Rom 8.37.
maugre the malice of all gainsayers and opposers.

Thus my Lord you see I have presumed to put you in mind of your duty, Phile.
v. 21.
having confidence in your obedience, knowing that you will also do more then I
say, the which the Lord work in you, both to will and to do, even of his good
pleasure, Amen.

The Lord of Heaven, in whose hands is the heart of all Kings, Pro. 21.1.
persuade our Kings heart to believe these things, and bring him home in Peace
to his Parliament, Amen.

FINIS.

