THE TREATY BETWEEN The Commissioners from the Lord Mayor, and Common council
of the city of London, and Sir Thomos Fairfax and the Army at St. Albanes.

With their message from the Army to the Common Council, in Answer to their
Letter, With the Demands of the Army.

V^^IT^^ VI^^^^IT (...) printer's or publisher's device

London Printed for B. A. 1647.

NEVVES FROM THE ARMY
SIR,
THe Committee of Aldermen and Common Council came yesterday hither to St.
Albanes, with a Message from the City of London, and have bin with the
G^nerall.

Alderman Warner and the rest of the Comemittee acquainted the Genesis that they
were sent by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, to acquaint his
Excellency, that they had brought from them an answer to his of June 10.
Assuring him, that they have a very high esteem of that army, whom they know
and acknowledge to be faithful, and wel-deseruing, and that the City have a
general desire to prevent all misunderstanding betwixt them.

That the City takes notice of the Army drawing near them, and the reasons
alleged; and return thanks for the care promised over the Soldiers, not to
permit them to do any evil toward the City.

And for those just demands, which you have made to the Pa^l the
Common Council of the City of London are so far from opposing them or the
Army in being satisfied therein, that before they received the Letter from the
army, they made their humble addresses to the Parl. for obtaining thereof; and
that after they received the said letter, they acquainted the houses therewith,
declaring the sense of that good opinion which they have of the army to the
houses, professing not to fail to prosecute their just desires to the Parl. as
occasion shall represent.

I have sent you here enclosed, the Copy of the Desires of the Common Counsel
of London propounded to the Army, and rest

Albanes June 14. Your servant, R. Corbet.

The Desires of the City of London presented to his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, by the Commissioners at St. Albanes.
1. We desire that you will be pleased to forbear quartering within 30 miles of
the City of London. 2. That you will desire no more from the Parl. or the City,
then what shall be just and reasonable. 3. That the addresses of the army to
the Parl. may be in such a way as may consist with the honor, power, and
privilege of P^rliament, liberty of the subject, and safety of the City and
Kingdom. 4. That your Excellency, and other the Commanders of the Army, will
have a speci^l care for the preservation of his Majesty's Royal person,
whilst he remains with you.
A Letter from his Excellencies quarters at St. Albanes,
SIR,
SInce my last, we have bin very busy about quarters, and other things, so
that I cannot give you so large accounts as I in tended of some things here,
which I must necessarily refer to the next, yet for the present, I shall give
you this breviate of the state of things with us at present.

The Genesis hearing of the coming of the Aldermen and Commoners from the
Common Counsel of the City of London gave order to have them honorably
entertained, and accordingly the Gen own Trumpeter, and diverse Officers met
them, and brought them in with great respect. Last night they delived their
message, and this day they received their answer, and were dispatched away
after dinner. There has bin very fair things on both sides, and things have
been carried on with much wisdom. I shall not trouble you with things at
large now, only acquaint you in brief, that

The Commissioners from the City are now dispatched, and will be with you this
night, with the full Answer of the Army, to whatsoever they could desire from
them, both as to members charged, and concerning the Parliament in gennerally.
They demand ten members of the house of Commons to be tried by the Parliament,
and to be suspended the House during the time of there trial. They desire to
know the resolutions of the Houses as to there siting, and how others shall be
called. They lay aside wholly the church, and governmant thereof. They propound
that the Kings Majesty his just and legal rights.

They propound that the Parliament may enjoy their just Privileges.

They propound that the Sub^ects of the kingdom may enjoy their just
liberties.

Their moneys also in the last place comes in course.

St. Albons June 15. 16^^.

