THE Perfect-Law OF GOD: BEING A Sermon, and no Sermon; -: Preached, and yet
not Preached;-: In a-Church, but not in a- Church; To a People, that are not a
People-.

By RICHARD CARPENTER.

Wherein also, he gives his first Alarm to his Brethren of the Presbytery; As
being his-Brethren, but not his-Brethren.

Psalm. 84. 10. Secundum Codicem He^^aeum, Elegi ad limen sedere, in Domo D^i: I
(...) o^ osen to sit at the threshold, in the House of God: Targ: adhae^ere; ^o
ly cleaving to the ^^^^sh (...), with hands and mouth: Lxx. (...) ^e as an
A^ject in the House of God; than to dwell in the Tents of Wickedness. London,
Printed by F. L. 1652.

To all Christian Governors, That are, or shall be: Be These Most Humbly
presented, Now, and hereafter, To the World's End.

Likewise, To all GENERALS, and Governors of Armies.

Finally, To all People, That desire to govern their Hearts, Agreeably to The
perfect Law of God.

St. BERN ARDUS, Sermon. 36 in Cant.
SUnt qui scire volunt, ^o fine tantum ut sciant; and turpis Curiositas est. Et
sunt qui scire volunt, ut sciantur ipsi; and turpis Vanitas est. Sunt item qui
scire volunt, ut scientiam vendant, pro P^cunia, pro Honoribus; and turpis
Quaestus est. Sed sunt quoque qui scire volunt, ut aedificent; and Charitas
est. Et sunt qui scire volunt, ut aedificentur; and Prudentia est.

Some desire to know, for this End only, that they may know; and it is a foul
Curiosity. And some desire to know, that themselves may be known; and it is a
foul Vanity. Some likewise desire to know, that they may sell their knowledge,
for Money, for Honors; and it is a Gain, foully got. But there are also who
desire to know, that they may edify others; and it is Charity. And there are
who desire to know, that themselves may be edifyed; and it is Prudence.

The Perfect LAW of GOD.
I Ta plane res est: It is even so. Though the Text of a Sermon, be the first
in Dignity; I never lead it up to the first place. A Text of God's Word,
expounded in God's Name, is the preaching and publishing of God's Name, and
like the Name of God; being Oleum effusum, oil or ointment poured forth; as the
Name of God is, Cant. 1. 3. Thy Name is as ointment poured forth. The Auditors
or Hearers, are the Vessels. We pour not pure oil, but into clean, and prepared
Vessels.

Holy David sings to his Harp, Psalm. 10. 17. Thou will prepare their Heart,
thou will cause thine ear to hear. Which the Editio Vulgata.
Vulgar Latin agreeably tempers: Praeparationem Cordis little audivit auris tua,
Thine ear has heard the preparation of their Heart; And pre-supposes, Deum
cordibus nostris aliquantisper aurem admovere, that God stands, as it were,
holding his ear, some while, close to the Door of our Hearts; and listening,
with earnest attention, to apprehend if there be any stir in the House, of
Preparation for him, or of Propension toward him. Symmachus puts aside
Preparation; and Symmachus.
assumes (...), the first proposal, or proposition; primum murmurillum, the
very first little inward murmuring of the Heart, concerning Faith and Good
life; the small noise and motion which the Heart makes in the first taking of
the pencill in hand, to draw the first lineaments of a good purpose; when we
begin to purpose, and before we can open our mouths to pray. Venerable Bede
implants here, Venerabilis Beda in Psalm. 10.
as in a fit ground, bonam Affectionem: and reads, Thine ear has heard the
good Affection of their Heart. His good Affection, being that previous
Affection which the School-Divines require as a gracious preparative or
Disposition to Faith. (For, a Disposition is ever analogous with the Thing,
toward which, or to which, as the last Disposition, it disposes: except the
Disposition disposes negatively; and only renders the Subject less
indisposed.) Wherefore these Divines, (in defiance of Pelagius, and of the
Massilienses or Semipelagians,) mark it with the Name of Pia Affectio, a godly
or pious Affection; because it is of God, as he is the Author of Grace.

Remember: That God sends his act^. all and first grace into your hearts; while
he stands himself abroad, expecting, waiting, and listening to hear the first
attempts and motions of this Preparation, propension, proposition, inward
murmuring; to hear the pleasant noise made in the first Draught of this Good
Purpose; the grateful* stirrings of this good and pio^^ Affection, in the
first waking of it: that Himself may open the door for Himself; and Himself
come in, to Himself and you, with his habitual and second Grace. Remember.

Now Three things: and the first, thus. (It relates to the most Angelical
Office of a Preacher.) The Latin word, Speculator, is authentically brought
home to us in our language: A Watchman from on high. And he that would
represent in his thoughts, a lively character of a Watchman, may fitly
pourtrait there, one tanquam in Specula positum, taking a full and superior
view of these inferior things from the top of a Watchtower. Watchman, what
see thou? What from the Tower? I Will tell you anon, and with more than
ordinary boldness. Gods Watchman should not appear aloft in a Sermon, as the
reflection of the great Angell-Image, recounted by Cardanus, from a Steeple-top
in Millan, Cardan. lib. 12. Contrad. Medic.
that at one stroke, limbd it self on the Clouds in the Air, of themselves
prepared for such an Impression; and only amazed and amused the vulgar Herd;
who vainly took the vain reflection of an Image on the Clouds, for a most
heavenly Saint or Angel: But should come down out of the Clouds, and speak
near, and home, velut Angelus in Carne, as an Angel in the Flesh; and movingly,
under God, to the Hearts of the people: and enter like a Wedg-Army; not
affecting the Name of a Heavenly Man, but acting the Work of Heaven. It is the
paultry Cutpurse (stop him there) that cunningly guides his arm, and fears to
touch the quick with his ready little knife; lest in the quick miscarriage of
his hand, he should quickly miss of his prey. And, Nusquam legimus scriptum,
says Trithemius, quod bonus spiritus Trithem. in Cariosit. Regia, Q^aest. 6.
in forma sit visus muliebri, aut Bestiae cujuscunque, sed semper in specie
virili: We read it no where written, that a good Angel did at any time appear
in the form of a Woman, or of a Beast, but always in the shape of a perfect
Man. The Messenger (or Angel) of the Lord of Hosts, Malach. 2. 7. Angelus
Domini Exercituum; And he of whom it is a sealed Truth, as of John the Baptist,
(that was, as our Preparation should be, rigid and severe in the preparing of
Christ's way,) Matthew. 11. 10. Behold I send my Messenger, (...), my Angel; has
nothing of Effeminacy, nothing sought or affected, in Prayer, in Preaching, in
Pronunciation, or in Matter: naught of the dull, and sensual Beast in him. He
is altogether manly, and his words and actions are (...), they move onwards in
the same yoke. Ye cannot exclame of him; O sweet, O pious, O valiant voice! or
say reasonably to him, as the Lacedemonian Plut. in Apophtbeg. Lacon.
in Plutarch, to the dead Nightingale, having found little sap and substance
for his nourishment, in her musical Body; V^x es, praetere a nihil, Thou art a
voice, and nothing but a voice. He will deny himself to be the Christ, even by
his preaching the Christ; and to be Elias, or a Prophet: And he will humbly
define himself in his Office; The voice of one crying in the wilderness; as
the Baptist did, Joh. 1. And therefore, he shall be most highly approved by the
divine Testimony of the Christ, and be declared to come in the Spirit of Elias;
and to be more than a Prophet; yea, the choice Angel of the great God, as it
was declared of John. O my dear Consorts of Nature: Coelum coelorum, the Heaven
of Heavens, or the highest Heaven, which is Coelum Beatorum, the Heaven of the
Blessed, wherein the blessed Saints and Angels dwell, is not rapted or carried
about, as those Vnder-Spheres are; Nor is a Man from Heaven, being God's Angel
or Messenger to Mankind, career'd about. And the Messenger qui versatur in
circulo, that moves circularly, though he comes from Heavenward, comes only
from the Sphere of Mercury, or of the Moon, being himself like the nimble
Spheres under our Heaven; of the which great Aristotle asserts, That if one of
them should Arist. lib. 2. de Coelo.
stand a while, while a small Fly could be raised to settle upon it, it would
be whirling about, in the very first onset of the silly poor Fly- I hear it
Thunder. Psalm. 77. 18. The Voice of thy Thunder in the Heaven; or in the
Sphere: the Original word with like affection importing a Text. Hebr
Sphere, a Wheel, and every thing, the motion of which is circular. Which moved
the Vulgar Latin to run parallel with our Codex vulgatus.
Sense: Vox Tonitrui tui in Rota, The voice of thy Thunder (thy Anger, thy
Judgment) is heard in the motion of the Wheel. And the same Propher reaches
even to this Age, and to this Nation, with a prophetical Eye and Prayer; Psalm.
83. 13. O my God, make them like a Wheel: that being drawn a little, turns
upwards, downwards; toward Heaven, and toward Hell; forwards, and backwards;
turning a new way, and to the way from which it lately turned: wheeling about,
and about, and about again; this way, that way, the other way; any way, every
way, all ways.

The second of the Three things, stands forth. And it pleads for the
maintenance of certain unoffensive Rights, concerning the materials and
composure of this Discourse. I have received it flowing from the
Pen-Distillations of the mighty Controvertist; whose very Name gives us an
Alarm, and sounds Bellum and Arma, War and Arms: that we may wisely return,
and run back with our Pitchers to the Greek and Hebrew Fountains; driven
Robert. Bellarm. lib. 2. de Verbo Dei, cap. 11. Tom. 1.
within the lists and restraint of four Cases or Exigencies. Whereof the third,
is; Quando verbum, aut Sententia in Latino est anceps; when a word or sentence
in the Vulgar Bible, is doubtful; and stands upright in aequilibrio, looking
at once two ways, or many; but inclining, or propending no way. And the
fourth, ad (...) and proprietatem vocabulorum intelligendam, for our clear
understanding of the secret energy, or efficacy, and smoothdeep current of
words, running majestically, and with grave silence, in their own Channel. As,
when the word or phrase in the Fountain, is beautifully bigg with an Emphasis,
or tacit signification. The wise Alchymist, in the whole progress of his Art,
extracts Things purer and purer, from grosser Things. And a Text sometimes, is
like a double Picture; wherein they wipe off with a wet cloth, the
watercolors, that the during oily Picture in recessu, in it is withdrawing
place, and retiring-Chamber, may now be unveiled, and come in view: which often
times is contrary to the Picture carrying the first face. Brethren, There was a
a kind of mortal punishment amongst the old Jews, badg'd with the title of
Combustio Animae, the Burning of the Soul: (My Author is R. Levi Ben Gerson) R.
Levi Ben Gerson in Levil. 10.
wherein they poured scalding Lead into the mouth of the condemned person; by
the which, his inwards were consumed; the shape and outward bark of his body,
remaining still with due proportion. So there be Translatours of the lower
Classis, (O dismal, and odious name!) that with a leaden sense, yet full of
Malignant heat and base passion, scalld away the Spirit, Soul, and Life of the
Text: leaving naught often times but a shell, Superfice and outward letter.
Moreover, I disclame and abandon, as I do the Angel of the Bottomeless pit,
Abaddon, King of the strange Locusts, Apoc. 9. 11. who in the Greek tongue has
his name (...), that is, exterminans, exterminating, as the vulgar Latin; as
Erasmus, perdens, Lectio vulgata. Erasm. Roterodam. in Apoc. 9. Text. Heb.
destroying; according to the letter in the Hebrew, Perdition, destruction,
here being (...) Effecti, a Figurative speech, in the which Effectus loco
Causae ponitur, the Effect is honorably substituted for the Cause, after the
leading of the Hebrew Dialect: Destruction in the abstract, for a superlative
Destroyer. As I abandon this Abaddon, this Devill-angel; I renounce all those,
who in their Use (Abuse is the Word) of holy Scripture, God's pure word; as if
it were homogeneal with Anaxagoras his (...)(...) upon Aristotle's Record; draw
Aristot. de Genera^. Animal. lib. 4 cap. 3.
quidlibet ex quolibet, every thing out of any thing, and make divine Scripture
in omnia sequacem, readily following them in their proof of all things, and God
the holy Author of Scripture, like a Cunning Man that is versatili ad omnia
pari^er Ingenio, of a wit or nature applying and turning it self to every thing
alike; and thus destroy the firmness of Scripture, and exterminate God out of
his own Word. These are unnatural Children, who for want of Superior
moderation, pull too strongly; and seeking Milk, suck Blood from the soft and
tender Breasts of sacred Scripture. It is Aristotle-proof, That Faculties,
Arist. lib. 1. E^hicor. cap. 1.
powers, sciences, etc. are supreme or subordinate, as their Ends are
subordinate or supreme. Therefore those Sciences, those powers, those
faculties, which are immediately helpful to the consecution of our last End,
are the supreme and superior of all other; and the other are Servants, and
waiting-maids in respect of them. How dare those Brethren of the Locusts, so
rashly, so rudely settle and fasten upon the highest of Sciences; and employ so
unadvisedly, indirectly, irreverently their highest Powers and faculties,
belying the blessed Spirit of God? To the matter in hand. Graft a Rose-Tree;
then convey a grain of Musk into a cleft in the stock: and all the Roses that
come of the stock, will carry Musk about them. The Scripture that sweetly
smells of the grain of Musk in the stock (in the Text prae man^bus, before us
to be discussed,) is doubly sweet, sweet of the Musk, and of the Rose.

The Third thing succeeds: and it serves as well to the Meridian of divine and
superior, as of inferior and humane jurisdiction, and to our Hem^sp here.
Elohim is a name of God, assisting his providence; by the which he governs the
World: and signifies God quatenus est Judex and Vindex, as he is a Judge, and
Revenger. Wherefore the Psalmist arraig^s the Fool, Psalm. 14. 1. The Fool has
said in his heart there is no God. First: The Original says, Nabhal has
Text. Heb.
said in his heart: which the Chaldee says over again, The mad man has said,
etc. Chaldaea Paraphrasis.
The Hebrew word signifies, a sottish or doltish fellow; yea, one that has
fallen or lapsed from good actions; such before other being Athesticall: or
finally, One that is both a Knave and a Fool; the Latin word Nebulo being an
Hebrew born, and coming, by ancient extraction, of this Nab^al. And secondly:
Text. Heb.
The Original owns, En Elohim, there is no Elohim. And the Chaldee fits it;
Paraphr. Chald.
Non est potestas Dei in terra, There is no dominion or power of God upon the
Earth. And this, the Jerusalem Targ. recounts Targum Hierosolymit. in Genesis 4.
to have been cursed Cai^'s plea against his blessed brother, before he
butchered him. The Word, Elohim, is lineally descended from El, which is a name
of God, reporting him strong; and ala, the translation of which, is, Obligavit,
juramento astrinxit, he has Obliged, he has bound by Oath: inferring covertly
as doctrinall, and purgatis auribus dignum, worthy to be received with clean
Ears, That God has blazoned his Omnipotent strength and power in creating and
adorning the world; ( Elohim being the first name of God in the Scripture, and
most used in the History of the Creation;) and beyond this, has obliged and
most firmly bound us by this excellent and actual Gift of his free Goodness,
as by a virtuall Oath on our parts, to his actual worship, and to the
repayment of real Obedience, and effectual Gratitude: And that, if in our
walkings we be retrograde, or, move in transversum quasi Cancer, crosly; if we
degenerate, in our carriages, into the Changeling with perverted Hands and
Feet; Elohim, that in the first Work of his actual Providence, was Elohim the
Creator; will in the later Works of it, be Elohim the Judge and Revenger: He
that was Elohim, strong to create us, and other Things for us; will finally
approve Himself Elohim, strong to revenge upon us, the vile and various
injuries done to him in the abuse of our selves, and his other Creatures. That
therefore we might recta pergere, go straight-forward, God, for our guidance
in the just and right use of his Cretures, ingrafted in us, in our Creation,
besides our transient, lost, and supernatural Grace; right Reason, and
Prudence; being the Rule and Measure of all our Moral Virtues, or Virtues in
the Will; Which are Virtues, because conformable to the Dictates and Judgment
of Prudence; from which, they receive the fair stamp or embellishment of moral
Honesty; and that they neither exceed, nor are deficient. And that, as right
Reason grew less right, and more warp't by contamination from outward, and low
things; it might be regulated, and heigthen'd by communication, from an outward
Exemplar on the Mount: Upon the Mount he did promulgate, Ore fulmineo, in a
terrible manner, a Moral Law; having betimes proclaimed himself, (as, to Abram
Genesis 17. 1.) El Saddai, God All-sufficient, by his Grace, Mercy, Power. Saddai
is one of God's ten famous Names which constellate in the Old Testament, and is
compacted of Schin a relative article, and the Noun Dai, signifying
sufficiency, Aquila, Symm^chus, and Theodotion, as St. Hierom, called Presbyter
(quod S. Hieronym. Ep. 136. ad Ma^cell.
plerumque Sacerdotes essent aetate provectiores*) attesteth in his Epistle to
Marcella; resolve it into (...) sufficient of and to himself, omnipotent. And
Saddai, as it often appears in the Scriptural^ use of the Word, turns an Ey to
Scaed, a Teat, a Breast; proposing God in his Mercy, as all-Breasts, and full
of Milk; and as offering the Breast, that is, cordially reaching forth Grace,
and heavenly nourishment, to all the Tribes of Men, and to every particular Man
in his Tribe.

And because Christ came to reconcile the great and general Difference bewixt
God and Man, and to satisfy for our Abuse of God's good Creatures, in the
Breaches of the Law: He assuming the Nature of Man, assumed something in it, of
every Creature; either Created Being, or Vegetation, or Sense, or Understanding
and Spirituality. For, In Man, all the Creatures of God in Epitomen reducuntur,
are epitomized, abridged, abbreviated. He is (to speak more Scripture-like)
(...), the recapitulation of all Things into one. And for this reason, God is
said Ephesians. 1. 10. (...), to gather together in one all things in Christ. Hence
Cajetan from the Consistory Caiet. in 3. part Quaest. 1 Art. 1.
of his high Thoughts; Incarnatio est Elevatio totius Vniversi in divinam
Personam, The Incarnation of Christ, is the lifting up, or Elevation of the
whole Universe into the divine Person. This Pinnacle Videatur Salmeron Tom. 3.
Tract. 2. explicans illud ad Ephesians. 1. 10.
of Truth, is artificially garnished by Salmeron, who brings with him St.
Gregory with his* Talent; contributing, that in this Consideration, Christ
sending his Apostles to preach to Mankind, used this Form of command, Marc.
16. 15. Preach the Gospel (...), to every Creature.

The Law of Elohim and Saddai, as it comprehends also the Precepts or Counsills
of Christ, is the choice Thing here, which I would gladly draw forth by it self
and preach to you, and to every Creature in you. The Text is in proximo, very
near, and calls for admittance. Now it comes. Receive it, as rich Vessels
prepared for it. Receive it as the Law and Love of the great Jehovah, and Lord
of us all, and of infinite worlds, lying hid in the dark and void womb of
Possibility, if he shall please to will them into Being, as he did this our
World.

Psalm. 19. 7. Lex Domini immaculata.

It speaks English thus:

The Law of the Lord is perfect. YEs. But notwithstanding; Tu tuas Res age; Ego
meas: Let me modelize my own work. It is joyfully received e Lyceo, out of
Aristotle's School, for a Arist. lib. 6. E^hicor. cap. 4.
Maxim amongst our Christian Philosophers, waiting dutifully upon Divinity:
(...), All Edification in Doctrine, grows up from known or accepted,
Principles, from Principles clear to the eye of right Reason, or of true Faith.
The Text here, is it self a principle, and set forth, standing with a broad
bottom, in the full view both of Reason and Faith. The Reasonable Man, a Natura
nondum ablactatus, not yet weaned from the Breast of naturated Nature, (still
the Milk pearls on his lips;) has willingly transcribed it out of Nature's
Original extant in his Heart, (being dead to God;) as a lively Principle of
Nature; and acts from it; but has not assentingly took it upon the best
account. If one write a Will or Testament, and hold the Pen with a dead man's
Hand, that Will will not hold in Law: It was not his Will; because it was not
writ by him, with virtue derived from any Principle of Life in him. Neither
will our Natural Man's Will hold for a Will in God's Law, being his revealed
will. Some Works and Acts of the Noctuambulones, or those that walk and talk in
their sleep by Night, though the same works, in the trial of Sense, with the
works of the same persons when they wake and walk, are not by Reason admitted,
or enrolled as such. Behold the Ground. Fix your Foot here, as upon a fixed and
immovable Truth. Only the acts and performances issuing from a divine
Principle in us above Nature, can suit with the divine Will, supernaturally
discovered.

But the Believer has religiously copied it into his Heart, out of God's
revealed will, and out of God in the best and highest Construction of him; as
he is in the supernatural Order, the Author of it; not as the Author of
Nature: and therefore, though the same Truth ( eadem in Terminis, the same in
Terms) be still embraced by both; yet now, it is a Truth of the supernatural
Order, and immediately apprehended by an active and fundamental virtue from
God in us; and one so perfect, u^ nihil supra, that nothing in this our State,
reaches above, or before it; and which is Ground-firm, and only able to meet
and close in fit equipage, with the supernaturality of Revelation. And as the
Prince of the Thomists divinely D. Tho: secunda secundae, quaest. 6. art. 1. in
corp.
speaks: Quia Homo assentiendo eis quae sunt Fidei, elevatur supra naturam
suam; oportet quod hoc insit ei ex Supernaturali Principi^ interius movente,
quod est Deus. Because Man by assenting to matters of Faith, is elevated above
his Nature; this must come from a supernatural Principle moving inwardly,
which is God. The supernaiura^ Principle is the main Thing: the principal
Thing. Examine your Principles.

I could render the Text like the Herb called the Tartar. Lamb, that with
secret pullings attracts the juice and virtue of, and seems, like a grown Lamb,
to put a mouth to, and openly feed upon the Plants and Herbs on every side of
it. For, though it be a Principle, it is a Principle in the midst of others;
and lies couchant, as it were, (...), in a rich pictured Pavement.

I might divide the Text too. But we never wisely divide in this Manner, save
claritatis ergo, for perspicuity, and to clear up our Knowledge of Kinds and
Particulars. (Nec ad aliorum Exempla me componam.) And, Principia sunt per se
nota, Principles are known of themselves. They are also compacted, short, and
spritely. And I will not be so like Vesalius the Anatomist, who commonly did
improve his Art, by cutting up Men alive. I shall therefore, Things fairly
flowing and growing of themselves, (Rebus probe fluentib us,) gently bind up
the whole Doctrine into this fair sheaf.

The Will, and Law of God; and the Wills of Men in God's place, which
correspond with the Divine will, and are therefore Law, are perfect and without
blemish.

The Law of God is most unblemished, and perfect, considered in it is Original.

As the Divine Idea, is Quaedam Ratio in Mente Divina, a certain Exemplary
Cause of Things in the Understanding of God: So there is Ratio quaedam in
Divina Voluntate, a certain Rule or Measure of Things in the Divine Will; which
is Lex aeterna, the eternal Law. The first natural Copy of it, is enstamped
in Angelica Natura, in the Angelical Nature. The Second, in Recta Ra^ione, in
the Right Reason of Man. And God's revealed Will in his outward Command or
Word, is an After-Copy; a Sensu init^um habens, entering upon us by the Sense;
as does all our other knowledge of outward Things. The Apostle album apponit
calculum, assents, Romans 10. 17. Fides ex auditu, Faith is occasioned by
hearing. Saint Austin disputing against that numble and whorish-tongu'd Faustus
the Manichean, defines S. Aug. lib. 22. cap. 27. contra Faustum.
Sin, (Peccatum in Commnni,) Dictum, vel Factum, vel Concupitum contra Legem
aeternam Dei: A Thing said, or done, or thought against the eternal Law of
God. This everlasting Rule in God, because in God, is essentially God and
infinite, as God is infinite and everlasting: And quatenus est Ratio
Fundamental is Agendorum, as it is the Fundamental Rule of Things to be done
in Time, is the very Will of God in God.

He that will give God a Name, bearing a special engagement to this Law of
Essence; must give him his essential Name, Jehovah: of the which, Himself
proclames, Exodus 3. 15. This is my Name Legnolam, for ever. Which Text the
later jews, as Petrus Galatinus informs Petrus Galatin. lib. 2. de Arcanis
Fidei, cap. 10. S. Hterom. Epist. ad Marcell.
against them, have greatly distempered by a little motion or mutation; reading
it, Legnalam, to be concealed. This Name of God, is God's proper Name, and
incommunicable to a Creature, as his Essence is; and his Original Will, that
is both a Will and a Law; Saint Hierom calls it (...); St. John Damascen,
(...); S. Jo. Damasc. lib. 1 Ort^o^. Fidei, cap. 12. Theodor. in Exodus 3.
Theodoret, (...). Which Epithites conspire in this; That the Name could not be
spoken, or uttered: Because the Letters, which tied up into a sweet Posy,
composed originally this Name, being Insonae, soundlesse, enigmatically taught,
God's Essence, imported by this Name, to be unspeakeable. It runs through all
the Differences of Time; and is aptly Englished, Who was, who is, who will be:
showing, it includes the Law that is essential and essentially eternal. It is
much applied to God in his merciful Acts; as Elohim in his Acts of judgment:
thereby divulging, That it is in complete Sense, as agreeable to God's Will, to
be merciful as to be; yea, that he delights as much in his Will of Mercy, as in
his Being: And his giving a Law, was a singular act of Mercy; as generally, it
is an act of Justice to punish the Breakers and Violaters of it. Wherefore
Paulus Burgensis contends, that the Mercy of God is insinuated Paul. Eurgens.
in Scr^tin. Part. 1.
by Adonai standing for Jehovah. The Name Iah, being the Name Jehovah with a
curb or check, or taken up into short; and signifying I am, is enrob'd in the
same Perfection. A Doctrine stands up here.

He that breaks the Law of God, sins against the Divine Essence.

O thou Spirit of Truth, assist me farther. The Prophet David cries out toward
Heaven, Psalm. 8. 4. What is Man, that thou art mindful of him? Where Enos,
which the Interpreters call Man, does not signify Man, quocunque modo: but,
Eusebius. de Demonstr. Evang^l. lib. 2. cap. 7.
as Eusebius learnedly, Man, quatenus est ar^^fex aut architect^s sceler^s, ac
immen or Dei and sui. The Paraphrase may be, O what is forgetful Man, that
thou art mindful of him, who forgets thee, and himself, and what he does when
he sets himself against thy very Essence; against thee as thou art Jehovah? Who
fears not to make a rude Assault upon the very substantial Essence of God?
Upon God, as he is Primum Ens per se subsistens, The First of all Things,
subsisting by Himself? As he is Fons Essendi, atque Existendi, The Foutain of
all Essence, and Existence; of all Being, and Well Being? Most Good, and most
Great; and most greatly Good in being most Merciful? Sin proprium periculum
increpuit; But if there be the least noise or crack of Danger in other Things,
mean things, starts, and looks pale, and puts wings to his Heels, and runs to
save himself; crying, make room for God's sake? And though lying under the Rod,
he lets fly a multitude of good Words, and Prayers; and fairly promises to be
reformed; framing likewise a promising Countenance; adjoining an humble Voice;
with some groans; and a goodly number of sighs; the hands, and eyes, all the
while, working mainly: yet, the Rod being laid aside; and the smart off;
presently ^redit ad ingenium, returns to his vomit; the Rod being yet in sight;
and Jehovah with all his Divine Essence, being present, and looking upon him?
What is Enos (or, Enosh) forgetful Man, that thou art mindful of him?

This Law of God, is yet more known to be most perfect, by it is Contrary. For
if this Will or Law of God, were not infinitely great, and good, and perfect,
the Thing contrary to it, could not be Malum infinitum, an infinite Evil, (the
Truth of this, every Man sees; nemo tam Talpa est, quin videat;) and have
infinite Imperfect on in it, as it has according to Divines, and the
Angelical Doctor their Speaker, speaking for them as follows: Peccatum
contra Deum commissum, quandam infinitatem habet ex infinitate D. Tho. part. 3.
quaest. 1. art. 2. ad 2.
Divinae Majestatis: tanto enim Offensa est gravior, quanto major est ille, in
quem delinquitur. Sin committed against God, has a certain infinity from the
infinity of the Divine Majesty: For, an Offense is by so much the more
grievous, by how much he is more great, against whom we offend.

The most adequate, and fundamental Reason is; Because in our Elections of
moral Good and Evil, we hold a Balance; weighing in a manner, the Creator and
the Creature: O great Indignity! And in our Applications to Evil, as if the
Creature were of more weight and worth than the Creator, we scornfully turn
from the Creator, and join affectionately with the Creature; bidding defiance
to the Creator. And, as the melancholy-She in Trallianus, as he delivers it,
Putavit se Alexand: Trallian. lib. 1. cap. 16.
uno digito posse totum Mundum conterere, thought she could break to pieces,
the whole world with the motion of one short finger; and crush it into a Miscel
any, with the clinching of her little Hand: So we, more mad and melancholy, set
up our selves, and stretch out our Hands, for the time, above God and his whole
Creation. In the which foul Act, there is Aversio a Deo, and Conversio ad
Creaturam; an Aversion from God, and a Conversion to the Creature: And therein
consequently, Bonum commutabi e praefertur Incommutabili Bono; a changeable
Good, yea, sometimes a villainous and filthy Lust (O Man, Siccine te ip^e
abjicies? will thou so debase thy self?) is preferred before a Good, and a God
that is unchangeable: And the Offender ab im^ ever^it ^omnia, overturns the
whole Frame of the Universe; exalting Earth to the place of Heaven, and
subjecting God and God's Heaven under his dirty feet. From this foresight,
Isidor. Pelufiot, St. Chrysustom's apt Scholar, exacts of a Isid. Pelus. lib.
1. Ep. 424.
Religious Man, (...), an honest and truly-faithfull Holder of the Balance.

And in answer to that Aversion and Conversion; there is in Hell, Poena Damni,
the Pain of Loss, by the which, we shall everlastingly be averted from God; and
Paena Sensus, the Pain of Sense, by the which, we shall remain for ever
assigned and confined to the Creature; I mean, to Fire; which being the most
pragmaticall Busy-Body of all earthly Creatures, shall actively revenge the
Wrongs done to the Creator, and the Creature; and which, because Sinners have
transgressed the Law of Nature, shall be promoted and elevated above Nature,
and beyond its own rank, to act upon the Soul; by Him who did not intend the
burning of Spirits and Souls, primaria Intention, qua rem propter se intend
it, with a primar^e Intention, by the which, he intends a thing for it self;
sed secundaria, quando rem vult propter al^ud, and praemissa alterius
Consideratione, but with a secundarie Intention, when he wills a thing, urged
to it in the consideration of a thing premised. And thus, our Commission of an
infinite Evil, is, rebus nun^ aequa lance pensatis, things now being equally
weighed, proportionably and most justly punished. We are averted from an
infinite Good; and affixed to a most intolerable Evil; being a material
Instrument of Justice, and representing our adhesion to material Things: which
in Duration a part post, shall be infinite; and infinitely subject a superior
Spirit to an earthly base Body.

Ye demand: Why God punishes a Sin, committed in Time, a short Time, a Moment;
with Hell, a Place of eternal Torment? Is this Law of God perfect? I answer,
First: If he to whose charge a matter of infinite price and worth, is
committed, should by his gross default, and (...) negligence, lose, yea
contemn, and wilfully disavow it: ought he not to pay an infinite price for
it? or, if he be not able to pay; ought he not to suffer an infinite
punishment; according to the plain Rule and Letter of Justice? In like manner;
He to whom the infinite God is given, with Grace; he who is entrusted with the
infinite Son of God, in the sacred Symbols of our Lord's Supper; he who is
redeemed with an infinite price; if by Sin, he shall lose these Infinites, or,
this many and one Infin^te; and cannot restore an infinite Satisfaction for the
loss of it; is it not equal, that the Sentence of Justice should pass upon him
according to his Fact, and give him over to an infinite Punishment? I answer,
Secondly: The Person is infinite, against whom, and the Law is infinite,
against which we Sin; and therefore Justice demands, that we should be punished
in infinitum, into infinite: and moreover, by reason of the infinite Person
against whom we Sin, Sin is an infinite Evil: and should not infinite be
punished with infinite? and by Sin, we are turned from our last End, which is
infinite; and have turned our Intention to a finite and vile Creature, as to an
infinite End. For, as Aquinas answers; (...) D. Tho. ^r^m^ secund^, quaest. 1.
^rt. 7. ad. 1.
qui peccant, avertuntur ab eo in quo vere invenitur ratio ultimi Finis, non
aut^m ab ipsa ultimi Finis Intention, quem quaerunt falso in alijs rebus. They
who Sin, are turned from that in which the fullness and perfection of the last
End is truly found; but not from their intending the last End, which they
falsely seek in other things. I answer, Thirdly: Sin, with and in which, the
Sinner dies, sticks always to the Soul: Because Death gives utter denial to
Repentance, by the which only, the Soul is washed. Therefore, where Sin
always sticks, it is just, that Punishment should also adhere. Ye may turn
again, and avouch confidently: The Angels being Spirits, changed from good to
evil, And why may not a Separate Soul change from evil to good? The Angels were
then in Via, in their School of Trial, and in their Way: The Separate Soul is
ultra Viam, and in Termin^, beyond it, and out of it; and we go not forward,
after the end of our journey. I answer, Fourthly: God gives eternal Happiness
to us, if we keep his Laws; therefore, if we break them, he may, by a fit
Analogy, reward us with everlasting unhappiness. Fifthly, I answer: The Sinner
is everlastingly punished, because he would everlastingly Sin S. Greg. lib. 34.
Moralium in Job.
if he could. Which reason St. Gregory illustrates: Ad districti Judicij
Justitiam pertinet, ut nu^quam careant supplicio, quorum men's in hac vit a
nunquam voluit carrere peccato: and nullus detur iniquo terminus ^ltionis, quia
quamdiu valu^t, hab^re noluit terminum Criminis. It pertains to the Justice of
strict judgment, that they never want Punishment, whose Mind in this Life,
would never be wanting of Sin: And there be given to the unjust Man no End of
Revenge, who as long as he could be faulty, would hear of no End of committing
faults. The same Divine Author speaks again: Iniqui ide^ cum fine delinquunt,
quia cum fin^ vivunt: Idem lib. 4. Dialogorum, cap: 44.
Nam voluissent utique sine fine vivere, no po^uissent sine fine peceare. The
Unjust ones, therefore Sin with End, because they live with End: For, their
desire is, to live without End, that they may sin without End. This, their
Actions testify. The Canon gives in an Evidence: Qui nunquam cessant peccare
dum vivunt, oftendunt, De Poemit. Did. 1. cap. Importune, Sect. Sive autem.
quia semper in peccato vivere cupiunt. They, who give not over sinning while
they live, tell plainly, and speak it in their behavior, that they desire to
live always in sin. And the Justice is founded upon a tripple Basis. First:
That he who does (...), fight against God in suo aeterno, in his own Eternity;
which Eternity is the Continuance of his Life; should, being arrested by
Sickness, and conquered by Death, God's Messengers and Officers, lie in God's
^aile, and be punished by God, in Deiaeterna, in God's Eternity; which Eternity
is the Duration of his Life, enduring for ever and ever. Secondly: That whereas
God sees the near Connection of our Will and Deed in respect of themselves; and
whereas an efficatious Will, is as the Deed, putting all the Requisities to it
on it is own part; It is a firm part of justice, that God should punish an
Everlasting Will, as an Everlasting Deed. Thirdly: It is just, that he who
would never stop in Sin, if he might live always; and would live always, that
he might always Sin; should live always, that he might always be plunged,
and engulfed into punishment. Therefore all Sinners, dying in Sin, and
everlastingly punished for it, are in the number and black List of those, of
whom the Apostle says, Romans 3. 8. Ending the verse with the End of wicked Men:
Quor^m Damnatio ^usta est, whose Damnation is just. It Is just so.

I see before me; that though Sin be not in every turn, Benoni, the Son of
Grief: yet, is it always Aboni, the Father of all our Griefs and Sorrows:
gliscente in dies malo, this evil growing forth into an evil without End. And
therefore, in the Hebrew Language, Sin is most conveniently named Aven: which,
as it offers it self to signify Sin, a Lie, an Idol, Vanity, Iniquity, that is
(...), inequality, injustice, injury, perversity; So it signifies great labor,
weariness, affliction. And Aven is reduced per Crasin Grammaticam, by a
Contraction prescribed also in the Hebrew Grammar, to On; which being
translated, sounds Grief. Sic abeunt in vanum Cacodaemones, ingenti post se
relicto foetore: So the Devil in his vanishing, leaves a noisome and
pestilentiall stink of all Evils, behind him.

O most dearly Beloved: Can it be unsavory now? Is it not apprime u^ile,
greatly profitable, to prevent Grief with Grief; with temporal Grief, Grief
eternal? Prove. 22. 9. He that has a bountiful Ey, shall be blessed. The
Vulgar Latin hands it forth, Qui pronus est ad Vulgatus Interpres.
Misericordiam, benedicetur: He that is prone to Mercy, shall be blessed. The
Hebrew gives immediately, Qui bonus est oculo, Text. Heb.
He that is good of Ey. And the Chaldee follows in the footstep, Qui bonum
Chald. Paraph.
oculum habet, He that has a good Ey. Then we have a merciful Ey, when we
look mercifully upon those who are in misery. Zanchius is ours: Inde dicta est
Misericordia, quod Cordi nobis sit aliena Zanch. de Natura Dei, lib. 4. cap. 4.
quaest: 1.
Miseria. Thence Mercy was by the Latius called Misericordia; because by Mercy,
we lay close to our Heart an other's Misery, Yea, Zanchius; we may be Similia
habet S. Aug. contr. Advers. Leg. and Proph. lib. 1. cap. 20.
merciful to our selves, if the misery has not yet irrevocably attached us;
or, if our deliverance from it, stands within the Verge of our own power; or,
in a Ray of the Divine Beams, cast upon our Industry. Thus much, Pace tu^,
with your good leave and favor. And who walks tottering upon the brink and
edge of eternal Misery, but he, for whom there waits an infinite Evil of
Punishment, ^oyn'd with an everlasting Aversion from God our last End? Can a
Man that answers in his Catechism, I am a Christian, murmr to himself, in
such Circumstances; or, sing with the Bird in his Breast, In tut^ sum; mea Res
est in tranquilla: I am safe; it is a Calm with me? O, look with a merciful Ey
upon your selves; your poor selves; your miserable selves: For, He that has a
merciful Eye, shall be blessed.

And in the Sacred Language here, (which Language was not the slender and curt
Invention of Man, but the most accomplished Ordinance of God) the Primitive
Word, Hhain, signifies both an Ey and a Fountain: Because merciful Eyes are
sweet and crystal Fountains of Tears. Blessed shall the man be, that has an
Ey which is both an Eye and a Fountain: a pure Fountain, running with precious.
Tears for his past offenses; to the which, the first and chief Motive was the
Love of God: and a clear and open Ey, watching over his after-wayes, that he
may keep the Door even against the least approaches of these infinite Evils in
their Scouts, and first Messengers; to the which likewise, the Love of God is
the Motive. The greatest Crocodile was at first harbored in an Egg, which is
paulo majus anserino, says Franzius in his History, a little bigger than a
Goose-Egg. Franz. in Hist. sacr^ Animalium in Crocodilo.
And yet, the Crocodile is a Devourer of Men: and when, being horrour-struck,
these can not weep for themselves, mockingly weeps over them; grows huge, and
on to the last period of Life; and is different, not a little, from the Goose,
in Shape, Substance, Color, Manners; though they favor one an other in the
Egg. Caesarius Ar^latensis gives good aim: Non est minimum, negligere minima,
Caesar-Arelat. Hom. 8.
It is no little Matter, to neglect Matters that seem little. No sensual
Creature spreds to so vast a bigness, from Fr^nzius ubi supra.
so small beginnings, as this Egg-Crocodile. Say the same of Sin.

Let us run this point low. He that beholds on the right Hand, an Eternity of
Good; at the left, an Eternity of Evil; both in Aversion and Couversion; And
that his Way carries him away of necessity, to the right or to the left: If he
be not emotus mente, mad; or impense improbus, ambitiously wicked; will be
wondrously circumspect.

Hell is called in the Greek Scripture, (...): being in the firstborn and
prime signification, a place, accountably to the Geographus Nubiensis Arab.
Nubian Geographer in a Map of his, lying humbly at the Foot of a Hill near
Jerusalem; into which all kinds of despicable and filthy Carcasses and Things,
anoying and unbeautifying the City, were contemptibly thrown, (the City did
ease and exonerate it self into this place, as the World into Hell) and in the
which, a continual Fire was maintained, for the quick wasting of the filth,
bones and carcasses; as R. David Kimchi writes. R. David Kimchi in Psalm. 27. v.
13.
In this Low place there was also a Highplace, called Topheth; wherein the
little harmless Children (Sweet Babes) were sacrifised to Moloch, Jerem.. Now
as Heretics are the Apes of true Christians, S. Cyprian Ep. ad Jubaianum.
(St. Cyprian tells it Jubaianus) So is the Devil, (qui quidem semper it odorans
quasi Venaticus, who truly goes always about, first senting all ways, like a
Dog in hunting, to find and catch us; then walks about to devour us a Lion, 1
Pet. 5. 8.) Simia Dei, God's Ape. And therefore, with a lift from what God had
commanmanded Abraham concerning Isaac, his Worshippers were also raised and
heaved on to sacrifise their Children. I find it controverted amongst the
gray-hair'd Rabbines, Whether these little Victimes were forced to pass through
the Fire? or whether they were put into the red-hot Hands of the bra^en Idol,
and therein consumed? This Idol had the brazen Face of a Calf, says an old
Book, and Liber Jal^ut in Jerem. cap.. Aben. Ezra in Levit. cap. 18. v. 21.
Idem in Deuteronomy. cap. 18. v. 10. R. Moses Maimon. lib. de Idololatr. cap. 6. Sect.
5. Moses Gerund. and Isaac Abravan. in Jerem. 7. v. 31. R. Bechai in Levi^. 18.
large Hands stretched forth, as of a Man opening his Hands wide, with a Quid
mihi dabis? What will you give me? And it was hollow. Aben-Ezra, and R. Moses
Maimenides, (as ye may read in the Latin Copy of Maimenides, translated by
Dianysius Vossius) side in this, That the Children were only drawn, or driven
through the Fire; and that this was the last, and chiefest Act of the Worship
performed to Moloch. Others of even Authority, as Moses Gerundensis, and Isaac
Abrava^el, stand in it, that they were burnt as low as Ashes. And the
Scriptures bending to this Matter, stand as if they stood on both sides. This
they did, says R. Bechai, because the Priests of Moloch had persuaded the
People, first diss^minando in Vulgus, sowing it amongst the Common Brains, the
shrubs of People; That a Child being given to Moloch, his Brethren and Sisters
should be privileged from Death, and the Parents afterward live happily.
Wherefore Josias acted like Josias, and much ennobled himself; when, to degrade
and otherwise incommodate these idolatrous Priests; and to persecute and
profligate this odious worship, agreeably with a stink; he commanded, that all
impure and unnclean Things, (singularly hateful to the Jews,) should be cast
away into this Gehinnom or Valley of Hinnom, 2 Reg. 23. 10.

Was this ugly Relict of Devilish Worship, so much hated and abominated by God
and all good Men; although in the thoughts of some both Great Ones and Gown'd
Ones, it was but the mere hasty passing of a simple Child through the Fire? And
shall we (we Christians) knowingly cast away our selves into Eternal Fire;
there to be averted and estranged from God (the Father of Christ) eternally? O
new, and extraordinary Worshippers! O us everlasting Worshippers of our
Destroyers! O us who freely make our selves Cast-awaies from an infinite Good;
look backward, an infinite Good; to an infinite Evil; look before you, an
infinite Evil, prepared for the Devil! O Infinite, O Eternity! what are ye? Of
us it will be, though not more truly, yet more thoroughly said, than of the Jews,
Deuteronomy. 32. 17. They saerifised unto Scedem, Destroyers, Wasters, Devils. Does
not the Fish Torpedo hang upon our Fingers? Does not the Remora cleave to our
Souls? When, imbued with Christian Principles, and professing to believe, That
Topheth is prepared of old, for the Contemners of God's Original Will, we move
no faster in the Performance of this Perfect Law, this most Divine Law and
Will; which is of God, in God, and God Himself? ( Perfectum est, cui nihil
deest: The Thing is perfect, to the which there wants no due Thing.) And in
the End of all this, we have pumiceos oculos, Eyes as dry as the pumice-Stone.
I have found it. Genus nostrum semper siccoculum fuit: It belongs to our
intemperate, and lukewarm Kind, to be so in heavenly Matters. (In temporal
Affliction, we can yell it.) Who, notwithstanding, may drop a little, by a thaw
of tender-heartednesse: or, have a Preacher that may perform in earnest, what
our Classical Brother so jestingly, and so commonly vaunted; I Will make the
People weep to Day.

The Law of God, is likewise perfect; as his Original Will is copied out into
his Word. Which Word in it is full Amplitude, fully complies with the End of
it is coming from God as his Word; and is abundantly sufficient, in it is kind,
to Salvation. It canonizeth no Falsehood: prescribes no frivolous, or evil
Thing. And herein differs our Christian Scripture from the Turkish Alcoran; The
Holy Ghost, from profane Mahumet's Pigeon; His Alcoran being a pure Drollery,
elemented and engendered in the Conjunction of three Apostaticall Brains. In the
perusing of which, Averroes Sir-named the Commentator, Avicenna, Alsarabius,
Vide Avicen. lib. 6. Met. cap. 7.
Albumazar, Haly, and other Mahumetan Philosophers, Physicians, Astrologers,
were so troubled and confounded, that they quickly deserted the Alcoran, as
repugnant, even in Matters bounded with the Precincts of Nature, to the
Principles of Nature and Reason: And, because it did gloriose mentiri^^ly
gloriously; to prevent their fall into the Desolation of Heart, catched upon
Aristotle for their better Information in the learning of Truths, natural and
supernatural. The Compilers of the Alcoran, had not learned the Text, Psalm.
25. 3. in it is Hebrew simplicity: Let them be ashamed who transgress without
cause. Where the Septuagin^ adopt, (...). Sept.
(...): Let them be confounded with shame, that act unprofitably without Law;
in the which acting, more is always lost than ^ound. The Vulgar Latin Edit.
Valg.
is the Septuagint vulgarly turned Latin. The fifth Edition is Greek-Hebrew; in
the word, Greek; Hebrew, in the sense: (...), Let them be ashamed Sept. Editio
V.
that apostatize.

In truth: Holy Scripture proposes different Laws, serving them forth in
different Times; or in the same Time, subordinating one to the other. But the
final aim, and ultimate Work, was one and the same. It was a Rule and
Pillar-Truth under the Old Law, That when a Precept of the Moral Law, so fell
in company with a Ceremonial or Judicial Precept, ut in angustum cogerentur,
that both could not hand it together; the Moral Precept should still challenge
the place, and be reverenced with Obedience. And whereas the Law of Moses, was
partly judicial, partly ceremonial and moral or natural partly: our Evangelical
Law turned off, and abrogated the two former, succeeding to them; but spared
and settled the last, as the written Foundation of all sound Law* because it is
the nearest to that unwritten Law of Nature, which is the first Extract in us,
out of God's Original. Weeker. de Secretis lib. 3. cap. 2.
VVeckerus will teach you the Art of making a Candle, the Flame whereof cannot
be extinguished: or one that as ardently burns and flameth under Water, as
above it. Such, yea such a Candle is our Law. Psalm. 11. 105. Thy word is a Lamp
unto my feet. The Textuarie Word holds, a Candle. The Law of Christ, is an
everlasting Lamp, or Candle.

Press on. As Christ, who is Verbum Genitum, the Begotten Word, and Verbum
Deus, the Word which is God, and the Founder of the Church, has a visible and
humane Nature: So has he a divine Nature which is invisible; and his best and
richest Nature, is not beheld with mortal Eyes. And Verbum scriptum, the
Written Word, which is Verbum Dei, the Word of God, by which the Church, as by
a Written Law, is aptly and (...) oportionably regulated; as it has a literal,
external, and historical Sense; So does it rejoice in a Sense that is
spiritual, internal, and mystical: and the best and true sense, is not always
obvious to our Understanding. Yea, it is a lasting Axiom, and stands like an Ol^
Monument in Divinity; When God is most observed and served by obedience to the
spiritual or mystical Sense; that Sense, though mystical, is most intended by
the Holy Ghost; The End of God, speaking to us, being to teach us to know and
serve him, through some Degrees of Perfection, answerable to our Model. By the
which it appears, velut Solis radiis depi^tum, as if it were painted with the
Sunbeams; That the Perfection of Scripture, in a main part, with regard to
the Interpretation of the Sense, lies inwardly; like the Soul of a Man, or the
Virtue of a Seed, Herb, Plant, Mineral, or Jewel. And therefore, as a rare
sort of Musical Instruments, require only to their Music, that they be
touched with the Sunbeams: So these inward strings, though perfect, yet never
give a right sound except they be gently touched by an Understanding, purged of
Opacities, and enlightened with the Sun of Righteousness. Yet this does not
any way derogate from the due Perfection of Scripture in it self; and God's
Providence toward us, preparing, offering, and affording Helps, general,
special, and particular. And, as Aquinas clears it: Iudicium de re non sumitur
secundum D. Tho. part. 1. quaest. 16. art. 1. in Corp.
id quod inest ei per accidens, sed secundum id quod inest ei per se: We judge
not of a thing according to that which is accidental and adventitious to it;
but according to that which is in it by or from it self. The same Truth stands
like a grown Oak, and is altis defixa Radicibus, deeply rooted, respectively to
the Interpretation of the Words.

I most humbly crave here a Christian, that is, a mild, tender, and pious
Examination, in your most retired thoughts, of a Scruple, quem injecit mihi
inter studendum profunda Cogitatio. Others have assumed the freedom, to
disquiet and invade the Press, in plain English, with some vain shadows of this
austere Difficulty, sent abroad like walking Apparit^ons: and have thereby
disorderly perplexed the Stated Hearts of ignorant people, that have learned
only to read English. I speak to Scholars, as in the Schools; and in the
language of the School. Of Scholars therefore, who try all Things, I reverently
demand a Reason of their Faith; as it is their Faith. If I could have
reasonably and quietly rested in private Answers; I would not have adventured
upon a public Proposal. I desire not the unhinging of any Man's Faith that
moves upon a right Pole. I rather wish, we were all attemper'd to the Spirit of
Orderly motion. Our Lord God knows, I never knew this Demand or Difficulty, by
the name of an Engine. Apage hin^, Ardelio. In sound earnest, O ye learned
heads, I have heard your Adversaries speak. And, in mandatis habeo, I have it
written in my Duty, that I must be true to you. I affirm nothing positively;
but put only Wind, and Tide, and Sails to the Quaere: that we may leave
nothing unsounded, unsifted, unexamined which is not Mysterious. I presume we
are not all traiterous-hearted, and afraid to be searched. The wise Mariner
rests his Vessel upon a side, and examines the bottom at home in the River,
lest he should be lost, by an unsound Bottom, at Sea. The Latin Speech will be
sometimes, Oration resistens, ac salebrosa: Because the Discourse cannot be
forcibly and properly delivered, without our acceptance of a few sublimated
Terms from School Divinity. I shall be an Englishman, here and there, for a
word or two, in the course of this Discourse: ut Populum, expectatione longius
hiantem, foveam, demulceam, d^tineam: and to take off, as with a file, the
roughness, and strangeness of my thronging so much Latin together.

These, concerning the Difficulty, when it enters, ye are advertised of it. In
the mean time, I shall turn the face of my Endeavor, to the preparing and
qualifying of the Matter.

Scripture is the Word of the most holy God, the Author and Revealer of Truth.
I receive it as such, in the posture in which some insigni^ris Notae Sancti,
Saints of more illustrious Note, have always read it; that is, upon my Knees.
I am induced to this, by these Notes, Marks, and Reasons.

1
By the resounding, or Ecchoing of the New Testament to the old; which sing,
the one to the other, like the two Parts of a Quire; and betwixt them make
complete Music. The New shows that to be done, which, many Ages before, by the
Old was foretold should be done. The singing of the New, is near and at hand:
of the Old, far off; but heard clearly, because loud and plain. The Foundation
stands upright, both in Divinity and Philosophy: Future Contingents, depending
only upon the most free, and close Decree of God; and upon the various Wills,
and secret Thoughts of Men, are known to God alone, to whom only, his own
Counsills, and the Hearts of Men, are known. God therefore, is the Author of
this Scripture, thus resounding.

2
Although no Writing may be reasonably believed, speaking in it is own Cause,
when it wholly rests upon its own Testimony; yet when it has miraculously
showed it self to have come from God, (as the first Reason evinces, that
Scripture has,) then our Belief may reach a Confirmation from the Testimony of
a Writing, testifying for it self. Wherefore when the Scripture professes
often in the old Testament, Haec di^^t Dominus, Thus says the Lord; and
attesteth also in the New, 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration
of God, etc. We may reasonably throw weight upon the Testimony, even which it
gives of it self.

3
It is no way carnal. Not carnal inwardly; because it contains a Doctrine,
consonant altogether to the Spirit, and that elevated by Grace; not to the
Flesh. Not externally or outwardly carnal; because neither God the Author, nor
the Instruments, the Prophets and Apostles, the Penners of it, gave the least
expressions of any carnal Ends, in the commending it to us, or the writing of
it.

4
The Miracles, that under both Testaments were wrought in ratification of the
Doctrine, comprehended in Scripture; which have descended to us, by the
Testimonies also of most approved Writers, in all knowing Ages.

5
The holy Simplicity, shining in the Vide S. Aug. de vera Relig. per Librum
totum.
Style, Phrase, and Disposition, which in those honest Ages, wherein Scripture
was written, was not used for Imposture.

6
The high Straein of Consent and Agreement, which Scripture above all other
Writings, has with a pious and religious Soul, made after the Image of God, in
respect of her Beginning; and for God, in reguard of her End. Which Agreement
and Convenience is such, that a good Soul, afflicted or oppressed, thinks her
self, as it were, safe and secure in Scripture, the Word of her Creator,
Friend, Husband, Savior, and last End; and feeds there, as upon the choysest
Dainties, and most precious Restoratives. She finds a Congruity with all Wants,
all Passions, but evil ones.

7
The Promises of God in Scripture, promising Eternity, and Himself to a Soul,
which cannot be otherwise satisfied. From the result of which, is manifest;
That Scripture answers, though not to the desires of corrupted Nature, yet to
this nacurall Appetite, ingrafted into us in our Creation, by the which we
desire our own Perfection, the Consecution of our last End; and not only to
continue our Being for Eternity, but also to endow it with all the blessed
Conditions and adornments, of which it is capable. For, Man being infinite and
immortal in Desire, can not lay his Desire to sleep, but upon an infinite
Good; which being infinite in all Things, is withal infinite in Duration. And
no Book promises Eternity, and God, but as a Borrower from Scripture.

8
It is known to be God's Word by the Effects. Because by such a Doctrine of
Humility and Mortification, and such calling to difficult and high perfection;
as, Matthew. 16. 24. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his Cross, and follow me; And Matthew. 5. 44. Love your Enemies, bles^
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them who
despitefully use you, and persecute you; The whole World has been converted,
and turned to performance. For, Acts so contrary to the Pride and Elation of
our corrupted Hearts, and so clashing and jarring with Flesh and Blood, could
not be done, (the respect to Vainglory, which discovered it self in the
Philosophers secluded,) without the Cooperation, Combination, and Influence of
the holy Ghost; Which holy Ghost does not Cooperate with false and fictitious
Things, or Things belying the most holy Name of God,

9
The Consent, Convenience, and Agreement, which it has in it self, in respect
of every part and particle, though written by diverse Persons, and in diverse
Languages, and Times. For, as the Ordination of inanimate Things in Nature to
one End, the Glory of God, arising from the Good of Mankind, shows one
Ordinator: So the Ordination of Scripture to one Thing, and the same a most
divine one, through so many diversities, shows one and the same Author, God,
who is the Cause of all perfect Unity.

10
The Martyrs gave up their Lives joyfully in the Confirmation of Scripture,
declaring plainly by their Heavenly Courage and Constancy, that they were
strengthened from Heaven, and that Scripture was Heaven-born. Wherein is eminent
the much different working of God, in Christ the Prince of Martyrs, and the
Martyrs his Servants. For, God laid his Son open to all the sufferance, whereby
Nature could be afflicted; and assisted his other Martyrs, relieving, and
easing Nature in their extremity.

These Reasons, Notes, and Ma^ks argue sufficiently for Scripture, in the
particular Matters from which, these Marks, Notes, and Reasons are taken; Yea,
for Scripture in every Letter of it, as it first came from God, or, is rightly
conveyed to us. But concerning ordinary Translations, amongst those especially,
that heap all the weight of their Belief upon their Translation, as upon the
only divine Instrument and ^ule, my D^fficulty thus humbly speaks.

Scriptura Sacra vel in primis illis Incunabilis, aut Hebraice loquebatur, aut
Chaldaice, aut Syriace, vel Graece, vel denique Latin; Anglice neutiquam. I am
pro certo nobis est, and pro comperto, Interpretes (non ibo per singulas
Classes) haud infallibiliter a Deo dirigi. Est enim in aperto, Haereticos ad
unum omnes, adolescente post Christum Ecclesia, suos habuisse Bibliorum
Interpretes. Qui cum pulchram scilicet, locarent suis op^ram, ut Res divinas,
ac Coeli Negotia Po ^lo praponerent; imo in manus darent, atque ob oculos
ponerent; modo pure humano: errarunt toto Coelo.

Hither I am safely come. Let this descend g^^tatim. Now hear farther; that I
may presently return to the People in English.

Scire nunc percupio, Cur and ista Translatio, quae, mul^ is jam annis, apud
no^ obtinuit; Erroribus graviter obnoxin non fuerit, quemadmodum and
Interpretes, quos in Objectum Fidei nastrae, nos ipsi, vel reluctantes ac
inviti, compingimus? Et ne verser totus intra Cancellos: An recte, nec non
Pietate salva, divinam Authoritatem possimus accommodare Translationi, quae
primitus ortum d^xit a Personis, quibus divinum Spiritum, ne dicam affingere,
sed, (ut loquar ore suavius formato, nimirum Sermon Castigato, jucundiusque
prolat^,) non audemus affigere? Addunt Aliqui: quorum^ Filios ex luto vario and
versatili conflatos videmus, and ad omnia para os pro mutat a Rerum facie? Sed
haec in hac Re, silentio premenda sunt.

Sit down here. Take breath; and look about you. Beloved, I am yours instantly.
I had a Secret to tell the Scholar in his Ear. Now on.

Praesertim, cum nobis in propatulo sit, refertas esse Scri^tur as divinas, and
quasi locu^letatas, Hebraismis, Arabismis, Syrismis, Graecismis; Figuris
Dictionis aeque ac Sententiae; Mysterijs omrifariam eventilatis, and in
incertum cadentibus; aliis^ velut Aenigmatibus infinitis: quae Lectores in
diversa rapiunt, atque solicitant Argumentis aequo pondere libratis. Quinimo in
Hebraica Lingua, Puncta Varia, and in varijs Codicibus alia at que alia, ut ex
Lectione Septuaginta Seniorum liquidius constat; Sensusque Radicum multiplices,
and in omnia propendentes; vel Doctissimis undique tenebras offundere, nemini
uspiam Docto dubium est.

This is our last Resting Place. Beloved, I am with you. The End sets a Crown
upon the Work. Look now, and observe where the Bullet hits.

Accrevit Moles ingens huic Difficultati. Nempe quod, ne pendeamus animis, ne
vacillemus; ita profecto securi debeamus nos esse de Translatione nostra, ac
veneranda Canities Antiquorum, de Scriptis Amanuensium Spiri us sancti: modo
Fides nostra cum Fide Christianorum Antiquorum in Unum coeat, in idemve
reci^at: Et modo (quod est e re nostra plurimum, quippe in quo rei Cardo
vertitur,) modo, inquam. Fidem infusam firmare velimus in Objecto. Quandoquidem
Virtus divina and Supernaturalis in nobis, uti Fides, plane sibi vendicat
Objectum quodammodo supernaturale ac divinum, ( utcunque se res habeat
aliquoties in Objecto partiali, aliorsum accepto,) divinitus and
supernaturaliter nobis oblatum, (id ^nim omnino res postulat,) per Media
infallibilia: ut Objectum Fidei, quatenus tale, sit and nobis taliter notum.

There Is all. Go, ponder it; and then, give me some Ease. Meditatio est Clavis
Ptolomae us in Proaemio Almagesti.
Sapientiae, says Ptolomie; Meditation is the Key of Wisdom. This thus
standing: The Law of God, even in the words thereof, is still perfect. (He that
questions a Writing, only as a dispirited Translation; questions not the
Writers, but the Translators, and their Spirit.) And the Conveyance is of the
same Piece. Neque Res omnis in incerto sita est. Vnriddle me this. Now to the
People again.

God has engraven the Truth of Sion, in Scripture, (in a Sense like a
high-swelling Sea) as he graved Sion upon his Hands. To which, he says, Isa.
49. 16. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands. The Vulgar Latin
assigns, ^od. Vulg.
Ecce in manibus meis descripsi te, I have copied thee out of my self, or, I
have delineated thee upon my hands; or, I have registered thee, My Hands; My
Book; which opens, and shuts as the Hand. The Septuagint, (...), ad vivum Sept.
depinxi, I have painted thee to the Life. Symmachus, (...), I have made thee
fast. Sym. Theodot. Aq^il.
Theodotion is English, (...), I have graven thee. Aquila, (...), I have done
it accurately, painfully. The Written part of God's Will, is a fair Copy of
God's Original Will, absolute or permissive, concerning us; of which, the
Latin, descripsi te, I have Copied thee, I have drawn thee forth into Lines.
After the Septuagint, (...), I have Painted thee to the Life: The Ceremonial
Law was a Painting; which though it was at first, lively; as it stood exerto
Collo, Capite porrecto, oculis apertis atque inquirentibus, and bending toward
the Life, the real Things fore-signified by the Symbols and Ceremonies; yet
finally all the Painting fell away, the true Bloud-Colour excepted; and the
Life outlived the Painting to the Life. The Judicial pertained only to the
Jewish Commonwealth, disagreeing from the Ceremonial; because it may be still
accepted and established by any, that shall accept it only as a godly Form of
good and lawful Government. The Moral Law was made fast, consonantly to
Symmachus, (...), I have fastened thee. And the new Testament has place in
God's Volume, like a most invaluable Jewel in a Gold-Ring; as being, though
the least, yet the most precious, and the most deepengraven. Which, Theodotion
declares without Theodotion: (...), I have graven thee. And in this little
Testament, this Jewel-Testament, the Death of Christ, is the most accurate and
elaborate Thing; the very Beam-lustre, and incomparable virtue of the Jewel.
Aquila seals it up unwittingly, in his (...), I have accurately, and with great
labor, graven the Truth of all my promises, upon the palms of my Hands, on the
Cross; When my palms were bored, and my Hands nailed to the Cross for Man, and
my Sufferings were entailed effectually to him; and this I have twice graven;
graven again in a Book, for the good of Posterity. I could insist upon it; That
the palm of the Hand, is not always open; and that being open, it is not always
exposed to every dull Ey^, as neither are the Scriptures in their Originalls,
wherein they are graven. And I could farther diffuse my self here. But I am not
of a Genius moving to Controversies, and I desire to maintain a Controversy
with nothing but Controversy, except where Sin ambusheth.

Our next, and orderly step here, is, The right Interpretation of Scripture,
both in the Words and Sense, compriseth all things necessary to sound
Edification; either, explicitly, formally, openly, plainly; or, implicitly,
virtually, covertly, seminally; either in the Conclusion, or in the Principle:
either telling the way, as with a Tongue; or, like a Merourial Image, pointing
toward it with a finger from the palm; and sending us away to the Interpreter.

The material Building of the old and outward Tabernacle, adumbrated the
Spiritual Edification of our Tabernacle that is inward. The persons elected
for the building of the Tabernacle, are described, Exodus 31. 2. See, I have
called by name Bezaleel the Son of Vri, the Son of Hur. And verse 6. And I,
behold, I have given with him Aholiab the Son of Ahisamach. If we poise the
names of these persons, in a Tropologicall balance, they will not only not
want a grain or two, but will also prove themselves gratefully passable without
allowance from our inclinations and propensities in their being accepted. Hur
signifies Whiteness, or, Light as White; even such a Light as Faith is, being
the first Break of Day in the Soul. And therefore, in Baptism, which is
Sacramentum Fidei, the Sacrament of Faith, the Dionys. Areop. in Eccl. Hierar.
I^^ Berosus lib. 4.
Baptized were after Baptization, arrayed in White. Uri signifies Fire; and Ur
Chaldaeorum, Ur of the Chaldees, famous in the History of Abraham, was called
Ur, because Fire was there honored with divine worship. And Charity is a Fire.
Yea, the holy Ghost, who is Love, (God is Love, 1. Joh. 4. 16.) descended in
Fire, when he did inflame his Disciples with Charity. The Textual Textus Graec.
Edit. Vulg.
Word, is (...), Dilection; and the Vulgar Latin evens it; Deus est Charitas,
God is Charity. For, the holy Ghost notionally considered, is the Love of the
Father and the Son. The Construction of Besele^l, is, in umbra Dei, in the
shadow of God; shadowing forth to us, the proper Act of Hope; which, as by a
proper work, lies securely down under the special Canopy of divine
Providence, as in the cool shadow and refreshment of a most pleasant Arbor;
or, as under the Defense of a strong Tower; or, under the spreading of a
Buckler; even the Buckler of Him that is in the Septuagint, (...). With and by
these The^logicaell Virtues, (which tend, in a direct Line, to God in their
first Acts,) and the Virtues accompanying them, is the Soul built up into a
Tabernacle, or Templum portatile, Temple of God, moving as we move. And the
three Virtues are Material, and Efficient. The Materials, and the Builders.
First, the Materials; the Builders, afterward. The Materials, when the
Building is, as it were, in Fieri, in Building; the Builders, when in Facto
esse, when it is Built. How may this be? Happily. The Builders with Respect had
to continual Augmentations, requisite Ornaments, and certain Reparations. But
the Architect or Master Builder, is God. We are God's Puilding. The Scripture
is firm and fair in describing, and prescribing these Fundamental Virtues, and
their Company. But there were equally called to the Building, Ooliab, which
Name the Hebrews interpret, Protectio mea est Pater, the Father is my
Protection: Interpretes Hebraei.
And Achisamech, which is, also after their casting the word back into it is
Ingredients, Frater conjungens, a Brother conjoyning himself. There is
therefore, as needful to us, the Providence of our Heavenly Father, protecting
us from Error; providing moreover, outward Helps for us, to the End of the
World; and appointing a Christian Brother or Father, holy and learned; or, a
Brother who is both a Father and a Brother; having the Wisdom and Providential
Care of a Father, and the sweet Fellowship of a Brother; looking over us as a
Father, and stooping to us in the Carriage of a Brother; a Father to guide us,
a Brother; to join himself to us; as Philip joined himself to the Enuch. And
such a Father-Brother we must find, and have, ut medicinam faciamus furenti
volaticoque Morbo; that we may stop the raging and running Disease of strange
Doctrine. And having him, we must hold him, and adhere constantly to him, being
of our selves, ingenio facili ac translatitio, easily transported. And, as St.
Bernard S. Bern. ep. 87.
in the heat of an Inspiration, rightly said, Quise sibi Magistrum consti^uit,
stulto se Discipulum subdit: He that sets himself to learn of himself, puts
himself to School to a Fool: and not an ordinary Fool, but one desperately
partial, and self-conceited.

Intellectus praefert voluntati lueernam, The Understanding should lead the
Will in its own light, and the light of Grace; (God's Helps assisting the
Understanding in the form of Light, 1. That he may work conformably to Nature;
2. To perfect Nature:) and our Will should not drag our Understanding after it,
and subject both that and it self, to the Passions of Anger, Envy, Malice,
Stubborness, Partiality; the Will being a blind power. The Devil's way is, to
pervert and confound the Course and Order of Nature; especially, in the Soul of
Man. Because he knows, that by the disorderly motions of the Soul, the Fountain
of Life, and of the Actions of Life, he is always a prime Gainer: God's Will
being always performed orderly, and in the Course founded, and appointed by him.

Quod ad me a^tinet; Credo Ecclesiam Caetholicam, I believe, that the Catholic
Church is directed by Christ, and relieved with vital Influences from it is
Invisible Head. And that, as Angelus est Nomen Offic^i, non Naturae, Angel is a
Name of Office, not of Nature; So it pertains to God's Messenger ex Offici^,
even as he is a Messenger or Angel, to clear, explicate, or unfold the Mind of
his Lord, who sufficiently instructs him, remaining in the condition of an
obedient Angel, (obedient to God and his Church,) for the sufficient Resolution
of all necessary Doubts, arising from his Message. And God requires of us, this
walking by Faith, by the which, we believe his promises to his Church, for
three Reasons. 1. Because Man, having sinned by Pride in eating of the Tree of
Knowledge; it was most agreeable to the Via Regia of God's Providence, so to
humble him, that notwithstanding his Ambition to know, he should not know the
Things, by which he should be brought to Heaven, but only believe them: 2. God
would lead Man to Blessedness, by Faith, and not by Science; that the Way might
be open, even to the weak, and unlearned: And therefore, the mind of a simple
Man, adorned with Faith, excels in Light, and Knowledge, (such as it is) not
only the Learning of the great Philosophers, but even the natural Knowledge of
Angels. 3. For Man's greater advancement in Glory: wherein Faith will be
greatly rewarded, as Faith; and rewarded more and more, as the Object is more
and more dark, and the Virtue more and more lively. But Knowledge will not be
rewarded, simply as Knowledge; but as dignifyed by the Object and End, and
also, manner of Aquisition. The former Difficulty seems here to be foild: but
is not, though it seems to be.

O indulge to me now, that I may without obstruction, make a good purpose.
Psalm. 16. 7. I will bless the Lord, who has given me Coun^il; good and perfect
Counsil in his Holy Word. The Vulgar Latin walks near it; but with a different
pace; Benedicam Dominum, Editio Vulgaris.
qui tribuit mihi intellectum, Who has given me Understanding, annexed to a
good Will; and made me capable of knowing and taking his Counsil. St. Hierom;
qui dedit mihi Consilium: a mere S. Hierom. in Bibl. Chald. Paraphr.
Englishman. And the Chaldee Paraphrast, Consulentem mihi, Counselling me. It
is not without a Mystery, That the Holy Tongue calls Counsil, Sod; which also
signifies a Foundation, or Stableness; by virtue drawn from the Root, Iasad, to
found. Whence in this Language, He that asks or gives Counsil, is answerably
said to found: So Pagninus; Who adds by Course of Surplussage; That Sod
signifies Pagninus in Thesa^ro.
Counsil from founding: quod ita se habeat Consilium ad Opus, ut Fundamentum ad
Aedificium; Because Counsil is the same Thing, turned toward a Work, as a
Foundation in Order to a Building. The Scripture understood in the same Sense,
and with the same Spirit, with and in which it was written, is a most deep,
sure, and perfect Foundation in its Kind. We can never say of one that sticks
close to this Foundation, Cec^dit Causa, he was overthrown in his Cause.

First then, I set aside by himself (he is one by himself,) the Private Spirit.
And I rank him with the person in a purewhite Dress at the Spittle: Whose mouth
was big with strange News; and the grand Matter, to the which all the rest did
offer, was, That he came lately from Heaven, tanquam Legatus a Latere, as a
Legate sent from the presence of God; and had brought with him the perfect
Knowledge of Hebrew, the Language of Heaven. And when I addressed my poor
skill, to the trial of him; I found, that his Language was a Wild-Irish
Welch-Scotch-Dutch-Hungarian Hebrew, a very Defluxion from his own over-flown
Brain. I found it Spittle-proof; or, as e Trivi^ petitas Mendicorum faeculas; a
kind of wretched Canting of Beggars, lame in their Limbs and their Tongues.

A Public Office and Exercise, must receive a Publ^ck allowance, by derivation
from that State, spiritual or temporal, in the which it is Work and Scene lies.
Certainly very many would run, before they are sent; entering otherwise than at
the Door; and allege a whole Pack of Private Calls; were it not imposed upon
them, to expect a Public and Visible Trial of their Call, and a like
Commission for the Exercise of it. And verily, Wicked Men would soon catch an
offered occasion to blurre and slander God's holy Providence; As if Men by the
direction of natural and participated Light, had better provided for
themselves, in the Administration of their Commonwealths, than the only-wise
God with the infinite Light of his Understanding, has provided for them in the
carriage and managing of his Church. For, If in a Civil Commonwealth, the Laws
and Appointments of our Ancestors, being relinquished; that should be Law to
every Man, which issues from the dictates of his own natural Prudence; how all
things would be mingled, troubled, and confounded? And yet, every Man has some
portion of Knowledge in Civil Matters, and may soon have more; Because the
Light is natural, by which, the Laws were contrived, and may be interpreted.
What then, would be the Consequence, if* every Man should be left to his own
Private Way, in that Commonwealth, which is not humane, but divine; and in
which Things to be believed, are supernatural; as also, the Things to be done;
at least in their Cause, which is Grace; And the one not being believed, nor
the other done, by the strength of Man?

And secondly; I reverently embrace with both arms, those Preachers, who
privately called, and publicly admitted, as to a public Office; and who
deeply-founded upon the Sense and Sentence of the Holy Ghost, speaking by the
Church of God; rise high like a tall Building; and become as the Brethren,
James and John, Boanerges, interpreted in the Greek Gospel, Marc. 3. 17. (...),
and accordingly Evang. Graec. Syrus Paraphrast. Trost. in Marc. 3.
in the Syriack, or Aramean Parathrast, Fil^i Tonitrui, the Sons of Thunder: By
Trostius, Filii Fragoris, the Sons of a great Cracking, (not of Cracking,
otherwise hight bragging,) They were sir-named Boanerges, (...)(...), S. Greg.
Naz. Orat. 19. S. Chrysostom. Nom.. 7. ad Popul. Antiochen.
as Nazianzen; (St. John Chrysostom adjecit calculum, Symbolum dedit; has
consented, and signed to it;) Because they should sublimely and perfectly
deliver perfect and sublime Things, and with a loud Voice and sublime
Expression like Thunder; And because they should (afterward) always and every
where carry (as it is Chronicled of Pericles Thucyd. lib. 3.
the Orator) (...), a perfect and heavy Thunderbolt in their Tongues;
wherewith, as (...) from on high, to strike to the Ground, adverse Sin, and
Satan the Adversary; and whatsoever shall oppose it self against God, and the
Holy Ghost. To symbolize with such Preachers, the Law to be Preached, was
delivered from a Thundering Mountain; and when the Holy Ghost came, There came a
sound from Heazen, as of a rushing mighty Wind, Act. 2. 2. These are they, who,
as Thunder, utter themselves truly, lowdly, plainly, powerfully, terr^bly. Qui
liberant fidem, who stand firm to their Promises made to God in their
Ordination; and faithfully perform their Trust. These are they, who make their
way before them, like Thunder: and are not of a tender-hoof; but, quorum durata
in aspero ungula est; who in their Walkings and Preachings, have trod the most
hard and rough paths (untrodden by Heretics) of austere Life, and severe
Learning.

I wade farther, in the Doctrine. Ancient Writers are Unanimous, and firmly
settled in this, as the Stars in the Firmament; That the Wills of Governors, if
they will be Laws; that is, say they, if they will, and do concentre with God's
Law; are also perfect Governors therefore, are obliged and bound up, by the
Supreme Lawgiver, to the giving, and authorizing of such Laws. Let us reduce
this Truth of Superstructure, to it is proper foundation, and former
Cause-Truth; and then, this part of the Doctrine will, analytically pondred,
empty it self into the Original Will of God, which is the Law Eternal.

Servitude, as the Civilians do state it, is not the genuine offspring of the
Law of Nature, but of Nations. As the Schools color it, It is the
Blackamore-child of corrupted Nature. Butfashionably to the perfect Law of
Scripture, and to the divinest Divines both in the School and from the School;
Orderly Subjection, and Superiority, bud forth and blossom, raised in the bud,
and promoted in the blossom, by a first direction and motion of pure Nature.
For, even in Heaven, the Created Spirits are all rallyed in Order. Of these and
their Orders, Dionysius Areopagita, that knowing Dion^s. A^eop. in Eccles.
Hierarch. Vide N^ceph Eccl. Hist. lib. 2. c. 20. Mose. B^r Ce^h. de parud. p. ^
Vide Perer. in G^^ej. cap 2.
Scholar of Saint Paul, to whom he had imparted the Secrets of the third
Heaven. And in the pure Condition of Innocence, there was a most Eminent
Superiority; first, in Man, over all other Earthly Creatures; and of this,
Moses Bar-Cephas. Secondly, in Man, over Woman; not only because the Male is by
right of Nature, Su^eriou^ to the Female; and because Reason is more
reasonable, and Strength more vivid and strong in him; but also for mystical
Considerations. And had they continued in Eden, (...), in the Garden of
Pleasure or Delights, until Adam had been a Father, there should have been
Patria Patestas, a Fatherly Power and Superiority; or, the Commandment with a
promise, Honora Patrem tuum, Honor thy Father, is not a moral precept. And
when Children had broached themselves into Families, even there also must have
been Superior Potestas, a Superior Power; or, the best Life upon Earth, must
have wanted one of the greatest created Perfections, consequent to Diversity,
Disparity, Multiplicity, upon Earth, and in Heaven, which is Order.

Let not our Brethren of the Scotch Mist, exalt the Perfection of their Parity,
with such a noise. Because Disparity in it self, (whatsoever may happen
Casually and disorderly,) is not a Witness of Imperfection. For, this very
State of Innocence, would not have been void of Disparity, even amongst Men and
Women; as in their Sex, so in their Age, Knowledge, Justice. And their Bodies
were not so far exempted from the Laws of Nature, that they should not have
received diverse Helps from Meats; and also, different Dispositions from the
Air, and Stars; advanced by which, some should have been greater, fairer,
stronger: But with a Restriction, that no Defect should have harbored in
those, either in Soul or Body, who should have been excelled, had they been
viewed, not comparatively, but in themselves.

Yet, This Power merely natural, and of Paradise, is only a directive (not a
coercive) Power; by the which Fathers should have governed their Children, and
the less Wise (such there should have been, to maintain Dependence, and
Subordination) have been ruled by the Wiser, Propter Obtemperantium Bonum,
chiefly for the Good of the Persons Obediently Subject. This being immovable,
All Governors are engaged from Heaven, to reform and bring back their
Government, as home as they can, to the Government of Paradise; (as all our
work of Godliness in all Kinds, draws altogether toward Paradise, from the
which we fell,) and set before them in all their Acts, the godly Direction, and
Christian welfare of those whom they govern. Therefore, O Governor, Si
Regiminis tui Acies aliquantulum hebescat; tu illam excita; when the Edge of
your Government grows a little dull, and flat, degenerating Times ever
contracting Corruptions, pull it back to the Primitive Edge and sharpness; not
sharp severity, (that sharpness was not Primitive,) but the sharpness of
Perfection: Severity-being only a Child of Necessity. And no Generation of Men,
is so degenerous, or, usque adeo Struthiocamelus, ut ferrum potuerit decoquere,
so much an Ostrich, as to digest Iron. For, Princely Honors, and other
Privileges of Kings, in their first Fundamentals, were not allotted and heaped,
with a full Ey^, or half a look, set upon Imperial or Princely Dignity, But
were chiefly given to the Vigils, Labors, and Troubles of a King, undergone in
his industrious Contriving the Good of his People, ut Oneri Honos responderet,
that Honor might Answer to the Burden. Otherwise no man would stoop his tender
Shoulders, and be a Governor, for the many Cares intending, and lying heavy
upon him in his Government. And Aristotle dividing Arist. lib. 8. Ethic. cap.
10.
betwixt a King and a Tyrant, parts them by this; That a Tyrant seeks
altogether his own profit, as if he were the great and absolute God of the
People, and of Nature; a King, or Prince, principally the Good, and Profit of
his People.

Power is not a Virtue; neither are the Acts of Power, morally good or evil in
themselves; but are made such or such by their Concomitants; good, if
accompanied with Mercy, Justice, Truth, Holiness, if otherwise, evil.
Wherefore the Legislative Power, being of God, who as God has Supreme Dominion
over us, and may therefore law us, falls under certain Conditions and Rules.
And four Conditions make a Law just. The first, ex Part Finis, That it be
ordained to the Common Good. For, a Princely and just Vide Arist. ubi supra.
Law, differs from a Law that is tyrannical, by this tending to Good, common
or private. The second, ex Part Agentis, That the Law be prescribed by One, in
whom resides original Authority. For, no Power can impose a Law, but upon such
as are lawfully subject to the Power. The third, ex Part Materiae, That by the
Law, neither Virtue be repul^ed, nor discountenanced; nor Vice induced, or
indulged to. The fourth, ex Part Formae, That the Law be constituted, and
promulgated after a due Manner and Order; to wit, That the Law keep that
Proportion in the distribution of Honors, and imposition of Burdens, which the
Subjects have and hold in order to the Commonwealth, S. Aug. lib. 1. de libero
Arbitrio, cap. 5.
in which, the Law is given. Unjust Laws, are not properly and in right speech,
Laws; as St. Austin lawfully declares. Unjust Laws, ratione Materiae, that is,
which jarre with, and are contrary to divine Right, do not only not oblige, but
also should not by any means be received, or observed; in agreeement to St.
Peter and the other Apostles, Acts. 5. 29. We ought to obey God rather than
Men. But the Laws which are unjust, in regard of the End, or Author, or also of
the Form, or Manner, may, and must be kept, in case that a Scandal would break
in upon us, if they should not. This is evinced, and evidenced, out of the
saying of Christ, Matthew. 5. 40. And if any Man will sue thee at the Law, and
take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also. Verse 41. And whosoever shall
compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. For, the Doctrine hence issuing,
is not, that we should thus always depart from our Right, and crumble away our
Goods and Privileges; but that we be ready to do it, whenever the
Circumstances becken us to it, and such a Work or Works shall be called upon,
as necessary, and greatly advantageous to the Manifestation of the Glory of
God. To this, that place of St. Peter holds a Candle, which Candle we ought not
to put under a Bush^ll, but on a Candlestick, 1 Pet. 2. 18. Servants, be
Subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but
also to the froward. Know further; That of Evils, some are Evil, because they
are forbidden by the Law; As, the Profanation of our Lord's Day: And some are
forbidden by the Law, because they are in themselves Evil, and are twice evil;
(because Evil, and because forbidden,) As, our Violation of the other
Commandments. The great Bishop of Hippo, asserts it concerning Adultery; Non
Adulterium malum est quia vetatur S. Aug. ^bidem, cap. 3.
Lege, sed ideo vetatur Lege, quod ma^um est, Adultery is not evil, solely and
simply because it is forbidden by the Law; but is therefore forbidden by the
Law, because it is Evil. And as Evils or Sins, are such, derivatively from
their Objects, to the which we are inordinately converted; and Sins applied to
Objects of different Kinds, specifically differ; Acts taking their Species or
Kinds from their Objects; So Sins greatly differ, compared to the Laws,
against which they offend. And therefore, some Sins are Sins of Commission,
some of Omission. (We set aside, Whether a Pure Omission be possible, or no?)
The Sins of Commission are they, which are acted contrarily to the Negative
Commandments; The Sins of Omission, which offend against the Commandments
that are Affirmative. And as the Commandment or Law, Divine or Humane, which
affirms or denies, deals in a Matter higher or lower; So is the Sin, lower or
higher. And if the Laws be more, against which we offend by One Act; this one
Act is more heinous.

Ut unde dudum digressus sum, refluat ac recurrat Oration.

Prudenter aliquando in obliquum aspicimus. It is a part of Prudence at some
times to look side-long; particularly, in giving a ^igne. But I will not. For,
I defy (which others deify) this peevish intermedling in the State-Business of
Public Persons, to whom I am subjected, at any time, by God's Ordinance, be it
of Commission or Permission, as they term it. Only thus, in the by, and in
general to all the World. There is a stout Ni^remberg. Hist. Naturae, lib. 9.
cap. 72.
Beast in Africa, by Name, says Nierembergius, Ejulator; Which repairing near
unto Villages, or Towns, in the Evenings, cries like a little harmless Child,
But the Person, that fondly moved, with pity, comes carefully to seek the
Child; is cruelly devoured by the false mouth of the Beast that cried so.
Aristotle's Tyrant, that waves the Common Good; that gives Laws derogating from
God's Law; cries like a little innocent Child, when he first calls us to him.
But, we being come, come, and submitted; and he in his Plenilune, or Solstice
of Honor; He that was a sweet Babe in Voice, is oftentimes a most sower Beast
in Action. And then, the People cry too, Quanta de spe decidimus? From how
great Hopes have we shamefully fallen?

My second Fundamental Proof sets forth Civil Governors; whose End, as they
are Civil Governors, is the conservation of the People in temporal Peace; and
whose Actions, as they are Civil, rest in the Consecution of this End; are
obliged (in a Christian Commonwealth) as Principal Members in a higher
Community, the Church of God; to direct all their Actions of Civil Government,
to the great Intention, aim, and End of the Church of God; Which is, the
Salvation of the Souls of the People. Because all Superior Power, which is
temporal; is inferior and subo^^inat^, as it is temporal, by the Law of
Nature, to Spiritual Power; and subjected to it in Matters pertaining to the
Soul, Mind, or Spirit; by the same Law of Nature, by which, the less perfect
Things are subjected to the Things more perfect; inferior, to superior; the
Body, to the Soul; Sense, to Reason; a Family, to a Commonwealth; external
Affairs, to internal Devotions; Earth, to Heavven; our temporal Conservation,
to our eternal Salvation; our temporal Peace amongst Men, to our eternal Peace
in God: And lastly, to the End, ea quae sunt ad Finem, the Things ordained for
us in the way to our End. The Church of God, being the most perfect, and most
noble of all Societyes, and the Society without which, we cannot go safe home
to our last End. The most low-fetch'd, and most penetrating Reason of all, is;
Because all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Power is originally founded (not in
the Pope; hence with so low, so creeping, so grovelling so poor a Thought; but)
in Jesus Christ, the invisible Head of the Church; and the gracious Fountain of
all the Graces, by the which we are graciously conducted to our last End. And
though it be not required, that the Means and the End should have a Similitude
of Being; yet, is it necess^^y, that there be no Dissimilitude or Disagreement,
betwixt the Means considered as the Means, and the End as the End. This is the
Doctrine of S. Greg. de Cura Pastorali, p. 2. ca^. 6. Idem Ep. lib. 2. Ep. 61.
S. Ambr. de Dignit. Sacerd. cap. 3. S. Chrysostom. de Sacerdotio, lib. 3. S.
Greg. Naz. in Orat. ad Populu(...) timore perculsum.
Greg. the Great, St. Ambrose, St. John Chrysostom. St. Gregory Nazianz^^, and
indeed, of all the Primitive Doctors.

Upon the Tower in the top, it is written in fair Characters; That Jesus Christ
must have the highest Seat in us, and over us. Psalm. 89. 15. Blessed is the
People that know the joyful sound, they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of
thy Countenance. For, the joyful Sound, in English, we read in the Vulgar
Latin, Iubilationem, Interpres Vulgat. Sept. Interpretes Graeci. Interpres
Sophocles. Interpretes Hebraei. Theologi Mystici. Vide Ludovicum Elasium in
Monili, and Alvarez. Tom. 3. de Oratione.
the crying out for joy. In the Septuagint, (...); Which the Greek
Interpreters, who best sounded their own Language, interpret, the Song of
Victory. And in the Interpreter of Sophocles, (...)(...), the joyful sound, is
(...), a Song of Victory. The Hebrew Divines unfold the Original Word, which
they likewise best sounded; The Sound of the Trumpet proclaming victory and
exciting to Joy. The Mystical Divines catch the Word at the rebound; and
transfer it to a shout or crying out for Joy, That God is God, and reigns over
us, and in us; and is above us all, and above all Things. This is the noblest
Effluence of our Heart, in the Motions of Joy; our highest Joy: As the Belief
of Mysteries, is our highest Faith; and our best Hope, is that which strongly
beats in the Pulse, when we wander per incerta Nemorum, through the greatest
Dangers; and our pure love, which loves God purely for himself, the highest. By
these, as the first and highest in their Kinds; our other Joys, Beliefs,
Hopes, Loves are orderly measured. This Joy cannot withhold it self from
trumpeting, and singing alowd it is own Comforts. For great and wonderful is
our Joy of Spirit, when Carnal Man is Conquered; and the Savior of Spirits
reigns over him. The Flames are pure and refined, because the Matter is clean
and heavenly. O blessed Victory! O the sacred Triumph; when this our
Spirit-Master, having sweetly conquered our Heart, Pompam ducit, is chief
Leader in the Solemnity! The Hebrews, in the relation of Paulus Fagius, report,
That the Feast of Trumpets was instituted, to Paul. Fagius in Levit. cap. 3.
preserve the memory of Isaac his release from being Sacrifised, and that
therefore the Trumpets were Rams-Horns, because a Ram was accepted in place of
him. Then, even then does this Trumpet-Sound sound the Victory of Christ by his
Death and Sacrifice, as by the meritorious Cause, over our Hearts, and over his
People, as Head of the Church, and as King of Hearts.

Favor me, pray, with your good leave, to remove here some peremptory
Objections, which, datis Habenis, if the reigns were laid in the neck of them,
would Reign and Revell in Divinity.

A good Law may permit Sin indirectly, and, considered with respect to the
Lawgiver, illibenter, unwillingly, by giving it line, (such as indirect
permission gives) and positively circumscribing it with Limits measured by the
End of the Line, as in Usury. For, when the Lender sins in his exaction of
Use-payments, the Borrower urged by his need, takes without Sin, as instigated
to such a Concurrence by mere, and most vehement Necessity, requiring the
supportance of ruinous Nature. Wherein, his: oncurrence to the Sinful Act, is
material, not formal, and he not willing but unwilling. Who truly, would have
joyfully borrowed, without such ungodly Retribution. And that which frees him
who borrows, frees also him who permits; upon whom in his permission, he
altogether holds his Ey. And whatsoever falls otherwise, and extra quadrum,
out of the right-sounding Figure; Whatsoever is exorbitant or extravigant,
happens prae^^r Intentionem Legis; besides the strict, and firstborn Intention
of the Law.

Yet farther. A good Law confirms sometimes a past Act of Sin, but not as a
peccami^ous or Sinful Act. A Virgin that espowseth her self, without the
knowledge or consent of her Parents, is by the Laws of our ancient Canonists
Canonistae Jurisperiti, and Jurisconsulti pariter omnes.
and Civilians, both lawfully and unlawfully espowsed. Here the Rule bears
Rule; Quod infectum, fieri non debet; factum, valet. Some things are validly
done, which are not done lawfully. And the Rule pronounces, That which being
undone ought not to be done, is valid being done. It stands, when the
Prohibition is of Man, in respect of the Circumstances; and the Ordinance in
the Substance of it, is of God. Hitherto therefore, Sapienter instituta Res
est, Men are wise and righteous in their Civil Constitutions.

Will you gird up your Garments, and climb with me, to the Brows of the
mountain behind us? God, the first, and ever-living Law, and the matchless
Original of our Law Givers, permitte^h Sin. Because, as it is a Vomit out of
the depth of the Devils Malice, (qui omnem admovet Machinam, who brings up all
his Engines of Battery against us,) to elicit Evil out of Good accidentally: So
is it a Coronet on the Height of God's Goodness, to call ( in aegris
exulceratisque Rebus nostris, and extrema jam Spe pendentibus, when our Help,
Health and Happiness hang, in appearance, by the least, and the last thread,)
Good out of Evil; as an eloquent Orator does sometimes exalt and serve up a
Soloecisme, to the promotion of an Elegancy; and an expert Musician in a
Traverse of Hand, of a Discord makes high Concord and Harmony. For, God the
Superlative Good, is so powerfully Good, that he draws and expresses from
the greatest Evil, the greatest created Good; which is, our Fruition of God in
the Bea^ifical Vision, drawn from the Jewish Cruelty in the Crucifying of
Christ; Great Goods, from great Evils, as the relief of old Jacob and his
Family, and of all Egypt, from Ioseph's hard usage; and some Goods, from all
Evils And it is a better Good, to crush with a skillful Hand, and express by an
after-Action, Good out of Evil; than, not to suffer Evil. Because it is a
more splendid and radiant Manifestation of God's Wisdom, Dominion, Power. Id^o,
says the most famous Bishop in Africa, melius esse judicavit, S. Aug. in
Ench^r^d. ad Laurentium, cap. 27.
de Malis Bona facere, quam Mala nulla esse permittere; Therefore God (as chief
provisio^, and Supreme Moderator of the World) judged it better to draw good
Things from Things Evil, than, not to permit Evil Things.

The permissive Decree of God, at the stair-Head of this Order, though
disOrder, is no proper Cause of Sin. Because it is not opperative, as being
altogether extrinsecal to the Sinner, and exercising no kind of Positive Action
or Influence upon the Sin. Neither we by any compulsion from this Decree, in
praecipiti sumus, aut in proclivi; are tumbled headlong into Hell, or warped
toward it. It is an Antecedent only, and such a one, as, it being enstall'd in
the place of an Antecedent, Sin follows not of Necessity, with necessity
derived from the Antecedent. But although it be a single Antecedent, in reguard
of us, yet is it an Act of God's consequent and Judiciary Will; and, as it
actually permits, is an outward Punishment, which we carelessly pull upon us
by abusing our Wills, and by strongly wrestling with God, and strangely
conquering him; and by snatching our selves in a Fume, from under the safe
wings of his preserving providence. And we are permitted, first to abuse our
Wills, because we will abuse them; and we will abuse them, because we will not
be regular in the moderation of them; and we will not, because we will not; and
the permission of this last will not, (the last in mention, the first in
motion, by the which, as a negative Cause, God is moved) comes originally from
God's Foresight of our future Negligence, and Disobedience; preservation from
Sin, being, under no consideration, due to persons negligent, and disobedient;
and the Preserver being now disengaged of his natural Obligation, and gracious
Promise; and left in the Hands of his own Arbitrament.

If a man be obstinate, and go off here, to return more strongly, thus; God
permits Sin to Damnation, and remitteth Sin, when he may dam up the way
before it, by his more puissant Helps; And why is he not therefore the moral
Cause of Sin? That is, Why is not Sin imputed to him? This Reason applied to
reasonable Creatures, who sometimes by Justice, and always by Charity, are
charged to defend one the other, from all kinds of Evil, as a Pilot, his
Brethren with him at Sea, would be Valiant; But, sticked upon God, it faints,
and falls, as the Viper from St. Paul's hand. Because the infinite Excellency
of God, and his royal Prerogative requires, his Dominion to be so absolute
over his Subjects; that it should not attend to their Profit, he having fairly
performed his part; but to his own Pleasure. Which only pleasure, and the
dignity of it, is of greater weight, than all the good of all Creatures. And
therefore, It is expedient, that it should be fulfilled; yea, if it should
require the Ruin of them all. This Answer gives no countenance to absolute
Reprobation; or to that absolute Reprobate, who teaches, That God may dam a
reasonable Creature to Hel-Fire, absque Demeritis, as St. Augustin's Language
is.

The return is, That the Christian Governor should conjoyn his Will, in his
Law-giving, and in all his works, with the revealed Will of God; to the End,
his Law may be God's Law, and immaculate; absque Macula, without spot; Marinus,
and Forsterus in Lexicis.
without, as the Hebrew Word is, Machalah, weakness, infirmity.

Mystical Divinity calls a Soul, being in this happy state of Conjunction,
(...), Uniform. And Religious persons thus United, are styled by Dionysius S.
Dionys. Areop. de Eccl. Hier. c. 8.
Areopagita, (...), persons closely compacted into one; and like the Pearl,
which is united in it self, and called Unio. 1 Cor. 6. 17. He that is joined
unto the Lord, is one Spirit; one Spirit in himself, and one with God. The
Vulgar Latin, Qui adhaeret Domino, Interp. Vulgat. Codex Graecus.
he that cleaves. The Original, (...)(...), he that is glued; vehemently joined
again, and firmly; that he may not be now severed, or pulled from his Heavenly
Comp^^t.

This Union is not altogether unlike the Hypostatical Union in Christ. Of the
which, Franciscus Suarez says, to the Fran. Suarez in 3. part. Disp. 53. Sect.
2. pest Conclusionem 2. dam.
very bottom of what men can say; Illa Vnio licet ex part Humanitatis sit
aliquid Creatum, tamen ex part Verbi ad quod terminatur, quiddan increatum
est; scilicet verbum per se Vnitum Humanitati; That Union, although on the part
of Christ's Humanity, it be created; yet, on the part of the Divine Word, at
the which it is terminated, is a certain uncreated Thing, even the Divine Word
united by Himself to the Humanity. Here is (...), profundum fine fundo, a Depth
without a Bottom. A Union created, uncreated, uniting God and Man in the
person of Christ; and yet, on Goa's part (though it be in the nature of a
Union, as it Unites, ut atting at Extrema, that it must touch the Things Vnible
and United,) the Creature is vanished, and the only Union is, Verbum per se
Vnitum, the Word United by Himself. Well now may the Incarna^ion of Christ, be
set next in place, unto the Trinity in Unity, as an incomprehensible Mystery.

Brethren, I cannot commend the Lay-Elder amongst you; who, (...) Men of
Repute, speak, denied the Communion to a Maid, (let her Name be, Susanna;)
because she could not answer him to the Question; Young Maid, What is the
Hypostatical Union? Was not this Lay-Elder, Inutile in Sambuceto Sarmentum? O
the monstrous Productions of Ignorance! Away with him. When the Master of a
Family, offended with a stink, kicks a Dog in the Parlour; the Servants kick
him too, through the Hall, and out of the Kitchen, until he be quite kicked
out of Doors, into the free and open Air, which the Wind purifies. The Master
of the Christian Family, is God. I return.

And our Deiform Will, and Union with God in Love, and Law; is a most gracious
Union of God with Man; wherein the Union, on the Soul's part, is Grace given by
God; and, on God's part, Deus per se unitus Homini, God by Himself united to
Man; that we may be conformable to our Head, Christ.

This Uniting Spirit of Grace, is that Adopting Spirit (we being adopted
Children through the natural Heir, in whom the Right stands;) even the Spirit
in our Hearts, Galat. 4. 6. Crying, Abba, Father. Which is a Term of more
familiar Compella(...), says Ludovicus Cappellus. Lud. Cappell. in illum
locum. Syrus in Marc. 14. 36. Johan. Drus. and Salmant. in Marc.
The Syriack in St. Mark, draws it forth as a Term of Appropriation, and winds
it up, to signify my Father; Which in the Targ-Language, it every where does.
Johannes Drusius admits it as a Term of Dignity; Salmanticensis, of Honor.
Wherefore this Union, even in the radical part of it, sets us up familiar with
God; and appropriats him to us; and entitles us, Most zealous in maintaining
his Honor, Crown, and Dignity.

The Duty therefore, of a Governor, looks three fair ways; by reason that the
Object of his Duty, is threefold; God, his Neighbor, Himself. Tit. 2. 12. We
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World. Which words,
St. Bernard, having tried them in the fire, sorts thus; Sobrie nobis, just
proximis, S. Bern. in Sermon. super Ecce nos reliqui mus omnia, etc.
pie autem Deo, Soberly, to our Selves; justly, toward our Neighbors; toward
God, godly. This duty is general, and every Man's Duty; but lies more heavy
upon the Governor; because his Office is of greater import. King David, his
Heart being well-steeped in this Doctrine, prayed for a threefold Spirit, Pal.
51. A right Spirit, verse 10. to guide his walkings with his Neighbor, in
Righteousness or Justice. God's holy Spirit, verse. 11. by the which, he might
be spiritually built into God's holy Temple. And, verse 12. God's free Spirit,
or (...), as the Septuagint, his principal, or leading Sept.
Spirit; for the principal fitting of Himself in Himself; that he having a
principal Spirit, in a principal Place, his Example consequently, might be
Principal, yea, Princely, and alios quasi manu ducere, lead others, as by the
Hand, into all Godliness, and Honesty. It respondently Follows, verse 13. in
the Vulgar Latin, Doce bo iniquos Vias tuas, and impii ad te convertentur: In
the English, Then will I teach Edit. Vulgat.
Transgressors thy ways, and Sinners shall be converted unto thee. And,
Exemplo aliis praeire, to go before others, by a leading and good Example, is,
to teach others in this good Sense. And, Qui Dux est aliis Actionum, He that
leads others by good Action, is rightly, Dux Via, Dux Populi, the Leader in the
right Way, the Captain of the People; (...), in this present World; or, in this
Now-World; wherein we enjoy, properly and together, but one short Now of Time.
For, Time, as Boethius timely told it, is Nunc fluens, a flowing Now; as,
Eternity is Nunc stans, Boet. lib. 5. de Con solat. Prosa ult.
a Now at a full stand. The first, is Nunc Temporis, the Now of Time; The
second, Nunc Aeternitatis, the Now of Aeternity. The first, is a Now; because
it is but no(...). The second, is a Now; because it is indivisible, and
all-together in all Eternity. Governors have more command in the World, and of
the World, than other Men; and yet, are commanded to learn, that they cannot
command or govern, more than a Now of Time in the World.

This holy Spirit fills the Heart with Holiness; and principally excludes
Emptiness of Spirit. Which has been always found in Heathenish, and unholy
Princes, filled but with Pride. (For, of such only, I desire to be understood;
as not being a lawful Judge of the emptiness in Christian Princes.) Those of
Job's Time, are shown in the Description of a Proud Man, Job 11. 12. Vain Man
would be wise; though Man be born like a Wild-Ass-Colt. Cod. Vulg.
The Vulgar Latin reaches; Vir Vanus in suberbiam erigitur; and tanquam pull^m
Onagri se liberum natum putat; The Vain Man is lifted up into Pride; and thinks
himself to be freeborn, as the young Wild-Ass, in the Wilderness. He thinks he
was born to do, non quid licet, sed quid libe^; not what lawfully may be done,
but what he lists to do; and that he may run his own wild Course in the
World, as a Wild Beast in the Wilderness. Pagninus inserts, Vir Vacuus, the
Pagnin. Figurin. Reg.
Void Man. Leo Hebraeus, or Figurina, Vir inanis, The empty Man. Regia phrases
it, Vir Concavus, The hollow Man. And the Notes upon the Gothic Bible of
Biblia Gothica S. Isidori.
St. Isidore, sue learnedly, for this Reading. The Hebrew Word, is Nabub; which
the English Translators, Exodus 27. 8. aptly render hollow. Surely, This Vain,
void, empty Man, and hollow, was long before Job, or, his Wild-Ass-Colt; and
immediately extracted out of the old Chaos; Of the which, Moses, Genesis 1. 2.
Terra eratinanis, and vacua; The Earth was without form, and void. The Original
grounds, Tohu Vavohu, a Sol tude, and Text. H^br.
Void. R. Aquila, called in the Chaldean Language, Onkelos, reads, Desolate,
and Void. The Septuagint have, (...)(...), Oak. Sept. Aq^il.
invisible and uncompos'd. Aquila settles, (...), Vanity and Nothing. Symmachus
consecrates, (...)(...), Sym.
idle and indigested. It was rudis indigestaque Moles, a rude and indigested
Heap. Theodotion sanctifies, (...), Vain and of no profit. Jonathas Chaldaeus,
the Author of the Theodat. Jonath. Chald.
Jerusalem Targ, gives the Reason of all: Because the Earth was void of Men
and Beasts. Our vain Man is empty of Man, and ^oid of Humanity; but has a vast
Wilderness of Beasts in him. Such a one was old Nimrod the Hunter. And such are
Turkish and Heathenish Tyrants, that hunt Men, as Men hunt Oppianus lib. 4. de
Venatione.
Beasts; yea, as the Numidian Hunters hunt Lions; armed with Swords, Iavelans,
and Fire. I dare not presume to retract any of these Readings, whether Hebrew,
Chaldean, Greek, Latin, or Gothic, I rather hold here, That each in his Place,
is tributary to the Text: and that all, after their several and private
Overtures, make a complete Piece of Mosaic Work, as they are wisely placed in
their chaste and unravished Sense; and with Colors answering to like Parts; and
always provided, that the other Colors do naught but observe, and set off the
Gold-Colour of the Origina^.

Fetch about again. The Angels that appeared from Heaven, like Men, had no
Heart, no solid Entrals or Inwards. But the Cause there, is, Those Inwards or
Entrals would have been fruitless, in them; and outward were sufficiently
answerable to an Apparition. Artificial Things, affabre facta, artificially
made, are polite, and fair outwardly: but are inwardly Unpolished. O those
Jews, not wise beyond a Figure, that embraced the Messiah in Figure, and
Shadow; but rejected him in the Thing, and in the Substance! Toads and Serpents
have been found in the midst and Heart of the fairest-figured Stone or Marble,
being hoilow. Knowledge estranged from Justice, is not Wisdom, but (...),
Craft; says Plato. And where Virtue is not, there is Plato in C^atylo.
Emptiness: As nothing sensibly fills, that is aerie and unsolid. And
Aristotle's Word, (...) Englished Subtilty; Arist. in Eth. and Polit.
is attributed to the Old Serpent, by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 11. 3. And the same
Serpent, Genesis 3. 1. in the language of Aquil.
Aquila, is (...): Which properly signifies one that is well-versed in all
Things; or, ^um qui omnia experitur, omnemque movet lapidem; tries and does all
Things, like an inconsiderate Empirick; in disorderly order to himself, or to
an Evil End. Such Governors, (if such there be in Christ's World) have more of
Italian Matchiavel in them; than of our Jerusalem Jesus, or, of Justice; And I
humbly pray them to know, That extrajudicial Action, is like eccentricall, or
like Violent Motion: And, that the latter End of such Action, will ever be like
the Motion of the Wheel, in Dialogo de White Dialog. 2. de Mundo.
Mundo. Which was first set on going; and then, carried about and about, round
and round with Bags of Sand tied to the Wheel; and falling still as the Wheel
moved, more and more forcibly, until the violent Motion kindled fire in it,
and burnt it out of all Motion, but what the sporting wind bestowed upon the
cold Ashes. The Foundation is unsound; And, Quicquid superstruxeris, corruet;
What you shall build upon it, will tumble.

The right Spirit and the principal Spirit manage the Hands and Behavior of
Governors toward all People: effecting, that it be innocent, just, and
altogether exemplary.

If all noble Persons are bound with ligaments from Heaven, to singular
Holiness; much more those most noble Personages that give Laewes. And the white
Robes of noble Persons, which they anciently wore, are Testes vere Classici,
Honorable Witnesses to the Truth supposed here. Whence amongst the Hebrews, a
Nobleman was entitled Ben Chorim, the Son of the While. And the Lorinus in
Eccl. cap. 10.
Title of a such a Person, in the Ishmaelitish Ton^ue, as the Rabbis testify,
was Filius L^ben, the Son of Whiteness. By this Portal, first entered our Latin
Word, Candidati; and the Particular Title, Eloquentiae Candidatus. This Wh^te
Garment, did not only put those noble Persons in mind of Justice and Innocence,
but also by a special Mark, deterred them from Injustice, as from being
polluted with Ordure, in their White and clean Garment. For, Aristotle speaks a
visible truth; (...) Arist de Gener. Animal. lib. 5. cap. 1.
(...), Little Spots appear in a White Garment. And Sidonius gives the like
Sentence, Si vestiatur albo, quisque fuscus fit nigrior; Every Man, black or
brown, that is clothed Sidon. (...). 2. Ep. 10.
in a White Robe; appears by the approximation of the contrary, more brown or
black.

And for, Behavior that is both Just and Exemplary; and wherein Justice sits
as in her Triumphant Chair, and clearly demonstrates her Self to sing in the
Quire with all other Virtues; As Christian Governors possess Gods Chair, and
govern for God, so they govern, watching over themselves and the People, as in
the presence of God, and are like the Princely Persons figuratively introduced
Zach. 4. and enstamped with an honorable Mark of Interpretation, verse 14.
These are the two anointed ones that stand by the Lord of the whole Earth. The
Vulgar Latin, and the Abettours of Interp. Vulgat.
it, read; ^sti sunt duo Filii Olei; These are the two Sons of Oil. And they
have performed Aristotle's Justice to the Glossa in Zach. Chald. Paraphrastes.
Hebrew, given the Text his own. The Gloss unmasks it; Id est, uncti Oleo;
That is, anointed with Oil. The Chaldec shapes it, Isti sunt duo Filii
Principum, These are the two Sons of Princes: The precious Gum, as it drops,
spreads thus, These are the Two Princely Persons, who sit at the Stern. Aquila,
and Theodotion dispense it; Isti sunt duo Filii Splendoris, Aquil. Theodot.
or Claritatis; These are the two Sons of Splendor, or, Clarity; that is,
illustrious and shining. For, Lamp-Light is the fair Child of Oil; as being
born, suckeld, and always nourished of it. Their work is, to wast and spend
themselves, as Oil, in the clear enlightening, and plain directing of others;
not in seeking themselves, and quaestus extemporarios, extemporary Gains. The
Septuagint, Syriack, and Arabic of Antioch, Sept. Syrus. Arabicus Antioche^us.
deal out; Isti sunt duo Filii Pinquedinis, These are the two Sons of Fatness:
The Kernel is, fat, and fertile, who shall be largely profitable, both to
Church and Commonweal. The Arabic of Alexandria walks alone in the presence
only of Arabicus Alexandrinus.
his own Shadow, but is egregiously substantial, and frames it; Isti sunt Filii
Misericordiae, These are the Sons of Mercy. Oil being a royal Symbol of Mercy;
and amiably setting forth persons in Authority.

These Governors, enriched with Princely Virtues, pertaining to Government,
Prudence, Justice, Fortitude; shall be to the People, in respect of External
Powers, Murus aheneus, ac Cingulum Adamantinum, a Brazen wall, and a Girdle of
Adamant, defending them from their Enemies; and to the same People, within
themselves, Light, Fatness, Mercy; Comforting, Refreshing, Succouring them.

The Casuists avouch with reason, Casuistae.
That we are not obliged in Conscience, to take up the Faith of the Minister
Sacramenti, or of the Susceptores; that is of those who Baptized us; either as
performing the Sacramental Action, or as Undertaking for us. Yet, they strictly
bind us to receive the Faith proposed by Him, in whose Name we are Baptized,
being rightly Baptized. So likewise, they who are God's Delegates, and sent by
the Lord of the whole Earth, are Heavensteer'd to do the Will, not of Man, or
of the lapsed Minister, but of Him that sent them; that they may be approved of
God, the Lord of the whole world; and accepted of God's Servants. For, Melchior
Canus is exact when he says, Si Legatus Melch. Canus lib. 5. de A^ctor Council.
cap. 5.
contra Instructionem agit, non censetur ex potestate delegata agere; atque
adeo non est, cur eo modo Acta, Superioris Auctoritate proba^a esse credantur;
If a Legate act contrarily to his Instructions, he may not be thought to act by
a delegated power; and there is no Reason, why Things acted after that manner,
should be received as firm'd and seconded by Superior Authority. The Comet is
perfectly Circular, except where it Blazes, yet wants the perfection, and
perfect influence of a Star; though, because it is nearer, it seems fairer.
Besides, It is an Upstart, and risen out of gross Matter. Such a Legate, or
Delegate, may still remain a perfect Delegate or Legate; but where he blazes,
and where he does mutare factum, go from himself; and there the influence is
Malignant, the Matter, gross.

I freely give, That Government administered according to the perfect Rule of
God's revealed Will, will be very laborious, and dolorous But, Optimi Milites
ad durissima mittuntur, as the Sto^ck Seneca; The best Soldiers are Seneca
^ib. de Provide etia.
commanded forth for hardest Exploits. And this will evince, That such
Governors adhere to him of whom it is Prophesyed, Is. 9. 6. The Government
shall be upon his Shoulder. The Vulgar-Latin-Word, L^ctio Valgata.
is, Principatus, the Dominion or Sovereignty. The Primitive Word in the
Hebrew, Misra; Which the Masters of Text. Heb.
abstruse and hidden Senses, amongst the Hebrews, of themselves acknowledge to
be, in Hebraeorum Officina non procusum, aut in longius protractum, sed arctius
contractum, ac velut in serevolvi; rolled up together by Concraction, and the
same with Misser sara, ex Spina Imperium; His Government shall arise from the
Sharp thorn, from a Crown of Thorns. To the purpose it might be fore known by
Prophecy, which was afterward to become History; That the Messiah, and
anointed one, should himself be afflicted, and the King of all true Sufferers,
and persons afflicted for Righteousness sake; or, in the patient and humble
performance of the pain-begetting, and thorny Work of Righteousness.

I have here, concluded the Doctrine in it self. And I now turn to the
Doctrinal Inferences; We attend the Text, and the Doctrine. The first, is,

If God's Revealed Will, as being a Copy of his Original Will, be perfect;
then, agreeably to the End for which it was revealed, it should be perfectly
Preached, and Published.

And now, what strange place in our thoughts, should the Preacher have, (for I
cannot contain my self from protesting against the works of this barbarous
Malefactor, in the first Appearance of him,) that oftentimes, especially Si
quid olfecerit lucri, if he sents gain, imperfectly delivers -- (What I may
call it, it occurrs not on a sudden; it passes for the perfect Law of God,)
Traditque quasi Traditor; and what he delivers, delivers asa Betrayer of God,
and of his perfect Law? I have much Business with our Quotidian Preachers. But,
the Spaniara's pace is, poco poco, by little and little; and the Italian says
as much, in his pean peano.

It is a dishonor to a Physician, that many perish under his Hands. Quae
foetum sunt perditurae, says Hippocrates in Hippocr. S^ct. 5. Aphor. 53.
his Aphorisms, iis mammae extenuantur, the Flagging of the Breasts in Women
with Child, portend Abortion. Search into your own Bosoms, O ye men of the
Pulpit, ye Jocky-Preachers. Are your Breasts, Lacte tumentes, swelling with
Milk? The Wiseman speaks wisely, Prove. 11. 29. He that that troubles his own
house shall inherit the Wind. So the Septuagint, (...) Sept.
(...), because Inheritances came formerly by Lots. The Syriack turning it,
Syras e Codice Ambrosino.
out of the Ambrosian Code, gives it wholly to me, Qui non congregat in Domo
sua, dividit Ventos filiis suis; He that is not a gatherer in his own House,
divides the winds to his Children, that is, has nothing to divide to his poor
Babes. Vixisse de Vento, nemo praesumitur, says the Civil C. de Alimentis.
Law, Men presume, that no man has lived of Wind, of nothing. The Mystical
Sense is, He that gathers not, not heaps up sound Learning into his Capacious
Breast, and large Heart, will feed the People with Air, Words, Language,
Sentences, Expressions, Scripture phrases crowded together, without order, as
if their Spiritual Appetite lay in their Ears. Such a one makes a loud
blustering for a while. But the loudest Wind, quickly blows it self all away;
Words are but wind. O this grand Plot-Master of Hell, how has he labored to
make holy Scripture Regulam plumbeam, a Leaden Rule, appliable to all Things!

And, Those Merchantmen, that fly with all the sail they can make, to Peru,
not only bring home Gold, but also, Monkies, Apes, Parrats. Yet, He that
Merchandises for Golden Divinity, should not bring ought in his Return, but
pure Gold. He should leave at Peru, the Monkie and Ape with their bad faces of
their own making, and the Parrat with his vain Tautologies, and Repetitions.
Quam tandem haec, Tragoedia dicam an Comoedia, habitura est Catastrophen? I
cannot stay here. Majora molior. The Preacher, that, according to the Discovery
made of him in Rhetoric, quasi aliud agens, as treating of holy Things, and
looking ( good Man, sweet Man, heavenly Man) an other Way, or toward Heaven;
wounds the Superior power with collateral Senses, as with Side-Blows; and in
every Sermon, for penury of sound Matter, damps the void and aerie Brains of
the People, with, as the Italian utters it, Raggione di Stato, high Reasons and
businesses of State; defiling their Ears; yea, pulling the people by the Ears,
till the Blood comes, and qualifying them for Insurrections; is more than
somewhat like him, who being Galen's Patient, and very sick, Galen. lib. de
Differentia Symptomatu^.
told him, demanding in the morning how he did, That he had been restless, and
without sleep; all the night, heaving himself from side to side, and heavily
groaning, and ut rem omnem paucis absolvam, had been grievously troubled in
seriously thinking, what should become of him (sick Man,) if Atlas, weary now
at last, should steal away his outworn shoulder, and Heaven fall upon him lying
weak in his Bed. These newfound Pulpit-Men, These Black Kinghts of the blew
Bonnet, (well-feather'd outwardly, but Adamites in Understanding) hope
devoutly, that weary Atlas will run away, and the Heaven of Superiority and
Government, with all the Larks in the Air, come down to them. Their only Grief
is (whatsoever Cloak they wear) that they move in a Lower Orb, than their
Sulphurous and aspiring Hearts would do; and that they do not, as the Black
Abyssine of India, (like to like) sit forward, and rule or guide the great
Elephant; and that their nimble and zealous-finger'd Party is not armed with
Spear and Bucklar, and possessed of the Tower and Castle upon his back. These
conscientious and godly Men, would zealously, religiously, and comfortably tuck
all Powers under their Geneva-Girdle; with which, they are not able to gird up
their own loins.

David gives out a fair-foul Image of such Night-Ravens, Psalm. 11. 2. For lo,
the wicked bend their Bow, they make ready their Arrow upon the string, that
they may privily shoot -- The Hebrew Text. Heb.
Word, here Supposite for privily, says, taken at the first Word, In tenebris,
in darkness. The Vulgar Latin exalts, Edit. Valgat. Sym.
in obscuro, in the dark. Symmachus, (...), as in the dark night, when the Sun
being set, is lost from our Ey. The Septuagint, (...), in a night Sept.
when the Moon shines not. An other would interpret it, in tenebris Sco^icis,
in the Scotch darkness of their Souls. He that will please himself with this
Northern point, may cheerfully do it; and yet, not overact his part with the
Waspes in Aristophanes; or, nutrire Vesparium in Vide Aristoph. in Vespis.
Pectore, nourish in his Breast a Wasps-Nest. They privily shoot; or, If they
bring other Men's Works into the Light, they hold them forth by a slight on a
sudden, and pull them back as quickly by a slight; (acting consutis ^ie dolis,
with pious frauds;) and in effect, render them like the Weaved Works of the
New-World, recorded by Pancirollus; Which, Panciroll. lib 2 Reru^ Memurabi^ium,
Titulo primo.
according to their manner of being exposed in the Light, show any Color;
black blew, brown, or green; white, red, yellow, or ash color. We are Saints,
or Devils; Reprobate, or Elect; Chaste, or Adulterous; Alive, or Dead; as their
sudden slight is in showing us. They labor, that all People should look upon
Men through their odious, and odiouslyfalse Accusations, using the craft of
those who make a Lamp of the black water, or Ink of the fish Sepia; Which
yields a Light, belying the faces of all that are present, and showing them
ugly, and of the Ethiopian Kind. At which time, larvarum plena sunt omnia, they
fill all with Ghosts, and Goblins. And in this Darkness, raised by them, they
muffle up themselves, and scarf their own Subtilty; and, at their pleasure,
disappear, Velut unguento Magico delibuti, as if anointed by the Witch, with
her Magical ointment; and as if they, fair Angels of Light, were altogether
unacquainted with the slight of casting a Mist, or, the Deeds of Darkness.

These, in the Dialect of Hesychius, are Hesych. saepe saep. u^.
many times named (...), persons carrying Men of Arms, and, old Sino^, vanum
^endacemque, with all his Vanity of Lying, under their Tongues; opening, and
invading Men's Hearts with dark and deceitful words, and, as they think,
Hermetically sealing them up again, for themselves. They seem to imitate the
old Germans, of whom, Tacitus; Atras in Praelia Noctes legunt; Corn^l. Tacit.
in Annal. lib. 3.
They choose the darkest Nights for their Battles: In the which, they are most
furious. Prodeunt e gurgustulis; cursitantes huc illuc velut in myrmiceto, They
creep out of their holes, and run here and there in great Multitudes; as
animatus Pulvisculus, that living and busy Dust yonder on the Pismire-Hill.
And in all this running, there and here and every where, they carry their Kirck
behind them. Any Man, a little entered in the Language of old Athens, knows
well, that the Greek word (...), signifies a Tail. They wagg their (...), their
ugly Tail, and fawn upon the People (the silly dull-ey'd people, that know not
a Head from a Tail) with shaking their Kirck, the (...) of all Churches; (which
they would set over our Head, even with the Ruin of Thousands:) Insinuating to
them in the Matter; That they would be kindly pleased, under a Pretense of
Zeal, and Reformation, and Godly Strictness, to suffer them, as young, but
arr^gant, Fathers; and theirs, as ignorant Elders, to make younger Brothers of
them. Which no throughly-Catechi'd Christian, would endure for a hundred
thousand Worlds, and as many more, ten hundred thousand times told over.

Then use they the White Genova-Wand in their Hands, as Pallas does in Homer.
Who makes wondrous sport with Homer. (...). 6.
V^ysses, a little Man: He is now small, wrinkled, ragged and torn, and
scarcely true; (...). But she having graciously touched him with her white
Wand, he is now again tall, and of a goodly favor and pesonage; And now the
gallant Man has Hair, of a violet, purple, or skycolour; (...). And the very
self-same Act, is a Sin and no Sin, as these prime Saints are (it is their own
sweet phrase,) conscientiously moved to teach that Day. And the same Text and
Sermon, only new vamp't, are fitted for a new Leg and Walking; and stretched
quasi Den^^bus admotis, Teeth and all being put to them, for the retriving of a
Contrary Purpose; with a little bandying of the Matter betwixt; Verily, even so
it is, dear Brethren; there is Scripture for it: And, Verily, my dear Brethren,
It is not so; there is Scripture for the contrary, even the Scripture used
formerly by our Adversaries. And thus, the miserable People, though they hear
contrary sounds from their Mouths, yet hearing still the same sound from their
Noses; are themselves led by the Nose.

Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity; Ecclef. 1. 2. Aquila, Symmachus,
Theodotion, Aquit. Sym. Theodot. S. Hieron. in Eccles. 1.
and all the Ancients except the Septuagint, says St. Hierom, expound it,
Vapor Vaporum, and omnia Vapor; Vapor of Vapors, and all is a Vapor. Is not
all this Preaching, a Vapor? All, is a Vapor, a Vapor of Vapors; the
veryest Vapor that ever was a Vapor. Is this, to Preach Jesus Christ; the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever? Is this the Birth of so many strange
Faces, strained Mouths, and close-closing of Eyes; or, of their
Star-Twinckling? Is this the Conclusion, or Use of the Doctrine, that roundly
bounds up every Period with Saints? O my immortal Soul, what do thou here,
amongst these Lunatic, these Changeling, these ebbing and flowing Preachers,
who are any Thing, every Thing, all Things? what do ye want? what will ye buy?
Qui labia omnino diducunt, ut in omnia deducant, Who alalwaies open and stretch
their lips wide, that they may stretch and open them to all Things? Vivus
vidensque pereo; I perish, living, and looking upon my self while I perish.

Is this, O prodigious Preacher, thy Food from Heaven? thy Manna? What? say
thou Man, that this is Manna? Then has Hell taken a Vomit; Then are the
Manicheans returned to us, out of the Bottomless Pit. Hear thy own Story, in
them, and their vapouring Founder. He denied his own Name, and adopted the Name
Manes. Which in the Babylonish Tongue (he was a Persian,) signifies a Vessel.
He desired ( precious Man) to emulate the Apostle, who is called Vas
Electionis, a Vessel of Election; Thus far Epiphanius. This proud Imp S
Epiphan. Haeres. 66.
named himself an Apostle of Christ, not after the common manner, but in the
singularity, wherein the holy Ghost, as being sent by Christ, was an Apostle;
So St. Austin paints him. Afterward, his Disciples in Greece, in regard his
adopted S. Aug. lib. contra Epist. Fundamenti.
Name had an ill Name and Sound in those Parts, being near to (...), signifying
Madness; wire-drew his Name into Mannichaeus, a fundendo Manna, ((...), is
fundo;) Because, they said, he S. Aug. lib. de Haeresib. Haeres. 46.
shour'd and poured Manna, ab ore rotundo, from a round, and perfectly-sweet
Mouth. These old, and our young Manna-Masters, may rightly mingle their mad
Manna's, in their pouring them forth; by the Rule, Simile Simili gaudet, Like
delights in Like. Shall I tell thee Man? Never a Manna better Manna; O thou
Scot^h Manichea^.

The Novatians were, in their own Language, (...), clean, pure; and the
Montanists, (...), the Spiritual. All were impure, and unclean to the
Novatians, but Novatians; All, except Montanists, were carnal to the
Montanists. But Absalom, though he carried in his Name, a Father of Peace; was
in behavior, a Child of Rebellion. And though Judas signifies Praise; Judas
the Betrayer of Christ was not Praiseworthy. I set a Bar here; and add no more
Names. Only prosecute the mad Folly of these Preachers in doting on
themselves, and their young. The Man that sees the Image of his own face in the
Water; and conceiving presently, that he has seen a Water-Nymph, or
Fountain-Goddess, is rapt with admiration of that beauteous Apparition, and
wastes his thoughts in the only Contemplation of it, goes for a Madman, and is
rightly called Lymphatus. And, when I hear these J^richo be^rded Preachers
praised by them, my Thoughts revolve E^asm. in laudem Moriae.
the Old Records, thus. Erasmus has written a Book, in the Praise of
Foolishness. Lucianus (...) has a writing which he calls (...), the
Commendation Lucian. M^. (...).
of a Fly. We have Pliny's Testimony, That Phainas the Physician, wrote the
praises of a Nettle; of which, Plin. lib. 22. cap. 13. Aul. Gell. Noct. Attie.
lib. 17. cap. 12.
one (surely) was, that it is a Stinger-Phavorinus in Aulus Gellius, praised a
Quartan-Feaver; and another Thing as bad, or worse; him that was only the
Tongue of a Stout Man, and Homer's Fool, Thersites. A certain riotous Bankrupt,
called his Who^es by the Names of the Muses. The Ethiopians, being black
themselves; do paint the Devil, in as white a Coat, as we do Angels.

O who shall reduce the silly Sheep, the bleating People, velut ictum fulmine,
and abreptum quasi turbine; as it were blasted from the Pulpit, and caught up
in the Air with the Whirlwind of Passion, Prejudice, and Popular Errors; all
raised from the Pulpit! Who shall disenchant, and unmantle these Jewish
Cabbalists, attributing divine Strength to Names and Words, used by Persons,
even altogether unacquainted with, and ignorant of the Things thereby
signified! Who shall unravel the damnable Work of these Conjurers, that impose
upon the People, ( infimi sub sellii Homines, Men and Women of the lowest
Form) with Characters, nothing powerful but by Compact with the Devil!
Quantitas Molis est inefficax. And, Figura est Qualitas circa Quantitatem. O
these both Preachers and People, decked, like heathenish Indians, with fine
Feathers, filch'd from Birds, that when they were alive, flew near Heaven;
while these, because their Feathers are ab extra, from without, and are
ascititious, cannot fly; can scarcely creep! O these unseemly Creepers, with
Feathers on their Backs! Their Names are, The Saints; the Elect; the dear
Children of God; God's holy Ones; the Godly. Godly Names, indeed; good Words,
fair Characters. Have they sinned away all right Understanding? all efficacious
Helps? all hopes of true Manna? Dum Moses ad pias Preces manus at toll it, Ros
de Coelo delapsus in precantis manibus concrevit; the Voice of Josephus; While
Moses lifted up his Hands in holy Prayer, when the People wanted Bread, his
Joseph. Antiq. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Hands open toward Heaven, were first filled with Manna; to give notice, that
those holy Hands lifted up in Prayer, had pulled Manna down. Is there not one
Moses more to be heard of, that may prevail with God for Bread in the
Wilderness of Sin? A Truth of Truths; Proclivius est, evocare ^acodaemona, quam
abigere; It is more easy to raise D^vils, (or Devilish Spirits) than to lay
them. O the miserable Gatherers of such Manna; such Doctrine, such Words* My
Tongue wants Words, and Colors, wherewith to pencill such foul words; and
black is not black enough for them. Senec. Tragoediogr. Hip. ^ct. 2. Scen. 2.
Curae leves loquuntur; ingentes stupent, Small Cares are talkative; whilst
huge-Ones are struck dumb with Astonishment. I will pray as the Original
prays, Psalm. 56. 9. Propter Aven ejice eos: Cast them out for their Iniquity:
or, as the blind-Man's Text Heb. Targ. Rab. Joseph. Caeci.
Targ; Propter falsitatem, for their falsehood, and lying; their lying Words;
their lying Works; Or lastly, as the Elders, not of England, but of Israel;
(...), for their nothing; Because Sept.
they have said and said again, and gainsayed; who, because they have said and
gainsayd, have said nothing; and are therefore, Homines Nihili, Men of Nothing,
of naught, no worth, no good account. Be not scandalized, Brethren, at these
overgone, or, as ye may think, overgrown Expressions. The old Saints (turn over
their Works) were as vehement, and as violent against the Deceivers of their
Times. And our Scotchsoul'd Sayer and Gainsayer, Vrtica est; Vrit, si mollius
tractetur; is a Nettle; and stings if he be gently touched. Is there not a
Godly Violence, a religious Vehemence? When is it reducible to Practice, if not
in this Case? But, the Discovery of these Pulpit-Meteors, blowing hard upon me,
has carried me from side to side, besides the Channel.

I require in a Preacher, that he may perfectly Publish and Preach the Perfect
Law of God; (besides inward qualifications, natural and supernatural, and an
Outward Call; the necessity of which, is understood with much facility;)
acquisite Learning in an excellent Manner; and Adherence to a Church of such
Authority as may reasonably ^ut a stop to Controversies. I read in the Perfect
Law of God, that God himself is most excelently perfect; and consequently was a
free-Agent in the Creation of the World, and the like Actions. An Infid^l, or a
weak Christian, demands of me, wherein this Liberty consists. Without sound
Learning, what Answer can I give? But assisted by such Learning, I may answer
thus.

God's Liberty consists chiefly, in this; That he can freely choose an Object,
either more or less good; And in this, his Acts of Choice are laudable; because
they can still fix upon an inferior good; and are infinitely praiseworthy ex
modo tendend, because the Acts of God. Although still, he cannot work better or
worse morally. And if we should deprive him of this Liberty; it can never be
well-unfolded, why God did not make more and more perfect Worlds, so long till
the Angels could not number them. And to say, that God is free only, toward
this and that individual Thing; would be to say, that no Honesty or
Laudability shined from the Exercise of his Liberty. And the same Objects which
God wills, are handed to us: both by God and Nature, and proposed as
unequally good. And this Perfection of Liberty, has place in God; because he
cannot want any kind of Perfection; except he has a Perfection equivalent,
which is incompossible with it: as it happens in the Divine Persons, with
respect to their Relative Perfections.

A Man demands, beyond all that I have said already; Why the most holy God
hinders not Sin? Without the concurrence of Sound Learning, we shall never
quiet him with a sound and full Answer; As thus.

Tertullian has a pressing Reason; and Tert. lib. 1. contra Marcion.
he presses it too: Because Man is graciously made by God, a free Creature,
undetermined in his Actions, until he be determined by himself; And therefore,
may not be drawn away from Sinning by Omnipotency; because God uses not
(neither does it agree with him) to repeal his own Ordinances, or to proceed
against them; As, Mercy may not do any thing, contrary to Providence. Now, God
does not so will the Damnation of a Sinner, but that he still leaves him
betwixt Heaven and Hell, in respect of his Abilities. He desires earnestly,
that he should turn; but willingly, consentingly, and according to the working
of his Abilities, appointed by Providence; not by force. Which if he did, he
could force him to return. He moves him to a return; and also gives him
sufficient ability, by virtue of which, he may return, though he knows he will
not. He that said to his Creatures, Increase ye, and multiply; put also a
Virtue into them, by virtue whereof, they might multiply and increase. He that
commanded the Lame Man, to arise and take up his Bed, and walk; so strengthened
his Joints, that he might do all this. God sees, that such a Sinner shall not
be saved; and he sees likewise, that he will not comply with his Helps. We
speak not in this Question, of the Physical, but of the Moral Cause. The
Physical Cause is that, which does truly and really effect; so God concurreth
to the entity of Sin. The Moral Cause is, which truly, does not effect truly;
but yet, is such, that the Effect is imputed to it; as an entreating,
counselling, or not hindering Cause. And God both entreats and counsils against
Sin. And if he does not hinder it, he is not bound; having assisted us to the
hinderance of it. And his Decree concerning Sin, is not absolute, but
condionate; though the Scotch Barnacles are otherwise minded. For, to every
absolute Decree of God, the Execution of the Decree, is most accidentally, but
necessarily subordinate. And so, Adam should have fallen and his Children after
him, by a necessity taken from the Divine Decree. And because God is the Author
of his Decree, if his Deceee does operate Sin, and necessitate to it; God in
his Decree, operateth Sin. It may not be reasonably said, that every thing is
made for it is Use, as for an End; and God chiefly uses the Wicked and their
Sins ad Exercitium Bonorum, for the Exercise of the Good; therefore the Wicked
were made, and their Sins decreed for this End; this Use of the Wicked, being
per accidens; neither did God make the Wicked, as they are Wicked. God
absolutely Decrees, that Children shall be begotten and born, yea though being
Children and born, they are presently guilty of Original Sin; Because the Child
born, is not the Cause of that Sin. Which freeth a Father also, from concurring
to that Sin, in the begetting of a Child, he not concurring to that, the whole
Commission of which, is past, and blown over. Indeed, God has a speculative
Knowledge only, of Himself; bebecause Vide S. Tho. part. 1. q^aest. 14. art 16.
he is not operable. But of all oother Things, he has a speculative and a
practical Knowledge: A speculative Knowledge; because he knows all things
speculativo modo, after a speculative manner. A practical Knowledge, of those
Things which in Time he does. And the Evils of Sin, although they are not
operable by him, yet fall under his practical Knowledge, as he permits, or
hinders, or as he orders them, and disposes of them; as Sicknesses fall under
the practical Knowledge of the Physician, when he cures them by his Art. Whence
it goes off clearly; that God knows a thing, which may not possibly be done by
him, because it jars with his Perfections.

A zealous Christian desires to know the fairest Foundation in point of Virtue,
upon which he may place his Worship of God. Sound Learning lays it out by the
line, in this manner.

There be many Reasons, and Motives, by the which we are bound and urged, to
give and yield all Obedience, Observance, Veneration, and Worship to God. For
first, We owe him Duty, as one infinitely better and greater than us. And this
Act is proper to a Virtue, called Reverence or Observance; whose charge and
business is, to make us respectfull and submissive to our Betters. Secondly, We
owe him Duty, as he is the Supreme Lord, whose all Things are, and to whom all
things are due, which we have. And this Act is proper to Justice, as far as a
man can exercise Justice toward God, which is not like the Justice betwixt Man
and Man: Because the Dominions of Men may be equal and unmingled; when yet,
nothing can be exempted from the most high Dominion of God. Thirdly, We owe him
Duty, as he is the first Beginning, and Creator of all Things; to whom
therefore our highest Worship is due, by the direction of the Virtue of
Religion. Fourthly, We owe him Duty, as a Father; who therefore is Venerable;
and who has made us, being most unworthy of so great a favor, his Children by
Grace and Adoption. And the payment of this Duty, is an Act belonging to the
Virtues of Christian Piety, and Filial Fear. Fifthly, We are his Debtors, as he
is our great and most liberal Benefactour. And the Works of this Consideration,
are all under the Protection of Gratitude. Sixthly, We are subjected to him, as
being most high, potent, and over all. And the Virtue that performs the
Commands of these Thoughts, is Humility. Seventhly, We have a reference to him,
as he is our Summum Bonum, and most diligible. And the Virtue that stirs here,
is Charity. And as the Ey of Faith and Love discerns more of these Motives;
so the Act has more Reasous of Honesty, derived from the different Species of
these Virtues; being like an Heavenly Rainbow, beautified with many Colors,
with which we shoot and wound our Beloved to the Heart.

If therefore, ye will know with sound Reason, that God made the World, not by
Coaction, but with affection to our Good; that the Lawgiver is Himself holy. If
ye will know how to make the best of your best Devotions, and Worship, ye must
sit at the Feet of sound Learning, as Pa^l, at the Feet of Gama^iel.

In these close Cabinets of Truth, Thousands of like Truths present themselves.
And, I am forced here, to imitate the Painter; who endeavoring to show to the
Ey, and gather a great multitude of Men, within the narrow-limited Compass of a
small Table; and fearing lest they should offend one another, if crowded
together; discovers in some, only their faces; in others, their backs; of
some, the tops of their Heads; of others, one only Foot: and sometimes a small
Cheek and one Ey stands for a Man; while he leaves the rest for our Imagination
to paint; which truly, performs a fair deal more in the Table, than the
Painter. And, in those rare Works of honest, and laudable Curiosity, those
famous Relics of Time, in which, the Shapes of many, both Men and Women, were
compelled within the Circle of a Penny; the part that was the Head in one Man,
was the Breast of another; and perhaps, another limb in a third; serving for
diverse parts, as it was diversely applied, and looked upon.

In Cases of Conscience. An honest Soldier, futurorum anxius, anxious of mind
concerning Things to come, is desirous to know the Conditions of a just War;
Sound Learning, is only able to answer his Desires: And says, The Conditions of
a just War, are, 1 Auctoritas legitima, a lawful Authority. Which is, The
Authority of a Supreme power, or of a Prince. Because Princes, and Supreme
Powers, have no common Tribunal, at which they may accuse other Supreme Powers,
and Princes. 2. Causajusta, a just Cause. Which is, The repulsing of notorious
and great Injury; the repulsing of which, is a more eligible Good, than the
Good, lost by the Evil of War; that the Supreme Power may defend the People
subjected to it, now greatly damnifyed by the Enemy. This Cause must not be
doubtful. Yet, in a doubtful Cause, a Person lawfully subjected to the Power,
may fight under it; a Stranger may not. Because Persons lawfully subjected,
ought not to discuss the Commands of the Supreme Power, in Matter of Doubt; as
neither ought an Executioner, to discuss the Commands or Sentence of a lawful
Judge. 3. Intentio bona, a good Intention. For, the End of War, being the Peace
and Tranquillity of the Commonwealth, in the Possession of her Just Rights; no
other End can bear the weight of War. We must therefore, first endeavor, that
Satisfaction be made by Peaceable Means. 4. Modus debitus, a due Manner. Which
enjoins the taking of all possible Care, that the Innocent be not endamaged.
These Conditions, every word being weighed in the Balance of Justice and of
the Sanctuary, speak a just War.

A well-meaning Man, having it larum'd howerly in his Ears, that our
Kirck-Innocents have had, of late days, their faithful Martyrs; is
importunate from the Desires of his distressed and troubled Heart, to know the
Conditions required to Martyrdom. Learning readily gives them out of her
Storehouse. Five Conditions must concur to the baptizing of an Adul^us, or
grown Man, Baptismo Sangui^is, in his own Blood, by the Name of Martyr, or
God's Witness. 1. Death must be inflicted upon him, in the hatred of Christ, or
of Christian Religion or of some Verity of Faith; or, because he has done some
Act of Virtue. Causa, non Poena, facit Martyrem, The Cause, not the Punishment,
makes a Martyr. 2. Death must be Piously accepted by him. 3. He that is
martyred, must not resist his Persequutors, in Act or Desire. And therefore,
even Christian Soldiers fighting in God's Cause, are not Martyrs, though
killed. Because they do not imitate the Prince of Martyrs, who suffered Death
without resistance. 4. He that is killed, must believe by a Supernatural Faith,
the Truth, in the defense of which, he dies; and the Fundamental Truths, for
the Propagation of which, Christ dyed. 5. His Heart must be established with
habitual Grace; and though perhaps, he was never baptized Baptismo Fluminis,
with the Baptism of Water, yet Martyrdom must find him baptized Baptismo
Flaminis with the Baptism of the Holy Ghost. These Conditions thoroughly
considered, the well-meaning Man refers the Matter to the strange Turns and
Wonders of the divine Providence; in the admiration of which, he is quite
absorpt. And coming to himself again, believes, that many temporal Blessings
shall in their due Times, accost the present State, in answer to brave Things
which they have done; and in the Head of all, to their suppressing these
Blackamore-soul'd Apostates.

A religious Man, that most lives and converses inward^y, would fain be
informed, for his own inward and sublime Exercise; Whether he may serve God
most, with his Understanding, or with his Will. Sound Learning teaches him,
That, Whereas there are two chief Faculties of the Soul, the Understanding and
the Will; and with the Understanding we know, with the Will we love: It is a
greater height of Perfection, to know the Things which are under us, than to
love D. Tho. 1. 2. quaest. 66. art. 6. ad. 1.
them. But for the Things which are above us, it is more perfect Satisfaction,
to love them, than to know, and understand them. And therefore, the Seraphims,
or loving Angels, are the first of pure Creatures, and the first allied to the
last Person in the Trinity, who is Love. To this purpose, the Divines teach,
That the Spiritual Powers of our Understanding and Will, being compared in the
Exercise of Contemplation, and considered ex modo procedend, the Acts of the
Will excel the Acts of the Understanding; though the Understanding, simply
considered, takes place of the Will. Because such is the Nature and Way of
the Understanding in Understanding, that the Things which she Understands,
she draws, in a manner, and fits to her self. Whence by Understanding inferior
Things, she advances them above their Worth and Degree; and by Understanding
superior Things, depresses them beneath their Degree and Worth. For, When the
Soul, a spiriall Substance or Power, by her Act of Understanding being also
spiritual, does understand sensible and material Things, cast beneath her
Condition; she does not therefore, sensibly apprehend them by her Intellection,
neither after a material or corporeal Manner; but by the mediation of a
Spiritual Form, or unmaterial Species, and by an Act altogether incorporeal.
Whilst the Will does not draw to her Self, the Things which she desires and
wills; but rather is drawn her self by them; and fits and conforms her self
to them. The Will therefore, is more subservient to high Things, and more
observant of them, than the Understanding; And we serve God, more by Charity,
the principal Virtue of the Will, than by Faith, the prime Virtue of the
Understanding; and Faith acts not, but by Charity; as the Body acts not, but by
the Soul; And, the greatest of these, is Charity. We cannot turn our selves,
wisely and securely, in Matters of private or public Importance, but we fall
into the Hands of Sound Learninng.

We come to the more excellent, and more satisfactory Knowledge of Scripture,
in the Knowledge of Languages. It is most consentaneous to Right and Reason,
that Christ's Preachers should be furnished with all substantial and convenient
Helps, for the plenary Performance of their Angelical Employment. And
therefore, Christ sending his Apostles into all the world, and qualifying them
for the Mission, endowed them with Languages. Which Gift being withdrawn, and
the End, for which it was extraordinarily given, Ending; the Church of God,
supplied the want of it by Industry, and ordinary Means.

Now, He that kens not beyond his Mother Tongue, nor is adherent to a Church of
sound Learning, and sufficient Authority; is deprived of these convenient and
substantial Helps. 1. He cannot conform himself to the Example of Christ and
his Apostles; who, though the Septuagint, many times, differ from the Original;
yet, many times, in their use of Texts from the old Instrument, (the old
Testament was anciently so called) took in at the Septuagint, and walked
besides the Original, receiving d^fferent, and explicatory Senses; and in them,
the Intention of the Holy Ghost; God intending all good Senses, in the giving
of Scripture; as in other Gifts, he intends all the Good conveniently arising
from them. 2. He cannot reach the Texts and Explications, which fitly solve
Doubts and Controversies, depending upon Scripture and the Translations of it.
It is doubted by what Sign Cain and Abel knew, the one that his Offering was
accepted of God, the other that God rejected his Offering. The Vulgar Latin
tells, Genesis 4. 4. Et respexit Edit. Vulgat.
Dominus ad Abel, and ad munera ejus; And God had respect unto Abel; and to his
Gifts. The Septuagint spoke it first, Sept.
(...), he respected, he looked favorably upon. The Doubt stands still; But
Theodotion removes it, (...), he Theodot.
set on fire, he consumed with a flame; as afterward, in such Cases. Ecce
Signum, behold the Sign. It is controverted concerning the Text, Jo. 3. 5.
Except a Man be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God; Whether the Text intends a grown Person, or any Person of
whatsoever Age or Sex. The Original disbands the Controversy, (...) -- Except
Text. Graec.
one be born, including all Ages, all Sexes. 3. He cannot come near the
Mysteries that ly couched in the Sacred words of Scripture; As, Genesis (...). 1.
Where the sacred Trinity, the Author of Scripture, is, (in despite of all
Gainsayers,) delineated in the very first Line of Scripture; Bereschil Elohim
bara, being exactly Text. Heb.
Englished, In the beginning Supreme Perfections he created. For, although the
Sacred Persons differ, one from the other, by their Personal and proper
Perfections; yet they are all he (as he denotes One God) and the very same in
Essence. And though the Name Elohim be not proper to the Persons, in it self,
and it is first aim; yet, the Name in the Number, is most proper. 4. He cannot
comprize the secret Energy of Words; As, in a million of places; And, besides
the Texts interweav'd in this Discourse, in that eminent place, Zach. 9. 16.
They shall be as the Stones of a Crown, lifted up as an Ensign upon his Land.
Where the Readings do all wear Crowns, and bear Ensigns. The Vulgar Latin,
Lapides sancti elevabuntur super Interp. Vulga^.
terram ejus; Holy Stones shall be lifted up upon his land. The Hebrew Text,
Lapides Text. Hebr.
nezer, that is, Stones of Separation, separated from common Uses; in which
Sense, the Word Nazarite is descended from nezer; or, Stones of Consecration.
Wherefore Tigurina set it Tigur.
forth, Lapides consecrati, Consecrated Stones. Or thirdly, Stones of a Crown,
Vatabl. Chald. Paraphr. Arias. Mont.
as Vatablus. The Chaldee, Eliget eos ^icut Lapides Superhumeralis, He shall
choose them as the Stones of the Ephod, or Superhumeral. Arias Montanus resolves
it; that the place alludes to the Stones erected in the Ways, for direction.
What an Ocean of Matter is discovered here, in the Power and Efficacy of the
Words in the Original? 5. He cannot amplify his Matter, from the exuberancy of
the Matter in the Original. The Matter abounds, Psalm. 37. 35. I have seen the
Wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a green Bay Tree. 36. Yet he
passed away, and lo, he was not. The Original, Vidi impium validum, seu
formidabilem, Text. Heb.
I have seen the Wicked mighty, or formidable. The Targ, fortem, strong. Targ:
The Septuagint, (...), superexalted. I have seen the wicked strong; Sept.
and not ordinarily strong; but mighty; and therefore formidable, and
superexalted; formidable to others, and exalted above others, and above
himself. And lo, he was not. The Hebrew, Et ecce non ille, and behold, not he.
The Targ, Et Text. Targ Heb.
defecit ex mundo, and the World failing him, he has fallen out of the World.
Though he was like a green Bay Tree, spreading it is Root, and lifting up it is
Body, arms, and branches, as growing in its proper soil; yet, this likeness was
not long-lasting. For, behold, not he. His Power is deficient, and the World is
now w^eary of it. I have seen this Text, hisce oculis, with these dear Eyes, and
the Amplification of it, verified and made excellently good, in the
Kirk-Monster. 6. He cannot relieve the Translation, when it is curt, or
otherwise ill fashioned. The Psalmist sings of the Godly, Ps. 84. 7. They go
from strength to strength: The Original sings higher, From Virtue to Virtue;
Or, from Army to Army: The Targ, Ex Schola in Scholam, Targ.
Out of one School into another. The Original Word is of a large signification,
and signifies all our strength, or vigor, inward and outward, of Mind and of
Body. And all Translations are almost every where curt, in respect of the
Original. 7. He cannot sound the mystical meaning of words: As, in the History
of Balac and Balaam. For, Balac signifies one devouring, or licking up, as an
Ox licketh up Grass; and allegorically intimates the Devil: Balaam signifies
a People of Vanity; shadowing the Scribes and Pharisees, who, instigated by the
Devil, would have destroyed Christ, and licked him up with their evil Tongues,
and false Accusations: But the Curse was quickly turned into a Blessing. For
this fair Note I thank Rabanus the Moor. The History has been acted Raban.
Maurus in Numer.
yet again, in the Pharisaical and vain Carriages of our Scotch-Balacs and
Balaams, and of their speaking Asses, toward me. 8. He cannot unfold the
Hebrew Words continued in the Translation: it being the custom of Translations,
(that of the Septuagint which leads the Train, and all others,) to retain
sometimes, the Original Words; As, Jehovah, Ephod; (these I have opened:) Urim
and Thummim; which the Vulgar Latin gives, Doctrinam and Veritatem, Learning
and Truth, Lectio Vulgat.
or, Science and Conscience; attending to the Translation of the Septuagint,
(...). It should here be known, that Urim may be deduced from Sept.
the root Iara; to teach; and Thummim from aman, he has believed; and that
then, the Septuagint and Vulgar Latin have done us right, Truth being the
Object of our Faith and Assent: And likewise, a Teacher should know, that Vrim
comes clearly from Or, light, and Thummim, from tamam, he has completely
perfected; and that now, Vrim and Thummim, the words being plural, to show
variety, and fullness, signify Illuminations, and Integrities or Perfections;
as others have understood them. Beh^moth Aq.
is translated by the Septuagint, (...), Beasts. It should be learned, that
this great V. de Busthamantinum in Behemoth.
Beast is called Beasts, because he contains in himself, (in one Beast) the
strength and bigness of many Beasts; and therefore, with much agreement,
adumbrates the Devil. Isa. 15. 6. the Word Nimrim is entertained; Which in the
Septuagint, is (...). Returned to the Original, Sept.
it signifies Panthers. The Panther is a Beast that washes it self in secret
Fountains, as willing to be rid of it is outward spots, and to pass for a clean
Beast amongst Beasts. A profound Hypocrite. Now the Text; The Waters of Nimrim
shall be desolate. The Panthers waters shall be dried up. The time is coming,
wherein the Hypocrites shall be deplumed of all their colorable Excuses,
Pretenses, Professions. 9 He cannot, except he can produce the Authority of a
known Church, lay his hand upon the Book, and say, This is the Original:
especially in the Places where the Hebrews themselves doubt, whether the Text
or the Margent be authentical. 10 He knows not; upon what Ground he stands,
when the Original-Copies dangerously vary; as they do sometimes, in the most
pregnant Places asserting Mysteries and most fundamental Doctrines. As 1 Io. 5.
7. Et hi tres unum sunt, And these three are one Thing; many Copies
pronouncing, as it were, by the mouth of St. John, (...), are one Thing. Where
Text. Grae. Complutens. Reg.
Complutonsia, Regia, and other ancient Bibles, as it were, speak it over again
from the same mouth, (...), that is, in unum sunt, tend to one; being the
Assertion used verse. 8. in a business of a lower Order. And though some Writers
meet these Bibles half way, with favorable constructions; yet they favor
Arrianisme. 11 He will be lost, when we shall be forced to enquire beyond the
Originals; and seek, not the Sense, but the Use of the Word, and the Reason of
it. As, in those two main Businesses, the Business of Nabotb, and of Job's
Wife; in both which, the Original cries bless for Curse. 12 We must leave him
behind us, when we travel beyond the Text, to the Jewish Antiquities; for the
true Name of God, used in the Place. As, where the Jewish Method enters
Adonai, signifying God wlth reference to his Dominion, for Jehovah, which
signifies God in his Being, Nature, Essence; and sends us to search amongst
humane Customs for many sweet Lessons; every Name of God sweetly concording
with it is Place.

I have been subdued to treat fairly with you, by the Spirit of Mildness. But,
Thunder once up, will not be long quiet: and at length, after much loud noise
and tumbling (me thinks I hear it again;) viam inveniet obicibus ^uptis atque
prostratis, it will with a mighty force, break it is way open, I cannot hold it.

O thou Vapor of a Preacher; The Law of God is perfect. And it thoroughly
requires of thee, O thou with thy through-Reformation; Of thee? Give me my
words again; I mean, of Preachers lawfully called; First, Perfection of Life:
and secondly, Perfection of Doctrine. (I could, had my pleasure carried me upon
Controversies, have brought also to my last Heap, that a Preacher must Tit. 1.
9. be able by sound doctrine, to convince the gainsayers; there being such, in
opposition to all divine Truths, mysterious and others: and that now, sound
Doctrine is not compassed, but by help, immediate or mediat, from sound
Learning.)

O give ear to the plain Truth, told plainly. We must not only preach of
Saints, but also, be Saints. In Pictures to be set aloft, the Painter sets
forth the Things he paints, Con Grandeza, as the Spaniard tongues it, in great
and rude shapes, and multiplies light Colors. But the People are near
Spectators of your Life's. Ye tell me of your true Faith. Pray, let your Medium
probationis be metal of Proof, proving it with a true Proof; and showing me
your true Charity. Scotus divinely Scot. part 3. Did. 36. Quaest. Vnica. Sect.
Ad primum.
calls all other Virtues, informs sine Charitate, without a Form, or, without
a Soul, if without Charity. And Charity, as it works after the prescriptions of
Faith, leads us, going it self with us, into Heaven, whither all good Souls
go: when Faith and Hope are excluded; Faith being de Rebus non vists, of things
not seen; and Hope, de non habitis, of things not had.

Those that would appear to men, greater then they are, in genere Moris et
Virtutis; are most little, most dwarfish, (O this dwarf-Devotion!) in the sight
of God; as being most contrary to him, who is major omni laud, beyond all
words, and understanding; and who can not exactly appear to a Creature, as
great as he is. The Image of Stone, Wood, or Metal, or the Representation in a
Looking glass, that shows a Face less than it is, may happily be like the
Face it shows, and Symmetrical with it: But the Representation, or Image that
swells up the Face, and gives it greater; except it be wrought so, for the
supplyance of what is lost by Distance, is monstrous, and cannot be like:
Because Proportion is retained in Representations which are lesser than the
Life: but in such as are greater, the Composition is discomposed, and the
Proportion scattered.

The Hebrew Word, Cados, signifying holy, primordially signifies, segregated
and separated from profane Uses. And the Greek Word, (...), signifying
likewise, holy, is as much as absque Terra, or extra Terram, one without Earth,
or, living in Heaven while he is upon Earth: although the privative Letter,
wanting an Aspiration, seems to disown the business: Thus Origin, Orig. Hom. 2.
in Levit.
and after, and out of him, St. Ambrose, and Venerable Bede. Dionysius
Areopagita, that stood Sentinel in the primitive Church, is true to his trust,
in saying, that Christian Piety does not endure (...) S. Dionys. de Eccl. Hier.
C. 2.
(...), divided and dissipated Ways and Life's. What Agreement is there betwixt
Light and Darkness? Betwixt a spiritual Discourse full of Words concerning
Heaven and Godliness, in the Pulpit; and out of the Pulpit, a most carnal
course, full of Works, discovering Devilishness, and earthly mindedness, and
even Hell it self upon Earth, and epitomized in a Soul? Nonne vides te loqui
pugnantia? Do thou not see O Preacher, that thy Words and Works speak
Contradictories?

Quaelibet Res ex pejoris immixtione sordescit, ut Argentum ex immixtione D.
Tho. 2. 2. q. 81. art. 8.
Plumbi; says Aquinas: Every thing grows filthy, being mingled with a thing
worse than it self: as Silver is vilified, when it is mixed with Led. And he
does not leave his golden Discourse, without Enamel: Ideo Men's humanae
inquinatur, ex eo quod inferioribus Rebus conjungitur: Idem. ibidem.
Therefore the soul of a Man is defifiled, because it is joined with inferior
Things. Did ye never hear of the Manucodiata, or Bird of Paradise? The Word is
a Compound, and compounded of two Indian Words, which are, Manuco Diata,
Avicula Dei, Gods little Bird. The Indians call it so: because it is never seen
upon the ground, but dead. O, those contemplative Souls, that are always upon
the Wing; not contradicting, that they are Aves Coeli, Birds of the Air, or of
Heaven, by their walking in the dirt as the brute Beasts of the Earth: how
happy are they!

The shallow Plot will at length betray it self; and the People will observe
the Deceit and Imposture: and look boldly, on the other side of the Vizard. And
even the High-Shooe, will take the courage to say, Psalm. 12. 2. With a double
Heart do they speak. The Vulgar Latin consonantly Cod. Vulg. Text. Hebr. Sept.
Sym.
with the Hebrew; in Cord et Cord, in a Heart and a Heart. And the Septuagint
are Unison: (...), Symmachus stands in Sight: (...), in one Heart, and, yet
another Heart. The natural Logic of the Clouten-shooe, will drive it thus far
beyond simple Apprehension: With one Heart in a Pulpit, and that is their
Pulpit-Heart; they pompously speak of heavenly things, speak, (and then he
smiles with his Countrey-Face:) and like those old Pharisees, give out a hard
Lesson to us, poor Folk; But, they make it a Lesson of mere custom: For with
another Heart abroad, this is their broad Heart, that accompanies their large
Conscience; they covetously seek, and greedily pursue, Things that are earthly.
And if he be a Latin-Scholar from the Free School, he will show it, and
moreover say: Incubant suo, inhiant alieno; they lie close upon their own, and
fly hovering over the Goods of others: Et indies emungunt argento mulieres; and
they-dive daily into the Women's Purses. All this will be stoutly said by the
Man of the Plow. O the weak Power of such Godliness! O the Shortness, and
Emptiness of Lip-Devotion! O the vileness of Pen and Paper-Sanctity; stepping
from the Pen and the Paper, to the Penny and the Coffer.

Blessed David begins his Psalms with blessed. And the word there of the
Septuagint, (...), is indifferently used in Scripture, Sept.
either to signify Beatitudinem Viae, the Blessedness of this Life, arising
from our walking with God in his Way, or, Beatitudinem Patriae, the
Blessedness of the Country, arising from our Union with God in the Beatifical
Vision. The Hebrew Word is Ashere, or Text. Hebr.
Ash-re, signifying Beatitudines, Blessednesses, and is a plural Noun without a
singular Number; involving the kinds of true blessedness. It comes by descent,
from the Root Asher, beat incessit, rectis passibus ambulavit; he has walked
rightly, blessedly: That it may point forth to us, not (...), those that can
bless others, or speak well for themselves, as Isocrates Isocrat. orat 4.
uses the word (...): but (...) those that go in a right E^gubin. in Psalm. 1.
Chald. Paraphr. Scholia Graeca. Theodot.
way, and walk uprightly; as Eugubinus notes. Hence the Chaldee contributes
there, for Blessed, Good: The Greek Scholiaest, (...), void of reprehension.
Theodotion in his digging, throws it up, (...), perfect is the young Man: the
man that begins early to study Perfection. Astronomers observe, that Stars.
which fetch about with a less Circuit, are more near to the Pole. And
Aldrovaud. in Philomela.
Aldrovandus agrees, that the Nightingale growing fat, can not sing. He that
intends to the Plow, may not look another way And he that wars, as a Captain,
for the Spirit, may not entertain a Truce, or Pa^l und^cently with the Flesh.
Because being Terrae Incola, a Dweller out of his Country, upon Earth; he
should be Accola Coeli, a Borderer upon Heaven, being his Country.

I will not compare thee, O Preacher, to Martha in her active Ministration:
because she ministered on Christ: But in her passive Distraction, thou art like
her. Lu: 10. 40. Martha was cumbred about much serving. The Greek Text is more
ample, and serviceable, (...): She was distracted and scattered about much
Ministration. Here she was, and there, and elsewhere: and here again she would
be. She was not where she was. She was every where, and she was no where. She
was going, and she turned again: and again, a new thought carried her to a new
place, which held her not long. Her mind was in many places, at the same time:
and her Body would have been so. Martha in her Ministration, is like the word
(...) amongst us; showing much distraction, in it is running to and fro, that it
may signify both a Deacon and a Minister: It runs, and turns, and would be
where it is not. The Arabic ^od. Arab.
Translation is admirable, and as much distracted as Martha: Martha autem
diligenter Ministrabat plurimum; But Martha diligently ministered very much. And
our Savior tells her of her fault, verse. 41. Martha, Martha; thou art careful,
and troubled about many things. Martha must now know, that she is multiplied;
and that one Martha is Martha Martha; Martha where she is, and Martha where her
Heart is; and that she is many Marthas, though but one Martha; because troubled
about many things. Emmanuel Sa explicates it, tumultuaris, And hither directs
his Arrow: Many things have Em. Sa.
raised many thoughts, which make a tumult in thee. Pray therefore, with him
that knew how to pray, Psalm. 86. 11. Unite my Heart to fear thy Name. A
Metaphysical Axiom acts the Handmaid here: Vnum est quod est indivisum in se,
et divisum a quolibet alio: That is one which is undivided in it self, and
divided from all other things. And morally understood, presents upon the Knee,
an Offering to Divinity. For Symmachus reads, (...), aduna Cor meum, unite my
Heart; that is, make it one and Sym.
undivided in it self: Which in a large sense, is, Cancellis circumscribito Cor
meum, keep my Heart from vain effluencies and excrescencies, from impertinent
exuberancies and extuberancies. But St. Hierom stoops for it, and takes it up
with a more native and Hebrew Face: Vnicum S. Hieron. in Bibl.
fac Cor meum, Make my Heart one only: that is, call it aside from the
multiplicity of Business, which pulls it many ways, and makes it numerous;
and, ex his me Turbis evolve, unfold me from the Rout of the World. And Aquila;
Let my Heart be (...), one alone: A sense falling and settling upon a most
abstracted and Heavenly Aq.
Condition.

The Ground will fasten all. According to the Multitude of Operations, (be they
of the same, or of a different Nature,) in which, the Soul does busy her self;
she performs each particular Operation with less Obsequiousness and ability,
and therefore, less perfectly. Because the Soul being finite, and limited; her
active Virtue is also limited and finite. And so, fitting and applying her
Activity to diverse Operations, she gives the Cause, that each participateth a
less portion thereof. It is not within the Sphere of humane Power, that one
should at the same very Time, observingly contemplate the Feature of a Man's
Face beheld with his Eyes; and judiciously bend his Thoughts to the curious and
bewitching Strains of Music, intruding upon his Ears: Nor in the same
instant, attentively discern the Differences, and several Garbs of Color and
Figure.

Ye have read in the English Bible, that the Slender-Soul'd Persons, distracted
with worldy Blandishments, and attentiores ad rem quam par erat, over-attentive
to Gain, were illaqueati, irretiti, inescati, ensnared, caught in a Net,
bait-held; and and went not themselves to the Wedding in the Parable, but sent
Excuses, even such as the Master of the Feast would not accept or legitimate:
nec inveniebant quasi rimulam, per quam elaberentur: neither was there any way
for their escape from the soar, net, hook. And to the end, it may be clear as
the Sunbeams, That it is in the Union and Perfection of Life, which God
requires of us; our Savior declares it in. his Exhortation, Matthew. 5. 48. Be
ye therefore perfect, (...), even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.
The Word (...), is an Extract from (...), signifying the End, which, as such,
is always perfect. And if the End be ultimate, or the last End; it is but One,
and obliges to Union and Combination in the Means and Powers. And St. Peter now
follows his Master with a near foot, 1 Pet. 1. 15. But as he which has called
you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation: (...), Holy, and
without the Commixtion of Earth, in all manner of Conversation. I had almost
translated it. Without the Conjunction of a Body. Let it go. For, Laurentius
Justinianus wills his Scholars to enter into Gods House, solo spiritu, with
their Spirits Laurent. Justin. de Discipl. Monast. cap. 17.
alone, and to leave their Bodies at the Door. God, whose Holiness and
Perfection is infinite, being set in the light before us, for our Prototype or
great and chief Exemplar and Example; We are certainly called to a certain
infinite Perfection, and Holiness; that is, to a Perfection, and Holiness,
which endure no Bounds, no Limits. In which Sense, St. S. Aug. Sermon. 15. de
verbis Apostoli.
Austin speaks Sense; Si dixeris, Sufficit, periisti; If thou shall say, It is
sufficient, thou art lost. And in another place, demanding of himself, who is
the Man that does not profit in Godliness; he answers to himself, Qui dixerit,
Sufficit mihi, quod Idem Tract. de Cantico novo, cap. 7. S. Greg. Nyss. lib. de
professione Christiana^.
sum; He that shall say, It suffices me to be, what I am. From hence it was
emergent, That St. Gregory Nyssen, the Brother of St. Basil, (quem Honoris
causa nomino,) declared Christianity to be (...), the Imitation of God. Which
afterward, the Greek Church tied up, as with a third of Gold, into one Word,
(...). The ground is, Man was made by God, after the Image, and Likeness of
God, Genesis 1. 26. And therefore, our work in our lapsed Condition, is, to
perfect and imbellish this Image in us, by conforming our selves, through God's
Grace, every day more and more, in likeness, to him: this likeness consisting
truly, in true Holiness, as it is called, Ephesians. 4. 24. or, as it is in the
Original hue, and returned by the Vulgar Latin, (...), Sanctitate Veritatis,
the Holiness Text. Gr. Edit. Val.
of Truth. And a good Man is called, by a new Word, (...), holy, from (...),
colo, veneror, I worship, I honor; Because true Holiness only, makes one,
after all the Transactions of Life, truly worshipful and venerable.

Circumspicite dum, ne quis nostro Auceps Sermoni sit; Enimvero sunt qui
auribus Aucupium faciunt; simplices atque incautos ex insidiis adoriuntur. Look
about you, pray, and tell me, if any be here, that come hither a Birding with
their Ears; and lie here ambushing, to catch and ravish a Word; or, to antedate
the Sense. Dionysius Areopagita, amongst other Excellencies in Christ, holds up
before us for our Imitation, his (...); S. Dyonis. Areop. Eccl. Hier. cap. 3.
not his Impeccability, but his Impeccancy. To the which we must draw by
spiritual Access, as near as human Weakness will be drawn after us: being
egregiously careful to preserve in their perfect Being and Appearance, all the
Titles and Punctilios of God's Honor. Perhaps, your Thoughts now, may turn
upon me with a fierce Assault: How comes it that your Life is not thus exact?
Strange Things fly abroad concerning you. Beloved, Know, as God knows, that
these Strange Things, are the Strange Apparitions, Delusions, Inventions of the
Devil, and of devilish Enemies. More afterward.

St. Gregory Nazianzen gives holy S. Greg. Naz. orat. 4. in Paschate.
Counsil: Simus ut Christus, quoniam Christus quoque sicut nos. Essiciamur Dii
propter ipsum, quoniam ipse quoque propter nos Homo factus est; Let us be as
Christ is, because he was as we are. Let us be made Gods for him, because he
was made Man for us. And, Nullus est Deificationis Terminus; There is no stop,
or enclosure of Deification. Boethius throws an Ey this way: Vltra homines
provehere, Boet. lib. 4. de Consol. pros. 3.
Sola Probitas potest; True Holiness, and true Honesty will promote a Man
beyond a Man. St. Dorotheus names the holy men of old, thus, S S. Antonium,
Pachomium, S. Doroth. Sermon. 1.
Macarium, caeterosque Deiferos Patres: holy Antonius, Pachomius, Macarius, and
the rest of the Fathers that carried God in them. Anastasius Synaita, S.
Anastas. Synait. lib. 7. Hexam.
that strict-liv'd Patriarch of Antioch, entitles such persons, quodammodo
veluti Christos in Divinitate simul and Humanitate: after a sort, christ's; as
partaking both of the Divine and Humane Nature. Acknowledge St. Peter's Phrase,
2 Pet. 1. 4. Partakers of the Divine Nature. Expediam Verbo. In a word. It is
the Holy Ghost Himself, that dwells in the righteous Heart, by an abode much
remote from his common abiding with us, per Essentiam, Praesentiam, Potentiam,
by his Essence, Presence, Power. For besides that holy Scripture manifoldly
stands up for it, It is incongruent, That the Devil should be more near to
his, and more intimate, by Possession; than the most good God, to his, by
Communication; who has more manifested himself to us, in his Works of Mercy,
than of his Justice. And Grace, the Instrument of the Holy Ghost, is more
honorably born, than other Things of our Acquaintance.

It is a deep bottomed Question in Divinity, Vtrum Gratia producatur per
Creationem? Whether Grace be Created, or not Created? The Affirmative seems
clear, Ephesians. 2. 10. For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good Works. We are God's Workmanship, more excellently in respect of the new
and inward Man. And Good works, (good in order to our Supernatural End,) cannot
be wrought without Grace; which Source or Fountain, is only correspondent, and
answerable to the high-flowing of the Stream. The Apostle clears and
illuminates it farther, 2 Cor. 5. 17. and Gal. 6. 15. In both which places, he
calls a regenerate Soul, novam Creaturam, a new Creature. But, this Opinion
would plain and even the way to a dangerous Conclusion; Creatura potest
attingere physic e Creationem. School-Divines well know, and have well sounded
the danger of it. These Positions therefore, asserted by the Apostle, ye shall
understand of Creation in genere moris, in regard of our first Conversion and
Justification. For, the first Grace being given without any precedent Works of
Grace, is made, as it were, of Nothing in genere moris; it being impossible,
and unimaginable, that Man should dispose himself for the reception of the
first Grace; because he that produces the last Disposition, is truly said
also to produce the Form called by it, and coming after it: and therefore, he
that disposes himself, by his mere self, to Grace, produces Grace in his own
Heart; of the which, no pure Creature can be the cause. This Opinion therefore,
I lay down, and lay me down to rest in another. The revelation of which, if
great Clerks will needs extort and wrest from me, they shall receive it
secundum modum recipientium, in their own Dialect. Gratia non creatur, sed
educitur supernaturaliter ex potentia Subjecti in quo Spiritus sanctus
inhabitat: Sicut and aliae Formae supernaturales, Visio Dei, Lumen gloriae, and
hujusmodi. I discover here, that there is yet, Terra incognita, a Land unknown
to you, in Learning, Religion, Holiness.

Dear Christians, attend to me. Should I, a reasonable Creature, hear men that
Profess and Preach God, and his only Son Christ Jesus, together with the holy
Spirit, the Sanctifier of Souls, three Persons, and one immortal, invisible,
and only wise God, telling me from a Pulpit in the Air, (to the which I must
look up, as if the Pulpit Men came even now from Heaven,) of Humility,
Continency, Temperance, Contentedness, Guiding of my Tongue, Charity, Peace,
and other things of that Feather; and bringing about at every half-turn, our
glorious Gad, (for, so they call him,) Jesus Christ, the Saints, the humble
Soul, let a going with a notable Aspiration; he was a precious, Man; the Lard
Jesus be with all your Spirits: And should I find, after a most accurate
search, eosdem numerice, the very same Men, down from the high-place, to be in
their Actions, most high and haughty-minded, and proud as Lucifer; most
lustful, and effeminate; most great, and most greedy-Lovers, and Worshipers of
their Bellyes; most uncontented, and unsatisfyed in their desiring part; most
vile Slanderers, and throwers of Dunghill-Dirt and Ink upon all that will not
run in the Ring with them; having no relenting Bowels, Mercy, Charity; as if
they would strongly prove absolute Reprobation by the absoluteness of their
most Reprobate, practices; should I find, that they are Striges ferale
stridentes, like Shrych-Owles, noising Death and Mortality; most fiery and most
contentious persons, as if another Aetna, or Vesuvius were always embroiling
their inwards, and throwing out Flames and fiery stones from their Stomachs;
or, quasi rem haberent quotidie cum Vrticeto, as if they had been taken out of
the Nettle-Bed, and were nettled, and nettle-Natur'd by their daily conversing
with Nettles; How could these Polygeneous Men, thus giving the ly to
themselves, cement or soder Hiatum hunc, this prodigious Chasm or gaping
betwixt the Word and Work; being as wide as Hell-Mouth, toward the World? And
might not I, with great reason, larum it to the Clouds, that all their spangled
Appearance, is naught but Infula Sanctitatis, Probitatis Tiara, an outward
Priestly Head-Ornament of Holiness; a Roman, or Persian Dress? and that
themselves are notoriously more hurtful, than those old heathenish fumosae
Imagines, quae stabant in Larario, smokie Images, or Images black with smoke,
that stood still, as they were set in the House-Chappel, and did not pervert
the People, either with False Doctrine, or with Evil Example; but only, stood
quietly to be worshipped, as the Fools their worshipers had set them? Might not
I say, That these Wooden Preachers are as like the savorykeeping Salt of the
Earth, as those useless fallings away of the Wood exercised with the Saw? Might
I not justly fire at them with a Sarcasme; O sad and bad Conclusion of their Ah
Lord, Dear Father, Holy God, Father --; of all their speaking good in the
Scotch Tone, and their praying God to do good to this People? O Images of Wax,
such as Witches abuse to mischievous Ends; call ye this, your improving your
Interest in Jesus Christ? Lord, help us. Might I not righteously compare these
Men of Clouts, with the Religious Mountebank in Bromiardus: who kneeling to the
Priest in Confession, confessed Joan. Bromiard. in Summa praedicat. and in
Verbo Consessio.
his sins with an humble Mouth, sighed, groaned, looked pitifully, and with a
face divided betwixt Sorrow for his Sins past, and Care lest he should offend
hereafter; and struck his Breast hard like the poor Publican, with one Hand,
his Godly hand, crying mornfully, and grievously, and with tears, Deus, esto
propitius mihi peccatori, Lord, be merciful to me a Sinner: And in that moment
of Time, in which he named God, the great Lord and Master of Heaven and Earth;
in the which he looked Heavenward, and implored the Divine Mercy with Tears
running down his Cheeks, as if they strived which Cheek should carry them
fastest into the Bosom; in the which, he pronounced with a voice framed to the
Matter, me a Sinner, and continued knocking at the Door of his Heart with one
Hand, his righteous Hand, as if he would have beaten down the Door, House, and
all; with his other Hand, his Unrighteous hand, picked the Priests Pocket, and
got away his Purse? Sincere Devotion, and true Holiness, I truly and sincerely
honor, but a Mountebank Holiness, a tumbling Devotion, and showing tricks in a
round Hoop, are most contemtible, most abominable. Beloved, If in the Church of
Christ, all Virtues were not preached by Example, as by a more short and
efficacious Manner of Preaching, than by Word or Precept; Men wanting
Ey-Dotrine, (the Ey being the Sense that discerns most Differences,) would soon
be blind to Godliness, and cry out, The Preachers are Infidels, they believe
not what they Preach; if they did they would practice it. Sed alio me vecant
Negotia, A new Matter calls me.

As to the perfect Law of God, there must appliably rebound, and resound, on
the Preacher's part, a perfect Life: so likewise, this perfect Law, must ber
perfectly preached; and the Sacraments, and Ordinances of God, as they are
perfect, must also be perfectly dispensed by him. Hence St. Paul 1 Cor. 4. 2.
exacts (...), of every Steward of God's Word, and Mysteries, that he be found
(...), faithful; found, when assaulted by Trial. It is imposed upon the Jews,
as Leo Modena, a late Rabbin of theirs, testifies, in a certain Italian
History, over-written; Leo Moden Histor. Di gli Riti, etc. Part 1.
Di gli Riti Hebraici di questi Tempi, Of the Rites of the Hebrews of these our
Times; That when they build a House, they must leave some part unfinished; and
thereby recount to the Dweller, the Destruction of Jerusalem, and of the
Temple. But he that builds for God, must exactly build. Domus Dei, says Saint
Austin, credendo fundatur, sperando erigitur, diligendo perficitur; The S. Aug.
Sermon. 15. de verbis Apostoli. R. Eleaz. in Zohar.
Temple of God in the Soul, is founded by Faith, walled up with Hope, and the
Covering is Charity. And Rabbi Eleazar, in the Zohar, fables to the World,
under the patronage of Tradition, that when God made this grand Machin, he did
of purpose leave a hole in the North. Except the Rabbin Prophesied, that the
Preachers of the Gospel in the North, should, for the most part, be hollow,
and instead of being holy, should be pleni rimarum, full of chinks and holes,
he was a Blasphemer.

How prompt are we, and how easy is it, to palliate a true Doctrine; or, to
skin a false one over with Hypocrisy? To leave a Doctrine like those
half-form'd Creatures, which the fat slime of Nile produces, aided by the Sun?
to vomit up whole Floods of Contradiction, as the Whale's Head throws up water?
to stuff up a Sermon with holy words, as with soft feathers? or dress it up
like a lure which calls the Haulke, but has no real Body of a Bind? (A word in
season: Is not the Fool's Coat, Vestis illusa flosculis, a Garment bearing and
wearing more of Color than of Comeliness? such a gaudy Thing is Oration
flosculis intertexta, intorta Calamistris, a flowery, or a purl'd and curled and
frizled Sermon; a Sermon made up into a Fardle of holy words of several purls
and curls and colors.) To show Truth as in a Glimpse, or moving like a Worm by
Undulation; and hardly able, but with fetches and pulls, to draw the Tail after
the Head? To raise an old De His Joseph. Quercitan and elii mulci.
Truth, like the Shape of a fair Plant, or Flower in a Glass, and suddenly to
draw the Flame or Candle away, and let it fall to dull Ashes again? yea, to
stand long in a place, above the People, as God's Lawyer, with a Tongue nimbly
running over Hedge and Ditch; and see dissemblingly, plain Truth, divine Truth,
sink with plummets at her heels? To speak irreverently, and wickedly of holy
and reverend Things: when we might humbly acknowledge our Error, our
Delinquency; by throwing presently, Rose Water into our Mouths? To use those
holy Doctors that anciently flourished, and were Stellae primae Magnitudinis,
Stars of the first Magnitude; now in their Absence, as the miserable offenders,
that are drawn higher, the more to be strapado'd? Beloved, As tender Infants
are more subject to fascination, than grown persons; so common people are most
easily deluded. And it was not well done of that envious Wretch in Quintilian;
who poisoned the Flowers in his Garden; that his Neighbors Bees Quinti l.
Declam 13.
might not safely suck any more honey from them.

A Man goes on sometimes in Morality as it were, with Oars; and sometimes his
Sails are up, and the Wind helps him on; And now he goes remis velisque, with
Sails and Oars. For, when the Mind by the help of our Virtuous Habits and
actual Grace, does operate or work, according to the Rules and Dictates of
right Reason, honest Things; we go rowing and failing. But when a certain
extrinsecall Force from God, does advance and elevate the Soul beyond all these
Rules, after a more vehement and high Manner, then is the Man transported by
some Gift of the holy Ghost; as Appolonia was, when brought to the Fire, (after
she had stood a while attending to the holy Ghost,) she cast her self into it.
Even so it is also, both in our Praying and Preaching. Let me now therefore,
utter a few Words, in the Rapture of my Soul.

O thou with thy flatuous Knowledge, thy Tympanie of Terms; os unpurum,
sparsumque, thou with thy wide, and impure mouth thou; hou, so meanly blyth and
buxom as thou art; Have thou not learned yet, what it is to send away to Hell,
Souls by whole Shoals? Souls, for the which Christ dyed? Do thou not know,
what a Soul is? Or can thou make a Soul? a Soul, wherein there is fairly
Charactered the Divinity, the Spiritualitie of God; the Unity of the divine
Essence, the Trinity of the divine Persons; the Generation of the Son, the
Procession of the holy Ghost? Hither Divines commonly come. But I cannot rest
here. A Soul, wherein there is an Evident Character of the Incarnation of the
second Person, the Divine Word; when our Will, the second Faculty of our Souls,
is conceived in our Words, and made, as it were, incarnate in our Deeds; a
Man's invisible Will, being made visible in his Actions; far otherwise than his
Understanding or Memory? the Prophet Psalm. 22. 20. calls his Soul his Darling,
his Dearling. The Vulgar Latin styles it, as Interpret Vulgar.
the Prophet speaks it in the Hebrew, Vnicam meam, my only one. The Chaldee.,
Spiritum Corporis mei, the Spirit of my Paraph. Chald. Sept. Aq. Sym.
Body. The Septuagint, (...), my onlybegotten. Aquila, (...), my long-Liver.
Symmachus, in the abstract, (...), my loneliness, that will soon be totally
Abstracted from the World. St. Hierome, S. Hier.
solitariam meam, my Solitary Soul. The Soul, which thou so murderously
destroyest, is the poor Man's Darling, his onelyone, the Spirit of his Body, his
onely-begotten, his lone-Liver, his loneliness, his solitahy Soul. Murder,
Murder, a a more horrible Murder was never committed. Do thou not fear, that
such a departed Soul will quasi Vmbra te persequi, Ghost-haunt thee? Where is
now thy supernatural Principle, that should move within thee? How will thou
crutch it up, that thou art a Christian? If thou art, awake the Christian in
thee. I could weep the rest. O my God, deliver my Soul from the Sword, my
Darling from the power of the Dog (...), (the Sept.
Septuagint read it so) from the two-hand Sword, or, the Sword that is edged on
both sides. The Sword of thy Tongue, O thou fals-Tongu'd Preacher, will cut on
either side; as the side is, to which, thy Belly most leans and lissens; cum
intestina tibi crepent, when thy guts murmr for Victuals. Was my Soul, my
Darling, my onely-one, the Spirit of my Body, my only-begotten, my lone-Liver,
my loneliness my solitary Soul, ordained for an other Man's Belly; Which Man,
when his Belly has done with my Soul, will throw it away to the Dog, the Devil?
Agnosco Discipulum Haereticorum antiquorum, Thou art a Scholar of the ancient
Heretics; For, in respect of their Soul-marketing, the old Romans, says
Lampridius, Lamprid. in Alexandro Severo.
contumeliously calld'd Christum, Christ; Chrestum, from the Greek Word (...),
profitable. Here Ends the Rapture.

Matthew. 2. 1. where the Greek has Evang. Graec. Evan. Lat. Evan. Sir. Arab.
Egypt.
(...) the Latin, Magi, the Engiish, Wise Men; and where the Syriack, Arabic,
Egyptiack or Coptick, with other Oriental Translations, (the Languages of
which, either by a right Line, or side-wayes, come of the Hebrew,) say the same
Thing, yea, the Persian-Gospel-Word is Magusan, wise men; Evangelinm Persicum.
Evan. Aethiopicum.
(only the Ethiopick is pleased with a Name caught from their outward Act of
Service; which is, Adoratores; Worshipers;) Munster in his Hebrew Gospel, Eva.
Heb. Munsteri
which he obtrudeth to us as the (...) of Saint Matthew, dresses them in the
Word mecassephim, praestigiatores, Iuglers or Enchanters. Art not thou in the
Cause, O thou Blazing-Star of the pulpit; thou Fabula Conviviorum and Fori,
almost all the talk of people at Feasts and in Marketplaces, for thy
Iugglings; that pious, wise, and learned Men, who have most faithfully followed
the Star of the East, are sensured to be (as thou art) Iugglers?

The Jewish Thalmudists story to us, Thalmud. Ord. 4. Tract. 2. and aelibi
multoties
that the Soul of one Man passes into the Body of an other: and that, for
Example, the Soul of Abel flew from him into Seth; (I suppose, it pearch't some
where by the way,) and from out of Seth, by another and an other flight, into
Moses. The Pythagorean (...), or, Transmigation of Souls, joined with the
Platonicall (...), or, frequent Renascency, had evened this way for the Jew.
And Pride made Julian, though not a Jew, yet a Philosophical Pythagorean;
Niceph. Eccl. Hist. lib. 10. c. 35
who conceived that his little Body was filled with great Alexander's Soul. And
now, to make a perfect Diapason, and agreement of Voices, as if all were but
one voice; thou have conveyed with a quick and cleanly Conveyance, the Spirit
of a Primitive Apostle into thy own body; and thou art in thy own Thoughts and
Words, greater than a Magnifico of the East, or a Western Admirante.

Recte admones; It is well thou tellest me so. For, had thou not, I should
have confidently retorted, That there must be truly, The Spirit of Truth in
some true Spirit, to decide the great Differences betwixt thee and others, cum
res caleat, utrobique velis furori permissis; the Matter growing hot, and the
persons fire-hot and angry. And that Differences, the Decision of which
pertains to all, must be publicly decided; And Differences concerning divine
Truths, di^nely and truly decided. Because Predestination being that part of
Divine Providence, which excellently deals and disposes in the last End of
God's People: Providence must needs be suitable with it self; and furnish out
other Parts, which concern, prepare and order the Means. And those Parts must,
according to God's usual Order of Working, and to the measure of Reason, be
more curious in their provision for Generals, than for Particulars: those being
more precious. I beseech you then, hide not under a Bushel, a matter of such
public advantage and concernment, but run and proclaim it with a Song of
Triumph to all Christian People who on Earth do dwell; That, because the variety
of Readings in holy Scripture, is wonderful, as it abundantly appears in the
Jewish Masoret; and the Margent is oft-times more divine than the Text: They
must repair from all quarters of the World, to you or others like you, for a
sound and final Resolution of all their Doubts in Religion. And thus our
English men having given a Bill of Divorcement to one old Pope beyond the Seas,
and beyond the Alps, shall now enstall and enthrone a goodly number of
Popelings, and young little Mufties at home.

In good sooth, upon second thoughts, I should have turned to you once more,
and told you; It is hard for a barefaced linsywoolsy Thing, ad huc a Matre
rubenti, and in omnia praecipiti, childish and heady; to move the Tongue in
divine Matters, without Blasphemy, and without enterfeering in every step.
There was a great Contest betwixt the Church of God, and heretical Nestorius,
which first thickened from a Question, Whether or no the Virgin Mary should be
called Deipara, she Mother of God? The Controversy wheeled in this, That the
Church called her (...), the Mother of God; Nestorius called her, (...), the
Daughter of Vide Acta Council. Ephesin. Generalis
God, (he meant, the adopted Daughter) or, when the Humor came fluent upon
him, and he would be liberal, (...), Christiparam, the Mother of Christ; whom
he deemed to have been a pure Man. It was but a small Accent, or matter of
Pronunciation, which varied the Words, and Meaning. Betwixt the Nicen Term,
(...), consubstantiall, or, of the same substance, and the Term Vide St. Hilar.
l^h. de Synodis, prope finem.
of the Arians, (...), of the like Essence or substonce; there is outwardly but
the difference of one Letter. And yet, their Doctrines are, the one of Heaven,
the other of Hell, and accordingly manumise, or enthrall those who receive them.

Howsoever, Be sure to keep in mind, That the Devil was known of all the
Fathers, by the name of God's Ape. Dionysius S. Dionys. Arcop. lib. de divin.
Areopagita styles God (...), a Unity subsisting after a threefold manner, or,
an Essence having three Hypostases or Subsistences. And such an Unity, such an
Essence, God is, yea, the sacred Trinity is called by St. Gregory Nazianzen,
(...), one S. Greg. Naz. in Odis.
Torch or Light, shining with a treble Flame. That this might be, in some sort,
imitated by the Devil, he gave his chief Oracles, ex Tripode, from out of a
certain rich Stool, or, Vessel, which being one, had three Feet, on which it
stood. There are admirable Matters delivered by Authors, of large Souls, and
deep Breasts; wherein Antichrist the Devils Darling, and of all his Children the
most like to him, and in whom, as fraught with all Devilishness, he shall most
vaunt himself; will strive to imitate Christ. But I pass them over; leaving
this only, for a Measure of the rest. As the Name, Christ, has a double sense
in Scripture, and is taken sometimes properly, for a certain excellent and
singular Christ, who is indeed, Jesus Nazarenus Rex Iudaeorum, and the Savior.
Head, and Prince of the Christian Church: sometimes commonly, for all those,
betwixt Christ and whom there interveneth a likeness, quantum ad unctionem; in
which consideration, Prophets, Kings, and Priests are all termed Christ's; As,
Psalm. 105. 15. Touch not mine Anointed; or, as the Vulgar Latin, Nolite tangere
Edit. Vulgat.
Christos meos; Touch ye not my Christ's. For, the word, Christ, signifies
anointed. So also, the Name, Antichrist, passes sometimes in Scripture, under
a proper sense, for a certain egregious and professed Enemy of Christ's; upon
whom the Scripture glances, Io. 5. 43. I am come in my Fathers Name, and ye
receive me not; if another shall come in his own name; him ye will receive; for
your Messiah, say many of the ancient Commentatours; and whom the Scripture
pourtraits out to us, in a large and plain shape, 2 Thessalonians. 2. in the middle of
the Chapter. And sometimes the name, Antichrist, is wryed and warp't into a
common and less proper acception, and signifies all, that any way set
themselves against, resist and impugn Christ, though not formaliter as Christ;
of the which 1 Jo. 2. 18. Little Children, it is the last time; and as ye have
heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whoreby
we know that it is the last time. As if he had said, ye have heard, that (...),
the Antichrist shall come; and now, though he, the chief Antichrist, the head
Villane of all, be not yet come; there be many come already, and in view, who
are Seducers and Enemies to Christ and his Truth, and may well he called
Antichrists. Behold a great Agreement in things most contrary. But the
agreement in the highest flight of it, is; God brought the work of Grace to a
Head in his Son Christ, the Head of his Church; And Aquinas says truly of D.
Tho. p. 3 Quaest. 8. art. 8. ad. 3
Antichrist, in eo Diabolus quasi malitiam suam ducet ad Caput, per modum, quo
dicitur aliquis ad Caput, suum propositum ducere, cum illud perfecerit; The
Devil shall bring his malice to a Head in Antichrist, that Aggregate of Malice
and Mischief, after the Manner as one is said to bring his purpose to a Head,
when he has effected it. The holy Ghost dwells in us, and some Special
Servants are said; in a special mauner, to be filled with him. And familiar
Spirits, mentioned 2 Kings 21. 6. have their name from the Hebrew Word Ob,
signifying a Bottle. For, the person possessed with an Evil Spirit, often swells
in the Belly as a Bottle, and the Spirit speaks from his Belly with a
low-fetc'd and hollow Voice, in imitation of God's Inspirations, and secret
talkings with us within us. Hence the Greek Word (...), one having a Spirit
speaking from his Belly, the seat of Lust and Gluttony. As God had his Ark
and Oracles; so there were even amongst the Jews also, certain Images, of
which, the divine Scripture gives an account, and which it calls Theraphim,
either from the Root rapha, to let, or pull down, because they bowed
themselves, and fell down before them; for the which meaning, Marinus and
Forsterus stand up; or, from Marinus and Forsterus in Lexicis.
the Chaldean toraph, to putrify: Whence the Chaldeans call an Idol-Temple
Beth Hatturpha, a House of Uncleanness. They were externally, the Statues or
Images of Men. They whose Images or Gods they were, did consult with them, as
Pagans did with their Oracles, de praesentibus ignotis, aut de futuris
contingentibus, concerning things for the present, unknown, or contingent, and
hereafter to come. To this known End of Knowing, they were made, says Aben
Ezra, by Astrologers, under certain Constellations, containing Aben Ezra in
Genesis 31.
and transmitting heavenly Influences, whereby they were enabled to speak. A
word to the Learned. This of the Rabbin is a strange Thesis. First, Because
Creatures, not entitled to Speech by the Influence of God's fundamental
Ordinance, can never be ennobled with speaking, by the aid of secundary
Influencies depending upon it. (Art certainly, wadeth far in this Business; the
business and endeavor of Art, being to imitate Nature.) Secondly, Because
Constellations are not infallible Helps, or Directions; For like
Constellations, do not always, or ordinarily, produce like Dispositions, or
Works. The Devil taught them to speak, not the Constellation. Zach. 10. 2. The
Idols have spoken vanity. In the Original, for The Idols, it is The Teraphims.
Genesis 31. 30. Laban speaks thus to Jacob, Wherefore have thou stolen my Gods? In
the Hebrew, my Teraphims. And in the midst of other reasons, why Rachel stole
away her Fathers Teraphims, or Images, this holds up the head, (and the Fathers
give it for a chief-one,) That Laban might not by his consulting with them,
learn which way Jacob had fled. And many speak from Pulpits, but not with a
right Spirit. And their Life's dead even the Truth and Good they speak, leaving
them like the Image in Davidi Bed, 1 Samuel 19. 16. Which the Septuagint render
(...), Statues representing a dead man, but vain ones, and having Sept.
no body of a Man; Aquila turns (...), Figures or Images: The Aq. Chald. Paraph.
Chaldee, Psalmenaia, Representations or Liknesses. O this mock-Godliness;
being only the face, and mouth, and wearing apparel of Godliness; the pale
Ghost of Godliness! There was scarce any ancient ceremony of the Jews, any
chief passage or description of the old Testament, which the Devil had not
filch't and privately conveyed into his Temples; wherein his idolatrous
worshippers kept their common Rendezvous. The Primitive Doctors abound in this
Matter. Christ our Lord prescribed the use of Words, in the use of his
Sacraments; and the Devil in Magic, prescribes words to Witches and
Conjurers, Vide Delrio in Disquisitionib. Magicis.
bound to him by a Compact; which words pronounced by the Magician and Witch,
though they do not move the Devil ad operandum, to effect their Commands or
desires, but he is always stirred propter alia motiva, by other Motives; yet he
shapes his behavior, as if they did move him; and is ready at their
pronouncing the Words after his prescription, to compass and bring about their
Designs. Non abibo longius, I will not go in pursuit of thee longer in this
Road.

Set aside your Familiar, and hear me discourse a Point Familiarly. Nothing is
more instrumentally dangerous than a glimmering and scanty knowledge, coupled
with a Pragmaticall and over-active Brain. I have read in Forestus; of a young
Forest. Observat. lib. 10. Observe. 13.
Divine in Lovain, who having wrought his active Head into Madness, cried
always in the fits and Paroxysmes of his distemper, that he had a Bible in his
Head. But I still forget, you have the Spirit, Nugae, Fabulae, you are a
Trifler, a Fabler. Why now rationem turpitudini quasi velum obtendis, you veil
your filthiness with reason; (which is, cum ratione insanire,) yea with the
glorious name of the Fountain of Grace, the most holy Spirit. Fie, fie, Have
thou not yet found, that these chattering Pies are full of prattle? And that
the Wood then cracks and sings in the fire (O this vain cracking!) when it is
not yet thoroughly kindled? The higher the Star is, the less it appears to us.
The silent Waters, are more deep. Chaff and straw ride in State, upon the back
and surface of the River to be seen; when heavy things do sink and hide
themselves. The Seminal Virtues of the Earth, are not seen but in their
productions; nor the wondrous properties of Herbs, and precious Stones, but in
their Effects. The Spirit of God is direct, and reveals not the secret of such
reflex Thoughts. Psalm. 45. 13. The King's Daughters is all glorious within; her
clothing is of wrought Gold. The Vulgar Latin gives out the former part, Omnis
gloria ejus filiae Regis Interp. Vulgat.
ab intus, All the glory of the King's Daughter, is from within. And Franciscus
Franc. Vatabl.
Vatablus, the French Kings professor of the Hebrew Tongue in Paris, carves
out the latter part with a more deep impression from the Original, Ex Vestibus
auro ocellatis indumentum ejus, her inward clothing is of Garments wrought or
Spangled with little Eyes of Gold; of the which, we may say, Scintillant Oculi,
these Eyes cast forth sparks, not of anger, but of brightness. These bright
sparkling Eyes are inward, ever open, and viewing always our secret selves, on
the part of our inward infirmities. Of these the Kings Daughter speaks, if she
tells Secrets. The Septuagint begin thus. Omnis Gloria ejus filiae Regis
Hesebon. And Sept.
the Stranger-Word Hesebon, Didymus Didym. in Caetena.
confines to signify (...), cogitation; and returns the sense to flow thus,
All the Glory of the Soul, is from the King of good Thoughts, and heavenly
Meditations, and of such as are, both Rich like Gold, and like Gold, Modest in
their shining, while the main Design of the Heart, is privately driven on
betwixt God and the Soul in the Soul, in Anima cogitabunda, in the pensive
Soul. Certain Grecians, discovered to posterity by St. Hierome S. Hieron. ep.
140.
in place of ab intus, from within, read, (...), from the inward Thoughts. And
they are favored by an old Copy in Vaticano; yea, Missa Sarum, receiving Missa
Sarum.
the Text out of that Copy, is applyable; And the Word is of the same force, if
Arabically taken. The Soul and the Heart of the Text, is; The best Beauty and
Glory of a Righteous Man, is the gracious, inward, and modest carriage of his
Heart, from one good act and virtue to an other: as in the Soul of Christ,
there was no breaking off or interruption of Good. I now fetch a reason ex Rei
Visceribus, from the very Bowels of the Matter. If thy Gifts are, only, Gratiae
gratis datae, Graces for the Edification of others; and not Gratiae gratum
facientes, Graces for the Sanctification of thy self, thou as yet, art unclean,
and have ugly Sin fermenting in thee, and taking up the room of a glorious
inside; and had thou a glorious inside, I should have seen it, by not seeing
it; and by thy prudent concealment of the best Things.

I hope, St. Austin may be heard as a wise Man, Melius it claudus in via, quam
S. Aug. Sermon. 15. de verbis Apostoli.
Cursor praeter viam, A lame man goes better in the true way, than a Runner or
Post in the way out of the way. The lame Walker or Liver is in a sounder
condition, than these aereal Spirits without footing on the Ground, or these
white quick silvered. Souls; these wandering Preachers of the Post. Indeed,
There were anciently in the Church of God, certain Bishops different from the
Chorepiscopi, or village Bishops (whose name was of (...) or (...):) called
(...), Zonar. in expositione Council. Laodicen. in Can. 57.
(...), says Zonaras, because they wandered from place to place, ut fideles in
officio continerent, that they might keep the faithful in the performance of
their Christian duties: (...), having no proper Chair. But these were not of
the Lapwing kind, bald bodyed, long-leg'd, Weak-headed, showing their white
backs in every corner, and hasting up and down, (as Mensarum Asseclae, Haunters
of other Men's Tables, and as good Trencher-Men,) without a Call from the Mother.

Blain Truth is the plain way. This our Scotch Imp in his Pulpit-Fort is
exectus in spem Lucri, drives furiously in the quest of gain, and popular
Applause, at which, he stands erected. Hujus est, fraudis inscios auro tondere,
It is this Man's trade, to poll ignorant People of their Gold and Silver:
howsoever sometimes in your first acquaintance with him, delicias faciat, he
may turn from your coming Hand, and seem squeamish. (...), a Tail, which puts
men in mind of the Kirk, is allied nearly to (...), Vain Lucre. There are also,
near Ties of Kindred, betwixt the Hebrew words Hable, signifying Vanities, and
Chable signifying Ropes; whereof Chebel is the singular number. The Root is
Chabal, signifying ligare, to tie or bind as with a Rope. Wherefore the
greatest of Ropes, or, the Sea Rope, is called in our Language, (which attracts
and pulls from all other Languages, and often from the Hebrew) a Cable. By the
which we are drawn as with a silken Rope, to learn, That Vanities and Vain
Things, as Lucre, Applause, etc. are great drawers; and, except we draw, pull
and strive greatly against them, will quickly pull us to them, and being pulled
to them, we shall be catched away with them, as by the storm called (...). For,
we know not our strength in such and such Circumstances, but when the
Circumstances do Circumstare, actually, quasi data Corona, stand about us.
These our Scotch Pharisees have a way beyond the Iewishones in St. Luke Chap.
16. verse. 14. And the Pharisees also, who were covetous, heard al these things,
and they derided him. Those were (...), Lovers of Silver, These are Lovers of
Silver, Gold, Linen, Woollen, Brass, Pewter, and of whatsoever Men call
precious. But the Jewish Pharisees (...) or, derided him, by drawing up their
Noses into wrinkles, signifying by such contraction of there Noses, that there
was no suavis Odor Lucri, sweet smell of Gain, in his Doctrine: which Doctrine our
Scotch Pharisees have sophisticated, and set to sale, sub Hasta vendentes. I
remember the time when a Minister was Pictured bending, with two Steeples on
his shoulders, and a fair one in the middle of his back, He had caught two more
under his arms, and two in his hands, one he embraced, and one he held betwixt
his Knees, and for one he gap't, standing in a fair bigness before him; it was
a Cathedral, and brought with it a Bishopric. This was then a Fancy, a
Picture; But see now, if it be not egregiously more than a Picture or a Fancy.
O Men of the Kirk, Fraudis abunde est, Desist, ye have cozened the World
enough. Of a Truth, Lucre and Applause, inferior Things, can generate no other
than inferior and sublunary Divinity.

And there is a mysterious Coveniency betwixt Scotus, a Scot, living under a
dark and cold Climat, and whose heart is also Glacie quasi compede revinctum,
hard-frozen like the Northern Waters in the dead of Winter: and (...),
darkness. He is a seeing Mon in his own sight, but in very deed, excaecatus
Avaritia, blinded with Covetousness, and little drawing near to him, that says
by his Prophet, Accedite ad me, and illuminamini, Draw ye near to me and be
enlightened; Or, to him that is, ^0. 1. 9. (...), the light which is the true
light; to Jesus, who, as in the Prophets, is also in the China-Language, Sol
Oriens, the rising Sun, dispersing the cold mists and shades of the Night.
Artemidorus tells, that he knew a Man, who Artemid. lib. 1. Oneirocrit. c. 28.
dreamed he had three Eyes, and the sequel was, that waking, he found himself
struck stark blind, his Eyes did not wake with him, and he saw nothing, but
that he was blind. Peer Mon! he saw wonderfully in his Dream, and in the dark;
but his third Ey that came in his Dream, enticed away his other two in act and
earnest; and the loss of his Eyes was beyond a Dream. The Tartarians in their
Wars, practice a strange work, which is the raising of Darkness and Mists, in
the Camps. and Armies of their Enemies. And by these dark Doings, many times
Victores evadunt, they go Conquerours. We may M. Paul. Venet in Hist. and
Haitonus in Histor. Sarmatica
say this over again of the Prince of Darkness, without belying the Devil,
during the time wherein our Souls are immured in these Walls of Flesh.

Christians, If ye think, these Kirk-Elves that show so cleanly, are not
Beetle-blind with the love of Dung and Money, totus circumfluat Orbis, ut aequo
litem dirimat judicio, let all the world stand about me, and Judge.

Matmon, or Mamon in the Hebrew Vide Forerium in Is. 32. 7. and 45. 3.
Language, signifies Riches and Treasures, as in the Chaldee, Mammon, or
Mammona. And Matmon has his Origin from taman, in tenebris abdidit, he has
hidden in darkness. And therefore Matmon signifies the Riches of Darkness and
Obscurity. In which respect the crooked Serpent, Job 26. 13. which in the
Vulgar Edit. Vulgat.
Latin, is Coluber tortuosus, the Snake or Serpent that windeth and turns
many ways; and which, the Septuagint shape (...), the Apostate-Dragon, Sept.
Symmachus paints with dark Colors, (...), the Serpent that Sym.
shuts up Treasures, and keeps them fast with Iron Bars, upon which Treasures
he sits, and about which he folds himself. And the Septuagint give fine Gold,
28. 15. (...), conclusure, or Sept.
shutting up, yea, the Hebrew Word Kelai, Is. 32. 7. The Churl, genuinly
signifies concludentem, one shutting up, from Kala, conclusit, he has shut up.
Speak World, have not these Cloak't-Harpies turned Stolen Goods into Hidden
Treasures? and have they not run with St. Hierom in his derivation, according
to whom, the Chaldean Mammona, cast S. Hier. c. 6. Mat.
back into his Ingredients, is min mona, signifying, from Violence? Have these
covetous Preachers, these lovers of Darkness, perfectly Preached the perfect
Law of God; these tempting, these alluring Times, I, or no? The World, and the
loud Echoes in the Dark Vaults where their Treasures of Darkness ly hidden,
and the Dragons there, cry, no.

To take up this Apostrophe. Complicabo velae. I will quickly fould up here,
having first showed in a Parable, that our false prophets are Lucre-wise, and,
Si quis odor lucri nares afflaverit, Gain-Hunters, and Fly-Catchers.

The Church of England in the non age of this latter Age was with Child. And
she brought forth her Eldest Son. He grew and was apt to learn, and to make a
good Scholar. To him as her Eldest and best she gave her Lands. This was the
Bishop. Speedily after, and before the Sun had ran with all his have through
the twelve signs of the Zodiac, she brought into the light another Boy, the
Prebend. To him, as the second, and loving his elder Brother, she gave goodly
Houses, annexed to Cathedral Churches; and therewith, fit Pensions. She was
big again presently, with more have than good speed; and brought into the
World, answerably to her Carriage; a poor, weak, rash, dull, simple Boy; for
whom she provided as simply, dully, rashly, weakly, poorly. That was the poor
Curat, living under the severe Impropriator. To him (having already given away
Lands and Houses) she freely gave in a manner, the Wallet behind the Door; and
left him in a craving condition; a condition altogether improper. There laid
she down her humor of Childbearing, for many years. At length the Humor had
taken her again, and she conceived, and bore with great pain, and brought forth
in a fright, and with much trouble, and imminent danger of Life. her last Boy;
to whom she gave a most hard Greek Name (...): I will not call it Nomen
absoletum, ac velut rubigine infectum, a Name grown out of use, and rusty: But,
confidenter dicam, I will say with courage, that it was never acknowledged
before, in the pretended Sense. His Education was mean: For he was not bred up
to much Learning. Yet Experience and Practice wrought him into a Peart Youth,
but a most unhappy Knave, in the Sense of all English, new and old; and one
that would act a part notably, and make mouths and faces at whole Assemblies of
his best Friends. His Mother calls him to her, and says: My Dilling, my Dear
Boy; Thou art my fourth and last Child: I gave my Lands to my Eldest; to my
second, my Houses; my Wallet, to my third: and I have nothing for thee, save my
Blessing, and my special Charge: Which is, I Charge thee upon my Blessing, to
shift for thy self. And, to know, if this last Boy, this Child of Pain and
Trouble, has not shifted for himself; ask all his poor Brethren; ask the
very people, qui eum adeo depexum dederunt, that have so trimmed him up, and
plied him with Resocillations.

This fourth Boy has surely fallen upon the Gospel of the Nazarites, or
Hebrew-Gospel; and there found Matthew. Evang. Nazar.
6. 11. Mahar, Panem Crastini; Give us this day the bread of the morrow: or,
St. Hierom's Note there: and pined St. Hier. ibi.
a new Construction upon it. David sings of Persons that were Sceleribus
mancipati; the Mancipia, or Slaves of Wickedness, Psalm. 53. 5. There were they
in great fear, where no fear was; no cause of fear. The vulgar Latin, I llic
Edit. vulgat.
trepidaverunt timore: There did they tremble with fear. In the plaining of
which Verse, Hesychius calls such timorous Hesych. in Sept.
and ague-shaken Persons (...), and (...), Persons fearing vain Noises, and
vain Specter. And the Hebrews Hebraei.
named such Fear, the Fear of a Lie, or, the Fear of an Idol. According to
which fashion of Speaking, the Chaldee speaks for David here; Ibi timuerunt
Chald. Paraphr.
timere mendacii, quo non decebat timore: There have they feared with the fear
of a Lie, with which it became them not to fear. Sophocles applies Sopb. in
Electra.
himself, (...), All things make a great Noise in the ears of a timorous Man:
and moving or not moving, make him to move Motu Trepidaetionis, with the Motion
of Trembling. And Aristotle is an Offerer; averring, Arist. in Pol^icis, lib.
7. c. 1.
some to be so fearfully fearful, that they fear (...), the Flies that fly
buzzing about them. This Boy fears with an unreasonable Fear, Cold, Hunger,
Starving; and that he shall be Fly blown before he is dead.

If the Jew be more caring and covetous, that having lost the God of Heaven,
follows eagerly the Goods of the Earth: judge ye that have, as I, seen both.
And now we have entered the Jew: I beseech you, inform your selves concerning
Statutum de Iudaismo: Which Statute was enacted under the Reign of Edward the
first, King of England. Ye will there find in the Consequences, that the Jews
Cook's Reports.
of England were at last banished into Scotland. But ye cannot find there,
when, or that they returned out of Scotland, or were transported to other
Coasts. And the hatred of Perke, and Hogs flesh runs yet in the Blood.

I leave these hungry Preachers, as I found them, tearing all Milvinis ungulis
ant aquilinis, with their Kites-feet, their Eagles Claws: or, as I have hunted
them, until I find them, as the crafty Fox, hung up in the Warren by the
Teeth, with Selfe-Industry; amongst the dead Vermin. Beloved; In the old Orders
of Baptism, the Greek, Syriack, Ethiopick, Armenian, and Coptick or Egyptian;
the Catechumenus did first publicly make his Abrenunciation of the Devil and
all his Works; with his face turned toward the West. This done, he brought
himself about toward the East, and then made as public Profession of his
Faith, in the Words of the Nicen Creed: And for me, (I will speak it aloud, nec
me Comprimam,) Be I fancyed an Energumenus, Competens, Catechumenus, or
Neophyt, or what Men of low Knowledge please to scribble me in their Fancies; I
will utterly renounce the Devil and all his Works, while our most merciful God
continues to me the commerce of Breath betwixt the Air and this my mortal Body;
with my Face turned toward the North.

There is a second Doctrinal Inference, Which I will not set up, but with all
it is Flags and Colors. Now I make my addresses to the People, the poor plain
Hearers of Sermons, which do praese far legem Dei, make a fair appearance of
Gods Law. My dearly-Beloved; Ponder it once more: The Law of God is perfect,
God the Father gave the Law. And your Duty is, concerning this Law, given to
you by the Lord God of the Hebrews, the natural Father of Christ, and confirmed
with a perfect enlargement, by Christ the Son of God: Osculamini Filium, Kiss
ye the Son, Psalm. 2. 12. The foundest and sweetest of Kisses, is Osculum
Charitatis, the Kiss of Charity. Aquila commends it here to you, (...), Aquil.
Sept.
love sincerely. The Septuagint are near in Sense, (...), The Vulgar Latin
latins it rightly; Interp. vulga^
Apprehendite Disciplinam, Apprehend Instruction or Discipline. Wherein the
Septuagint, says St. Hierom, showed S. Hier. in Prologo Galeato.
their faithful Respects to Ptolomy, Platonizing in the Doctrine of one God:
lest he should think that the Word of God spoke of more Gods than one.
Symmachus lays it forth, (...), Sym.
worship him purely. O the sweet symphonizing of Interpreters! Summa votorum
attigi, I have reached the top of my Desires, in this one Text. For; Behold
here, the three Degrees of God's worship; inward, outward, instrumental.
Clemens Alexandrinus writes of S. Clem. Alex. lib. 7. Strom.
himself, and of other Primitive Believers, Pedes attollimus in extrema
Orationis Acclamatione; We lift up our Feet, in the end of divine Worship: to
signify, that we now are going upwards, and ready to practice what we have
received in Prayer, or by Preaching. And the Primitive-Church-Word, after the
receiving of the Eucharist, or Communication of the Mysteries, was, Evolemus in
Coelum; Come, Brethren, let us fly away into Heaven: We are now made one with
God, and are no more earthly. These were Christianae Dignitatis insignia, the
Signs and Manifestations of Christian Dignity. It is just therefore, that the
Hebrews express the Word Tephilah, signifying Prayer, from the Chaldean
taphal, interpreted, Copulare, to couple, join, make one. God's Work upon us,
is not as the Work of the Workman, that hews and carves the Stone into the
Form and Image of a Man; and his Work ended, turns it off a cold hard stone
without life, without motion: but as when he breathed into Man the breath of
life; and the issue was, Genesis 2. 7. Factus est homo in animam Edit. Vul.
Parapbr. Chald.
viventem, Man became a living Soul; or, as the Chaldee, in aenimam loquentem,
a speaking Soul; because it is one of Man's Excellencies, that he can utter his
Soul by Speech. One stair higher; All that were not in the Ark, though some
were advanced nearer Heaven than others, by climbing the tallest Trees and
Mountains, were drowned: And though some of us, being Sermonum Helluones, may
frequent more preaching; and grow perhaps more tall in Morality than our
Brethren, if we should be found Extra Arcam Ecclesiae, out of the Ark of the
Church; All would be lost, Labor and Cost; and Pejore Res loco non posset
esse, our Affairs would move in a bad place.

If then; the Persons delivering the Law, should be Frontis adeo inverecundae,
tam funesti oris, ac fidei sublestae, of so shameless a For-head, so polluted
and barbarous a Mouth, of so weak and faithless a Faith, that the perfect Law,
by their disservice in the fomenting of Errors, and imbittering your Hearts,
should imperfectly come to your Ears: ye would not receive the perfect Law of
God. By the help of a Glass, invented by Galilaeus the Florentine, the Heavens
are pulled more near to us, than to those of Aristotl's Time: But by the
Preacher's Gloss, the Gloss of a pretended Galilean, flourishing, and growing
upon the Ignorance of the People, our Heaven is every day removed farther from
us. How shall a scattered Soul be swathed up, and succored in this Case? For,
Plato knowingly calls Man, (...), Plato in Timaeo.
an heavenly Plant; and therefore he wants; and opening himself toward
Heaven, begs with silent Oratory, says Philo (the Jewish Plato) (...), Philo
in lib. de formatione Hominis.
heavenly nourishment.

Your way must be the way of the old Saints of God in the Primitive Church.
That is the Milkie way, with some Disparity; and leads us to the triumphant
Court. Via lact^ae, says Fromoudus, nihil aliud est, quam innumerabiles
stellarum Fromond. Meteor. lib. 2. cap. 5. art. 2.
fixarum Greges, qui cenfuso et pallenti lumine Tractum illum inalbant; The
Milkie way is nothing else, but an innumerable number of fixed Star^, which with
a pale and confuse Light enlighten and whiten that long Tract. The old Saints
were fixed Stars; but their Light was not confuse, or pale. And the Tract
whitened, and enlightened by the Primitive Apostles, and their Disciples, is
long. The fixed Stars are unchangeable, except in the motion of their Orb: The
Moon is not. And therefore, Plut. in convivio Sapientum.
Cleobulus in Plutarch, declares it in a Parable: because the Moon cannot be
fitted with a new Coat. The People that do not constare sibi, stand up to
their Principles; can never be fitted with a Religion: Nunc excrescunt in
cornua; nunc in Orbem videntur ire: nunc in acutum, nunc in obtusum desinunt:
Sometimes they have Horns, and they are sometimes Orbicular: Sometimes their
Horns are sharp, dull sometimes, and obtuse: Stultus ut Luna mutatur, The Fool
is changed as the Moon: And Folly and Heresy are both soon weary of themselves.

Those of the Primitive Descent, and Race, will take thee by the Hand, and lead
thee into the way of Salvation. God promised to old Sian, Psalm. 132. 16. I will
also cloth her Priests with Salvation. The vulgar Latin accord^ Edit. ^ vulg^^
Sacerdotes ejus induam Salutari: And the Septuagint, (...), But the Chaldee
goes off, to return Sept. Paraphr. Chdld.
more powerfully: Sacerdotes ejus induam vestibus Redemptionis; I will cloth
her Priests with the Garments of Redemption: with one Garment, as Livers; with
an other Garment, as Teachers. The true Preacher, or Preacher of Truth, shall
be meek, humble, chaste, Amphilochius in vita Basilii: De ijsdem quoque clerici
Antiocheni. Ep. missa nd Ioannem Constinopolitanum. Episc. contra Severum
Episc. suum haereticum quae lecta est Action prima Synodi Generalis
Constantinopolitanae.
temperate, a Contemner of the World, and shall recover the People out of their
evil Courses, with heavenly Doctrine, firing their affections, and with Example
that is Angelical. The safest passage through the Deserts of Arabia, is, when
the Passengers join themselves with the royal Caravan. Such Doctors will
indeed, Praemansum in os inserere, feed thee being a Babe with chewed Meat; but
with sound Nourishment. These will conform thee to God's Ordinances, and
prepare thee for them by Ordinances of Preparation. These will evidence to
thee, that in the old and venerable Times under the Gospel, over the Places in
the Temples, where Baptism and the Eucharist were administered, there were
hanging Columbae aurcae vel argenteae, the likenesses of Doves in Gold or
Silver, to teach emblematically, that the Holy Ghost is given to the worthy
Receivers of the Sacraments.

If ye object: The Primitive Doctors had their Errors; and they were but Men,
as we are. I answer: When any Doctor of the Primitive Church erred, others
presently were found, that stood up in the face of the Church, and contradicted
him. We require therefore a consent of Doctors of both Churches. (the Latin and
Greek) in or about the same Age, by which we shall gather the voice and
Doctrine of the Church thenflourishing. To the second Part: They were but Men
as we are; if we consider them in their Nature or Essence: But if considered in
their gracious Accidents, by the which their Nature was greatly perfected, and
spiritually beautified and strengthened; they were not Men, as we are: For,
they were more pious, more familiar with God, more near to the Fountain, and
the purer streams of Truth; more humble, more industrious, more delighted with
Fasting, Watching, Praying. And it utterly betrays your Cause, that ye cry
down all the Fathers, to set up your selves, and your Interpretations of
Scripture, above them all: Which true and wel-grounded Humility would never do.
And now, the Cryers are cried down, and themselves come ad inclinatam fontunam,
et prope jacentem; qui, quoniam inciderunt in Foveam, obruantur. Accinat
Providentia: Amen.

If ye farther object. The consent of the Fathers, is but a sign of
Likelihood or Probability, according to the Philosopher, Probabile est, quod
multis sapientibus Arist. lib. 1 Topic. c. 1.
videtur. And the Doctrine of such is but Dogmaticall. I answer farther: The
Doctrine of the Fathers was not true, because it was the Doctrine of the
Fathers, but because it was the Doctrine of the true Church, in the which, and
of the which, they were.

Thou therefore, O Hearer, Keep thy Soul diligently, Deuteronomy. 4. 9. Keep it from
the Locusts of the North. The Devil is called, answerably to many Greek Copies
and to the Printed Arabic, and Gospel Evang. Graec. Evang. Arabicum. Evang. S.
Matthaei. Heb.
of St. Matthew in Hebrew, (...), Deus, or Balus Stercoreus, the Dung-Hill-God,
or Dung, God: and agreeably to many like Names, which the pious Part of old
Jews threw upon him and his Temples. The Syriack Paraphrast names him (...),
that is, (as the Septuagint Syrus Paraphr. Sept
in the old Testament) (...), Dominus Muscarum, the Fly-God, or Lord of Flies.
He was the great Master-Fly, that corrupted our Nature. S. Greg. Naz. Orat. 4.
in Iulianum.
And his Ima^e, says Nazianzen, though it could not fly, was yet hewed into
the shape of a Fly, as Dagon had a Dag, that is, a Fish for his Tail. The Fly
flies up to us, on every side of us, buzzing into both our ears. And the Devil
in his Instruments, rides up to us, as it were, in a Serpentine Motion We know
not by his Motion, on which side he will first set upon us. And in his onset,
quos conficit Maeandros? how many turnings and windings does he make? The
Swarms of Flies, were one of the greatest Plagues of Egypt, Exodus 8. 21. The
vulgar Latin affords, Omne genus Edit. vulgat.
Muscarum, all kinds of Flies. The Word in the Hebrew is arob: which, if the
Root be taken up, viewed, and opened; signifies a mixture or miscellanie,
without any kind of separate Specification. Some determine it to wild Boasts,
as, Josephus the Jew; and the Chaldee Joseph. Antiq. lib. 2. Chald. Paraph.
Pagn.
Paraphrast, that interptets it, Mixturam Bestiarum noxiarum, a mixture of
hurtful Beasts; a Rout, a Rabble, Hell broke loose: Also, Pagninus, whose
Interpretation is, Omne genus ferarum. all kinds of wild Beasts; Also, R.
Solomon, who lets loose, Turbam Serpentium R. Solom.
and Scorpionum, a throng of Serpents and Scorpions: And Aben Ezra; Aben Ezra.
that affrights us with his Interpretation, being Incursionem Leonum, Pardorum,
Luporum, an Incursion of Lions, Pards, and Wolves. Others refer it to Infects,
or unperfect Creatures upon the wing; as St. Hierom, the Septuagint, and
Aquila; who give it, a Miscellany of Flies; For, Aquila lets it fly, (...), the
Aq. Sept. Editio S. Hierom. in Exodus 8. Philo Jadaeus.
Septuagint, (...), which is latinized by St. Hierom. Philo the Jew prefers
(...), Dog-Flies, inferring their impudency, importunity, Doggish biting. Philo
is carefully followed by Origin, St. Austin, Theodoret. And these our
Dog-Flies, Canina Rabie furentes, involant in Hominum Bona, and Famam, raging
with doggish madness, fly ravenously upon the Goods, and good Names of others.
And the People (which tears my Mercy-Bowels, when I think of it) Plagued with
them, and bitten by them, are almost incurable. For, as upon the biting of a
Mad-D^g, there ensues a Disease called (...). a fear of Water. And as persons
thus bitten, and fearing Water, fear commonly the Water of Life, that is, the
Remedy of their Disease; They think they see an unclean Dog in the Water, even
when it is exactly pure and clear; Ruffus apud Paulum Eginetam, l. 5 cap. 3
(yea, Ruffus the Physician alleged by Paulus Aegineta, tells of them, that
they are persuaded from the dumb persuasions of their Imagination, they see
in the Water, the very Spectre of the Dog which bit them;) So the Person
intoxicated by the Dog-Fly, will not endure the living Water, or the Doctrine
of Life; The Dog-Fly, in his thinking, is every where, but where indeed it is.

The Witch-Mark; or, the Sign velut inustum Cauterio, given, as it were, with
an hot Iron; (let them remember their chief Patron of this abominable
Doctrine;) by the which, you shall signally know these devouring Locusts, (with
Ira Dei, embroidered upon their Wings) and hungry Dog-Flies; Vide S. Bedam in
Hist. Ang. lib. 4.
these venomous Corrupters of the perfect Law of God; and in the showing of
which, I will hunc tibi eximere scrupulum, unscruple you, and clear it, that
they are not unjustly censured by me, as false and profane Teachers; is their
Capital Doctrine, which leads up all their other Blasphemies, with as great a
Train, as Lucifer draws after him when he moves his Court. Stand off when you
hear it, lest you be poisoned with it. That God makes the Wicked, of purpose to
damn them; without any consideration of what they will do, or how behave
themselves, as reasonable Creatures, and enjoying gracious Proposals, in the
way of this World. This is a most damnable Doctrine; and does faces Hominibus
ad quamcunque libidinem praeferre, Usher men with Torch-light to the wilful
performance of their various Lusts. The ancient Church explodes it. Fulgentius
S. Fulgent lib. 1. ad Monimum Regem.
writing to Monimus, condemns it to eternal darkness; Quos praescivit Deus
hanc vitam in peccato terminaturos, praedestinavit Supplicio interminabili
puniendos; Those of whom God for-saw, that they would end their Lives in sin;
he therefore decreed, should live in endless punishment. Prosper of Aquitania,
Pro^per Aquitanious ad Object. V^ncent. Resp. 3.
throws it away as execrable; Omnium quidem hominum Deus Creator est; sed nemo
ab eo ideo creatus est, ut periret; quia alia est causa nascendi, alia
pereundi. God in truth, is the Creator, of all Men; but no Man is therefore
created by him, that he should be damned; because there is one cause of our
being born, an other, of our being damned. These two Doctors chiefly debated
this matter. And the rest publish themselves to be of the same Heart, when the
like occasion, or any bordering upon it, invites them. The Scripture treads
this Hellish Doctrine under fe^t. Let one place speak for many, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.
David says to Solomon his Son, of God and Solomon; If thou seek him, he will
be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.
God's final casting us off, is conditional; if we forsake him. Reason abhors
this unreasonable doctrine; yea, sanctified Reason, devoutly waiting upon
Scripture. For, if God excludes not a Man from Salvation in time and in effect,
until the Man effectually and in time forsakes God; then assuredly he
rejects no Man in Decree and Purpose, but such a one as he foresaw would
forsake and reject him. Observe the Ground. God's Acts in Time, are measured
and regulated by his Decrees before Time. There must therefore be a strict and
rigid Conformity between them, as between Regulam, et Regulatum, the Rule, and
the Thing ruled or regulated by it, You see how this Ignis sopitus, Fire
sleeping in Ashes, being stirred a little, rises with a flaming Sword and
Point, against Heaven, against Scripture, Grace, Reason, righteous Antiquity.

The misshapen Doctrines, that this horrible-one twisted with others, draws
after it longo Syrmate, in the long Train, are scarcely to be named amongst
Christians; As proclaming God, ( Horresco referees, I tremble in the naming
it,) who is 2 Cor. 1. 3. the Father of mercies, and one that has, Ezech. 18.
32. No pleasure in the death of him that dies; to be (I Will speak it in short,
it must not stay long upon my Tongue) the greatest of (shall I go on? I must,
for your Information,) the greatest of Tyrants, and of Hypocrites. Such a one
they make their good Gad, their dear Father.

O Christian Souls, Fear not the shadows of Death, and smoke of Hell; which
these Fumivenduli, Smoke-sellers sell in Pulpits. Fear not their evil and
uncreated Looks, when they disfigure their faces, as those ill-look'd
Hypocrites, Mat. 6. 16. For, even with Cave and Cylinder Glasses, we may
reflect any shape of Anticks, Monsters, Devils, and those hanging in the Air
over our Heads. These are of the Family or Faction of Barthochahas in St.
Hierom; Barthochabas Auctor Seditionis Judaicae, stipulam S. Hieron. Ep^ ad
R^ssinum.
in ore succensam anheliru ventilabat, ut flammas evomere putaretur. He had so
medcin'd his mouth, and he so managed a Device in it, that he seemed to vomit
Fire.

Beloved, It burns in my Bowels, and I cannot hold it. Some called Separatists,
(and they are so, and more than so, as separating from the Church, not in
Communion only, but also in Faith;) are better-marrow'd, and more Evangelical,
than these Pulpit- Ignes-fatui, foolish Fires; than these Preachers, ex argilla
et luto conficti, of dirt and clay. He that compares the Independents with the
Presbyterians, compares the Nephilim, or Giants that made others to fall before
them, with the Pygmie-Archers on the Towers of Tire in the Vulgar Translation,
Ezech. 27. 11. Which are Translat. Vulg Prima Editio Aquilae. Lyra, et Forer.
in Ezech.
called also in the first Edition of Aquila, (...), Pygmies They were set
there, as Lyra thinks, ad Hostium irrisionem; to mock the Enemies of Tire, from
the top of those invincible Towers: though Forerius tuggs for it, that, the
Towers being high, the Watchmen seemed Pygmies to the Beholders on the Ground.
The Presbyterian Pulpit-Archers, have crawled up to the top of a little
Tyre-Learning; But the Giants, undepending of Tyres and Towers, in some of
their Doctrines, are wellgrounded upon Scripture-Ground that will never perish;
and the Pygmies dare not come down to them on the Ground. The Presbyterians on
the Walls of Tire, cry out, that the Independents are the (...) of the
Septuagint in Isaias, Chapter 13. Seducing Sirens. But the Independents might well
send their Cries to the tops of the Towers, and hollow it to the Pygmies, that
the Presbyterians are the (...) of the Septuagint, the Monsters divided betwixt
Men and Asses, Sept.
and the Satyrs of the English Bible; and might plead with reason, that these
Asses have formerly drunk up the Moon. The Presbyterian objects, that an
Independent Videatur Ludovicus Vives in S. Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 10. cap. 16.
was called to preach, from behind an O^k; But let the Independent reply, that
the Presbyterian was called by the Bird in the Ivy-Bush. And if the Courses of
Independents, be the Dances of Anticks, the Presbyterians began the Dance;
Which Dance was not so well begun in any Respect, as in some Respects it is
followed.

My loving Hearers, let me whisper a Word into your Ears. Go to God, in earnest
and humble Prayer; Press him upon his Promises, and cry to him, for Denial of
your Selves, and of the World; And the Knowledge of the Truth, if ye closely
pursue this grand Affair of the Soul, will soon follow, by the help of God; all
things lying obedientially under his Feet. Ye shall quickly then be Undeceived,
and perceive a large Difference in Doctrines. The Silkworm, and the Spider.
What of these? They both work; and both, out of their own Bowels and Substance.
So far they work together. Now they differ in their working. One of them only
works substantially. The Spider works for his own private end and gain (great
gain to gain a little Fly;) The Silkworm wrought for the Tabernacle and the
Altar, and still works. The Spider works a poor, thin, weak, black, idle Web;
The Silkworm, a rich, fair, Silken Substance. The Conclusion falls thus, The
Spider's Work is swept, and swept; swept down, and swept away; The Work of the
Silkworm, ( Verbo date Veniam) is a Courtier, is worn, and advanced by Princes.

Certain Corollaries, or Gleanings remain; quae ne summis qnidem digitis, aut
labris adhuc primoribus attigi; which I have not as yet touched. First, The
Preachers and Keepers of this Perfect Law, are commonly contemned and
slandered. What admirable Helps for the perfect knowing of Gods perfect Law,
had the Pagans in the blessed Days of the Primitive Church? (As we go,
Casaubon denies the Sybilline Oracles, because they have spoken more Casaub.
Exercit. cap. 1.
plainly, and more particularly, than God's beloved Prophets; and therefore, he
fathers them all upon our Primitive Teachers and Fathers; But he should have
understood, that God acts in relieving us, according to our wants; and the
Pagans needed more plain, and more particular Information, than the People of
God.) And yet, the Believers and Teachers of that perfect Law, were most
greatly dishonored, and brought into Obloquy; and their Names inquinated, by
those unbeleeving Pagans, the Contemners of it. For, when Good is raised, and
on foot, the Foundation of Hell shakes.

The Pagans reported, that the Christians were Eaters of Man's Flesh. Which,
some think, was occasionally taken from the Words of Christ, delivered
Form-wise in the Institution of the Eucharist, Hoc est Corpus meum, This is my
Body. That they worshipped the Sun. Which was first blown up and kindled, Vide
S. Justin. in fine Apolog. 2. and Epist. Plinii Junioris ad Trajanum. Joseph.
contra Applon Grammaticum, lib. 1.
as some conceive, by reason of their Praying toward the East; as others, by
occasion of their Early rising to sing the Praises of Christ. That they
worshipped an Ass his head. Which took fire, Because the Christians under some
Consideration, descended from the Jews; And the Jews had been accused of such
Folly, though Josephus frees them; Of whom, some notwithstanding, it may be
doubted, were stained in that part; because their Inclinations were ever
swerving, and Idol-bent; and Sampson had acted wonders by the Jaw Bone of an
Ass. The Paganish Story of the Wild-Asses going before them, and showing them
Water in the Wilderness, is a wild, and aerie Fiction. That they came together
unlawfully by night, eversa Lucerna; Which indeed, was the Sin of those
unclean, lustful, and false Professors, the Gnostics. Lastly, That they were
the dismal Cause of all the Wars, Earthquakes, Innundations, Pestilences,
Famines, and Troubles of those Times. This ye may read in St. S. Just. Ap. 1
and 2. Tert. ad Scapulam, and in Apologet. S. Cypr. Contra Demetrianum.
Justin, in the African Doctor Tertullian, and in Cyprian of Carthage: Likewise
in others, apologizing for the Christians. The Pagans made the Church of
Christ, Asinum Clitellatum, their Pack-Ass: And then, looking upon the
Christians, not with all the Requisites to clear Sight and perfect Apprehension
of the Object; but through these Calamitous Disasters, and those abominable and
loud-crying Reports, cried aloud with them; Christiani ad Bestias, Christiani
ad Leones, The Christians to the Beasts, the Christians to the Lions. For, Love
and Hatred, are like the two Ends of a Perspective-Glass; whereof the one
multiplies, the other makes less. Or, Man in this regard, is like a
Turning-Picture, a Lamb on the one fide; a Lion on the other. Yea, Disaffected
or angry Persons, are like Persons ill-affected in their Eyes; who, as Abenzoar
sets them before our Eyes in his Description; see two Abenzoar. lib. 1. c. 1
Tractat. 8.
Things, when but one presents it self; Every Man in their seeing, has two
Heads, four Eyes, two Mouths, two Bodies, four Hands, as many Feet; and is
twice Himself, and a double Man; and is therefore, Monstrum, Horrendum,
Inform, Ingens; a huge, misshapen, horrible Monster.

Beloved, Cheirsh an Example or two, taken from the Cabinet of mine own
Knowledge. To name the Persons, mihi Religio est, I dare not in Conscience. I
knew an earnest Teacher of God's Law, publicly dishonored by Persons wearing
the same Sheeps-coat, and vexatious to him, (as beloved by the People for his
opening the Scriptures in his Sermons, conformably to the Example of Christ
after his Resurrection) and audito nunciantes, speaking by hearsay; and this,
in Re gravi, in the aspersion of a most filthy Matter. When as I am
superlatively certain, That the Soul of the accused Man abominates the very
first Thought of such an Evil, with more abomination than any Stomach did ever
abominate the Toad; and hates the remembrance even of the noblest Act in that
Kind; although he may, after the common Rule of human Consideration, most
honorably conform to it. When I first heard of this unchristian dealing for
Christ, Ego continuo mecum, I said presently within my self, The Saints, if
these be Saints, are horribly malicious. O ye false and evil Tongues, I will
not tell you, that alios ex vestro judicatis Ingenio, ye judge others by your
own Acts and Propensities; The Malice of the Blackhellish-Accusers must needs
then have been at full Sea, and the Sun of Righteousness, in Apogaeo, in the
farthest point from them.

Moreover, I knew a resolved Teacher of God's Law, who resolutely, and with a
bold Spirit, gave chaste Counsil, from the perfect Law of God, to a rich Woman,
poor by a generally-suspected Life; exhorting her to refrain the company of a
most lewd, and most execrable Fellow, who boasted commonly, that he commonly
devoured qualified Poisons to procure Lust, and to render himself more
acceptable to the Vile Prostitute, and who showed in his cortupt and beastly
Mouth, that he kept always in his Heart, as in a Seraglio, Variety of lewd
shapes. The Sequel was. That Miscreant was presently informed by Her, (O
crooked Way!) of such adventurous Counsil given against him. And, Lust being
always impatient, he as presently sought this Counsil-giver, found him, and so
mangled him with an Irish Dagger, that he bears in his Body, the Marks of the
Lord Jesus. The base Assassine glorying also, that his direct Intention was, to
murder him. I know not, what, Men-and-Women Beasts do in the dark: But I know
the Saying of Men walking in the light; Homicidium, Adulterium anteit in
Praecepto, Subsequitur in Facto; Murder in the Precept, goes before Adultery,
follows it, in the Fact. The desire of Babylas, Bishop of Antioch, and Martyr,
was commendable; Suid. in voce (...), and Catalogus Episcoporum.
qui id Amici^ dedit negotii, who left it in charge with his Friends, to bury
him in his Chains, lest his dead Body should want it is livelyest Ornaments. It
is the great Joy of my Friend, that his Body shall bear these Beauty-Marks,
when his Soul shall be presented before God.

I reverently accept it, as a fair Staff of Christ's Song, his Wedding Song, or
Spiritual Epithalamie, Cant. 6. 3. He feeds among the Li^ies. The Lilie is
the cleanest of all Flowers, and exalted from the Ground, by a long stalk; that
it may be conveniently preserved in it is Purity. Christ feeds, that is,
abides and sojourneth with men, whose Conversation is Lilie-white, (O the
black-Man, that has Lilie-white in his mouth only!) and lifted above the
ordinary level of the World. The Christian should be the tallest Flower in all
the Field, pure in his unknown Actions, as his known End is most pure. But
Mahomet's Paradise agrees more homogeneously Vide Alco^anum Arabic. azoara 2.
with such a wretched Captive of Lust and Beastliness, usquedum a P^oposito
resiliat; than the Blessedness of Christians; Of the which, Aquinas, Ultima D.
Tho. p. 1. q. 12. art. 1: in Conclus.
Hominis Beaetitudo in altissima ejus Operatione consistit, quae est clara
divinae Essentiae Visio per Intellectum; The last Blessedness of Man consists
in his highest Operation; Which is spiritual, and pertains to the
Understanding, being the highest Power of the Soul. God preserve all Superior
Powers, to whom, accordingly with his Will, we owe Duty and Obedience; that
they be not like, with relation to such dissolute Persons, the kind Ewe, quae
Lupae Catulis mammam dabat, that gave suck to the forsaken Whelps of the
She-Wolf, which afterward, destroyed her, and her young, and all the Flock.
Such are Luparum vetularum Amasii; Men of exorbitant Courses, now turned over to
Carnality. These are the Vultures that watch upon the Tree, while the Lion and
the Boar try their strengths on the Ground. These judge all Obstacles to their
Wickedness, Ense quasi Falce resecanda, to be cut down with a Sword, as good
Corn with a Reaping-Hook.

Christian People, Of a declared Beast, and one that fears, every Day, the
Devil, velut ab Hyposcenio redeuntem, ac Pilis horridis obsitum, as if he were
opening the Earth to swallow him alive into Hell; we expect naught besides
beastly Conversation, and Helhatcht-Vngodliness. But of a Pulpit-Petifogger,
Saint-mouth'd Thing in a brown or blew Covering; ye perhaps, expect a Civil and
Saint-like Behavior. O the strength of Imagination! All the Root of that
Saintliness, is your in Fancy. And ye expect it ex Imperio voluntatis. Your
Expectation is commanded by your Will. But your Will is quickened by your
Imagination, not by your Understanding. Could ye but once say to these walking
Lanthorns, in the Spirit of true Zeal; Ite nunc, atque aliis fucum facite, Go
now to others, with all your colorable Deceits, your whole Pack; Go, pack
away; ye would be free, and others, fearful.

But where am I? Ubi sum, ibi non sum; Ubi non sum, ibi est Animus. Wheresoever
my Tongue is, let your Hearts wait at the Altar, and sacrifise all the
Dishonours of your God-Names, to the Honor of God's great Name.

Take now thy Son, said God to Abraham, Genesis 22. 2. thine only Son Isaac, whom
thou love, and get thee into the Land of Moriah; and offer him there for a
burnt-Offering upon one of the Mountains which I will tell thee of. He must
take now, presently; Not his Sheep, his Ox, his Servant, but his Son; Nor, one
Son of many, but his only Son. And his Sons name is Isaac, which in the Hebrew
Tongue sounds Laughture. Take now thy Laughture, thy Joy. If Isaac be
sacrifised, with Isaac all thy La^ghture dies: It is denied to thee, O Abraham,
to laugh any more. And this Isaac is not a Child, in quo desiderantur Ingentum,
Pietas, Obedientia: that has wrought himself out of the Love of his Parents,
by his Disobedience. Behold his Name, and his Praise; Isaac, whom thou love;
First, for his Wit, sweet manners and Morality. Secondly, for his Piety, and
Obedience. Thirdly, because he is Filius Senectutis, the Child of thy Old Age;
and old Abraham going out of the World, is now to leave his new likeness behind
him, in young Isaac; in Isaac the laughing Boy, that made all the House laugh.
Fourthly, because upon Isaac stood the Promise concerning the Messiah; Genesis 21.
12. He must go into the Land of Moriah, a public Place, and eminent. The
Vulgar Latin, in terram Inte^ p. Vulgat.
Visionis, into the Land of Vision, or, the Land seen afar off. The Septuagint,
(...), to the High-Land. Sept.
Aquila, (...), the Land Aq.
that is conspicuous, because in Excelso loco sita. Symmachus, (...), Sym.
It was followed, and interpreted by the Vulgar Latin. He must offer him there
for a burnt-Offering; He himself by himself, being his dear and most loving
Father, not by an other, must kill him, offer him, burn him; burn Isaac, offer
Isaac, kill Isaac; kill his Laughture, offer his Laughture, burn his Laughture.
He must tear from his own Heart and Bowels, all Natural Affection, and strike
his Son hard, and keep his Ey steadfast upon him, and wound his own sweet Child
to death; and his pretty Child's Blood so shed, must run down upon the Ground,
in several streams, before him. And then, the precious Body must be burnt in a
Holocaust, no solid part remaining, to tell the Ey that Isaac once lived; and
the Ashes of Isaac, Abraham's laughture, will now be the Winds mirth, and
recreation. And he must not yet know, which of the Mountains shall be the sad
place of Execution. Of that, hereafter. Abraham consents to all this, and rises
early to do it, verse. 3. He tells no tales. His Wife knows nothing. He thinks
within him, as Basil of Seleucia assequitur conjectura: (...), Basil. Seleuciae
Episc. in Homil. de Abraham.
Mothers overcome by the impotency of Nature, are grievous. He conceals it from
his own Nature. Abraham's own Flesh and Blood, must not be of the Counsel. O the
Power of God, and of Grace! O the Obedience of Abraham the good old Man!

And, O thou injured person; Take now thy Good Name, thine only Good Name,
which thou love; and while these murderous Tongues, not commanded by God, but
driven with a firebrand, by the Devil, wound and kill thy beloved Isaac, thy
Laughture, not in an uncouth, and unfrequented place, but in a public one; let
thy Will, by most humbled and profound Submission to the Will of God, ly
prostrate at the foot of the Altar, and then arise by the strength of a new
Grace, and Offer it self a perfect Holocaust, in the flames of thy Good-Name,
to the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. Let it be (...), all burnt: (...),
let all the fruit be returned to the Glory of God; let it be Calil,
Consummated; and Ola, an Ascension; let the whole Sacrifice ascend, in fire and
smoke, to God. And protest thou in this thy Sacrifice, that thou art wholly
God's, Soul, Body, Scarrs and all; and that he may demand thy Life, when he
shall please. And do thou cry out heartily, Lord, thou art my Goods, my Good
Name, Laus me^, my praise, and my All in all, and beyond all that all the World
owns.

My second handful of Gleanings is, That ordinarily Men are forward, and bend
themselves with some strength and alacrity, to the Law of God for a while,
after a passionate Sermon, the death of a friend, or some great loss, or
sickness; but they quickly wheel about again; and all their forwardness in
Godliness, A^guilla est, elabitur; slips from them, Eel-wise. Is it
praiseworthy in a Christian Life, to imitate the flying fishes of Brasilia:
which, after a fair flight, Lerius in Hist. Navigationis Brasilianae, cap. 3.
in their flying from the bigger Fishes; are soon diving again into the Sea, as
into a tumultuous and tempestuous World? O Christian Soul, Tibi hoc in manu
est, ne fiat: The shunning of this evil, God's Grace puts into your Hand.

The first Reason of this our neglect, is; Because we are propense by Nature to
coolness in good Acts and performances. It must therefore, be your care, that
the Customary Acts, which should generate your good Habit, or that flow from it
being now generated; be intense and fervent. For, tepid and remiss-Acts, will
not expedite, or introduce, and build up a Habit. And, Aliqui Actus ab Habitu
procedentes, diminuunt ipsum, as Aristotle Arist. lib. 2. Ethic. cap. 2.
clearly proves; Acts proceeding from a Habit, when they are incompti, impexi,
negligently acted; diminish the Habit. Of* this thread it is; That by our
neglect in the admission of the smaller sins, we are prepared for the
Commission of the greater. The Manichean S. Aug. super Joan Tract. 1.
in St. Austin, who led on the Catholic Christian to a belief, that the Devil
was the Creator of the Fly, quickly brought him forward, per Orationem quasi
nimia religione attenuatam, by a Speech slender'd and attenuated with much
Curiosity, to confess the very same of the Be, as being not much grosser;
and afterward the same again, of the Locust. From the Locust he leapt ( the
Locust had taught him leap) by a (...), a new Transition or leaping beyond
kinds, to the Lizard: From the Lizard, to the Bird; From the Bird, to the Beast
of the lesser bulk. From that poor Beast, to the Ox: From the Ox to the
Elephant. From the understanding Elephant, to the reasonable Man, not
distinguishing betwixt Repraesentationen^ vestigii, and Repraesentationem
Imaginis, the Representation of Gods Foot-step in the Elephant, and of his
Image in Man. And at last, bringing both ends together by a Logical Sorites,
laid the Man upon his back, and persuaded him unreasonably, and devilishly;
that reasonable man was not created by God, but made by the Devil. Where St.
Austin concludes; Ita ille miser, cum tadium passus est a Muscis, Musca factus
est quem diabolus possideret. So that miserable Man, being troubled by the
Flies (which, the Manichean considered) was himself made a Fly, and the Devil
caught him. The Devil uses always, a kind of Sorites, in perverting a good
Life, so carrying his Discourse, ut ab evidenter veris (aut very similibus) per
brevissimas mutationes, Disputatio ad ea quae evidenter falsa sunt, perducatur.
Holy Dorotheus also, has put S. Doroth. Sermon. 2. de Humimilitate.
upon the Record; That a certain Christian Brother, by degrees contemning
others, more and more observed for Sanctity; was in the end engulft into the
contempt of the most sacred Trinity. By the like Artifice, we are drawn from
better Things to Things good: Whereas the Will, which does simply embrace Good,
is not evil: but yet, if embracing the good, she throw off the better, she is
disordinate; not in embracing the good, but in repulsing the better. You will
say; outward Things pull you to them; you attend to the pull, and forget your
Duty. But I will answer with Thomas a Kempis: Tho. a Kemp. ^e Imitat. Christi.
l. 2 cap. 1.
Homo internus citose recolligit, quia nunquam se totum ad exteriora effundit:
A Man living inwardly by Introversion, soon gathers up himself; because he
never turns out, and pours abroad his whole self upon exterior Things: but
reserves always to himself inwardly the best part of himself. And if your true
Call^ are more from the World, your Helps are more, and greater from God. For,
his Helps by a kind of (...), are more increased and strengthened, when opposed
with Contraries: Then Christ is Emmanuel, which Aquila translates, (...), the
Strong with us; alluding to the Word often used by Aq. in Is. 8. 8. Sept.
the Septuagint, (...) qui potens est, he that is powerful: this being one of
the ten famous Names of God in the Vide S. Hieron. ep. 136. ad Marcell.
Old Testament, and the Name by which the Septuagint always render the Hebrew
Word, Ghibbor, a Giant. Then Christ shows himself, as he is called, Is. 9. 6.
the mighty God: Where the Text Hebr.
Hebrews speaks it, El Ghibbor, strong as a Giant for us, and with us. And as
God is strong with you, O Christians, so must you validis incumbere remis, row
strongly with your strong Oars, and totis initi viribus ut enaviges, endeavor
with all your might, to escape safe to shore.

There is a second Reason of our Neglect. We are of those that Amos marks nigro
Carbone, with a Coal; Amos 6. 3. Ye that put far away the evil day. Where the
Vulgar Latin attends with, Qui separati estis in diem malum; Ye that are Edit.
vulgat.
separated, or set aside, as Anathemata, cursed Things, for the Evil Day. But
the Hebrew Word, Menaddim, is of an Text. Heb.
active Signification, and acts thus, Separantes vos ad diem malum, Separating
you for the Evil Day: Whence the Septuagint denote, the Evil Persons to Sept.
be the Agents, thus: Qui venitis ad diem malum, Ye that come to the Evil Day.
The Chaldee, Clarius, Vatablus, Chald. Paraphr. Clar. Vatabl. Rabbin^.
and the Rabbis revolve it otherwise, and set up a Light in the Harbor, for
the English; Separantes diem malum, Separating the Evil Day; Or, ye that put
the Evil Day beyond it self, that ye may sin more j^^ially; saying* that the
Prophets speak of Times a great way off. Tigurina are Tigurina.
fashionable, Qui in longinquum rejicitis diem malum; ye that cast back the
evil Day, a great way. And Pagninus yields, Pagn.
Qui longinquum putant diem malum: They who think the Evil Day to be far away:
and fear it not. For, as Aristotle Arist. lib. 2 Rhet. cap. 5.
more than Philosophically speaks: Quae longinqua sunt, non metuuntur. Sciunt
enim omnes fore ut moriantur; sed quia id prope esse non putant, ideo nullam
curam suscipiunt. The Things far off, are not feared. For, all Men know they
shall die; but because they vainly think, that Death is not near them, therefore
they take no Care. Did thou posi^ively know, that thy Life hereafter shall be
but of twenty years durance; in the end of which, thy Soul shall be Separate;
thou would not Separate the Evil Day; thou would not separate thy self from
the visible Church of Christ: O how nice and circumspect would thou be in the
government of thy Life thus known? how thou would eam circumquaque polire
lima, file and polish it on every side? But, because thou art encompassed with
uncertainties, (which of themselves invite us to watchfulness,) thou art Callo
obductus, hardened with use, and continual attendance upon them; and called to
look farther, by Hope and Expectation; and art therefore, supinely negligent.

I have a third Hand^ull. The written Law of God, is a Rule to us, while this
Life endures: Which being ended, the Book shall be shut, and no more opened to
us. My Brethren, shall I commend a Looking-Glass to you? Take that which the
skillful Spaniard made in the Days of our Fathers. In the which Glass,
whosoever looked into it, beheld two shapes of himself; the one perfectly
representing him alive, and the other showing him as having faciem Cadaverosam,
the face of a dead Man. Thomas a Kempis reasons matters as if he had been
altogether Thom. a Kemp. de Imit. Christi, lib. 1. cap. 23.
(...), taught of God: Quam felix and prudens qui talis nunc nititur esse in
vita, qualis optat inveniri in morte^ O how happy, and how wise is that Man,
who now strives to be such a one in his life, as he wishes to be found in his
Death! Thou will cry then, my Brother, with a doleful Voice, and a woeful
Heart, O that I had lived agreeably to the most Perfect Law of God! Now
therefore, live, as thou will then wish to have lived; the World being behind
thee, and before thee, Heaven or Hell. The Young Man persuaded into a Bed, as
his Deathbed; and hearing the Bell, as tolling for him: rose a Penitent. The
Hour of Death, is in some, a Seeing Hour. Do thou not see now, all Things
here, tenui pendentia filo, hanging by a small thread?

In the ancient Greek Church, Excommunication the Greater, was called Vide S.
Greg. Neocaesariensem in Ep. Canonica, quae adjungi solet Canonibus Photii.
(...). Persons manacled with it, stood altogether without the Church;
beseeching all whose faces were toward it, as with prayers so with tears, to
be humble Suitors to God, who dwelt in that House, for Mercy toward them. Which
action of crying and wet Devotion, gave them the Name Plorantes, Weepers. To
some was interdicted the use of the Eucharist only. Some were moreover put
Hospin. Tract. de Templis. Vide Justell: Notas in Codicem Canonum Eccles.
Universe. ad Can. 25.
into the Chatechumenium, as Hospinian calls it; and, according to Order,
departed before the Celebration of the Mysteries, with the Catechumeni; when
the word was given toward them, Ite, Depart ye. Another Sort of Excommunicate
Persons, were thrown from the majesticall Presence of God in the Temple, to
attend him in the Porch; according to Vitruvius his Reason for Porches. All
Vitruvius lib. 6. c. 8.
these were ejected from the Communion of the Faithful; but not as Excrements.
For, still they might beg, and cry for entrance, and they might be graciously
readmitted. But by an evil Death, we are pulled up Root and Branch; and exuti
Bonis omnibus ac spoliati, turned out of all.

After such a Death, there is no place for Prayers or Tears. It is a Truth
beyond the reach of Opposition, though Gelasius spoke it, and though it be
recorded by Gratianus: Mortuos suscitasse legimus Gela. 1. in comm^nit^rio ad
Faustum, Legatum Constantinop^litanum, and allegat Gratianus Causa 24. Qu. 2
cap. Legatur. Similia habet idem Gelos. Ep. ad Episcopos Dardaniae, and allegat
Gratianus. ibid. cap. Nec quisquam. Council. Cor. thag. 3. Can. 6.
Christum: in errore mortuos absolvisse non legimus. We read, that Christ
raised some from Death: We read not, that he pardoned any dying in their Sins.
Wherefore the Hebrew Language calls the Grave, Duma; which properly signifies
Silence. And the Greeks call the Burying-Place, (...), a Dermitorie; Because
there is no crying, or groaning for our Sins, in the Grave. Hither looks an old
Canon of a Council of Carthage, in the which St. Austin was present; and to the
which he subscribed: Placuit, ut Corporibus Defunctorum Eucharistia non detur.
Dictum est enim a Domino, Accipite, and Edite. Cadavera autem nec accipere
possunt, nec edere. It has pleased the Holy Ghost, and us, That no Man shall
put the Eucharist into the Mouths of dead Persons; as some unwary Christians
have. For, Christ said, Take ye, and eat. But Carcasses can neither eat, nor
take. O that I could in Animas Hominum irrepere, creep into the Souls of
People; and lay this home to them! I yield it, that the Jews even to this Day,
call their Burying-places Batte Caiim, the House of the Living: And that the
High Dutch know their Churchyards by the Name of God's Glebe-Land, because our
Body is therein sown a natural Body, 1 Cor. 15. 44. But, all thi^does homage to
the Resurrection; in the which, our Body shall be raised a Spiritual Body; the
Soul in the Saved, transfusing into the Body, as far as may be, her Spiritual
Perfections; (it is contrary-wise in the Damned.)

My Heart aches, when I read of Wicked Men, Psalm. 9. 6. their memorial is
perished Edit. vulgat.
with them. The Vulgar Latin serves up, Periit memoria little cum sonitu; Their
Memory has perished with the noise, or sound. The Lovers of the World, are in
this line of Relation, as in others, compared to Hogs. When a Hog is laid hold
on, and cries, all the other Hogs, both little and great, that are near, come
running from every side, and cry too. O what a mixed noise there is! But when
the first Hog that raised the Cry, ceases to cry, though this be because he is
dead, and can cry no more; they cease all, and turn themselves presently; to
their former digging and tumbling in the mire, without any fear or
apprehension, that their turn is also coming to cry, and to raise a cry, and
to cry no more. So while a Sick Friend, or other dying Person groans, and cries
out, we are moved: Porcos dicam alto grunnitu grunnientes. But the noise and
sound ceasing, arescunt lacrymae, our tears dry up, and our memories are short,
and we forget the dead Friend; and looking out from our selves, and seeing the
World before us, we turn to our old wallowing in the mire; never considering,
that the Law of God is perfect; Vide Paracels. in libris de vita longa.
and that, though Paracelsus were alive again, and had the dieting, and keeping
of us, we must dye, as our Friends dye. If ever, O man from the Earth, Earthy,
thou will meditate upon the night, of which the Gospel, Io. 9. 4. the night
comes when no man can work: Do it now, die jam in occasum flexo, and appetente
Crepuscul^; the day being far spent, and the darkness of the night approuching.
Me thinks now, that I preach to my self. For, God oftentimes, speaks to us from
our own Mouths.

Brethren, I greatly desire to dye the death of the Saints, precious in the
sight of God; That I may, to use the word of Theodor. Bals. in Canones
Trullanos, Can. 52.
Theodorus Balsamon in his sense, (...), sacrifice everlasting Praises to God,
and celebrate a continual Feast with him in his glory; and being loosed from
this earthly Tabernacle, be rapted away Sept. in Levit. 23. 36. and alihi
sem^er, cum idem subsit in Orig.
to the blessed Thing anagogically signified by that (...) of the Septuagint,
to bear a part with the Saints in that heavenly Song in the End. I have
professed for you, these many years. And, That a Man may be joined in Communion
or Union with the Church of Rome, and yet preach here as a Minister, is a most
false Alarm, and the mad bellowing of enthusiastical and fanatical persons,
and answerable to Presbyterian Ignorance. I will here unrip my Soul unto you.
He that will join with Rome, must unroost here. No Law forbids a Man to groan
when his pain comes. O that there had been always in me, Virtus altis defixa
radicibus, Virtue Deeply-Rooted!

I did once expect to have found in England, one bearing (...), a superhumeral
made of Sheeps-Wooll, and signifying (...), as Isidore Pelusiot, the skin of
the Sheep which Christ Isid. Pelus. l. 1. ep. 136.
sought, found, and carried home upon his shoulders; and which was always put
on in the pronouncing of these Words; according to Simeon Thessalonicensis:
Sublata Sim. Thessal. in Bibliotheca Patrum.
in humeros, Christ, Natura quae erraverat; assumptus, Deo and Patri illam
obtulisti. O Christ, thou taking upon thee the Nature of Man which had erred;
and having ascended did prefer it to God thy father. But, Verily, verily, I
neither found here, the Patriarch that sent it, nor the Bishop that wore it. I
found indeed, the most professing, and most showing People of all others; but
amongst all others, the most prodigiously ignorant of Right and Equality
concerning Practicable Matters; as is evidenced by the daily practices of the
People; their Desires and Works having no Bounds, or their Words Limits, but
the Limits and Bounds which the Law of the Land has forced upon them; over
which notwithstanding, they leap, like the Wild-Beasts of the Forest. I hoped
to have entered upon, post Magellanicos Tumultus, Aequor pacificum, after
foreign Tumults, a peaceable Sea at Home. But by reason of some
Kirk-Sea-Monsters, (who disguising their Ends, and bringing Non-Causam pro
Causa, a Supposititious Cause for the Cause it self; and bleeding inwardly with
grief, that their Congregations grew thin, low and lean; persecuted me:) I have
lived here as in the Suburbs of Hell; and as amongst Conjurers, wearing Devils
upon their fingers in Rings. In every touch, I felt their Devil stir, and
work. And because he wrought not by himself, but by them. I could not command
him to desist. The Devil in a round Ring was called (...), a Familiar, giving
Counsel. They wear the Devil in a Ring, that by devilish suggestions, bring
trouble and Hel-fire to every Thing they morally touch. Their moral touches, as
their Tongues, are set on fire of Hell, James 3. 6. Fire, fire; the worst of
all fires, the fire of Hell; fire, fire, Hell fire. I have dealt in this
Nation, with rich-furred Beasts, (their Cases were far better than their
Bodies) lurking under the Cinnamon Tree, the Bark whereof is dearer than the
whole Bulk. In fine, I have seen the very S^orm, and Loss, which the Triremis,
or Gally-Tavern Athenaeus lib. 2. Cael. Rhodigin. l. 17. cap. 2.
in the Sicilian Agrigentum, did undergo. And in the last Act, was horribly
struck from above me, with a Perhaps you have a Pension from the Pope, tanqu^me
Machina, as out of the highest Seat over the Stage, from the which some feigned
God appeared, and spoke Oracles. To Walk before God with a perhaps, is, to walk
contrary unto God. Levit. 26. 21. And if ye walk contrary Vatabl.
unto me. Vatablus his Reading, is, Si ambulaveritis mecum cum Casu, If ye
shall walk with me by chance, or at all adventures: I ye build the vast, and
high Towers of your Scotch-Babylon, upon the nodding and shaking foundation of
a Perhaps. For the Hebrew word Keri, Occursus, signifies according to the
Hebrew Bias, as well Chance as Contrary. And he that comes contrary to me,
occurrit mihi, meets me running; and all Chances eunt obviam eis, meet those,
and are upon a sudden, occurrent to them, in respect of whom they are such. Did
this Child of Chance, this honest-Perhaps, ever understand how a Science is
raised out of it is Principles? or, that Scientia procedit ex evidentibus, All
knowledge proceeds from Things evident, and clear by the Light of Nature, or
of Reason? Hic de Grege illo est; This is one of the old Herd.

And for a Pragmaticall, envious, eager Man-Friggo^, stirring up every where,
before Women, (...), Word fighting; and larding his Discourses with greasy
Language, and the same, a Preacher of Novelties; the Apostle describes him in
his walking, Coloss. 2. 18. Intruding into those Things which he has not seen.
The Vulgar Latin devotes, ambulans, Edit. Vulg. Text Graec.
walking. The Original, (...), And (...), as it is interpreted by St. Hierom,
is, gestu corporis praeferre S. Hier. in Colloss. 2.
Mentis Superbiam; in the garb of the Body, to show the pride of the Mind.
Vatablus consents, Fastuosus incedens, Vatabl.
says he; is proud, and pompous in his going, and says in his puffed thoughts,
with him in the Poet Seneca, Aequalis Sen. in Thyeste.
Astris gradior, I walk equal with the Stars. And therefore, the Apostle
presses on, Vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind. He walks in the stately
Galleries of his own Fancy; and his Body walks, as his Soul walks in it. An Act
of rash and false Judgment, notabile Damnum inferens, at first, may carry a
face of Justice, but is like a beautiful Apparition, beckning to us to come,
and, we following it into a dark place, suddenly turning into a must horrid
shape, and strangling us. For, Difficile est in lubrico diu stare, It is a hard
Matter, to stand long safe, in the dark, on a slippery place. I could send this
walking Personage, a talking Page to Minister unto him. But, God has uncased
him. The World knows it. Rumor jam raucus factus est. Let me pity the People,
that were like the poor Lacedemonian Plut. in Lacon.
youth, who having craftily stole a Fox, ran his way craftily, craftily
thinking he had a rich Prize; And who craftily kept the Fox so long warm under
his Coat, until the Fox most craftily had bit him through his tender side into
his Bowels. The Fox, not able cleanly to make me a Fool, would have made me a
most unclean Beast. O most pure God, Knower of all Secrets, thou know, that
our homespun Jesuits, the Presbyterian Ministers, were, in this Accusation,
most false, and most unjust. And yet, although they durst not attest it before
me, or before my Friends; they dealt the Matter in secret ^^ cunningly, that
wheresoever I came to sit down, it flashed in my face: And they have made a
wound, which the Weapon-Salve it self cannot cure. What abominable Actions, as
being notoriously opposite both to Justice and Purity, have both City and
Country discovered to me, in the Lives of Presbyterian Ministers; and my Tongue
never yet received an Order from my Heart to tell them? The glory of God
hereafter may command a Discovery. Psalm. 140 11. The Original pronounces, Text.
Heb.
Vir linguae non stabilietur in terra: A Man of Tongue shall not be established
in the Earth. The Targ, Vir qui loquitur lingua tertia; that is, A man who
Targum.
destroys three with his Tongue; the Person of whom he speaks, the Person to
whom he speaks, and himself. And this is one excellent Reason, why the
Presbyterian Ministers shall not be established in the Earth. If we go raking
in the sink of the best Man's Life, we shall quickly prove him to be a Man.
But, from scandalous Evil in Morality, I hope, God has kept me.

Go then, O ye Priestbyterian Ministers; (I may as well mistake a word, as he
that told be, the word in the Original is (...), and put me in mind of the
Shepherd in the Eclog;) Go then, with your lies of Defense, lies of Offense,
whole lies, half lies, quarter lies; lies with heads, but not with feet; lies
with feet, but not with heads; lies with neither head nor foot; lies that are
all belly; short lies, long lies, and lies of a middle size; lies whispered,
and loud lies; lies of any breadth, of any length, of any bigness; a lie that
plays or sings the tenor, a mean lie, and a base lie; lies of all sorts, of
all colors, of all fashions; (a lie will ye buy?) lies that still, and ever
lie, and yet, never lie still.

O these unhallowed Instruments, unfortunate in all their Attempts, because
Evil in their Intentions and Practices: And very like that Impure Limb, and
Trophy of incarnate Malice, and Mischief, risen from one poor Shift to many:
Who stooping in his Drunkenness, to his Vessel to draw Wine; dropped himself as
the Droppings of the Vessel, into the Vessel of Droppings; and left the Wine
showring upon his Head, until being almost drowned in the Flood and the Shower,
he was drawn forth by the heels, and lest uttering his loathed Stomach upon the
Ground! May these blind Guides, drunk with Malice, and vomiting their Malice,
be called Saints? Can that Soldier be true to his Cause, or General, that
encourages with invitation, and with mirth and tacit assent allows his Guests,
execrating his General, to call their Unclean Dogs by his Generall's Name?

But God forgive them; and grant, that they be scourged with punishments, ad
Correctionem, non ad Destructionem, to Correction, not to Destruction: And that
their Temptations end, as God intends them, in Triumpho, in Triumph, non in
Ruina, not in Ruin, as they are intended by the Devil. Yet, I would fain open
to them a Case of Conscience. Zacheus says to Christ, Luke 19. 8. If I have
taken any thing from any man by false Accusation, I restore him fourfold. The
Text proceeds, v. 9. And Jesus said unto him, This Day is Salvation come to
this House. Why does Zacheus engage to restore fourfold? The Casuists answer,
Because the Damage was threefold: For, false Accusation is injurious, First,
in taking away our good Names; Secondly, in retaining them; Thirdly, in
creating much outward loss, and inward vexation. And he restores fourfold;
because he will go a degree beyond what his Adversary can require of him. And
present Restitution being promised, he that was Lord before, is now Jesus; and
Salvation is come to Zacheus his House.

People will here expect an Account of my Faith. I will here faithfully give
it. The Myrrh that sweateth out of the Tree of its own accord, and is called
Myrrha prima, or Electa; is far more precious than that which runs forth,
the Tree being cut or pricked. Voluntary Confessions are most sound, and
honorable. It is known, that Scholars grow every Day more knowing. I begin.

1 I believe, That Worship is due to God, quatenus est Principium Essendi atque
Existendi, as he is the Fountain of all Being. And I deny with a Christian
Resolution, all such Worship to Saints or Angels; because I received no kind of
Being from them, as the Fountain of it. And for a Picture or Image; they are
void of Life, and intrinsecal Motion, and cannot help themselves, much less
save, or deliver me. 2 I believe, That no Man can be saved precisely by his own
Merits; or, has any Merit in him in Order to Salvation, except by the Merits
of Christ, and the Grace of God. And, That Prima Gratia non cadit sub Merito,
The first Grace cannot be merited: as neither the Death or Incarnation of
Christ was or could be. 3 I believe, That God only is able to forgive Sins, by
an Original Power in Himself: But I find, 10. 20. 23. That he delegated this
Power to his Apostles, to be ministerially performed by them. 4 I believe, That
Christ is present in the Sacrament: But not so, that a Man receiving the holy
Sacrament, chewes the Flesh of Christ with his Teeth; or, that the Body of
Christ carnally nourishes the Receiver; or, goes away in the Draught. 5 I
believe, That some Priests were married in the ancient Greek-Church: and that
first Marriages of such Persons, were allowable in that Church. But I, a Member
of the Western Clergy, have experimentally found little Comfort in Marriage,
little outward, and less inward comfort. I only set in public, this my private
experience. 6. I believe that Men may pray to God in any Language, if they
understand it: But to preach to the People in an unknown Tongue, is ridiculous,
and besides the end of Preaching, which is, the Edification of the People.
Hitherto I have said nothing, but what a knowing Papist will say. And
therefore, our Pulpits, and the simple ears of our people have been abused by
the Devils Ianizaries. It remains; that I believe the perfect Law of God, as I
have here described it. And I reject the Presbyterians, as Vpstarts; and
because their Ancestors are not recounted in Sacris Diptychis, and as the
causes of Iliads of Ills, and Myriads of Mischief. But I have done; and
parumper^os obdam mihi pessulo.

Well, I have been Terra jactatus and alto, tossed both by Sea and Land. Fain
would I be a Saved Soul. O then, let Tho. a Kemp. l. 3. de Imitat* Christi cap.
8. Idem ibid. cap. 13.
me pulverize my self in valle nihilcitatis meae, as it is in Thomas a Kempis,
in the valley of my Nothingness; and so humble my Self, as the same Author
exhorts, ut omnes super me ambulare possint, and sicut lutum pl^tearum
conculcare; that all Men may walk upon me if they will, and tread me under feet
as the dirt of the streets. For I have singularly deserved it. I have infinitely
more cause, than St. Bernard, to bemoan my self in his words; Eg^ S. Bern. ep.
249 ad Bernardum Priorem and ali^s.
enim quaedam Chimaera mei Saeculi, nec Clericum gero, nec Laicum: I a certain
Chimera (or Monster) of the Age wherein I live; have neither demeaned my Self
like a Clergyman, nor yet like an upright Layman; But am like some amphibious
Beast, living betwixt the Possession of Land and Water; God and the World.

O my Soul, prepare diligently for the Time wherein thou must leave thy Body:
and give an account of thy Conformity to the perfect Law.

St. John, being in the Island Parthmos, was entertained with many visions. He
describes one of them; Apocal. 6. 8. And I looked, and behold, a pale Horse,
and his name that sat on him was Death; and Hell followed with him. The
Original calls that which we name pale, (...). Which-Word, truly and fully
signifies both pale and green. It signifies in its first, and more native
Signification, the green color of Herbs; and thence, in a second
Signification, their Paleness in their withering. The Reason why this Word is
assumed by the Holy Ghost here, is, Because the Death of the Godly, and the
Death of the Ungodly, are of different colors: and Death presents himself to
the Godly, as upon a Green Horse, adorned with all his trappings of Herbs and
Flowers, the Glory of the Spring; Green being the Spring* Color, a Color that
is recreating, and a Mark of Hope, of Cheerfulness, and of Renewing; and which
implies the beginning of Comfort, and the neerness of Summer and Harvest. And
such is Death to the Godly. But the pale Color, is the Color, not of entrance
into Joy, but of Death as Death; of Horror, of Destruction. And such a ghastly
Death's Look, Death casts upon the wicked and ungodly. Though Malice may look
Pale upon this green Horse, and will not submit to it: I am confident, the Note
is not omitted by any of the most notable Interpreters. The green Horse does
also cast a shadow upon the joyful Resurrection of the Godly, when their bones
shall flourish like an Herb, Is. 66. 14. O this blessed Spring-Colour! what
shall I do to see it?

O that blessed Day, when the Bridegroom shall call away the Spouse in these
words, Can^. 4. 8. Come with me from Lebanon, my Spouse, and look from the top
of Amana! The word (...) in the Septuagint, signifies S^pt.
Frankincense. Come with me from the Mountain of Frankincense; of sweetsmelling
Prayers and Meditations, ascending as Frankincense* Am^na, says Lyranus, was a
high Mountain in the edge of the Wilderness, over-looking Lyran. in Cant.
Candan; from the which, the Jews beholding the Land, and the Riches and
Beauty thereof, there made Coronets of Flowers, and wore them on their Heads,
in sign of Joy and Congratulation. For which cause, the Vulgar Interp* vulgat.
Latin sends it forth in a sweet Air: Coronaberis de capite Amana, Thou shall
be crowned on (or from) the top of Amana, the top of thy Devo^ions having in
view, and almost in possession, the promised Land. What Land? Heaven. O that
blessed Mountain! that blessed view! that blessed Coronation!

If a poor Man had a fair and beautiful Child, a Boy; and were certain, that
he could not have more; And that this Child should have a Kingdom, if he lived
to it; And thereby should promote his Parents, and be the Joy and Glory of all
his Kindred, if he were safely kept, till he came* to Age; Would not the
Parents of this Child, be careful of him? Would they not follow him with ready
Hands, and watchful Eyes, which way soever he turned? Would not the Mother
attend upon him, and still say, My sweet Child, take heed you do not fall: O
Child, there is a deep Pit, come back, God bless my Child. And though the Child
should cry, she would not let him stay there, upon the brink of the Pit; she
would rather carry him an other way, and kiss away the thought of the way
leading to the Pit. The Father would come home, and his first Saying would be,
How does the Child? The little Prince of so great Hopes, that, we hope, will
make us all great? Give's the meaning of all this, or, you have said nothing.
Every Body, or every one of us, as we consist of flesh and blood, and sense
only, has a most sweet, and pretty Child; a Soul, beautified with God's Image;
And we are certain that we shall never have more, more such Children. And this
Child is an Heir of Heaven, and shall be a Prince, if it dies not before it
comes to Age: And shall promote its Friends, if they keep it well; advance it is
Body, and Senses, if they betray it not; which otherwise shall never be
glorified, and which cannot be glorified by their own Industry: Shall we not
watch over our only Child by a good life, and keep it from the Pit of Hell, and
from the False and Knocks of sin, which bruise it, and break it, and kill it,
that it cannot inherit?

Be thou therefore, O my Soul converted, and conformed to the perfect Law of
God, as it opens before thee the perfection of the necessary Parts of a
Christian; and as it promotes thee in the perfection of Degrees. Say to the
Flesh, Viscus merus es, thou art mere Birdlime. To the World, Abi lutum,
Naturam haud amplius urgebo superft^is; Go dirt, I will not any more urge
Nature with superfluities. To the Devil, praestigiis tuis detenta jam diu fui,
delinita lencciniis, I have been long thy Slave, I belong to Jesus the
Conqueror. Say to these Preachers, ye are ignavum pecus, a dull kind of
Cattle; ye have learned a tumbling trick with the lip and tongue; but for
Action. ye know not the behavior of Zeal, Humility, Charity, or of any true
virtue: And I will rather ire ad genua praetereuntium, beg my bread of all
others, than close with you. Say to God. Abba Pater, miserere mei: Father of
Christ, and Father of Christians; Father of Jew, and Father of Gentil; Father
before, and Father now; have mercy upon me. And then, look before thee.

God says to his People, Numb. 14. 30. Doubtless ye shall not come into the
Land concerning which I swear to make you dwell therein, save Caleb the Son of
Jephunneh, and Joshua. Why should these two only enter into the Land which
typified the heavenly Canaan? Caleb, says Procopius, one of the learned
Procop. in Numb. 14.
Grandies in the Hebrew Language, signifies every Heart (Leb is a Heart.) And
Jephone signifies Conversion. And as Joshua was a Type of Jesus, the Captain of
his People* and he that won for them the Heavenly Canaan: So Joshua, in it is
true Signification, is Jesus, a Savior* The mystical Sense therefore, is;
(and it has something in it, of the tropologicall, allegorical, anagogicall;
as it relates to Manners, to the Church militant under the Gospel, to the
Church triumphant in Glory:) Doubtless no man shall enter into the Heavenly
Canaan, except the Person having a Heart which is the Child of Conversion; and
that goes with Jesus, fighting under his Banner. For, Joshua and Caleb stood
for the Head and the Body; Christ and his Church. There may be a Spot in a
Garment, quae nullo potest elui lixivio, Which cannot be washed off. But, the
Blood of Christ will cleanse thee from all Sin.

The Bridegroom promises to the Spouse, Cant. 1. 11. We will make thee Borders
of Gold, with Studs of Silver. For which, the Vulgar Latin exhibiteth; Inter p.
Vulgat.
Muraenulas aureas faciemus tibi vermiculatas argento, We will make thee little
collars or necklaces of Gold, worm'd, or embroydered, or checker-wrought with
R. Abrah. in hunc locum.
Silver. R. Abraham descanting upon this place, (though few of the Jewish
Rabbis have commented upon the Book,) affirms that these Necklaces (in use
then) were made of Golden Turtles, dressed and flourished (perhaps on the Bill,
Wings, Feet,) with Silver. And therefore, some translate here, for Borders or
Necklaces, Turtles; others, Jewels; the Hebrew word Thorim sinifying both. The
Soul espoused to Christ, must carry for her continual adornment, the mourning
Turtles about her. She must remember that her Heavenly mate is gone before her;
and, the way by which he went, the Cross; and the occasion of his Coming and
Going, her Sins; and be groaning always inwardly.

Thou know now experimentally, O Soul of mine, That many Christian Matters
have been proposed here, illegally, confusedly, falsely, and with all the
deceiveableness of unrighteousness; and, that Christian Truth, sanctified with
the Blood of Christ Incarnate, God made Man, must needs be the highest Thing,
and the most Soul-ravishing, of that Order. Enough. My Powers, and the Powers
of Hell are now in Procinctu. And, Res est jam in Vado, Here is a shallow
place, it is not far to the shore.

O great God, what shall I say more to the People? The Sins of the People have
carried them beyond all that a Man can say. I Will, I must say with David,
Psalm. 60. 3. Thou have made us to drink the Wine of astonishment. We stand in
the hearing of our perfect Duties, like People astonished, but we stir not a
Foot in the performance of these our perfect Duties; And the Fit of
astonishment being gone, we idolize our selves, as before we did. The
Septuagint turns it up, (...). Sept.
Which, the Vulgar Latin readily turns Edit. Vulg.
again, potasti nos Vino Compunctionis, Thou have given us to drink, the Wine
of Compunction. O Heaven and Earth, what strange Compunction may this be?
Aquila states, (...), Wine causing Aq. Sym.
Drunkenness. Symmachus puts forward, (...), Wine causing a rude Storm in our
Brains, as Wind causes Commotion in the rude waves of the Sea. In such a
troubled plight was Cain, having killed his Brother. For, Cain, according to
the Hebrew and Syriack, says the Greek Scoliast upon the Septuagint in
Genesis, Scoliast. Graec. in Genesis
was (...), moving ever to and fro. (Some have said, that the Hair of Cain and
Judas, was Coloris mustelini, Weesil-colour'd; I am sure, their moving Hearts
were black and foul.) Hesychius Vide Hesych. hic, and in Isaiam.
admonishes, that the Word of the Septuagint, is dug from (...), the night:
whence also falls (...), I sleep. We are like a person violently wak't out of
his Sleep, that starts up and stares about him, and presently lies down again,
upon the soft and yielding Pillow, utterly forgetting that he was awake. St.
Hierom, full of these thoughts, forms Edit. S. H^eronymi.
it; Potasti nos vino consopiente; Thou have made us to drink wine casting us
into a dead sleep. Another Text reaches toward this, Is. 29. 10. For the Lord
has poured out upon you the Spirit of deep sleep, and has cloased your eyes.
The Vulgar Latin also lets it go, Spiritum Inter. Vul. Sept.
S^poris, th^e spirit of sleep. The Septuagint return their old word, (...),
compunction. Which they seem to have administered, says Hesychius, for (...),
Soporation. I rather deem, that by compunction, they mean transpunction, either
to signify, that when the Ear is boared with an instrument, which breaks
through the Organ, the Sense is lost; or, that a boared vessel holds not
Water. And in this Sense, our Hearts being boared, we have lost our hearing.
Which directed St. Cyprian S. Cyp. l. 1. Epist. ep. 3
to pronounce of the Obstinate Jews, pertusa est illis Men's, their Mind is
pierced, it holds nothing. And hence we say, Sermon Plau^ino, in the Phrase of
Plautus, In pertusum Dolium dicta ingeris, you pour Words, as into a boared
vessel. Our Hearts in a moving Sermon, are full of the Sermon, as a Sive in
the Water, of Water; Remove the Sive out of the Water, and the Water is out of
the Sive; the Sermon ended, our Sives, our Souls, lose all at the Church-door.
Theodotion holds up, (...), ecstasie, or alienation of Mind; urging, That
whereas there may be two ecstasies in respect of one Man, consisting of a Soul
and Body; one by the which we may be drawn above our selves, to the honorable
Orders of Angels, with Elias; another by the which we may he thrown beneath our
selves, with Nabuchodonosor, to the base and disorderly condition of Beasts: we
are fallen out of our selves, into the last. Aquila uses (...), Aquila.
the Spirit of profound sleep, otherwise called a Lethargy. The Chaldee spins
Chald. Paraphr.
it, Spiritum Erroris, the Spirit of Error. The Syriack encountering it in Syrus
Inte.
St. Paul, Romans 11. 8. Spiritum Stupiditatis, the Spirit of Stupidity. The
Hebrew Text Hebr.
Word Tardema, signifies a Sleep that folds us up in the bottom of our selves,
and transports us beyond the use of all our Senses; that we are, in a manner,
beneath what the Fool in Aelian. Montal. lib. de Morb. c. 2. de M^lancholia.
Montaltus did but conceive himself to be, beneath Shell-Fishes; which have the
Powers of Touching, and of Dilatation and Contraction, in their lowest Degree.

Our Help must be, to pray for a Heart, even the Heart mentioned in the prayer
of Solomon, 1 Kings 3. 9. An Understanding Heart, discerning between good and
bad. The Vulgar Latin writes, Interp. vulgat.
Cor docile, an Heart apt to learn. The Hebrew founds it, Cor audiens, a
hearing Text. Heb. Sept: Edit. Sixth.
Heart. And the Septuagint, Sixtinae Editionis, walk up, and set it down, Cor
ad audiendum, a Heart to Hear. Regia, and Complutensis stand by, and sentence
Reg. Complut.
it, (...), Cor Sapiens, a wise Heart. The Chaldee, stamps it Chald. Paraphrast.
Cor intelligens, an Understanding Heart. There waits the English. They all
teach, It is a chief Part of Wisdom, to hear, and to be quick of learning.
Prove. 1. 5. A wise man will hear, and will increase learning. Apoc. 2. 7. He
that has an ear, let him hear: an ear to hear. A wise man will not drink down
his Doubts in Religion, and his Scruples of Conscience, as men commonly do.
But, as there is Idea, or Forma Idealis in Mente Artificis; an Ideal Form in
the Mind of the Workman: So a wise Man will receive an Ideal Impression, in the
diligent hearing of a godly Sermon; after the which he will work; and by the
which, he will increase learning. And whereas Intus existens prohibet alienum;
And, if the Pupil, or Daughter of the Ey, as the Hebrews call it, were colored
with any color; it could not see the colored Object: The Ear wide open, and
the Heart emptyed of our selves: spunge-like, imbibe and suck into themselves
the perfect Law of God.

The Earth, which we love so much, in respect of the Heavens, is but a Point;
And if the Body of this Earth, should take the Place and Splendor of a Star,
it would scarce appear to Men, abiding in the same distance from Heaven in
which they now are. Hear from above, O ye Heavens, and look up, O Earth, and
observe the difference betwixt a Shepherd of unreasonable Sheep, and a
Shepherd of Sheep being reasonable. The first, whose employment stands in the
Cure of the Diseases infesting his Sheep, which Diseases are natural, and which
Sheep are unreasonable; may cure them, whether the Sheep will or no: But the
last, because his Work lies in the Cure of Diseases, which are voluntary, his
Sheep being reasonable; can never cure the Sheep, except the Sheep will be
cured. And therefore, his Task is much more difficult. Answerably to this; A
Secular Judge or Magistrate, whose Business is, to regulate the outward Actions
of Men, may compel a man, will he, nill he, to new-mold his outward Manners:
But a Spiritual Pastor, whose Work is chiefly, and for the greatest part,
inward, and in the very Heart, a Substance not diaphanons, or transparent;
cannot mold a Man, in regard of his Heart and Affections, into the being of a
Christian; except the Man himself will, by the virtue of infused Grace, dare
manus; praebere collum, submit and yield to him as God's Instrument.

I pray God for Jesus Christ his sake, who was made flesh, and dwelt among us;
who lived and dyed for us; who for us, and our happy Resurrection and
Ascension, rose again, and ascended; that, after all is done, we do not dye
that old Death amongst the Jews; wherein the Malefactor was first half-buried
in Moses Kotsensis in Sanhedrim.
Dung, and then strangled. Death finds us half-buried in the Dung of this
World, and taking us by the throat, stops our breath, and strangles us.

Beloved, I have prayed: Do ye likewise help toward the great work of your
Salvation. Coloss. 3. 12. Put on therefore (as the Elect of God, Holy and
Beloved, (...), beloved with the love of Dilection) Bowels of mercies. Be
merciful to your selves: Let your Bowels be moved with Pity toward your
selves, your distressed selves. Stretch the Orifice of your Hearts open toward
Heaven. Pray God to render them of a porous Substance, in respect of Godliness
Blow and stir up the Good in you: Cum omnes virtutes current ad bravium, sola
perseverantia coronatur, says Petrus Petr. Bles. ep. 22.
Blesensis: All virtues run the Race; but Perseverance only is crowned with the
Crown of Victory.

I know not what to say more, or how to help you. Did the Witch cleave to you,
or the Devil actually possess you; Some strange Disease assault you beyond the
Physician; some Lameness, forsaken by the Surgeon, cripple you: I might
produce, not a Simon Magus with his Characters, or an Apollouius, qui ex eadem
Officina Nequitiae prodiit, and whom Porphyrie compares with Porph. contra
Christian.
Christ for his Miracles; (the Devil raising up such in the Primitive Age, that
he might obscure the Miracles of Christ) but a poor Charactered Man, to do
something for you in the Name of Christ, which is not secundum Legem
Ordinariam, according to God's ordinary Course. In the curing of your Souls, I
have done what I am able. I look upon you with the Eyes of Compassion: and my
Heart is greatly moved within me. In lieu of all my pains, shed one tear for
your Sins. When Human Helps faulter, we look up to Heaven. Jesus help you. O, I
hear the Angels, those rejoicing Spirits in the conversion of a Sinner, sing
from Heaven, (O sing aloud) Amen: Halelujah, Praise ye Iah or Jehovah: or, as
Theodotion expounds it, (...); or, as Justin Martyr, (...), Theodot. in vet.
Test S. Justin in quaest. Orthodox.
Praise ye, and carefully sing Hymns to him, whose Name is, Apoc. 1. 4. (...),
who is, and who was, and who is to come; or, who is now coming. Amen. For
which the Septuagint, (...), be it so; Sept. Vide* S. Hieron. ep. 136 ad
Marcel. and in fine Comment. ad Galat.
Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, (...) let it be truly and faithfully done
by Him that is most faithful and true, Amen, Amen.

Soli Deo, Dei Honor et Gloria.
LVC. 1. 49. Quia fecit mihi magna qui potens est.
Textus Graecus (...), magnalia;
Syrus Interpres, magnifica;
Titus Bostrensis, admirabilia.
FLOREAT ANGLIA:
Imo, supra ipsam floreat a florendo dictam Florentiam;
Eiusque Res publicae, privataeque
Vti Flores in Floridis florentissime floreant.

POSTSCRIPT.
IF any Man be grieved at ought I have here written, and cannot subdue his
Grief from festering into a Quarrel: I desire that his Answer may be returned
in Latin. First, Because I will not enter the Lists with any Adversary, but a
Scholar. And Secondly, Because I will not be Sea-bounded, and judged concerning
my future Discourse, by an Island. If the Adversary be obstinate, let him know,
that my Pen shall not spend Ink hereafter, but in the Latin Language. And I
promise my Reader, That I will not only endeavor to satisfy him in the
present Matter; but also dress the Matter in warm and fit Language without
varnish, and replenish my Treatise with store of hard Scriptures in their
fundamental and choicest Interpretations, and with other pleasant variety of
honest and accepted Learning.

By Me Richard Carpenter;
Not a Papist, but a PROTESTANT: As Protesting against all Corruptions, both in
Faith and Manners, Whatsoever, and wheresoever: But not, as protesting against
ought that is excellent, and (...) Holy in point of Doctrine or Government, in
any Christian Church, Wheresoever, or Whatsoever. Who likewise utterly
disclame, That I am, or ever was, or will be, ( Aspirante Deo) A Jesuit, From
Rome, or from Geneva.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
(Quae in ipso Lectionis transcursu sese inferebant) graviora, minimeque
ferenda, Sic referenda sunt ad limam.

Page 11. Lin. 17. Atheistical, p. 15. l. 20. Law and Lore, p. 25. l. 10. to be
(...), p. 28. l. 9. also always adhere, p. 29. l. 8. in marg. Paragr. Sive
autem. p. 49. l. 18. Incunabulis, p. 69. l. 20. intruding. p. 76. l. 7. in
marg. Sophoclis, p. 78. l. 23. right-founding, p. 80. l. 2. scrue up, p. 81 l.
2. operative, p. 84. l. 2. Compart, p. 87. l. 21. Dux viae, p. 89. l. 3.
Tigurina, p. 97. l. 12. Missir. p. 97. l. 26. Which attend. p. 105. l. 6.
(...), p. 109. l. 26. Hominibus, p. 126. l. 27. Bereschith, p. 133. l. 5. in
marg. Paragr. Ad primum, p. 142. l. 9. (...). p. 155. l. 9. Apollonia, p. 155.
l. 18. impurum, p. 161. l. ult. (...), p. 163. l. 9. Christ, p. 177. l. 22.
obsoletum, p. 179. l. 15. timore mendacii quo non decebat timere, p. 179. l.
15. (...), p. 190: l. 22. (...), p. 195. l. 29. (...), p. 204. l. 24. a
Saint-mouth'd, p. 208. l. 10. humble, p. 210. l. 18. to leap, p. 212. l. 30. O
Christian, p. 213. l. 2: eniti, p. 217. l. 31. Houses, p. 222. l. 26. If ye.


