THE COPY OF THREE PETITIONS As they were presented to the Honorable, the
Commons assembled in Parliament, September 14th. and 15th. 1647.

1. From the County of Bucks, against two great oppressions, viz. Tithes, and
Free Quarter. 2. From the County of Oxford. 3. From Oxford, Bucks, and
Hertford, for purging the great Fountain of Justice: that at last, Justice
might run down the Land like a stream, to wash away the pollutions thereof.
LONDON, Printed for William Larnar, and are to be sold at the Black-Moor, near
Bishops-gate. MDCXLVII.

TO THE HONORABLE THE Commons assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition, of the Inhabitants of the County of Bucks.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners have for their good affection to the Parliament and
public interest of the Kingdom, gone through many difficulties, and been
exposed to much danger in their persons, besides their great impoverishing and
weakening of their estates; and now that God has subdued the common enemy, and
given hopes of a well-grounded peace, they hope to have reaped the fruits
thereof, by the removal of all common grievances, and the enjoying a freedom
in their estates, in some measure answerable to the price they have paid, and
the many hazards they have undergone, but still find their expectations almost
frustrate, by reason of the heavy burden that lies upon your Petitioners, by
the continuing of Tithes upon them, going under the notion of the tenth of
their increase, but is really (the Rents, Charges and Losses considered) the
third part of the yearly value of their Lands in tillage: and your Petitioners
condition is made now more grievous, by reason of this unequal payment is
strengthened by several Ordinances lately passed for that purpose, which causes
the greatest part of the whole estates of your Petitioners to be in the
disposing of the Justices of Peace, (many of which are interessed in Tithes, if
refusal be made of that which amounts to a third part of their estates, to the
great discouragement of your Petitioners and others that are Owners or Farmers
of Land in Tillage, and wherein much of the welfare of this Kingdom does
consist.)

Your Petitioners likewise still undergo a heavy burden, by reason of the
Free Quarter taken amongst us, by the Army, and if not timely prevented (by the
constant paying of the Army) will be the ruin of them, and their Families, and
bring a far greater burden and charge upon this Kingdom, then the constant
payment of the Army would amount unto.

Your Petitioners therefore most humbly pray this Honorable House to take
their sad condition into your pious consideration, and to make provision for
removal of the payment of Tithes, leaving it to your wisdoms to consider of a
more equal and peaceable way for the maintaining of the Ministry, and
rendering a reasonable satisfaction for the impropriations: And that you will be
pleased to ease your Petitioners, and all other that are sufferers by Free
quarter, by the constant payment of the Army, either by your further Authority
to compel the Collection of money in Arrear, or by some other Taxes to be
imposed, that the soldiers having a constant supply of money, may make their
own provisions in such places as are most commodiously fitted for their
entertainment.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray.
TO THE HONORABLE THE HOUSE of Commons in Parliament assembled.
The Petition of the Inhabitants of Oxfordshire,
Shows,
THat amidst the various dispensations of Divine providence, in the diversity
of blessings conferred upon mankind, nothing renders more delight and content to
man's natural affections, then liberty, and peculiarly in his external
enjoyments, the want of which (as experience tells us) renders an irksom, yea
an intolerable condition, effecting exclaimation and complaint of oppression
with sighs, sobbs and groans for Liberty.

Now among the rest of those sore pressing grievances under which this Nation
has been long subjected, there is one of heavy weight, endeavoring
irrecoverably to sink and drown our whole estates and livelyhoods in that
common and vast ocean of oppression and cruelty, (viz.) The usurped and
constrained maintenance of our Lordly-rich-Ministers, and Annual revennues of
incroaching impropriators, by that intolerable tax and oppression of taking
away part of our Stock and years hard labor, under the notion of Tithes,
Offerings, Oblations, Obventions, Church-dues, or Tenths of increase, whereby
there is taken from us the tenth of our daily earnings, by the sweat of our
brows, the tenth of our substance and stock, in the tenth of our crop, wherein
our stock and years labor ly, yea though our crop answer not our charge by
many degrees, and the year never so unseasonable, yet is the tenth thereof
taken from us, without any consideration of our losses or deduction of our
charge, so that at the length, the rich Parson being a man of many hundreds,
yea sometimes of thousands per Annum, possesses himself of our whole stock and
substance, whereby we are forced to lay down our Trade of Tillage, and put
either to shifts, or day labor, for our selves and families.

And there is that makes heavier this our intolerable oppression and burden,
rendering it more burdensome then before, (viz.) A late additionall Ordinance,
commanding the continuance of this direful oppression, passed by those that
we have thus long looked and waited upon, and whom we have assisted with our
persons and purses, endangering our lives, and leaving our livelihoods,
expecting future ease and reformation: yet we still find men Judges in their
own causes, whereby we are sensible of much oppression, injustice, and
Arbitrarynesse: men exacting, and illegally recovering what we find directly
contrary to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the power of Godliness, which though
however required, or recovered by Magistrates, we conceive our selves and
others, in Conscience and Covenant, bound to extirpate as Popish, and in nature
as oppressive.

And many of us being men of mean estates, in Tillage, and almost swallowed up
in our estates, by Taxations, Plundering, Quartering of Soldiers in the time
of war, and now also at Free quarter: yet if we but sue for, and seek after
Liberty in our own (which in nature we are bound to do, it being our proper
and natural right,) and to refuse bondage and thraldom, which we cannot but
do, our conditions are thereby many degrees worse, and our damages greater
then before.

Even at this time, many of us ly under unnumerable Judgments, and the time of
Execution almost expired, which unless the Ordinances commanding the payment
of Tithes, be speedily repealed, will be executed.

It is therefore our humble and earnest desire that it would please your
Honors to take the premises into your serious and speedy consideration, and
hasten the application of such remedy as may tend to Gods glory, and the good
of your Petitioners, wherewith you are entrusted, by the speedy stoppage of
such Judgments as are issued out against your Petitioners, which if not
granted, will suddenly be executed, contrary to Christian and Subjects liberty,
in the property of their good.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
TO THE HONORABLE THE HOUSE Of Commons, assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of diverse Well affected Inhabitants of the Counties of
Oxon, Bucks, and Hertford.
Shows,
THat this poor bleeding Nation has had its expectations of Peace and Freedom,
long frustrated, and its burdens and miseries increast, by the presence, power,
and prevalency of some desperate enemies to public good in the supreme
Council; And that lately Divine Providence has made a clear discovery of many
of them, by their sitting at Westminster usurping a Parliamentary power, when
the free Parliament was forced away and suspended, and endeavoring by
pretended Votes; Orders, and Ordinances, to have raised a new bloody war, and
brought the King forthwith to London upon his own terms, to the danger of
ruining all well affected people; Hereby giving a fair opportunity to this
Honorable House to have expelled those Incendiaries.

But to the grief of our hearts we understand, that this happy opportunity of
removing those Obstructors of all that really tends to the peoples good, has
hitherto been neglected, and notwithstanding the urgent importunity of the Army
for their removal, many of them sit and Vote in this Honorable House, and
others that are now absent, have liberty to return, when they shall see their
advantage to prosecute their wicked intentions.

And we cannot but conceive that from the prevalency of those ill-affected
persons in the House, have proceeded those dangerous delays (since the free
Parliament was brought to Westminster in safety by the Army) in clearing and
securing the Peoples rights and freedoms, and that grievous and intollerably
burdensome Ordinance for enforcing all to pay treble damages that shall refuse
(though for Conscience sake) to pay tithes. Considering therefore that our sad
experience witness, that none of the just desires of the people can be expected
to be answered [seeing we cannot prevail after some years solicitation, that
the burden of paying Tithes should be removed from our Consciences] nor a happy
Peace sealed, in case these Incendiaries be permitted to Vote in this
Honorable House.

We are enforced to entreat you, that the way that God has in goodness opened
to free the Nation from the power of its Enemies in this great Council, may be
forthwith considered, and that it be immediately declared, that all and every
of those persons that lately sat at Westminster, when the Paliament was by
force suspended, shall incur some great penalty, in case any of them shall
presume, after this day, to sit in this Honorable House, before they shall
have given satisfaction concerning their aforesaid sitting in the pretended
Parliament, and shall have given sufficient evidence that they did neither
procure, nor give their consent to any of those pretended Votes, Orders, or
Ordinances, tending to the levying of a new war; or for the Kings forthwith
coming to London.

That thus the obstructers of Justice being speedily removed, Justice may be
executed on offenders, and without any further protraction of time, the loud
cries of the oppressed Prisoners may have free and impartial audience to their
effectual redemption, the intolerable burdens of the distressed Commons on
their Conscience and Estates might be removed; a constant certain pay for the
Army in an equal way provided; and the peace and freedom of the Nation firmly
established.

And your Petitioners shall truly pray, etc.
FINIS.

