THE ANABAPTIST Washed and washed, and shrunk in the washing: Or, a Scholasticall
Discussion of the much-agitated Controversy concerning Infant Baptism;
Occasioned by a Public Disputation, Before a great Assembly of Ministers, and
other Persons of worth, in the Church of Newport-Pagnell, Betwixt Mr Gibs
Minister there, and the Author, Rich. Carpenter, Independent. Wherein also, the
Author occasionally, declares his Judgment concerning the Papists; And
afterward, concerning Episcopacy.

Phil. 1. 8. God is my Record, how greatly I long after you all in the bowels
of Jesus Christ.

St Cypr. Sermon. de Lapsis. Dolco, Fratres, vobiscum: cum singulis copulo Pectus
meum: cum jacent^bas jacere me credo; cum prostratis Fratribus and me
prostravit Affectus.

Brethren, I grieve with you: with every one of you I closely join and couple
my Breast: with such as lie on the Ground as if they were dead, I fancy my
self to lie on the Ground as if I were dead; and with my prostrated Brethren,
my Affection has prostrated me.

London, Printed by William Hunt.

The Author's Admonition to the Reader, concerning the Picture.
Reader,
I Know not any Man, but agreeably to Rule, and by his Fruits, I know not, that
See Mat. 7. 16.
all Jesuits are Lion-mouth'd in the Picture-Sense: Nor that all Presbyterians
are tongued like the Dragon: Nor that all Anabaptists vomit fire.

I rather believe, that the Lion-mouth'd Jesuit is the Pragmatical Jesuit,
descended from the roaring Lion in St Peter; who gives devouring and murderous
Counsill, and seekingly 1 Pet. 5. 8.
contrives the temporal destruction of his Opposers: And that many
Presbyterians have peaceable Natures, and are not infernall-Dragon-tongu'd; but
are inconsiderately engaged by the simple and unballanced Apprehension of
Moral Circumspection in such Persons: Yea, that many Anabaptists are
temperate-hearted and mouthed, and have not the Tongue that sets on fire the
course of Nature, and is set on fire of Hell: but have James 3. 6.
been wrought into this Adhesion by the violent and unequal Proposition of
irregular Doctrines.

Iudicium ad Sapientiam pertinet, says Aquinas: Right Judgment is an Act of
Wisdom, D. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. art. 6. ad. 3. Mat. 7. 1.
Wherefore: Judge not; that is, not rashly, but wisely, and according to pious
Knowledge; that ye be not judged.

The End of the fifth Objection in the Advertisement, reflects more Light upon
this Place.

Obrugiens Ore Leonino Uulpinus Jesuita.

Presbyter Serpentino Spiculo purus putus obgan^iens.

Non te deseram, ne^^ derelinquam: Heb. 13. 5. Et nunc Exaltauit Caput meum
Super Inimi cos meos: Psalm. 26. 6.

Sulphureis ab Ignibus Obmur murans faculentus Anabaptista^

Per Vomitum Scurra -- faculentus obstrepens.



To all the zealous Defenders and Abettors of Infant Baptism, Grace and Peace.
Dear Christians,
I Am pressed once more to appear in English, against thought, and wide of
desire. Because the Persons, generally concerned in this Discourse,
notwithstanding their high looks, and more than manly words, cannot look so
high as Latin, which they call the Language of the Beast.

The leading occasion in the turning Point, was; I was called inwardly, and
outwardly recalled, agreeably to the mixture and even Composition of my first
and fundamental Calling; to preach in the Church of Newport-Pagnell, before a
very numerous Auditory, congealed and consisting of the more solid and sapid
part of Town and Country: And after the Sermon, baptized a Child, orderly
presented in the Church. In the sober performance of which Mysterious Work, the
Minister, unsettled in place, and (it seems) in person, professing for
Anabaptism, and suddenly rapted with a vertiginous Motion, interrupted me. And
presently summoned me by a Challenge, in the face of the Congregation, to give
him and his Brethren of the Separation a meeting there in public; after his
twelve-days preparation, being the long Parasceve to his intended and presumed
victory.

The sequel I beseech you to enquire from others. Only, pray, take this from
me, pledge-wise. Delrio in his Magical Disquisitions, Delrio li. 2. Disquis.
Magic. quaest. 25.
teaches, that sometimes by the secret, energeticall and unseen operation of
the Devil, and again sometimes by the seen, effectual and apparent violence
of a Disease, men are ecstatically rapted, and alienated from their Senses. Who
likewise refutes, first, Cardanus affirming that men may be rapted and set out
of themselves by a natural Commotion of Spirit, and at their pleasure: And
afterward Bodinus asserting that in a Rapture the Soul actually deserts the
Body for a time. And indeed, the Soul of this Minister I beheld in the
wildfire of his eyes: wherein also, I saw some strange and occult Thing beyond
a Disease, beyond Man, and beyond God's way of working.

This heady Enthusiast, being now in his own Head, the Head of the Universe,
was insooth sometimes a Member of the University, (for the which he did
evaporate his grief, and cry out in the pangs of his inward remorsement before
the Country) and had been somewhat vexatious to the Protestant Ministers in the
Circle about him. His Friends and Allies fixed all their eyes, with all their
lies, upon him as the Carry Castle, or Behemoth of the Country: (the Sea Job
40. Vide Bus^amantinum de Animantibus sacra Scripturae, lib. 4. cap. 12. de
Behemoth.
word is Hebrew-born, and fetched from Behema, a Beast.) I was born there; and
born thither by a charitable desire of consociating and consorting with my
Friends. He gave the first onset in a mad mood, being a Figure of his
after-carriage; and would needs be Syllogizing in Mood and Figure. The marrowy
part of our Disputation, with the bones; and of Sermons preached afterward by
him and by me, I here humbly, dear Christians, offer to you.

It agrees on each side with the Anabaptists: They have Osee 8. 7. Sept.
sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlewind: or, as the Septuagint:
They have sown (...), seeds corrupted with the wind, and having no marrow,
which the Grecians call (...), says Saint Hierom: And therefore, having S.
Hierom. in Os. 8. 7.
sown empty and vain seeds, they shall accordingly reap vain and empty
Fruit; and shall be long-whirled about, as in a whirlewind, with every wind of
Doctrine, blowing dust into their Eyes, and striking them, as the Angels did
the Sodomites, Sept. in Genesis 19. 11.
(...), that they shall see all things but the Door.

Yet, here is not all; For, The Lord answered Job out of the Job 38. 1.
Whirlewind. And St Gregory S Greg. ib.
moralizes the Reason: Quia flagellato loquebatur; because he spoke to one that
was actually under the lash. And, I hope that God, enthroned upon a whirlewind,
will change the Subject, and raise his Instruments and Servants to answer these
wild-conceited people, and lash them into some right use of their understanding
and senses again.

I am a true Protestant in my own sense, and perhaps in yours. And I utterly
deny, and heartily renounce, that I am a Papist in the Sense of the common
Sectaries and others of the speckled Rout and miscellaneous Rabble, who call me
so. I never was an Anabaptist, or had a Congregation heaving that way, God
Almighty knows, and the world can testify: though now after our Disputation,
and the success of it, the adverse Party has most unworthily started this
insipid Scandal of me, and as impudently defends it.

These are they who leave altogether Viam Regiam, the Princely way of Truth,
and turn aside to lies: Or, according Psalm. 40. 4. li* dit. vulgat
to the Vulgar, insanias falsas, false madnesses: Or, in the words of the
Septuagint, (...), lying Sept.
madnesses: Or, acceptably to the Hebrew stamp, impressed by St Hierom, Pompam
mendacii, the S. Hier. in Psalm. 40.
worldly Pomp of a lie. These, although they should be in Ecclesia, in the
Church, yet could not be de Ecclesia, of the Church; neither could they
pertinere ad Regnum, pertain to the Kingdom. For without are dogs, (persons
Apoc. 22. 15
barking, and biting, and tearing as they go,) and sorcerers, and whoremongers,
and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

The Doctrine of Aquinas, D. Tho. 1. 2. q. 18. art. 2. and Interpretes ibi.
and of the Schools, is true: Humane Acts do take their Species or kinds, from
their Objects: and if the Object be good, the Act is good: If the Object evil,
the Act evil; in such a kind of Virtue or Vice wherein the Object is placed,
or to which it is drawn or perverted. Because the Object being loved and
efficaciously desired by the will, is always in the matter pulled home to it,
and so refunds its goodness or badnesse upon it. Therefore the will which
loves and makes a lie, and by loving it is habituated to it; is habitually
evil in that kind.

Standing upon this firm Ground, St Austine preaches: S. Aug. ep. 52. ad
Macidonium.
Non faciunt bonos vel malos mores nisi boni vel mali amores: Good or evil
Love makes good or evil Manners. And again, Talis est Idem Tract. 2. in ep.
3. Joann^.
quisque, qualis est ejus dilectio: Every one is such as his Love is: Love
being the first, and the Queen of Passions in the Soul, and the rest all
servants, and of the Train. In truth, and sans lying: It appears to me, that
if Archimides were alive, he would sooner undertake to number the sands of the
Sea than to sum up the Lies of such lovers and makers of Lies.

I have been rather a constant and sedulous Opposer of Anabaptists, being
actuated thereunto S. Bern. lib. 4. de Confid. ad Eugen. Pontis. Similia habet*
Sermon. 34, in Cantica.
by the grievous complaint of St Bernard: Cadit Asina, and est qui sublevet
eam: perit Anima, and nemo est qui reputet; A she-Asse falls, and the Owner
presently runs and lifts her up: A Soul perishes, and there is no man who
considers as he ought to consider, how precious a Jewel a Soul is, or, what
is lost when a soul is lost.

As first, in their first holding up their head, I opposed them and all their
Tub-men, by public Disputation at Wapping: Where I extorted from the Minister
of the place, by the rack of Argument, that his Congregation was the Synagogue
of Satan; who thereupon was defeated, and fairly driven to the quick use of
his Heels, by his own Congregation: and ran, as if Satan himself had been at
his heels. And afterward at Doctor Chamberlain's house, and in the fair and
amiable presence of his Fairy-Congregation, where I devoutly heard from him a
long Discourse, comparing (while his young she-Disciples encircled him in
clusters) natuturall generation with Regeneration; and being, in proper
Language, a learned Lecture of Man-Midwifry: And where afterward, going up to
the mouth of him, I tore from his lips, that we might baptize Children, did
they not show resistance: and the resistance wherewith he defended himself in
the push of Argument, is: Children usually cry, in the sprinkling of the water
on their Faces. Whereupon I replied, that, by the same Reason, Children
newly-borne, and feeling the cold Air, and crying, should not, after such
resistance, be continued and entertained amongst us, but speedily returned into
their mothers wombs. And there I left him, ready to do his Office, but not able
to say a word for himself, or make any resistance. So that the pious
Observation which holy St Austin used S. Aug. lib. 1. de Peccator. meriti^ and
remissione, cap. 23.
for the magnifying of the Mercy of God in his Ordinance, and for the
commendation of the charity of Christians in administering it: Flendo and
vagiendo cum in eis Mysterium celebratur, ipsis mysticis vocibus obstrepunt:
Infants by crying when the Mystery is rightly celebrated upon them, noise it
against the mystical words: Our womans-Doctor seriously abused and turned
against God's blessed Ordinance, and the charitable and righteous
administration of it. What Christian emolument came of the good which I wrought
at the Spittle, by tormenting the Anabaptists there, (those petty Chapmen and
Pedlers of Divinity,) and by stopping their Pestiducts; let the judicious
Hearers (for, such there were of my Companions in every meeting,) judge.

And now, with what strange and powerful water, these men have washed their
Foreheads, or, how they have hardened them, I know not; as being altogether
ignorant of this their mysterious Trade. Yet, I believe Hieronymus Hier.
Cardan. lib. 6. de Subtilit.
Cardanus, in his report, that he saw a man at Millan, (being an Italian City,)
who washed his face and hands with scalding lead, as carelessly and as
confidently, as a man washes his hands and face with ordinary water: but he
had first washed them with an extraordinary, new-sound and hardening water of
his own.

I forget. As the Physician describes the Disease, so he prescribes the Cure.
These must be cured in their Hearts, and Roots: In their Actions, and Lives.
Men have learned the way of changing bitter Almond Trees into sweet-ones: which
is, they pierce them near to the Root, and let forth the bitter juice: So
these bitter-hearted men and women, should let their perverse and sower
Inclinations forth, at the Root of their Hearts; and become of bitter, better.
And the Physicians, that they may draw the vapors from the Head of the
Patient, apply Pigeons to the soles of his Feet. If these black Saints would
walk innocently, and with Pigeons at their feet, they should not be troubled
with such gross and idle fumes in their Brains.

If they will not: The Palm Tree, being, in some sense, the Phoenix of Plants,
will grow strait and tall, and show fresh, and have sweet branches; howsoever
at the Foot thereof outwardly, there may be Troops of unpleasant Frogs, of
poisonous Toads, and of ugly Serpents, crying, and croaking, and hissing, and
making a mixed noise that brings horror to the Hearer. Let them set before
their eyes, a late woeful and wonderful Transaction in the same Country:
containing a most remarkable Act of Gods Justice, in the stripping of one, and
laying him naked in open view, who had attempted, many a time, to commit a Rape
upon my good Name: Being such a notable Trophy of divine Advertisement, that, I
believe, it will be transmitted by Tongue and by Pen, from Age to Age, until
the World be so aged, that the Pen shall no more assist the Tongue, or the
Tongue need the Pen's assistance: and that in the reading and hearing thereof,
the most petrified hearts in the last Age of the World, shall be dissolved.

I desire in the fear of God, that they would abject, abdicate, and
abrenunciate these their unjust and abject Criminations, being the vulgar
supports of a weak and tottering Cause: and object what arises e Re nata,
from the Thing in question, and ex visceribus Rei, from the bowels of the
matter in hand; according to the just latitude and Economy of
Conscience-Freedome; if such a thing there be.

I trample not upon any man's weakness. I have long ago learned from St
Austine: Nullum S. Aug. lib. 50. Homil. Hom. 23. Tom. 10.
est peccatum quod fecit homo, quod non possit facere alter homo, si desit
Rector a quo factus est Homo. No Sin has been committed by any Man, which
another man in being, may not commit, if the Governor be wanting, of whom man
had his first Commission to be.

May their sins be destroyed in them, and not they destroyed in their sins:
compliably with the tropologicall Exposition of Gaudentius: Adhuc triduum, and
S Gaudent Tract. 3. ad Neophytos.
Ninive evertetur: Verum praedixit, nam eversa est Iniquitas ejus, quia
poenituit. Yet three days, Jon. 3. 4.
and Niniveh shall be overthrown: He foretold the Truth: for, the Iniquity of
Niniveh was overthrown, because she repented. (Note: The Septuagint, followed
Sept. Orig. S. Chrysostom Arab. Alex. Codex Heb. Paraphr. Chlad. Aq. Sym. Theod.
by Origin, St Crysostome, and other Grecians, with the Alexandrian Arabic,
propose yet three days: But the Hebrew, and Chaldee, with Aquila Symmachus,
and Theodotion, maintain, yet forty days.)

My only Work is; if my Heart were seen by all Men, as God sees it, in the
Original: whatsoever their magnifying and multiplying Glasses tell them that
have devota ig ni Capita, Heads devoted to Fire and Sedition; and who
themselves, like Badgers, run best in crooked paths. I have lived beyond the
Seas, and have seen much of Heaven in the Church of Rome; and therefore, I have
reason from Heaven, to be more prying into the matters of my Faith than every
homespun man; and to be of a more delicate touch, in the presentation of new
Matters. And although I shall never open my self so wide, as to swallow many
things done and accepted in that Church; which this Discourse will set in view
and upon a Hill: yet censure me gently, dear Christians, if these English
Overtures of Heresy, every day, turning over a new leaf, have sometimes
brought my Heart into a kind of Earthquake, and rendered me wishing that I
could see the Church of Rome in her mutatis mutandis, best holiday Garments.
The very same I now wish: though verily, I am now very much angry with some
Papists, upon particular, and those reasonable Considerations.

Therefore: As one foot of the Compass stands fast in the Point, or Center,
whilst the other walks the round; so howsoever the World moves, or my Body is
moved, my Soul shall now stand fast, and direct all that I have seen in the
World, to the making of a Circle, the most perfect of all Figures, as being
without ruptures, without angles, without end.

Alexander ab Alexandr^ has Alex. ab Alex. lib. 2. cap. 19.
Chronicled a Generation of people, that were borne having the print of an
Anchor on one thigh; yet gives them not the credit of sticking to an Anchor:
But I now feel the print of Gods Anchor-Signet upon my Soul, by the which he
has signed me for a staid Man. And here will I stay: desiring you to read
attentively, patiently, and with understanding.

This in the Farewell. After the Disputation at Newport, an illiterate,
saplesse, and obscure Townsman of Alubury, did subobscurely challenge me to
buffet with him in the like Disputation. And I presently formed the Latin
Epistle which follows, being obscure to him, as perpendicular to my purpose,
that I might fall sharply upon, reject for contemptible, and confound his blind
presumption of opposing Scholars. For, the abilities of Disputants must always
be congenerous with the Matter disputed, and the various annexes of it. And
therefore I will never answer as a Disputant, by word or by writing, if the
Adversary be Sterquilinii Filius, a Son of the Dunghill, and not able to fill
the stomach of the learned Reader and Hearer.

(...).
Your Christian Brother, Rich. Carpenter.

I. B.
QUae nune denuo te prorsus agunt, Intemperiae dicam an exagitant Furiae? Number
tantos, miselle Pusio, velut afflatos ex nupero turbine, sumpfisti tibi
Spiritus, ut me putidis tuis illis, ac penitus ambesis, and quasi vili Murium
opera corrosis, ullatenus circumscribi posse putes Cancellis? Absit a viro vero
largaeque Mentis, hujusmodi falsa pariter and curta Cogitatio.

Profecto, mihi vel Jure debetur literario, ut libere liceat, cum libuerit,
expatiari per Campos illos nostros Elysios; nempe Latinos, Graecos, Hebraicos:
Quinimo per Labyrinthos apprime nobiles, Artium secretarum sacrarumque, ducente
filo, divagart. Idquo ipsa postulat, acclamante Rerum Natura, si penitius
introspicias, Causae Theologicae divina sane Majestas; imo quidem, and Gravit
as plane mystica. An non confestim, Rebus eo redactis and calentibus,
cancellatas dabunt manus, and nuda terga Lictoribus offerent, isti singulares
trium Literarum Homunciones?

Agedum: Produc in Solemn pulveremque (...) illum; nimirum quem veneranda
nobilitavit Academia, sacer (ut aiunt) ordo consecravit. Et cura diligenter, ut
is, quem scilicet in certamen posco, rebus transactis, evadat alter (iudulgeas
(...) referenti vocabulo veniam) Bar-Ghibbhor.

Quod ad te attinet, Editionis imperfectae Homunculum, and vere (...)
Philosophicum, (quamvis and Corio tectum Jordane before intincto,) me jam
denique ad Congressus Logicos acriter provocantem; sic animum induxi: Coelestis
Aquila non exuit alas, quibus evecta, cum fulminibus colluctatur; non inter
vermes impuros, and ipsa turpis ore sordido, repit.

Quinetiam lino protinus ligandus est* and ipse suis omnino lacerandus virgis,
qui Rationum gravioribus hisce Momentis a me stantibus, licet alienis a re tua
and aliorsum vellicantibus, ultro non acquiescat, submitt atque lubenter vela.

I nunc, ut consulas Interpretes ex Ministrorum Collegio, quod pro nihilo habes.

R. C.

The Anabaptist washed and washed, and shrunk in the washing.
CHAPTER I.
ANd when we have done all, we must all dye. Yea: Howsoever we are parted in
the lines of Life, we must all meet in the Point of Death, as in a full point.
Death! What is Death? Heathenish Plato describes it with a Divine Plato in
Phaedone.
and Christian Character. (...): Death is the dissolution of the Soul and
Body. And the Latin Orator looks with a full eye upon the Platonists, when he
says: Sunt qui Discessum Cicero Tusc. Qu^st lib. 1.
Animae a Corpore putent esse Mortem: There are who think Death to be a
Departure of the Soul from the Body.

What these thought, and was to them a matter of Opinion, which is Assensus
pendulus, a wavering assent: is to us Materia Fidei, a Matter of Faith, which
is Assensus immobilis, a firm and immovable Assent to the revealed Truth of
God.

Saint Paul was the Instrument of Revelation, and has settled it: first, as
having a desire to depart: dissolvi, Philip. 1. 23 Interp. vulgat. Tixt. Graec.
2 Timothy 4. 6. Edit. vulg. Cod^^ Gr^^c
says the Vulgar: and the Original, (...), to be dissolved: (when he was in
bivio, in a way betwixt two ways:) And secondly; as prophesying, the time of
my departure is at hand. The Vulgar: Tempus resolutionis meae. It is OF (...),
in the Original: the time or opportunity of my Resolution or Dissolution,

The Philosophical Reason is: (this being also a Philosophical Truth, and
there being Philosophical Reasons of all Divine Truths which are not
mysterious, miraculous, or merely depending upon Divine Pleasure.) As Life
results from the Union; So, by the Logical Rule of Contraries, (it is the same
case with proportion in privatives,) Death, from the Disunion of Soul and
Body. The Rule is: Contrariorum contraria est Ratio, The Course of Contraries
is contrary.

And Death, as the Lion, wounds Fra^zius in Leone.
not a part, or member only, but divides and rends in pieces the whole
substance; and subverts the Being caused by the Composition of essential Parts.

CHAP. II.
ANd when we have done all, we must all dye: must be dissolved. And then,
whither the Parts dissolved* our Souls and Bodies (ours in particular) shall
go, (the Devil sitting See Jer. 3. 2 S. Hieron. lb.
for us by the way, as the Arabian in the wilderness, for the Passengers; or,
according to St Hierom, ut Latro, as a Robber; the Arabians being mighty
Robbers and Hunters of Men in the Wilderness;) and how they shall fare,
resolve it fairly and positively he that can.

Two States are assigned to every Soul: The State of Conjunction with the
Body, and the State of Separation from it. Of the first, we have long trial:
Of the second, we never yet had any. No living Man or Woman knows
experimentally, what is the departure of a Soul from a Body: or, what
Subsistence, Adherence, Condition, Companions, Relations a Soul has in the
State of Separation.

Now, me thinks, He and She that may, this very night, be turned over, by
Dissolution, to this wonderful, unknown, and unfathomed State of Separation;
should be very careful what they believe, and how they live: Especially, the
Life of Man being a very Bubble. A Bubble puts on the form of an Hemisphere:
And shadowing half the World, as being an Hemisphere; it accordingly consists
of two Elements. It is Air within, which is invisible for its Rarity; and
without, a thin-shapt skin of water: and there is all the Bubble. The Air
deciphers our Soul; and the watery skin, our Body; in this present World. The
skin presently breaks: the Air as presently breaks loose: and there is a
present end of the Bubble: and we are as presently delivered up to another
World.

O Lord, open thou my Lips, and Psa. 51. 15.
my mouth shall show forth thy praise: And whatsoever others believe, or do, or
teach to be done and believed; I will not recede from thy known Truth. Even the
Sea Monsters (or, Lam. 4. 3.
Sea-Calves driven with every Surge of the Sea) draw out the Breast: The
Vulgar; Sed and Lamiae nudaverunt Edit. vulg.
mammam, But even the Witches (or, Fairy-Ladies and ranting Night-Dancers) have
laid the breast forth naked: The Septuagint, (...), Sept. Sym.
the Dragons: Symmachus, (...), the Sirens: they give suck to their young-ones.
But they shall not suckle me.

CHAP. III.
ONce more here let me symphonize with the Spirit of David. I said, says he,
and I say with him; Psalm. 39 1.
I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my Tongue. I will take heed
to my ways, that I speak not, (write not,) prompted by Prejudice, Custom, or
Carnal Affection.

But I may not shut the Book after the reading of this Text, as the good old
Saint in the Lives of the Vitae Patrum. Idem exemplum habetur apud Theodoretum
in Histor. Tripart lib. 8. cap. 1. Et adducitur a M. Marulo l. 4. cap. 6.
Fathers, that having (...) Bible given into his hands, and letting his eye
first fall and settle upon these words, returned the Book shut, and cried, Sat
est quod didici, I have learned enough for the present, I will first* endeavor
to digest this divine Lesson.

Holy Scripture must lie open, and enthroned, when holy matters are in
debating; according to the sober Custom of ancient Councils: The Word of God
being the most authentical High-Place, from whence, in our wants, and at
pleasure, we may look into Heaven, and into the first and Original will of
God: and God having dealt otherwise with us, than Adrian the Emperor Niceph.
Eccl. His^. lib. 3. c. 24.
with the rebellious Jews; who banished them from their own Country, and
commanded that they should not look back* upon it from an high Place.

The Scripture, as the Logicia^s teach de Terminis Co^notativi^* signifies in
recto all that which is material in it, being the things themselves, or the
fair and fragrant Posie of the Truths revealed: and in obliquo signifies that
which is formal in it, being the manner of Proposition, or the Tradition of
these Truths by Writing. Wherefore, although Scripture-Truths be divine Truths,
and made legible; yet if they be not rightly preached, interpreted, proposed,
received, they will not be true to us, and written in our Hearts.

The Divines question, How light could be created by it self, according to the
narration of Scripture: Because there seems then to have been Accidens (cujus
esse est inesse) sine subjecto, An Accident (the radical being whereof is to be
in a Subject) without a Subject: and the narration likewise pretends, as if
Color could otherwise be than in a Thing or Substance colored. But Aquinas
makes it luce lucidius, clearer than D. Tho. part. 1. quaest. 7^* art. 1. ad ^.
the light. Prima die facta est natura lucis in aliquo subjecto: sed quarto die
dicuntur facta Luminaria; non qui^ ^orum substantia sit de novo producta, sed
quia sunt aliquo modo formata quo prius non erant. The nature of Light was made
in some Subject, even upon the first day: but upon the fourth day the
Luminaries or great Lights are said to be made; not because their Substance was
now newly produced, but because they were formed in some manner, in the which
they were not formerly formed. My Application is. The Light of the first day,
in a Spiritual sense, is the Word of God, as coming from God to his Church:
and the great Lights of the fourth day, are the same Word rightly proposed by
the Church, and received into fit and gracious Subjects. More of this
afterward.

CHAP. IV.
TO press nearer. The Mathematical Axiom, Supre^um infimi tangit infimum
supremi, The highest part of the lower thing touches the lowest part of the
higher thing; insinuates a Concatenation of Things, and of Causes. And that
this Concatenation may be securely supported in every link: God the first
cause (though most united in Himself) is in all second Causes, and in all
created things, per Essentiam, per Praesentiam, per Potentiam; by his Essence,
by his Presence, by his Power. With reflection upon which Power, it is revealed
of him; Attingit a fine^que ad finem fortiter, He touches from one end of the
Creatures to the other, strongly.

And he does not uphold or touch his highest and lowest Creatures, as deserting
or over-passing the rest couched betwixt them. For, De extremo ad extremum non
est transitus nisi per media: The ordinary transition (yea, of the Creator
attemperating himself to the Creature) from one extreme to the other, is by
middle things: as the Passage ab Initiativo puncto ad punctum Terminativum,
from the Initiative to the Terminative Point, is by the Line, being the Flux of
the first Point. Therefore, as the blood continually resorts to the Heart in a
Circle, from all parts of the body: So the Conservation or continued Creation
and being of all things is from him, from whom is their first being and
Creation.

Hence we pronounce ex Cathedra, from the Chair in the School of Divinity:
Providentia, vel infima tangit: Divine Providence touches all things, and even
the last, least, and lowest of them. And again, Praedestinatio est pars
nobilissima Providentiae, Predestination is the most noble part of Divine
Providence. And hence, it being a question amongst Schoole-Divines, Scholastici
in tertiam partem D. Thomae.
Utrum visibilis detur Effectus divinae Praedestinationis in Infantibus
baptizatis; Whether or no there be any visible effect of divine Predestination
in baptized Infants: The common answer is affirmative, concerning Infants dying
after Baptism, and before they have actually transgressed.

But the weak and fallible Authority of Schoole-Divines in it self, is not my
(...), or the Touchstone wherewith I touch and try questioned Metals. Man did
eat Angels food: The Vulgar: Panem Psa. 78 25. Interp. vulgat. Text. Hebr.
Angelorum manducavit homo, Man has eaten the Bread of Angels. The Original
word rendered Angels, is Abbirim, of the strong: Angels being so called, because
they are of superexcellent strength.

I have read in Materia de Angelis: One Angel teaches another Angel; or, a
Superior Angel, having received in his Creation, more universal Species,
teaches an inferior Angel, by willing only, that he should know his mind; (
quae volitio adimit impedimentum Secreti, and movet Deum ad imprimendam speciem
talis Objecti alteri Angelo:) But it falls otherwise, in the Messenger, or Angel
of the Lord of Hosts, designed by Malachi; Mal. 2. 7.
who teaches men by administering to them the Bread of the strong.

The Angel of the Church, as proposing this Proposition-bread, or, these (...),
Leaves of bread set in Sept.
sight, being the bread of the strong; has strongly taught and maintained in
the face of all Ages, the baptizing of Infants: And whosoever has obstinately
set his face against it, has been always esteemed respectively (...),
heterogeneous and heterodox; by the said Angel or Angels. And to the Judgment
of these Angels in their Interpretations of Scripture, being the Will and
Testament of the Lord of Hosts* from whom they come as Delegates and
Ambassadors; I shall strongly stand; and seek the Law at their month.

CHAP. V.
LEt all Christian Fathers and Mothers take their little Children into their
Arms; and having first kissed them, let them with a placid eye look upon
them, and meditate over them. If they be not plane (...), plainly void and
emptied of all natural Affection; they will most plainly discover, that there
are two things excellently conspicuous in Babes: which are, Innocence, and
Impotency. By the first, they are altogether incapable of hurting others: by
the second, as insufficient for helping themselves.

In consideration of the first: It seldom falls out, even in the most bloody
wars, as Vegetius observes, Veget. de re militari, lib. 3.
that old men, old women, young maids, and little Children are not spared. And
in examination of the second; St Austin piously exhorts: St Aug. ad Hilar. ep.
89
Tanto magis pro Infantibus loqui debemus, quanto minus ipsi pro se loqui
possunt. We ought so much the more to speak for Infants, how much the less
they be able to speak for themselves.

Poor Things; they say nothing: But they are Dove-eyed, as the pretty one in
the Canticles: and they Cant. 1. 15.
beg aloud, and plead prettily for themselves, with the dumb and silent
Oratory of their sweet and innocent looks; being apt emissions and
scintillations of their inward prettiness. Woe may compare them to a small kind
of Lights or Lamps, composed of sweet matter, which are both shining and
odoriferous. Certainly, God is graciously propitious to them in their kind,
and in every kind agreeable to them; toward whom he has imprinted in us, and
even in barbarous People, a most merciful inclination of Nature; seconded with
a viscerall commiseration of all their sufferings, above all ordinary course.

I am too narrow. God has enforced the very Tumult and outrage of the Sea, to
acknowledge the baptized Infant: It being storied by Osorius concerning
Albuquerqnez, Osor. de Rebus gestis Emmanue^is, Portugalliae Regis, lib. 1.
Admiral of the Portugal Fleet for the Conquest of the East Indies; that,
being surprised by a most horrible Tempest, which gave sudden occasion to a
woman in the same ship with him, to be delivered of a tender Babe, presently
baptized by reason of the present danger; he fell upon his knees presently,
presently took the newborn, now-borne, twice-borne Child in his hands, and
held him toward Heaven, whilst he sacrificed his Prayer to God in this humble
manner: Averte, Domine, facie ^uam a peccatis meis, etc. Lord turn away the
Face of thy Justice from my sins, and from the sins of the People with me: And
though we have all deserved thine Anger yet in thy Child Jesus, spare us, by
sparing this innocent Babe with us, that never sinned against thee, and is now
received by thine Ordinance into thy Favor. Which Prayer being ended the
Tempest ended, and the Sea became as harmless as the Child, and as calm as
the water wherein the pretty Babe was baptized.

We grown Persons are like Lampreys: we have all some strong string or other of
poisonous actual ^ination in us, but Babes have not: ((...) therefore, Men are
exhorted, (...), wax ye, or be ye 1 Cor. 14. 20.
children in evil, or malice:) especially, baptized Babes, translated to a
new, and heavenly condition; and in whom is presented a most pleasant part of
Music, even that wherein the falling from a short Discord to a sweet Concord,
causes more than ordinary sweetness.

CHAP. VI.
THe holy Doctrine of Infant Baptism, has been soyl'd much, and polluted. How
may it be reduced and recalled to its Native Purity? The Naturalists have found
Albertus lib. de Gemmis.
by curious Inquisition* That if a Pearl which is foul, be swallowed into the
womb of a Dove, and remain there some while, the Dove will give it again
most pure and Or^^ut. So every Doctrine must be tried and examined in the womb
of the Scripture-Dove the Holy Ghost, which womb is the Word of God, proposed
and interpreted by the Church of God: And if the Doctrine be Pearle-proofe, the
Holy Ghost will quickly return it as such, and free it from spots, clouds,
deformity.

For the Church may well be subservient to the Scripture, and the Scripture
auxiliary to the Church, in diverso Genere Causae, puta Exemplaris, and
instrumentaliter effectivae: Neither do the Logicians eliminate such Circles,
or Circulations of Arguments; nor do such make us giddy.

Prophetae, says St Hierom, appellabantur St Hieron: ep. ad Paulinum, de sacra
Scriptura.
videntes: quia videbant cum quem caeteri non videbant: The Prophets were
called Se^rs: because they saw (Dono Prophetiae, by the gift of Prophecy, which
gave them to foresee, and understandingly to declare their foresight; their
Prediction including Prevision, quia praedicebant ex Praevisione; in the which,
they differed from the Sibyls, who neither foresaw the things they Prophesied,
nor perfectly understood their own Declarations,) Christ, whom the common Herd
saw not. The Prophets and Apostles in their Holy Writings, and the Church
interpreting them, discover Supernatural Truths to us, which we know not by
other means: and their Testimonies are irresistible.

The Chemists and Alchumists Chymistae. Alchymistae.
are agreed, that the most tried way of effecting the strange Transmutations of
bodies, in Oils, Plants, Minerals, is to endeavor, and urge pressingly by all
means the reducing of them to their old Nothing. The Scripture-Texts for
Infant Baptism, are so substantial, and solid, that, rather than they shall
prove nothing for it, they take strange and many shapes, every shape shaping a
proof.

It is a secret of secrets in Sounds: That the whole Sound is not in the whole
Air only, but also in every minute Part of the Air; otherwise, one and the
same Sound could not beat upon many ears, and come with all the differences of
it in such diversities of convenient Distance and Place. True it is of the
Apostles: Their line is gone out thorough all the Earth, and their words to the
end of Psalm. 19. 4.
the World* as the Hebrew: or, as the Text. Hebr. Sept. Lectio Vulgat.
Septuagint, (...), sensed by the Vulgar, In omnem terram exivit sonus little,
their sound is gone forth into all the earth; and strictly followed by St Paul,
and the Arabicks: Romans 10. 18. Arab. Alex. Arab. Antioch. Interpretes Sir.
or as both the Syriack Interpreters, Evangelium, vel Annuciatio little, Their
Gospel or Annunciation is gone forth: All these running after the Septuagint,
in the near Path of the Sense; not with the Hebrew, in the Road of the Letter.

May the Evangelicall sound of the Apostles in this matter, reach even to the
end of the World, and come wholly to every man's and woman's ears thorough all
the earth.

The Great Wheel in the Work, after which, and impelled by which, all others
move; and the turning of which* as the first movable, shall be my care; is, to
prove, that the words of Christ, Except a man be Joh. 3. 5.
borne of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God;
preach Baptism.

CHAP. VII.
SOme of the blockish and more earthy kind, seem to be scrupled and
scandalized, that I have sometimes reformed a Text in the English Translation
of the Bible, by retriving it in the Original. Which notwithstanding, ought to
be faithfully done by a faithful Teacher, for many Reasons: one whereof, I
shall here indigitate. Because the English Translation is now and then so
large, profuse, redundant, and running over, and so spreading it self beyond
the modest limits of the Original, that it opens a way and window for an
Adversary of Truth, which the Original shuts up and blocketh against him.
As here: The English Translation gives, Except a man be borne, etc. And the
Adversary swallows presently, and concludes in haste; Therefore, if the Text
hands forth Baptism, the baptized Person must be a grown man, as the word
(man) commonly imports.

Now can I be a faithful and equal examiner and Preacher of Gods Word, and
conceal the discrasie of the Translation and the present Obstruction of Truth:
knowing, that the Original says only, (...): and the Vulgar Text. Graec.
Edit. vulgat
answerably, Nisi quis renatus fuerit, Except one be borne: And that except a
Child be not one, he is not excluded from Baptism by the warrant of this Text,
but affixed to it?

Here the senseless Censurer ignorantly retorts upon me, that I speak my
self wiser than all the English Interpreters of the Bible, and set them before
my Tribunal; and above all this, that I correct the Word of God: when I am
indeed Gods Advocate, and set my self before the Tribunal of all the learned
Knowers of the Original, to whom I humbly appeal as Judges; and when I only
vindicate Gods known Word from gross error and misinterpretation, and protest
against it, lest I should partake of it, according to the Rule in the Canon
Law, Error Gratian. D 80. C. error cui non.
cui non resistitur approbatur, We approve the Error which we do not resist.

The Black within the White, is: These blockish and dull-soul'd Censurers know
no other Language than Mam-English, or, their mother Tongue: and they would
feign have the whole work of sounding Scripture by the Line and Plummet, to
move altogether and run within their own small Sphere and Circle; and so they
would shoulder it with the tallest Divines, because they have been Abecedarii,
and can, after much hammering, and stammering, and many a smarting Lash, put
the Letters together, and cast a spell.

I shall never be so forward and hardy as the late English Rabbi Dr Featly, who
delivers for positive, Dr Featly in his Dipper dipped, not far from the beginning.
and avouches plainly, That no Translation is authentical, or, the Word of
God. But I shall touch every suspicious Text of a Translation, with the Lydius
Lapis of the Original: And if I make a false step, let the Learned tread upon
me and crush me.

I answer therefore to the shallow* thoughted Censurers, in St Gregory's St
Greg. Homil. 7. in Ezech. D. Tho. 2. 2* q. 43. art. 7.
Words alleged by the Angelical Doctor: Si de Veritate scandalum s^mitur,
utilius nasci permittitur scandalum quam Verit as relinquatur: If a Scandal be
taken from Truth, the Birth of a Scandal is more profitably permitted than
Truth may be relinquished: The Scandal is passivum non activum, passive not
active; non datum sed acceptum, not given but taken.

CHAP. VIII.
Whereas Christ the Son of the living God, by his Humanation, his Passion, and
his Death, is the Universal Cause of our everlasting Life and Salvation: And
whereas Universal Strength or Virtue even in these natural Things, is not
bowed to us, and applied to particular effects, but by particular causes: it
was convenient and reasonable, that some Remedies should be prescribed and
adhibited to us in a ruinous Condition, that should, as particular causes,
convey and confer to us the Virtue of the Cause which is Universal. These
excellent Remedies are the Sacraments.

And as the second Causes and Instruments of the first; and particular Causes
attend the work of the Universal Cause: So these our Sacraments are the means
and Instruments of Christ, for the effecting of his divine and saving Work
upon us. And because there are always required to the work of the principal
Cause, proportionable Instruments; it was congruous, that these our Sacraments
should be presented to us under practical and visible Signs, and efficacious
Words which are audible: the Universal Cause of our Salvation, being the Word of
God Incarnate, and made sensible by assuming humane Nature, and elevating it in
the Person of Christ.

And because there is no salvation without Grace, as being previous and
singularly proportionable to Glory; it is likewise conformable to right Reason
and Measure, that Sacraments should be the divine Instruments of Grace in us;
not as introducing the last effect of Grace by their virtue; but after the
manner as the Sun and a man beget a man, which notwithstanding touch not in their
operation, the Essence of the Intellective Soul, because it comes ab extra
from without by Creation, and is not educed ex potentia Materiae, from the
passive power of the Matter.

And therefore, as the material Causes of our production in Generation, are
attendant only upon the last disposition of the Matter, and aim precisely at
the union of the Soul with the Body: So the Sacraments do not physically
produce Grace it self, being a supernatural and proper gift of God the sole
fountain of Grace; but only touch inclusively, the last disposition to it,
pretending to the Union, and moving God to the production of it in a worthy
Receiver.

In relation to which virtus motrix, moving virtue, (moving the Will of God
upon his promise,) the Prophet Micah says, Thou will cast all their Mich. 7.
19.
sins into the depths of the Sea. Where Arias Montanus notes out of the
Rabbis, that it was customary with Benedictt. Arias Montan. in Mich. ex
Rabbinis in Misnaroth.
the Jews to throw all things they did execrate and abominate, into the Lake
Asphaltites, called Mare Mortuum, the dead or salt Sea. And conformably, the
Indians who had expressed in them some footsteps of Judaisme, being now lightly
impressed, express their sins in writing, or by some other Symboll; which they
cast into a River, that it may be carried into the Sea, out of all sight and
memory; as Acosta has delivered to Acosta li. 5. de novo Orb, cap 25.
memory, from his own sight. But our Prophet alludes properly to the drowning
of Pharaoh in the Red Sea; which was a type of Baptism, made blood-red by the
death of Christ; and in the which our Egyptian sins are destroyed. Whence
Theodoret Theod. and Rupert. in hunc locum.
and Rupertus do here by the depths of the Sea, allegorically understand
Baptism.

And Saint Gregory draws out in a long-spun thread, this efficacy of Baptism
from the drowning of the Egyptians: and inferres, Qui ergo dicit peccata in
Baptismate funditus Gregor. Magnus in lib epist. ep. 39. ad Theoctistam
Patriciam.
non dimitti, dicat in Mari rubro Aegyptios non veraciter mortuos: He
therefore, that says our sins are not forgiven in Baptism, may as truly
say, that the Egyptians were not drowned in the Red Sea: and if he will give
this, he must grant the other. And he fortifies himself with a reason of
Proof: Quia nimirum plus valet in absolutione nostra veritas, quum umbra
veritatis: Because the Truth is of more validity in our deliverance and
absolution, than the shadow of the Truth.

The Nicen Creed is, after Scripture, the warrant of these writers: (...);
Symb. Nicen.
I believe one Baptism for the remission of sins.

CHAP. IX.
THe Signs also, and Matter of the Sacraments, are by divine Institution, most
divinely and conveniently instituted. Behold this divine convenience in
Baptism, wherein we are spiritually regenerated which analogy to material
generation.

For: Whereas material Generation is Motus vel mutatio de non-esse ad^^sse, A
Motion or mutation from not-Being to Being; and Man in his first* Being, is,
for the transfusion of Original sin, debarred of his first Birthright, the
prime infusion of spiritual Life; from the which he does afterward
analogically recede more and more, as he is more and more implicated in the
bonds and sins of Death: it was orderly, that unto Baptism, which is the Laver
of spiritual Regeneration, there should be ascertained on the part of the
Sacrament, and annexed the spiritual virtue of washing away and removing sin
by the infusion of Grace; and of translating by the same Grace, man to a
gracious life above Nature.

And because Signum respondere debet significato, the sign must always and
signally answer to the thing signified; and the ablution of the outward filth
of the body, is effected instrumentally by water: it was consonant, for the
practical signifying of the spiritual and inward ablution of sin, that this
initiatory Sacrament should be dispensed outwardly with water, sanctified by
the word of God.

And as one thing is once only generated; so is it concordant, that Baptism
once rightly conferred, should not be iterated upon the same subject; lest it
should wander, deviate, and degenerate from the Nature of Regeneration, as
forgetting of what house it came.

It goes without opposition in the school of natural Philosophy; that a thing
is by so much the more Noble, by how much it has more of inward form, from
which formal interest, the Celestial bodies and precious Gemms have their
Nobility: And the Sacraments are dignified by their divine and beautiful
Influx, and their formal setting our souls in the grace and peace of God which
passes all understanding.

Aristophanes undertaking the praises of temporal peace, finds not Aristoph.
in pacc.
a name ^quall with the praises of it; and he wishes to find (...), a word or
name equalling the capacity of ten thousand Amphors: (the Amphor was a large
two-car'd Vessel in Athens:) but what word can suffice to blazon the dignity
of our Spiritual and Sacramental peace with God?

CHAP. X.
A Sacrament, beyond that it is signum rei sacrae, a sign of an holy thing; is
in the next consideration, and in the review, Visibile signum Doni invisibilis,
a Deo institutionem trahens, A visible sign of an invisible Gift, deriving
it is institution St Aug. lib. 2. de Doctrina christiana, cap. 1.
from God.

Signum, as the Bishop of Hippo defines it, est res praeter speciem quam
ingerit sensibus, aliud aliquid ex se faciens in cogitationem venire: A sign
is a thing, of it self causing an other thing to press upon our thoughts,
besides the resemblance which it offers to our senses.

First then: every Sacrament must be signum sensibile, a sensible sign: And
all Sacraments both old and new, are combined in this. For: Although God might
and could have ordained some spiritual sign of grace, yet that sign should
not have properly been a sign in a Sacrament, (howsoever some Doctors pull
strongly for the contrary,) as I now speak of Sacraments: Because it should
not have been signum humanum sed Angelicum, an humane but an Angelical sign;
and should have conformed to subsisting spirits, not to men consisting of souls
and bodies: Who require such Sacraments, as are able to congregate into a
being, and to conserve in a warm being, a visible Church: God attemperating
and proportioning his Ordinances to us and our mixed condition.

That the Character impressed upon the soul in Baptism, is a spiritual and
invisible sign; I will not doubt: But it has no shelter here.

Secondly: there are speculative and practical signs. And the Sacraments of
the old Law, were not signs merely theoricall or speculative of salvation and
Grace; but practical. Because the promise of a thing is not
speculatively-behaviour'd and manner'd toward the thing promised, but
practically; as causing it in some manner. For: he that promises is afterward
moved by his promise, to correspond with it by fulfilling it. And thus the
promise is Causa moralis Re^ promissae, the moral cause of the thing promised:
Every promise having a moral force, actually moving, or apt to move the
promiser to performance.

Whereas therefore, all the old Sacraments were certain promises or signs, by
the which, God did, as it were, promise in figures, Christ and our Salvation:
it is fairly and fruitfully consequent, that they were practical signs of
Grace to be given by Christ: the Figure-Promises, rending to after-performance
through him that was to come. And if the old Sacraments were practical signs;
it is a sign, that the new are much more, and more excellently, as grasping a
more excellent promise.

Thirdly: the sign here, must represent a sacred and invisible thing, not a
thing which is profane or visible. The sacred invisible thing which the
Sacraments of the new Law do signify, is threefold: 1. Habitual and
justifying Grace, which, as present, is demonstrated: 2. The passion of Christ
the mediator, which is the cause of Grace, and is remembered as being past: 3.
Glory and life eternal, which is the effect of Grace, and which, all habitual
Grace, quantum est ex se, brings to it is Subject; and which as being hereafter
to come, is prefigur'd.

For the Sacraments signifying Grace, do consequently signify the beginning
and end of the saine grace. And their signification must be considered with
some proportionable reference to the light of the divine understanding, and the
beams and irradiations of it; which brings and binds up uno intuitn, both ends
together: Because the institution of a Sacrament, is only of God the author of
Grace; God alone being able to compound and connex inward grace with an outward
sign.

CHAP. XI.
I Wade farther. It is a fundamental rule, Aeque certa sunt ac evidentia, quae
ex sacris Literis evidenter ac certe deducuntur, atque ea quae in illis
express and (...), i. e. ad verbum and in terminis, habentur. The things are
equally certain and evident, which are evidently and certainly deduced from
sacred Scripture, as the things which are found in Scripture expressly, and word
for word. And the same rule is returned in another dress: Conclusions are as
right as their Principles, if rightly and consequentially concluded.

The first reason of this truth, is fundamental as the truth is: Ex vero nil
nisi verum, of truth comes nothing but truth, by true deduction. And the second
reason is: Because the conclusion is in effect, the principle; and the truth
deduced, is the truth from whence the deduction issues, in other and more
declaring terms.

It is true, that of truth, falsehood may come per accidens, by chance, and
materially; not by formal, right and necessary consequence.

Hence we cry: Principia fidei, vel quae ex eis deducuntur, sunt in Scriptura:
The principles of faith, or, the truths deduced from them, are in Scripture:
And, Omnis divina revelatio est in scriptura, vel direct, vel per necessariam,
and inevitabilem consequentiam: Every revealed truth is in Scripture, either
directly, or by necessary and inevitable consequence. And hence we throw
abroad; he that holds a Doctrine, holds all the consequences of it: Because the
Doctrine and the Consequences are one identicall truth in different language.
The difference betwixt Principles and Conclusions being, according to the
Nature of similitudes, like the difference betwixt the heavenly and earthly
bodies: The heavenly bodies having their last perfection from their creation,
and by their very nature; but the earthly bodies acquiring their due perfection
by mutation and motion; because they are generable and corruptible: Or: Like
the blessedness of the Creator and the Creature: Whereas soli Deo Beatitudo D.
Tho. p. 1. q. 62. art. 4. in corpore.
perfecta est naturalis; quia idem est sibi esse and beatum esse; Perfect
blessedness is natural to God alone; because to be and to be blessed is the
same thing to him: But the blessedness of the Creature, requires a trial of
motion in the way; which is heavenly-true, even of the Angels.

CHAP. XII.
THE truth which I promise to fasten, and to settle upon pillars, as wisdom
does her House: namely, P. o^. 9. 1.
that the words, Except one be borne, etc. engage for Baptism: I prove in the
first onset, from the words of the Text it self: thus: Here within these
words, is contained all that is essentially necessary to Baptism; all other
things excluded: And this is the onely-safe way to know and find when a Text
speaks fully and wholly of any thing: This being that full and adequate
Correspondence, which Logic exacts betwixt an Essence and the thing
essentiated; as also betwixt the thing defined and the Definition: that the one
may fitly, fully and entirely pertain to the other, and be convertible with it,
and measurable by it.

After this manner, Baptism is responsible to the Text, and the Text to
Baptism. For: Baptism is our birth of water and of the spirit, opening unto us
the Kingdom of God; And, our birth of water and of the Spirit, opening unto us
the Kingdom of God, is Baptism: And: This our birth of water and of the
Spirit, opening unto us the Kingdom of God, is nothing else but Baptism; And,
Baptism is nothing else, than this our birth of water and of the Spirit,
opening unto us the Kingdom of God.

If the Son of the Cooper shall set in his hoope, another Text, which takes up
something of this, and conjoines it with some other thing dissentaneous from
Baptism, (wherein the holy Ghost denotes a particular and secret concordance of
Divine things and Ordinances,) that he may vie it with this our Text: the
Logical Rule will unhoop him, de dissimilibus non est idem Judicium, Of things
unlike, we may not pass the same judgment.

And even according to Arithmeticall Proportion; the mere addition of a single
Unity, detracts from the samenesse, yea and creates a specifical difference
betwixt numbers: And, Numerus est in numeratis, A number, that it may be real
and not notionall only, must be subjected in the things numbered, being
therefore also accordingly differenced.

But when things of a different number, differ also in Nature; they are made by
more differences, more different. And in things Divine, as in natural things,
partial Natures are communicable to several things. The Text, Wash ye, make
Isa. 1. 16.
you clean; for which, the Vulgar offers, Lavamini, and mundi estote, Interp.
vulgat.
be ye washed, and clean; though it forespeak for Baptism, and was accepted
under such a notion in the Primitive Church; yet because the precept is
unrestrained, undetermined, and not bounded with a difference, and therefore
not definitive; it bound not Christians with a strict bond; and Heathens
finding it lax and wide, had seemingly, but unjustly brought it to their
lustrations, as they are justly taxed by St Justin. Justin Mar. tyr, Apolog.
prima and in Paraenesi ad Graecos and Gentiles.


CHAP. XIII.
THat in this our Text is all essentially necessary to Baptism, is farther
apparent: Because here is signum externum and sensibile, the external and
sensible sign, being water; and the concurrence of it, with the spirit: Here
is operatio vel (...) sancti spiritus interna and spiritualis, the inward and
spiritual operation and energy of the holy spirit (that works always
inwardly,) implying (...), an inward work and Birth: And here is mandatum Dei
saltem implicitum, vel per consequentiam, at the least an implicit or
consequentiall mandat of God.

For although God be not our Neighbor, and therefore such obligations are not
incidentiall upon him: Yet we are all fundamentally obliged, quatenus proximi;
as neighbors to remove from our Neighbors, with the same love wherewith we
love our selves, and with our uttermost power, the impediments and obstacles
lying in their way to the Kingdom of God: And therefore, this divine
Declaration being extant and supposed; we are implicitly and consequentially
commanded to execute the Sequel of it.

Moreover: A sign may be natural, quod non pendet ex nova Institutions, sed
ex natura sua significat; vel voluntarium, and ex arbitrio instituentis, id
est, ad placitum divinum vel humanum; Natural, which does not depend upon a
new Institution, but signifies of it is own nature; or voluntary, and from the
Arbitriment of the Institutor, that is, according to divine or humane
appointment: And water here, is of divine and royal Institution, as the Spirit
is of Royal and Divine operation, and as the Mandat is Divine and Royal.

Lastly: The sign as it is here assigned, has complete analogy with the thing
it signifies; it being most proper to that which is (...), the sign, to
signify: Which it may do quoad substantiam, and quoad effectus primarios aut
secundarios, respectively to it is substance, and to it is primary or secundary
effects; as here the sign does, principaliter quoad effectum Ablutionis,
principally with a finger pointing to it is effect of Ablution.

Water washes with its Humidity, being in the first and confuse view of Reason
it is prime Quality; and therefore, fitly signifies the Ablution of our sins:
With its Frigidity, it mitigates the superfluous exceedings of heat; and
therefore fitly signifies the mitigation of the Fomes Peccat^, fire-hot and
combustible matter of sin, being concupiscence: And as water is diaphanous, it
is susceptive of Light; and therefore fitly enters league with Baptism, in
quantum est Fidei Sacramentum, as it is the Sacrament of Faith, being the prime
habitual and supernatural Light of the Soul. (It must be the Woolf of the
evenings, which Jerem. 5. 6.
Oppianus likewise advisedly calls (...), a Walker in the dark Oppian li. 1. de
Venat.
night; that would abridge innocent Hearts and Lambs of the Sacrament of Light.)

And the Sacrament of Baptism, as we find it here, is a practical sign, and
besides it is signification has efficiency, as entitling us to the Kingdom of
God through his princely Son the Bridegroom of our Souls, and as therefore
adorning us with the wedding Garment of grace the pledge of Glory; (and for
this reason is aptly called a Seal, being a practical sign as not only
representing the Image, but also impressing it in the wax;) by the power of the
Principle cause or Agent, that comes regaliter, legaliter, and authoritative,
regally, legally, and authoritatively with an Imprimatur, Let there be an
impression of the Seal in the Soul.

CHAP. XIV
I Confirm it, first. That which is essentially, with respect to the whole
Essence, agreeable to Baptism, (or any other thing,) is not common to many in
the same literal construction, or communicable to any thing of a different
kind: lest the whole Essence of Things should be confounded.

Verily: The Genus in a Definition, is essential to the thing defined, and
communicable to many things of a different kind: But it is not essential to
the thing defined, (or to other things,) with respect to the whole Essence, but
only as a Logical part. Neither are tears in Repentance Essential to
Contrition, (which is an Act of Displicence in the heart;) that they should
Essentially pertain to the means of Salvation. But water is essentially
necessary to ordinary Baptism; though in extraordinary cases, involving
Extremum periculum and horam Mortis, extreme danger and the hour of, death
the defect of it may be supplied.

And the Declaration here, as it is delivered in high terms, so is it
Essential with respect to the whole Essence of ordinary Baptism. Which
directed the Chair-divine of Aquine to speak high: Si aliqui nunc
sanctificarentur D. Tha. part. 3. quaest. 68. art. 1. ad. 3.
in Utero, necesse esset eos baptizari, ut per susceptionem Characteris, altis
membris Christi conformarentur: If any should be now sanctified in the womb,
(as Jeremy and John the Baptist,) and cleaned from Original sin, they should
of necessity be Baptized, that by the susception of the Character they might be
conformed to the other members of Christ: this indelible Character having three
Offices, aptos nos facere ad culium divinum, configurare Christo ejusque
Sanctis, and distinguere ab altis; to apt the subject, in some measure, for
Divine Worship; to configure us to Christ and his Saints, (to Christ primarily
and secundarily to his Saints under a new consideration;) and to distinguish
the Baptized from the unbaptized, even in Hell it self.

We are configur'd to Christ, who Heb. 1. 3.
is the brightness or effulgency of his Fathers Glory, and the figure of his
substance, as the vulgar; or, as the Greek Text, (...), Edit. vulgat Text.
Graec.
(...) and the Character of his subsistence; or, and the express Image of his
Person, as the English. The subject of the Character, is the Soul secunaum
partem Intellectivam, according to the Intellective part; in the which part
Faith is.

And in Baptism, that which is Sacramentum tamum, the Sacrament only, is the
corporeal and exterior Ablution, effected under the prescribed form of
words: That which is Res tantum, the Thing only, is the Justification of the
Person Baptized: And that which is Res and Sacramentum, the Thing and the
Sacrament, is the Character of Baptism.

And as the fit use of the prescribed words, though necessary to ordinary
Baptism, (which therefore may not be administered by one that is dumb,) is
included here in the right use of the water tending to spiritual Birth; so the
impression of the Character, though likewise necessary, is here included in the
work of the Spirit: Complete Birth in Baptism, supposing the performance of
all works necessary to such Birth.

And all this holds fair with reason: it belonging to young Sheep and
initiated Servants and Soldiers, to be signed with a Character; and Christ
being our good Shepherd, Master* Captain; who therefore, was not himself
signed with a created Character; And therefore also, neither Circumcision, nor
any Sacrament of the old Law, did imprint a Character in the Soul.

CHAP. XV.
I Confirm it, secondly. This Text agrees not with any Sacred Thing so evenly
as with Baptism. Let any man* go, and make a near search, percurrendo per
singula, examining the singulars in every kind. Let any man travel per
enumerationem partium, through the numbering of all the choice parts of Divine
Worship, or of Gods Word: and in his return, honestly give up his Verdict.

The child of the Hoop, answers out of the Tub; That by born of water, is meant
born of the word; because the word is in Scripture oftentimes compared with
water: and that the word meant, demeanes it self as an Isntrumental cause,
the Spirit as an Efficient.

I answer: This is the Hocus Pocus of desperate Ignorance, and a fugitive
course. For: It is a breaking of all hoopes and bonds, and a running hastily
without cause, from the literal or historical Sense to a figure; in open
defiance of the Rule, Minime recurrendum est ad figuras, ubinulla cogit
Necessitas aut Absurditas: We must not run back to figures, where we are not
compelled by Necessity or Absurdity: Yea even against a fundamental Axiom set
in Divinity, as a Star in the Firmament, for our guidance in the right
understanding of Scripture: Which Axiom is precedent to the Rule: The literal
sense, as the most obvious, and sweetly dropping from the native simplicity and
propriety of words, as from a moderate Limbeck; if it be Usher to no evident
absurdity, is always the meaning of the Holy Ghost.

And if it were not: The Readers of Scripture would be Vagabonds, and never
know where to sit down. And if, in every propulsion of our corrupt wills, we
might affix new senses; we might also commonly deprave the most clear and most
flourishing places of Scripture, and unbottom them from their proper hold,
root, and inclination.

The Herb called Morsus Diaboli, Devils-bit, the God of Nature has so deeply
rooted, that it is not pulled up entire: From the root of which, grew the name,
and fable, that the Devil bites off the root, envying to us the use of it, as
conducing so much to our health. When we violently pluck Scriptures from their
native root and letter, with which they innocently bear toward us: the Devil
bites in earnest, and ultra fabula^, beyond a fable.

And therefore, we prove matters of Faith, and matters in controversy, only
from the free-offering of the literal sense. And hence the Maxim: Theologia
Symbolica vel Allegorica non est argumentativa: Symbolicall or Allegorical
Divinity is not reducible to Argument. For as the Spiritual sense, super
literalem fundatur, and cum supponit, according D. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. art* 10. in
corp.
to the determination of Aquinas; is founded upon the literal sense, and
supposes it: So it supposes also, that the Sense of the foundation is the
first, and most genuine Sense; as being the first considerable, and only root
and prop of the rest. And the same Aquinas: Seasus literalis est, quem Auctor
intendit: Idem ibid.
The Author of Scripture, intends the literal sense. And again: treating of
the literal sense he adds: Idem ibid. ad primum.
ex quo solo potest trahi argume^tum, non autem ex his, quae secundum
allegor^am dicuntur, ut dicit Augustinus: Out of which only, we may draw an
affirmative argument, but not from the things spoken according to Allegory, as
St Austin says.

Vincentius the Donatist had in a prodigal humor attempted to prove from a
dark and mystical St Aug. ep. 4^. contra* Vincentium Donatistam.
place in the Canticles, that the Church of God was fled into Africa: But St
Austin betaking himself to the royal Fort here, put him to flight with a
Sarcasme, ipsumque vincebat Vincentium, and conquered him that had his name
from conquering; with a Negative Argument.

CHAP. XVI.
THE Amplificator, thinking to hoop us up, amplifies the comparison, by
describing in the rebound, how the Word agrees and contracts with water: As
that 1: Water is of a purifying nature, and so is the Word: 2: Water is weak of
it self, except it be compounded, and made comfortable with comfortable
Ingredients; and so the word is a dead letter; and the comfortable Spirit and
Life of the Word, is the true sense thereof: 3: Water has a cooling and
refreshing quality; and so the Word.

I answer: All this is true: and all superlatively comprehended in Baptism. As
1: Baptism is of a most purifying nature: 2: Except the water in Baptism act
with the spirit, it is most weak, and brings cold comfort: (But an argument
raised from water here, taken for the word; in a word, is as weak as water:) 3:
Baptism is endued with a most cooling and refreshing quality.

Had the chief Properties of water, closed with the word, and not with
Baptism; and been proper to the word quarto modo, proper to the word and only
to the word: the Adversary, and the two proper Pages of his black Guard, had
made a fairer appearance with their Pageantry.

Thus did the Devils Oracles deliver many sound truths, the better, under such
palliations to disseminate and publish their most unsound errors. Thus does a
stink offend us more, when concomitant with some weak perfume which it has
pro vehiculo, than if it singly sets upon us; the perfume procuring for the
stink, easier admittance into our sense: the stinking Perfumer that smells of
Italy, knows it practically: and stinking Perfumers are more offensive. Thus
poisons are most dangerous and irremediable, when joined in commission with a
cordial that is not able to resist them: It serving to conduct them to the
heart, and being unable to vanquish their malignity.

This is (...), to lead Aristoph. in Avibus. Suidas in voce (...).
silly women captive by the admixtion of truth with falsehood, as the old
Fowlers deceived Pigeons by showing an exoculated Pigeon leaping and dancing in
a net. And these impious ways of enervating and cutting the sinews of
Scripture, may soon imbroyle the whole frame of it, and overturn all. Thus did
the Tyrant Mezentius in Virgil, bind the quick and the dead together, and
then, throw them into a den; leaving the living still embracing the dead,
until death embraced the living, and made the conjunction homogeneall.

Mortua qu^netiam, jungebat corpora vivis Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 8.

Componens mantbusque manus atque oribus Ora.
Excellently Tertullian of Carthage: Tert. lib. de Praescriptionibus adversus
Haereticos.
Tantum Veritati obstrepit adulter Sensus, quantum and Corruptor Stylus, An
adulterating Sense is as obstreperous to Truth, as a corrupting style: a false
Sense of a true and Divine Text, being as mischievous, and doing the same work
as a profane and ascititious Text. And vel caeco apparet, Violentam hanc, and
quasi sidiculis extortam esse explicationem; the blind beggar may see this
figurative explication, or confession of the Text, to be violent, and, as it
were, extorted with the Rack.

CHAP. XVII.
I Prove secondly, that the Text proclaims Baptism: By answering the Arguments
marching up in Batalia against this Truth. The first is. The new Birth is not
attributed in Scripture to Baptism.

I answer: This proposition is Antichristian, and most odiously false; as
having the whole toad in it, guts and all. Baptism is named in scripture,
Lovacrum Regenerationis, the Laver of Regeneration: of which afterward. I will
here, only set in the middle, a Text of the Apostolical Epistle to the
Colossians: Colos. 2. 12.
Buried with him in Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him, through the
Faith of the operation of God. Buried and risen in Spiritualibus, in Spiritual
things; is nothing else but born again. In the which Burial and Resurrection,
Corruption unius est Generatio alterius, The corruption of the old man is the
Generation of the new; and of the Subjects of sin, we are made the Adopted
Children of God.

And the Baptism here exhibited, must be Baptismus Fluminis, the Baptism of the
Flood, or Water Baptism, which was commonly given with Immersion, to represent
the Sepulture of Christ; answerably to this Text: And therefore, the Text runs,
Buried with him. And in Sacred Sincerity, (which in our dealing of sacred
things, ought to deal most sincerely,) the Greek word (...), Baptism. properly
signifies Immersion: though in rigore loquendo, Ablution is of the Fssence of
our Baptism; but the manner of Ablution, is accidentary: because the Intention
of the Lawgiver, with respect to the thing signified, is in the substance, ut
abluamur, that we be washed.

And in this Baptism, (whatsoever the Adversary muttereth, and champeth betwixt
his teeth,) we are properly Baptized into Christ's Death and sufferings: Because
the virtue of this Baptism, is derived from his Death; by the which we die to
sin, and live to God. And what is there in the essential Constitution of the
new Birth of a reasonable Creature; that is, in the constitution of a Child by
Adoption; which is not reasonably discovered in a Baptized Infant; etiamsi
passive se gerat?

Adoption is by habitual Grace; which the Infant may receive by Infusion:
though he cannot cry, Abba, Father; as wanting actual Gal. 4. 6.
Faith. Adoption differs from Natural filiation in this Essentially, that
Natural filiation is founded in communicatione naturae viventis, in the
communication of the Nature of a living Person, (Christ being called Mat. 16.
16.
the Son of the living God, quia viventium est generare sibi simile in natura,
because it is the part of living things to beget their like in Nature:) Vide
Council. Francosordiense, circ^ finem.
But Adoption is the Assumption of an extraneous Person, into the place of a
Son: So may God assume a Child, in his free goodness. Adoptare, est quasi
optare ut sit quod per naturam non est: To Adopt, is in a manner to wish, that
he were a Son by Nature who is not: So God may join Children closely to him,
as his Children: the wish in the Notation of the Name, failing here; because it
fails of Divine Perfection. Adoptio fit per Filium natural^m, ubi naturalis
Filius est: Adoption is made through the natural Son, in whom the Right and
Heirship stands; where there is one; who consentingly yields up something of
his Right: And Children may be Adopted through Christ the Natural Son; and be
made partakers of his merits by the Sacrament of Baptism; The Sacraments being
the Conduit-pipes, conveying the Grace of God, and Merits of Christ to us.

The Eagle of the Thomists accords: D. Tho. p. 3 q. 62. art: ^^n sine Corporis.
Unde manifestum est, quod Sacramenta Ecclesiae specialiter habent virtutem ex
Passione Christi, cujus Virtus quodammodo nobis copulatur per susceptionem
Sacramentorum. In cujus signum de latere Christi pendentis in Cruce, fluxerunt
Aqua and Sanguis, quorum unum pertinet ad Baptismum, aliud ad Eucharistiam,
quae sunt potissima Sacramenta. Whence it is manifest that the Sacraments of
the Church, specially have virtue from the passion of Christ, the virtue
whereof is in some manner coupled with us by the susception of the Sacraments.
In sign of which, out of the side of Christ hanging on the Cross, flowed
Water and Blood, one whereof pertains to Baptism, the other to the Eucharist,
being the Chief Sacraments. He brings up the rear in the same Article, Idem
ibid. ad tertium.
with: Justificatio attribuitur Resurrectioni ratione termini ad quem, qui est
novitas v^tae per gratiam: Attribuitur tamen passioni ratione termini a quo,
scil^cet quantum ad d^mission^m Culpae: Justification is attributed to the
Resurrection of Christ, as to that to which the motion tends, which is newness
of Life by Grace: Yet is it attributed to the Passion of Christ, as that from
which the motion arises, Videl. with regard to the remission of the fault.

And therefore, because in the Eucharist also, there is a Representation of
Christ's Death, by the which we are made alive, and rise with Christ; the Signs
there, are called by the Fathers of the first Nicen Council, (...), Concilium
Nic^num primum.
the Symbols of the Resurrection.

CHAP. XVIII.
THE sacred words: You are risen with him, through the Faith of the operation
of God: reinforce upon our Thoughts, that divine Faith is infused by God, the
Supreme Divine Power, to whom nothing is impossible, which involves not
repugnantiam in terminis, a repugnancy in the Terms.

And in pious Truth: The Agent of infinite Power, does not of necessity require
to his Action or Work, Matter or Instrument: as it appears in Creation, which
is one of the proper and incommunicable Actions of God. Therefore, neither does
he require any disposition or Preparation in the Subject or any kind of
isntrumental concurrence.

Wherefore God may strangely operate Faith in children: although we have no
comprehensive knowledge of such operation: God's Spiritual operations in us,
operated by his Creative or like Virtue; being rather known to us by their
Effects, than by their Manner of Infusion.

We own a Doctrine: Infantes sunt negative Infideles, non positive: Infants
before Baptism, are Infidels negatively, not positively. Wherein they are
distinguished from grown Heathens, being positively Infidels. Now if God
infuseth Faith into Infidels that are such positively; yea, if the edge of his
Power could be dulled by Resistance in the Subject, he may infuse Faith into
such as are negatively Infidels; here being less resistance, and these having
no opposite Habit, or Act of perverse will.

But the strangeness is, (says he, who with sufficient unadvisednesse Doctor
Tailor in his Liberty of prophesy^ Sect. 18.
and Incogitancy, took so much liberty in his Liberty of Prophesying;) That
there should be an Instrument without an Agent to manage, or force to actuate
it.

Does not God infuse a reasonable Soul into a child, in the very dark Womb:
And is not Reason there in Actu signato, a long while, as an Instrument without
an Agent to manage, or force to actuate it? And though John the Baptist was
truly Sanctified in the womb, (which Sanctification was effected by the
Infusion of habitual Grace,) and once leaped there for joy: Yet we hear Luke
1. 41.
no farther of such unusual expressions in his Nonage; neither have we reason
to believe otherwise than that habitual Faith remained in him, as an
Instrument without an Agent to manage, or force to actuate it: nor will I dare
to put him in equal balance with his Lord and Master. And though the last be
an extraordinary Example: the first is not. And why we might not have such
ordinary Examples, as frequently in the Order of Grace, as in the Order of
Nature; I can not ken.

That John was truly and really purged in his Mothers womb from Original sin,
and there Justified; St St. Aug. ^p. 57. ad D^^d^nu^^.
Austin denies; which St Hierom also disavows of Jeremy. St Austin's St H^erom.
in cap. 1. Jerem.
reason is: quia renasci praesupponit nasci: because to be born again,
presupposes to be born.

I humbly answer: Man, with relation to his Capability of being born again by
Grace, is conceived to be then born when he is conceived in his Mothers Womb,
and receives a Soul and Life from God. For: as he is then born with! Original
sin, so even then presently he may be reborn by Grace, and purified from it;
yea and Baptized, either his mother dying, and his way being opened; or she
living, and he exerting a foot or hand: that the divine Remedy, as a remedy,
may be as early as the disease.

And our Scripture-plea foreran the Forerunner: he shall be filled with Lu. 1.
15.
the Holy Ghost, even from his mothers Womb. The Syriack Bibles Syrorum Biblia.
have sanctified, Spiritu sanctitatis, with the Spirit of Holiness: And
Codices Arabui.
the Arabic Books, in Utero, in the Womb. And we may not admit such an
Audacious Hyperbole in Scripture.

CHAP. XIX.
THis habitual Perfection, though it has no precedent or concomitaut Acts in
Children, suitable with it: Yet has it Acts precisely consequent to it.

For donbtlesse: Baptized Children, coming to the dawnings of Reason, are
wonderfully moved and raised from the habitual principles of Faith, Hope,
Charity, (these being inseparable in them) to many spiritual and excellent
Essays, of the which, their tenderness is capable; and which are not in
unbaptized Children, and ungarrison'd Souls. As when we graft a Rose-Tree, and
insert a grain of Musk into the cleft of the Stock; all the Roses that spring
from it, if the Tree be not blasted from the ambient Air; will smell of Musk.

It is true: These Essaies are not explicit Acts of Faith, Hope, Charity:
Because these Acts ordinarily suppose acquired Knowledge, and Omnis nostra
Cognitio a Sensu initium habet, all our acquired knowledge begins by the Sense.
And this Infusion being acted independenter ab Organis Corporalibus, without
dependence on Corporeal Organs, as being merely Spiritual; and acting upon
the Soul ex part Infusionis, as if it had no dependence on a Body: Except the
body receive an outward Impression of Learning; the Man consisting of Soul and
Body, is defective in part, and cannot ordinarily and explicitly produce Acts
by the Combination of Body and Soul, tending to which production the Body has
no such present or former impression.

Although therefore, it flies from one mouth to another: Infantes Baptizati
habent Fidem, uti Rationem, in actu primo, non secundo: Baptized Infants have
Faith as they have Reason, in the first Act, not in second: that is: (...) non
(...), potentialiter, non energetice; in remote power and aptitude, not in
actual Operation: Yet it is not meant cum respectu ad consequentia, with
respect to all that follows; as, that Faith in Children, proceeds of it self
to explicit Act and exercise, as Reason does, which needs not outward
instruction to the common exercise of reasonable Acts: Because Reason belongs
to a Man, as proper to him in his fleshly House, and as being in his
Definition; which, Faith, as being supernatural, and a Gift of Grace, does not.

And this their habitual Perfection, may be well apprehended, as in the
reality of it is Infusion, so in it self: it being in them, sicut Habitus est
in Adultis dormientibus, and ex Habitu non operantibus, as an Habit is in us
when we sleep, and work not by the Habit. Wherefore Baptized Infants are
Fideles, of the Faithful Kind. And indeed, grown Persons are not called
Faithful, ab actu, sed habitu Fidei, from the act, but from the habit of
Faith; otherwise, when they sleep, and also, when they wake and think not of
Faith or Divine Things, they should not be Fideles, Faithful.

I confess that a Baptized Child, educated amongst the Turks or Indians, and
not hearing of Christ, would be of the Indian or Turkish Profession: Because
the Grace of Baptism would be lost and chased away, by the disordinate
Application to sensible and present Things. For: As where the Sea is red or
Nieremberg. Hist. Naturae, lib. 16. cap. 57. De mari rubro and nigro.
black, the Rocks and Sands are also there black or red: So we commonly conform
in Religion, to the places of our Education, and are effigiated in morality by
the manners of the Persons with whom we live.

CHAP. XX.
THese recluse and profound secrets of Knowledge, will be the more pervious, if
this note concerning our Habits be enterweaved.

Those Habits of Virtues which God (the Lord of all Spiritual Treasure)
insuseth into the Soul, are actively produced by God, without us, (who
passively receive them,) or our aid and cooperation. Whence an Infused Habit
is defined, Bona Qualitas Mentis, quam Deus in nobis, sine nobis operatur: A
good Quality of the Mind, which God works in us, without us. And: Habitus in
Adultis tribuunt facilitatem Potentiae ad operandum: Habits in grown Persons,
give a facility of working to the Power; as being capable of it. And the Acts
of those Habits, either elicite or imperate, that is, the exercises of Virtue,
are so produced by Grace in us, and in the Powers of our Soul, ( good Habits
not coming forth into Act, but by the present Influx of actual Grace,) that
we also, must actively concur, and not only vitally, but also readily,
freely, and with Election, and ordination to some honest end; to their
production. 1 Cor. 3. 9. Text. Graec. Lect. Vulg.
(...), says St Paul: or, as the Vulgar, Dei enim adjutores sumus; For we are
helpers of God, in the work of God: or, as the English: For we are laborers
together with God.

From this Doctrine of Habits, the second Arausican Council took Council.
Araus. secund. can. 20. S. Aug. in Sententiis, number. 311.
i'ts Rise, when it published out of St Austin: Multa enim Bona facit in
Homine, sine Homine, Deus: Sed nihil Boni facit Homo quod non faciat Deus, ut
faciat Homo. Many good things God works in Man without Man: But Man does no
good thing which God is not the cause that Man is the Cause of. The former part
of this part of the Canon, speaks of Habitual Grace in the Infusion: the
latter part, of actual Grace and Operation.

It is Visible here, that the Nature of an Habit is compossible with the
childishness of Children: and that the Habit does not give a facility of
working to their Powers, by reason of their Indisposition, inward and outward;
as we are indisposed, being in a sleep, or Trance, or distracted with Affairs
of a lower order.

I am startled sometimes with horror and amazement, as if I were planet-struck;
when I consider and chew in my Thoughts, how inconsiderately and rashly, the
ignorant ranting Rabble of Men, Women and Children, being exhausti Pudoris, of
exhausted shamefastness, rush beyond the Hoop, and make a rude assault upon
these hidden Depths, and Heigths, and Breadths; the sound Explications and
evolutions whereof, are imbodied in School Divinity. They should hear Lucianus
adversus indoctum.
the Dogs bark in Lucian; which when young Neanthus played upon the Harp of
Orpheus without Orpheus his skill; enraged with his tunes out of tune, ran with
open mouth upon him, and tore him, almost into as many picces, as the noise he
made, consisted of Discords.

That Baptism is the Instrument of our new Birth, the Fathers and old
Interpreters of Scipture, bear up by general Acclamation. I enter Tert. lib
de Baptismo cap. 1.
Tertullian as their Orator: Nos Pisciculi secundum (...) nostrum Jesum
Christum, in aqua nascimur: We little Fishes, according to our Fish, Jesus
Christ, are Spiritually born in the Water. His explicit meaning as it depends
upon History, is: (...), Jesus Christ the Son of God, our Savior, being the
Motto or Title of Consignation in all our Affairs, and by us gathered together
in short, according to the first and Head-Letters, into (...) is by you
coagulated with scorn, and interpreted a Fish: who notwithstanding is
mystically and Metaphorically our Fish; and we according to our mystical Head
thus intimated by these Head-Letters, are inwardly born with the Fishes in
their secret Element exposed to our mystical Use.

CHAP. XXI.
THE second objection is: If the Text declares for Baptism; either there is an
halfe-Birth, and some are newborn by halfes; or, all the Baptized shall enter
into the Kingdom of God: quae ambo, sunt inconvenientia.

I answer to the first Member: There is no halfe-Birth; neither are Baptized
Children newborn by halfes. For: the whole work of the New Birth is
completed in them: They have, saving Faith you may call it, or Sanctifying
Grace; and they are Justified. Only: They have not this Grace or Faith, quoad
externum exercitium, according to outward exercise: the effect of all, being as
yet immanent and inward. Because, Quicquid recipitur, ad modnm recipientis
recipitur: Whatsoever is received, is received and contained according to the
manner and measure of the Receiver. And Children receiving the Life of Grace,
when the corporeal Organs remain slatted, and lying mortuo modo, after a dead
manner, in regard of such high and lively performances: we may not expect
exercise, until teaching shall (...). 2 Timothy 1. 6. in Textu Graeco.
stir up the gift and grace of God in them, by blowing the coal, hid and lying
as dead, some while in the Ashes: As the Fire (...), which fell from Heaven,
was nourished and cherished with the Suppliance of ordinary Matter and Helps,
by the Priests under the old Law.

For: Supernatural Habits are outwardly manifested and explicated by natural,
outward and ordinanary Means: though Habits cannot be strengthened inwardly or
augmented, but with Acts of the same kind.

A Coat for the body of a Child, may be a whole Coat, a sit Coat, and a warm
one, though it appears outwardly but a little Coat.

And as we draw Original sin from our Parents, so God our Heavenly Parent, in
a due Time, takes us up de matre cadentes, falling from the Mother, and being
unclean; with a cleansing Ordinance. And because the Grace of Christ is, at
the least, as great as the Prevarication of Adam; they who are made guilty by
the first Adam, may not be neglected by the second: And therefore, his Visible
Ordinances are addressed toward them as soon as they Visibly appear in the
world.

But the reverend and Politic Doctor objects for his Brethren the Doct. Tailor
in his Liberty of prophesying. Sect. 18.
Anabaptists: That, Grace being an improvement and heigthning of the Faculties
of Nature, in order to a Supernatural and most high End; has no influence or
Efficacy upon the Faculties of such, who cannot reasonably perform the natural
Acts of Understanding.

The Answer is: Grace in Children, perfects and heigthens the Faculties of
their Souls, by cleansing them, by adorning them for God, and consequently by
stating them in a capacity of their supernatural End. For though as Aquinas
admonishes: Fi^em oportet esse praecognitum Hominibus, D. Tho. p. 1. q. 1. art.
1. in corp.
qui suas intentiones and actiones debent ordinare in Finem: It be necessary
that the End should be foreknown by Men, who ought to direct their intentions
and actions to their End: Yet in Children, in whom, for their defect of
Understanding, there can be no such direction or dirig^ble Action; God Almighty
directs and acts for them; and they are directed by him toward their
Supernatural End, Sicut Sagitta a Sagittante dirigitur versus Scopum, as an
Arrow is by the Archer directed toward the Mark; God working in and with all
things, answerably to their being and capacity: and supplying, as the Supreme
cause, their defects.

CHAP. XXII.
TO the other Member of the objection: Or, all the Baptized shall enter into
the Kingdom of God: I answer: All fitly qualified for the whole effect of
Baptism, and rightly Baptized, shall enter into the Kingdom of God; modo
postea non ponant obicem, if afterward they, on their own part, scatter no
impediment in their own way.

Simon Magus has no work for a Cooper; (I despise no man whose Father is a
Cooper; but if such a one shall undertake to Hoope-binde his Hogsheads, or
Bucking-Tubs, and not perform it strongly; I shall merrily tell him of it:)
because he was not sitly qualified, though Baptized. Act^ 8. 13.
Ponder the Text: Then Simon himself believed also: and when he was Baptized,
he continued with Philip, and wondered, beholding the miracles and signs which
were done. His Faith and Foundation was not sound: therefore his Baptism and
Superstructure was not safe; he remaining still unqualified: the fit
qualification of an Adult, for the whole effect of Baptism, being Faith and
Repentance.

The Divines have truly discovered four Kinds of false Faith in true and Holy
Scripture: The Faith of the Heretic: The Faith of the false Christian: The
Faith of the curious Person: The Faith of the Person unquiet or unstable. All
these have misplaced and mis-centred their Faith. Guess now I beseech you,
which of these false Faiths, was the faithless Faith of this false Dealer,
Simon the Magitian. Surely: his Faith was the Faith, which, as the rest, leanes
not upon the Veracity of ^od, the Revealer of Truth, in his Revelation; nor
upon the well-groundednesse of the Church, the Pillar of Truth, in her
Proposition; but is generated and earth-begotten, when (this being its
differentiall mark) the person is hurried on with a curious Motive of seeing
Miracles: as the Scribes and Pharisees were, saying Master, Mat. 1^. 38.
we would see a sign from thee: Of whom also St Paul: The Jews require 1 Cor.
1. ^2.
a sign. And Herod was tainted Luke 23. 18.
in this kind.

This Faith was the broad-ey'd and staring Child of Amazement and Amulement.
And therefore, even the Apostles themselves were deceived, etsi non i^ materia
Juris, in materia tamen Facti, though not in matter of Right or Law* yet in
matter of Fact.

But the Member here, serperastro cohibendum est, must be swathed up. The
Alchymists uncertainly obtrude Alchymistae.
to us, to keep straight their curious opinion of the Philosophers Stone, and
of the making of Gold; That Nature intends Gold in all Metals; and that if
the Crudities, Leprosities, Impurities of Metals were cured; they would all
evade into Gold. Certainly: God intends intention primaria, with his primary
intention, that the Sacraments should be rightly received by all the Receivers,
(and that they should all enter into the Kingdom of God;) and if they be not,
the fault most commonly is in the Impurities, Leprosities, Crudities of the
receivers; their impure Heresy, their leprous Christianity, their curious and
unstable Crudity.

He wills no man absolutely from his entrance into the Kingdom of God. And that
he foreknows the non-entrance of many, has no forcible operation upon the
Things foreknown: Sicut enim, as St Austin, S A^g. in sent^nti^^. S^^. 379.
nemo memoria sua cogit facta esse quae praetereunt, sic Deus praescientia sua
non cogit facienda quae futura sunt: For as no Man by his remembering of things
past, compels them into Vide quae sequuntur apud Augustinum.
a past being: So God by his prescience and foresight of things to come, forces
them not into being hereafter. But he wills it conditionally, from the breach of
his Condition in his Covenant with Mankind.

Divinely St Bernard: Recte Deus non pater judiciorum vel Ul^ionum S. Bern.
Sermon. 8. in Natali Domini.
dicitur, sed pater Misericordiarum, eo quod miserendi caus^m and originem
sumat ex proprio, judicandi vel ulciscendi magis ex nostro: God is rightly said
to be, not the Father of Judgments or of Revenges, but the Father of Mercies;
because he takes the cause and origin of showing Mercy, from his own; but of
judging and revenging from us.

And from the bottom of Reason: Reprobation is an Act of divine Hatred; and God
hates nothing in man exept sin; and therefore, does not reprobate Man for any
thing but for sin.

CHAP. XXIII.
TO right Baptism is required; ex part Baptismi, vel Sacramenti on the part of
Baptism or of the Sacrament: 1: right Matter: which is, natural water, not
artificial as Rosewater and the like. And it must be water in its proper and
simple Element, not compounded* 2: right Form: As: I Baptize thee in the name
of the Father Ecclesia O^cid^ntali^.
and of the Son and of the Holy, Ghost, according to the received use of the
Western Churches: or, as the Ecclesia Grae^^, E^ O^ales aliae quaedam.
Church of Greece, and some other Oriental Churches; Baptizetur Servus
Christi, talis, in nomine Patris, etc. Let the servant of Christ be Baptized
(here he is named) in the Name of the Father, etc. For: the Grecians do not
attribute the Act of Baptism to the Minister Sacramenti, Minister* of the
Sacrament; that they may de industria, of set purpose, professedly and
practically condemn the old error of those who attributed the virtue of
Baptism to the Baptizers, saying, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of
Cephas. 1 Cor. 1. 12.


With a beam cast upon these Requisites on the part of the Sacrament, St
Austin is doctrinall: Accedit S Aug. Tractat. 80. in J^an.
Verbum ad Elementum, and fit Sacramentum; The Word is applied to the Element,
and there is made a Sacrament.

And, ex part Baptizantis, on the part of the Baptizer; we may not undervalue
his right intention. For: as a certain Form of words is required by the pull
of necessity, that the indifferency of the Matter may be determined; so there
is need of some special Intention, formal or virtuall, to determine the
indifferency of the Form: otherwise, he that shall accidentally read or utter
the words or formal part of the Sacrament, in strange or profane matters and
occasions; shall be said to read or utter them Sacramentally.

And in Conscience: The Minister of a Sacrament, does not Act Sacramentally,
but as Minister Christi, the Minister of Christ: and he cannot act as the
Minister of Christ, except he does intend the work of Christ, and to Act after
his prescription.

And lastly, ex part Baptizati, on the part of the Baptized, right
qualification is required: which in Infants, is; That they are offered to the
Church, and supplied with the Faith of it, that they may be offered to God.

CHAP. XXIIII.
AND it is not absonous from Truth, that the Kingdom of God is open to the
rightly Baptized: The Scriptures being impregnably strong for it.

The Ap^stle St Peter having opened the sluees of Heaven, and brought the sloud
into his Discourse, and how some were saved by water in the Ark. ass^meth: The
like figure 1 Pet. 3. 21.
whereunto, even Baptism does also now save us. And St Paul is divinely Tit. 3.
5.
symphonous: But according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. The Original deals it: (...):
which the Text. Graec
Vulgar does re^^est into its native signification; per Lavacrum
Regenerationis; Edit Vulg.
by the Laver of Regeneration.

Then are we saved by Baptism, as by a Sacramental Instrument. Then are we
likewise washed in Baptism, from Original sin. Then is Baptism the Sacrament
of Regeneration; and consequently of Initiation.

And it is most conformable to the royal way of divine Mercy, and to right
Reason, the royal Work of the divine Power; that the Sacrament which initiates
us, should also instrumentally regenerate us, and compliablie lift us up into
the royal state of Salvation: that the Goodness of God may be, not only as
large and extensive, but also in some sort, as intensive and efficacious for us
to life and deliverance, as the malice of the Devil is to Death and
destruction.

Wherefore Ananias to Paul, then Act. 22. 16.
Saul: Arise, and be Baptized, and wash away thy sins. For: As the outward
filth of the body is washed away with water: so the blood of Jesus Christ
applied in Baptism, 1 John 1. 7.
cleanses us from all sin; which is the filth of the Soul.

Then are our actual sins also, committed (if such there be) before Baptism,
washed away by it. And either this water-signe must be Signum inane, a vain
Sign, and of no effect; or there is an inward washing, suppositis intere a
supponendis. And if there be; this washing, God's works being perfect, and
Sanctifying Grace being opposed to all sin, must be a washing from all sin.

Which complete washing is indeed so properly the Thing intended by the Author
of the Sacrament, and Giver of Grace; that be the outward washing more or
less, (I speak here of Infants; not of Adults, in whom the Grace received is
correspondent with the qualification of the Subject,) the inward effect does
not recipere magis and minus, but is ever the same.

Because God looks upon the End in every practical touch of his Power; which
End is the chi^fe in all the course, and the first intentionally, though
executively the last: and Grace the Gift of God, is an attendant upon the Thing
signified, and does not attemperate it self to the manner of signifying. And
therefore Baptism given with a threefold Immersion, does not more justify, than
Baptism conferred by one Immersion or Inspersion: And yet, the first is a more
express and visible sign of Sacrramentall Grace; because it washes more
perfectly; and furthermore, adumbrates the most blessed Trinity, in whose most
blessed Name the Baptism is given.

A Roman Council celebrated under Gregory the Great, and the same Gregory
together with Gratianus, firmly set a bar upon this Truth. Leander Bishop of
Hispalis or Sivil, imploreth Gregory his Determination concerning Immersion,
whether it should be one or threefold: Gregory answers as follows. De
Concilium Roman. sub Gre^^cio primo: and idem Greg lib. 1. Regist^i, ^p. 4. ad
Leandrum Episc. Hispal^nsem: and allegat Gratianus de Consecrations, D^st. 4.
cap. de trina.
trina mersione Baptismatis nil responderi verius potest, quam quod ipsi
sensistis; quia in una Fide nihil officit sanctae Ecclesiae Consuetudo diversa.
Nos autem quod tertio mergemus, triduauae Sepulturae Sacramenta signamus; ut
dum tertio Infans ab aquis educitur, Resurrectio tr^duani temporis exprimatur.
Quod si quis forte, etiam pro summae srinitatis Veneratione, existimet fieri;
neque ad hoc aliquid obsistit, Baptizando semel in aquis mergere: quia dum in
tribus Subsistentijs una Substantia est, reprehe sibile esse ni^a tenus potest,
Infantem in Baptismate vel ter vel semel immergere; qu^ndo and in tribus
mersionibus personarum Trinitas, and in una potest D. vinitatis Singular it as
designari. Concerning the threefold Immersion in Baptism, nothing can be
answered more truly, than that which ye have thought; (Leander and the Church
of Sivil used one Immersion;) because a diverse Custom of the Holy Church
hurts not where there is one Faith. ^ut we dipping the third time, declare the
Mystery of the three days Sepulture; that while the Infant is drawn from the
water the third time, the Resurrection of Christ after three days, may be
thereby expressed. If any perhaps may think it to be done, even for the
veneration of the highest Trinity; neither is there any hinderance to this, but
such a one may dip once only the Baptized Person: Because there being one
Substance in three Subsistences, it cannot be at all reprehensible, to dip the
Infant in Baptism either three times or once; whereas in three Mersions, the
Trinity of Persons; and in one, the Singularity of the Divinity may be designed.

Also: in the Thing signified there is never any difference, Rebus eodem modo
se habentibus: because God works infallibly: And: Agens agit ad extremum
Potentiae, si Patiens eodem modo se habeat: The Agent acts to the utmost of his
Power, if the Patient be alike disposed: And not only the Natural, but also
the Voluntary Agent, respectively to what he proposes and intends.

Let the backward-witted Anabaptists know, that a Divine must not expatiate
altogether in Scriptures, which in every purge-motion, or Tickle of their
Imagination, they turn and wire-draw with their most unnatural and violent
Interpretations, to their own everlasting Perdition.

CHAP. XXV.
Here now remains yet one obstacle: this being the last and strongest Quill
which the Porcupine shoots in this encounter. If Children be infallibly
Sanctified in Baptism, then is there a falling from Grace.

My answer is. I confess in the sight of the Sun, that my Judgment goes
aequis passibus, with some Independents in many particulars. For example: in
the Doctrine of Universal Redemption, if piously regulated: Of Conditional
Reprobation; and that our sins and Damnation are of our selves; our Salvation
of God: That there is a moderate Freedom in Man with reference to
supernatural Actions, excluding Pelagius and the Massilienses or
Semipelagians; and that the Action has its being free, from our Will, and from
the Divine Grace, it is being gracious: These actions in us being somewhat like
the theandricall Operations in Christ: and in all their Doctrines, militant
against the Calvinists; wherein the Independents as noble Creatures and
Adversaries to the Viper, free our most good and most pure God from being the
Author of the Evil of most impure sin. Likewise: that there is a Falling from
Grace. Which not being granted: the Anabaptist will here throw the Paedobaptist
slat upon his back, that neither Scripture nor Learning will be able to relieve
or help him; except he shall pitifully fly to this miserable and unreasonable
(...), that some infants are Sanctified by the Sacrament, and others are not.

Neither are these the Doctrines of Independents only, but also of the most
expert Scholars of the English Nation; against whom I shall never take up this
Gauntlet.

The Grace in the question, is habitual Grace: and the falling, is a Falling
for a Time in the Saints of God, and a final Falling in Reprobates. For: He
that says, the Elect fall finally, ^als himself presently into a
Contradiction: And: Contradicentium unum necessario ve^um, alierum falsum est:
Of contradictory Sayings the one is necessarily true, the other false: And in a
Contradiction being grounded upon esse and non-esse; and therefore, consisting
of two parts, where of the one denies Being, and the other affirms to be; it
is impossible that both parts should be true, that is, should be, otherwise
than Chimerically. If they be Elected by God to Salvation, whose Decrees
concerning our last End are immutable; they cannot fall finally from it: And:
if they can fall finally from Salvation, they are not Elected by God to it: the
immediate Jarr being betwixt ens and non-ens, being and not being; betwixt
being Elected and not being Elected; betwixt falling finally, and not finally
falling.

The firm Tenure therefore, of this Truth is: That as the Sense of Touching,
like a faithful and most unseparable Achates, stays outwardly with us unto
the last breath; and this ending to act, Death begins Vide Arist^ lib. 3. de
anima, cap. 13. Tex^. 67.
to execute: So the Elect may for a while, and Reprobates finally do, lose all
the lively Touchings and faithful Attendance of inward and habitual Grace,
and consequently, the Life of Godliness.

CHAP. XXVI.
I Receive Scripture in the humble Gius. in vita Caroli Borromaei, lib. 8. cap.
2.
posture of Carolus Borromaeus, who read it always upon his Knees, as humbly
attending to the Royal Words of his King. And my first Text is: But when the
Righteous turns away from his Righteousness, Eze. 18. 24.
and commits Iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that the
wicked man does, shall he live? all his Righteousness that he has done, shall
not be mentioned: In his Trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that
he has sinned, in them shall he die. Here it is evidently supposed, that the
Righteous man may, and sometimes does, fall finally; as dying in his sins and
Trespasses: yea, that he loses while he lives, not only Gratiam gratum
facientem, the Grace by which he is properly acceptable to God, and which gives
to the Soul a divine and supernatural Being; and consequently, the Habit of
Charity, (these not being distinguished, according to Scotus and the
Anti-Scotian Scotus and Scotistae.
Scotists; the same gift, as it makes us beloved of God and accepted to Glory,
being called Grace, and, as it renders us Lovers of God, being named Charity;)
but also all good Habits that are merely natural and moral, and which cannot
be expelled by one opposite Act, but require many such Acts to their expulsion;
such Habits being acquired by the multiplication of Acts of the same nature,
and therefore, being weakened by the diminution of them, and lost by cessation
from them; and by the frequent acting of opposite Acts: For, he is here
declared to do according to all the abominations that the wicked man does, and
to have put himself into a lost condition, wherein all his righteousness that
he has done, shall not be mentioned; our past Acts, intercepted by a change,
not returning upon us except we be qualified and opened for them by a condition
agreeable to them.

My second Text is: And because M^t. 24 12. 13.
Iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. But he that shall
endure unto the end, the same shall be saved. The Greek Text affords, (...),
the Charity of many shall wax Text. Graec.
cold. Which words imply a total extinction of Charity, and a coldness of
Death; because the coldness of Charity is opposed here to Perseverance, which
endures unto the end; and the opposition or antithesis would not be right and
even, unless it were a coldness losing all heat of Charity, and ending in
coldness: And the Text supposes, that few shall endure unto the end, yea but
one amongst many, the rest losing their Charity.

My third Text: Know ye not that 1 Cor. 3. 16. 17.
ye are the Temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you? If any
man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy: for the Temple of God is
Holy, which Temple ye are. The Original goes, (...): If Text. Grac.
any man destroy the Temple of God, him shall God destroy. It is consequent:
the Temple of God may be destroyed; and the Person, who was the Temple of God,
and in whom the Spirit of God dwelled, may be destroyed finally.

My fourth text: Holding Faith and a good Conscience, which some 1 Timothy 1. 19.
having put away, concerning Faith have made shipwreck. A good Conscience
conspiring with Faith, is a true mark of Gods's faithful Servant: yet, some
that had a good Conscience, have put it away, and thereby made shipwreck of
their Faith: which they could not have done, had they not once been in the Ship
or Arc of the Church, and there obtained, first their Faith, and then, their
good Conscience: and therefore, they were utterly unravelled, as losing, first
their good Conscience, and then their Faith.

My fifth Text is: In the latter 1 Timothy ^. 1^
times some shall depart from the faith. But no man actually departs from
that which he has not. It runs on: giving heed to seducing Spirits, and
Doctrines of Devils. And no man is rightly said to be seduced from a false
faith, but only, from the true faith: Neither is any seduced Person entangled
in the false Doctrines of Devils, but as relinquishing the true Doctrine of
God: from the possession of which, being drawn, he is properly seduced and led
out of his way, having been in it; the seduction here, not being a seduction
from the way to the Doctrine of God, but a seduction from the Doctrine which is
the way of God, this being diametrically and immediately opposed to the
Doctrines of Devils.

Many more Texts there be, if summed up by the Algebra of ingenuous and
Christian Candor: but even these are able singly to heave out the objection.
And: if we cannot fall from Grace or Faith: why does holy Scripture exhort us
promiscuously, many times and pressingly, to stand fast, hold fast, persevere?
and why do we produce and prosecute these Texts in our Sermons? Exhortation
always presupposing a possibility of the contrary.

The Text in high esteem with our low square Knights of the round Hoop: The
gifts and calling of God Romans 11. 29.
are without Repentance: gives nothing to the adverse party, but only a call to
Repentance. For: although the Original word be (...), impenitible; and the
Basilean Code Text. Graec. Codex Has^^eensis. Syrus In^crp.
exalts, (...), immutable; and the Syriack shrines it, non mutavit Deus Donum
suum and Vocationem; God has not changed his Gift and Vocation: Yet this
proposition is intended de Vocatione absoluta and efficaci, of the absolute and
efficacious Vocation of predestined persons, with respect to the final
effect, which assuredly follows: and of the Gifts in order to it. And if you
wry it from this, you move crokedly; because, Many are called but few, etc. And
in genere, it is true of inefficacious Vocation and Grace, quantum est ex part
Dei, as considered and weighed on God's part; and on the part of his
antecedent, not of his consequent and judiciary will.

CHAP. XXVII.
REason, as the Handmaid, waits upon Scripture.

First: if Charity be considered ex part Subjecti, on the part of the Subject:
the Subject being vertible and mutable, Charity may be lost by actual
mutation. For, in regard that this Charitas viae, Charity of the way, does not
fill the whole possibility of the Subject, and therefore, is not always
actually, nor at any time necessarily carried toward God: in the time wherein
it cease from act, the Subject being free from necessity and coaction, has
power at the presentation of other concurrences, to disband the Habit.

Secondly: if Charity be considered ex part Habitus, on its own part, or on
the part of the Habit: the use of the Habits in us on our parts, is from our
will, as from an active Power or Faculty; and there is essentially required in
our will, a Reference ad utrumque Oppositorum, to both the Opposites; that is,
as well to the one as to the other: in respect of which Respect or Reference,
the Subject or Agent is variable.

Thirdly: The understanding of a Saint militant, is capable of darkness and
offuscation: and every sin descends from some kind of ignorance: Whence the
Philosopher: Arist in Ethic. lib. 3.
Omnis Malus, ignorans est: Every evil person is ignorant: Therefore, we are
then only secure of Holy Charity in our will, when we are secure of perfect
Knowledge in our Understanding: as, when we clearly see the first Truth, the
clear sight whereof is our Blessedness: Therefore, if we are not secured by
Grace, from ignorance and errrour; neither are we secured by Grace, in the
possession of Grace.

Fourthly: The will of Man in hoc statu, is mutable: and therefore, the state or
condition of it, is likewise mutable. For: there agrees not with our will a
state of immutability, or immutable Adhesion, but when our will is adequately
filled, and has nothing offered to it by the which it may be diverted from
it is Object: and it cannot be filled when any thing remains to be desired: and
some strange Thing will obtrude it self as desirable, until we are united with
our last End.

Fifthly: Man is made flexible by Disoipline: and therefore (as before) people
exalted to Grace, are exhorted to beware lest they fall from it. Looking
diligently, lest any man fail Heb. 12 15.
of (or fall from, says the Margeant,) the Grace of God.

Sixthly: I pretermit the fall of the Angels, and of our first Parents: also, of
Solomon St Peter, etc. And I argue thus. David was a saint of God: The same
David committed Adultery, and Murder: This very Commission, even in its very
first adventure, was a foul falling from the fair Law of God, and from the
gracious keeping of it, and by consequence from the gracious Helps of keeping
the Law, whereof the chief is Habitual Grace.

If you return: It was a Falling from the actual Use of that Help, but not
from the habitual Possession of it: It is answered: It was a Falling from
Habitual Grace, as it was a Falling from the Law of God the Giver of Grace for
the keeping it; these being equally Gods Instruments, and though divided in
their places, yet united in their Office and work: And the Law was thrown out
of his Keeping and Possession.

Again: If the inward Help of Habitual Grace be not actually used, in the
meeting and convention of circOne of the killers, Steven Green, was found
guilty on May 07, 2009 in the US District Court of Paducah and is now awaiting
sentencing.mstances implying our strict obligation, and our just freeing of
God's Honor; but on the contrary, the maine End of the Habit be perverted by
the full and free admission of Contrary Acts: the Habit being debaried of
employment when it should work, certainly fares as God fares ^he Author of the
Habit, and he that dwells in us by it, and works by it in us; who now is opposed
by contrary procedings, utterly thrown off, set at desiance, and altogether
contemned; all the secret cords of Love and Unity being broken.

And to say, that God dwells by Habitual Grace in a Soul contemning him,
setting him at defiance, throwing off him and his chief Instruments, inward
and outward; and contrarying him in his ways and works; is to defy with a
graceless defiance, both Scripture and Reason. What fellowship has
righteousness 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15.
with unrighteousness? and what communion has light with darkness? and what
concord has Christ with Belial? The word Beliall signifies in the Hebrew
School, without profit, or, in the cast of another derivation, without yoke:
And it is taken sometimes in concreto, as the Latin Oratores Latini.
Orators use pro Scelesto Scelus, wickedness for a wicked man; and so it is
takable here: And therefore the Syriack sounds it, What concord is there, Syrus
Interp.
Messiae cum Satana, of the Messiah with Satan? Satan derives it self* says
Isidore, from the Hebrew Shatan; Isid. in Etymol.
which is Englished, he is an Adversary. And God's greatest Adversary, is sin:
Yea, the Devil is not his Adversary, but for sin. And does God keep his Holy
Temple, (which if it be not Holy, is not his Temple,) where sin and the Devil
set up their unholy Standard, and build impure Trophies after their Victory and
Triumph over the Temple of God? O Myriads of Contradictions!

And the Apostle must be understood of exact Light and extreme Darkness: for
otherwise, there is Communion betwixt them: And Adultery begetting Murder,
Proceeds from extreme Darkness; and is, it self, dark and dark;
Adulterously Dark, and Murderously Dark.

Be it so: That Peccatum opponitur Gratiae, ut Gratia est, non contrary, s^d
demeritorie: Sin is opposed to grace, not as contraries are opposed, but as the
Sinner demerits a Jewel of such Excellency: Yet, one contrary Act being
accepted into the retiring-place of a Supernatural Habit, (the Supernatural
Habit, according to the common course of Habits; inclining, not compelling us
to it is Act, nor of necessity precluding the way to a contrary Act,) this
peccaminous and contrary Act puts the Supernatural Habit to flight, as
possessing and contaminating all the powers of the soul; a coexistence by the
Rules of Divine Economy, not being allowed on either side.

Besides: What should hinder, that he who does the works of Carnal and
unconverted Men, called the works of Darkness; should not be known by his
Fruits; and be in a dark and Carnal condition, as such men are? especially, St
John testifying: 1 John 2 9.
He that says he is in the light, and hates his Brother, is in darkness,
even until now. Which cannot be meant, but of Habitual darkness and Hatred
of our Brother, that continues until it be expelled by the Habitual Love of
our Brother: As Faith expels Infidelity, (and is expelled only by it;) these
not being able to stand in the same Subject, in eodem Nun^ in the same Now of
time. And sans doubt: he that wilfully murdereth his brother, hates him.
Moreover: If David fully and wholly consented to Adultery and Murder; all the
Spiritual Parts of David in David, were of the conspiracy; and as they could,
preferred Adultery and Murder before God, as majus Bonum Davidi, magisque
desiderabile, a greater Good to David, and more desirable, either as
pleasurable or profitable: But Habitual Grace could not conspire in this
kind, so much as negatively, by denying or suspending it is Help; because if it
be, it always Acts for God, as a Supernatural Habit; and has such a near
link with Heaven, and likeness with Divinity, that it cannot betray it is
Trust. And neither can any good Habit be used evilly, besides what may be said
of remiss Acts.

I give, That indifferent Acts may be acted without the concurrence or
Subduction of the Supernatural Habit: And if Aquinas and his Thomists D. Tho.
and Thomistae.
do substantially prove, some Sins to be praeter Legem, non contra eam, besides
the Law, not against it; or equivalently, not contrary to Charity, though
contrary to the perfection of it; the same Doctrine may not be repealed
concerning these.

And to what newfound Utopia in David, could Grace retreat; all David
consenting to Adultery crying Murder?

Furthermore: Praecisione intellectiva and rationis, etiamsi non reali and
objectiva; By intellective, though not by objective and real Precision: If
David had died in his Act of Adultery, or consent to Murder: had he been
carried to Heaven or Hell? If to Hell; then he was not in a sanctified State,
or the state of Habitual Grace: If to Heaven; then would there have been a
going to Heaven without Repentance after sin; and many plain Texts of Scripture
would have moulder'd into nothing.

This Dilemma though most unconquerable, a certain uncertain and inferior
Waiter on the lower CLasses, would elude with a supponis quod non est
supponendum, you suppose what may not be supposed* for, you may not suppose a
Falsehood to prove a Truth.

I answer: Then (...) we all Divines taken an evil course in all their good
Discourses; who frequently enter their proofs with, Si per impossible daretur
etc. And yet I will distinguish here (that I may be liberal to my friend)
betwixt falsum ex Natura Z* b^rella in M^^aph.
sua, and propter intrinsecam repugnantiam Terminorum, and falsum ex
suppositione Decreti extrinseci; That which is false of it is nature, and by
reason of intrinsecall repugnance in the Terms, and that which is false from
supposition of the extrinsecal Decree. And I consider not David now, as a
predestined person by Virtue of the Divine Ordination, (from which I totally
prescind,) but with a full eye upon his murderous Adultery, inhumanely
committed by Divine permission. And such a Supposition is not repugnant with
the proof, but is only and simply previous to it, in such an imaginary Case as
this is.

CHAP. XXVIII.
THE third Objection succeeds. Christ and his Apostles, in their discoursing
and preaching, never presled Baptism, at the first lift; but either faith or
repentance, or these together.

I answer. Hoop. Whither so fast? come back. Never, is a Term of Infinity: in
the which because it here states the Proposition, and betwixt finite and
infinite there is an infinite distance; it unmakes the Proposition by making it
infinitely false.

I distinguish therefore. We may consider Baptism to be presled, at the first
lift, by one discoursing or Preaching; ( cum respectu ad Finem;) either that it
may be presently known by him with whom he discourses, or, to whom he
preaches; as the first Sacramental Ordinance, ipso facto vel dicto, moving
him to immediate preparation: or, that it may be presently used by him in his
own Person. In the last consideration* it was never presled, at the first lift,
by Christ or his Apostles, to the persons with whom they discoursed or
preached: But in the first Consideration, it was first pressed to Nicodemus.

Yet: this was not the ordinary, and every-day course of Christ and his
Apostles: Because in their discoursing and preaching, their business being only
with Adults; their first Business Ordine Naturae, (which is not always ordo
Doctrinae,) was their Qualification. Wherefore when John the Baptist began to
preach to the People of the Jews, he began, Repent ye, for the Kingome Mat^h.
3. 2.
of Heaven is at hand. When Christ began to preach to the same People, he began
after the same manner: Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. When the
Mat. 4. 17.
twelve were sent forth by two and two, amongst the same People: (it stands
recorded of them:) they went Mar. 6. 12.
out, and preached that men should Repent. When Peter had ended his first
Sermon, preached likewise to the Jews, after the coming of the Holy Ghost,
which Jews had now been the Crucifiers of Christ: and the people troubled in
Heart, said unto Peter, and to the rest of the Act. 2. 37, 38.
Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them,
Repent, and be Baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the Gift of the holy Ghost: Repentance
in grown persons being the first fruit and work of Faith, (which is the only
Basis and adequate foundation of all Christian Virtues;) and being requisite
together with Faith, in such persons, to Baptism.

It has two faces, faciem Humanam, and faciem Angelicam* an Humane face turned
backward and sorrowful; an Angelical face turned forward, and showing a
cheerful Resolution: And it has answerably, two works or Acts. St Gregory S
Greg. Him. 34. in Evang.
puts them together: Poenitentia est, anteacta peccata deflere, and deflenda,
iterum non committere: Repentance is, to Lament for our sins committed, and not
to commit the sins to be Lamented for. Which Acts are jointly preparatory, in
persons that have actually sinned; and are in the cause, that there are joined
according to the Holy Language of the old Liturgies* (...), Holy Things
Liturgi^ S S. Basilii and Chrysostomi.
to Holy Things, Holy Hearts to Holy Ordinances.

And here appears, like a good Angel, the reason why we are formally
reconciled to God after actual sin, by Repentance, and by no other Virtue, or
performance. Which is: Because in our actual sinning, the Soul consented to
Evil: and Repentance only, is the formal reversing and cancelling of that
consent, quantum ex part voluntatis possibile est, as far as is possible on
the wil's part: which, though it cannot factum infectum reddere, undo the
thing done in respect of the Act, as being contradictory, and because the thing
done has a necessary connection with the Time in which it was done; yet being a
gracious will, does unwill the former willing of sin, as throwing it forth by a
contrary Act; and so does Undo the thing done in respect of the Effect; and
thereby, qualifies the Soul of an Adult for God's mercy in Christ, given by
Baptism; of which, the peccaininous Will is not capable.

CHAP. XXIX.
YET, we may reasonably believe, that the Apostles Baptized many, who could
neither actually Repent nor believe. Because they baptized Families: as in the
acts, Cornelius Act. 10. 47, 48. Act. 16. 15. Act. 16. 33. Act. 18. 8. 1 Cor.
1. 16.
with his Household; Lydia and her Household; the Jailor and all his; Crispus and
all his House; And St Paul says: I Baptized also the Household of Stephanus.

I shall not urge here, the Probability of there being Children in these
Households, and surrender this Houshold-hold with reserving only an Argument a
Probabili. But I will boldly maintain these House-Garrisons, even by little
Infants; and pronounce, that he who will securely follow this President, must
Baptize Households; and that he who follows the President of Baptizing
Households, in the which there is no Verbal or Consequentiall Exclusion of
children, must Baptize children, households benig ordinarily recruted with
Children: And that therefore, exempli gratia, I being called to an House,
whereof all are already Baptized except a Child or Children; to correspond with
these Apostolical Patterns of Baptizing Households, must Baptize the Child or
Children: Except I will magnify certain periodicall and stationary Times in
respect of the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, as they are multiplied by the
Astrologers Astrologi.
in respect of temporal Kingdoms. And that if the Apostles did not Baptize
Children; the defect was not on the part of their Intention, which was
Habitual and Hypotheticall even toward Infants, but because there were no
Children in these Households; (which notwithstanding, would be most unreasonably
said;) for, they aimed as they acted, and as the Text runs, to Baptize
Households without exception.

And if you except Infants, because they be not expressly mentioned in
Scripture; why are the Apostles admitted as Baptized Persons, the Baptizing of
whom, Scripture does not any where mention: and the best written account of
Euodius in Epist. quae inscribitur (...) Nic^ph. l. 2 Eccles. Hist. cap. 2.
Euthym. in cap. 3. Joannis.
which, we derive from Evodius, the Successor of St Peter in the Bishopric of
Antioch: who writes, that of women, the Virgin Mother was only Baptized by
Christ; of men, only Peter; and that Peter Baptized Andrew, James and John; and
they, the rest of the Apostles * The same Relation was afterward brought about
again by others, as by Nicephorus, Euthymius, etc.

In Verbo Sacerdotis Christiani: We Cabalistae
must all be Caballists in some Sense, and receive with a plaudit the
Distinction of the word of God into (...), written and unwritten; and that some
Truths were Apostolically given at the first, (...), besides the pen and Paper:
which Distinction moreover, I know not how to call Distinctionem Generis in
Species, but rather Subjecti in Accidentia; because the Scription, as also the
Orall Communication of it, is purely accidental: and we might have received it
as Verbum Mentis, or Verbum Dei in Mente, the Word of God in the Mind; after
the primitive manner of Reception: Neither know I how to say, that the Things
understood by the Members of this Distinction, do really differ.

The Text in the History of the Jailor: And they spoke unto him the Act. 16. 32.
Word of the Lord, and to all that were in his house: is to be understood, to
all in his house that understood the Word: And of the Text, Believing Verse. 34.
in God with all his House, the Sense is; all in the House that could Believe,
Believed: And: the House of 1 Cor. 16. 15.
Stephanus addicted themselves to the Ministry of the Saints: that is: all of
the House that could so addict themselves. For: Propositio quae affirmat
Hurtado in Logica.
vel subinfort rem impossibilem, non est Vera: The Proposition affirming or
inferring an impossible Thing, is not true, And figurative Expressions
admitting such limitations, are very common in all Historical Narrations.

Yea, this very limitation must likewise be taken home into the Narration, that
the Apostles Baptized Households; the Sense being, Baptized all in the
Households, capable of Baptism; which capability, we prove to be in Children.
And therefore, I say again: and I must, and will say it: Take him Jailer.

O how the dirty Camel, that Franzius ^^ Plutarcho and aliis.
thinks not the Water fit for his, or any good use, except he trouble and
muddy-make it with his own dirty feet!

CHAP. XXX.
THE fourth Objection breaks in upon us. Baptism is not commended or intended
in the Text: Because the Baptism only now in force, was John's Baptism; and
Christ should here transform himself into a Minister of John's Baptism, which
would be incongruous.

This Objection supposes a wide difference betwixt John's Baptism and the
Baptism of Christ; unto which, I give a Transeat without murmuring. John verily
Baptized Acts 19. 4.
with the Baptism of Repentance: that is: Baptismo qui erat Symbolum, excitatio
and Protestatio Poenitentiae, ad remissionem Peccatorum Baptismo Christi
recipiendam: With the Baptism which was a Symboll, excitation and Protestation
of Repentance for the remission of sins to be received by Christ's Baptism.

Hence it runs directly without a By as in the eyes of unbyassed Judgments;
that Infants, and Children void of actual Reason and incapable of Repentance,
were not Baptized with the Baptism of John: But the Baptism of Christ is given
to Infants for the remission of Original sin.

The Text proceeds: Saying unto the People, that they should believe on him
which should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus. From this Holy
Declaration, St Ambrose, St S Ambrose lib. 1. de spiritu sancto, cap. 3. S
Hierom in Joelis c. 2. Petrus Lombardus. D. Tho. Bonaventura, Palacius and
alii, in l. 4. Sententarum, D^st. 2. Hugo de sancto victore, lib. 2. de
Sacramentis, par. 6. cap. 6. Palac. ibid.
Hierom, the Master of the Sentences, Thomas Aquinas, Hugo de sancto Victore,
Bonaventure, Palacius, and others, extract; That this was the Form of John's
Baptism, Ego te Baptizo in nomine Venturi Messiae, vel, in eum qui Venturus
est, ut credas: I Baptize thee in the Name of the Messiah to come, or, into him
who is to come, that thou may Believe in him. And when he baptized Christ,
says Palacius, he used this Form, Ego te Baptizo in Nomine tuo, qui Venturus
es, I Baptize thee in thy own Name, or, in the Name of thy Self who art to
come. And as the Person was extraordinary and singular; so also was the Form of
Baptization, and indeed the Baptism, singular and extraordinary: Because it was
not to Christ, as to others, Baptismus poenitentiae, the Baptism of Repentance.

And the next Verse presently starts another difference betwixt these Baptisms:
When they heard this, they were Baptized in the Name Act. 19. 5.
of the Lord Jesus. For: the Baptism of Christ cannot be iterated, in regard of
the Character; but the Baptized of John, were Baptized again by the Apostles.
Wherefore John faith of Christ: he shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and
with fire. Mat. 3. 11
The Vulgar: Ipse vos Baptizabit in Spiritu sancto and igni. So the Greek.
Lectio Vulgat. Text. Graec,
(...), he shall Baptize you in the Holy Ghost, and in fire. And so moves the
Syriack, Arabic, Persick, Egyptiack. Syrus Interp. Evangelium Arabicum,
Persicum Aegyptiacum, Aethiopicum.
or Coptick, and the Ethiopick.

The words in their sense, flow thus my Baptism is preparatory as the common
use of Water is: but the Baptism of Christ is in Spirit-power, and
fiery-natur'd: And by* how much Fire is more active and efficacious than water,
by so much the Baptism of Christ is more empowred than my Baptism: Fire fires,
inflames, enlightens, purges, carries upwards, changes into it self: all
which, the Baptism of Christ does; Habitu, Actu, Effectu, vel Aptitudine, by
Habit, Act, Effect, or Aptitude, in convenient Subjects.

CHAP. XXXI.
THis given pro concesso, for a thing granted, on both sides: My answer may be:
These words were said to Nicodemus, by a Prolepsis or Anticipation of Time; as
the most Noble Things are delivered in Scripture.

And let our young Hoop-Master be admonished, that, as I formerly denied Figure
flinging in a plain Text, so neither do I entertain a Prolepsis here, as
Figuram Dictionis aut Sententiae, a Figure of Word or Sentence; but only, as a
Figure in the Circumstance of Time; which is outward in respect of the Words or
Things.

The Baptism of John was, as his Office, preparatory; and as his cry: Prepare
ye the way of the Lord. So Mat. 3. 3.
were the old Ceremonies in respect of Christ and the Gospel. And yet, Christ
was preached in most full and high Terms; the Validity of the Ceremonies yet
standing in its full Height. Unto us a Child is born, unto Isa 9. 6. Text. Hebr.
us a Son is given. In the Original; Praeteritum Tempus ponitur pro futuro,
the Time past or past Tense is put for the Time to come or future Tense: Which
is exactly recounted Sept.
by the Septuagint; (...), A Boy has been born to us, a Son has been given to
us. And this was fairly done by the Figure Prolepsis: though in it self, it be
rather Evangelicall, than Prophetical. And though the Expression be freeborn
in the Original; and propose to us, that the Child shall as surely be born and
given, as if he were already given and born: Yet the Figure stands immoveably;
Figures in all our Langusges, being often wedged into Idioms: as here the
Prolepsis is not merely circumstantiall, but looks inwardly, to keep the Sense
straight.

But I have a strong reserve. For: The Baptism of Christ was also now in force.
See John. 3. 26. and John 4. 1.

How strongly do these Arguments recoil upon our Adversary, their Answers being
fitted to them? And how gross and supine Ignorance do they suppose in him,
both of Scripture and Arts?

This empty Anabaptist, having publicly disputed away the University, that is,
renounced the University in his Disputation, and done public Penance for his
inward acquaintance with her; never thrived afterward: and retains nothing
now, of Name or Thing, but a mere presentation of Surface-Learning: and forgets
that in the old Law, the hands of the Priests were filled in their Ordination,
to signify, that they were ordained to fill the Ears and Hearts of the People,
with Truth and sound Knowledge; not with Falsehood, and clotted, clouted,
unreasonable, unseasonable Answers.

But although he be little* considerable, yet his rashneste may happily prove
the unhappily-happy Occasion of much good; and many seduced People may now
bring near to the Eye, their own Error.

Trithemius Chronicles a Jew named Trithem. in Chron. Anno 876.
Sedechias, and reports him for his honor, to have been sometimes Physician to
Jews the Emperor: Who being a Sorcerer, devoured in the sight and persuasion
of many Princes and their Followers, a Cart laden with (unchopt) Hay; not
abstaining either from the Horses or the poor Carter: Also, an armed Man, his
Horse and Harness. Yet, the Mist being recalled; the Countryman, and Man in
Arms, and all their Goods were made good again. These Devourers of Souls, may
in God's good time, disgorge again these Ignorant Country People; and
themselves return to their old sucking a Paw or a Claw, as the Bear or Polypus.

CHAP. XXXII.
HIs fifth Objection holds up the Head. There is no Man of late, who has made
use of this Text in the Proof of Baptism, but the Papists: and Bellarmin
himself receives it not as conducing to such proof: nor any of the Ancients.

I answer. Horum Omnium Contraria vera sunt: The Contraries of Dr Featly in his
Dipper dipped. Bellarum. l. 1. de Sacramento Baptismi, cap. 4. Idem facit Eodem
in libro. cap. 8. Bellarm. l. 2. de Essectu Sacramentorum, c. 3.
all these Things are true. Dr Featly has used this very Text in the defense
of Paedobaptism. Bellarmin chiefly builds upon it in this Matter: proving the
necessity of Baptism from the necessary meaning of this Text, iterum iterumque,
again and again. Likewise: the same Bellarmin has brought together the solid
Testimonies of fifteen most approved Doctors and ancient Fathers, who all
understand by the water in the Text, not the Word, or any other like Thing, but
the Water of Baptism. The words of Bellarmin are these: Omnes Scriptores
hactenus hunc locum intellexerunt de Baptismo; ut Justinus Apolog. 2.
Tertullianus in lib. de Baptismo: Cyprianus lib. 3. ad Quirinum, cap. 25.
Ambrosius lib. 3. de Spiritu Sancto, cap. 11. Hieronymus in cap. 16.
Ezechielis: item Basilius, Gregorius Nazianzenus, Gregorius* Nyssenus in
Sermonibus de Baptismo: Denique omnes Interpretes hujus loci Origenes,
Chrysostomus, Augustinus, Cyrillus, Beda, Theophylac^us, Euthymins, and alij.

O God, before whom we shall stand at the last Day; how confidently, yea how
impudently do these Religious Rats look out of their Holes, and mouth it
concerning Protestant* Writers; concerning that good-liv'd Mirror of
Encyclopedy, Bellarmine; and all the Ancients; and yet, relying upon I know not
what Perfugium Soricinum, Rat-Hole by which to escape, utter not one true word!

Beyond this. St Ambrose writing S Ambrose lib. 10. Epist 84. ad Demetriadem
Virginem. Jansenius Harm. in Evang. cap. 20. S Chrysostom. Hom. super* Nisi quis
renatus sucrit, etc. Perlege D. Tho. p. 3. q. 66, 67, 68.
to a Virgin, expressly affirms Paedobaptism to be the Constitution of our
Savior, and erects his Pillarproof on these words, Nisi quis renatus fuerit,
etc. except one be born, etc. See Jansenius in his Evangelicall Harmony. St
John Chrysostom not only Interprets the words for Baptism; but also dignifies
a famous Homily, by making them the Subject of it; wherein he carries all
before him for the Baptism of Infants. Aquinas is of the same Judgment.

Now indeed, one would think, a man might in reason give credit as soon almost
to this reverend Squadron of Worthies, St Justin, Tertullian, St Cyprian, St
Ambrose, St Hierom, St Basil, St Gregory Nazianzen, St Gregory Nyssen, Origin,
St Chysostom, St Austin, St Cyril, Venerable Bede, Theophylact, Euthymius; I
mean, to all these in the Complex: as to one, lone, lean, leaden, Pagnel-Saint
in the Country.

Shall a young barefaced dough-bak'd Dwarf of March pane, be much more
priviledg'd because he is devoted to an old Woman, than these walking Libraries
wedded to the ancient Church?

And now in the revolution of my Thoughts, why may we not encounter him with
three of these, being Latin Fathers, and three of the Greek Church? Why should
we muster up fifteen at once?

Nay verily, now I fetch the cud about again: why may not single St Austin
take him up, and throw him down? St Austin was a Godly Man, and somewhat
learned.

CHAP. XXXIII.
BUt the Papists use this Text for Baptism: there is the grand Ulcer.

The best Divines concentre in this: That the very Devils may perform Acts
morally good: and that the Pagans, and the most obstinate Heretics have
sometimes wrought Miracles: and that there was never any Arch-Heretick, which
did not maintain some Truths, and rightly, according to the Rules of Moral
Rectitude, defend them by Scripture. And yet now the Papists (concerning whom
it has been generally believed in England, after some evaporations and
ebullitions of heat and passion; that they are a part of the true Church,
though a corrupted one; and that many millions of them are said:) may not
believe any Truths; and as believed by them, justly prop them with Scripture. A
sad case: but f^ctitious, and absque Fundamento in Re.

In the place of, Sun, stand thou Jos. 10. 11
still: or, as the Vulgar, Sol non movearis, Interp. vulgat. Text. Hebr:
Sun, be not moved: the Hebrew gives up, Sol, tace; Sun, hold thy peace, or, be
silent. For which cause Rabbi Solomon gave it forth R. Salom. in hunc locum.
for Doctrine as clear as the Sun, that the Sun daily sings Hymns, and sweetly
sings them in the praise of God: from the which his sweet Hymnsinging he ceased
at the command of Joshua. The Rabbin seems to run after the Platonic
Philosophers, who with their nimble-finger'd thoughts did set singng Sirens in
the Celestial Orbs. Be silent, be still, or, hold thy peace, is, in Original
signification, stand still, rest, or be quiet: and the Catachresis or abuse of
Speech, is frequent in the Hebrew Language. Now as it is the same Thing in the
Sun, to stand still and to hold his peace: So shall I construe it, one and the
same in me who should be the Light of the World, to hold my peace, and to stand
still. Which yet, I may not, until commanded by Joshua or Jesus: who likewise
never commands us to hold our peace, for the concealment of God's praises,
which are then sung alowd when oppressed Truth is relieved. Wherefore Joshua
chose the Sun for the Subject of his Miracle, because the Sun was the God of
the Amorites; and the praises of God were sung in a most high and heavenly
Song, when a Servant of the true God, commanded this their false God to stand
still or hold his peace and see his worshippers overthrown.

Thus therefore. The Cosmographers Cosmogr^p^i.
inform us, that there is more Sea in the Western, than in the Eastern
Hemisphere: and if they do not know it, I now inform them, that there are also
more Ebbings and Flowings, more water-Tempests, more Sea-alterations and
wavemotions of Religion, in these our Western parts, than elsewhere: And the
Church of Rome holds Truth fast many Times, when others wretchedly betray it.

And I sincerely confess, that even in this Discourse, I walk, beyond ordinary
walkings, upon the Grounds of the Church of Rome; as being well assured, that
these return to the Adversary what is righteously due to him, and that none
other will overturn him at every Turn, when he should be turned, returned,
overturned.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
HAD my Adversary said, that many Papists have abused Scripture in the
Sophistical maintenance of some ungrounded and Air-Castle Doctrines: I would
have ran along with him heartily, and without any discomposing the placid order
of my Soul, and followed his Game, as he with Hoopings, so I with a Kennel of
loud Cryers.

Had he set up his cry against Aquinas his Doctrine (restored by D. Tha. part.
3. quaest. 25. art. 3.
Bellarmin) in his question. Utrum Image Christi sit a^oranda adoratione
latriae? Where he resolves, that the Image of Christ or a Crucifix maybe adored
with the Adoration of (...), being a Worship due to God alone: I should have
set up an outcry, and have cried out with him, O absurd! abominable! I would
have answered to him with an extraordinary Echo, that should have plainly
repeated all his words; and having done my Eccho's part, would have begun and
performed my own part by sound Proof: As: This Worship is abominable* and
absurd; howsoever the Worshipful Maintainers of it, crutch it up with the
common distinction of ordinative and terminative, that is, with referring the
Worship to the Prototype, and not housiing it in the Image:

First: because the Worshipper, either gives divine Worship to the Image, or
destroies (...), the very Thing in Question:

Secondly: because this Doctrine does cast a foul dishonor upon the Humanity
of Christ, and throws the Business, as if there were as great an alliance, at
the least in respect of outward Privileges, betwixt Christ and the Crucifix or
Image of Christ, as betwixt the Son of God and his Humanity: for, neither is
divine Worship terminated in the Humanity of Christ.

Thirdly: because Acts of divine Worship are from necessary Injunctions, and
rely upon Principles which are aeternae Veritatis, of eternal Truth, or, true
at all times: but it lies howsoever, in the free pleasure of Men, whether or no
they will accept such an Image as an Image of of Christ to such Adoration; and
consequently if they do, such Adoration is not proposed as necessary.

Fourthly: because the common People, being the greatest, part of Worshippers,
who are most efficaciously tutored by Sense, can hardly reach in this case
without confessed Idol-Worship, to so nice an Act of Distinction betwixt
Ordination and Termination in the Worship of (...), wherein they do (...),
actually give divine Worship due only to God, to the Creature and to the
Creator by one and the same Simple and undivided Act; and though the Creator be
first, and inwardly intended, yet even divine worship is out wardly given and
impended to the Creature:

Fifthly: because divine Worship is never given except under the strict Bond of
the Hypostaticall Union, to a Thing propter aliud: but always propter se; as
being altogether incommunicable; and communicable Things only, are given
propter aliud: and therefore Christ repels and convinces the Devil out of
Deutoronomy, with Mat. 4. 10.
the Law of Worship imposed upon Mankind; (...), him only shall thou serve
with the Service or Worship of (...).

Lastly: Because this Doctrine is patched up of insolent and seandalous Terms,
and sounds offensively; which should be avoided as being justly grievous to
chaste and pious Aelian. in Hist Animal.
Ears: And, in fit comparison, is like the Head of the Frog that Elian saw as
he was traveling from Naples to Puteoli, which drew a Body of shaped dirt
after it.

And again: I would have declared: that this idle Idolillo-doting is abhorred
by the most conscientious and most learned of their own Bishops. As: to prefer
an example: The People in certain parts of Spain, namely, Cantabria, Galetia,
etc. were so deeply enamored on their old, maimed, deformed, and wormeaten
Images, and which the Verminous Hieronymus Lamas in Sum. p. 3. cap. 3.
Rats had gnawn out of shape; that, as he witnesses who was an Eyewitness,
when, by the command of the Bishops, they were at length removed, and Images of
decent composure placed, according to the Method of Rome, in their rooms: the
ignorant Spaniards, Men and Women, young and old, and of all sizes, put their
forefingers in their eyes; and like children having lost their beloved Bables,
or their Deos rurales, country-Gods; cried lamentably (poor Seniors and
Senioras) for their old Images again; they would not have new ones: and this,
even since the Council of Trent, and the many great complaints there.

CHAP. XXXV.
HAD my Adversary said, that many Papists have misled Scripture in their
inconsiderate laboring to prove, the single Life of Priests to be from divine
Command; I would have joined Hands and Hearts with him; and have di^mounted the
Papists from the figurative 1 Timothy 3. 2.
Sense of the Text. A Bishop must be blameless, the Husband of one Wife; after
the very same fashion* as I now unsaddle the Anabaptists from the Text in hand,
by keeping him to the Letter. And I should not have rested there; but have
argued further, out of my own Treasure.

First: The boldness of tainting this holy Scripture, has been unfortunate,
as in other places, so at London: For: when John, Cardinast Mat. Paris lib. 7.
p. 219.
of Cremen, in a London-Councill, had leven'd his Oration with a medly to this
purpose, he was found at night by the queint disposition of divine Providence,
notwithstanding his divine Speech and the Divine Command they profanely
recommend to us, in bed with a whore: and though he had been received with
great Pomp and Honor, he now tucked up his long Train of Scarlet, and stole
away in a Mist; leaving, as the Devil commonly does when he disappeares, a
poisonous and abominable stink behind him of a whore and a whore-master:

Secondly: I have discovered by reading* that when the Christians besieged
Ptolemais, they took a Aldrovandus P^olegom. in Ornithol. ex Egnatio.
weary Dove which brought a Letter from the Sultan directed to the Besieged;
and by letting the Dove fly into the City with a new Letter of their own
composing, moved the Citizens to Dedition, and gained the City: But I could
never discover by reading or other industry, that the Letter which the Holy
Ghost, the Dove of Heaven, brought from Heaven, can be changed or altered by
Christians upon Earth: And had we been commanded to marry in the words,
Increase and multiply, and consequently, sinned if we had not married; or, had
the words, the husband of one Wife obliged the Bishop to marriage, and not
inferred only a strict exclusion of Polygamy, whether taken in the venerable
Sense of Jewish Antiquity, or in the construction of the Greek Church; it would
have sorely troubled the Church of Rome, to have learnedly pretended the
setting of an Ecclesiastical Constitution as a firm obstacle against a divine
Command:

Thirdly: It is not probable, that a divine Constitution can be repugnant with
Marriage, first ordained in our most divine state of Innocence, and first
celebrated in Paradise the most Divine Place upon Earth:

Fourthly: If it be a divine Constistution which abrogates the marriage of
Priests, how is it fair, that the Vicegerent, having a delegated and
subordinate Power, and acting for God, does not Act according to his Delegation
and Instrument, but dispenses oftentimes in a Superior and explieit
Constitution of his divine Master?

Lastly: where shall we find a divine Constitution opposed so largely against
the Intention and Institution of Nature in the Species, especially in so high a
Kind as this of Mankind; and Marriage being ordained, by a second Ordination
of Providence, as a Remedy against the vile productions of Lust?

CHAP. XXXVI.
HAD my Adversary said, that some Papists have wrested Scriptures in arresting
them to justify the Latin* Prayers, even of the most ignorant People among
them: I should have stood for him, and seconded his endeavors:

First: because the Definition of Prayer which the Schools have received from
St John Damascen, is, S. Jo. Dam. l. 3. d^ Fide Orthodoxa, cap. 24.
(...), the Ascent of the Mind or Understanding to God: And the Understanding
or Mind cannot ascend to God in religious Prayer, being an humble and
petitionary Ascent of the Understanding and Will, moving God to Assent by a
knowing, reverentially-becomming, and attentive Presentation of our just
Desires; except the Prayer be offered with Understanding:

Secondly: Because though we should in our Prayer, sometimes attend to God to
whom we pray, and sometimes to the Thing for which we pray: yet, if the Prayer
be not Understood, our Lip-offering would be a Tempting of God, when so near
and fair a Means and Help of Praying after the best manner, is obstinately
rejected:

Thirdly: Because God requires our Offerings to be proportioned to our
Abilities; and he has made us understanding and reasonable Creatures; and
requires therefore of us, reasonable Service, and to pray with Romans 12. 1. 1
Cor. 14. 15.
Understanding:

Fourthly: Because if there be such need of the outward Picture, to prevent
distraction; there is much more need of the inward Pictures, which the words
present like the turning of the Heavenly Spheres, for the same end.

Fifthly: Because there should be nothing useless or vain in our Commerse and
Conversation with God; but the Words in such Prayers are vain and useless: God
accepting not of Things which are foolishly, ignorantly, and indevoutly
presented; and words not understood, being presented indevoutly, ignorantly,
foolishly.

Sixthly: Because those who pray thus, are not conformed to the Church, as
ignorant Priests, and Sacerdotes ad Missam, teach and pretend, except they will
as ignorantly grant, that the Church to which they are conformed, prays
without understanding:

Lastly: Because the famous Parrat of Cardinal Ascanius, which Coeliu^ Rhodig.
de antiquis Lectioniq. l. 3. cap. 32.
distinctly and with seeming devotion oftentimes recited the Creed, prayed, or
said part of the divine Office, as religiously, with relation to understanding
the Prayer, and outward appearance, as these misunderstanding People: For: the
Parrat recited many good words (which it understood not) in their order;
because it had the Species of those Words, connexed in the Imaginative Power:
And these Parrat-Christians ex Regione P^sittacorum, recite their Latin
Prayers; as having the words concatenated in their Memories, or because they
read them.

CHAP. XXXVII.
HAD my Adversary said, that Scripture has been stormed by Papists, to exalt
the Pope in certain undue Kinds of Greatness, Power, and Titles: I should
have presently come at the Call, and have brought Victory and Victoria with me:
who having quilted his Discourse with a long Narration of the Pope's improper
Titles, Power and Greatness, uncreates him again with reference to such
Greatness, Power and Titles; and undoes all with a Catastrophe: Sed
Glossatores Juris hoc Victoria de Potest. Eccl. Relect. 1. Sect. 6.
Dominium dederunt Papae, cum ipsi essent pauperes Rebus and Doctrina: But the
Canonists or Glossators of the Positive Right or Canon Law, gave this Dominion
to the Pope; themselves being poor with respect both to Riches and Learning.
And I should have added this Grain or two ex meo: From their poor condition
and Poverty, came their poor-conditioned Flattery; and from their Ignorance,
their blind asserting of those Things which they did not understand.

Verily, I should have been familiar with my Adversary; and said: Sir: There
has been a question conjured up from Hell: Uirum Papa possit voca^d Deus?
Whether or no the Name, God, may be given to the Pope? And though the Term,
God, in the Question, opens the arms to receive a Distinction, and by
consequence a Decision; and may be understood, either secundum Naturam,
according to Nature, or secundum Similitudinem, according to Likeness; and the
Pope may be called Deus secundum Similitudinem, God according to Likeness; as
the Angels, yea Men, and Judges especially, are honorably called Elohim in
scripture: yet, the Question is unexpedient, irrelegious, and
unsufferably-swelling, as concerning the Pope.

First: because this high pretense to earthly Greatness, is directly opposite
to Christ, who is the generally-confessed Head of the Church; appearing upon
Earth in the form of Phil. 2. 7.
a Servant. And therefore, When John Archbishop of Constantinople vainly
pretended to glorious Titles above him; St Gregory Bishop of Rome, pulled the
other way, and styled himself Servum Servorum Dei, a Servant of the Servants
of God:

Secondly: because a mere Man, and one who is not infallible or unerring in his
particular actions concerning himself; is quickly puffed up with such Titles:

Thirdly: because People who depend upon the Favors of Princes, are soon
intoxicated with opinion of the pretended Rights and Greatness of those upon
whom their Honors and Profits depend; all the Passions running as Love runs:

Fourthly: because such Questions and Titles render the Pope most odious,
ridiculous and contemptible to all his Adversaries, confessing, or denying
Christ; and are the cause that his Adversaries confessing Christ, do,
according to his Principles, the less confess him; and that his Adversaries
denying Christ, deny him the more:

Fifthly: because the Angels were thrown from Heaven, and Man out of Paradise,
by desiring to be as God:

And lastly: Because the special raising of this Question concerning the Pope
by his Parasites, is a notable sign, that the Aim was directed beyond the
Bounds of Likeness; and overlooked, yea and overwent the Question proposed
concerning Bishops, Princes, Judges, or other Magistrates, in a strange
untrodden Course.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
HAD my Adversary said, that Scripture has been ravished by Papists, to prefer
the impious Art of pious Fraud; which has much thrived, grown fat, and
prevailed amongst them: I should have said as my Adversary said: and have
strongly proved it:

First; by the Testimony of their Nicol. Lyra Comment. in cap. 14. Dan,
secundum, Edit. Vulgat.
Nicolaus Lyra: Aliquando in Ecclesia fit maxima Deceptio Populi in Miraculis
factis a Sacerdotibus, vel eis adhaerentibus propter Lucrum: Sometimes the
People are very greatly deluded in the Church, by forged Miracles; the Priests
or their Adherents forging them for gain.

Secondly; by the Authority of their own Alexander Hales: In Alex Halens. p. 4
q. 53. Me^^b. 4. art. 3. Solut. 2.
Sacramento apparet Caro, interdum humana procuratione, interdum operatione
Diabolica: Flesh appears in the Sacrament, sometimes by humane Procuration,
and sometimes by Diabolical Operation: the Priests and the Devil doing the
same work fraudulently; and the Devil, whatsoever the Priests may pretend,
always working for an Evil end:

And thirdly, by the infallible Sentence, (...) Cl mentis O^^^vi transmissum ad
Regula^es.
and most known Precept of their own dear Clement the Eighth, commanding the
Regulars to surcease from the deceitful and fraudulent Abuse of their
Knowledge acquired in Confessions, by the which they made them burdensome, to
promote their own advantage in their outward Government. And having proved the
Things, I should have strongly and boldly proved against the lawfullnesse of
them, (of these their pious Frauds:)

First: because all proper Means are naturally suitable to the End; and if the
End be good, the Means must be proportionably good; and if the Truth of God
published, be the End; the Means of Publication must be true, void of deceit,
and godly:

Secondly: because by fraudulent carriages in the way to our good Ends, a vile
aspersion is cast upon the Providence of God; as if good Means were not
adequately prepared by divine Providence for good Ends:

Thirdly: because by such fraudulent Conveyances in holy Things, holy Things (
in direct motion and issue and not per accidens) are disesteemed; the most
excellent Truths of God questioned; and Men become (...); without God, and
Atheistical.

Fourthly: because as evil produces evil, and false Actions produce false
speeches in the same Subject; so, much deceit of the Tongue, is produced by
this deceit of the Heart and action, before and after it; as, pernicious Lying,
impertinent Equivocation, multiplication of idle Words.

And lastly: Because the Devil is the Father of Lies, and of double dealing;
and the old heathenish Priests, his impious Instruments, were expert in
reducing to praxis this pious Art: the Holy Ghost is the Author of all Truth,
and of Holy simplicity.

Therefore these being so different in their Causes, Means, Ends, may not be
joined in their Terms and Logical Predications; and fraud cannot be pious, nor
piety fraudulent.

CHAP. XXXIX.
HAD my Adversary said, that Scripture has been prostituted by some Papists,
to sanctify the licentiated Stews at Rome: I should have come to his hand, as a
Hawk to the Lure, and zealously protested against them.

First: because the Evil in this Permission, does infinitely surmount and
preponderate the Good; as appears by the consequents; more by thousands, being
encouraged in this permission, to the most grievous Commissions of Adultery,
Fornication, and other Uncleanness, than the Good is or can be that the filth
and stink of the common sink is restrained from certain Houses.

Secondly: because the filth might be more perfectly restrained by severe Laws
and a Coercive Power.

Thirdly: this public permission of the Stews, is not like the permission of
Usury; because in Fornication, Adultery, etc. the Actors, both sin; but in
Usury, the Taker or Borrower, (upon whom he that permits Usury, keeps the
single Eye of his Intention,) Sins not; his Concurrence being material not
formal, and he not willing but un willing:

Fourthly: because God has dealings toward sin, before the Commission;
prohibendo, by forbidding it; impediendo, by hindering it; permittendo, by
suffering it; as after the Commission, ordinando ad bonum, by actual and
executionall ordering it to good; ignoscendo, by pardoning it; puniendo, by
punishing it: and this Permission of the Stews, is larger than the divine
Permission in such a latitude; for, God sometimes in all places, absolutely
hinders sin; but in the Reign of this Permission of sin by the Romanists,
there is no absolute hinderance, there being so much of furtherance, on their
parts; and there is but a dull, cool and weak prohibition in consideration of
penalties to be inflicted upon sense; and these only of all humane Acts, work
effectually upon a Soul steeped in the Lees of corrupt Nature:

Fifthly: because this permission proves a double Allurement to the single
Clergy:

Lastly: because the Jews there, are greatly disturbed and nardened by this
Permission.

And I should have garnished this Reason with a prevalent Example, commended to
Eternity by Bishop Espenceus; who relates of a Jewish Maid, that she renounced
the Jewish Religion and became a Christian, that she might freely exercise the
Romish-Christian Art of Ribauderie, not unsoundly permitted, as amongst
Christians, but soundly punished by the Jews. And the Bishop bewailes the
sadness of the matter, with many a mournful Accent: Dici nequit, quam
incredibili Christianorum Esp^ncaeus de Contin l. 3. cap 4.
tum pudore, tum etiam eorum qui vere tales sunt, cordolio, factum est, ut
Judae filiae scort^rs non liceat, Dei filiae liceat: Imo Israelis filia
meretricari non aliter ante possit, quam facta per Baptismum sanctum Christi
soror, and filia: It cannot be said, with what incredible shame of Christians,
and also with what heartgriefe of such as are truly such, it is come to pass,
that a Jewish Daughter may not become Whore, a Daughter of God may: Yea that a
Daughter of Israel, cannot otherwise play the Harlot, than when she is made by
Holy Baptism, the Sister and Daughter of Christ.

She was made so quoad externan^ apparentiam, according to outward appearance;
and she had been really made so, remotis impedimentis ex part Subjecti, had
the impediments been removed on the part of the Subject.

CHAP. XL.
ROme: I Honor thee in thy Truths: which are many, and excellently obeyed by
many. But I detest thy Corruptions: and I see a large Field before me, and
could proceed farther against them, should I not wander beyond the Lines of
Communication with my Matter.

Finally therefore: Had my Adversary said, that the Scriptures have been
rifled, spoiled, exanimated and murdered by some Papists of the Jesuiticall
Division, to set aloft the Scarlet-colored practice of the murdering of
Princes in the dark, by private and obscure Persons: I should have cried
Murder, and Treason too: and have fortified my self in the Preamble, with the
forerunning History of the preposterously-Heroicall M. Claudius Paradinus in
Heroicis.
Courtier of Millain, Andreas Lampugnanus; who when he desired to Murder
Galeazus Marius the Millain-Duke, for a Tyrant; did practice it* long before,
by stabbing privately the Duke's Image; that his hand might not shake, or he
miss his aim in his stabbing the Duke: whom at last, he stabbed to the Heart,
even before the Altar, in a Church. O the Purity of this Duke-stabbing under
the roof of the Temple and the white Canopy of Holiness!

There wants nothing to the top and top-gallant of this Angelical
Devilishnesse, but the presenting of the poisoned Sacrament to a devout
Emperor on his Knees: which likewise, they have devoutly done:

I would have opened the door to Jesuiticall examples, and let them ^orth
tumbling one over another, like the Waves in a foul and troubled Sea: As: of
Garnet and Oldcorn, Jesuits, and chief Actors in the matchless Powder
Treason; who are English Martyrologe printed in the year, 1608.
Chronicled for Martyrs: of Sixtus Quintus a Favourer and Patron of the
Jesuits, who consecrated a Panegyricall Oration to the immortal praise of
Clement the Jacobin Friar, that Murdered Henry the third, King of France, by
searching into his Belly with a religious knife: And of Barrier, who
endeavored Arnault ^ Frenchman, in his Pleadings against the Jesuits, on the
behalf of the King and Parliament of France.
the killing of Henry the fourth, with a poisoned Altar-Dagger; (which
Raviliach afterward expedited;) animated thereunto by holy Father Varad a
Jesuit.

And I should have sifted the Original Question: An Deus dispensare possit in
Lege Nature vel Decalogi? Can God (the Pope's Lord) dispense in the Law of
Nature or the Decalogue? Wherein Occam, Gerson, Occam. in. 2. q. 19. ad 3. and.
4. dub. Gerson in Tract. de vita spiritali Lect. 1. Corol. 10. in Alphabeto 61.
litera E. Almainus Tract. 3. Moral. cap. 15. Scot. in 3. Distinct. 37. q. 1.
paragrapho, Hic dicitur. Bonavent. in 1. Distinct. 47. q* 4. Gabr. in 3. Did.
37. q 1. Art. 2. Concl. 1. Durand. in 1. Did. 47. q 4. number. 16.
and Almain affirm, that he can dispense in every Law of the Decalogue: And
their Foundation is: Every sin is a sin, because it is forbidden by the will of
God; if therefore, God will a thing to be no sin, hoc ipso it shall not be a
sin: And in the which Question, Scotus, Bonaventure, and Gabriel defend, that
God can dispense in the Precepts of the second Table, but not in the Precepts
of the first Table: that is: can dispense in those commandments which manage
us toward our Neighbor, but not in the Commandments which conform us toward
God: And in the which* Durandus declares, that God may dispense in the
affirmative Precepts of the second Table, but not in the negative Precepts
thereof.

And I should have determined, that God himself cannot dispense directly and
formally in any Precept of the Law of Nature. The Reason is: Because the Laws
of Nature contain and command that which is good intrinsecally and in it is
Nature; therefore the Things opposed to these Laws, are in their Natures and
intrinsecally Evil; and not because they are prohibited by the will of God,
but because of their own Natures, they are dissentaneous and contrary to
Natural Reason and reasonable Nature, qua talis est: As: possible Things are
possible, not because God has willed them to be possible, but because it is
not in it self Contradictory, that they may come into Being.

Wherefore God cannot make, ( pace Occami,) the Hatred of God to be Godly, good
or Lawful: because this Turn of Things overturns all, and is contrary not only
to Nature and Reason, but also, to the Divinity of God. And God cannot persuade
us to these Evils; much less will them, command them to be, and make them
good, lawful and honest.

As therefore, the Creatures have their existence from the will of God, but
their possibility from the very Nature of God; (because if we consider the
Nature of God in his Omnipotency, it naturally follows and results, that there
is a possibility of Things by Creation; which Things, if per impossible God
were not, were impossible:) So the positive Law, both Divine and Humane,
depends upon the will of God; but the Law of Nature is derived from the Law
Eternal in Mente Dei.

Yet, God can dispense indirectly and materially in these Laws, by changing
the matter of the Thing commanded, and thereby subtracting it from the Law of
Nature and obligation of the Decalogue. For: God can give to one Man, Power
over the Goods, Body and Life of another.

But, when, where, or how did God give Power to the Church of Rome, over the
Goods, Bodies, and Life's of Princes? And if the Laity be subject to the Clergy,
as the Body to the Soul: yet, the Soul has not absolute Dominion over the
Body; and therefore, may not lop off the Members, or pluck an eye out, having
offended her, and cast it from her, otherwise than in a spiritual and moral
Sense, the literal Sense being repugnant with other Precepts: though she may
willingly suffer them, or, freely give them up, to be lopped off passively, in
the Confession of the true Faith; or, surrender the whole Body to be destroyed,
in Martyrdom.

Desist then, O ye cruel Jesuits, from this your making odious the most
acceptable Name of our most mild and meek Jesus.

CHAP. XLI.
BUT in regard it is only Objected by the Adversary, that the Text ( Except
one be born again etc,) is used by the Papists: Per me liceat: They may use
it, without opposition from me: their using a Text in a righteous manner and
Matter, being no sufficient and reasonable Ground of Quarrel. As I may not
quarrel with them, for their using sacred Scripture in the proof of the most
sacerd Trinity against the old Arrians, and those of Transyluania: or in the
proof of the Incernation of Christ, for the Prepossession and corroboration of
Christians against the cursed Insinuations of Mahomet.

The Spirit of Contradiction and the works of it, are not unknown to my
Adversary: And does he think, it would become me, to be like the Ilanders
adjoining unto China, who, by reason of some Traverses of discord and
jealousies (which oftentimes arise betwixt neighboring Countries and
Provinces) falling betwixt them and the Chinenses; salute one another by
putting off their shoes, because the men of China perform the morality of
their Salutation by putting off their Hats?

The violent motions of spirit, Jesuiticall and Presbyterian, cannot be of God:
in the long Catalogue of whose blessed works, their is no violent Thing.

I would have the World to understand, that I now understand the difference
betwixt the Doctrines which Pride and private Interest have publicly raised in
the Church of Rome, and which are not destructive of its being a Church; as the
sins and errors of the Pharisees, destroyed not the Chair of Moses: and the
Doctrines of the Church of Rome, lineally descended from Apostolical
Antiquity, or included Virtually in their seed and root: And that my Quarrel
is not with Truth or Integrity, but with the Corruption of Integrity and Truth.

And in the Truth and Integrity of a sincere and unleven'd Soul: If I dye on
my Bed, and with knowledge of what I say and do; some of my latest words on my
Deathbed, shall be these.

I most heartily deny, defy, renounce, abhor and protest against the
Presumption, Pride and Avarice of Popes, their Nephews, and Cardinals; the
deceitful Dealings of Priests, Jesuits, Monks and Friars, and against all
their Doctrines which bear the true Marks and Hecceities of Corruption: But,
all the Sacred Articles of Catholic and Apostolic Doctrine amongst the
Papists, which they have faithfully conserved; all their well-ordered Zeal,
their admirable and most ravishing Devotions, their Deiform Intentions, their
Heroical Acts of Virtue; their Abnegations of themselves, and of their
Friends, Goods and Pleasures; their Watchings, Fastings, Prayings; their
Recollections, Meditations, Spiritual Exercises, Introversions, Soliloquies.
Aspirations, and all the pretty-Love Actions of the Body that attend them;
their Keeping of the Heart and Senses; their Humiliations, Mortifications, and
Resignations of themselves, to the Will of God, come Riches or Poverty,
Disgrace or Honor, Li^erty or Imprisonment, Sickness or Health, Life or
Death; their sighings, sobbings, yernings, and Groanings after God; their
appretiative Love of God, when they cry out, in the Surges Psa. 73. 25.
and high Sea of the Spirit; Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none
upon Earth that I desire besides thee; their intensive Love of God, when the
Soul being returned from the Ravishments and ecstasies of Love, and the Body
overcharged; the charge is jointly given. I charge you, Cant. 5. 8.
O Daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my Beloved, that ye tell him that I am
sick of Love; or, as the Vulgar, Edit. vulg.
quia amore Langueo, that I languish with Love; and afterward, their dying,
and giving up the Ghost in their vehement loving of God, and by the very force
of it: I most humbly receive, embrace, approve, with all my Soul, Heart and
Spirit.

And I will never believe, that the Tree is corrupted in the Root, Heart and
Substance, which brings forth such heavenly Fruit; especially when I behold
Trees, that are more promising and professing in their leafes and blossoms, but
less performing in their fruit.

And I confess humbly and sorrowfully, as in the Presence of God and Man, that
when I first came from the Papists, I was more, as it often happens in
extraordinary Mutations, fired on with Passion than sweetly drawn with Devotion.

But now I desire of God, that I may be seasoned with Moderation, and love in
every place, what my experienced Soul tells me in the retiring-Chamber of my
second and composed Thoughts, God loves and likes in all places.

We often deserve by our own Offenses, that we take offense at the miscarriges
of others; and reject in a lump the good with the evil.

A Scandal is defined: Verbum aut Factum minus rectum aut bonum, praebens
occasionem alteri Spiritualis ruinae aut lapsus in peccatum: A word or Deed
less right or good, giving occasion to another of Spiritual Ruin or Falling
into sin. Where the Adverb, minus, less, may not be taken comparative, sed
negative, comparatively, but negatively, for a Word or Deed which is not good
but evil: And the Evil may be intrinsece, vel extrinsece malum, intrinsecally
or extrinsecally evil: the evil intrinsecally evil is charactered in the
precedent Chapter: the other is described; which hic and nunc in respect of
particular circumstances, of Time, Place or Persons, wants some Moral
Rectitude or Goodness. The Active Scandal is subdivided in Scandalum per se
and per Accidens, A Scandal by it self, and a Scandal by Accident; this
happening praeter intentionem Agentis, besides the intention of the Agent.

God almighty grant, I may be so absorpt in the profound Consideration of the
Scandals which I have given, that I may only use the active Scandals of others
as I would use a Mark of Caution, set near or over Vide Ambros. Catharin. sib.
de Propheti^ Savonarolae, and Raphaelem Volater. lib. 5. Geograph. in sine.
a Rock. For it must needs be that offenses come, in all Churches; and Papa
Angelicus the Angelical Pope and his Reformation already come in the
Prophesies of Savonaerola, may not in reason be farther expected.

CHAP. XLII.
I Am now carried, as upon the Wings of Cherubims, to the maine drift of my
Adversary in his last Objection: which was: to bring an Odium upon me, and
stigmatize me for a Papist. Hoop: do me no harm good Man.

I am verily persuaded, that there are of my kindred (being in part Jewish
Presbyterians) who greatly desire to reinforce Popery upon me for secret Ends,
which they have as they are (...), Lovers Text. G^aec. 2 Timothy 3. 2.
of their own selves, and lovers of Money. And they Would persuade me into it,
by long persuading me that I am of it: Which in truth, is a powerful assault
upon the will; as continually hammering the thing proposed, and the
conveniences and friendly considerations of it, into the Heart. Upon this
Assumption, (as commonly, a Man's Enemies are of his own Household,) they let
fly their fancies by the Voley.

And therefore, as it was in the old Greek Litany, (...), Lit. Graec.
(...): From my self good Lord, deliver me: And as it is in the Roman Orat.
Rom^nae ad Primam, and alibi:
Prayers: De Inimicis nostris, libera nos, Deus noster: From our Enemies,
deliver us, O our God: So my most hearty Prayer, shall ever be: Ab Amicis meis
liberame, Domine Deus noster: From my Kindred deliver me, O Lord our God.

St Gregory Nazianzen objecteth S. Greg Naz. orat. 4. in Julian.
against Julian; that his cheeks undecently swelled, when in a Fume, he blew
the Coals at the Devil's Altar with old women, enemies to the Truth of God and
of Christ.

But: Mihi ab istis perquam Volupe est affligi: I take great pleasure in being
afflicted and Crucified by these and the like Lumber: as, by other merciless
Presbyterians, by wilful Anabaptists, by the profane Regiment of loose, lewd,
unjust, and unmoralliz'd Ministers: by the Satyr-Kinde of ignorant,
phreneticall, and powder-passion'd Papists, etc.

And here: I will answer punctually. First: They call me Jesuit; And I call,
not them, but the great Majesty of God to witness, against them: That I never
was a Jesuit, nor a Lover of Jesuits.

Secondly: They Tare-sow among the People, that I am a professed Papist, and
reconciled to my Priestly Functions: both which, are most false, the most true
God knows.

O degenerating England: do thou thus poorly reward one that came to thee,
as an humble Suppliant, in a Church-storm, for pious Harbor? one that has
sat peaceably under thy wings, and was never in Arms? One that, whatsoever he
writes to better his judgment, never preached ought thwarting the known Church
of England; or gave pass to a word looking awry upon the State?

I humbly hope: that notwithstanding the various and easy Pretenses of Worldly
Policy; we are not as yet, Seducers, and righteously worthy of Silentiall
Punishment, if we Preach against Anabaptism.

I am bold; and I cannot hold: because I never learned to be afraid in the
defense of the mighty God's cause: And if I suffer, I shall suffer, the strong
God looking upon me and strengtening me; and moreover, in the view of the
Christian World: Many whereof, rejoice to hear and see me already made a
miserable Sufferer by my own dear Countrymen, to whom I have hopefully ran for
Appeal and safety.

Now if any Romanist shall take offense at my taking and publishing these
Offenses; I shall joyfully enter the lists, even with him; and shall undertake
to make the Offenses I have taken, so numerous and so ponderous that all the
Catholic perfumers in the new Exchange, shall not be able to suppress and
pacify the stink raised in the stirring of Romishpuddels.

In the mean time: all the world must grant, as they grant Postulata
Mathematica, Mathemeticall Postulates; That although Motus Coeli semper sit
Uniformis Velocitatis, the Motion of the Heavens be always of a most Uniform
Swiftness, because it has already the highest Perfection of its Motion; yet
Man upon Earth, being short of his highest Perfection, has not a motion that
is Uniform, but moves unequally, is fast and slow, sometimes humanely moves one
way, ignorantly sometimes another way, a third way imperfectly sometimes, and
moves nearer to the highest Perfection, as he makes progress in the way of
divine Knowledge.

CHAP. XLIII.
THE sixth objection bears up to us. If I understand in the Text, by the
Kingdom of God, as I seem to do, the Kingdom of Glory; then the Text,
including Baptism, excludes and excommunicates all Unbaptized Persons from the
Kingdom of Heaven.

To this Argument, Doctor Featly, according to his Grounds, would have
answered: That all unbaptized Persons are excluded the Kingdom of Heaven, de
lege ordinaria, by God's Ordinary Law; Christ here speaking strictly, to bind
Parents to their duties: Yet, that God has a Prerogative, quae est supra legem
Ordinariam, which is above his Ordinary Law; and by this, he does, as work
miracles, ^o extraordinarily execute the secret Decrees of his Benevolence and
good Pleasure, in extraordinary Cases; these requiring extraordinary
Proceedings: And if we consider him, as having a royal Prerogative; he may not
be confined, otherwise than he has confined himself. And how God may be above
himself in differen^ respects, is presently understood. For: As he is Author
Gratiae, the Author of Grace, he works above himself as he is Author Naturae,
the Author of Nature: the Supernatural Order being so called, because it
stands above the Order of Nature; and Supernatural Grace perfecting humane
Nature in order to a supernatural End* without which Grace we cannot arrive
unto it: And extraordinary Cases even in the same Order beget the different
respects, and Considerations of God in his Prerogative, and God in his ordinary
Course.

Now the Kingdom of Glory, is chiefly and most commonly understood by the
Kingdom of God: because it is the first, and most noble thing understood by
it: and the Kingdom of Grace is not so called, but with denomination from the
Kingdom of Glory: Which as of all Kingdoms it is the most excellent, this
being the best, highest, and most profitable Sense of the Kingdom of God; so
it most urgently obliges us to Baptism under such Terms.

Eucharisticall Nourishment or Manducation, though it conduces also to the
nourishing of the Body; yet is more constituted under the Kind of Spiritual
Meat, under which Reason it is more profitable to us, than under the Kind of
material and corporeal Aliment: As also an Iron or Steel-Breast-Plate,
although it be a kind of Garment, as it covers our Body, and defends it from
heat and cold; yet goes more in the mouths and estimation of men, for a kind
of Armor, as which, it exercises it is chiefest office, and under which notion
it is more profitable to Men, than for a Garment. In like measure
proportionably, although the Kingdom of God signifies the Kingdom of Grace
and the Kingdom of Glory; yet does it more, and more often signify the
Kingdom of Glory, under which Sense it is most profitable and advantageous to
Mankind; than it signifies the Kingdom of Grace. And when a word signifies
diverse Things, and one of them chiefly: the Thing which it chiefly signifies,
is the Sense if the Sentence will claspe with it: the chief Things, being to
be chiefly considered, as always first apprehended in our Goings from the
Cause to the Effect.

The word, Body, may be understood of a natural Body, a mystical or
Ecclesiastical Body, a Civil or Politic Body. Which Word if it is place will
endure it, must be understood of a natural Body; because the natural Body, is
a true Body, and more properly a Body, than the rest; and because from the
natural Body, the mystical and the Civil Body are called Bodies; the
natural Body being so realiter, really; the mystical and Civil Bodies being
so only denominative, by denomination. And we shall thus know when a Thing has
his name by denomination from another Thing. It has* if, another thing so
named being taken away by intellectual Ablation or Separation, it therefore
and immediately vanishes as such. Take away the natural Body; and the Civil
and mystical Bodies lose their Names. Take away the Kingdom of Glory: and
there will be no Kingdom of Grace. For: Sublato Principali tollitur
Accessorium; Sicuti, Sublata Causa tollitur Effectus; and, Subla^a Forma
Essentiali, Res ipsa tollitur: The principal being taken away, the Accessory
is also removed; As, the Cause being taken away, the Effect is taken away also,
which Essentially depends on the Cause; And, As the Essential Form being taken
away, the Thing it self is abolished. And the natural Body is the principal
Body, considered as a Body: and the Relations betwixt these Bodies as
Essentially and Fundamentally depending on the natural Body, fall to the
ground, if the natural Body, which is Fundamentum Relationis, the Foundation
of the Relation, be set apart.

The Body of an Ape is in many parts and particles, like to the Body of a Man:
and therefore, Galen addicted himself more to the Anatomising of Apes than of
Men; as Franzius in S^mia^j
Franzius recounts out of two famous Anatomists, Vesalius and Columbus. Yet,
the Transition from Apes to Men, is not always happy and successful. If the
Adversary had studied humane Arts and Sciences, or Anatomized Corpus
Theologicum, the Body of Divinity; and not only read the History of Apes, in
his learning to make ilfavoured mouths and Vide Quintil. in Rhet.
evil faces; or learned only conformare os, to fashion his mouth to an
untuneable Tone: he might himself have smoothed his own way through these
knottie Matters: and I now question, if his unopen'd understanding can follow,
when the way is opened and playned before him for him by another.

CHAP. XLIIII.
BUT while the Adversary bespattereth and bedawbeth his Mother Church, as
accusing her that she damns Children dying without Baptism; he runs himself
inevitably upon Scylla or Charibdis. For: he would have Children saved without
Christ; that is; without Grace, which is the bond of Salvation in Christ, and
the wedding Garment; without Faith, (which is the first sanctifying Grace,)
against the common cry of Scripture; and without a Sacrament, the Sacraments
being the pure Channels of God's mercy to us in Christ: and so, sets them above
all Ordinances: or, he would have them all damned who do not ascend to the
years of discretion. Alas poor Babies.

That, God, as the great Provisor, and overlooker of the natural and
supernatural Order; and that Christ as the High Priest, and the Shepherd and
Bishop of our Souls, supplies 1 Pet. 2. 25.
by his extraordinary Power the inculpable defects of the Sacraments, which are
Defects ex part Ministri, Materiae, etc. I deny not. And that he supplies all
the Defects concerning them: I do not affirm. Because the Supernatural and
extraordinary suppletion is, in the most part, when the ordinary fails without
our fault or failing; it being therefore afforded; and the obligation of the
Supreme Provisor, in some such Cases only arising. As the Universal Cause in
Nature, supplieth in like manner the natural Defects of the Particular Cause.

Here the Adversary, being desperately resolved durissima atque ultima
sustinere, to endure all hardness: manumises this Proposition: Those who do
not manifest Grace, are not of the Visible Church.

I answer, first: The Innocents Mat. 2. 16.
in the Gospel, Baptized Baptismo Sanguinis, with the Baptism of Blood; did
not manifest Grace, and yet, were of the visible Church, because they were
visible Martyrs. And they are called by the Ancients, Primitiae Martyrum, the
first fruits of the Martyrs. And when the Fathers in their Sermons upon St
Stephen, dignify him with the Title of Protomartyr, the first Martyr; they
suppose him to have been the first in respect of adult Persons, and the first
complete Martyr.

Where learn, that the Baptism of Blood has the same Effects, as Baptismus
Fluminis and Flaminis, the Baptism of water and the Baptism of the Holy Ghost:
that is: as Baptismus in Re and Baptismus in Voto, Baptism in the Thing and
Baptism in Desire: here being an extraordinary Suppletion. Yea: the Baptism of
Blood is the more noble, as having and holding a singular conformity with the
Passion of Christ.

Secondly: If Children do not pertain to the Visible Church, because they
cannot manifest Grace; then if they dye being Children miserable is their end,
and their misery in the loss of God, is without end. Because the Church of God
is Via, the way; she only, teaching it; and the Head of it, so calling
himself: and the Kingdom of God, is Patria, the Country. And as no man comes
to his Country, but by the way; So extra Ecclesiam non est Salus, out of the
Church there is no Salvation: A Figure whereof was, That all were drowned in
the Houd, whom the Flood found una^ked. The divine S. Cypr. lib. de Vni^ate
Ecclesiae.
Rule of St Cyprian is universally accepted: Non habet Deum Patrens, qui non
habet Ecclesiam Matrem: He has not the God of the Church for his Father, who
has not the Church of God for his Mother. And Council Lateran sub Innocent. 3.
cap. 1.
the Faith* Confession of the Council of Lateran under Innocentius the third,
is innocent: Una est Fidelium Universalis Ecclesia, extra quam nemo salvatur:
There is one Universal Church of the Faithful out of which no Person is saved.

Lastly: outward manifestation of Grace, does not render us Members of the
visible Church as visible, that is, of the outward Church as it is outward:
but, that we visibly and and outwardly communicate with the said Church, and
are congregated with the visible Members of it: (the Case of the Innocents was
extraordinary, as the Birth of Christ was, upon which it waited:) because the
outward manifestation of Grace imports a reference to the Senses of men, which
are not capable of the Impressions of such manifestation: and because outward
manifestation in free Agents, is no infallible sign of inward and invisible
Grace, except it be infallibly known to us, that the Persons giving such
manifestation, are infallibly directea; or, except we receive it of God, by
private Revelation.

CHAP. XLV.
THe last Objection comes to it is trial: And it is the monumental Objection of
Mr Tombs, the Oracle, Apollo, Champion, Achilles, Mr Tombs in his Examen.
Goliath, Knight Errant, or, less improperly, the feathered Forehorse of our
Anabaptists.

It parallels another Text with ours. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink his Blood, ye Jo. 6. 53.
have no life in you. Being the Text in meditation whereof, Synesius hymns it
of the Eucharist, that it is (...), Synes. in Hymnis.
the Trophy of Divine Love.

It is not, says Mr Tombs, proved sufficiently by illation from this Text,
that Infants may receive the Lord's Supper: therefore neither from the other,
that Infants may be Baptized. Wherefore although the Text treats of Baptism,
yet is it not efficaciously convincing for Infants.

I answer. First: These Texts very much differ in their Logical Terms and
latitude. His Text is directed by a Term of restriction to the Jews, (to whom
Christ preached in the Synagogue,) being grown See V. 59.
Persons; and commends to them the eating of strange, but solid meat, perfectly
agreeable to them only, and such as they; Except ye eat, etc. In our Text,
although presentially directed to Nicodemus, the direction is let loose, and
widened with a Term extending to all persons young and old, etc. Except one be
born.

Secondly: These Sacraments are very much different in their Natures and
Effects. The Sacrament of Baptism was given, that it might initiate us, purge
us from sin, and reduce us to Spiritual Purity: and it is requisite, that even
Children should be initiated, purged and reduced; and being now initiated
bodily and apparently into the World, should not be left there by the Lover of
Souls, as the most innocent, and yet wanting an Ordinance of Spiritual
Initiation. For this reason: the Sacramental and visible Action in Baptism, is
washing with water; accordable even with Children, who are born unclean, and
therefore, presently washed by the Midwife. The Eucharist was appointed, that
it might nourish and conserve Spiritual Life acquired in Baptism; which
corporal Meat does in corporeal Things* as conserving the animal Life: and
therefore the Signs here are presented in the form of solid nourishment, which
agrees not perfectly with Babes, but only with grown Persons. Yea: the
Spiritual Repast in the Eucharist, being instituted with analogy to material
Meat and Drink; and presupposing in the Receiver, Spiritual Life: if it
finds it not, cannot nourish: material eating and drinking, presupposing
also the Life of Nature. And God giving grace to the religious and humble
Receiver of this Sacrament; gives it always as an augmentation of Precedent
Grace, not as the beginning of Spiritual Life. But Baptism, as vivificatory,
primarily and properly belongs to Infants that are dead in sin. And a strong
digestion of solid nourishment in Spiritual Things, conformable to vigorous
Augmentation; is not, without the Spiritual strength and election of grown
Persons. And the Eucharist most relieves the best disposed: As in Nature; Est
modus operandi Causae uniuscujusque, ut (cateris Paribus) semper magis operetur
in passum melius dispositum: Every Cause more works upon a Subject more
disposed, because it has less to conquer. But there is no diversity of
Disposition in Children; nor any positive or privative indisposition to Baptism
And therefore. Baptism infallibly, necessarily, and irresistibly produces it is
whole Effect in them. For: Causa necessar^a sufficienter applicata, debet
operari: A necessary Cause applied sufficiently, must work; if it encounter no
resistance requiring a Warlike encounter in the Subject: and here is none.

Thirdly: when Actions are directed and determined to certain Persons capable
of performance: it is supposed, that the performance belongs to them and their
care, to whom the determination and direction is made; as, in the Text, Except
ye eat: the persons here being all capable of such care and performance. But if
Actions be enjoined in Terms that involve all, and some be incapable of the
care and performance enjoined: it is supposed that the performance belongs to
the capable and knowing part, not only in respect of themselves, but also in
respect of them who are unknowing and incapable in themselves of such
performance and care; and therefore Subordinate: And Parents are obliged to a
care of their Children, Superiors to care for Inferiors, the Knowing to be
careful of the Ignorant, by the Laws of God and Nature.

Lastly: His Text is religiously true and illative even in our Sense. For:
except the grown Jews, to whom solid nourishment belonged after their
conversion; were converted, Baptized, and received the Sacrament of the
Eucharist in Act or Desire: Or: if they wilfully rejected, or neglected the
sacred use of it: they were void of Life; as not having the Life of Grace, and
conserving it with agreeable nourishment.

CHAP. XLVI.
IF St Austin deduced a like necessity S Aug. l. 1. de peccatorum Merit is and
Remissione, cap. 20. S Cypr. in l. de Laps^s.
that Infants should receive the Lords Supper, from the words Joh. 6. as
appears by his own clear expression. If within the Line of St Cyprians Days,
the sacred Communion was exhibited to Infants; as is evident by his evidence
given concerning himself giving the Communion to an Infant. Which History with
its Book, is again Historied by St Austin. If it be delivered S Aug. cp. 23.
up into the Senate and Council of the Learned by Maldonat, that Maldon.
Comment. in Jo. 6.
Innocentius the first, held a necessity of communicating Infants; and that
this opinion and practice went on six hundred years with some parts of the
Church: I shall yield it passage as a pious Use, but not as absolutely or
strictly necessary, nor as able to infringe the Baptizing of Infants, or our
Text concerning Baptism; for the most unalterable Reasons newly given.

And moreover: because the susception of the Eucharist, cannot have it is whole,
substantial or most excellent Effect in Infants.

And the Authority of private Men, say the Sorbonists, when they Sorbonista*
are not made public by representing the Church in Councils; proves little in
dubious, and those ill-byassed Cases. Original and Secondary Tradition, are
not of equal Validity. Neither are some particular Churches and their use,
comparable, or, to be measured with the overspre^ding use in the great stream
of the Church.

Innocentius as a private Doctor, might accept it as a private opinion. So
might St Cyprian, St Austin and others before them, as the Testimony of
Dionysius Areopagita makes credible.

It was a pious use, and somewhat like, that the sacred crumbs were anciently
given, in the Greek Church to innocent Children.

And uses of Ordinances must be measured with the Natures of them, and thereby
tried.

I maim no Authority because it is such, but as deviating or turning aside from
Truth. The Cou^cill of Trent reasons devoutly, most piously, Council. Triden..
Sess. 21. qu^ suit quinta su^ pio quarto, cap. 4.
and according to right Reason: Sancta Synodus d^cet, parvulos usu rationis
^arentes, nulla obligari necessitate ad Sacram^ntalem Eucharistiae Communionem;
siquidem per Baptismi lavacrum regenerati and Christo incorporati, adeptam jam
filiorum Dei Gratiam in illa aetate amitte^e non possunt: The holy Synod
teaches, that Little-ones wanting the use of reason, are not obl^ged by
necessary obligation, to the Sacramental all Communion of the Eucharist:
because they being regenerated by the Laver of Baptism and incorporated into
Christ, cannot lose in that Age, the Grace of the Sons of God now obtained.
Where the Council learnedly enforces, that the Eucharist being ordained for
the nourishing of the Grace received in Baptism; the use of it would be
useless, with regard to the main use, in an Age which cannot lose the Grace
received.

And whereas we are nourished, not only that we may not perish, but also that
we may be strengthened; we are not strengthened in Grace (for present use,) but
by the concurcrence of actual Grace, of the which, Children, as not acting by
Grace, are incapable: there only remaining accidental and adventitious
benefits according to the good use afterward made of Baptismall Grace.

And now, quandoquidem umbone exceperim hoc telum, seeing I have received this
Dart upon the bosse of my Shield or Buckler; I thus retort it. If Infants were
partakers of the Eucharist, then certainly they were Baptized being Infants:
Baptism preceding the Eucharist: Yea, Dionysius S Dionys. Areap. lib. E^cles.
Hierarch. c. 7. part. 2.
having eternized in his Hierarchy, That the unbaptized ought not to be
admitted to the sight of the Eucharist. And St Austin here wheels to us: Ad
Sacramentum S Aug. l. 1. de peccat. Merit. and Remiss. cap. 20. Tom. 7.
Mensae Domini nemo rit e nisi Baptizatus accedit: To the Sacrament of the
Lords Table none come, by direct and orderly proceedings, but the Baptized.

That the Ancients were deceived in the Baptizing of Infants, as in
communicating them; will not follow; because the Sacraments are differently
natured, and intended; and because the practice was differently carriag'd.

This return of the Argument; is like Aurum fulm^nans, which is an Extract from
Gold, admixed with other Ingredients; and in the blow, forces downwards with a
mighty power. This Return drives all down before it, but what was down before.

CHAP. XLVII.
THirdly: I gather up my self to prove, that the Holy words, Except one be
born, etc. word it, in the nearest and holiest Sense, for Baptism; from the
sweet harmony, concord and consonancy betwixt other Texts of Scripture, and
this Text thus understood. And thus I begin to raise the Works.

That Circumcision did forerun and foresignifie Baptism, and that Baptism
answers to it; is aftersignified by the Apostle: who abstracting the
Colossians from the Coloss. 2. 11, 12.
old Circumcision, which was carnal, and settling them upon the new, which is
spiritual; transfers the Name of Circumcision to Baptism, and calls it the
Circumcision made without hands.

Besides: Circumcision was, and Baptism is the initiating Sacrament: and they
were both accordingly instituted, by way of Relief and Remedy, against the
first and fundamental evil deprehended and reprehended in us, Original sin;
being the greatest Evil and sin, as the Cause of all other sins and Evils.

Now the Children of Christians, are as capable of Baptism, as the Children of
the Jews were of Circumcision: and as wanting of it. For: Idem est vulnus, and
eadem Ratio Medicinae sub utroque Testamento: There is the same Wound, Soar,
and Reason of the Medicine under both Testaments. Eademque Ratio Legis: And the
same Reason of Prescription for the Cure.

There is no repugnance therefore, ex part Sacramenti vel Instrumenti, on the
part of the Sacrament or Instrument; neque etiam ex part Subject^, nor on the
part of the Subject Neither is there any resistance or opposition ex part
Instituentis, vel Author is Sacrament^, on the part of the Institutor, Author
of the Sacrament, or him that licentiates the coition of the Subject and
Instrument; and authorizes by royal Authority, S^c James 2. 8
the Instrument to work Instrumentally upon the Subject.

And I make it up, thus Circumcision according to the Institution of it, was in
its Drift and Nature, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith: And Romans 4. 11.
this was ipsissimus Finis Institutionis Baptismi, the very End it self of the
Institution of Baptism, and comprizes the Nature of it: it being instituted to
be, and it being in it is Nature, a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, or, of the
Righteousness of Faith.

And although Children under the old Law, had not on the eighth Day, actual
Faith, nor could express their Faith by their actual profession* yet the
Sacrament of Circumcision was actually applied to them, as God's Legal
Instrument: Therefore the Sacrament of Baptism, as God's Evangelicall
Instrument, should, for the same Reason, be applied actually to Children under
the Gospel: and if it be not, the fault is in us, being the animate
Instruments.

The Mouse in Lemnius, was begat Levinus Lemnius, l. 2. cap. 10
of Corruption in the Ventricle of a Man. What Beast is bred of the Corruption
in the Brains of Anabaptists; except it be the Beast in Plandanus, which being
most foul Vide Plaudanum, l. 2. de S^cretis O^bis, and Rerum Miraculis.
and ugly, abhors all kind of cleanness by washing, and therefore devours the
Lambs approaching the Water, which in places remote from it, he loves, plays
with, and cherishes: I am altogether unknowing.

CHAP. XLVIII.
CIrcumcision was by command commended to the Jews: first that they might be
admonished by this Sign, of the divine promise made to Abraham concerning the
Genesis 12: 15. 17. 22.
M^ssias, who was to come, as a royal Extract, of his Generation, and in whom
all Nations and Generations should be blessed: And in this respect, it was
executed in Membro Generationis, and was Signum Praefigurativum.

Secondly: that the People of God, should by this Sign be discriminated and
discerned from the Vide S. Chrysostom. Hom. 30. and 39 in. Genesis Item, Irenaeum l.
4. c. 30. S Jo. Dam* l. 4. de Fide Orthodoxa. cap. 26.
Gentiles. Wherefore St John Damascen was fixed in the Opinion, that the
Israelites therefore were not Circumcised in the Wilderness, because, they not
being mingled with other Nations, there was no visible need of this distinctive
mark: though indeed, a more applicatory Cause was; their difficult Journey
would have been grievous to them, had they been there Circumcised: In this
regard it was Signum Distinctivum.

Thirdly: that it might be used as the Remedy of Original Sin: which in
Circumcision, (and not by it,) was remitted by the Faith of the Parents: And
therefore also, was Circumcision enacted in Membro Generante; Original sin
being traduced by Generation. So St Gregory, S. Greg. in cap. 3. Job. S. Bern.
Sermon. 3 de Circumcisione. S Beda in Lucae* c. 2.
St Bernard, Saint Bede. Hence the Fathers, catechizing the World, teach; that
Circumcision stood in the Place of Baptism, and reversally Baptism stands in
the place of Circumcision. In this place it was Signum Rememorativum, scilicet
Peccati Originalis.

Fourthly: that a Name might be duly and religiously given to the Infant. For:
the Names of Abram and Sarai were changed, when the Genesis 17.
Law of Circumcision was promulgated: and whereas he had been called Abram,
that is, Pater excelsus, an high Father; Ab in the Hebrew, signifying Father,
(which in the Chaldee and Syriack, is Abba; and in the Greek and Latin,
wherein there is the concession and freedom of a literal Termination, Abbas,)
and ram signifying high: God then added honorably to his Name, the letter
Hain, and so drew it forth into Abraham: Which is in true signification, Pater
multarum Gentium, the Father of many Nations: Likewise, his Wife having been
formerly called Sarai, that is, my Princess, Mistress, or Lady; God
abstracted from her Name, the letter Jod, and conveyed the letter He into the
place of it; and she was called Sarah, signifying Princess, absolutely, and
without any mean reference: (the literal Communication from the incommunicable
Name, Jehovah; I name not:) And here, it was Signum nuncupativum.

Fifthly: that it might serve to the diminution and abatement of carnal
Concupiscence; and therefore again, it was administered upon the Member, in the
which, that Carnal Vanity most commands: And in this consideration, it was
Signum directivum.

Sixthly: that it might be a Sign of the Spiritual Circumcision wherewith
Christ Circumcising us by his Blood, should remove the superfluities of our
sins. Of this, St Paul: Romans 2. ^9,
He is a Jew, which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart, in
the Spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God. And
to this also, agrees Irenaeus: And now, S. Irenaeus ubi supra,
it was Signum Commonitorium.

Lastly: that it should be the Sign of our Baptism. Wherefore as Circumcision
distinguished the Children of Abraham from the Gentiles; So Baptism severeth
Christians from Infidels: As Circumcision impressed a deep Character in the
flesh, not easily concealed even with Superinduction; so Baptism impresseth an
indeleble Character in the Soul: As by Circumcision, the Jews and Proselytes
were piously received into the warm boso^ of the Synagogue; so by baptism
Christians are incorporated into the Holy Church, and made Members of it: As
Circumcision did cut off the foreskin of the flesh; so Baptism cutteth away
Carnal Concupiscence, as instilling Grace into us, by the which we may resist
it: And as in Circumcision, Original Sin, was remitted; so also not only in
Baptism, but even by the Grace of it, the same Sin is exauctorated: And in this
Sense, it was Signum typicum, and Signum Bonorum futurorum in Christo, in cujus
Mortem Baptizarentur Christiani.

CHAP. XLIX.
SHould I give it a kiss of Peace, Dr Tailor in his Liberty of Prophesying,
Sect. 18.
That Figures and Types prove nothing, unless a Commandment go along with
them, or some express to signify such to be their purpose: although it
unsalts, yea grievously belepers Gregory the Great in a great part of his
works: I have expressed the Express, being the Express expressed to the
Colossians.

But I cannot give admittance to Idem ibid.
all the following ^ardle: Circumcision l^ft a Character in the flesh, which
being imprinted upon Infants did it is work to them when they came to age; and
such a Character was necessary because there was no word added to the sign;
but Baptism imprints nothing that remains on the Body, the Character is on the
Soul, to which also the word is added which is as much a part of the Sacrament
as the Sign it self is; for both which reasons, it is requisite that the
Persons Baptized should be capable of Reason, that they may be capable both of
the Word of the Sacrament, and of the Impresse made upon the Spirit: Because
the Godfathers, anciently called Susceptores, Undertakers, and still, Patrini
and Compatres, oblige themselves, to acquaint these their Spiritual Children,
entering upon the years of Understanding, with the ceremonial Work and real
Effect of Baptism, which involve both the Words and the Spiritual Character.
And the grown Children under the old Law, could not understand the direction of
the Character in the Flesh, without such teaching; which is the formal and
lively direction; the Fleshly Character being no direction without express
teaching, and but a materiall-one with it.

It was therefore, even before the formal Institution of Priests and Levites;
the Duty of the Parent or Chief Person and Firstborn in the Family, to
instruct the Child afterward.

And as words were not used in Circumcision, so neither in any other Sacrament
of the old Law; because the words in Sacraments, have necessary reference to
the Word incarnate, whom they design, and from whose actual Passion, words
being inefficacious of themselves, they have that they are effectual.

Hence the School-Divines require, that the Minister of a Sacrament in the
administration of it shall intend to behave himself as a Dispenser of the
Mysteries of Christ: and farther teach, that if he shall Baptize without
intention, or as a Devilish Engine of Contradiction with a positive Intention
and resolution against it; he will not act as a Dispenser of the Merits of
Christ in his Mysteries; but attribute strength to words, (in the manner of
Witches and Conjurers) which as merely such, are not forcible.

These Things orderly considered, the Reason of the Parity betwixt the
Sacraments, fails not; and the Argument though analogicall, is efficacious.

I understand at last, that I do not make these Batteries against the Doctor's
Judgment, but his Policy. And again, I bleed inwardly with grieving, that the
Divines in eminent places; should betray Spiritual Truth, to found the
Colossus of a temporal Purpose: (for, this was truly the false and unfriendly
betraying of a most invinsible Fort to a most false enemy of Truth:) As if the
mystical Body and the chained Order of it, were subordinate to a Civil Body
and it is Order and Chain: And as if Heaven were not rightly placed above
Earth, and God above Princes. I am assured, that he found no such lineament in
the Exemplar, the Life of Christ. Yet, I hope, he will furnish us with Holy
Life's and Prayers enough to redeem his Error. And perhaps, he will write
seriously for God, of the same Subject, as he has written against him in jest
and mockery. Fie, fie: Abeat in Proverbium, Let it pass into a Proverb: A
Doctor amongst the Anabaptists.

The Judgment of Agapetus was both ordinat^ and edificatory; as is evidenced
by the religious Council he gave to Justin^an the Emperor: Caesar ^ius Tom
^an Just^niano.
Sceptrum Imperil cum a Deo susceperis, cogitato quibusnam modis placebis et,
qui id tibi dedit; cumque omnibus Hominibus ab eo sis praelatus prae omnibus
eum honorare fest^na, Whereas you have received the Scrpter of the Empire from
God; think, by what means you shall please him who gave it unto you: and
whereas you are set by him before all men has^en to Honor him before all Men:
and to set God-pleasing, above the pleasing of Men. But the mourning
Nightingale sitting upon the sharp Thorn in the midst of my Heart, sweetly
sings to me, that the sublime Soul of the royal Clay abhorred this low,
hellish, Atheistical, and most dirty Stratugem.

CHAP. L.
I Confirm the Argument, first: If the Children of Christian Parents, should be
thus excluded from Baptism, they would be empaled into a narrower and more
limited Condition, than the Children of the Jews under the Law: the Sacrament
of Circumcision opening to these, the royal Door of God's Visible Church, and
entering them as blessed Partakers of his Promises: And so, the Sacred and
complete Ordinances of Christ, should be most unnaturally Circumcised and
Circumscribed; which in their Nature, Work and End, are much more large and
ample, than those of the Law: The Intention of the Ordainer in his Personal
Coming, (Christ the Fountain of Grace, now coming visibly and in Person with
his Fountain running Wine and Oil,) being, not to shorten, abridge, or abolish,
but to lengthen, enlarge, and multiply Evangelicall privileges; as appears in
the multitude of Persons now accepted to Grace by General acceptance, and of
their extraordinary Graces, and the extraordinary Manners of their being given:
And the fundamental aim of the divine Ordainer, (that works in his second
works, which are his works of Grace, agreeably to his first Works, which are
his Works of Nature, and in Whose only power it is to institute a Type, because
it is in his Power only, to annex the Thing Typified:) being, to make plain,
that the Substance is more effectual than the Shadow, the End more excellent
than the means; and the succeding Antitype, than the preceding Type.

Children therefore, may not be Losers, but must be Gainers by the coming of
Christ; and that they may be Gainers, must be supported from falling into a
Chas^^, by an Evangelicall Sacrament.

He that shall urge here, (...) polemically: Children accordingly, Mr Tombs in
his Examen.
should receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist, because they were admitted to
the Passover: must prove, and bind it fast with the nerves and* ar^eires of
strong Arguments, that Infants were admitted to the Passover, as to the
receiving of that Sacrament; the manner of Exodus 18. 11.
which, is prescribed in Exodus: and likewise, that the Nature and Effects of
the Eucharist, are as coherent with Infants, as the Effects and Nature of
Baptism are proved to be.

And though we shall not put God to a confinement: yet because, in ordinary
Things and Cases, he has confined himself to his own Order, we shall consider
him in comparison of such Things, to be there where he has put himself; and
not expect extraordinary Works in disagreeing and ordinary Courses; or
Superord^nations within the Dominion of Ordinances.

For the way to God, being the way of God, is agreeable to God; as (...) Means
agree with the End. And therefore, we come to the God of Order and of
Harmonious Heaven, by an orderly Way, which is the Godly Participation of his
Ordinances: As Men go to the Devil, the God of this World and of Discorder,
(Sidonius testifying, there Sidon: lib. 2. ep. 9.
is a great Head or Power in Hell, overlooking and overawing all, that there be
no order kept;) (...) a disorderly Way, which is the wicked neglect, contempt
or abnegation of his Holy Ordinances.

CHAP. LI.
I Confirm it, secondly: Christ is the Son of the Father of Mercies: his
Natural Son: And: From the Father and the Son, by one everlasting and
undivided Act, proceeds the Holy Ghost, who is Love, ^or, 1 Jo. 4. 16. Text.
Grac
as the Original, (...), Charity: And: the Son of God, so loved Mankind, that
he took the Nature of Man, in the very womb of a Woman, and first was and
appeared a Child. And this Divine Son of God, grown from a Child to a Man,
professed himself to be, and was Medicus Animarum, the most knowing and most
merciful Physit^an of Souls.

Now, is it imaginable by intellectual Creatures: or, can a Man be so blind
to the Law of Christ, whose Love, Wisdom, Providence and infinite; as to
think, that our Spiritual Physician, described by the Prophets and in the
Gospel, as the grand Master of the College; would now under the Gospel,
which is the Perfection of the Law, and to publish which Christ himself became
a Child, suffer Children to have a damnable and mortal Disease, inward, but
revealed, in his Visible Church, upon which, rejecting the Synagogue, he settled
all Heavenly Rights and Properties, now purchased and unfolded by his Death;
and not suffer them to have a revealed Cure by a Visible Ordinance?

It is improper, that the Society of Jesus, which Jesus is the greatest Lover
of Mankind; should be such an evil Companion, as to molest and incommodate
all other Societies and Communities. But it is most improper, that the sweet
and blessed Child Jesus, should not be a Savior of sweet Children, as he is of
other Persons; or, that they should want the Blessing of his Providence.

Plutarch honors in Ti^us a Pagan Plutar. in Tite, Vespasiam Filio.
Emperor, that he was Deliciae Humani Generis, the Dainties of Humane Kind;
and that he was often heard to say; Hodie non regnavimus, quia neminem
affecimus Beneficio, We have not reigned to day, as not having been beneficial
to any. Palladius applauds Bisarion, because Pallad in ^ausi^ca, cap. 116.
Leonti^s in vita Joan. Eleemosyna^ii.
he sold his Bible for the relief of a poor Man. And Leontius magnifies in
Joannes Eleemosynarius, that he wept always in the evening, when in the Day he
had not been solicited for the suppliance and succor of some afflicted Person.
And now, the Anabaptist sets Christ, in whom the fulness of Mercy as of the
Godhead dwells, looking sternly and immoveably, night and day, upon all innocent
Children, (who in puris naturalibus cannot look toward him, and who, by the
default of others, are burdened with accidental and grievous Impediments,) and
leaving them destitute of Help, yea selling, in a manner his Book of Promises
and glad Tidings to others, for their Prejudice, and without any pity of them
pretty Souls.

The Casuists publish to the World, Casuistae.
that when the public Use of a Thing is both Righteous and sinful, sub
diverso respectu, according to the good or evil Persons using it; as Oil was
in the Primitive Times, wherein it served for meat and for Lamp-use, and was
orderly used by the Christians, and by the Jews, disorderly: it may be
Righteously sold to all that are not known to buy it for evil purposes. This
Doctrine of the Anabaptists, cannot be accepted of any for a good End; because
it is evil in it self, as Blaspheming the Mercy of God, the Procession of the
Holy Ghost, who proceeds ut Amor, as Love; the Incarnation of Christ; as
excommunicating harmless Children, assigned to Christ by divine Title; as
profaning all Congregations and Families, with uncircumcised and Unblessed
Company; as being injurious to the whole Church of God.

CHAP. LII.
I Confirm it, thirdly: As it is an ordinary manner of Inference, to infer by
arguing a majore ad minut affirmative, From the greater Thing to the lesser
affirmatively; thus: He that is able to do the greater Thing, is able a
fortiori to do the lesser, in eodem Ordine, in the same Order of Things:
because, as God having an Infinite Power, does all things equally, and with
like facility: so we being finite, and acting by our Power, act proportionably
with it; and in proportioned and subordinate Acts of Power, the greater
includes the lesser: And as this Manner of Inference concerns the Power of the
Agent: So is it an extraordinary manner of Inference, but a firm one and
Giantstrong, according to the divine Logic of Scripture; to infer by arguing a
minore ad majus, from the lesser Thing to the greater; thus: If God actually
cares, and exercises his Power in caring, for the Sparrow, and the Hairs of
our Head; he cares much more for our Children: If he provides comfortably, for
Children under the Law; he provides more comfortaebly, for Children under the
Gospel: And this Manner of Inference, concerns the providentiall Love and
good Will of the Agent.

And although this Manner of Inference, be not ordinary, but, with certain
other applications, deniable; yet the work and Order of Love, is a Proof above
Nature and Reason, and will not be thus limit-bound.

So we teach in ordinary Logic; A posse ad esse non valet Argumentum: The
Argument is not Valid which says, whensoe're there is a passive Power that a
Thing may be done, then also, is there an active Power, which shall or will do
it: Because, although every Passive Power has an active Power extant, and
responsible to it* Yet many times they meet not. But Love and Truth transcend
all, and teach above the ordinary Level, that the Rule is contrary, and rules
thus; A posse ad esse praesens vel futurum valet Argumentum, when it meets with
a Set and promised Order of divine Things; and that God having willingly and
lovingly bound himself to an Ordinary Law, and proportionable Course; being
extraordinarily able to keep it, will not ordinarily break it.

And the proportionable Course is founded in this: That the old Law was a
Figure of the new; and the S Dionys. Eccles. Hierarche. c. 5. part. 1.
new is a Figure, says Dionysius, of our future Glory: And that in the new
Law, the Things* done in the Head, were Signs of the Things to be done in the
Members: Whence arise the three Spiritual or mystical V^^e D. Tho q 1. a. 10.
in corp.
Senses of Scripture, allegorical tropologicall, or moral, and anagogicall.

And it is not a Spiritual Sense in our Sense here, when words do signify
Things, but when Things do signify other Things* As: When the Things under the
Law, signify the Things under the Gospel, and the Things done by the Head of
us, signify the Things to be done by us; and the Things under the Gospel,
signify the Things of Glory* by Gods Ordination: who only, makes Holy Things
to signify other Holy Things that are subsequent to them by connection from his
Decree, through much difference of Time, Place, and Persons: And therefore, as
the mystical members necessarily pertain to the invisible Head, and Glory of
necessity follws the Gospel; so the Gospel follows the Law, and pertaines to
it; as giving to the Life in every touch of the Pencill, what the Ceremonial
part of the Law has showed in the first draught.

CHAP. LIII.
NOte. Baptism* succed (...) Circumcision, quoad Substant^am, non quoad Omnes
Circumstantias: agreeably to the Substance, not agreably to all the
Circumstances, (which Circumstances in the greater part, are now
heterogeneous:) As the Sacrament of the Eucharist, succeeds the Feast of the
Paschall Lamb.

And therefore we, conforming to old Things in their new Substantials: are not
obliged to Baptize Children on the eighth Day, this being a Circumstance of
Time; nor in the part wherein they were Circumcised, this being a Circumstance
of Part or Place; nor to Baptize the Males only, this being a Circumstance of
Person, as it designs this and that Male, and as it relates to the Exclusion
of Females; though not, as it imports in recto the Inclusion of Males.

Where I suppose against Dr Tailor; See Doctor Tailor Sect. 18.
That the Persons included, under the reduplication, as such, or, as included,
are not a Circumstance, neither are impertinent and accidental to the
mysteriousnesse of the Rite, but pertain essentially to the mystery, as without
which persons being the Subjects of it, the mystery could not be constituted,
or performed.

So Males and Females, at the least disjunctively, pertain to the essence and
actuality of Baptism, as being more ample.

For: then only, Persons are in proper Speech Circumstances of a Work or
Action, when they are only Circumstantially, outwardly, and accidentally
interessed in it; as here the Persons are, considered in individuo, but not,
considered in the whole Kind.

Now these old Circumstances had of old, their sufficient Reasons. Circumcision
was deferred until the eighth Day, that the Children might gain strength, for
the prevention of precipitation into mortal Danger. Which Reason falls off
in Baptism, in the which, our skin is not stirred; the new Law being a Law of
Love, as the old Law was a Law of Terror and Fear. Children were Circumcised
in Membro Generationis, for the reasons given before; the chief and carrying
reason whereof, now falls with it is Carriage; because Christ is already born and
we are not Abraham's Children, otherwise than by Faith; and the greater Number
of Christians Baptize all parts of the Body, to signify a total and perfect
washing of Spirit: (though Clement the eighth Clemen^ octavus in extravag.
declared for the admittance of the foot or hand to Baptism, in case the Child
should be in danger, and the hand or foot only, show it self as animated, and
with proper motion.) And the Males only, were circumcised; because this
Ordinance attached them in the part proper to them, they being the stronger,
and only able to bear a wound and bloodshed in that Age: Which reason, as it
relates to Females, now loses it is hold: Who then, it is most probable, were
embraced by some other Ordinance which the Scripture conceals, and not by their
lackying to the Males.

Wherefore Baptism is not expressly adjudg'd by God to these Circumstances; as
Circumcision was.

And although there was in the manducation of the Paschall Lamb, no
prescription of Sacramental drink; we will not hence deduce that the
Eucharist may not by divine Ordinance, be administered but in one kind: Because
in the most ancient Churches, it was at the first administered in both kinds;
yea, in many Western Churches, this use continued unto the Days of Aquinas:
And Vide D. Tho in ^d^ Materia.
because the Feast under the more perfect and explicit Law, is in it self,
more perfect, complete and explicit; and especially in it is noblest Use; as
explicitly and perfectly representing and signifying the Passion of Christ
sacrifized for us.

CHAP. LIVE.
I Draw with a chain of Adamant, my second Scripture-Consonancy, a Mandato
Christi, from the command of Christ. For: When Boethius Boethius super Topica
Ciceronis l. 6. non procul a sine.
delivers, Locus ab Auctoritate est infirmissimus, The Topic of Authority is
most infirm; he does not infringe his own Authority, but speaks of Authority
founded upon Humane Faith, not of Authority founded upon Science, or upon
divine Revelation, which comes from God; who by reason of the infinite Light of
his Understanding, cannot be deceived in himself; and by reason of his
infinite Truth, cannot deceive others: the Authority of his word understood
aright, being therefore most firm.

Go ye, says Christ, and teach all Mat. 28. 19. 20.
Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you: and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. Amen. If we
bring this English Text to a refinement by the Greek: it will sound otherwise.
The English teaches: teach all Nations: So also, the Vulgar Latin. But the
Edit. vulg. Text. Graet.
Greek disciples us: (...), disciple all Nations; not (...), teach ye. Which
expression, doubtless, in the first and most common acception of it, intends
as the complete Sense, the making of Disciples by actual teaching: and this
discipling was afterward most common, as being agreeable with the much greater
part of such who were designed for Disciples. But in a second and less common
acception, as agreeable with a lesser part, and an incompleate and lesser
kind; the word Disciple signifies initiate, or, set apart for Disciples; or,
devote such to God, by marking them for Disciples, and let them be taught
afterward, who in regard of their present ineptitude and incapacity, cannot be
presently made Disciples by actual teaching.

And the Reason of this Exposition, is uncontrolable: Which is: When an Active
Verb of Command, is applied to all Nations or People; it must admit such
Senses, by the which, it shall approve it self appliable to all people or
Nations: And Children certainly are a bigger part of the Nations or People, in
respect of their number; than they are in respect of their growth.

And that our Children are so discipled, is undeniable: Because, first: they
are offered to God by the Church, or by their Parents; who devote them, and
give their Names to Christ:

Secondly: the Susceptores undertake for them; that, in conformity to their
Obligation intimated in the Form of Baptism, (which is afterward expressed in
the Charge,) they shall be taught the true Worship of the most Holy Trinity.
Hitherto they are only Disciples in Fieri.

Thirdly: they receive the royal Mark or Character in their Souls; by the
which, they are Sealed for God, and made Disciples and Christians in Facto
esse: not as being actually taught, but as being put into the School and Family
of Christ, and set actually in the number of his Disciples, according to the
less common acception of the word.

We send sometimes, little children to School or put them into the hands of
Tutors or Governors, not for their present and actual improvement by
learning, but that they may be kept out of harms way. And thus children are
sweetly received into Chrstian Discipline, to way-lay the danger of their dying
without Baptism, God's general and Holy Ordinance; the Holy Ordination of
which, was not for naught in respect of any person.

Though this be adduced for Illustration sake; and Similitudines Illustiant,
non probant, Similitudes prove not, but Illustrate: Yet, when the Similitude
stands with both feet, upon Things of near affinity, and like Economy, and
concurring to Identity or some aggregate Perfection combined in the same End,
(as the outward Man and the inward Man in the same man, are but one and the
same Christian Man, tending to Legatur Suarez in Metaph. Disp. de Vno, Sect. 8.
Christ;) the Illustration is a solid Probation.

CHAP. LV.
AND in this Text, the word, Teaching follows (...), Teaching them to observe
V. 20.
etc. And yet* we do not there press the word, Teaching, to teach, that
Teaching always and of necessity follows Baptism; because Baptism of
necessity and always follows Teaching in Adultis, in grown Persons capable of
Teaching.

But now, will they force Christ to speak irrhetorically, and burden Scripture
with a Tautology, that he may speak for them? Truly if they should, he would
immediately draw off, and leave them to speak for themselves. For^ If Teaching
be set before Baptizing, it will not evince, that all the Persons deputed for
Baptism, must be actually taught before they be Baptized.

First: Because, ut habetur in Materi^ de Legibus; Statuta Communia Videatur
Materia de Legibus.
prop^^^ntur secundum quod multitudeni convenient: and ideo Legislator in eis
statuendis attendit id quod communiter, and in pluribus accidit: General
Appointments, as this is, are proposed accordingly as they agree with the
greater number: and therefore, the Lawgiver in appointing them, attends to that
which commonly, and for the most part happens. And the greater number in those
times, were such as should be taught before they could be Baptized, being grown
Persons: and the Lawgiver attends to the common course, and bids, teach all
Nations Baptizing them.

And indeed in the Conversion of Nations, and the general Plantation of
Christian Faith; the Preaching of the Word, as being the first onset upon the
Sense and Soul, precedeth orderly and simply, the administration of the
Sacraments.

Secondly: because it might also be reasonably answered; (which would rebate
the edge of all that could be said;) The stepping of teaching before Baptizing,
does no more carry away with it, that teaching has legal precedence, and
ought always to take the place in action before Baptizing; than that
Repentance, as being commanded before Faith in the Words, Repent ye, and
believe Mar. 1. 15.
the Gospel, should therefore claim always the first place; which yet, is a
fruit of Faith: Faith attending upon Repentance here, by a Rhetorical (...).

These pleasures of the Holy Ghost in the contexture of Scripture, occasioned
the Rule of Exposition, Non datur prius aut posterius in Scriptura: Scripture
observes not sometimes, what is former, or what latter in it self.

I commiserate the Adversary here; he being so environed, that if he will
dance, he must needs dance in a Hoop. But, as St Austin elegantly: S Aug. l. 1.
Confess. cap. 13.
Quid est miserius misero non miserante seipsum? What is more miserable than a
miserable man having no commiseration toward himself?

CHAP. LVI.
THere is another knot. The Text in the Mine, has: (...), Baptizing them into
the Name-: Because the Baptized should not only catch to themselves, the Name
and Profession, but also be soberly immersed into the Thing professed and named.

I answer: The Undertakers take for Infants, with respect to the Profession:
but the Thing and the Name, themselves take. They are washed and Sanctified in
the Name of Christ; and are therefore called Christians: external
Communication being necessary to a Member of the visible Church; but not
external and personal Profession in this case; the Persons being incapable of
it, and the Profession of others, being equipollent on the behalf of such
Persons.

Still they stick by the teeth, at (...): and finding it to be an alien in
gender from (...), they have taken up from under the hedge in the Highway, a
Noun whereon to throw it; which themselves have made fit, and clothed: And this
is (...), Disciples. And thus they send back (...), them, with a pass and an
Officer, to be carried, not to the Nations, it is native place, but to the
Disciples in the Nations.

Let the Answer be. The like Conjunction of (...) and (...), is frequent in
Scripture: And they are at once, thrice conjoined in the Apocalypse. Rev. 20.
8. 9. 10.
And why may we not more naturally fetch out a companion for (...), from the
Vulgar use of speaking, tha^ from a strange V^rb of Command, (which Verbal
fetch, would be a wondrous fetch and (...), or Abase of speech, and most
abusively surrogate one word for another:) and ^ather Substitute (...) a Name
common to Men, Women, and Children; and bind all up in the end of the
Construction, with (...), of all the Nations?

Neither is the Conjunction of (...) and (...), incongruous; because (...) is a
most ready word in that Language; and as always ready, so able always to make
the construction perfect: the Nations being constituted of Men, Women, and
Children.

What a mighty weight would these underlings and Country-Workemen heap upon a
new-sangled supposition of their own: When a Building should not be
improportionable to the Foundation.

The Author of the Arabic Catena, Author Arabicae Catenae, cap. 8.
sets for a mark to us, that Cain's Mark made him proof against Men and all
their Weapons: Had there been Swords or Pikes, they could not have entered him:
had there been Guns; he was so marked by God, that he could not have been their
Mark to be marked by them: Against all the Beasts, and Serpents: his Force and
Poison proved the stronger, and subdued their Poison and Force: Against the
Elements: He could nor be burned by the most devouring Fire; or drowned by the
great Ocean of Water; or blasted by the most Pestilentiall Air; or crushed by
the fall of a Rock or Cliff. Against the War and uproar of the Clouds, and Sky:
Thunder and Lightning could not offend him; nor, Tempests hurt him.

The simple Herd of Anabaptists fancy to themselves, that their Arguments are
all of proof; and they prove nothing for them, but only, that they prove
nothing for them, and altogether for us. An ordinary pen, is a sufficient
Weapon to pierce them: One spark of industrious courage, is able to consume
them: A few drops from the profound School-Ocean; to chill, benumme, and drown
them.

CHAP. LVII.
I Confirm this Argument, first: Christ demonstrated by his Example, that he
intended in his command, the Baptizing of Infants. It is written: Jesus
himself Baptized not, Joh. 4. 2.
but his Disciples: that is: Baptized not ordinarily, but only extraordinarily;
in compliance with the Testimony of Euodius.

And Jesus devolved and delegated the function of Baptizing, to his Disciples:
First: that he might enable them, in regard of appliance to the wants of the
Church: And secondly, that he might ennoble them; and that the people might
look upon them as having such power so derivatively conferred on them. For* had
Christ himself commonly Baptized, the People would have greedily sought to be
Baptized by him, and have waved his Disciples who therefore, would have sunk in
repute, and been brought into contempt and obloquy.

Now Christ Baptizing not, for these Reasons: could not in his Example, express
for Infants, more fully and plentifully tha^ he did. He said: Suffer See Mat.
19. 13. 14. 15. Mar. 10. 13. 14. 15. 16.
little children to come unto me: that is: to come in a large Sense, or, have
access to me, for a Spiritual End. And the three Evangelists, who treat of
this Matter, declare first, that they were brought. Yea St Luke says
expressly; Lu. 18. 15. 16. 17.
And they brought unto him also Infants, that he would touch the^. Where the
Original ears exactly: (...): But Text. Graec.
they brought unto him also sucklings: Adferebant, non adducebant: they brought
them, they did not lead them.

Roger Bacon instructs us in his Perspectives, that Looking-Glasses Rogerus
Bacon in Perspect. Did Vlt.
may be erected, by the representations of which, we may, notwithstanding the
interposition of much distance, look into the Countries Cities, and Camps of
our Enemies. Let us here as in a Glass, behold the deceitful carriage of our
Adversary in reversion.

What nimble Familiar taught Mr Tombs, that when the word Mr Tomb^ in his
Examen. Mat. 12. 22. Mat. 17. 16.
(...) is applied to the blind and deaf Demoniack, and to the lunatic Child;
the persons were steered to Christ upon the carriage of their own legs, and not
carried to him? Anabaptism walks by the false Light of strange and feverish
Fancies.

And is there not a blindness and deafness, (I will be modest and not asperse
them with Devilishnesse,) in such who will not allow (...) to signify they
carried, when it is joined with so portable Subjects, as (...), babes?

Such might be shamed into better knowledge, by the Greek words, which begin
with a Child, and are both carried and run along with him until he ceases to
be a Child. First: in the womb of his Mother, he is (...): being born he is
(...), or (...): there he stays a while: he is afterward (...), puerulus;
(which word is used by St Matthew and St Mark:) until he be (...) a stripling
Boy.

But Mr Tombs being readyhanded, Mr Tomb^ in his Examen.
would gladly take away the word (...) to signify a Child explerato ingenio
praeditum, come to some known ripeness *of Wit and Understanding, and now
capable of Learning: because the Apostle writes thus to Timothy: And that 2 Timothy 3. 15.
from a Child thou have known the holy Scriptures: in the place of the
Translation expounding from a Child, the Original exposing (...): Text. Grac.
Which in our Sense, would signify, from thy very Infancy.

It is not far to the Answer. The Intention of the Apostle is, to manifest
here, that his Timothy had early and betimes applied himself to the reading of
Holy Scriptures; and therefore, he takes a Word upon which, that he might raise
up this Example as an honorable Pyramid with a point like a Flame, he builds
an Hyperbolicall Sense: the plain and ready meaning of which, is; thou did
begin so early to learn Holy Scriptures, that, had it been possible, thou
would have begun, even from thy very Infancy.

A word now, having a proper Sense, in the which it is almost always used for
a common Reason; and a Sense that is Hyperbolicall; in the which, for a
special Reason, it is used once only: shall I disdainfully turn away from the
proper Sense, and adhere to that which is Hyperbolicall and improper?
Certainly, no Man does it, unless to defend improperly, improper Works.

I make up al into a precious Bracelet, thus: Christ by receiving Infants into
his Arms and Bosom, he being the Bridegroom and Head of the Church; and now
working as the Head and Bridegroom: showed, that we might receive them into
the Bosom and Arms of the Church: Christ by laying his hands upon them, in sign
they were his own; showed, that we might sign them, as his: Christ by blessing
them, (which was the last and highest of present mercies, it being supposed
that he Baptized not;) showed, that his Disciples, and we might Baptize them,
(which is the last of our present favors toward them:) And therefore, Christ
by saying, Suffer little Children to come unto me; showed, that we must not
prohibit them to be brought unto Christ by Baptism: And Christ by declaring,
that of such (and none but such) is the Kingdom of God; declared likewise, that
the Kingdom of Grace, as the Way, is open to them.

CHAP. LVIII.
I Confirm it, secondly: The Church, or Kingdom of Grace, may not reject such
as the Kingdom of Glory receives: Yea: Such as the Kingdom of Glory receives,
must be received into the Church or Kingdom of Grace, by God's Ordinances in
it, as Ordained to give them the Signs of their Title to the Kingdom of Glory:
it being said of the Church now increasing, And the Lord added Acts 2. 47.
to the Church daily such as should be saved: Without which daily and visible
addition to the Church, of such as shall be saved; the (...) or hairy Devils
Scripturized by Aquila, Aquila in Is. 13. 21.
would soon dance in it.)

If therefore, Infants must be offered to Christ, and thereby have a Communion
with him in the Kingdom of Heaven; Baptism Christ's Ordinance, now in full
vigor and force, must be communicated to them in the Church, Velut Arrha
Sponsi, as a Christian Sign of this their Communion with Christ, and Right to
him in the Kingdom of Glory, and as a visible Manifestation of this invisible
Benefit; the Church of God, being as truly visible as invisible.

He that objecteth our Text, saying, Text. Graee* Mr Tombs in his Examen.
(...), of such, not (...), of these, is the Kingdom of God, or, of Heaven:
and that Christ intended to teach others Humility, Simplicity, Innocence, by
these Children: and that therefore, the Kingdom of God is of such only, who
are like to these Children; such Children expressing not Innocence, Simplicity,
Humility, as they are Virtues: may take for a sure Answer: Propter quod aliquid
est tale, and illud magis: That for which, any Thing is such, is it self more
such: If Men be qualified for the Kingdom of God, by reason of their likeness
with such Infants; such Infants are as much (if not more) qualified for the
same Kingdom: who, though they do not express true Virtues outwardly, yet
outwardly express the likeness of such Virtues; and have inwardly, true
Virtues by Infusion, effecting their inward conjunction with God.

And this outward likeness, though natural and not flowing from inward and
Supernatural Habits, yet is in such Infants, outwardly significative of inward
Perfection; from which signification, the similitude is taken.

Where it is Note-worthy, that Baptism was not obligatory, or necessary to
Salvation, until after the Death of Christ, (the very Morning-Rites and
Sacrifices being on the day of his Passion, in force; and the
Evening-oblations, invalid;) nor declared in a general consideration, until
the command went forth, Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, Baptizing
them, etc: nor yet, fully and completely sealed and perfected, until the
promulgation of the Gospel in the Pentecost.

And we are not driven to take Sanctuary at the Terms of the Summulists:
Summulissae. ^
and stand it out, that other children in the rigor of Speaking, are such.
For: although Christ did both commend these Virtues (the likeness whereof is
in children,) and Men-piously-turn'd-children, in respect of their having them
truly: yet he showed also, that the age of children is not underannuated, and
estranged from the Kingdom of God. Because when he said, Suffer little
Children to come unto me, he spoke literally and Historically of true children,
presented actually to him: And therefore even the reason adjoined, for of such
is the Kingdom of God; must also truly agree with true children: and those
imbracings and blessings of true children, signify truly, the like Things in
the Kingdom, and import Heavenly blessings and imbracings.

CHAP. LIX.
I Confirm it, thirdly: If in this great Command of Baptizing, children be not
included; God having imprinted in the nature of Parents, a most ardent and
earnest Love of their children; there is nothing in the Supernatural Order of
Grace, that answers to this natural Love, according to the way of God in the
disposition of these Orders; and the Parent is left by the God of Nature, very
much loving his child, and yet, not succored by the God of Grace, or informed
how or that his child shall be beloved of God* without which pectorall
security, he cannot love his child as he ought, and with a love becoming a
Christian Father.

I speak of security by Ordinance, (we being confined to Ordinances,) which
excludes four. And if this fear be not excluded; it will be continual and
urgent; and the Gospel and law of Christ, shall, in this respect, be Lex Timor
is and Servitut is, non Amoris and Libertatis, a law of Fear and Bondage, not
of Love and Liberty: which it essentially is, and ought, and is revealed to be.

And the fearful and troubled Parent, may perhaps, go aside into a melancholy
place, and there desperately cry: O, for my poor childrens sakes, that I had
been born a Jew before Christ, and expected him in Figures: this my latter
having him in Substance, is dangerously prejudicial to my dear flesh and
bloud-Babes.

Rachel in the Oriental Languages Hebr. Sir. Chald.
is interpreted a Sheep or Lamb; and a Lamb or Sheep was aptly and suteably
called up to lament, weep, and Mat. 2. 18.
mourn over Innocent Lambs. Indeed every Christian Mother, if knowing and not
unnatural, (I exclude Anabaptists,) would be a Rachell, a sheep, and, in this
great contest betwixt Love and Fear, mourn, weep and lament over her Lambs.

And whereas it is the observation of Franzius, that the Sheep or Franzius in
Ove.
Lamb, uses, in the sensual motions of Joy and Sorrow, but one bleating ^one,
and that one a pleasant-one: Grief would invent many sad and unpleasant Tones
in those Rachels or Sheep.

And the persuasions of the most Spiritual Men, would not otherwise prevail
with them, than the Odours applied to Persons in a Fit of the Falling
Sickness; which happily recover them out of the Fit, but are unfit to
discharge the Disease, or fitly prevent the casual Recurrence of it: Because
their Griefs would under the Supposition and consequence of this Case, be
rational. For: it would be apparent, that the Course of Divine Ordinances was
interrupted: And therefore, like Rachel, they would not be Comforted.

And as, according to the Discourse Scholastici.
of School Divines, if God should reveal to a Man his Damnation; he might
lawfully despair: So if this neglect of divine provision for Infants, now only
under the Gospel, were a revealed Truth; Parents would think (justly or
unjustly, my reverentiall Fear of God will not suffer me to define) themselves
dealt with hardly, strangely, preposterously: and the Thoughts arising, would
raise and beget irregular and immoderate Sorrow.

I do not justify these complaints, or Griefs: But I maintain, that God
cannot give a just cause of Grief, or complaint against him; and that the
Matter of this Case, thus put into Form; is impossible: and therefore the thing
is impossible, which is dreined from it, as here, not only ex Vi suppositionis,
but also, ex Vi consequcntiae petitae quasi ex rei natura.

CHAP. LX.
NOte. The Baptism of Infants is not commanded expressly and interminis; though
the Circumcision of them, was expressly commanded, and by a positive Law.
Because the Thing which materially occasions a particular nomination, or branch
of injunction in a Law, is a particular Case and condition: which condition and
Case are not in Baptism; it being set open to all sorts and conditions.

And in Types there is need of express Descension to particulars; because the
Rule of the Type, is the first Rule: In Antitypes there is not the same need;
(because the Antitype is, in some fashion, regulated by the Type:) especially,
where there is a notable variation in the Antitype, by the which, it is widen'd
and made large for the free reception and admittance of all persons, as here
there is: Circumcision being appliable to Males only, and Baptism agreeable
with all.

And though Females were not Virtually Circumcised in their Parents; yet some
command they did undergo, answearable to their Kind, as Circumcision answered
to the Males in their Kind, and having the same end with it; which together
with Circumcision, thawed and resolved it self into Baptism.

Moreover: What need is there of a new-moulded and express Command for
Infants, when the old command in regard of the Substance of it, that is, as it
substantially and essentially imports a divine Remedy against Original sin,
according to the old works and warpings of Corrupt Nature, inherent in our
Children; it being more than the mere Privation of Original Justice: is not
antiquated, but still in ancient force and ability?

As ^e have now no need of an express Commandment, for the keeping of the
Lords Day; because the old Memento Commandment, is quoad substantiam, yet in
force; though the Church has intermedled in the Circumstance of Time, for the
Commemoration of the new Creature rising from his own Nothing, with Christ in
whom he has all Things: the Substance and Morality of the Commandment,
remaining immovable; which obliges us necessarily and substantially to the
keeping holy of one Day in seven.

Whence in the most Primitive Tract of Apostolical Times, the Syriacke,
Arabic, Greek and Roman Calendaria Syriaca, Arabica, Graeca, Romana, antiqua.
Calenders did equally reverence the Jewish Sabbath and our Lord's Day: (and I
cannot cover as I go, the Wind blows it open, that the Feast of the Nativity of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the natural Son of God by his eternal
Generation, and temporally, conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin
Mary; is found as ancient in these Calenders, as our Lord's Day.)

Let our Anabaptists therefore, take to Heart, that in general Precepts and
Laws, the numeration of special Kinds or Matters, is not only not necessary,
but also supervaneous, and praeter morem, besides the course and custom of
general Laws; such especially which have been in any sort formerly modelized.

CHAP. LXI.
HEre is the Place and seat of my last chief Argument arguing from Consonancy.
The Seal of the Covenant belongs to all those who belong to the Covenant: the
Seals following always the Right and Propriety. And Children supplied with
the Faith of the Church, (as also, the children under the Law were,) belong to
the Covenant.

For: when God covenanted with Abraham for him and his Posterity, he consigned
the Covenant with Circumcision: which having a Spiritual reference, not only
as referring to Spiritual Circumcision in respect of the Persons circumcised,
but also as referring to a Circumcision without hands under the Law of Christ;
received the Gentiles into the Covenant by Spiritual Adoption: And, as Mr
Tombs honestly grants: Mr Tombs in his Examen.
The Covenant was the same in all Ages, in respect of the Thing promised, and
Condition of the Covenant, which we may call the substantial and essential
part of the Covenant: that is: in the Abstract. But he dishonestly substracts
the Covenanters or confederates, who, on our part, as elected and called, or,
as called only, are also necessarily included in the Concretion of it.

The Covenant is exhibited in a short Scheme: which notwithstanning, is the
Magna Charta, or great Charter of God's free Mercy in Christ: And I will
establish my Covenant Genesis 17. 7.
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee, in their Generations, for an
everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee: that
is: thy seed after thee by flesh and blood; or by spirit and Faith only; that
it may be an everlasting Covenant; and that the Covenant may comprehend all
them, unto whom I shall be a God, and in whom I shall be apprehended by Faith,
or by Faith here and hereafter by Vision.

And hence Isaac was Circumcised on the eighth day: And hence again, the
Apostle St Paul first, to Romans 4. 13.
the Romans: For the promise that he should be the Heir of the World, was not
to Abraham, or to his seed through the Law: but through the righteousness of
Faith: and as he was the Father of all the Faithful. V. 16.
And the Promise being made to him and his Seed, under a Spiritual
Consideration, was therefore made to him as he was a Spiritual Father, and to
his Seed as they were his Children Spiritually; and therefore, all coming
within the reach of this federal and pious consideration, fall into the pious
Arms of the Covenant. Secondly, to the Galathians: Know ye therefore, that they
which are of Gal. 3. 7.
Faith, the same are the Children of Abraham.

Wherefore Zacheus, after his Justification, was presently styled a Son of
Abraham. And when the Luke 19. 9.
Jews soared in their Thoughts, because they were the Children of Abraham
according to the flesh; it came inauspiciously upon them, to be called by John
the Baptist, a Generation Mat. 3. 7.
of Vipers; and to hear the reason of their being called so, Think Verse 9.
not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father; he depressing
them with a tacit reflection upon other children, in the very consideration
wherein they exalted themselves.

The Apostle St Peter speaks consonantly to the Jews: For the Promise Act. 2.
39.
is unto you, and to your Children, and to all that are afar off, even as many
as the Lord our God shall Read Ephesians. 2.
call: that is: afar off in the Series and order of Generation, as being yet in
the loins of their Parents, and afterward* to be born; or, in distance of
Affection, as the unbeleeving Jews and ignorant Gentiles.

Severus the Emperor (my Author is Lampridius) had in his first Lamprid. in
Alexandr^ Severo.
Lararium, the Images of Christ and Abraham, to which, every morning, as
Pontifex Maximus, he sacrificed* but he did not know or worship Christ aright,
neither was he a Faithful Child of Abraham.

Now Children being involved in these Generations under the old Law; and these
Generations yet continuing: must pertain as truly to the Covenant under the new
Law.

The Adversary may raise a dust or a mud, in darkning and dirtying Scripture
with corrupt Interpretations: as nothing is so notum in se a^t nobis notum*
clear in it self or clear to us, but something may be said against it. Yet:
Maledicta Glossa quae corrumpit Textum: Cursed is the Gloss, which corrupts
the Text.

CHAP. LXII.
I Confirm it, first: by St Paul's Romans 8. 30.
Order of Predestination: Whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and
whom he called, them he also justified: and whom he justified, them healso
glorified. Here we have wholly given into our Hands Virgula divina, that every
predestined Person in the Generations of Abraham, is called, is justified, is
glorified: and in the contrary consideration, that no person is glorified,
except he be first justified; that no person is justified, except he be first
called; and that no person is called (...), according to V. 28. Text. Graec.
purpose, except he be first predestined.

Now we cannot possibly discover or imagine a Vocation or calling with relation
to Infants, but by Baptism: Because then only, they will be rightly said to be
called, when they are actually ascribed into the number of those who are
called; as then only, they will be actual Covenanters, when they have been
signed with the Seal of the Covenant. Neither are they capable of any other
Vocation; as neither, of any other Seal. And either they are not predestined;
and shall not be glorified, if they dye being Infants: or they are called by
Baptism, and justified by the Virtues infused, Jo. 3. v. 3. and 7.
(...), from above into them in it.

If you fly to and take refuge at, extraordinary Vocations in Ordinary Courses;
you disesteem God's Ordinances as curt, and not carved proportionably to all
ordinary Conditions: when Order cannot consist without Proportion.

In Lucian's Philopatris* wherein Luciani Philopatris.
the Interlocutors make it their grand Affair, to dishonor the Worship, Rites
and Manners of Christians; they might have justly cast out a scorn upon such an
out cast Vacuum in Religion as this is.

And if you repeat, that Children ordinarily dye before Baptism; then will they
of the School reply without Schelastici.
stammering, that such are not called. If you ask: will the Mercy of God look
besides a Child, because men look not after it as they ought, or because
chances impede the religious endeavors of Men? They will answer: One Attribute
of God does nothing in prejudice of another: And therefore, his Mercy does not
any thing in opposition to his Providence: that God may be conformable to
himself in his Works; and that men may be conformable to God in his Ordinances.

CHAP. LXIII.
I Confirm it, secondly: The Scriptures irrefragably, and manifoldly manifest:
That there can be no justefication, without Faith. Therefore either Infants
have habitual Faith, by the which they are justified; or, being Infants, they
are totally averted from justification.

It is truly supposed, that actual Faith does not justify: and it is justly
and actually granted, that Infants have not actual Faith: Because as Grace
perfects Nature, so it first supposes Nature, quatenus Perfectio supponit
perfectibile, in regard that the Perfection of a Thing supposes the Thing to be
perfected by it; and as it supposes the being of it, so likewise that it be
like-behaviour'd: and therefore, there cannot be actual Faith, where there is
not actual use of the natural powers; and where the Understanding, being the
Power or Faculty wherein Faith resides, cannot move in the Sense wherein Motus
Intellectus est intelligere, the Motion of the Understanding is to Understand.

And actual Grace requires a likeness in the Subject, not only in respect of
the natural Act, but also, of the natural Aptitude; which, respectively to
heavenly Things, is not an early-riser in Children though graciously habited.

If it be thrown in my face: Without Heb. 11. 6.
Faith it is impossible to please him: for he that comes to God, must believe
that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him: But a
Child does not believe that God is, or, that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him: And yet, without this Faith, says the Apostle, it is
impossible to please God. I answer: These are the Acts of Faith: and therefore,
the Apostle speaks here of grown Persons, and of actual Faith, without which
it is impossible that Persons having the right use or understanding, should
rightly please God.

For: Christ and his Apostles, in their commending the Acts of Faith, as such,
and to the people; chiefly considered two things.

First: that there are some works, which are done viribus naturae, by the
strength of Nature, and sine speciali Dei Auxilio, without the special Help of
God; and that these were the works of which the Philosophers boasted: and that
there were other works, which having been commanded in the old Law. were now
acted without explicit Faith in Christ; and that the grown Jews presomed upon
these works: And therefore, they weaned the people from the works of Nature,
and of the Law: and grounded them upon an apprehensive and active Faith in
Christ, without which they could not please God.

Secondly: they considered, that Faith is Principium, Fundamentum, and Radix
nostrae Justificationis, The Beginning, Foundation, and Root of our
Justification; and, as being active, our formal Justification; because Charity
is the Life and Form of of Faith: And that one thing may be the Beginning of an
other Thing, of the which it is not the Foundation; and the Foundation of a
Thing, of the which it may not be the Root: And that a Beginning, as a
Beg^nning, does but begin a Thing; a foundation supports the thing which it
founds; A Root, not only supports, but also influit esse, gives being to
another Thing by influx: And, Principium radicale virtute continet reliqua, A
radical Beginning, virtually contains the Things, of which it is the
Beginning: And that Faith acting by Charity, was therefore necessary to the
Salvation of the People: which Action is in Covenanted Children, by virtuall
suppliance; their Sanctification being only intended for the present.

If any man shall assault me thus, quasi palmario Argumento, as with a chief
and Victory-portending Argument: Fides non justificat quatenus Fides est, aut
credit; sed quatenus operatur: quia etiamsi credat, aut sit Fides: si non
operetur, non justificat: Faith does not justify, as it is Faith, or, as it
believes; but as it works: for, although it believes, or, is Faith; yet, if it
works not, it justifies not: it being like fire, which does not enliven, as it
shines or gives light; but, as it heats: and therefore we say from the mouths
of the Philosophers, Calor vivificat, Heat Philosophi. Vide Edmundum Campianum
in december Rationibus.
enlivens: And though some have given to Children, pulsus abditos Fidei,
actual Faith acting inwardly as the pulse does; yet no Divine will divinely
say, that Faith in Infants acts by Charity: And although Justification be
attributed to Faith, by the Rule, Quod natum est ex pluribus sequi, tribuitur
ei quod est primum: That which follows of many Things, is commonly attributed
to the first of them: Yet Faith justifies, as being alive; and, as being alive,
works. I answer: This Argument fights altogether, for the Faith of
understanding and grown Persons: and if it wins the Field, I lose it not: And:
Faith in Children, is not dead, though it works not; the fault being in the
Organ, with regard to within and without.

CHAP. LXIV.
I Confirm it, thirdly: St Paul writes Ephesians. 5. 25. 26.
to the Ephesians: Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the
Church, and gave himself for it: That he might sanctify and cleanse it with
the washing of water, by the word. Where it is perspicuous; that either Infants
are of the visible Church, and partakers of her Faith; or, that Christ did not
give himself for them: and also, that those for whom he gave himself, he
sanctifies and cleanses with the washing of water by the Word: the water and
the word being the outward part of the Sacrament; and the Sacramental Sense,
being the literal Sense of this place; though the Adversary would have hoop't
it up, to the washing of the word preached; until his Hoops brake and flew
about his ears, and the water being left, leapt into his face.

And the visible Church is here meant, because the visible Church is the Church
which is invisibly sanctified and cleansed with the Visible washing of Water by
the Word.

And because the water and Word in these words, concern Children: the
Admonition is conveniently directed to Husbands, who are exhorted to love their
Wives; this Love being the pious occasion, that Children are born to the Church.

In the which exhortation agreeably, the Baptizing of Infants is implicitly
Theologi in primam, and secuudam partem D. Thomae. Vide S. Hieronymum adversus
Jovinianu, Vigilantium, etc.
commanded.

Now, the Divines put it to the Question, An Deus jubeat impossibibilia?
Whether or no, God Commands impossible Things? And they generally, answer
negatively. Their Commanding Reason is: Because if God should command
impossible Things, ageret praeter finem Mandati, qui est, ut servetur: he would
work besides the end of the Commandment, which is, that it may be kept. And
here, is Ignorance, Imprudence, want of Power, and Unrighteousness, in one
lefthand-cast of the Anabaptist, cast upon God. For: in his Legislation, he
commands and appoints a Thing; which, as the Anabaptist mutters, for the
unfitness and incapacity of the Subject, to which the Action in the
appointment, is appointed to point; neither ought nor can be done, according to
Appointment.

CHAP. LXV.
NOte. The federall, adherent, extrinsecall, relative, and Covenant. Holiness,
transmitted from the last Age to Posterity, and grounded 1 Cor 7. 14.
upon St Paul; and which is commonly distinguished against internal, inherent
and Personal Holiness: is not fashionable to this purpose, or, of the same
color with it. And, Mr Tombs in his Examen.
as Mr Tombs judiciously censures it, the ancient Writers knew it not.

For: this federall Holiness, as it is ordinarily expounded, walks by the
sides of the Parents; who are, many times, unbeleevers, and formal Denyers of
God in their Works, and therefore, cannot qualify their Children, being also
Children of Wrath, for Baptism.

And though, in such a Case, the verticity of the point moves to the Faith of
the Church; yet neither this Faith concurrs to the Holiness of a Child in
order to Happiness (as we speak here of Holiness,) without application; which
is by Ordinance.

And what shall be said of those young raw Catechumeni, the Jewish Children,
Baptized by Athanasius in his childhood, as he was playing the Bishop on the
Sea-shoare: which Baptism was pronounced firm and Sacrament-strong, by
Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, and his learned Assistants; and was pinned upon
the Record, by Ruffinus, Nicephorus, Ruffin. Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. cap. 14.
and others?

Our Christian Monuments and Annals have many potent Examples, that urge
accordingly.

And if a Paganish Infant-Orphan be brought by Providence to be educated, all
the time of his Pupillage by a Christian: shall he not be presently Baptized;
when the Patria Potestas, Fatherly Power over him, is now untterly dissolved?

Farther yet: The Covenant confirmed by the Blood of Christ, is more ample, and
of more efficacy, than the Promise to Abraham as such: Wherefore if the Child
offered, be in a condition, that the Undertakers can perform their Promise;
there can be no injury where the Right leans toward God, and when the
Sacramental Ordinance is opened to all Nations.

And if an innocent Child should be thrown aside from Baptism, hoc ipso, by
this very thing, that he is not born of Christian Parents; the child should be
hardly used, and it would hardly, yea verily, it would never be soundly
explicated; wherein the largeness and plentifullnesse of the Gospel with
relation to Infants, does consist.

And here is no repugnance oppugning us from the want of Christian Parents:
because the Christian Suseeptores adopt such children, and are loco Parentum.

CHAP. LXVI.
I Now set forward to prove the Baptism of Infants by Reason, and to send the
Text assistance from the God of Nature: Reason as Aquinas D. Tho. p. 1. q. 1.
a. 8. ad 2.
teaches, being subservient to Faith; as the natural Inclination of the will
is to Charity.

I prove it, first: There is a perfect Congruity and Conformation of Things in
this Ordinance, with reference to Children: Which Infers a Congruity, if not a
Necessity of their being Baptized. As thus: There is required in grown Persons
an actual Disposition to Baptism, by actual Faith; for two Reasons. The first
is: Because they are defiled by actual sins; which they have added wilfully,
to their Original Transgression: Sins which are committed by the actual
aversion of our wills from God, naturally and symmetrically asking, if they be
remitted, the actual Conversion of our wills to God. The second is: Because God
acts with all Things according to their Natures; and therefore, the reasonable
creature having the use of Arbitriment; and wanting to be justified, is not
justified by God, except he concurs by free and actual Assent. But neither of
these Causes has place in Infants; they having only an habitual Aversion,
which may be removed by the infused Habit of Theological Charity; and they
having sinned, not by their own wills, but by the will of another, and it being
therefore even and equal, that they should be relieved by the wills of others:
Which is most proportionable to our way, Guidance, and Prudence, (we dividing
to all, all Things agreeably to them, by an Act of distributive Justice
informed with Prudence,) being the Way of Humane Reason; and to God's Way and
Government, being the way of Divine Providence.

Wherefore St Austin speaks, as reasonably S Aug: Sermon. 10. de verbis Apost.
so divinely: Accommodat illis Matter Ecclesia alioru^ pedes, ut veniaut;
alioru^ Cor, ut credant, aliorum linguam, ut fateantur: ut quoniam quod aegri
sunt, alio peccante praegravantur; sic cum sani fiant, alio confitente
salventur: Our Mother the Church lends and fits to Infants the seet of others,
that they may come to the Font (which presented it self at the Door, because
Baptism is the Door into the Church;) the Heart of others, that they may
bele^ve; the Tongue of others, that they may confess: to the end, that as they
are made sick and weighed downwards by the sin of another, so by the
confession of another they may be restored to Health saved, and carried upwards.

CHAP. LXVII.
I Prove it, secondly: (which Proof may serve as a perfect Confirmation of the
former:) The Doctrine of St Hierom is pure Divinity, and like S. Hieron. ep. ad
Da mas.
exalied Metal: Peccantes recedunt a Deo, Affectuum, non Locorum Spatiis:
Sinners recede from God, by the distance of Affection, not of Place.

And the Reason is at the next Door. God is every where; though not repletive,
repletively, and circumscriptive, circumscriptively, as a Body is in a place,
which possesses a place, and so fills it, that it excludes another Body out of
the same place; and which is circumscribed: nor definitive, definitively, as
the Angels, who are so determined to a place, that if they be here, they are
not elsewhere at the same time: yet attinctive, attinctively, quia atting it
ubique, says Cajetan, because he touches every Cajet. in p. 1. q. 1. a. 10.
where; as conserving and holding all Things up by the touch of his Power; and
impletive, impletively, according to his own Testimony of Himself in his
Prophet, Caelum and terram ego impleo, I fill Heaven and Jer. 23. 24.
Earth; and so, he is totus in toto Mundo, and totus in qualibet part Mundi,
All in all the World, and all in every part of the World; and so also, he is
All with all his Essence and Power out of the World in Vacuo, wherein he can
create more Worlds at his pleasure: and therefore, we should not locally or
absentially depart from him, though we could run out of the world.

Wherefore we likewise return to God, versis Vestigiis, in the very same Way,
non Spatiis Locorum, sed Affectuum, not by the Spaces of Places, but by the
motions, Pases, and fo^tings of our Affections; not our Persons, but our
Affections drawing near to him, and those, not in a Physical or natural, but
in a moral and ethicall Consideration.

And this our return to God being every where, yea, this only, is proper to us
in respect of our Departure, and of the Nature and possibility of the Thing,
and pleasing to God in respect of his Acceptance: Because this only, is
proportionable to our Departure in the removal of it, and to our Duty in
repairing the breach made by our Departure: And therefore, having departed,
only after that manner; after this manner only, by the Rule of Proportion, we
return.

Now when we recede from God who is every where, by the Affections of others,
as in Original sin; it is likewise, most proportionable and orderly, and
therefore, most proper to us in regard of our Departure in the manner of it,
and most pleasing to God in regard of his Acceptance, yea, only proper and
pleasing, as being only proper to the Nature and possibility of the Thing; that
we should return to God by the Affections of others, if we have not the use of
our own.

CHAP. LXVIII.
I Prove it, thirdly: God has wonderfully ordained, that as Children are not
capable of the qualification of grown Persons; so neither should they need it.

I have proved, that they need not actual Charity, and consequently, neither
actual Faith, by way of Remedy; because they have not actually sinned. (Truly:
though a grown Man should not actually sin after Baptism; yet he should need
actual Faith and actual Charity; but he should not need them in Remedium, as
a Remedy.)

And moreover, Children should not need actual Repentance, although they
should be able, in respect of their Powers, to Repent actually: Because
Original sin in the Children of Adam, is not Materia Poenitentiae, Matter of
Repentance:

Neither does a Man, rightly repent of a sin which he never committed; and the
position or opposition of which, did not lie within the Verge of his Power. To
which purpose, the Scripture equitably says of two Infants, Jacob and Esaw;
neither having done Romans 9. 11.
any good or evil.

Therefore, according to the stipulation of sound Reason, there is another
qualification of Infants, agreeable to their need; which can be no other than
Baptism: God supplying abundantly, with his Remedies, all our Spiritual needs
according to their exigence.

Chesed (a Scripture-Word) in the Hebrew Language, properly signifies Piety, by
the which, a Man is pious, not only toward God, but also toward Men, and
toward these, especially in the cravings of their Wants. And therefore, it
signifies Piety, as Piety is an infused Virtue: that is: Piety toward God for
his own sake, and Piety toward Men for God's sake; or, a Piety toward Men,
regulated by the Law of God. Hence Marinus, Forsterus, Pagninus ^exicis.
a good and Holy Man is called Chasid, pious; and a Stork, Chasida; as being a
pious Bird toward it is Parents; and as painfully, and, as it were, piously
supplying their needs and wants in the ingruencies and strong Assaults of their
feebleness; and as being therefore a Symboll of Piety.

If Men by a divine Regulation, piously supply the wants one of another; and
this, by a Participated Goodness or Piety: God, as being essentially good, (in
which Sense, God only, is good,) much more supplies the Wants of his Creatures,
especially of his reasonable Creatures, and of those, especially as he he sits
at the Fountainhead of the Supernatural Order; wherein the Gifts are most
excellent, and most excellently and plentifully communicated; the End being
most excellent, as being infinite, and the communication of an infinite Good
finito Modo, after a finite manner, because the Subject is incapable of
Infinity; and the Provider being infinitely able, infinitely wise, infinitely
merciful.

Which consideration, in the rallying of every Argument, must bring up the Rere.

CHAP. LXIX.
I Prove it, fourthly: In the curing of natural Diseases, we instruct a sick
Man concerning the Circumstances of his Recovery, and we exhort him to the use
of the Means: Yet we do not exhort him to be well, (which is the End;) but
medicine him: Because the curing of his Disease, and his well-making, are not
in his own Power, but altogether in the power of God, and of the wise Physician
under God. And therefore, the Physician cures Mad, Lunatic, and Lethargick
Persons; that have no desire to be cured, and consequently, do not confer
their endeavors toward it.

In the curing of Spiritual Diseases, we both instruct and exhort the sick
Person, if he be capable of exhortation and instruction, because there is a
Voluntary and Supernatural Concurrence, absolutely required on his part; and
God infallibly performs his Promise, if the sick Person does, in the strength
of the Divine Helps, what in him lies.

But, in the curing of natural Diseases, We use not such Instructions or
Exhortations, if the Patient has not the right use of his Understanding and
Senses: neither does the Physician wait or attend the time of his coming to
them, but presently apply his best Helps.

Likewise in Supernatural Wants and emptiness, with respect to which, God is
the professed Physician; we may not expect until the Patient comes to the
right use of Reason, but must help, as in the Case of present necessity,
according to the Rule of Right Reason; which direct us to believe, that God is
super excellently provident, and more copious in every kind of Help for
Spiritual Cures, and for Cures wherein he is the immediate and only Physician
with sanative application to the Spirit; than he is for bodily Cures, whereby
he works more mediately by others, and more joynedly with them.

Therefore having also a reasonable and outward Ground for our inward
Direction, in his Word, and in either Sense of it; we may, and must, (and are
more bound to it,) apply our Helps, as we do, in the Baptizing of Infants.

David tunes his old Harp to a new Psalm. 102. 17. Text Hebr.
Song: He will regard the Prayer of the destitute. In the Original, the Words
are high, though they are ^ung with an humble Voice, and treat of a low Thing:
Respexit ad Orationem Myricae: He has lo^ked Targ. Josephi Caeci.
back, or, had respect to the Prayer of the low Shrub. The Targ: ad orationem
desolatorum, to the Prayer of desolate Persons, The Septuagint: Humilium Sept.
of the humble.

Does God look back, or, has God respect to the Prayer of one good Man in a
low Estate? And does he not accept of the Faith and Prayers of the whole
Church, (which reserveth continually, holy Prayers and pious Intentions, for
such holy Works and pious Performances,) offered with the Application of a
divine Ordinance, for these many low Child-Shrubs? these little Babes, desolate
in the judgment of ignorant Men; these humble Sweet-ones?

CHAP. LXX.
I Prove it, fifthly. The Church of God is like the Body of Man, (and is
therefore called a Body,) as the Apostle teaches, who diversely argues Romans 12.
4. 5. and 1 Cor. 12. 12. and onwards.
from the body of Man to the Church of God.

Now though Simile non est omnino Simile, Like is not altogether like; or,
Simile non est Simile quoad omnia, Like is not like in all Things; And it be
sufficient to the sufficiency of a Like, that it be grounded and erected upon
the position of one Convenience: yet the likeness betwixt the Body of Man and
the mystical Body, is manifold; and stands unblasted and inviolate in respect
of the Parts and Actions, by the which, the Body of Man is a complete humane
Body, and does the chief and necessary Actions of such a Body; the reservation
of their Properties being supposed, namely, that the Parts and actions of the
one are natural, the parts and Actions of the other, Spiritual or mystical:
otherwise the mystical Body could not be called in Scripture, a Body, with
respect to such a Body.

Whence I argue. In the humane Body we see many and diverse kinds of Parts;
whereof some live and have Sense, as the fleshly Parts; some live and have no
sense, as the Bones; some neither live nor have sense, as our excrementitious
Parts, the nails and hairs: So neither is it strange, or against the nature
of a mystical Body, but rather omnimodously agreeable to it, that there are
some in the Church, who have Spiritual Life, and give sensible Effects of it,
as good signs, (though they are not evident signs in respect of us;) these
actually exercising Faith, Hope, and Charity: and some who live inwardly,
without any sensible manifestation or appearance; as, Baptized children, having
only habitual Faith, Hope, and Charity: as there be some grown Persons, who
have only Faith; and some also, who have neither actual nor habitual Faith,
but only, an external and relative Conjunction with the Body.

I double the Files in this Matter: that the Convenience may be seen to be
started at every turn. Spiritual Regeneration by Baptism, is like our carnal
and bodily Condition in this meeting-Point: That as children in their Mothers
Wombs, neither live of themselves, nor carve or care for themselves, but live
by a Soul given of God, and are sustained in life by the nourishment of their
mothers; so Children, which have not the use of Reason, being now in the Womb
of the Church their Mother, receive Life and the Badge of Salvation, and the
Seal of Spiritual Cure and Sustentation, not by themselves, but by the mere
Gift of God and Act of the Church. It is the Office therefore of the Curers to
cure them.

In Joel, where the English inoculates, call a solemn assembly; the Septuagint
Joel. 1. 14.
preach (...), Sept. S. Dionys. de Eccles. Hier, c. 10*
preach ye a Curation. Whence Dionysius the Areopagite names the Persons wholly
devoted and addicted to God's Service, (...), Undertakers of Cures, or, Curers
of themselves and others.

If the Conveniences betwixt the natural and mystical Bodies, be many and
great; and one be, that the Parts of both, are sometimes ill-affected, and want
Curation to be performed by the undertakers of Cures, or, by the Curers of
themselves and others: it is the part of the Curers on both parties, to perform
their parts in curing the diseased parts, under God who, as a Supernatural
Curer, is All in All; wholly belonging to their Cure,

CHAP. LXXI.
I Prove it, sixthly; All that are not Spiritual, are excluded from Heaved:
Either therefore, all Infants dying without Baptism, are excluded from Heaven,
or, they are made Spiritual without Baptism: And they cannot be made
Spiritual in our Sense, but by the Communication of Spiritual Gifts; against
the like Communication of which in Baptism, our Anabaptists rebel.

Besides: If they be made Spiritual without Baptism; then is there in respect
of Infants, a divine Election amongst equal Things (which divine Election, as
divine Judgment, pertains to divine Wisdom;) and God Elects and receives
absque fundamento in Re posito, and ante praevisionem Operum, without any
Difference and Foundation in the Thing; and without any variation on their
part, in regard of our Christian Duties, or application to God's Ordinances.

Again: Either all Unbaptized children are saved, or some are saved, and some,
accordingly to the Concessions and Confessions of the Anabaptists, damned to
everlasting Torments and Perdition; and their Perdition is of God, and not of
themselves: which enterfeers with the Text; O Israel, thou have destroyed Hos.
13. 91 Edit. Vulg.
thy self; or, as the Vulgar Edition, Perditio tua ex te, O Israel, O Israel,
thy Perdition is of thy self: which Text with our Context, our ablest
Independents grant animo Volente, Volently, and Violently Pulpit for.

And if this Consequence, (which with the rest, proceeds ex falso Supposito,)
were true; the Presbyterians or strict Calvinists would cristas attollere, lift
up their Crests and Combs; and continue their unnatural and exotic
Interpretations upon the old Proverbiall Sentence: The Prove. 16. 4.
Lord has made all things for himself: yea, even the Wicked for the Day of
Evil Which the Hebrew Text. Hebr.
hands forth: Omnes operatus est Jehovah propter se: improbum ad Diem mali:
Jehovah has made all Persons for himself: the wicked Man to the Day of Evil.
And which the English Presbyterians English: God has made all Things for
himself: yea: the Wicked for the Day of Judgment and eternal Damnation:
pouring, as it were, by the carriage of an Indian, upon God, that he makes the
much-greater and massier Part of Men, Women and Children, of purpose to Damn
them: Whenas this good Proverb speaks of the Evil Day of temporal Punishment:
which according to the Hebrew Dialect, is called the Day of Evil; or, as the
Septuagint Sept.
oftentimes, (...), of affliction or afflictation. Or: If they will draw the
Text to the punishments of Hell: Then must they draw with it, that God made
indeed, the Wicked for the Day or Time of Evil, intention secundaria, with a
secundary intention, and having fore-looked upon them in the Evils of their
sins,

And thus, the Ends here, God and the Day of Evil as executing the good
Justice of God, are, as we term it in Logic, Fines subalterni. And when God
made the Wicked Man for the Day of Evil, he made him for Himself: Because
when he punishes him with temporal or eternal punishments, he glorifies
himself in his executive justice: And the wicked man falling by Death from
under the Order of his Mercy, falls under the Death-Order of his Justice,

Now God cannot absolutely Ordain a Wicked Person for this good End, the
glorification of the divine Justice by his eternal punishment: first: Because
this Ordination would Eclipse his Goodness, and his very Nature: And secondly:
Because he should then, be contrary to his own Sanctity, and absolutely Ordain
the wickedness of the Wicked Person, as such: the absolute Ordination of
which, would, by a necessity derived from the Ordination, bring it necessarily
into Being. And: Non est faciendum malum vel minimum, ut eveniat bonum vel
maximum: The least Evil S^^ Romans 3. 8.
may not be done, that the greatest good may come of it. For: Though in the
Evils of Punishment, we may lawfully choose the lesser: because the lesser
Evil, tnuc indueret rationem Boni; would then put on the State or Nature of a
Good; as we may rather choose the loss of our Goods, than of our Lives: yet
Malum Culpae quatenus tale est, nunquam potest habere rationem Boni; The Evil
of sin, as such, can never put on or have the Nature or state of a good:
Neither can a good End moralize or sanctify an Evil Action.

CHAP. LXXII.
I Prove it, lastly: The natural work of Baptism, answerable to the Word, (the
best and most primitive Words, signifying the Natures of Things,) and to the
Sign: is, to wash. And Children greatly need Spiritual washing; as being
greatly defiled with the first sin of their first Parents. Therefore Baptism,
which is a Sacramental Washing and the first Sacrament; greatly agrees with
them, as not being yet washed; And is not in vain with respect to Children.

Frustra est quod non potest habere suu^ usu^: that is in vain which cannot
have its use: As Aquinas expounds D Thom. comment. in A^^stot. l. 1. de Coelo
Text. 12.
upon Aristotle's Axiom, Deus and natura nihil frustra faciunt, God and Nature
do nothing in vain. Which Axiom thus expounded has a farther aim, yet, clearly
winds up, and proves, that even the actual use of Baptism belongs to Infants.

And: If the Thing which is ordained for all who are touchable by the Faith of
the Church; may not, by reason of humane Restraint, be communicated to the
Little-ones, which are many: there follows upon wheels, that the Restainers
render it useless and vain with respect to the many Little-ones at the least:
and that although God will make nothing in vain; yet men make vain the will of
God: Which likewise, all unbeleeving Parents, in respect of their Children; and
all Unbeleevers, in regard of themselves do, Baptism being ordained for all
that want it: and all wanting Baptism that want Baptismall Grace: and all
wanting Baptismall Grace that want to be washed from Original sin: and all
wanting to be washed from Original sin who are desiled with it.

These Arguments are such as the Substration of the Matter will bear. For: we
cannot, in this place eventilate Reasons from the Definition or Nature of a
Sacrament, or from the Effects of Baptism, in themselves, and in the proper
Houses and Places wherein, as the Planets, they have their plenary Power.
Because these things being Spiritual, mystical and Lidden; our natural
Reason cannot give an exact estimat of them, or bring them forth to the most
perfect discernment and avowance of the reasonable Man: And as Revelation first
supposes Reason: so Reason afterward, in her Discourses of revealed Things,
supposes Revelation; and sometimes, walks only by the walls and Edges of it.
And for the same Reason, we are unfurnished of Demonstrations both a Priori and
a Posteriori; that is; Cause-Demonstrations, and Demonstrations by the Effects.
Yet: we have Reasons of the second Order and Metal and of the Silver-kinde:
which are perfectly urging, (so say the Logicians,) where Demonstrations cannot
be had.

CHAP. LXXIII.
LET my Standard be now set up, at the Doctrine and Praxis of the Church in
Primitive Ages.

Because there is no express Precept in Scripture, saying, Go, and Baptize
Infants; no President in plain Terms, saying, They Baptized Children; no clear
Promise, promising clearly, Many Benefits shall accrue to Baptized Children,
many to the Baptizers of them; or the like: the Church gave to the Baptizing of
Infants the Name of an Apostolical Tradition: Which we therefore understand,
with respect to the expressenesse of Precept, President, Promise.

In a general Sense, and much used anciently; the whole Body of the new
Testament, is an Apostolical Tradition; and in a special Sense, some special
Truths of it: That, in See 2. These. 2. 15.
our Sense, is an Apostolical Tradition, which was delivered by the Apostles
to the Church, and is not found expressly in divine Scripture, though it be
expressly found and extant in the writings of Apostolical Men in Apostolical
Times: Or: That is an Apostolical Tradition, which has many fair and
excellent Characters in divine Scripture; but has it is explicitnesse or
expressenesse from Apostolical Precepts, Practices, Promises, warranted to the
Apostles by Christ their Master, which are Unscriptur'd.

The Baptizing of Infants, being thus received by such Tradition: the Disciples
of the Apostles preached it in their Sermons, (it fell from their lips in the
first warmth of the Gospel, like sweet Gumms from the Trees of Arabia heated
by the Sun;) the Fathers of the Church published it in their writings; the holy
Councils Canonized it; and it became a Starrified Truth, or, a Truth of the
Firmament.

And as Vincentius Lyrinensis thunder-strikes the Heretics of his Time: Quid
unquam aliud Conciliorum Decretis Vinc^nt. Lyrinens. contra Haeres: cap. 32.
enisa est, (scilicet Ecclesia,) nisi, ut quod antea simpliciter credebatur,
hoc idem postea dil^gentius crederetur? What other Thing at any Time, has the
Church endeavored in the Decrees of the Councils, than that the Things which
were simply believed should afterward be believed with more diligence?

And this Truth thus extracted, being as such, more than a humane Truth, is no
less than a divine Truth. For: As the Art or Invention which removes a Thing
from Earth, must needs exalt it nearer to Heaven; and the farther from Earth,
still the nearer to Heaven: So a Testimony coming from God to us through
Sanctified Persons; if it be more than humane, must needs be, in some sort,
divine: and it coming through Persons divinely inspired, and infallibly
directed; the higher it is raised from the consideration of being humane, the
more divine will it be.

And if such a Testimony, were not Apostolical, but only Ecclesiastical; even
such an Ecclesiastical Testimony, endowed with all it is Perfections and
Formalities, would be formally Divine.

CHAP. LXXIIII.
IN this purified Sense, St Dionysius Areopagita, who lived in the first
Century, and was the Disciple of St Paul, as having been his Convert at Athens:
affirms to be delivered S. Dionys. Arcop. lib Eccl. Hier. cap. ult. part. ult.
Author Quaestionu^ ad Orthodox^s, quaest. 56.
by the Apostles, that Infants should be Baptized.

The same thing is Orthodoxly taught by the Author of the Questions ad
Orthodoxos: who also, after some discussion and bandying of the Business,
concludes in the rebound, that Baptized Infants are saved, unbaptized Infants
are not saved; leaving us to save our selves as we can. And though Justin
Martyr be not the Author of this Book; it caling into the Court, Irenaeus,
Origin, the Manichees: Yet the Author is confessed by all Authors, to be very
ancient and of great reputation.

And Justin Martyr himself being S Just. M^rt in D^al^g. cum. T^yp^^^e Judaen.
p. 2. prop^s. 3.
a Noble Member of the second Century, and contemporary with St John, and
therefore well familiariz'd with Apostolical Practice: declares himself
like-minded, in his Dialogue with Tryphon the Jew.

Irenaeus also, an honorable Extract S. Lenaeus contra Haeret. l. 2. c. 39
of the same Century, honorably mentions the Baptizing of Infants.

In the third Century, we have Origin; who having alleged the Words of the
Prophet, Psalm. 51. 5. Behold, I was shapen in in quity, and in sin did my
Mother conceive me: follows the motion of his matter thus: Propter hoc Ecclesia
ab Apostolis Orig. lib. 5. Homil in c. 6. ap Romans
Trad^tionem accepit, etiam parvulis dare Baptismum: For this reason, (namely
because we are all conceived in sin,) the Church received a Tradition from the
Apostles, enjoining us to Baptize Infants. St Cyprian S. Cypr. Carthag. l. 3.
Epist. 8. ad Fidum Episcopum.
was the Church-Pillar of Africa, in this Century: who together with a Council
of Carthage, consisting and bound together of 66 Bishops, as of so many strong
Cartilages, whom he venerably calls his Colleagues; determined, not only that
Children might and ought to be Baptized, but also, that they might even before
the eighth day: which was not app^ent and Crystal-clear to Bishop Fidus and his
Church, in respect of the neernesse and compliance betwixt Circumcision and
Baptism, and the Determination of the Council having been occasioned thereby:
which Determination St Cyprian recounts to Fidus.

CHAP. LXXV.
SAint Hierom witnesses for us, S. Hierom. l. 3. contra. Pelagianos. S. Aug.
l. 10. de Genesi ad literam, cap. 23.
in the fourth Century. And St Augustine: who thus writes: Consuetudo Matris
Ecclesiae in Baptizandis parvulis, nequaquam spernenda est, ncc ullo modo
superflua deputanda, nec omnino credenda nisi Apostolica esset Traditio: The
Custom of our Mother the Church in Baptizing Infants, is not to be despised,
nor in any sort deemed superfluous, neither at all to be believed except as an
Apostolical Tradition: St Austin embracing Apostolical Tradition, as the
unwritten word of God; and speaking here, of belief built upon express
Declaration of God's Word.

The same St Austin, to prevent the Insurrections of objection, devoteth a Rule
to the perfect knowing of an Apostolical Tradition; and Reason in the Light of
Nature beholds the evidence of it: Quod universa Idem. lib. 4. de Baptism^
Parvulorum contra Donatistas, cap. 23.
tenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi
Authoritate Apostololica traditum rectissime credimus: That which the
Universal Church holds, and was not insti^n^ed by Councils, but has been
always retained; we most rightly believe to have been delivered no otherwise
than by Apostolical Authority.

The same Father again, treating of this Ecclesiastical custom of Baptizing
Infants, ascertains to us that it was Universal: Hoc Ecclesia semper habuit,
semper tenuit; hoc a Majorum Idem. Sermon. 10. de Ver^is Apost. c. 2.
fide percepit: hoc usque in finem perseveranter Custodit: This the Church
always has had, always has held; this she received from the Faith and credit
of our Ancestors; this she perseveringly keeps to the end.

Yea: the three tutelar Angels of the Church in their Times. St Hierom, St
Augustine, and Prosper Aquitanicus, always pres^e on, and put forward this
Custom, in their Victorious S. Hieron. ubi Supra. S Aug. Sermon. 14. de verbis
Apost. qui inscribitur, De Baptismo Parv^l^rum contra Pelagianos. Tom. 10.
Item, l. 1. de Peccator. merit. and remiss. c. 26. Prosper Aquitan. l. 2. de
Vocatione Genesis ium, cap. 8. Council. Milevit. Can. 2. S. Greg. Naz o^ at. in
sanctum lavacrum. S. Basil. Oyat. Exhortatoria ad Baptismu^. S. Chrys^^. Homil.
1. ad N^ophyto^.
Disputations against the Pelagian Heresy, which denied Original sin.

CHAP. LXXVI.
IN the Year four hundred eighteen. The Milevitan Council, being a
Provincial of Africa; consecrated this Canon: Placuit ut quicunque Parvulos
recentes ab uteris Matrum Baptizandos negat, Anat^enia sit: It is the Pleasure
of the Council, that is, placuit spiritui sancto and nobis, It has pleased
the Holy Ghost and us, that whosoever denies Baptism to Infants newly born, be
denounced an accursed Thing: The intendment is: whosoever denies Baptism to
such at such a Time, as a Thing then alienated from their condition. Other
Councils give the like Counsill afterward.

I add St Gregory Nazianzen, St Basil, St Chrysostom. And I could add very
many others. But these are sufficiently efficient. And this Doctrine thus
grounded and mounded, is like the Laure^l, which stands firmly to it is Root,
and is fresh, green, and glorious, amidst the violent Careers, and hottest
conslicts of Lightnings and Thunderbolts with their obstinate Opposites: and
when other Trees are weatherwasted and blasted, has not a leaf impeached: and
therefore, is worn on the Heads of the most conquering Conquerou^s.

The little Child which Jesus called Mat. 18. 2. Vide Jansen. Harm. in Evang.
Vide Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 30.
unto him, and set in the midst of his Disciples; was thought to be St
Martial; or St Ignatius, who testifies, that he saw Christ after his
Resurrection. St Martial was named a Mart, from War, or Martial Affairs and
Discipline: and St Ignatius ab Igne, from Fire. Every Child that has seen an
Apostle, would be Martial; and every Pen-and-Ink Horn-Boy, would be all Spirit
and Fire, in the maintenance of Infant Baptism; if it could be instilled into
them; how credible this Object of our Faith is rendered by Antiquity.

CHAP. LXXVII.
IT is a ready Work now, for a Man of a selfe-moving and opinionated
Conscience, unreasonably to distrust Authors that speak against him, (as
Heretics in all the retrograde Motions and Hurlyburlies of Time, have
distrusted and rent from the sincerity of the Canon, many fair parts of
Scripture;) to bite the long-untainted Works of Ecclesiastical Writers, dente
Sordido, with a Sordid Tooth; and to perform the rigid Command of Macchiavell
and his rabid Academy; Macchiavell. in Principe. Idem babet in Regno.
Caluminare auda^ter; saltem aliquid adhaerebit, Caluminate thy betters boldly;
some filth will adhere to them.

Indeed, and indeed: The Humor of such a Man (seeking himself and not God) is
like Virtus formatrix, the formative or plastic virtue in Semine; which
endeavors always to shape the subjected Matter to it self.

And he that is truly (...), Act. 17. 18. Text. G^e^.
Seminiverbius, a sower of words; may quickly disseminate into the people, that
this Doctrine of Apostolical Tradition will presently break the Bars, and set
all wide open; and that now the Communion of Infants may force a re-entry; the
Easther of Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, may take up it is old quarters; and any
man may recommand admittance, that brings with him the revived opinion of
Papias Bishop of Hierapolis, Scholar to St John, and Schoolfellowe to St
Polycarp; and of his Followers, St Justin, St Irenaeus, Tertullian, S. Just. in
Dialog. cum Tryphone. S. Hieron. in Catal^go Scriptorum Ecclesiast, Eusebius.
Eccl. Histor. l. 3. cap. 22.
Lactantius, Apolinarius, and others, going all in the foul way of the
Millenaries: (which opinion was accepted as from St John, but came, like a
sudden Inundation, from Cerinthus, who pretended to have received it from the
Angels: though as it was fomented and fermented by Cerinthus, it was more
fleshly in the Adjuncts and Circumstances and gave after-Occasion to the
Paradise of the Alcoran.)

But our Mark of an Apostolical Tradition, which St Austin administers, and
other Marks waiting in the Antecamera, and expecting to be called; will
strongly keep the brazen doors against them.

And though English writers desire to touch this point with tenderness, and a
Ladies Hand: yet in verity, if Apostolical Tradition must be housed in the
Almes-House, as miserably poor, and altogether superannuated; we may soon hook
our selves in a collateral Consideration. For: If it be objected: The like, or
greater Dangers wait the written Books: As: Whether or no they were first
delivered by the Apostles? Whether they were not corrupted by the Librarians,
or others being Heretics? Whether the Manuscripts were not perverted by the
Malice or Ignorance of the Transcribers? our last Refuge must be the same, the
Promise of God to his Church.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
THE Arguments, that struggle and tugg for Anabaptism, may now at last
supervene and somewhat infest our Text. Yet few there are that appear to go
strongly, none go upon a sure foot: all being spiderweb-Arguments; and wrought
in the Light, to catch Flies; and as much excelled by the Arguments of the
contrary part, as the poor yellow Picture of the Sun in the ci^ling, is
excelled by Gods greater Luminary.

There are two much-opposite Houses, opposite in themselves, and opposed in
Scripture: Bethel and Bethaven. Bethel signifies, the House of God who is
strong. Bethaven is interpreted by Theodotion, the House of Theodor. Symmach.
Aquila. Sept.
Iniquity: by Symmachus and Aquila, the House of Nothing. The Septuagint
contract it by a Grammatical Crasis, and square it forth Domus (...), in the
opening of which, as wanting the fit and true key, the Greek Scholiast and
Interpreters have long wearied and greatly tormented themselves.

Aven tied up or filed by Contraction, is on, which signifies Grief or an
Idol: and the House was called Bethon, because Jeroboam's golden Calfes were
there worshipped.

Now the sa^e Hebrew Non or Name which signifies an Idol and Wickedness:
signifies in Contraction, Labor and Grief: because an Idol and Wickedness
are the causes of, and end in grief and labor: And from Bethaven the
Idol-House and the House of Wickedness; we remove to Bethon, the House of
Grief both temporal and eternal.

The Arguments for the Baptizing of Infants, justly pertain to the House of God
who is strong; and their strength as being divine, cannot be demolished. The
contrary Arguments belong to Bethaven, the House of the Idol and of
Wickedness: and as they are wickedly set up, like golden Calves, to be
worshipped; so they are every day righteously thrown down like the senseless
Nothing in the Sense of Symmachus and Aquila, to the great grief of the great
and grievous Calves who set them up to be worshipped, and of the leaden Calves
their Worshippers, who bow themselves down to Worship them.

And if their Authors ad Scholae Diatribas sisterentur, should be cited to
School-Exercise; they would soon effugere per posticum, sly away by the back
Door.

They are for the most part, thrummed with Scripture-Texts shamelessly wryed,
and caught up by them with a slight; as imitating the vile artifice of our
vagabond Jugglers, when by the means of an unseen Hair, they bring small bodies
to them with a praesto. Which Text-Arguments I shall pass carelessly by, their
nap being off, and they dismantled already: one only excepted, which, as they
have straw-stuft it, looks Saracen-big upon us. And from this, I shall step to
that little which they presume to bubble up from the Dictates of Reason, and
from Records.

Some Arguments I have raised for them from the Foundation: and some I shall
make, as I hitherto have, more strong as they stand upon their Foundation; and
velut amento mittere, as it were, slingthrow them.

CHAP. LXXIX.
THey argue first, from Scripture. Mar. 16. 16.
He that believes, and is Baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not,
shall be damned. Here actual Faith is required before Baptism; as a Requisite
with Baptism, to Salvation.

I answer: If this Text excludes Infants from Baptism, then all Infants dying
in their Infancy, and before they have actual Faith, shall be damned.

And if Infants may be debarred from Baptism, by the judgment and Act of this
Text, because they cannot actually believe; they may be denied to eat by the
Sentence and Act of a like Text, because they cannot labor actually: the
Apostle giving a law, If any will not work, neither shall he eat. 2 These. 3. 10.


But it is most undeniably certain, that this place of St Mark aims altogether
at grown Persons, as is admirably evident by the steerige of the precedent
Verse: And he said unto them, Go ye into all the World, and V. 15.
Preach the Gospel to every Creature. For: the Gospel is not Preached but
unto the grown Person, as only capable of being edified by Preaching. And
therefore, the place, that it may be righteously and modestly understood, must
of necessity receive this Ingredient, derived from the precedent Verse: He of
them to whom the Gospel is Preached, that believes and is Baptized, shall be
saved: but he of them to whom the Gospel is Preached, that believes not,
shall be damned. And the grown Persons must likewise adequate the sense of
every Creature, though every Creature be not a grown Person.

Where the English puts into the mouth of the Psalmist: God sets Psalm. 68. 6.
the solitary in families, or, in a House: Interp. vulgat.
The Vulgar offers, Qui habitare facit unius moris in Domo, who makes Persons
of one carriage and behavior to live in a House together. The Vulgar
Interpreter drew his water from the Nile of the Septuagint: Sept.
who have in the Current of their Version, (...), Men of the same Manners, and
having the same scope. Aquila Scripture-makes, (...), Aquila.
Men singled forth, and living alone.

Christ in St Mark, separates grown Persons from Children, and puts Persons of
the same carriage together: affirming that in the conversion of grown Persons,
Faith which comes by hearing and Baptism are necessary to Salvation: and also,
subinferrs, that Children may be Baptized and saved, without hearing the Word
Preached, and without actual Faith, as not being capable of either.

CHAP. LXXX.
THey argue, secondly: (...), from an absurd Thing which would follow, if
Children were Baptized.

For: as Hurtado diggeth out of Hurtado in Logica, ex Organ. Aristot.
Aristotle: Ex vero nec (...) nec (...); of Truth no absurd or inconvenient
Thing follows, nor a Thing impossible.

Signum frustra datur non intelligentibus quid significet: A Sign is in vain
given to those who understand not the meaning of it: As: a beautiful Picture,
though the Masterpiece of a Master-workman, is in vain presented to the Void
Circles in the face of a blind Man: He does vainly that Musicks a deaf Man, or
sounds a silver Bell or Trumpet at the doublebarred Door of his Ear: He vainly
works who physics a dead Body.

I answer: The Proposition is moderated and regulated by some, after this
manner. Signu^ frustra datur non intelligentibus velintellecturis quid
significet: A sign is in vain given to those who understand not, or shall not
afterward understand, what it means.

But let others take this rough, rugged and brier-bearing path: I will not.
Because many Children dye quickly after Baptism, who neither knew, nor shall
know, in the State wherein the Signs are in force, what the Sign signifies:
And some Children, putting off their childhood with their coats, climb up to
years; who know not wisely themselves, or any Thing pertaining to them, but are
themselves wisely known to be Fools.

And therefore, in downright Truth: this argument is not upright, but is it
self most absurd and blasphemous: it spitting fire at God* and kicking, with
an equal foot, against Circumcision, and God the Author of it: the Sign
whereof, was not in vain, though given to such as understood not what it meant.

Wherefore the Proposition is false: it not being in vain to offer to any
Person what may do him good, though he be not sensible of the Thing offered,
or of the good it does or can do. Physic is ministered to Children, Fools, Mad
men. A Man sunk to the Ground in a Swoon, and unsensible of Help, is raised
again, and forcibly brought back to sense by strong water forced upon him; or
something of a strong sent, by force applied to his nose. One sick of a
lethargy or epilepse, or grievously wounded, is used accordingly.

The man who traveled betwixt Jerusalem and Jericho, and was left Luke 10. 30.
half dead in the way, having been assaulted by Thieves; though he was
neglected by the Priest and Levite; was rightly succored by the Samaritane,
who bound up his wounds, Verse 34.
pouring in Wine and Oil.

The Answer which wholly and through-cuts the throat of the Argument, is: The
Sign is not in vain which does not signify to the Persons whom it principally
concerns: But, the Sign is in vain which cannot at any time signify to them,
by reason of defect and default in it self. As we say: Frustra est Potentia,
non quae non reducitur ad Actum, sed quae reduci non potest: The Power is in
vain, not which is not reduced, but which is not reducible to Act. As also,
according to the divine Dictates of my most eminent Master in Rome: Joannes de
Lugo, Cardinalis, in Materia de Christo.
Non est frustra in Deo Potentia assumendi plures Naturas humanas: The Power in
God of assuming more humane Natures, is not in vain. For: although he will not,
yet he is able by his absolute Power: Which Ability diverts and forestals the
Vanity of the Power.

CHAP. LXXXI.
THey argue, thirdly: a Congruo; from the Congruity betwixt Persons of a like
Condition. No Man Baptizeth grown Persons that are blind, deaf, and dumb:
Therefore, neither ought we to baptize Infants, the same Reason interposing it
self, and Infants being blind, deaf and dumb in respect of the Ordinance.
Lessius, Emmanuel Sa, Medina, Mariana, and al^^, in Castbus Conscientiae.


I answer to this Case-Argument, according to the most sound Doctrine of the
most profound Casuists. If the grown Persons which are blind, deaf, and dumb,
could by any means express of themselves a pious W^ll, by which they willed or
desired to be Baptized, or denoted their preparation to Baptism; or, if they
were not born so, and have manifested such a desire or will and preparation,
immediately before they were vanquished by the Calamites of dumbness,
deafness, blindness: or: if one having declared his good will to Baptism,
become presently sick, and by a sudden extraposition be exposed out of himself
and his Senses; and there be no Indic a Sanitatis, signs of his Health and
Recovery: Such Persons might, may and must be Baptized.

(Yea: the Baptism is valid, which is given to Persons either a sleep or mad,
if Baptism were formerly desired by them.)

But if their will and preparation cannot be known: they are not Baptized.
Because in those who have the flourishing use of Reason, their express consent
is required to baptism, and also, their preparation by Faith and Repentance:
otherwise grown Persons would not be reconciled to God according to their
capacity, and the Condition of Humane Nature, agreeably to which Condition and
Capacity God always works.

And the Persons in the Argument, as they have no capacity of expressing their
consent and preparation, because it cannot be riveted into them what Baptism
is; wherein they agree with Infants* so have they no capacity of expressing
that they do not ponere obicem, put an hinderance or obstacle to Sacramental
Grace; and herein they differ from Infants, who cannot put any such obstacle or
hinderance. And therefore, except we have an outward Sign from them of their
inward qualification, we (as being guided only by outward Signs) do not
apply to them the outward sign of a Sacrament, as having moral signs of
inward prevention, and abuse of the Sacrament.

Hence on the one side, though sons or daughters wanting the use of Reason, may
not be Baptized invitis Parentibus, their Parents being unwilling: yet if such
being rip'ned, shall express their consent, and manifest their preparation, we
Baptize them, notwithstanding the unwillingnesse of their Parents: And on the
other side, we Baptize a Mad man, that has been mad from his Nativity, without
or against his consent; because although he may outwardly oppose the outward
Ceremony of the Sacrament, yet he has no inward opposition to the inward Grace
and Effect of it.

Thus their Congruum is incongruum; and the blind and deaf Persons in the
Argument, are not so deaf and blind as the Forgers of it.

CHAP. LXXXII.
THey argue, fourthly: We cannot be assured of Childrens inward qualification
for Baptism: therefore we may not Baptize them.

I answer: We are assured of a negative qualification in them; namely, that
there is nothing in Children, by the which, according to their childish
condition, they are unqualified. And as they cannot have a positive
qualification, so they need it not.

And in this respect, we are much more assured of their qualification, than of
the qualification of grown Persons: who, though they profess the true Faith of
Christ, and seem, faithfully to promise amendment of Life; yet cannot make it
plain, answerably to our assurance, or make certain to us certitudine
Scientiae aut Fidei, by the certainty of Science or Faith, that they cordially
profess the one, or faithfully promise the other; or, that the Motive of their
Promise and Profession is the Love of God, and not a temporal Consideration:
the Garb of Hypocrites, comprehending all the outward postures of Godliness.

And as in grown Persons, the Secrets of the Heart are known to God, not to Men
or Angels; so there is a secret work of Sanctification in Baptized Infants,
which God knows as omniscient, and as the Author of Sanctification; and Man
knows not, (I will not seclude the Angels being Spirits, from the sight of
infused Grace, either in the actual infusion or in the residence of the
sanctifying Habit:) upon whose royal knowledge of Spiritual Things in
themselves, we may not wish or think to intrude.

That the Pancrasie of this Answer, may farther exert it self to view: Let the
Anabaptists consider, first, the Nature of divine Faith: which is, A firm
Adhesion of the Understanding to the revealed will of God; which Adhesion is
commanded by our Wills, acting by Love the will of God: Which Faith and Love are
the Gift of God. For: an impera^t Act of the will, concurs with the
Understanding to an Act of Faith: And as Biel scholastically: Biel* in. 3.
Sent. d. 23. q. 2. a^l. 1.
Cre^ere est Actus Intellectus Vero assentientis, productus ex voluntatis
Imperio: An Act of Belief, is an Act of the Understanding assenting to Truth,
and produced by the command of the Will.

Let them ponder, secondly, that this actual Faith is connexed with 1 Timothy 1.
5. Text. Grae^.
actual Charity: which is (...), Charity ^ut of a pure Heart, and of a good
Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned or unhypocriticall.

Thirdly let them advisedly recount, that the Catechumeni coming to make the
Profession of their Faith before Bapiism, must come obediently to the
Exhortation of the Apostle: Let us draw near with a Heb. 10. 22.
true Heart in full assurance of Faith; or, as the Original speaks, (...),
Text. Graec.
in the fulness, or certain persuasion of Faith.

Now if the Anabaptists require assurance in the Baptizers, the Baptizers must
be assured, that the Persons whom they Baptize, are thus qualified; of the
which they cannot be assured, but by divine Revelation: And we are all already
assured without a new Light of divine Revelation, that these extraordinary
Matters are not the ordinary Matter of Divine Revelation.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
THey argue, fifthly: De Baptism^ non repetend^, in sacris Tabulis nihil
occurrit: We are not prohibited in Scripture to it^ra^e Baptism: therefore we
may be rebaptized.

I answer: Neither is the iterating of Baptism in a Person Baptized with
Christ's Baptism, commanded, commended, or tolerated in Scripture: the Answer
being as full and Scripture-strong as the Argument.

The Rabbis anxiously dispute upon Rabbini in Genesis 4. Genesis 4. 15.
the Text, and the Lord set a Mark* upon Cain, lest any finding him should
kill him: What Sign or Mark this was, wherewith Cain was marked or signed.

Some think it to have been a woundrous and unnatural howling and yelling, by
the which he did bewail his lost and wandering condition. Others imagine, that
it was a wildness or Fury: Others, a wandering Flight: Others, a perpetual
shaking and Trembling of his body, and especially, of his Head; signifying his
continual Instability, and horrible Fears: and that therefore he built a City
for his Defense; he having in his Fears and wanderings dilucida Intervalla: the
first and this opinion, being anchour'd upon the Septuagint, where Sept. Genesis
4. 12.
for a fugitive, and a vagabond, they allow, (...), mourning and trembling.
Some give abroad, that he crept on all four, as Children sometimes do: Some,
that he was bra^ded and cauteriz'd with a particular Mark: So Aben Ezra. Yea:
R. Solomon Aben Ezra in Genesis 4. R. Solomon, ibid.
avoucheth, that God imprinted a Mark in his Forehead. And intruth, some
Arabic Versions of the Septuagint translate it, And the Lord imprinted. The
Hebrew Word Oath signifies also a Letter: and we may, without injury to the
Text, interpret it, And the Lord set a letter upon Cain. Which Letter some
Hebrew Doctors wisely surmize to be Thau, being the last Letter of the Hebrew
Alphabet, and the first of the Hebrew Word Teshuba, signifying Repentance: that
all people seeing Cain, might be silently admonished to Repent of their sins;
lest God should give them over to final Desolation of Heart as he gave Cain.

Which Mark soever of these, we sieze upon as the mark of Caine; that, even
that very Mark, is verily the Mark of an Heretic: but especially the
Vagabond-Mark. The Difference is: God set a Mark upon Cain: The Anabaptists, in
the repetition of Baptism, mark themselves: After the marking of which Mark,
See Ezech. 9. 4 in the Hebrew.
(so the Hebrew phrases it;) it is remarkable, that they know not where to rest
or end their Motion, but are turned besides their Marks, ways and Arguments,
and sent into the Wilderness by every Novice.

And having once iterated Baptism, although they should be Baptized as often,
as Alexander the Physician required the washing of Lapis Lazuli, before it
should be used: they would never be clean, or washed from this irremoveable
Mark of their continual Wandering and Motion.

CHAP. LXXXIV.
THey argue sixthly: The Merits and Satisfaction of Christ profit us not, but
as pulled home to us by our Application: Therefore the Sacrament of Baptism
cannot convey the Satisfaction and Merits of Christ to Children; these being
unable to apply to themselves the said Merits and Satisfaction.

I answer: Be it heartily granted, that there is a necessity of Application in
Persons capable of it. Because the satisfaction of Christ is altioris Ordinis,
of a higher Order, than any pious operation of ours, it being general; as
offered and prepared for the sins of all Mankind; and our pious Operations
being particular, and reflecting only upon our own Faults. And as the Sun,
being a Universal Cause, does not anull or abolish the proper Efficiency of
the particular Causes, (for Example, of a man begetting a Man;) but rather,
works with them, and requires their cooperation, without which it works not in
the production of such Effects: So the general satisfaction of Christ,
requires to it is Effects the Particular operation of grown Persons, without
which it does not operate.

Hence, for the Sin of Adam, being the general Fault, and adhering to humane
Kind, God is wholly and solely satisfied with and by the Satisfaction of
Christ; a general Satisfaction being adequately commensurated with a general
Fault: and in regard of our particular sins, he requires our particular
operation, and application of the general Cure; the most sovereign Medicine or
salve not curing, except applied to the wound or Soar to be cured: (the
Weapon-salve and magneticall Cures have here no place or likeness.)

But particular Application cannot have being in Infants: And God exacts not of
any Persons in any condition, above what he offers, or has given to them:
And therefore, the Faith of the Church is efficiently and sufficiently
appliable to them, and supplies their Defects.

Sans doubt: When Children shall be unchilded, their particular and personal
Application is necessary. Which Application does not enforce Rebaptization:
Because the Sacrament of Regeneration, as relating to Generation, cannot be
iterated: And because we may not be twice Charactered with the same Character.

Wherefore it may be justly said of Rebaptization from the Pen of St Cyprian
writing against the promiscuous S. Cypr. contra promiscuos in ^alne is
Congressus.
Meetings of Men and Women in Baths: So^didat lavatio ista, non abluit: This
washing defiles, and washes not.

CHAP. LXXXV.
THey argue, seventhly: from the Authority of a Council: Upon Dr Tailor in his
Liberty of Prophesying, Sect. 18.
which, the Libertine-Prophet confidently reposes himself, as with Authority.

The Council of Neocaesarea allows expressly to a woman with Child, that she
may be Baptized; the Baptism Council. Neocaes. Can. 6.
of one in her Condition, not descending to the Child in her Womb: because
every one in that Confession, should show his own Election.

I answer: first: This Council was not a general Council, or confirmed by a
general Council in every particular Branch of it.

Secondly: Even a general Council may err in reddenda Ratione, in giving a
Reason, and in Things besides the Thing principally defined and intended: And
therefore, a Council does not oblige us ad necessario credendum aut faciendum,
but when it speaks definitive, definitively; God securing to us, only the
Matters to be believed and to be done, which conduct us to Salvation, and
leaving us to discourse the Reasons: Because the Definitions pertain to all;
the Reasons, to the Learned only, who are Judges of them.

Thirdly: this Council undertakes not to define the Matter of Infant Baptism;
but only, glances at it, obiter and aliud agens, by the way.

Fourthly: As Infants may not be Vide D. Tho. p. 3: q. 68. art. 10.
Baptized in the Womb, for excellent Reasons: so being out of the Womb and
alive, they must be Baptized for as excellent Reasons.

Fifthly: The Canon compares an Infant in the Womb, not constituting a Person by
himself, with one out of the Womb, being a proper Person subsisting by
himself; and to such a Person the Canon requires, that he shall show (...),
proper Election. And this is all that Theodorus Balsamon, Zonaras, Photius, or
any Expounder of the Canons, can demand canonically of this Canon.

But the Canon does not show, that the Election of others having Dominion over
the Child, and their public showing of it, and strengthening it by their
Confession of the Faith for him; is not accepted as the proper Election of the
Child, and as his personal showing of it; and may not be so named; in the
nonage of the Child.

And this answer perfectly divides betwixt the Child in the Womb, and the Child
newly born.

For, the Sacraments are Visible Signs, and must therefore be conferred upon
and terminated at Persons in a visible, approximate, and tangible condition. So
that, had the Canon compared Infants with grown Persons, in this or the like
Pronunciate; Infants, that they may be Baptized, must grow beyond their Infancy
and Childhood, and must have and show proper and personal Election, as other
grown Persons do: it had pronounced against us.

But whereas it only requires in an Infant, a proper Election and the showing
of it, with comparison to the Infant in the Womb, for the which, none can Elect
or show Election, because no one can see for what he should show Election on
God's behalf; which inhibits the administration of the Sacrament, being a
Visible Sign, and requiring a Visible and apparent Subject: The Child born,
being now a Person by himself, though he has no such actual Election in
himself, yet may Elect and show his Election by others, of which only Election
he is then capable; as he Elects by others, in the matter of temporal and
outward Provision; and as Nature Elected for him in the Womb: and this may
freely pass for his proper Election, and answer to him as being now a proper
and single Person, and in the hands of others having received spiritual Power
over him from God, and in whom it lies to dispose of him to God's greatest
Glory, who is most glorified by his Worshippers.

I confirm this Answer, by unlocking another precious Cabinet of Divinity. St
Hierom expounding the Words of Christ after he had set a Child in the midst of
his Disples: Take heed that ye despise not one of Mat. 18. 10.
these little ones: for I say unto you, that in Heaven their Angels do always
behold the face of my Father which is S Hieron. in M^t. 18. exponens il lud, V.
10. Angeli ^^rii in caelis* etc.
in Heaven: cries out: Magna est Digni^as Animarum, ut unaquaeque habeat ab
ortu Nativitatis, in Custodiam sui, Angelum delegatum: Great is the Dignity of
Souls, that every Man has from his first rising and appearing under the stars
in his Nativity, an Angel delegated to him for his Custody.

If a Child has an Angel delegated to him for his Custody, from the first
minute of his Birth: Which Angel is not delegated to him in his Mothers Womb;
because there he is adhuc Aliquid Matris, as the School-Divines Scholastici:
School us after Aquinas, yet something of the Mother; as fruit hanging upoon a
Tree, is yet something of the Tree: Shall we grown Persons think that an
Infant, being now a Person by himself, and therefore specially attended from
Heaven, may not partake of Gods heavenly Ordinance, if he shall by Heavenly
Providence fall into the Right of those that can Heaven-Chuse and rightly
confess for him; and that this Heaven-choice and confession may not be called
his personal and proper Confession and Heaven-choice: especially, the gracious
Acts which God accepts from us, though, as such, effected Supernaturally by a
power infinitely above us; being imputed to us, as our proper and personal
Acts? Avertat Deus: God forbid.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
THey argue, eighthly: from the bowels of ancient History. Certain Persons, born
of Christian and zealous Parents, were anciently detained from Baptism, until
they came to years: As: Constantine the Eusebius. in vita Constan^ion. Russiaus,
Nicepho^u^: and alii. S. Aug. confess. lib. 1. cap. 11. Vide vitas Sanctorum.
Son of Helena a Christian: St Austin the Son of Monica a Christian: who
together with St Hierom and St Ambrose borne of Christians, were not Baptized
until they had completed the Age of 30 Years. And St Gregory Nazianzen, the
Son of a Bishop in the Greek Church; was Baptized being a Youth.

I answer: This in the winding it up, concludes only, that the Practice of
Baptizing Infants, was not strictly, absolutely and altogether Universal.

And first: These Parents would not have willingly, and without a torture of
Heart, so neglected these their Children, that they should have dyed without
Baptism. St Austin Possidonius in vita Augustini.
was greatly and fearfully sick, at which time his Mother Monica was also
greatly sick with fear, lest he should have dyed without participation of the
sacred Ordinance. And what these Divine Worthies divinely thought and taught
concerning their own, or others dying without Baptism; is worthily manifest in
their most worthy writings. Let St Gregory Nazianzen stand here for a S. Greg.
Naz. in Sermon. de Baptismate.
Mark, because he seems most remarkeably opposite to us. He commands
expressly, that the Child be Baptized in periculo Mortis, in the case of
Mortal Danger; and he proves it with an argument desumed from Circumcision:
and he farther wills, that Baptism be not differred beyond the Age of three
years: in which Age, we that are of Age know, Children are unknowing, and
cannot have actual Faith and Repentance, and consequently, neither publish
them by Profession.

Secondly: Their Parents and they proposed to themselves a religious End in
differring their Baptism: Yea: the Devotions of these few and extraordinary
Saints, staid them long amongst the Catechumeni, partly that they might heap
together, and treasure up great store and variety of Learning and Experience in
their capacious Hearts, before they should be forced upon public Offices,
Ecclesiastical or Civil: unto which they were not ordinarily driven or
called, being yet Catechument; though it extraordinarily happened to St Ambrose
and Constantine.

Thirdly: St Austin, St Hierom, and St Ambrose were partly elevated above all
ordinary Rules, by extraordinary Inspirations, to an ardent desire of
conforming themselves to the extraordinary Example of Christ their Master.

Lastly: Actiones Paucorum (quemadmodum and Privilegia) non sunt trabendae in
Exemplum: The Actions of some few, militant against the common Praxis of the
Church, (as also the Privileges of some,) a^e not to be drawn into Example: It
is an exemplary Rule in the Canon Law. To which I lawfully marry, and in a
C^nonicall Hour; another like Rule: Logibus, non Exemplis, vivitur: we should
live according to Laws and not according to Examples of Men carried against,
besides, or above Law.

Ludovicus Vives his mistake was Vide Lud. Viv. in S. Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 1.
cap. 27.
gross, and he grossly ignorant of History, all people must confess that
will not be, as he was, grossly mistaken.

And concerning Constantine: the Vide etiam Metaphr. in Constantino. Surium
Tom. 6. Martyrol. Vsuard. and Pontifical. Roman. c. 34
most creditable opinion is, that he was Baptized by Sylvester Bishop of Rome,
immediately after his Conversion; (and not by Eusebius the Arrian Bishop of
Nicomedia, Death invading him with sickness:) and that his Mother Helena then
expected the Messiah, and was of the Jewish irreligious Religion.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
LAstly: they argue: from the loins of Modern History. The Children of the
Georgians in Armenia, are not Baptized until they be aged eight years.

I answer: The Abassine Christians are Circumcised. The Customs of decayed and
corrupt Churches, are not presidentiall unto us.

They argue still; and magisterially enough: but either by pressing places of
Scripture, which they press to death; or by oppressing us with a multitude of
Arguments, bearing no date of Authority or superscription of Reason. And herein
they tripudiate like the Fairies or Satyrs upon the Mountains; as if all the
good ground they dance upon, were their own. And whilst they amuse us, with a
plausible and yellow paint of carriage and of stretched pronunciation, they
suppose themselves to set off their dull-coloured Arguments, with the gaudy
luster of their painted behavior: But, all this while, cannot sink to the
bottom of the Devils Policy. Non enim persequitur and impugnat Cypr.
Carthaginensis l. 3. Epistolarum, ep. 1. ad Lucium.
Christi Adversarius, says the Glory of Carthage, nisi Castra and Milites
Christi: Haereticos prostratos semel and suos factos contemnit and praeterit:
Eos quaerit dejicere, quos videt stare: The Adversary of Christ does not
violently persecute and impugn, but the Camp and Soldiers of Christ: He
contemns and passes negligently by Heretics, as being now in the dirt, and
already made his own: He seeks to throw them down, whom he sees to stand.

It appears a godly Truth: That the Devil never appears to them, whom he knows
to question his Being: because in that respect, he has already sure hold of
them. And Theodot. Job 1. 6. Vide Theophylact. in Mat. 12.
he, who, according to Theodotion, is (...), the Adversary that lies in ambush
against us; is willing that the Anabaptists should greatly please themselves
with a little smattering of Morality, and a few beggarly rudiments of pious
Profession; whilst they are Soule-poison'd themselves, and whilst they poison
the Souls of the People with their impure Arguments; which, like the enchanted
Castles of their Hearts, are strong and impregnable, only until the Charm be
dissolved.

O the Savior of Israel: Nature in the Natural Body, does always endeavor
to rectify it self: And Grace in the Soul, rectifies Nature: But who shall
rectify these out-lawed and strong-will'd people, that strongly keep the Fort
of their Hearts against Grace? Even thou alone who art (...), the mighty God.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
THE Results here prefer themselves. Whereof the first is: This Text thus
warded, guarded, and secured with Fortifications of all sorts; professing for
Baptism: the Baptism of Infants is commanded in Scripture.

The Resultancy is thus brought near to the Eye. Every Proposition is either a
Principle, principally and properly belonging to some Science, (I speak of
Science in a large Sense;) from which the Sc^ence partly flows and follows;
every Science being Virtually contained in it is Principles: or is a Conclusion
deduced from a Principle: Whence every Conclusion is reducible to the
Principle, from which it was deduced.

And Sciences are of two Kinds: there being some, which proceed from
Principles known by the natural Light of our understanding, as Arithmetic,
Geometry, and others; and some that proceed from Principles known by the Light
which a Superior Science gives to us; and these we name Subordinate Sciences;
As, our Science called (...) or Perspectiva, proceeds from Principles Vide
Alsted^i Cursum Philosophicum ultimae Edi^ion is, in Perspectiva and Musica.
made known by Geometry; and Music, from Principles known by Arithmetic.

Now if the Proposition be a Principle of a Superior Science, it supposes no
other Principle of it is Kind, going before it; yet, is it big with Inference:
and the Propositions inferred, are Conclusions regulated by it: this being one
applicatory Sense of the Rule: Primum in unequoque Genere, est Mensura
reliquorum, The first in every kind, is a Measure of the rest.

And every Conclusion supposes and infers; unless the last Conclusion that
is deducible, may be ^ound; this inferring not, but abundantly supposing.

And of what rank and Order soever the Proposition is which supposes and
infers, of the very same Order and rank are the Propositions inferred and
supposed: If that be a natural Truth, these also be natural Truths: If that
be a divine Truth and God's Word, these be God's Word and divine Truths:
Because as that in it self, expresses God's Speech; so likewise by it self,
it supposes and infers God speaking by these.

Take now the Text or Proposition here, Except one be born of water and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. This Proposition supposes
and infers. What does it suppose? Every Proposition necessarily and
immediately supposes the Proposition, whereof it is the immediate Reason; the
Thing and the immediate Reason of the Thing, being immediately connexed; and
such a Reason orderly, necessarily, and most nearly following the Thing. The
Thing therefore, which this Proposition must of necessity suppose, is: Go and
Baptize all Persons qualified for Baptism, yea even Infants offered by the
Church; it necessarily following as the immediate Reason, For except one be
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: Or;
Except ye Baptize all such, and they be born of Water and of the Spirit, they
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

And the immediate Reason has so severe and sincere a connection with the
Thing; that the Thing, which even now went before it and was supposed, it can
now again infer and bring after it, making the Thing omnimodously strong, by
supporting it on both sides, and with both Arms upholding it: As thus: Except
one be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
God: Therefore go and Baptize all Persons qualified for Baptism, yea even
Infants offered by the Church.

Finally: This Proposition or Conclusion, except one be born, etc. being the
Word of God, a divine Truth, and a Proposition of the Superior Science, which
is Scientia Dei and Bea^orum the Science of God and the Blessed; the other
Proposition, Go and Baptize all Persons qualified for Baptism, yea even
Infants, etc. must also be a Proposition of the Superior Science, a divine
Truth, and the Word of God; even upon a double Account, and as in the
Supposition so in the Inference; and must be received by all rational Persons,
as of equal weight and worth with the written and express Proposition, Except
one be born, etc. by the which, it is necessarily supposed, and from the which,
it is inferred of necessity.

And therefore let our Anabaptists never ask more, where we find the Command
of Baptizing Infants in the Word of God; it being there, once and again,
within a short space of place.

And the Truths of Scripture cannot be more cleared by interpretation, if we
could mingle with our Interpretations the very Beams of the Sun.

Indeed: A Conclusion may proceed ex falsa Hypothesi, from a false Supposition.
But our Conclusion is the Word of God: and in a false supposition, the Thing
supposed is not immediately, necessarily, and naturally supposed, but
accidentally, ad placitum, and as being far fetched; neither is the Proposition
supposing, or, before and to which we suppose; the immediate Reason of it: And
the false Supposition may be soon discovered to have crep't and wedged it
self unnaturally into the Order drawn from the Principle, and not to belong
orderly and naturally to it.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
THE second Result is. The Baptizing of Infants is necessary tam necessitate
Pracepti quam necessitate Medii, by the necessity of Precept, and by the
necessity of Means.

That is necessary by the necessity of Precept, which is necessary because it
is divinely commanded. And that is a Command; at the least an implicit-one; to
the breach of which, there is annexed an extreme Penalty; as here there is.

That is necessary by the necessity of Means, which is appointed by divine
appointment, as a Means of our entering into the Kingdom of God: And here
Baptism is required as a necessary Condition, Qualification or Means; Except
one be born, etc. the unbaptized being excepted, by a contrary exception, as
unconditioned, unqualified, and without the Means.

The Reader may perhaps voice it here: This is Popery. If he does: I reply,
first: I have repeated what I have read in Dr Featly: who has Dr Featly in his
D^pper dip't.
written as I have, that Baptism is doubly necessary by these Necessities.

Secondly, I reply: Dialogismum Cordis mei sequor, I follow the discourse of my
Heart in the deep tracts of School Divinity; the strength and marrow of which,
I find, after long use, to be superlatively strong and useful, and above the
marrow and strength of Lions: although the Crassipelles or thick-skinn'd
Preachers dabling and wading in the shallow, shallowly think otherwise.

Thirdly: An Act of dissembling, in turpissimis habeo, I place amongst the
basest of Things.

There is a famous Alphabet of Hebrew Words; which being compared Habetur in
Maso^a sinali, cujus Collecto^ ^rat R. Jacob Ben Chaijm, quaeque (...) est Co^
Venetian^ and Bux^^ sianis (...).
two by two, agree in their Letters, both radical and servile, and in their
Manner of being written; and very much differ in their Sense.

But if I differ from the multitude in Judgment, I shall humbly and
submissively propose in writing, the difference of my Judgment; and no way
differ from my self.

The most heavy hand of God is upon us; and how dare we to dissemble in God's
weighty Business? Psalm. 29. 9. Targ. ibi.
The voice of the Lord makes the Hindes to calve. The Targ runs with the
Hindes: parere cogit, compels to bring forth; the Hindes bringing forth with
great difficulty, but when affrighted with Gods Voice, being Thunder.

Now, as one Christian may believe another: If I could yield consent to the
whole Mass or Medly of the Doctrines of Papists; I would be as free as the
Air, and as bold as a Lion, and the Reader should quickly know it.

And: If Men will be star-lighted by Sense and Reason, they must conceive,
That, had I been acceptable to Papists, the Popish-linag'd Heir would not have
stabbed me the other Day with an Irish Dagger, in the sight of the Sun, and in
an open place so near to the Grand Seat of Justice.

God Almighty defend our Superior Powers from such Mischiefs; which commonly
bring subitaneam and improvisam Moriem, sudden and unexpected death.

In the sacred Assistance of the highest Power; I shall never be like to the
Jesuited Papist, in the stabbing of any Man, or in the nonperformance of
obedience to the Powers under whom I am dejected, although the said Powers
should cloudily shine upon me.

CHAP. LXXXX.
THE third Result is. The Sacraments have their Effects and Virtue from Christ;
who alone, makes our way clear for our entrance into the Kingdom of God: and
therefore, a wicked Man wrapped, envelop't, and involved in sin: does Valide
Validly, though not Licite, Lawfully, administer a Sacrament.

For: As it matters not in respect of Curing Diseases, whether or no the Body
of a Physician (which is the Instrument of a Soul having Art,) be sound, or
infirm: And as it neither helps nor hinders the conveyance of water, that the
Pipe of Conveyance or Conduit-pipe be composed of Gold, or Silver, or Lead, or
Wood: So it imports not in regard of Sacramental Effects, whether or no
Minister Sacramenti, the Minister of the Sacrament, be good or Evil; (though
in obedience to the will of God, and in respect of his own personal Good and
actual Preparation complying with the sacred Ordinance, and of the good of
others by the Good of his good Example, he should be excellently good.)

Because Instrumentum non agit secundum propriam formam aut virtutem, sed
secundum virtutem ejus a quo movetur: An Instrument, as an Instrument, does not
Act according to it is own form and virtue, but according to the virtue of the
Power by which it is moved: All actions coming from agreeable Forms and Powers.

Wherefore Christ operates in the Sacraments, by the good, as by the living
Members of his Church; and by the evil, as by inanimate Instruments.

St Austin gives his full, and manifold S. Aug. in Evang Joan Tract. 11.
Approbation: Baptismus qui datus a Juda, Baptismus Christi crat: qui autem a
Joanne datus, Baptismus Joannis erat. Non Judam Joanni, sed Baptismum Christi
etiam per Judae manus datum, Baptismo Joannis etiam per manus Joannis dato
recte praeponimus: The Baptism that was administered by Judas, was the Baptism
of Christ: And the Baptism administered by John, was John's Baptism. We do not
set Judas before John; but we rightly prefer the Baptism of Christ even
administered by the hands of Judas, before the baptism of John though it passed
through John's hands.

He returns the same reason in another place, wherein he speaks, not as before
of different Baptisms, but of the same: Per Ministros dispares, Idem. lib. 3.
contra Cresconium Grammatitum, cap. 6.
Dei munus aequale est; quia non illorum, sed ejus est: The Gift of God is
equal, though administered by Persons of unequal Conversation: because it is
the Gift of God, not of them who administer the Gift.

The same quick-sighted Author weaving into his Discourse, that although some
vain Persons of the weaker Kind, prompted and solicited by sinister
Intentions, brought Children to be Baptized, to the end, the Children might
receive or conserve bodily Health; yet the Children were truly and rightly
Baptized by the Ministers of the Sacrament: after-strows this Reason:
Celebrantur Idem epist. ^ 23. ad Bonifacium.
enim per cos necessaria Minisleria: For: Services of necessary Consequence and
Result, are celebrated by them.

And I wonder not a little, that reasonable Mr Tombs could fancy Mr Tombs in
his Examen.
any Thing to be soundly deduced for him, from the vanity and irresolution of a
few seduced and unsound People.

And if he will tear to himself, that the want of a good Intention in the
Parents, may pervert or inco^modate the actual Baptism of the children: it
will much more follow of it self, that the want of Intention, or of a good-one
in the Minister of the Sacrament, must quel and overthrow his Act of Baptizing;
the Minister of the Sacrament, acting Sacramentally.

It is cast up in the end, as goldoar with an Indian Spade: that a Sacrament,
quoad Essentialia and Substantialia Sacramenti, according to the Essentials and
Substantials of a Sacrament; proves alike to the Receiver, whosoever the Giver
or Minister be, if the Giver be rightly called and Ministerially gives a
Sacrament.

CHAP. LXXXXI.
THE fourth Result is. Although we are obliged to the Baptizing of Infants, for
the prevention of the Danger in the Text, and as Fellow Members with a People
professing Christ; Yet grown Persons anciently converted to the Faith, were
orderly and rightly catechized and instructed, before they were Baptized: Such
Means proportionably agreeing with such a Condition.

And therefore: in their first Application to the Church, they were
aestimative, in the estimation of Bel^evers, Unbeleevers and called (...), as
possessed of an evil Spirit and moved inwardly by it: and were searched (how
strangely soever the Word may sound in strange Ears) with Exorcisms, by some
deputed for that work and called Exorcistae, Exorcists; who rebuked the devil
in the Name of Jesus.

After these Exorcisms; they were brought unto the Baptistery, and there they
put on the Name of Competentes, because they did there competition for Baptism:
And there were they put into the hands and tuition of the Catechists.

And now, while they were taught and catechized, they were named (...). These
did frequently fast, watch, pray, and hear Sermons: being separated from others
in the Church, by a proper place called Catechumenium. They departed from Vide
Hospinianum in Tract. de Templis.
the Church ante majorem Canonem, before the Priest entered upon the greater
Canon and Celebration of the Mysteries: Yea, they were not present in the
Baptizing of others.

After their Baptism, their Name was (...), being a Twin-word from (...), a new
plant.

But except necessity pressed, by occasion of sickness or other like evil,
inducing the Danger of Death; they were Baptized, only at the two great Feasts,
in the which, S. H^eron. in vita Paul^, primi E^^mitae.
Anthony wore the Palm-Habit of Paul the first Hermit; that is, at the solemn
Feasts of Easter and Pentecost; Tertul. l. de Baptismo. ad Ca'ccm. Leo Magnus
ep. 4. quae ^si ad Episcopos Sicihae.
according to Tertullian and Leo the first.

And again: before they were admitted into the number of Believers, by Baptism;
(let the Reader patiently, if not reverently, hear the repetition of some
special Ceremonies of the Church, raised from the reverend Monuments of pious
Antiquity; in the seattering of which, I am only the Interpreter to the
Fathers;) first, they turned their faces toward the West, and renounced the
Devil and his works, and the works of all them from whom the Sun of
Righteousness was departed, (in the Apostolical form); as Dionysius
Areopagita S. Dionys. Arcop. de Eccl. Hier. cap. de Baptism.
recounts.

Secondly: they tacked about and faced the East; in which position of Body,
they professed the Christian Faith, and their Defense thereof; (using the words
of the Apostolical Creed;) agreeably to the same Dionysius: Idem ibid.
and afterward of the Nicen Symboll.

Thirdly: the same writer attesteth, Idem ibid.
(I can witness nothing in it, but him to be a witness of it;) that the Sign
of the Cross was made on their Foreheads, and on their Breasts: by the which,
they were signed for God and for Christ crucified; the ignominious and
inglorious Passion of whom, should be their Triumph and Glory: as it was St
Paul's. Gal 6. 14.


And yet, again: After their admittance by Baptism: first: they were kissed
osculo Pacis, with a kiss of Peace, by the Christians who were present, in
token that, as Baptized Persons, they were now their Brethren: this is
enrolled by St Cyprian. S. Cypr. l. 3. cp. 8. ad Fidum.


Secondly: a burning Taper was given into the hands of the Baptized Persons, in
sign of the Faith and Grace received; and to signify that now they were
translated from the Power of Darkness, to the admirable Light and lot of the
Sa^nts: this S. Greg. Naz. orat. in sanctum Lava^rum. Lactant. in Carmine.
Paschali.
is Chronicled by St Gregory Nazianzen.

Thirdly: they were invested in a White Dress, as Lactantius has left dressed
in metricall black and white; which they wore from the Sabbath or Saturday*
being the Eave of Easter, and called Sabbathum Sanctum, the Holy Sabbath; to
the Sunday after Easter Day, which was therefore named Dominica in Albis, The
Lord's Day wherein the Baptized, appeared all in their White Garments: of this,
Dionysius is the Recorder. S. Dionys. ubi supra and alii ex eo.


And then at their putting off these white Garments, Divine Sermons were
preached to them, in the which they were exhorted to retain inward whiteness
and purity, of which the outward purity and whiteness was but a white Mark.
Hence we have most Heavenly Sermons In Bibliotheca Patrum.
amongst the Primitive Records, entit'led De retinenda Puritate, Of retaining
Purity.

Fourthly: Milk and Honey was given into their Mouths, to be Tertul. l. 1.
contra Marcionem, cap. 14. S. Hieron. in D^alogo contra Luciferianos: vide
eundem, Comment in Is. 55. 1. ubi vini and Lactis mention^m facit.
tasted by them: of which Tertulliaen; and afterward, St Hierom, who
interprets it to have been done in sign of our new Infancy in Christ. Wherefore
on the Dominica in Albis, in the Roman Church, with reference to the Neophyts;
part of the Epistle of St Peter is read which contains, Quasi modo geniti
Infantes lac concupiscite, etc. As newborn Babes desire the sincere Milk of
Missale R^manum Dominica in Albis, in Epistola. 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3. Dr Tailor Sect.
18.
the word, that ye may grow thereby. If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is
gracious.

But I see not, how Dr Tailor thumming this Baptismall Ceremony in his
tailoring, and cutting it out against the Baptism of Infants; can hence piece
it up, that because Men who were Baptized, were to be as Babes, therefore Babes
must not be Baptized until they be Men. Yea rather, Babes should be Baptized,
because their Innocence is the Scripture Measure and Rule, by which, Men are
made Baptizable; and to which, they are now pleasantly and sweetly directed by
the Ceremonious tasting of Milk and Honey.

This expression, as new born Babes, or, as little Children, has an express
Mat. 18. 3*
Confirmation from Heaven, in the Name, Perfection, and Adumbration of the
Cherubims: In their Name: the Word Rub in the Hebrew Language, (as also Rabe in
the Chaldee,) signifying a Child; and Che signifying as: In their Perfection,
their fulness of knowledge, according to their other derivation, being
Charactered and compendiously delineated in the Faith of initiated and Baptized
children; because Faith here answers to Vision or Face-Knowledge hereafter:
In their Adumbration, the Cherubims having chiefly been effigiated as and in
the shape of Children or Babes in respect of their Faces.

CHAP. LXXXXII.
THE fifth Result is. The Senses of Scripture, accepted by the Primitive
Church, and all venerable Antiquity, being so violently and obstinately
rejected in this our obstinate and violent Age: we should give our Assent to
the Senses of Scripture, not rashly, but secundum Regulas Prudentiae, according
to the Rules of Prudence.

There is a Thing, almost in every Text of Scripture beckening to Practice,
like that which the Painters call the Air in every Face, For: if all the parts
of the Face, be taken in their proper feature, and right Proportions, and this
Air be not thus taken, (which Air is a special kind of Center, wherein all
the consents of Similitude have a general Meeting;) the want of this Air, is
in the reason, that the Judgments of Men give a different Air and sound; and
that while one strongly affirms, the face to be like, another denies it as
strongly.

And if the words of any Text be taken or understood, according to the partial
and particular Acception of those Words, in common use, or in other places of
Scripture: And the general Air, (which is the Scope of the whole Text, and
coincidence of it cum Antecedentibus and Consequentibus, with the Things going
before and the Things following: Yea: which is the Relation it bears to
Persons and their Conditions, and the interest it has in Places; and, as it
were, a sudden cast of the Look upon Times and Customs; and so forth:) be not
understood and taken according to the several aims and ey-turnings of the
Text: the Judgments of Interpreters, will be various: although they shall
pretend to Interpret by divine Inspiration.

S. Hilary turns us upon another Turn of the Eye in a Text: Intelligentia
Dictorum ex Causis est assumenda S. Hilar. l. 4 de Trinitate
dicendi; quia non Sermoni, Res, sed Rei Sermo est Subjectus: The Understanding
of Things said or Sayings, is to be taken from the Causes of their being said;
because the Thing is not subjected to the Speech or Saying, but the Saying or
Speech to the Thing.

Is it probable now, that ordinary People can take this Air in a difficult and
controverted place of Scripture? It is not probable. My Reason is: Because
there are ordinarily required to an Understander of Scripture, first,
Godliness, Peace of mind, (which excludes overbearing Affection,) and a good
Wit; in the wise, peaceable, and godly Judgment of St Austin: Si tamen bono
Ingenio S. Aug. de utilit. Credendi, c. 18.
Pietas, and Pax quaedam Mentis accedat, sine qua de sanctis Rebus nihil
prorsus intelligipotest: To a good Wit there must be added Godliness, and a
certain Peace of the Mind, without which, nothing at all of Heavenly Things
can be understood: Secondly: great Wisdom and Learning; by the which, the
Reader may judge of the circumferentiall References which the Text has, caused
by Languages and Uses of Speech, Times, Places, Customs, Persons, precedent
Precepts, Causes, Natures of Things and their Effects, etc.

Thirdly: when we have done what Man can do: If the Interpreters of Scripture,
be not spirited with the same Spirit, with which, the writers of it were
spirited; they shall never give Spiritual and secure Judgment, proportionably
to the Prophetical and Apostolical Spirit.

Infallibly* If it be not moreover, infallibly known to us that they are
divinely spirited; they cannot imbreathe into us Cognitionem quietativam,
Knowledge that shall qiuet and allay our exasperated and troubled Hearts.

And the Doctor Subtilis binds it up with an infallible Reason: Nemo Scotus 2.
D. 23. q. vnica:
perfect credit, and omnino firmiter, ei quem scit posse fallere and falli: No
Man perfectly, and altogether firmly believes him, (let him be Interpreter of
the Words or Sense,) of whom he knows that he can deceive and be deceived, in
such Things and Occasions; as having no security of Direction, from the
gracious and manifest Promise of God.

CHAP. LXXXXIII.
THE last Result is. There is a strong necessity of an Overseer, whom God (the
Overseer from Heaven) has promised to direct according to his Place and Office.

Feed the flock of God (says St Peter 1 Pet. 5. 2.
to the Elders that were Elders as he, being (...), was an Text. Graec. V. 1.
Edit. vulg.
Elder,) which is among you taking the oversight thereof. The Vulgar divulges
it: Pascite, qui in vobis est, Gregem Dei, providentes: Feed ye the flock of
God which is among you, foreseeing, and most vigilantly providing for it: or,
as the Original, (...), Superspecu^antes, supervigilantes, looking carefully
and watchfully from above it, on every Syrus Interp. Pagn. Leo Hebraeus in
Editione Tigurina. S. Hieron. ep. 85. ad Evagrium.
side and all ways: or, as the Syriack, Pagninus, and the Tiguri^e Edition;
curam illius agentes, exercising care over it: or, as St Hierom St Austin, and
other Fathers uncase it, Superintendentes, intending and bending the whole
study of your Minds, from your high Seat and Place, to prevent Error, Schism,
and abuse of divine Mysteries amongst the People.

This was the duty of Bishops; and this their Office or Duty, gave their Name
to them. And the want of this oversight, inclined the People to Schism: the
Ordination of Bishops being directed to the prevention of it. Episcopi enim est
superintendere Gregi, S. Aug. lib. 19. de Civit. Dei, cap. 19.
says St Austin; For, it is the Duty of a Bishop to superintend, or
intentively watch over his Flock, that it be not scattered by the Woolfe, which
first scatters the flock, and then preyeth upon the Scattred-ones.

St Ambrose understands by the S. Ambros. lib. 1. de dignit. Sacerdotali, c. 6.
Word Bishop, Superinspectorem, a Superinspector, or a Seer into the Behaviors
of Men from above them.

From hence Isidor Pelusiot derives his Allusion, when writing to Eusebius the
Bishop, he writes; a Isid. Pelus. l. 1. Epist. 151.
Bishop doing as he ought, and closing with his Duty, to be (...), all Eye.

For this cause, there were sublime Thrones erected in Churches for Bishops, by
Primitive Institution; that they might (...), from their Illustrious and high
Seats behold the People and their demeanor more accurately: which is Zonaras
his Animadversion upon Zonar. in Canones Apostolicos, Can. 58.
the Apostolical Canons.

St Bernard found Pope Eugenius (once his Scholar) set upon his Episcopal
Throne; and he leaves him sitting upon it, while he pulls him down inwardly
with humble Considerations: Blanditur Cathedra? S. Bern. l. 2. de
Consideratione ad Eugenium Papam, cap. 6.
Specula est unde superintendis, sonans tibi non Dominium, sed Officium. Quidni
loceris in eminenti, unde prospectes omnia, qui Speculator super omnia
Constitueris? Enimvero prospectus ille procinctum parit, non otium. Nec locus
est otio, ubi sedula urget solicitudo Ecclesiarum. Does your high Chair flatter
you? It is a Watchtower, from whence you superintend; while it sounds to you,
not Dominion, but Office. Why should not you be placed on high, from whence you
may foresee all Things; who are set a Watchman over all Things? Forsooth, that
prospect should beget readiness, as of Men provided for Battle, not Idleness.
Neither is there place for Idleness, where there urges a diligent Care of the
Churches.

St Paul was pulled several ways with such a Care: as he testifies: that 2
Cor. 11. 28.
which comes upon me daily, the care of all the Churches. Where the Vulgar
Interpretor interprets: Instantia Interp. vulg.
mea quotidiana, solicitudo omnium Ecclesiarum: that which presses daily upon
me, is the diversely and many ways pulling and te^ng care of all the Churches.
Which Care is in the Text. Graec.
Greek, (...). The word is brought (...) from it is parting or cutting asunder
the Mind.

By which it is intimated: that such Care pulls the caring Person with
adhibition of great force, diverse ways at the same time; and that it divided
St Paul's Heart amongst many Churches.

This cutting and dividing Care, stops the way to the divisions and Cuttings of
Schism: the Greek Word (...), Schism: coming from (...), I Isid. Hispalensis in
Etym.
cut. Whence Isidor: Scisma a Scissura Animorum nomen accepit: Scism is a
Cutter, and cut it is Name from the Scissure or Cutting of Minds.

CHAP. LXXXXIV.
NOthing is more often repeated in the royal Spouse-Treasures of Antiquity,
than Pastoralis Vigilantia, Pastoral Vigilance.

Yea: the staff of the Pastoral Dignity belonging to Bishops, had from of
old, the shape and fashion of a Shepheard's Hook: to design their Authority,
by the which, they were designed for the pulling of the diseased Sheep to them.

And though we read of St Peter Chronicon Alexandrinum.
Bishop of Alexandria and a Successor to St Mark; that he would never sit in
St Mark's Chair, but humbly sat al his days on the Footstooll; even until,
after his death, the devout people of Alexandria, having dressed and adorned
his un^ould Body with the Pontifical Habit, set it above the Footstool in the
Pontifical Chair: yet his Pastoral Watching, unto which the high place in
the Chair directed him, was eminent even from the Footstool, though the
Footstool was not preeminent.

This Care and Vigilance from on high, has two extremes, as all virtues have;
the one growing from excess, and the other from defect. The excess looks from
on high, too highly; and seeks highly, caringly, and pragmatically, the
temporal and unjust profit of the Bishop, (being unjust in it self, or unjust
because unjustly sought;) not the just and spiritual profit of the people; for
which profit of the People, the Bishop is a Bishop.

Wherefore the Apostle St Peter prosecuting his Matter, says: not for 1 Pet.
5. V. 2, 3, 4.
filthy lucre, but of a ready Mind: Neither: as being Lords over God's
Heritage: but being examples to the flock. And when the chief Shepherd shall
appear, ye shall receive a Crown of Glory that fades not away. For our
lording it, the Vulgar takes dominantes, Versio Vulgata. Text. Graec.
exercising sovereignty: the Original interweaveth (...), Mastering it over
God's Heritage.

The Text wills and commands, that the Mastership or Sovereignty, and the Profit
thence arising, be not the chief Things which the Overlookers actively look
after in their looking over or overlooking.

A notorious Example of this Excess, we have in Paulus Samosatenus; Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 26.
who affected secular Honors, piliaged the People, moved from place to place
with expressions of Luciferain Pride and Pomp, and commanded that he should be
called an Angel, and that Psalms should be sung in the Praise, not of Christ,
but of him.

Hither I may throw with scorn, the Bishops, that in their Processions, were
carried in Chaires upon the backs of the Clergy: Which, a grave Council was
troubled to forbid by a Council. Bracarens. 3. Can. 5.
Canon.

The Defect, is a Dormouse-Life, and a negligent giving of the Bridle of
Government; by the which, the Bishop permits all things to the people.

This was the fault of Ars^cius, who succeeding to St John Chrysostom in the
Arch Bishopric of Constantinople, was supinely negligent, gave broad way to
the Monstrous Vanities of the Empress Eudoxia, and lived as if he had been
dead while he lived And therefore Nicephorus bewailing the Matter, elegantly
Niceph. Eccle. Hist. l. 13. cap. 28:
calls him (...), an old and unprofitable stump, stock, or Blockhead.

In the middle Point betwixt these two, sits the Godly, wise, and learned
Bishop or Overseer, on a high Seat, from which there is less Deceptio Visus,
deception of his Sight, and as more overseeing, so less Oversight; and from
which he draws more Power and splendor, (which beget fear, awe, and
veneration) and therefore more ability to correct and amend the Things, that in
his Overseeing he sees to be against or under the Law.

For: Although this reverentiall fear and awe in the People, should be godly,
and therefore generated of a like Cause, namely, Godliness in the Bishop: Yet:
whereas the Bishop, in the consequents of his overseeing, deals more with
ungodly, than with godly Persons; the ungodly being the more numerous; the just
Acts of his Godliness, must be freed from contempt and maintained by Power,
and Splendor, or their Influence upon the ungodly will be small and
contemptible.

Splendor without Power, will be vain, idle, and a mere splendid show. And a
Beggar or other poor Man, having Power, and wanting Splendor, will be
ridicuously powerful; and his Power will prove a poor and begging Power.

CHAP. LXXXXV.
THAT Episcopacy is de Jure divino, of divine Right; and consequently that
Bishops were instituted by Christ himself, and that the Apostles were Bishops:
I believe, I hope, with divine Faith.

For: When St Hierom let fall S. Hieron. in c. 1: ad Tit^^.
from his Pen, that by common consent and Custom, Bishops were first preferred
before Presbyters: he wrote, though his words may seem to resist this
Interpretation, of the Custom and Common Consent which supposed the divine
Ordinance, and was radicated and grounded upon it; and of Prelation, not in it
self, (as Nature has preferred Gold in it self, before other Metals,) but
with respect to public and Universal knowleage and acceptance.

Because the same St Hierom contends Idem ep ad Heliodorum ^ ep. ad Marcellam.
the Bishop to sit above the Presbyter, and to be empowred before him, tum
potestate Ordinis, tum potestate Jurisdictionis, by the Power of order, and by
the power of Jurisdiction.

Yea: St Hierom defines as a Truth of God: Ubi non est Sacerdos, Idem in
Dialago advers. Luciferian.
non est Ecclesi^: Where there is no Priest, there is no Church. And most
certainly, he understands by a Priest here, a Bishop: for, the word Sacerdos
was applied to both, and he speaks of the Priest, qui potestatem habet
Ordinandi, who has Power to give Ordination; which, even in the Judgment of
St Hierom though Vide ejusde^ Epistolam ad Euagrium.
a Presby^er, a mere Priest or Presbyter has not, but a Bishop only.

Add, that the Church of God, being the Spouse of Christ, is Acies Ordinata, A
well-ordered Army; Cant. 6. 10. Edit vulg. S. Ignat. in Epist. ad. Trallianos^
Idem inculcat in Epist. ad Smyrn^^ses.
which is visible and incapable of a general Parity: And that St Ignatius, the
third Bishop of Antioch from St Peter admonishes the Presbyters or Priests
accordingly: Presbyteri, subjecti estote Episcopo: O ye Presbyters, be ye
subject to your Bishop.

In good deed; the Bishops did at the first, sweetly and humbly consort and
companion with the Presbyters, as their Fellow Laborers; until the Vide S.
Hieron. in c. 1. ad Titum.
Presbyters abused their humble demission and sweetness, and began to be
insolent, and, equallizing themselves with the Bishops, to break away into
Scisms.

But, we know that a Child is a reasonable Creature, although the Chief Signs
of Distinction betwixt the reasonable and the sensitive Soul, and their divided
Actions, appear not in a Child.

The Church in her Childhood, was in Statu perturbato, in a troubled State, and
could not step so publicly forth in her Pontificalibus.

This Overseeing then, we see, is of Divine Right; and therefore, God assisteth
and supporteth it by divine Direction; as he does support and assist every one
settled by divine Right, and rightly performing his part, in the dispensing of
divine Matters belonging to his Office.

For me: I cannot fly cryingly from the Honey* comb; because I have been stung
by the Be. And I know, that Abusus non tollit Usum, The Abuse of a Thing does
not make void the Use thereof.

Behold: I have only made public and common my private and particular
Judgment.

Before I descend to my Inferences; I crave leave* of my Reader, that I may
here go aside with two Chapters; and have them at my own disposing, for
Excursion.

CHAP. LXXXXVI.
THE Species that are Visible and the audible Species, do specifically differ.
And moreover they have this Kinde-following Note of Diversity: The Visible
Species are not mingled in the Medium: the audible are there mingled. We see at
the same Time, Stars, and some thinner Parts of the Firmament; yea, Mountains,
Trees, Men and Beasts: and the Species (by which, the Object is United with the
Sense) of the one, stands apart from the other, in the little Round of the Eye;
they being inconfused. But if many sounds are soundly sent at once unto our
Ears, through the Air, from the Circumjacent Parts of the Orb; they presently
confound one another. Even so: Men may quietly understand within themselves,
many Truths of Heaven and Earth: Which, if they be sounded forth to the
Understandings of others, are soon dashed against, and soon clash with their
Opinions.

Two Answerers especially, have made some attempts upon my last Book, entitled,
The perfect Law of God.

The one composed a Latin Answer to my Latin Difficulty there: And because I
was not called to a fair perusal of it, before it was made alieni, licet haud
publici Juris; I was a little scruple-gall'd. But the Author, being (as his
friend charactered him to me) a solid and deserving Member of the good old
Protestant Church; has unscrupled me, by discovering fairly to me, the
fairness and singleness of his Intention. If I make a farther Discovery, I
may discover farther.

The other, to gratify the tickling Itch of a rich Presbyterian wearing my
Name, in his Parish; on whom he depended upon a Tythe-Account; himself being
of a much-alienated Judgment: answered in a word, in a single Term (it was
Terminus diminuens) from a double Heart; and ( animo decipiendi) wrote upon the
Book, Spalatensis.

But honest men say: He that should have seen the late Renegado Bishop of
Spalato, and impartially compared him with our Answerer; would have answerably
judged them, not much unlike in their Paunches; and that the Motto on the
Paunch of this Answerer, is, Spalatensis, Cujus Deus Venture est* A
Spalatensian, whose God is his Belly; and whose Religion his Tithes.

And some bruit him to be more like the fat Belly-Mountain'd Bishop, than he
that once acted him on the stage.

I say: The Apostles of God, were not Pleasers of Men.

Great Man: let me teach you a little. The Kingdom of Heaven does not consist
in eating and drinking. There will be another World after this. The works of
God, confess God and his Providence; though your works deny his Providence and
Him. And if God be Provident; Vide Salvianum in Libris de Providentia, vel de
Gubernati^ne Dei; and Lactantiu^, Divina^um Institutionu^ l. 1. c. 1. etc.
nihil inordinate facit, he does nothing inordinately. And if God does nothing
inordinately: the condition of Men and the condition of Beasts, cannot be equal
after this Life. For: If these conditions should be levelled and equali'd by
Death; Inordination would be seen to break the Ranks of Things: and Man, the
noblest Creature of all that are Visible, would be the most miserable of all
other.

And this will visibly appear, if we survey the present and apparent
privileges of Beasts.

Nature has provided and made teady for Beasts, Meat, Clothes, House-room, and
other Things necessary to the Conservation of Life; which, Men acquire with
great labor, (and sometimes, with great, and sometimes with your sins.)

Beasts are contented with present Things, and are not solicitous concerning
Things to come: Men have an insatiable desire of after-enjoyments* and are
often storm-tossed in the consideration of the future Byasse of Things; (and
purchase them as you do, with Men-pleasing.)

Beasts are pleased with few Things, and their desires are filled and satiated
with a little of those few, and their Hearts many times and greatly rest in
those little-few: but the Heart of Man is restless, unquiet and unsatisfyed,
(as your Belly.)

Beasts fear not death nor danger, but in the near approaches of them; nor
think in meditation, that a Time will come wherein they shall not be, or not be
in vivis: but Men are commonly goared and lancinated with such Thoughts,
(though you are not.)

O Man of the Belly: Humane Rest in Summo and divino Bono, is the Pearl of the
other World: and there will be a Resurrection of the Body, and Life
everlasting. Amen.

We are condemned to labors, as Offenders to the Mines; that our labors in
the acquisition of all necesaries, may be laboriously measured and squared by
the divine Rule. Enough of his Belly-Marke.

His Mouth Mark is: that he has always the Fathers in his Mouth; and throws
Learning, dressed in swelling and haughty Language, before Swine.

These (...) or Symptoms, are sharply censured in Mystical Divinity.

But: I shall oppose two Fathers to this Father mouthed Man of puffpast, and
his Tythe-Father: a Father of the Greek Church, and a Latin Father. St
Chrysostom, a Greek Father, S. Chrysostom. Hom. 17. in 1 ad Tim.
speaks thus from his Golden mouth: (...): We say not that a swelling Body or
Part, is in health or sound. And St S. Aug. in Psalm. 38.
Austin, a Latin Father, accords: Inflatio and tumor imitantur magnitudinem,
sed non habent sanitatem: Inflation and swelling imitate Greatness, but have
not soundness.

And again, (that his Humor may be Unfather'd and unfeather'd,) two Fathers
more: Father James an Apostle-Father; and Father Solomon, a wise Father of
Israel: who join in saying: God resists the Proud; or, as Ja. 4. 6. Prove. 3.
34. Text. Graec.
the Original, (...), the Lord sets himself in Battle ray, or, puts his
Armies in order against those who lift up themselves.

O my dear Thrasonicall back-Friend: adime tibi Cothurnos: off with thy Buskins
or Pantofles, that set thee up so high and portly.

Alas! How long may the deluded World expect, until this proud
thunder-jaw'd, sower, sullen and grim Sir, shall be pleased vacare Deo, to be
vacant for God, and bend his Abilities (within the Circle of which, he sits
conceitedly sweltring and swelling) against the Presbyterian or Anabaptist,
(against both whom, he can sufficiently rail by a good Fire?)

But therein he supposes Danger: and he fears Hunger, cold, nakedness; and
lest being hunger-starved, he should be Tenasmo constrictus, belly-bound. Warm
Broth is comfortable: and a long Spit, turned round and round before a good
Fire, with an oven heating; are comely Ornaments in a fair Personage-House of
our own.

These paultry Fears, and this ugly disproportion betwixt Profession and
Practice, in the Clergy; have unsainted it in the just opinion of the
Anabaptists.

For my part: I cherish no base or low Thoughts of Persons in Authority: and I
shall be fearful, only, to give just Offense.

When I first embraced England; I discovered in her, neither Anabaptista nor
Presbyterians: and therefore be it known to Heaven and Earth, that I will not
own either of them.

Now this Answerer Epicuri de Grege, considers me, as one against whom he may
plausibly rave and rail: and when he does bepope me, and bedash me with the
Sink-Dirt of Rome; then, he knows, he sits in the midst of two Cradles, and
Cradlerocks the Presbyterian and Anabaptist, sings a merry song to them, and
makes them laugh, and reach over him, and hugg one the other. Abi Lutun^.

Other Answerers like to the last here, I hear of. But: the Night-Noddy Ranter;
the bezling, bestiall and effeminate Person; the Person that withers beyond a
Name, and is enslaved to the manifold windings and turnings of dissembling,
lying, coosenage: are beneath my Pen; when they are beneath and under al worth.

CHAP. LXXXXVII.
A Paumphlet (it is lawful to enterpose a Letter, (...), for good sound sake)
came lately to my Hands, written against me by William Hartly, a
squintey'd-profession'd and Linsy-Wolsy-Brother of Stony-Stratford: containing
mingled Stuff, and yoking the Ox and the Ass together: The Author being more
able to walk under a Pack of Holland and Scotch-Cloth, or, caricas clamitare,
to cry rotten Figs about the streets; than to write sound Books.

The Naturalists observe; that Weckerus in Secretis.
poison being in its natural and proper place, carries always it is Antidote
along with it. If any sound Man be desirous to unbend his Bow and be merry; let
him view the Book-Poison of William Hartly, otherwise called Infant Baptism
none A Christ's; and the Nonsense, Non-English, and abundant folly it bears
about it, will abundantly answer it.

If the Votaries of his own Sect set a price upon it, the Famine of Samaria See
2 Kin. 6. 25.
is come upon them: they so dearly prizing the Head of an Ass.

His Reader shall find high, good, and unctions Words, (lest the Speech should
be Sermo Redestris, foot-language,) but those importunely misapplied and daubed
on.

I fear: the Author has gone amongst the Beggars, as a Spy, to the Door of
some plundered Minister: who having naught else to give, gives good Words to
the Beggars.

He is much taken (though mistaken) with the word, Calculated; (it stands in
the Front, it comes in the Rere:) either, because he lives in a Stony Place;
or, because he lives by a stony Heart; or, because he is often troubled with
extraordinary fits of the Stone, (for such may be the Kidney of the Saint;) or,
because he accounts himself one of Account, or, because he has taken it up
(and redeemed it from the superstitiously-red letters) in the painted porch of
an Almanac.

He uses a word or two of Latin, but falsely, and below the Schooll-Boy, and
timorously, and as it were stammeringly, and as if he would Cant or deliver
Pedlers French under his Hand.

His Matter, and the poor, forbid, creeping and crawling Spirit of it; is the
mere some, scum, froth of one in a deep Fit of the Falling* Sickness.

Thus, weak, feeble and Epilepticall Brains will needs be opening their Packs
and showing themselves (as it happened also in the late Astrologicall
Concertation at Newport, betwixt the Star-travelling Physician Mr Culpepper,
and a venturous Apothecary that in the mean time stays below, and cures both
Men and Beasts;) who would seem fairer, and more able in the concealment, and
with an Irish blanket over them; than they do in the Show.

He defiles the Names of three Ministers, as his use is in his Paumphlets: whom
the Ditch Frog impudently calls his Antagonists, as he does me: and having no
good Thing worthy of humane observation in himself, he desires to make
himself known to others by lackying after us.

The Gentlemen I know not. Yet, I believe there is worth in them; because they
are molested by so prodigious a Rhapsody of Unworthiness, and haunted by such
a Will of the Wisp.

He is a cruell-thoughted and exenterated Person: For: being unable to quell
and suppress the mounting Flames of their Discourses and Reasons; he would
entangle them wrongfully in some Hook or Wire of State-Offence: as if his
pretended Christian Freedom, were nothing but an extended Net, Snare, or Gin,
unchristianly to slave us.

The like false-dealing, I have observed with grief of Heart, in Mr Tombs
against Mr Baxter.

Which uncharitable and exitial Kind of Heart-burning or Heartlying, I never
found, but amongst the very Garbish and Off all of People utterly nescient of
true Religion.

He rails against an old raggedbehaviourd Minister of Stony-Stratford; and by
objecting him, (as if he had the sleight of slaying many with the Jaw Bone of
an Ass,) rejects the whole Militia of divinely-call'd Clergymen: therein.
objecting Judas against the Apostles; and behaving himself like the hungry Sow
in Franzius; that brake into a garden, Franzius in Sue.
and carelessely passed by the Lillies, Roses, Violets, and other gay Flowers,
and all the sweet Herbs; and made great have to a little dark place under the
Hedge, where the Gardners man (a lusty Knave) had laid his last load of
Excrements; and there she put her bold nose and unclean Mouth greedily to what
she found.

If Ministers would stoop to be advised by me; they should let this arid, naked
and empty Scull, or (...) alone, and not answer him according to his
Foolishness, or mark every Puddle-Bubble of his Brain, and Tayl-wagging of his
noisome Pen: but only stand patiently by him, until he and some of his private
Accomplices break and shatter into pieces; and then, they may hear publicly of
him; I will not say, of his dark and fetid Nightworks.

When the Italian had lost out of his Memory, many great sins committed the
past year, and Easter was now approaching, which enjoined him to Confession: he
angered his Wife: and she quickly disgorg'd, and vomited all up that he had
done many a day.

Let Ministers bung up their Mouths, and wait a while as remote Spectators
only: and perhaps, there will be matter enough in the latter Acts to throng a
Chronicle; and public Shows of all that has been contrived in secret.

But I have honored this vile Relic of the Owl, or Cuckow-Eggshell too much,
in taking so much notice of him. I will not hereafter, glorify him in this
manner.

Now, I commend to the wise and serious consideration of Ministers, and of all
Understanding and judicious Persons; a Question.

Are these; who, as the Goats go before the Herd of Cattle, in the
presumption of some thin Hairs under their Chin; so thrust themselves before
others: Are these, I pray, fit Preachers of God's deep and holy Word, and able
Determiners of Controversies in Divinity; who, when a divine Matter is
discussed, as it ought to be, with due enquiry made into liberal Arts and
Sciences, as Handmaids to Divinity; into the secret Orders of Grace and Glory;
into the natural and Supernatural Acts and Habits of the Soul, being a
Spiritual Substance marked with the Trinity-Seal; into the recluse and hidden
Natures, Properties, Inclinations, Motions, Effects and Ends of Things; into
their Definitions, whereby their Natures are fairly Charactered; into the
Differences of Things, cleared and opened as the Day, by proper Divisions and
Distinctions; which take Things asunder, and, as God in the Creation, divide
betwixt Light and Darkness; into the weight and strength of Illations,
Collations, Relations; into deep and intricate Questions; into the Nonultras of
a Question, when a discourse comes to the Bottom-Puncto, and the last Exit;
into the Grounds of Truth, and the Reduction of every Proposition and Inference
to their Ground-Truths; into Denominations, Derivations and Languages, and into
all their Figures and Dialects; into the Resolution of Conscience-Cases, upon
all Casual and Emergent occasions; into the rich and wondrously various
Closets and the Spiritual Magazin of Mystical Divinity; into Councils,
Fathers, Statutes of Emperors, Records Utriusque Juris, and Manuscripts; into
all Annals and Histories, Ecclesiastical and profane; into the old Liturgies
of the Oriental and Occidentall Churches; into Things nova and vetera, new and
old; and indeed, into all the discovered and revealed Treasures of God, Nature
and Art; yea all the dismembered Monuments of the ancient Archives: without all
which, divine Truth cannot be honorably, majestically; and according to the
Crown, Dignity, and Splendor of it, presented and illustrated; and the
Gainsayers convinced: who. I say, when a divine Matter is justly discussed
after this profound, bottomsearching, and righteous Manner; are not able with
all their might, to utter the lest Atom of a wise word; but stand amazed as at
the sight of a strange Messenger from the other World, appearing in an
Air-borrow'd Body; and after long amazement and wonder, coming back to
themselves, retreit unto Texts of Scripture, which in the Authentical and
Original Copy they Understand not; and which, if they could interpret the
words, require oftentimes, as Helps from Humane Industry, (which, ordinary
Graces require and suppose) the Knowledge of Antiquity concerning the Sense of
the ancient Church; and the Knowledge of natural Sciences; to the
Interpretation of their Sense: (Extraordinary Graces of this kind, being never
given without their Mark or Witness, which is Gratia Miraculorum, the Grace of
Miracles* and public Exercises answering only to public Vocations in the same
Order?)

I conclude here: Scientia non habet inimicum praeter ignorantem: Science has
no Enemy but the Ignorant Man. And the Ignorant Man is an Enemy to Science:
because he is ignorant how useful, weighty, and worthy Science is: and as
Ignoti nulla Cupido, we desire not the Thing we know not so neither do we judge
of the unknown Thing: and: quemadmodum caecus non judicat de Coloribus, ita
nemo judicat de Artificio, vel Artifice, nisi Artifex; as the blind Man
judges not of Colors, so no man judges of Workmanship or of a Workman, but a
Workman.

Note: Let no man deceive you with vain Philosophy: that is: with Philosophy,
which vainly exalts it self against Divinity, or, against God and the Sacred
Mysteries; as the Philosophy of the old Philosophers exalted it self in the
Primitive Ages. But Learning in her proper place, is an Attendant upon
Divinity, and brings the various Goods and richest Materials of Egypt, to the
building of the Tabernacle, and the framing of the Vessels and Utensils
belonging to it; and there, deceives us not, as being, in a manner, Divine.

And when Mahomet threw sound Learning out of his unsound Religion; he threw
his Religion beyond all ordinary means of Truth-Discovery, and set God back to
his Principles, and first manner of Working by Miracles.

CHAP. LXXXXVIII.
I Return: and ty a knot upon the Posy of my whole Matter, with Inferences.
Whereof the first is. Let all Apostates be ashamed, that have not repented of
their Apostasy.

The Prophet meets us opportunely: Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my Psalm.
25. 1, 2, 3.
Soul. O my God, I trust in thee, let me not be ashamed: let not mine Enemies
Triumph over me. Yea, let none that wait on thee be ashamed, let them be
ashamed which Transgress without Cause: For, let them be ashamed which
Transgress: the Vulgar Edition Edit. vulg.
brings forth, Confundantur omnes ^niqua agentes, Let all be confounded with
shame (Confusion is the overflow of shame) who do unjust and unequal Things.
The fifth Edition of the Septuagint, digs it up out of the Hebrew: (...): V.
Editio 70. Senioru^.
Let all that Apostatize be ashamed. (Rabbi Saadias is within R. Saadias in
version^ Arabica.
sight.) Let them be ashamed of their vicissitudinary and interchangeable
Courses; and of their swerving from the divine Rule and Law.

There be many Hebrew Words, which signify a Thing sometimes, whereof
sometimes they signify the contrary: yet, we have Rules and Observations, by
the which we are heart-led to the right understanding of these Words in their
places.

But when a Man does now signify a Baptizer of Children, and now again, an
Anabaptist: we are only taught by Rule, that he moves irregularly.

It is undeniably true in Philosophy, of natural Motions: In omni ordinat a
Motione oportet virtutem secundi Movent is, a Movente primo deduci. In every
ordinate Motion, the virtue of the second Mover, must be deduced from the first
Mover.

In religious Motions; wherein we have, besides our first Mover, an Exemplar:
we should be moved by divine Grace, (which is the virtus motrix, divinely moving
virtue of the first Mover;) and according to divine Direction.

Now although divine Grace be invisible; yet the rule of divine Direction is
extant, and sensible: from which the Anabaptists (it is already made sure and
sinew-strong by proof) swerve and deviate: as, I fear, many of them do also
from the (...) of their own Hearts.

And as the Anabaptists, even so let the Presbyterians be ashamed; who have led
them in the Dance.

Some noise it, (I am dumb in this) that when the Presbyterians had pared,
rounded, and brought the Baptizing of Infants from the settled and immovable
Font to the moveable and unsettled Pue-Dish; the Anabaptist did quickly wring it
out of his Hands, and move it quite away.

Yea: one thought in a Dream, that he saw the Presbyterian come dancing in a
Mask, with his Pue-Dish in his Hands; and our Gib-Anabaptist (as round as a
Hoop) dancing to him, grapling with him, pulling it from him, and furiously
dashing it against the Ground.

But, ^e videar (...), lest I should seem to sell Dreams; I say waking, that
they have done like Things.

The Presbyterians have stamped and bissed away the Use and Virtue of the
Sacraments; the virtue of which, is essentially virtuous and edificatery to the
Church of God: The Presbyterians have unfather'd and renounced the Fathers: The
Presbyterians have unprayer'd and rejected the Lords Prayer: which, (it is known
to the Readers of the Jewish Writers) our Vide Seder. Tephill. Lusitan. p. 115.
Sepher Hammussar, 49. 1. Comm. in Pirk. Auoth fol. 24. Seph. Hammussar. 9. 12
Savior, the divine and Eternal Wisdom, gathered and borrowed (as
represented to him by divine Light and Infusion) out of the old Elders and
Rabbis; that he might commend and dignifie the Authority of Ecclesiastical
Writers, and Prayer-Makers: (I could ride a great circuit here.) And the
Anabaptists have followed them at the Heels with a Trip.

Let them therefore, be again ashamed; because they have followed the unruly
Presbyterians, when they should have followed the Rule.

And let them learn from a Learner; That Man, above his natural End and the
Law of Nature corresponding with it, has a supernatural End, and a
supernatural Law, by which the Law that is natural is perfected, and to which
he should be conformable in natural and Supernatural Things: and whereas
humane Laws which are made in conformity to the Law of Nature, and by the
Light of Nature, tend, and are extended only to the regulating of outward
Actions, and rendering the Agent punishable in consideration of their
exorbitancies: he should now rule his very Thoughts, and compose the first
Motions of his erring Heart, according to the Divine Law and Rule.

CHAP. LXXXXIX.
GOD threatened his People then living Harlot-like: and will Osee. 2. 9.
recover my wool and my flax given to cover her nakedness. The Vulgar Interp.
vulgat.
Latin Adopts: Et liberabo lanam meam and linum meum; and I will set free my
wool and my flax.

God made all things for his Glory and Service: and when a Thing is diverted
from this End; it is captivated, and held in Captivity.

In an excellent Manner, God has Ordained Scripture and his revealed Will, for
our Edification in the Work of his Worship and Glory: Which revealed Will, if
preverted, and wrought as Wax, to men's Ends; falls besides this divine End, and
is detained in Captivity: And God will, in his Time set it free: in which Time,
the nakedness and selfe-ends of Heretics shall be discovered, to the shame of
such as cover their known Ignorance and miserable nakedness with God's Holy
Covering.

Thus the good Meats and Drinks, being God's blessed creatures, which are
greedily devoured by wicked Men; have a strong reluctance: because they shall
now be maligned and tainted, in regard that in all Nutrition there is Conversio
Alimenti in Substantiam Aliti, A Conversion of the Aliment into the Substance
of the Thing nourished by it: and because they are carried away by violence,
for the support of those who are in the field and in arms against God.

Much more have Scriptures a reluctance, when abused by Heretics: because they
are perverted to heretical Senses: and because they are profanely handled as
Arms against God.

It is the Language of St Paul: The earnest expectation of the Creature Romans 8.
19.
waits, etc. Where the Original sanctifies: (...): Text. Glac.
that is: such an expectation as Men express by standing upright, holding up
the Head, stretching out the neck, and looking earnestly and anxiously for the
Thing expected. So, in a manner, do the Scriptures expect the coming of
Christ: looking, as it were toward the East, and crying: Come O blessed Author
of Scriptures; glorify thy self, deliver us, and shame our naked, ignorant
and profane Abusers. Amen. Even so come Lord Apoc. 22. 20.
Jesus.

The Metaphysitians have well said: Perfectio se tenet ex part Formae:
Perfection arises from the essential Form: the Matter being incomplete and
imperfect, and perfected by the Form.

The Reason is: Forma dat esse Rei: the Form gives the Being.

Yea: As the Form is, so is the Action: the Action following the Form, and
being proportioned to it. For: Unumquodque sicut est, operatur: Every Thing
Acts or Works as it is.

And the more simple Elements, are the more active and perfect; as having the
more Form: and therefore, the Heavenly Bodies are more perfect and active than
the Elements.

Amongst knowing Things, those have more knowledge and activity; the Forms of
which are more elevated from the Matter.

Of Men, those are more active and knowing; whose Souls are more exalted above
their bodily Matters, and material Things.

If the Souls of these Anabaptists, immers't into their Bodies; were extracted
from the lees, and set upright, and could, as an active Mistress, lady it over
their Bodies, and over external Things attending upon them; as, the favor and
applause of Ignorant Men, etc. They would walk more innocently, sincerely,
perfectly; and not unsoul and dispirit Scripture and the Law of God as they do.

Who, if they expect to discover the pure will of God, by making and hewing
their own wilful way through the Law of God, and against the propensity of his
Word; may Vide Albert. de Saxon. l. 3. Physic. q. 6. art. 62. Conclus. 3.
Menduz. Virid lib. 4. Problem. 47.
with more Prudence expect until the Air be found navigable; and they be able
to sail in a Ship upon the Convexity thereof, toward Heaven; as Men sail at
Sea, when they discover new Stars.

CHAP. C.
THE second Inference is. Let those whom God strengthens against these and
such his Enemies, rejoice in God their strength, and be confident of his future
Mercy.

Many there be which say of my Psalm. 3. 2, 3*
Soul, says holy David, There is no help for him in God* Selah. But thou, O
Lord, art a shield for me (or, about me:) my Glory, and the lifter up of mine
Head. The Vulgar lifts it up: Edit vulg.
Multi dicunt Animae meae, Non est Salus ipsi in Deo ejus: Many say unto my
soul, There is no help for him in his God. The Hebrew Text senses it: non
emnimodo salus ei: There is no Text. Hebr.
help for him, though he should search all manner of ways.

It was then a Proverb, say the Rabbis, amongst David's Enemies; Ei qui
furatus est ovem, and occidit Rabbini in hunc locum.
Pastorem, poterit esse Salvatio? Can there be any Salvation for him that has
stolen away the Sheep, (Bethsabe,) and killed the Shepherd, (Uriah?)

And so the Vulgar Anabaptists have exclamed: Can he be saved that has stolen
away the Sheep, and outsputed the Shepherd, and worried him out of Breath? They
should have said: fairly disputed down the Shepherd.

The intermingling of earnest and zealous Expressions, which the conquered,
Commanded, Captive-led, and Duke-devoted Sisters have called worrying, was an
Act of compliance with the Apostle, saying, warn them that are unruly: or, as
the Vulgar, Corripite inquietos, use Corruption 1 The^. 5. 1^. V^rs^^ Vulgat.
Text. Grac.
toward them that are unquiet: or, as the Original, (...), sharply reprehend
them that are inord^nate or disorderly.

And Selah justly takes up the middle Place in the Prophet. For: it is a Matter
of high Meditation: And therefore, the Singers in the Temple, staid upon the
word by quavering it, that they and the Hearers might there meditate: or: if we
take up the word from a Root, signifying Marinus in Lexico.
exaltavit, elevavit, he has lifted up, because in the Sentence to which,
Selah was added, the Singers exalted and lifted up their voices; I shall exalt
and lift up my voice and Heart, and Sing to God in whom I rejoice and Triumph,
(the Music answering to me;) Many there be which say of my Soul, etc. And
recover my Spirit, and sing a new Song; mine eyes being fixed upon Heaven: By
this I Psalm. 41. 11.
know that thou favourest me: Because mine Enemy does not Triumph over me: yea:
Sing it over again in the Vulgar Interpretation: In hoc cognovi Interp. vulgat.
quoniam voluisti me, etc. In this I know that thou have willed me with a good
and been volent will toward me, etc.

The proud Boasters are thrown to the Ground, and God has wrought a Change:
Let there be therefore, a Change of the Song, and an interchange in the
Singing: as there was amongst the Jews: (which is the Reason that Selah is
translated (...) by the Septuagint, Symmachus and Theodotion; Vide S. Hieron.
in Hab. 3. 3. Sept. Sym. Theodo^. in Psalmis. Suid. in voce (...).
and that Suidas interprets (...) vicissitudinem Canendi, the vicissitude of
singing.)

And rightly may I sing and rejoice in Spirit: because, had God laid me under
this Man of the Tub; it had begot such a festival Day and rejoicing in the
Flesh, amongst his Brethren and Sisters, that the very Barn-Birds of the Night,
would have come abroad in the Day, and sung to them in their merry Cups,
Hoop-Holiday.

But as, When the Sun rises here, the Earth is fairly shown, while the Stars
are hidden from us; and in the setting of the Sun, when the Earth is hidden,
the Stars appear to us: So let the God of Heaven speak peace to my Soul in the
Way of his Saints; howsoever these dismal people upon Earth, shall noise it in
my Ears,

CHAP. CI.
YET, I shall never desire to Triumph over them in their Destruction: though
Anabaptists have been severely punished by the most religious and most
honorable Courts of Judicature: As, at Vienna: Where Gastius, l. 1. de
Anabaptistarum Erroribus.
they were made sure, one to another, with the obligation of Ropes, and forced
to pull, the one the other after him, into the Water, Until they were all
drowned: that as the one had secretly drawn the other with the Cords of Vanity,
and with sin as with Cartropes, to a rebaptizing; so the one should likewise
draw publicly the other, by the Ropes of Justice, to a drowning: The wise
Magistrate reflecting upon the old Maxim of Justice, Quo quis peccat, eo
puniatur, In what one Sins, let him be punished* that his punishment may fall
square to his Sin:

And at Munster, where the Bodies of John of Leyden, a Tailor, (who was
fifteen-strong in wives,) and of Cnipperdoling the Tailor's Prophet, and one
more of their Complotters, after their Execution, were suspended in the Air, in
Iron Cages, upon the steeple of the Church, called by the Name of St Lambert,
being the highest in Munster: (these Examples are both recounted by Dr Featly:)
which perhaps, Dr Featly in his Dipper dipped.
is the Reason of their calling Churches Steeple Houses.

But I am no Man of Bloods, as the Hebrew Phrase is: neither will I bebloody my
Heart with such Thoughts; lest I should, in respect of desire, be a Member of
the City, which the Hebrew Text calls the City of Bloods; and to the which, a
See Nahum 3. 1. Text. Hebr.
Woe is pronounced, as to a grievous Offender.

Intruth: I find it checkered in my Ordination, that I may not yield any
Concurrence to the shedding of Blood; and I find it inessentiated into God,
that he delights in Mercy: Mic. 7. 18.
And when I read the Histories of these Children of Cain and Men of Bloods; I
find that the final Result, is Horror and horrible Desperation.

One Example is like the Pillar of Salt, and able to season a reasonable Man.
Charles the ninth King of France, after the Parisian Massacre, Thuanus in Hist.
was infested with ghastly and horrible Apparitions, and with the waking and
working of his troubled Fancy; insomuch that his Musicians could not play him
asleep, nor his Physicians ease him, nor his Divines appease him.

And therefore, I shall not help, remote aut proxime, remotely, or nearly, to
the Destruction of any Man; or take the way whither all the ways role in
Arnoldus Meshovius: Indigne Vide Arnoldum M^shovium in Historia Anabaptista^um.
Baptizatur quise Baptizat secundo, Baptismo Fluminis: Indignissine a Deo
facit; nec ab eo Baptizatur Baptismo Flaminis: Et dignus est qui ab Homine
Baptizetur tertio, Baptismo Sanguinis. The mere English Man shall not
understand it by me, as being, in this Turn of the Face, a pure Independent.

My Conglobation, is this only: The Anabaptists were first washed, when they
were Baptized being Infants; They were washed again, when being well-Aged, they
were ill-Baptized the second Time; And I humbly conceive, that I have here,
well and thoroughly washed them once more, in their latter Age. And there is the
last gripe of my Rigor: Though (I am sorry to say it) the ordinary Anabaptists
speak nothing but Fire, Halters and Puniards, to all them that endeavor, in
the trying of all Things, to try them and their Opinions.

Thus I only desire, that they be fairly convinced of their foul Errors by
Argument: and that we may rejoice in God over them as he is the Teacher and
Converter of Souls.

Yet we seldom hear of any converted, and received into the Church Jure
postliminio, after their heretical Absence and Captivity.

Because the pertinacious and obstinate Person, or, the Person possessed with
prejudice; may take the deaf Man by the Hand, and go with him to a Sermon or
Disputation; and they shall profit alike.

(And I now chiefly rejoice in God, as he is the blessed Conserver of others
from falling.)

The Anabaptist has a resolute mind to sleep in his erroneous opinion: and
Thunder shall not wake him. He is like the Lethargick Person in St Austin:
Recedite a me, S. Aug. Sermon. 59. de verbis Domini secundum Joannem:
ait lethargicus Quare? dormire volo. Sed illi: Morieris. Inde ille amore
Somni, Mori volo respondet: Depart ye from me, says he that is sick of a
Lethargy. Why? I will sleep. His Friends answer him: Then you will die. He for
the love of sleep, replies, I will die. Nihil enim facile persuadetur invitis,
Cicero Orat. pro Quinctio.
as the Orator: Nothing is easily dropped by persuasion, into them that are
unwilling.

This ordinarily is the Fault of dull and gross Natures; in which the
understanding is weak, and unfurnished of Knowledge: and therefore, the Will
strong, and unknowingly determined.

CHAP. CII.
THE third Inference is. Their Holds being daily beaten down, and their Holes
dug up: let them fall down before God, and yield themselves up into the
Hands of his Church.

It is in the minds of some People, as it is in our Eyes, (and Ears.) We learn
in our Optics, that the Thing which the Eye discerns by a refracted Beam, it
apprehends to be in a different place from that wherein it is. The
Understandings of People broken from the Vine, behold the Truths of God, as it
were with refractions: because they do not look by a direct and proper Light
upon them; but with a Beam of Nature, even refracted with Self-conceit,
Passion, and Obstinacy; and such will never yield.

If all the ordinary Conveyances of Light in a Room, be stopped and obstructed,
and Light has no entrance but through a small Glass; all that is, or is done
abroad in the view or Eye of that Glass, will appear in the Room, after a
strange and singular Manner.

He that would see the Truths of God, being now hid from him; must shut his
earthy Senses, and open his Understanding toward Heaven. Si exterior Evagatio
Sensus S. Greg. l. 30. Moral. cap. 9.
clauditur, interior Sensus aperitur; says Gregory the great: If the outward
Sense be shut and wander not abroad, the inward Sense is opened.

Now the Hearts of Selfe-moving and Selfe-determined People, are so infixed and
immudded into received Doctrines; that although they hear them evacuated by
Reason, yet still they fancy themselves to hear some Voice from Heaven speaking
for them above what has or can be said against them by Men upon Earth.

Which voice I cannot compare more fitly to any Thing, than to the feigned
Music and Pythagorean Harmony of the Spheres: Of the which, Plutarch descants,
that if a Plut. in Symposio.
Man were an Inhabitant in the Moon, he might conveniently hear it: And
concerning which, Philo the Philo Judaeus in l. de Somni^s.
Jew soberly proposes, that if we could be privileged to hear it, we should
need neither Meat nor Drink, but live easily by feeding at the still Organs of
our Ears: and that Moses in the Mount* received no Sustenting and alimental
Substance, forty days and forty Nights, by the Mouth; because he was Ear-fed
with the Melody of the Heavens: Some People fancying a noise from Heaven,
beyond the Note-reach of what can be said by Mortals.

Prostratus aliquando, aliquando de genu pugno: I fight sometimes, being
Prostrated on the Ground; and sometimes upon my knees.

May God in Mercy come down, and speak to their Souls, and break down this
idle Card-Fabrick of their Fancy, as their Clay-Castle Arguments are daily
beaten down.

(I should grant, if I were urged to it, that if we could hear and see the best
Things; the Senses of Smelling, Tasting, and Touching, being the more gross
and Earthy; which God has provided to be seen and heard: we should
bewondrously transported by them; because the Senses of Seeing and Hearing are
most proportioned to accidental Blessedness: yet, these Things would be real
not imaginary, as Blessedness is not imaginary, but real.)

And why are these infatuated, and Ignis-Fatuus* led People so Fancystrong in
their Thoughts? Because they were Sin-strong in their Actions.

These new-Baptized and blanched Persons, do not remember the Primitive
tasting of Milk in the Ceremonies of Baptism: Neither do they know, that blind
Homer seeingly named, according to the report of Clemens Alexandrinus, innocent
S Clem. Alex. lib. 1 Paedag. 6
and just Men, (...), Eaters of Milk. Their lives are not like those ancient
Lamps, that were called perpetual, because they were found continually burning.

They talk too much of white Powder, and of doing mischief without noise, and
in the dark.

Three Jewels I wish I could have transported with me, from Rome into England,
and our Universities: School Divinity, Mystical Divinity, and Case-of
Conscience-Doctrine: the Defect of which, has rendered the Leaders of these
wretched and leaden People, wretchedly deficient, and altogether sinking within
themselves.

They should make better and stronger use of their strong Imagination; as the
Mystical Divines have taught, after these presentiments of Theologi Mystici.
School Divinity.

The Cognoscitive Powers, are in us threefold: the external Senses, the
internal Senses, and the intellective Power. With our external Senses, we
gather and gain the Knowledge of Singulars only; and those must also be both
sensible and present: these Senses not intermedling either in absent Things, or
Spiritual Things, or Things Universal. With our internal Senses, we attain
to the Knowledge even of Things absent; if they be neither Universal nor
Spiritual, but singular and sensible. With our intellective Power* we reap the
Knowledge of Universals and Singulars, of Things absent and present; be they
material and sersible, or spiritual and purely intelligible. Only: the
Understanding Understands not without help. For, in the Body; it knows not a
Spiritual Thing by a Proper Species, but by a strange-one, taken from a Thing
that is material and sensible: And it. Understands not Universals reduced to
Singulars, but by the succor and help of the interior Senses; nor present
Things, as really present: but helped from the Senses without. Moreover:
Amongst the internal Senses, there is a Sense commonly called Sensus Communis,
Common Sense; which discernes the Objects of all the five outward Senses; and
aided by which, our Imagination can Imagine that it sees, hears, smells, tastes,
touches, even absent Things, and make them present many ways.

Let these Fancy-walkers, besides their pretended understanding of
Spirit-Affairs; behold the Actions of Christ, described in Scripture, and
translated out of Scripture into this Treatise; let them hear him speak as he
speaks in Scripture, and here: let their inward Imaginations set him exactly
before their outward Senses; that their Senses, both inward and outward may
help, according to their Offices, in the conveyance of him to their Souls; and
he may be strong and lively, both in their Souls and Senses.

CHAP. CIII.
BUT let us all be silent while Scripture speaks. Ephraim also is Osee 7. 11.
like a silly Dove without Heart. The Vulgar: Et factus est Ephraim Lectio vulg.
quasi Columba seducta non habens Cor: And Ephraim is made as a seduced Dove
not having a Heart: that is: not having Prudence, or Understanding. For silly
and seduced, the Hebrew Text allows Potha, which Text. Hebr.
is, easy to be bent, Seduced, wryed, turned any way. The Septuagint (...),
Sept.
unwise; or, as Isidor Pelusiot distills it, mad. Aquila and Symmachus: decepta,
Isid. Pelus. Aq Sym. Editio. Tigurina.
deceived. Leo Hebraeus, or the tigurin Bibles: stolida, foolish: because the
Dove foolishly suffers her self to be deceived, and her young to be taken. The
Syriack Interpreter: Syrus Interp.
Factus est Ephraim, quasi Columba Puella; as a Girl Dove. The Arabic Arab.
Alex.
of Alexandria: Factus est Ephraim ut Aves insipientes, and non est illi
Intellige^tia: Ephraim is become as the u^wise Birds, and there is no
Understanding in Ephraim. The Arabic of Antioch: Arab. Antioch.
Factus est Ephraim sicut Columbae; non habens intellectum neque Cor: Ephraim
is made as the Doves; not having understanding nor Heart.

Now the Heart and Understanding of the Matter, lies in the Reason why Ephraim
was like a silly Dove, a seduced Dove, a Dove easily bent any way, a^ unwise
Dove, a mad Dove, a deceived Dove, a foolish Dove, a girl Dove; like the unwise
Birds* and like the Doves; insomuch, that if any Dove or Bird be more Unwise
then the other Birds or Doves, Ephraim is like it.

This Reason is: The Ephramites did offer their Children to Moloch: and though
they saw them destroyed, yet because they were diverted by Music from hearing
their outcries in their Consumption by fire; still they came with their
laughing Children to Moloch. And the silly tame Dove, filled with a prolificall
Virtue, lays her Eggs, and brings up her young in a known place; and though
she finds them taken away, and finds that they cannot be found; yet still she
lays her other Eggs, and hatches her other Young, in the same place.

And the Parents of Children amongst the Anabaptists, hear from the
Pulpit-Raven, a noise of words devoutly champed; and themselves whiningly
produced before God, and called poor Cre-a-tures; with which they are so
minstrel-fooll'd and Taber-Catch't by the Ears, that they neglect their
miserable Children, though they see them die every day without Baptism, which
Christ so vehemently commends and lays home to us; and though they see their
Babell-Towred Arguments demolished.

(Let not our Presbyterian mint it in his Thoughts, that he is the only
Tongue-Man, the only Singing-Master of the Pulpet. The Anabaptist can tone it
exactly, and utter his Impurities to a Tune as pure and heavenly, as the most
tinkling-ton'd Presbyters.)

It is not exempted from sacred Mystery: that these are set and sorted together
as unclean Creatures, or Cre-atures: The little Owl and the Cormorant, Lev. 11.
17.
and the great Owl. The little Owl resembles the Unbaptized Child: the great
Owl is the Anabaptist-Parent: And Corvus Marinus, the Cormorant betwixt them,
is the wide-throated Preacher, that has divided the Child from the Parent,
dives into them, and swallows their Souls.

You question it: What shall become of Children dying without Baptism? I
answer: I cannot either damn them or save them: and therefore, I referr them to
the Divine Providence, and to the necessary Consequences of Scripture-Sentences.

But it will not be refractory to the Matter here; if I relate the Opinions of
Catharinus and Salmeron. 2 Pet. 3. 13. Catharinus and Salmeron in hunc Petri
locum.
These Authors in their Comments upon the Text: We according to his promise,
look for new Heavens and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness: give
their Cogitations blended into one, after this manner: That, after the
Judgement-Day, these Children shall inhabit this new Earth, refined, and
flourishing as the old terrestrial Paradise; and there, have the fullest and
most vivid natural Use of humane Reason, and of their Senses* with all
Perfections inward and outward, agreeable to the Nature of Man in a r^fined
Condition: and be perfected in the Knowledge of natural Things; and enjoy the
Visitations and Revelations of Angels; and love God above all Things, as found,
by natural indagation, in his Creatures, and admire, and praise him: and that
the loss of the Beatificall Vision, shall not afflict or molest them; because
they did not lose it by their own fault and offense of God. Thus these: and
more tolerably then the Chiliasts.

CHAP. CIIII.
IN God's Name; O ye Anabaptist-Parents, presume not upon the new direction of
your private Illuminations in the public Matters of Faith: but be better
taught.

The English Bible exalts: for I Psalm. 71. v. 15, 16.
know not the numbers thereof* (thereof, if we look into the Original, is not
thereof.) I will go in the strength of the Lord God. The Vulgar: Edit. vulg.
Quoniam non cognovi literaturam, Sept.
( the Septuagint, (...),) introibo in potentias Domini: Because I have not
known literature, letters, or learning, I will enter into the strengths of God.

This Text, if there were not an Original Text above and beyond it; would
frustrate or impare Learning, and all ordinary Means and Helps; and urge an
extraordinary Suppliance of them in ordinary and quotidian Vocations and
Matters, from the Strength of God.

The Hebrew Word, from which the Seventy Interpreters and the Author of the
Vulgar Edition have extracted Learning or Literature; is Text. Hebr.
siphrot: that is: numbers, or Ciphers, (which being added to numbers in
Arithmetic, make them grow;) as the Rabbis and Symmachus unbind Rabbini.
Symmach. S. Aug. S Chrysostom. Arnob. in in Psalmos. Psalteriu^ Romanum*
and open the word. St Austin, St Chrysostom, and Arnobius read (...),
negotiationem, (this Word is retained in the Roman Psalter*) negotiation; which
requires numbers and ciphers to the casting of Accounts.

And such Literature or Learning, as involving the continual employment and
business of the World; is a grand impediment to the manuduction and carrying
on of our Soul in the Strength of God, or, in our Spiritual Commerce and
traffic with God, wherein his Strength is most excellently manifested to us.

Circumcise therefore the foreskin Deuteronomy. ^^. 16. Sept.
of your Heart, and be no more stiffnecked. The Septuagint (...), the hardness
of your Heart: these aim at the Circumcision of the obdurate will. The Chaldee
Paraphrast; Chaldaeus Paraphrastes.
insipientiam Cordis vestri, the foolishness of your Heart: he wisely directs
his arrow toward the Circumcision of the imperfect Understanding: Perfection
and imperfection, wisdom and Folly, as Contraries, attending upon the same
Power.

And if, O Parent, thou do acknowledge thy weakness; and thereby open the
Door: the Lord thy God will Circumcise thine Heart. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Sept.
The Septuagint: (...), will purge it about: that is: purge it of intellectual
Errors and Imperfections, and ^f all vicious and carnal Affections of the
Will: He will digg about it, and dung it; even he will do it, that appeared,
after his resurrection, to Mary Magdalen, like a Gardener. Jo. 20. 15.


Come to their Souls, O thou Heavenly Gardener; that being risen with thee,
they may raise their Infants to thee, by thine Ordinance,

I have not tempted God by this Prayer. Because Christ delights in the
Innocence of Children; as exhorting us to the Imitation of them in respect of
their Innocence, that he might delight in us. And if he delights in the lesser
Perfection, he would much more delight in the greater.

I will not omit here, that the Innocence of Children is the most lively
representation upon Earth, of Adam's Innocence: and that if Adam had continued
in his Innocence, and remained harmless as Children; Christ even then, as
many Choice-ones amongst the Fathers and Divines have left recorded, would have
been incarnate:

First: because as according to the present Order of Things, he was principally
intended in the Creation of the World, he being the most noble and principal
Thing in the whole Order as it issues and slows from God; so in a different
Condition of this present Order; Love which was the Motive of his actual
Coming, might, and, it is most Likely, would have moved him to Humanation,
though his Passion should hove been incompatible and inconsistent with the
Circumstances.

Secondly: because deliciaeejus esse cum Filiis Hominum, it is his delight to
be with the Sons of Men; when they are holy as he is holy; and when they are as
Children, innocent: And he feeds among the Lilies: and Cant. 6. 3
Mankind should then have been Lilie-white:

Thirdly: because as it was now requisite, that the Chiefe-Head and Captain
should be, after some manner, Visible, in respect of the Visible and militant
Church; and in respect of the Triumphant and invisible Church, after some
manner, invisible: So likewise would it then have been as requisite.

And does not Christ now delight to dwell Spiritually in little Infants?

CHAP. CV.
THE fourth Inference is. Let them begin with a good and moral Deportment.

The Physicians give amongst us, out of Hippocrates, Galen, and others, Morbos
complicatos dissicillime Curari, that of complicated Diseases the Cure is most
difficult: And then they say, that if we break the Knot, and subdue the
malignity of one, or some; the rest will not be subdued uneasily.

There is a bed of Snakes in corrupt Hearts, the complication whereof is
wonderful: these must be unbound, unfolded, and unbedded. If this be done by
bruising the heads of some, and the combination be dissolved; they will be soon
all dispersed, and put to slight: And the disposlessed and freed Persons will
then be like the Serpent, in Wisdom, not in carrying and concealing Poison
under the fair Picture of a speckled skin; and like the Sun, in heating and
giving light, not in producing contraries, as, in hardening and melting,
generating and corrupting, producing sweetness and sowernesse; though it is
admirable in the Sun, that it does all these Uno eodemque modo, by heating, not
by cooling and heating. They will not produce contraries, or a contrary
appearance.

Pa^lus Fagius, a Proselyte from Paulus Fagius Not. ad Paraph. Chald. Deuteronomy. 17.
the Jews to us, relates of them, that they delight only in the bark and
outside of Religion; which he plains to us, in some particulars: asserting,
that they set their Bible above all their other Books; that they touch it not
with unwashed hands; that they kiss it, as often as they open it, or shut it;
that they sit not upon any form or seat, whereo^ the Bible is laid; that if
they see the Bible fail to the ground, they devote a day of Expiation to
fasting; (Of this also Joannes Isaac.) Joannes Isaac in Responsione ad Libros
Lindani de Optimo Genere interpretandi Scripturas.


But, says Fagius, they little mind a serious application of their Hearts and
Minds to the Things which the Bible chiefly teaches; as, to Faith, Charity,
Justice, Truth, Meekness, Innocence of Life, and the other Things wherein
Solid Piety consists; concerning which they are not anxious or troubled; but
stick still in the bark or Ceremony. Thus he, of the Jews, from which he came:
and thus I, of the People, to which: Caetera puduit scribere.

Now let the Anabaptists (Men and Women) cleanse their profane Mouths of
uncharitable Words and Wishes, and of Unchristian Accusations; and wash their
hands in Innoc^ncy and then, all modest appearances in Religion, will grow
well, If well roo^ed.

The School-Divines lesson us, Scholastici. Vide D. Tho. 1. 2. q. 73. a. 1. ad
1.
that although one imperfect Virtue may have place in us, without an other; yet
Virtues in statu perfecto, being wholly and perfectly had, are connexed: and
that he who has one whole Vice with all it is additaments, has all vices; and
if he does not act them, the reason is couchant in the defect of Circumstances.

These Professors must therefore endeavor, that Virtues be rooted in them, and
that Vices be supplanted and extirpated.

The Authors that write of Husbandry Varro and Columella.
and Planting, Plant in their Books, that if one engrave a word or Character
upon a sound Almond, and return it into the shell, closing and binding it up,
and then setting it: all the fruit which the Tree produces, will show the same
Character or word engraven on it.

They do not observe the best Method who begin only with the exterior Man,
and the superscription of Carriage.

We should regulate our selves according to the Method observed Gal. 2. 20.
by St Paul, who says: Vivit in me Christ us, Christ lives in me: and, the
Heart being the Fountain of Life and Motion, our Carriage will be carried on by
Christ, and live by the Life of Christ living in us.

And because Rectum est Norma sui and obliqui, A right Thing is the Rule of it
self, and of that which is crooked: the right Heart will regulate us both
inwardly and outwardly; and the outward Face of Prevarication, acquired by
Evil Habits and Customs, and left by them; now laid to this inward Rule, will
appear crooked, and be quickly defaced by Prudence, as being the Major-Domo in
God's Building; and the Virtue, that pulls forth omnes Radicum fibras, all the
Root-threds of Vices, and picks the Thorn out of the Conscience.

CHAP. CVI.
WHEN Fire is put to the Wood, it first works upon it, and strives against the
mo^sture and hardness of it, until having conquered the radical resistance
which the wood can make, it ascends in a tall and great Flame; as it the Fire
would leave the wood, and be joined with it is Element: this being the only
chief Reason, that leads us to believe there is an Element of Fire in the
uppermost parts of the Air. So when the holy Spirit of God, works upon our
moist flesh and hard Hearts, there is much struggling for a while; and the aim
of the Spirit, is, that the Soul now i^flamed, may be drawn upwards, and set
above the Body. When therefore, by the puissant strength of God's holy Spirit,
it is crowned with Victory, and enthroned upon the Body; it neglects the Body,
(...) now tending to Consumption and Ashes, and turns the point of it is Spirit
altogether toward Heaven, as waiting for a blessed Change and Separation.

O most Unchangeable God, work this Work of Charge, upon the Hearts of the
Anabaptists: that they being Conquered by thy Spirit, their Spirits may look
upwards, and ascend to thee in the bright flames of perfect Charity.

Gideon gave to his Soldiers, Judge. 7.
Trumpets, Pitchers, and Lamps within the Pitchers: who, when they came to the
Camp of their Enemies, blew the Trumpets, brake the Pitchers, and held the
Lamps in their Hands.

If we profess for Christ, as they professed for Gideon, by the blowing of
their Trumpets; and if, when we come to the whole Camp of our Enemies, after
that our Pitcher-Bodies are broken by death; our Lamps (our Souls) appear
burning with true Charity, (Faith being evacuated:) we shall go Conquerours.

Men are diseased in their Bodies: and they presently send in all have for the
most expert Physician. Men are disquieted in the Possession of their Goods: and
themselves presently run in all have to the most cunning Lawyers. Men are
troubled and to^n in their Souls, and their Consciences are discomposed: and no
Man runs or sends, that unerring Science may be brought and applied to
Conscience, and the true Seal of God to the Soul. Therefore, Men love their
Bodies and Goods, more than their Souls and God.

There are two sorts of People amongst us, that are deaf to Goodness, and
almost irrecoverably and implacably wicked: A kind of scatter-brain'd.
phreneticall, scandalousliv'd, sulphurous, and plainly Gunpowder-Papist; and a
mad ranting Atheist, that questions the being of God, of the Angels, of the
Soul, of Heaven, of Hell; and indeed, questions all the Articles of all the
first Creeds; the Apostolical Creed, the Nicen Creed, St Athanasius his Creed,
and the Creed of Constantinople: (to whom we may reduce, as their Sisters and
Consorts, those Bubbles of the feminine sort, that spend their days in jollity
and wantonness, and repent in Sack, and not in Sackcloth.)

These two sorts often revoke Alexander Crinitus l. de ^sta Disciplina.
into my mind: who commanded that the two notorious Rogues which infested his
People, should whip and scourge one the other out of his Dominions: ut alter
alterum fugeret, alter fugaret alterum, to the end the one might fly from the
other, and the other put this one to flight; and so, he and his People might in
a good hour be rid of them both: Yea: These (the women being added) renew in my
memory him in the Comedy, that had three bad Ignoramus and Dulman.
Wives, of the which he said, Duas Cacodaemoni darem, ^a lege, ut abriperet
tertiam, I would give two to the Devil, on condition, that he would come and
fetch away the third. But I will not be so merry in a Tragical Business, nor
so vainly witty in Earnest.

Yet I earnestly and in earnest, desire of God, the removal of the Devil's
sworn Instruments, even by Justice, if they have sinned away all Mercy. No Man
pities the Devil as no Man pities a wounded Dragon, though he groans. And
Serpens, says Albertus, cum Serpentem devorat, Albertus Magnus.
sit Draco: As the young Serpent devouring an old Serpent, becomes a Dragon; so
the old Serpent devouring a young Serpent grows into a Dragon also.

Now I return to you, O Anabaptists. May the Spirit of Truth enter into your
Hearts. Be it unto your Souls, as I wish to my own. Remember: that the most
excellent Signs of our Predestination are; If we are joined in
Spirit-Communion with the People of God: If we have the Bowels and Works of
Charity, Mercy, Clemency: If no sin rules and commands in us: If there shine in
our Lives, many remarkable, extraordinary, and heroical Acts of Virtue: If we
are purged and purified by Afflictions; and rejoice in them: If we be resigned
to the will of God in his Word; and it be not in our desires, to pull him out
of his w^rd after our wills: the Contraries whereof, if not contraried by us,
are the Signs of our Reprobation.

If ye censure me, to have thinned my Ink with the spirit of wormwood: I pray
you, let me be excused. Because the Fathers and holy Writers, St Cyprian, St
Hierom, Russinus, St Austin, St Athanasius, St Chrysostom, St Gregory
Nazianzen, St Hilary, St Prosper, Optatus Milevitanus, St Bernard, Salvianus,
and others, though otherwise meek-carriaged; have taught me by their Examples,
to be fervorous, vehement, and high-strained, in the Defense of God's Truth,
(be it Veritas Doctrinae, aut Veritas Vitae, Truth of Doctrine, or Truth of
Life,) against obstinate Heretics and Sinners. The Grace of Conversion, be
with you all.

CHAP. CVII.
THE fifth Inference is. Let this Defense of Infant Baptism, as God's
Instrument, hammer us into steadfastness of Faith.

And God said, says Moses, Let there Genesis 1. 6
be a Firmament in the midst of the waters. The Hebrew Word signifying Text.
Hebr.
Firmament, is Rachiagh; the Root of which being Raka, as St Hierom S. Hieron.
in qq. H^braicis.
witnesses, is in strict Sense, Expandere, distendere, and distendendo
Firm^re, to stretch out, and to firm and consolidate in expansion, a Thing
which was sluid and rare, as the Matter of the Heavens was; these being made of
water.

Oleaster, Cajetanus, and Pagninus Oleast. C^ jet. P^g^. iv Genesin.
Understand an expansion or extension, instar extension is quae sit in lamina
Malleorum ictibus diducta atque expansa, like the extension caused in a Plate
beaten with Iron Hammers.

Ye must be beaten into solidity and stabiliment and a very F^^mament, in the
midst of these troubled and moving waters: the Firmament being called also
(...) by the Septuagint, Sept.
and by the Latins, Firmamentum, quia firmatur, because it is made firm and
solid, and firms other Things adjoining to it.

The Negroes that are Diverse for Pearls in the West Indies, and walk under
Water, feel no weight or Burden: because Grave non gravidat in suo Centro,
Heavy is not Heavy in it is proper and Original place. The Sea-Waters take
their tumultuous Courses, and rebound above and about them; whilst they seek
in the bottom, earnestly for Jewels.

O thou pious Heart; notwithstanding all the disorderly motions of Heresy,
round, and round, and round about thee; do thou earnestly gather in the bottom,
the Spirit-Jewels of God's holy Truth.

In the beginning of the Creation: Genesis 1. 2.
the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters: which, for the honor of
the Spirit, were not said to be Cursed. The Vulgar: Spiritus Domini Interp.
vulgat.
ferebatur super aquas, the Spirit of God was carried upon the Waters. So also
the Septuag^nt: (...), was Sept. Text. Hebr.
born or carried. The Original Word is, Mo^akepheth, incubabat more Avis, sat
brooding as a Dove or Bird S. Hieron. in qq. H^br. in Gem sin. Cilix Diodor. in
Cent.
upon her Eggs: to the which, Cilix Diodorus accords, attesting that the Hebrew
word signifies (...)

And this holy Spirit, though he brooded upon the Waters, did not Effect, that
the World should be altogether uncrring in it is Productions; but sometimes
Monsters, being the Vide Arist. 2. Physic. Text. 82.
Sins of Nature, are produced, against the particular Course and rightnesse of
Nature: which Monsters notwithstanding, do not so prevail, that Nature is
Universally deficient: she indefatagably working agreeably to kinds and
Species, and according to Particulars for the most part ordinately and
successivel^.

And in the beginning of our Recreation the same Holy Ghost was Heaven sent
unto us; who taught all Things in order to Spiritual Generations, and a
Spiritual End; as before, he wrought in his brooding, chiefly and more amply,
for a material End. Yet: Many false Prophets Mat. 24. 11.
shall rise, and shall deceive many: And, oportet Hereses esse: there must be
also 1 Cor. 11. 19.
Heresies among you, that they which are approved, may be made manifest among
you. And yet again: God will preserve the ways of Life; and Spiritual
Generation shall remain successively and ordinately in the true Church of God.

For: as God is not deficient in his Concourse with respect to necessaries in
natural Things: so neither is he deficient in his Co^course, as proportioned
to necessaries, in Supernatural Things: and the divine Promiser in his Promise
to the true Church, intends Necessaries.

My Council therefore to all welaffected People, is: Waver not; with reference
to Sects and Heresies: neither be ye of doubtful Mind. (...) Lu. 12. 29.
^^xt. G^ac. Theophylact. in Lu. cant.
(...), says the Greek Text: Which, Theophylact regives, nolite esse animo
instabili, be not of an unstable Mind; as if an Heretic or Scismatick, e
Cochlea prorepens, creeping forward, like an obscure Snail, one of a vile shell
under our Feet; had some thing of divine Truth to tell us, above all that the
Councils and Fathers in all Ages have said, and above all that we yet know.

(Some Truths are indeed unknown to many; but the Scismatick and Heretic know
not all these, nor any of them with Sanctified Knowledge.)

Vatablus interprets it: Ne animo Vatabl.
pendeatis: do not hang in Mind or Judgment, as if your Hearts hung in the
Air.

The Greek word (...), is in Latin Words, animi dubious, suspensus, nedum mente
fixus; in English, doubtful in Mind, of a suspended Heart, not yet fixed in
Judgment. Gaza let us it fall pensilis, hanging Gaza in Grammatica G^aeca.
down toward something beneath us.

Oromazes in Plutarch was Master of an Egg; and he boasted that Plut. in Parall.
there was included in it, all the Happiness of the world: Which Egg being
broken, proved a Winde-Egg: and nothing came forth, but a corrupted Air.

Likewise: it is in the general Cry of Heretics; that their Doctrines are
saving Truths, and write the Receivers of them happy: But if we break them
open, and search thoroughly into them; there only fumes out an ill sent: caused
by a noxious vapor, first issuing from the corrupted and putrified Brains of
their Authors.

In such a Case; if ye need a Perfumer, do not entertain a Popishont, that has
learned the Perfuming sleight of Italy.

CHAP. CVIII.
THE sixth Inference is. Let us carefully seek and serve God that had mercy on
us, and received us being Infants, in Baptism; when we could not ask his Mercy.

By which there is, according to my former intimation, a sweet Convenience and
most divine Economy and Order, apparent in gods Household.

For: As in Original Sin, we sinned by Proxy, and by our first Parents,
without us; so in Baptism, were we admitted to Grace by Proxy, and by the
presentation of our after-Parents, without us: And as Original Sin encroached
upon us, without our Act and exercise of sin; so are we washed from it,
ordinarily, and in a settled Church, without our Act and exercise of Faith.

(This Convenience is as ancient as Circumcision; if not older, with relation
to something which God accepted in that kind before it.)

Which way of divine Ordination, answers also to our Election, and Creation;
these being without us, and our consent or knowledge; and the divine Record of
St Austin, being S Aug. Sermon. 15. de verbis. Apostoli.
Understood de Adultis, of grown Persons: Qui fecit te sine te, non justificat
te sine ^e: fecit nescientem, justificat volentem: He that made thee without
thee: does not justify thee without thee: He made thee, when thou were ignorant
that he made thee, but he justifies thee, having first prepared thy will to
consent thereunto.

And here we may borrow authorized by the analogy of Scripture, the Saying of
Esaias and St Paul melted Romans 10. 20.
into one: Esaias is very bold* and says, I was found of them that sought me
not: I was made manifest unto them that asked not after me.

Hence: As the Euchar^st is Sacramentum Vivorum, the Sacrament of the Living,
(nourishment being given to the Living only, and the End of nourishment being
the maintenance of Life:) So Baptism is Sacramentum Mortuorum, the Sacrament of
the dead; we being dead in sin, until we are washed from it in Baptism.

And hence: The Scripture calls Heb. 6. 4. Text. Graec. Vide Council. Neocaesar.
can. 6 S. Jo. Damase. Orthod. Fid. lib 4. c. 10. etc.
the Baptized (...), the illustrated or illuminated; and Baptism is called by
the Ancients, (...), illumination: because the Habit of Faith is infused, in
Baptism.

Live therefore, O dear Christians, as illuminated Persons: and labor (with a
labor becoming the Gospel of Christ and everlasting Life,) that God may
adopt you: and being adopted; pull not your selves away again, from under the
Shield-Canopy of his Vocation, special Protection, Adoption; as many do that
are called, specially protected, adopted.

Vulnerum Animi, tanquam Sanguis S. Greg. Nyss. orat. suneb^i de Placilla.
Lacrymae sunt: It is the voice of St Gregory Nyssen. Tears are the Blood, that
gushes out by the Eyes from the wounded Mind or Soul.

I have often wept, (he that wept over Jerusalem knows it,) in consideration,
that, although there are more Stars under the Northern than under the Southern
Pole; yet I have seen more People-Stars in the Southern Parts, than I ever saw
in these of the North: and that in those parts, I have seen religious Unity;
irreligious Divisions, in these: and whereas, after the coming of the holy
Spirit, the multitude of them that believed, Act. 4. 32.
were of one Heart, and of one Soul; the pretended holy Spirit amongst these,
brings divisions and separations to a multitude of Hearts and Souls.

And I cannot believe, that sic cecidit Alea, it falls out so by chance, as in
the throwing of Dice.

The Novelties therefore, that shall be said plausibly and acutely by
Scismaticks and Heretics; shall be in your estimation, Lepores illepidi, Sales
insulsi, Acute sayings unacutely said.

When sound Learning is repudiated; and fair words rendered ominous with foul
faces, introduced: beware of an Heresy.

CHAP. CIX.
WE might, had the divine Providence smiled upon it, have bin born of and
amongst Unbaptized Insidels, as, Jews, Turks, or the wild and Barbarous
Indians. But the good pleasure of God, was otherwise of us.

Therefore, let us seek him, love him, serve him. Let us seek him prudently and
earnestly, not imprudently and furiously. Zeal without knowledge, is like a
blind Horse well-metall'd; his courage being inservient only, to endanger him
into pits and Precipices.

Gravely, not apishly. They who seek God with sought Mouths and Faces, do
(...), disguise themselves, and mock God with Apish Imitation.

Let us Love him solidly and inwardly, not vainly and in show only: As a great
part of the Puritan-Papists called Jesuits; who profess much Holiness, and
utter denial of the World; and yet, are more learnedly covetous, and more
exactly exacting, than the profane Rabble. And therefore the Spaniards wittily,
and with a Sarcasm, call them Los Teatinos, Y los Padres Teatinos, the
Teatines, and the Teatine Fathers: from this Account.

A Spanish Painter being Scandal-struck by the Covetousness of the Jesuits,
drew a Picture after this manner. He hung in the uppermost part of his Table, a
vast purse of money. He set round about it, in the lower Parts; one of every
sort of Mendicant Friars; who looked upwards willingly and devoutly upon it,
but durst not touch it; as being forbidden by the Rules of their several
Orders. He painted a Jesuit in some distance, armed with a Bow and Arrows and
looking over (and indeed overreaching) the poor Mendicants. For: he held up
his Bow, and had let his Arrow fly, which had struck the Mark, (the purse;) and
now stuck in it; he still keeping a fierce and eager eye upon the Mark. And the
Painter had learnedly derived these Latin words from his mouth, hanging as if
the cold air had frozen them into a Record: Te attingo: O, Purse, I reach thee,
I hit thee, I have thee.

Whence the Spaniards, being edified by the devotion of the Painter and
holiness of the Picture, presently called the Jesuits, Los ^eatinos: the
Spanish Word coming up as nearly as it may, to the Latin* from which, the
Spanish Language has deviated.

(A word while the Matter is warm. I have posied up, after my long gathering of
Universe-Flowers: that all the cruel exploits of the Jesuits, were Faux led
by Covetousness.)

The Husbandmen say: the Trees which are double-blossom'd, seldom bear: and,
such Trees often blossom themselves to Death.

And let us serve God wholely and entirely. He cannot be a
true-built-Christian; in whom one grievous evil of sin, habitually revels, and
actually reigns and Commands.

Let me state a Case or two: If a Man pleads for himself at the Bar, that he
is well-esteem'd, and respected as an honest Man in his Country: and it be
pleaded and proved on the contrary side, that he sits usually bezzling in a
Tavern, (the Master whereof is a Professor,) all the night going before the
Lord's Day, until, the Cocks being quiet, his Brains begin to crow; and until
the Sexton, calling to Church, rings his Passing Bell: the judge will readily
pronounce, that such a Man is beloved of Men, because he is a debonier and good
fellow, as they call him; and will add as readily, that he is ha^ed of God, and
belongs not unto the everlasting Sabbath; as being a denyer of the temporary
Sabbath, and of Christian Religion in the Power thereof.

If a Man have defrauded his Brother by false and evil suggestions, causing
unjust fears; and by working deceitfully upon his Ignorance of Law-Matters:
though he shall multiply Prayers, and Sermons in his Family, and engross the
grosser people. Understanding persons will believe of him according to the
sound and old Case-Rules, which will meet him before the Judgment Seat of
Christ: Quod injuste acquiritur, injustius detinetur: That which is acquired
unjustly and by indirect means, is more unjustly detained: And: Invalidus est
Contractus, si ei Dolus causam dedit; ut, in metu injuste incusso, aut in re
penitus ignorata: The Contract is invalid, of which, Deceit was the Cause: as,
when one is unjustly terrified, or ensnared in a Matter whereof he was utterly
ignorant: And: He that builds his house upon unrighteousness and injustice,
declaratively such in Foro Dei, in God's Court, being the inward Court of the
Spirit: will perish at last, how fairly soever he shall fare in Foro externo,
in the Court that is outward, wherein the Judge, as being a Man, looks not
beyond outward Things.

To Men of wrong, this I rightly offer, (besides the former strowings of the
Casuists,) from the Gold-Mine of Divinity: Commutative Justice prohibits all
wrong in the Commutation of Goods: And every good Action is tutored by some
Virtue: and the lawful Change of the Dominion which every one has over his
own, lawfully made his own; must be regulated and informed by Justice.

Moreover: Let such Men read and judiciously ponder Aquinas his D Tho. 2. 2.
quaest. 62. art. 2.
Article, thus inscribed: Utrum sit necessarium ad Salutem, quod fiat
restitutio ^jus quod ablatum est? Whether it be necessary to Salvation, that
there be Restitution made of the Thing Unjustly taken away?

From Humanity, I offer this: The X^noph. l. 1. Cyropaed.
old Persians an Ignorant and heathenish Generation, did send their Children to
Shool, to learn Justice: as the Grecians, theirs* that they might be bettered
in Letters.

And this particularly, from Universal Law: No Law will permit us (especially
being blinded with Covetousness as the divine Collier was) to be judges in our
own Causes.

CHAP. CX.
THE last Inference is plain and common and shall be ^et before you in a most
common and plain Manner: Because Friends when they are in parting, use neither
cleanpic'kt Language, nor long-pack't Expressions.

Let all people devoutly consider, that they must dye.

I find nothing taught so very home, as this assiduous Doctrine of dying.

The Body of Man, being all his visible part, was made of contemptible
Grave-threatning Earth.

The name of the first Man, was given to him, from Earth: Adama signifying red
Earth.

His Garments were by divine Institution, a sign to him of death: Unto Adam
also, and to his wife, did Genesis 3. 21.
the Lord God make Coats of skins, and clothed them: by the which, he was
advertised in the Garments carried always about him, that he should dye like
the Beast: as wearing the skins of dead Beasts.

His employment was a daily digging in the Earth; that in his daily digging, he
might say within himself daily, as Job said: the Graves Job 17. 1.
are ready for me; wheresoever I am, there a Grave gapes for me: or, as the
Vulgar: Solum mihi superest Edit. vulg:
Sepulchrum: Nothing remains for me but the Grave.

All Men, Women, and Children teach this Doctrine by Example: We must needs
dye, (or, as the Vulgar Iuterpreter, 2 Samuel 14. 14.
omnes Morimur, we all Interp. vulgat.
die,) and are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again.
And, as St Paul: It is appointed Heb. 9. 27.
unto Men once to dye.

Yea: Christians are apprehended by the Wisdom of God in their best Devotions;
and put in mind of their dying, in a wonderful manner, by the Eucharisticall
Mystery: For as 1 Cor. 11. 26.
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's death
till he come. And the Mystery mystericusly tells to us; The Lord and Master of
the Mystery and of the Family, dyed; and shall the Servant escape Death?

And as the Thing is most certain: so the Time and Manner are most uncertain.
Latet ultimus Dies, as St Austin reasons, ut ^bserventur omnes S. A^g. Hom^l
13 ex ^^.
Dies: Our last Day is hidden from us, that we may observe and keep every Day,
as we would keep and observe our last Day.

Yet, wretched Fools as we are; we look, every day, upon our last Day, as
removed far from us.

My observation is: No Men have been less injured and more esteemed these
Times than Physicians: because the more wicked Men grow, the greater care they
have of their Healths, and the more willing they are to prolong their Lives.

O beloved Christians: If the Lives of all the Creatures that have lived upon
Earth, that live now, and that shall hereafter live, were knit up into one
Life; this one Life, considered in it self, would be a long Life: but this
long Life would be a very short Life, if compared with Eternity.

And when I shall be graved, and keep my rottenness, and the stink of it about
me; or, the relics of it, shall remain to testify my former Being: What
benefit shall I reap by the preferments of the World?

Then ought we to be divinely careful, how we live, how we shall dye: what we
teach, what we hear: what we receive, what we reject.

For: when we dye, we shall be ax-hewed from all our Friends* and shall depart
out of this World, every one by himself: and no Man or Woman shall go hence
with us, to speak for us, or to comfort us.

And when we have done all, we must all dye.

A needful Advertisement to the Reader.
Christian Reader:
AMongst the many grievous Excrescencies, Redundancies, and Ple^nasms of this
Age; one is: That People being heated seething-hot, and having the Spirit of
Commotion in their Hearts, quickly run over at their Mouths with most
merciless and most unreasonable Sentences of rash Judgment. As if it were a
Classical and godly Matter forsooth, to be the cruel Homicides of our Brother
in his good Name and reputation.

And my Reader: Did not these unhallowed Sentences breaking into pious and
judicious Ears, presently discover themselves to be spuriousborn, and false
Alarums; and had they not the fortune of the Arrow which Acestes in Virgill
dispatched Virg. Aeneid. l. 5.
from his Bow, that kindled in the Motion, flew in the Air like a Meteor, and
was, at the last: self-consumed: One Neighbor should not, without the torture
of a Perpetual Martyrdom; or, his being arrested by false Report, and held
continually in confinio Vitae ao Mortis; subsist by another

I have gleaned after the Christian Masters of refined Philosophy: Sicut omne
Agens natural in agendo repatitur; ita and omne Patiens in patiendo reagit: As
every natural Agent suffers again, in it is Action; so also every Patient does
re-act in it is Passion. And we know, that even Divinity is benign and assenting
to regular and measured Re action. Allow me freedom therefore, benevolous
Reader, to Re-act according to Rule and Measure, in the Agony of my sufferings;
and to build Obstructions, and royal Forts, against these following Objections
which concern my self.

OBJECTION I.
FIrst: It is objected by some (not many) and those who have Opiniones alias
vag as and volaticas, other wandering and flying Opinions; That I was, and am
still a Jesuit, I answer; as in the sight of the most high God, my Judge; and
before the glorious Courtiers of Heaven, his Attendants* and before Men,
whereof many are my witnesses: That I am not a Jesuit, that I never was a
Jesuit; and that my Heart is, and ever was, extremely averted from the
Practices and opinions of the ( Pragmaticall) Jesuits.

Concerning the Practices and opinions of whom, as of such, I verily believe
that they are Doctrinae and (...) Lolium, the very killing Tares of Doctrine
and Practice.

The Devil is called malus absolute, Mat. 12. 19. Text. Graec.
absolutely evil, (in the Greek, (...),) or, the wicked one: First, because he
is superlatively evil; there being no creature as bad or evil as the Devil:
(The Reason whereof is: By how much every Nature is more excellent, by so much
it becomes more evil and vile, if it prevaricates: and the Angels were, as the
first, so the most excellent of all Creatures:) Secondly, because the Devil is
not only evil, but also confirmed in evil, and set beyond the possibility of
being good: (as the good Angels are confirmed in Good:) Thirdly, because the
Devil is not only evil, but also his whole Trade, Occupation, and Work is, to
make others evil.

This Jesuit (whom I call so (...), by contrary Speech) is not as evil as the
Devil, because he was not founded in the Angelical Nature, and because he is
convertible and may be afterward good: but certainly he makes his Approaches
toward him in the third Angle; a great part of this Jesuit's Work being, to
make others Children of the Devil, and like himself. Wherefore I discliam and
renounce all cohesion and conversation with him.

This Objection having a Repulse here, makes forward again by another inlet or
passage, thus: That although I am not a Jesuit, yet I am a Priest. I answer: If
there be meant by a Priest, one who has received the order of Priesthood; this
I confessed eighteen years ago in a Sermon of Recantation at Paul's; and
assuredly, I am no Lay-Levite: but if we mean by a Priest, one who says Mass;
I am no Priest in this Sense, I truly, humbly, and, I trust, with a penitent
Heart, declare before the Chief and High Priest Jesus Christ the righteous.

When there is a personal mutation of Place, in the concurring and monstrous
troubles of a Nation and Family: can we conscientiously mould the Lump into a
By-Construction of our own? Know we not, that the sweet Application of the best
and most Charitable Construction, in a doubtful and manifoldly-Circumstanced
Case, is a fair and separating Mark of a Child of God? And: would a reasonable
Man have sought that abroad, which always waited his leisure and pleasure at
his own Door? When the Papists know that I am peaceably theirs to have and to
hold, they will have so much Wit as to hold their Peace.

Now therefore: Why do the Heathen rage, and the People imagine a Psalm. 2. 1.
vain Thing? or, as the Vulgar: Quare Edit. vulg.
fremuerunt Gentes, and Popul^ meditati sunt inan^a? Why have the Nations made
a noise, and the People meditated vain Things? The Septuagint Sept.
led the way: (...); Why have the Nations noised it like enraged Horses? the
Word (...) being thus interpreted by Suid. in voce (...). Text. Hebr.
Suidas. The Original says plainly: Quare tumultuantur Gentes? Why do the
Nations or Heathenish People make a confused noise as in a Tumult? as if it
pointed at the Manners of these few truculent and turbulent People in my Case.

OBJECT. II.
SEcondly: It is objected: That the Difficulty which I clothed in Latin and
proposed in my last Book ( The perfect Law of God,) is jointly proposed by the
Church of Rome. I answer: I never found or heard it proposed by any Church or
person in such a Manner, and as making such an Assault. And as the Church of
Rome has enforced a like Difficulty; so have the greatest and most conspicuous
Independents amongst us, reinforced the very same with the same Church.

Besides: I proposed it ex composito, and ex praeparato. I composed it into
Latin and prepared the way before it, with many an humble and hearty Prayer,
Acknowledgement, and Groan, expressed by the weight of my Burden: that I might
not cast a shadow of the least Offense or Occasion of Error. And if after all
the sweet Moanes, that humane Providence and Circumspection can preassume; One
will fancy to himself Unsavory Sents: I will not say, that such a Man obtusae
erassaeque naris est, is of a dull and gross Nose or Nostril; but I will affirm
with Reverence, that the Mistake and Evil comes of the corrupt Defluxion, per
Caput Vermiculans, from his Brain into his Nose.

Had I deliberated and plotted with my self, to have disordered the
Soul-Harmony of weak Persons; (against which I also protested in my prolocutory
and first Address:) I should have proposed the Difficulty, according to
Serpentine, Prudence, in the Language only known to such Persons. And surely,
the Examination of the secondary Foundation, (of the which kind a Translation
is,) is included primarily, when the Apostle exhorts us to try all Things.

Again: The very Names and Memories of Pherecides, Diagoras, Protagoras,
Lucian, etc. are odious to me. Credo in Deum Patrem Omnipotentem, Creatorem
Cali ac Terrae: and in Jesum Christum, Filium ejus Unicum, etc. I beleve in God
the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth: and in Jesus Christ, his only
Son, etc. And my Difficulty cannot induce to Atheism: because in the
dislocation and removal of one Bottom-Stone, it actually subministers and
infers another as the more firm. And therefore a famous Doctor unscrued the
Difficulty like a Doctor, and like a Divine; by answering that the Proposition
of the Church is not huma^e but divine: Only: the proportionable squaring of
the Result, waits the Doctor's leisure. And, I pray: If the Difficulty induces
to Atheism, how does it pull for the Church of Rome? If it pulls for the Church
of Rome, howdoth it induce to Atheism, which denies both God and Church? What
foul and uncouth ways this will-strong Objecter takes, to gain the wind and
the ^^gher Ground; and that he may be-gual and be-choler me? Facessat igitur
impexus omnis, illotus, inquinatusque Sermo. I am as freeborn as others, and
may therefore, as freely propose and answer; especially when I neither
challenge first, nor give the first Insult.

And I am secure, that in my Proposal of this Difficulty, as the Action was
good, and advanced beyond Indifferency; so it was directed to the the Glory of
Him that is most good. Now that an Act is not referred unto God as unto it is
last End; I know, it may happen, first, exparte Actus, on the part of the Act,
and secondly, ex part Agentis, on the part of the Agent. On the part of the
Act, when the Act is not Ordinable to a good End; in which consideration,
inordinate Acts or Sins are not referible to the last End. For: an inordinate
Act, as being Evil, is not a convenient Mean or Middle, by the which we may come
safe to a good End: as a false Proposition is not a Convenient Medium, by the
which we may safely come to sound and true Knowledge. And, that the Proposal
of this Difficulty, is an ordinate Act; is without Difficulty, and exempted
from it by the Premises. On the part of the Agent, when the mind of the Agent,
is not directed in Act or Habit to God or a good End ending in God. From whence
it follows, that, an End being necessarily required, an Act proceeding from
such a Mind, makes it is direction to some strange and vain Thing as to it is
last End; and then, the humane Act is Evil. Of the V^d^atur Arist. in Rani^,
and Felix Plat. Obs^rvat. lib. 1. Psalm. 78 57. Versio Illyrica. Vide C^rd^n l.
12. de R^^um Variet cap 56 and Claudidianum in Panegyr. Theodosii Imp.
which there is no Coalition here.

To this Objecter* with his old Friend always in his Mouth (and as not unlike
him with Aristophanes his Frogs in his Belly;) it may be rightly and worthily
applied: they were turned aside like a deceitful Bow: Where it is turned by
the Illyrican Version, Converterunt se in Arcum inversum, they have turned
themselves into an inverted Bow: this Bow being so turned, that it shoots the
shooter.

OBJECT. III.
THirdly: This manifold Objecter objecteth: That the said Difficulty, according
to the present Proposal, is not so difficult, nor so regularly proposed, as is
pretended. And first: That the Syriack is the same Language with the Chaldee. I
answer:

Ecquis Mortalium Nepos audebit, erectus in Caelum, negare, Linguam Syriacam ex
Hebraica and Chaldaica, complicatis lenirer fibris, in Captivitate Babylonica,
paulatim const^tam, coaluisse? An non omnes Undiqueversum Scriptorum Calamos,
vectigales habeam? Quin igitur totus ad litem nunc denuo glorio^e dirimendam
circumfluat Orbis per Summa Capita signatus contextusque.

Secondly: That no part of God's Word was primogenially delivered in Latin. I
answer:

Res agatur apud Authors illos magni profecto Nominis, a Bellarmino Bellarm.
de Verbo Dei, l. 2. cap. 7.
consultissime, sed fasciatim, productos in Aciem: quippe qui rem omnem
diligenter evoluit, inque sublimi statuit evolutam. Prasta puer, Muscarium: Nec
tamen proloquar; quamvis and hic me vehemenier exacuit, admotisque saepicule
Facibus atrociter inflammavit in Vindictam: quae frigida repent suffusa
subsidens, in Preces ab^it arde^tissimas.

Thirdly: There is no need that the Translators of Scripture, should be
securely directed. I answer.

Fides inf^ll b^lis non atting it Objectum suum, quod ettam est infallibile,
nisi Mediis proportional^er oblatis, infall bilibus, and e^usdem penitus
Ordinis: Ut Virtus ^heologica, quae quidem and ipsa ^mmediate in Deum fertur,
and nos transfert in Deum Dcoque tradit; ex omni sit Part d^vina, Donumque
De^. Objectum (ne fo^san and hic haereamus velut in Salebris aut confragoso)
^st illud quod (...) objicitur Fide^ sub ratione Cred^b^lis. Objectum Sc^ent^ae
est Materia circa quam versatur Scientia: Sicuti Theologiae Objectum est Fn^
revelatum; vel Deus, habito resp^ctu Ita Suarez in p. 1. circa Princip.
ad al^a sub Ratione formali Revelationis cadentia in ordine ad Deum. Eodem
plane modo de Objecto Potentiae, servato Rei tenore, Philosophandum est. Nos
autem non de Objecto Scientiae* vel Potentiae, sed de Virtutis Objecto Verba
facimus hac in Re.

Fourthly: the Approbation of the Church is not necessary. I answer:

Transeat quod in Regulam Juris Lex Civilis.
jamdudum transiit: N^mirum: Non crescit ex postfacto Praeteriti (vel Rei)
aestimatio. Sed instat Sensus, qui semper appenditur. Is est. St Dignitas and
Certitudo Rei considereniur in se. Etenim nostra aestimatio qualiscunque tandem
sit illa, non addit quicquam, nec aliquid subtrahit subduci^que Sacrarum
Scripturarum Dignitati vel Certitudini, scilicet intrins^cis and essentialibus.
Si vero considerentur quoad nos, and c^m respectuad Propositionem and nostros
inde sequutos Amplexus; Dignitas and Certitudo Scripturae divinae divinitus
innotescunt n^bis ex post nata vel post modum orta Ecclesiae Approbatione.

Fifthly: the Children of the Interpreters are not mutable, and susceptive of
impressions. I answer:

Frustrahic subsultat impatiens Oneris Animus. Quamobrem si dixero, gravius
errasse jampridem, uti fatuos quosdam ac palustres Igniculos per Amnes, Foveas,
and Praecipitia: Imo si confidenter astitisse dixero Victoribus Utrinsecus,
oculis subinde placide que mobilibus ad omnes omnium nutus renutusque: quis
adeo saxe^ fuerit Pectoris, orisque turpiter (...), ut Erroris vel simulate
insimulet dicentem? Libenter in me recipio quicquid obmurmurat Sublicium Caput.

Sixthly: the Hebrew Roots are not appliable to various Senses. I answer:

Vocabula multa and apprime Varia, Variosque induentia Sensus, ex una cademque
peti Radice, prudens and sciens, vivus vidensque Verborum aestimator haud ibit
inficias. Praeterea: Vide Pamelium in vita Cypriani.
Radices id haursunt a punctis; ut quadantenus, plen^us imprimis atque affa^im,
deinceps pa^cius and moderatius, concise denique fluan^ and attenuate. Taceo
quod Rabbini ^orumque Discipuli Rabbinismum sptrantes, eadem ipsa Vocabula ex
Radicibus exprimunt variis atque expromunt, and in vartos proinde distribuunt
Sensus.

Lastly: Divine Providence is the Guide of Interpreters. I answer: Nequaquam
sane omnium: si de Providentia loquamur infallibiliter dirigente ne Sacra
Profanis commisceat. Certe: Divina Providentia quosdam certo dirigit
Interpretes insignioris Notae, Notisque quibusdam qu^si Gemmulis interstinctos;
de quibus certos nos fecit: and hos insuper impigre, pic, and ut par est, se
gerentes, vereque Deum Colentium numero ascriptos. Eheu alii mnlti mul^oties
manifesto Scelere (...) constriguntur. Caeteraomniae, ut omni^o aberrantia a
Sco^o, and assumenta mera, seda^e rejicio.

Let this Objecter therefore cease, tanquam Pharmacopola pauperculus inanes
ostentare Copsulas, as a poor Apothecary to show with vain Ostentation vain and
empty Coffers or Pots. Praeclarus est isthic Verborum Tinnitus: Here is a
famous Tinckling of Words; but the sound is empty of soundness.

Franzius notes, that the Dog barks Franzius in Cau^.
vehemently and with a most angry Note, at the poor Beggar: because the
Beggar's Arrant is for Crusts and Bones; which otherwise fall to the Dog,
ignoble for his Envy. And he plants upon it: (...), Those who live by the same
Trade, exercise their Trades and Abilities to the prejudice one of the other.
It is much under me, to verefy, as the first and frenzie-moved Mover, this Note
of wise Franzius.

I have here, all the Matter of the Forest of Arden before me. Of the which,
perhaps afterward. I now teach you, Reader, to walk in the dark, and am no
Teller of Tales.

OBJECT. IIII.
FOurthly: It is Objected; That I am violent in my writing. I answer: I write
against Presbyterians and Anabaptists. And I am verily believing, (and am ready
to carry this Belief with me to the other World,) that if our Master were now
upon Earth, he would himself cry against these, with the same Wo-denouncing
words and Accents, with which he cried against the Scribes and Pharisees. The
Matters in controversy, are not Adiaphorous: the meanest and most despicable
thereof, having it is dangerous Climax.

Leading-Sinners and People hardened in Sin, are led, moved and fashioned with
like Instruments. Iron is wrought upon, with Fire and Iron Hammers: when Wax,
as of an yielding Nature, is made pliant and fashionable betwixt the soft and
warm fingers. Wherefore St Paul writes to the stiff-soul'd, and
errour-shackel'd Corinthians: What will 1 Cor. 4. 21.
ye? shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the Spirit of
meekness? inferring secretly, that a public Rod is proportionably due to
selfe-will'd, obstinate and public Sinners.

But, loving Reader: Vin' tu jam nunc, ut libere detrahamus (excidit hic mihi
Nomen) (...)? What is the Reason that our Objecter is pained and galled beyond
all mean and measure, and more then kickingripe, in the Cause of the
Presbyterians: against whom he is likewise a violent Professor, Under Hatches?
Expediam tibi paucis. There has been an ambidextrous Trick on foot, these
Tumbling Times. Which is: That many Families have cunningly dispersed their
Ends and Interests: to the end, that, which side soever prevailed, one of the
Family might stand upright, and be able to gather up, support, and cherish the
rest in a languishing Condition. Now the Presbyterian Spirit (like the Natural
Spirits as flowing of the Liver) runs in his Blood: Or: As the Animal Spirits
have their Origin from the Brain, reside in the Nerves, and effect Motion and
Sensation: So he, a cunning Animal shall I say, or Natural? extracting his
Brain, and consequently Sensation and Motion, from a stiff-hearted and
refractory Presbyterian, (who is, yo^ must believe, non infimae Classis Vir, O
the Vain and Luciferian Folly of humane Ostentation!) and being therefore an
Extract of Presbytery, because he was born somewhat like to Minerva; has for
his Device a Contrary Profession.

Reader, If I be called afterward to unriddle these enigmaticall Expressions,
and to produce a certain concealed Description which I have in S^nu: you will,
and you shall, and you must laugh, if you be not plane (...). I had rather go a
wandering after Erra Pater in the Firmament; than to walk Genius-bound upon a
most unfirm and rotten Foundation of yielding Dirt.

If Presbyterians have been hurtful and injurous to me, and were so as
Presbyterians; I may consider them sub Praeeisione Objectiva; and let fall the
murderous Attempts and Injuries as moving toward me, and yet righteously
retain the Consideration that Presbyterians were the Movers or Actors, because
this Actio^ or Motion had another chief tendency, and was primarily noxious,
injurious, and offensive to God and his Church.

And I am not altogether ignorant of the difference betwixt our loving a Friend
and our loving an Enemy, and of our Obligations in both respects. Neither is
the Distinction hidden from me, that our Dilection of a Friend and of an Enemy,
may be considered either ex part Proximi qui diligitur, on the part of our
Neighbor who is loved, or, ex part Rationis propter quam diligitur, on the
part of the Reason for which he is loved. In the first respect, the loving of
our Friend is better than the loving of our Enemy, quia est super Materiam
magis debitam, because it pitcheth upon a Matter which in it self is more
suitable, congruous, du^, and proper. In the second respect, the loving of our
Enemy is more excellent, for two Reasons: First: because we may be moved to
love our Friend, by a natural or moral Cause, as, by natural instinct, by
conversation and the sight of his Manners, or by benefit: but we cannot
unfeignedly love our Enemy, except for God's Cause: Secondly: because although
both our Friend Vide D. Tho. Quaestionibus de Amicitia, in secunda part, quae
est de Actibus humanis; and Caje^anum, al^o que Scholasticos ibidem.
and our Enemy be loved by us for God's Cause or Sake; it is apparent, that our
Love of God is greater by the which we are moved to love our Enemy, than our
Love by the which we are moved to love our Friend: quia fortior est virius quae
se extendit ad remotiora, the Power or Virtue being the stronger, which extends
it self to Things that are more remote: as the heat of the Fire which burns
things that are farther off, is more intense. Yet hence it falls not, that our
Acts of loving our Enemy, should be more intense, than our Acts with which we
love our Friend. For* Although the Fire be more strong which burns farthest, it
nevertheless burns the things that are near, more intensely and strongly, than
the like Things removed farther. In like manner: Although we need more heat and
Charity to the loving of our Enemy, than we need to the loving of our Friend;
yet we love our Friend more intensely, and with more heat.

In friendly Truth: I love all Presbyterians and Anabaptists, as they are my
Enemies, and as they have abstracted me from the Goods which, after St Austin,
we call Bona Scabelli, the Goods of the World and Footstool: But I hate them
Odio perfecto, with a perfect Hatred, as they Psalm. 139. 22.
are God's Enemies, and as they would abstract from me Bona Throni, the Goods
of Heaven and of the Throne. And, as such, I will never treat them gently, or
handle them mollibus and sericis Verbis, with soft and silken Words.

OBJECT V.
Fifthly: It is Objected: That I have obstinately set my self against learned
Men, and against my own Friends. I answer: My Quarrel is not with the Learning
of the Learned, nor with the Friendship of my Friends: but with the Unfriendly
and Ungodly opinions of both. In Sensu diviso and separato, I most heartily
honor Learning and love my Friends: But in Sensu conjuncto and composito,
wherein the Learned and my Friends are presented to me, not in a separate
Sense, yet as joined with Separatists, and as God's Enemies, and Complotters
with the Devil (all friendly Communication with whom I ought continually to
desie and abominate) against the Lord of Lords, and him that made, redeemed,
sanctifies, and preserves me; and as Homines latifoli^, People having broad
leaves, and little good Fruit: I consider my Friends as mine Enemies, and the
Learned as illiterate.

I am Lesson led by ^ur blessed Lord and Savior first, and afterward, S.
Hieron. ep. ad Heliodorum. Vide Taci^* lib. 5. Hist.
by St Hierom: (little regarding that Cornelius Tacitus fetches up his throat
and stomach against Christians in this, as in many other misrepresented
Respects.) Licet parvulus ex Collo pendeat Nepos, it is the Religious advise of
St Hierom to Heliodor; licet ubera quibus te nutricrat Matter ^stendat, licet in
limine Pater jaceat, per calcatum perge Patrem, siccis Oculis ad Vexillum
Crucis evola: Although thy little Nephew shall hang to thee by thy neck,
though thy Mother shall show thee the naked Breasts wherewith she suckled thee:
though thy good old Father should lie before thee on the threshold: turn off
thy Nephew, and let him fall; turn from thy Mother and her d^ceitfull Breasts;
tread upon thy Father, and fly presently with dry and cheerful Eyes to the
royal Standard of the Cross.

Here therefore: I Richard Carpenter, Sacerdos Dei Summi, but a Psalm. 51. 1.
Psalm. 119. 176.
miserable Sinner, ( Miserere mei Deus, etc.) and a sinful wanderer; ( Erravi
sicut O vis quae per^it; etc) yea, in very deed and truth, the very last and
least of all the Servants of God: denounce Bellum Sanctum, Scholasticum, and
Literarium, a Holy, Scholasticall, and Literary War; against all pragmaticall
Jesuits, engendered, like imperfect Animals betwixt violent Heat and Corruption;
against all factious Geneva-Jesuits; and, as drawn irresistibly to it by their
own tedious Provocations, against Anabaptists; yea, against all their
Leviticall Defenders and Flatterers whomsoever. Vivat Christus Deus and Homo,
Christique Veritas vivat: Let Christ, God and Man, and his Truth, live for
over. Reader: Pause, before you censure. Divinus Amor, says Dionysius the
Areopagite, ecstasim S. Diony s. divin. Nom. cap. 4.
facit.

In the Intervall of Time before actual Opposition, let the Opponent whosoever
he shall be, be entreated as a Candidate of Learning, that he will not
aggravate the grievous Evil of Antichristian Falsehood, by offering to the
Press and a Million of Chaste Eyes, seu majora Vero, seu minora; nor appear in
public, eundem de Papismo Coccysmum nobis occinens, crowing to us the old
young-cockrel crow of Papist and Jesuit, (that is used by some, as a mere
Stop-Gap in great penury of Matter; by others, quasi (...), like an efficacious
Bug-Beare, as if they could and would; and might do as they would, though
according to Right and Law they could not; entangle me with a dangerous Name,
and thereby deter me from my Sacred Purposes; and upon these designs, often
enters tanquam versus intercalaris, as the Burden of the Song;) utque duram de
nobis emolliat Sententiam, and that he will not entertain hard and Evil
Thoughts of me, before he well knows me.

But although I bind up the Anabaptists into this heterodox Fardle: yet, the
great Aim which my soul has in this World, being to be a perfect Lover and
Advancer of Truth: I engage my self to make it shine as the Sun, that many
Anabaptists are the Propugners and Maintainers of most excellent and most
divine Truths: and are more justifiable before God, and more sufferable by Man,
than the Presbyterians or strict Calvinists: and attached upon this Account, I
shall enter the lists with any Man in the fair Field of School Divinity; by
measuring and weighing the Doctrines avowched on both sides.

And a word more in the heat of true Love toward honest and harmless Truth.
It runs amongst the People without opposition, that there are, or were lately,
Jesuits in this our Army, and that they have Preached there. Yea, it has
clearly passed, and been embraced and hugged with much joyful wonder, that the
Pope's latest Agent in England, Signior Con a Scotchman, has been seen by
Knowing Eyes, in this Army. For me: I have not received any particular Favor
from the Army, nor from the present Authority: neither will I accept of
preferment. But the God of Truth, whom I honor, commands me to publish, on the
behalf of injured Truth; how ungrateful soever and censurable the Publication
will be to many: That, whereas I know Popish Affairs, Motions and Contrivements
in a large Measure; (and, in holy Truth, I know more than many think me to
know and than some would have me to know) I faithfully believe, this Report to
be the most malicious and most damnably-false Invention of the
seething-scalding-burning-fire-hothearted Genevenses, to bring the State and
Army into dishonor and Obloquy: ut que Oleum huic Incendio copiosius
affundant: as other strange Things have been forged by them. And I am certain,
that Signior Con dyed many years ago, and before the new-moulding of the Army,
beyond the Seas. This I deliver in the word of a Christian, and in the Hopes
which I have to dwell with the most Unerring Fountain of Truth, the all-knowing
God. We walk in Darkness: deceiving and being deceived. Pure Religion and
Undefiled, is this: To believe the Truth of God rightly, to speak it boldly, to
build upon this Truth and not upon Lies, and to perform religiously toward
God and Man, well-ordered Love and Obedience.

The Vindication of one Truth, extrudes another. Let the World take special
notice, that I bleed in my Spirit, and am ashamed of my Company; when I hear
it asserted in Pulpits, by Persons non infimae Classis, That the Pope dispenses
with Priests and Jesuits to recant and join with the Ministers of England, that
they may reduce Protestants the more conveniently to his Religion: That the
Common Prayer is Mass in English: That the Papists believe they shall be saved
by their own Merits, excluding the Merits of Christ: That the common People
amongst them, pray most commonly in a Language which they Understand not: That
all ordinary Papists worship Images as their Gods: That they all hold, Adultery
and Fornication to be but Venial Sins: That no Professors of Chastity, live
Chastely amongst them: That all of that Religion, are bloudily minded: and the
like: And conclude, that these Fancy-Fram'd Pictures of Doctrines, falling foul
with my clear Knowledge; may pass along with other A^ntick Shapes. It is
infallibly certain: That there are amongst Papists, Corruptions both of
Doctrine and Manners: But he that objects Falsehood against them, will, after a
while, manifest his own Falsehood, and set them free: yea, will appear in the
number of the greatest Tyrants; as tyranizing over Souls and weak
understandings. The Man is not well settled in his Wits, who blames my reviewing
and revising the Secrets of Truth; when I am a sad Spectator of
Soul-Alterations, evil in their Terminations; and a mournful Hearer of
Blasphemies; every day, on every side.

Perhaps, Reader, it is troublesome to you, that I write my self Independent,
adeo ut me transsig as convitio. If it be so: So be it: Vereor etenim ne
muricatus tibi subsit Animus; For, I fear, that which way soever your Mind
falls, it is pointed toward me, sharp, hurtful, and Caltrap-like. Whereas
Heretics and Scismaticks give me Names at their pleasure; I presume that I may
have leave to Name my self by what Name or Title soever, I shall desire to be
modestly called. It matters not, how I am called by my self; but what in my
self I am. Indeed: The chief Doctrines which I propose to the Reader, I will
defend to have been formerly defended and proposed by the most learned Divines
of England; and now to be recommended to the people by the most Popular
Independents. And therefore: Tell not me Apparatu plane scenico and Thrasonismi
pleno, with your Theatricall Language; that my Discourse is Oration pernicioso
confecta Philtro. It is the godly Truth of the most true God, who is my Rock,
and I fear you not.

For: God said to the valiant Joshua, Josh. 1. 5.
and the Words are sweetly warbled over again by St Paul: I Heb. 13. 5.
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Where the Original is wonderfully
big, and breeding: (...) Text. Graec.
(...). In which Versicle there are five Negatives: (...). And the Original
meaning affirms: I will never, never leave thee; I will never, never, never
forsake thee. Then If the Presbyterian comes to bite, if the Anabaptist; God
will never, never leave me: If the wicked Liver comes, if Jesuit, if Devil;
God will never, never, never forsake me.

OBJECT. VI.
LAstly: It is objected: That I understand not all the Languages which I use. I
answer: I submissely confess, that I do not understand all the Words and
Secrets of these Languages: yea, that some of these Languages have many Secrets
and Words which I reach not. I understand English. And my old School-Fellowes
at Eton College, know that I was there a Babbler in Greek and Latin. I have
picked up some odd Ends of Languages abroad. And I have taken some pains in the
Oriental Languages. In the which notwithstanding I go not the rough and
tedious way of the Character; but apply my self to Books, wherein the proper
Characters of these Languages are alienated and Italianated. St Hierom is my
Cynosura. Hence I write only toward the place of the right Hand: and
altogether use European Characters, not Asian, not African; not Hebrew
Characters, not Samaritan, not Syriacke, not Arabic; nor indeed Ethiopick
Characters, although this Language be written from the left to the right, as
Greek, Latin, and the other Languages of Europe. And whereas a Divine should
carry in a full Body, all Knowledges before him, and chiefly, Divinity and her
School; all other Knowledges being subservient to Divinity, and Subordinate to
Scripture the Written Rule: he shall never be able to circumscribe and compass
his Design, except he shall now and then ^e succinct, and gain Ground by a
compendiary way, and by over-stepping the less needful Things.

Reader: You have in this Washing of the Anabaptist, the sound Truth both of
Divinity and Language. And whosoever shall Object Schism or Heresy to this
Book, having first well-poised the Words against which the Objection shall
aculeos exercre: is himself Ignorant, or Malici^us. Be not like the Women
affected with the Pica, or the Malacia: who neglect solid and proper Meats* and
greedily devour and seek after Coals, Ashes, Meal, Tar, Chalk, Raw-flesh,
Man's-Flesh, and the like disagreeing stuff.

As we grow in years, we do, or should increase in divine Knowledge. In the
Generation of Natural Things, Nature, whose Work is Opus Intelligentiae non
errantis, first prepares the Matter, then, introduces the Form, which gives
Being to the Thing; then presently follow the proper Accidents; then, the
Accidents which are common: then she cleans and purifies her Work from
Superfluities: and Lastly, endeavors to ripen her Work and lodge it in the End
for which it was made.

For Example. In the Production of Man, the Body is first prepared; the
reasonable Soul is afterward introduced: then follow the Propertie^; Which
are; that the Child is risible, and that he is disciplinable: then come on the
common Accidents, being quantity, color, figure, etc. Which are Posteriores
Ordine Naturae: Then the Child increases, and Ejects superfluous Things which
are obstacles to perfect Operation: Lastly: He moves more forcibly toward the
End of his Creation.

So in Spiritual Things, the Man, as the Matter or Subject, is prepared: Grace
is introduced, as the Form: The proper and common Accidents attend him; those
within, these without. Wherefore let us lay aside every Heb. 12. 1.
weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us and let us run with patience
Verse. 2.
the race that is set before us: Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of
our Faith: or, as the Original steers Text. Grae^.
it; (...): to Jesus the Beginner, (or that works the Beginning,) and the
Finisher of our Faith, (or, that consummates our Faith and makes it perfect.)

This Jesus will savingly wash us from our seven Head-Sins, in his Blood shed
seven Times; and will vanquish our Enemy, the seaven-Headed Dragon; and fill us
with the seven Gifts of the Holy Ghost; and give us Donum Lachrymarum, the gift
of Tears; in the which we shall be dipped and Bathed, as Naaman the Syrian was
in Jordane, seven Times; the Number, seven, being a perfect Number, and
signifying many: and whereas his Flesh returned as the Flesh of a Child; so we
shall be (...), Children in Wickedness or Malice; and be joined to Jesus (the
Savior of washed and Baptized Childen) now by Faith, and afterward by Vision
or Fruition; here by Grace, and hereafter by Glory.

Behold the Course by which we are conducted to our End: and now, St Ambrose
shall end the Discourse. S. Ambrose l. 4. in Eucam, c. 16.
It is his Doctrine, that Christ was afflicted with seven bleedings. First: he
bled in his Circumcision against, and in the defyance of our Luxury or fleshly
Sins: Secondly: he bled in his Garden-Sweat, against our sins of Intemperance
and Gluttony; Sweat being occasioned and materially caused by the Fat of our
Bodies, which is begotten of plentiful nourishment; and this as a Sweat from
inward Heat and Motion, bringing blood with it: Thirdly: he bled in his
Coronation, or, when he was crowned with Thorns, against our Pride and
Ambition: Fourthly: he bled in his Flagellation or Scourging, against our Envy;
because a Whip is most agreeable to a Dog, which the Naturalists have exposed
as an Emblem of Envy: Fifthly: he bled in the boring or Perforation of his
Hands, against our Extortion and Covetousness; the Hands being the nimble
Instruments of gathering, pulling, tearing, and heaping up: Sixthly: he bled in
the nailing and Crucifixion of his Feet; against our Acedie and Slothfulness
in divine Matters: Lastly: he bled in his Lanceation, or, when his tender Side
was opened with a Spear, and the Water which cooled his Heart, was let forth in
the Rupture of his Pericardium; against, or, in the abommation of our Anger;
Anger being the Accension or Ebullition of the Blood about the Heart.

Wash us thoroughly from our Iniquity, Psalm. 51. 2.
and cleanse us from our Sin: O thou lover of Souls; O our love that wast
Crucified for us; O our God and our All.

Amen.
I freely, and more than Summis Lab^is, invite an able Answerer. Let him come.
He shall be entertained as he behaves himself It is easy to catch or snarl at,
yea to misinterpret and corrupt witsi a cursed Gloss, any Doing or Saying: as
the Jews and old Heathens misinterpreted the Sayings and Doings even of our
Lord and Savior Christ: infinitely beneath whom, we all are. My former
Wanderings and Aberrations from the Truth, I humbly confess and heartily repent
of. The Morality of my Life, let him blemish that can with Truth. I am known to
many: and there are many Witnesses of my Conversation. And now: Let God and Man
judge betwixt the Answerer and me: and Vincat Veritas.

I most heartily and humbly desire the Prayers of all good and growing
Christians, and such as are familiar with God in Prayer; on the behalf of an
intimous and inward Friend, who came with me from the Church of Rome, and has
been (I am certain) cordially adherent to the Church of England; but is now
greatly Spiritwounded and heavy-Heart-laden, upon a very sad and strange
Occasion. Which is: as she has oftentimes privately, and mournfully related to
me: She could comfortably say her Prayers, converse with God delightfully, and
abundantly weep for her Sins, when she was a Papist: and such Tears, Delights
and Comforts have been denied to her, during her Application to the Church of
England. She desires therefore, of this our most gracious God (if in Jesus
Christ he be so pleased) the restoring to her, of such Comforts, Delights and
Tears. And my Prayer is: Restore them to her, O our most gracious God, in
Jesus Christ.

Amen.
Substerno me pariter, and, ut par est, patienter huic Regiminis improviso
plane Miraculo, eo praesertim atque imprimis nomine, quod inter ultima (prima
non est animus revoluere) minime ultimum, imo quidem primum sit atque optimum.
Enimvero, Socii, cum Sinceritatibus promissioribus, and egregiis virtutum
Crepitaculis, cumque adipata Religione, Res haud agitur nostra: Neque profecto
(quicquid intemperantius effuderint Homines paralyticae Linguae Labiique
multiplicis ac subiti) sub Have a positi sumus. Commode potius anhelamus ad
Libertatem Liberis accommodam, and Morum Amorumque nunc anxie quaerimus
Delicias inter Arma, si non ex Condicto, ex Praedicto certe, Misericordia
suavissima conditas and sociali. Quin itaque Cogitationum reprimanous
immoderatos Impetus; obsignatisque fidelissime Labiis, aures arrigamus,
advertamus animos. Nullibi jam nunc securius inveniemus Depositum. De catenato
dein Event^^ videant hi prorsus impervti, penitusque occlusi Rebus ingloriis,
and impuris Fraterculorum praecipue, minorumque Gentium, in misellos and
exanctoratos Fratres Conjurationibus Animi, qui in sacro Fermento jam sunt, ut
Negotium ferveat sacrosanctum, and caelestis continno Panis emergat.

Authoris ad Classes quasdam lunaticas, vel in Orb lunatico; vel certe
Chimaericas and Utopianas, Epistola: scripta Anno 1648.
VIri Classiarii: Ad Classiculam Vestram in me multa nequiter, and immodeste,
nec non gloriose Crocitantem, and quasi Classicantem, legavi denuo Nunciolum
hunc Epistolarem.

De viro vere pio ut Oeconomo singulariter Classico and prudente, Psalm. 111. 5.
a pud Interp. vulg. Sept.
regaliter canit Chorista Regius idemque (...): Disponet sermones suos in
Judicio. Accinunt Septuginta: (...) (...): Ubi per (...), uti pensiculatius
Euthym. in hunc locum.
insinuat Euthymius, non sermones modo, verum etiam Rations modique
Administrationis, quibus Res nostras dissimili velut effictas Metallo, Mosaico
Opere componimus; in una quasi Class, cautius ad Exemplum reponuntur.

O Faces Ministrorum gregariae; pro Facibus egregiis, vobis Pace vestra
praeferam, ex veteri Testamento Abrahamu^; de quo (...) Zeno Veronensis: Zeno
Vero^. Sermon. 3.
Cujus Conversatio Lex fuit: Ex novo quidem, Dominum Jesum; quem Nazianzenus
ille Theologus ait, iccirco S. Greg. Naz. Orat. 31.
loca subinde mu^asse, ut nimirum (...).

Ad Politiam Beatorum, Christiani per (...) accedunt, ut S. Dionys. lib. 2.
Eccl. Hi^r. c. 2.
loquitur Areopagita; nempe quam servare pie, sancte pollicebantur Catechumeni,

Ni fallor; Haud patienter tolerabitis, a Feris Hominem discerpi, Revera;
Minime toleranter patiemini; Presbyterculos amputari, quamvis inutilia prorsus
in Sambuceto sarmenta. Sed interea nobis estis authors quodammopo Classici,
praecipitisque publicitus and cumulate per stomachum, ut quisque Fratris Honori
(...) petulanter ac mulicbriter objiciat. O Effatum, O Mandatu^ Propylaeo
Delphico non indignum! O Christianam (...)!

Emissarii vestri saepicule Vocantur ab Hesychio (...). Ego Hesych in Bib.
Aristot. l. 3. Eibicor.
plane dicerem cum Aristotele, (...): quippe qui Naturae Genio praefracti cum
sint, and obstipa Mente atque Obstrepera; tamen formident ex Officina Veritatis
elimata proferre Verba and librata: tandemque quasi re confecta (cum conficta,)
redeant e Pulvere Victores Olympiaco.

Nae vos Aedilitatem nequaquam versatis ac voluitis animo, cum Populares Vestri
primulum depeculentur Ecclesias; demumque per Epitasin turbulentam, in
Ecclesiasticos Viros virus expuant and exonerent; evomantque in Chartulas, ut
pestem Lectoribus inhalent.

Neronis opera conflagravit aliquando Septicollis Urbs quaquaversus incendio:
quo tempore cum infiniti propemodum Homines, Bonis Sutt. c. 3. 8
exuti penitus everlique, velut ad incitas redigerentur; ipse Tyrannus e Turri
Maecenatiana prospectans, and raptus incensusque flammae, ut aiebat, bella
pulchritudine, (...) Ilii, Scenico velatus Habitu decantavit.

Inflexo poplite, saluere vos jubeo, Maecenates, iidemque facile principes and
palmares; praesertim considentes pro Tribunali.

Hem: Dicite, quid in Aere (...)? (...) and Plant-Animal in Terra, quid? quis,
ex Homero Mars (...)? quis itidem, indies ambulans in Petauro (...)?

Audi, Viator candide. Quicquid suae peringeniose praetexant Inscitiae Ministri
Classici ex Arabico Nido scilicet in Praestega Classiaria: in eosdem ipsos
(Homines Veteratorios,) eorumque Mores Vernaculos, apprime quadrant haec omnia.

O Fulmen Dionysianum! (...). S. Dionys. Arcop. de divin. Nom. p. 2. ca^. 13.


Jam tandem Classicum velut ab alto canimus.

Anglia, Campus est; in quo, uno eodemque fere temporis momentillo, ut argute
Pindarus, (...) Pind. Olymp. od. 7. in fine.
(...). Imo, ut eleganter Aristides (cum lachrymas excuteret Aristid. in Orat.
ad Antoninum.
Antonino) de collapsa Terrae motu Smyrna, (...). Induit se nuperadmodum in
Florem Hyacinthum; nempe qui facie Caeli mutata, mutatur facie; serena sive
sit, sive nubila. Isidorum Isid. lib. 16. cap. 9.
percontamini.

Decumbit Anglia* Advocate (precor, O, precor) undique Medicos: non eos qui
magno cum sudore Nugas agunt ingentes, quosque alloquitur Jobus, (cum vos etiam
latenter indigitet,) Job 13. 4. ex Sept.
(...). Vocamini planius in Lingua primigenia, Medici Elil; quae vox apposite
redditur Fraus, Mendacium, Inanitas, Idolum.

Deducunt enim plerumque Doctores, Elil ab al, quod negationem pertinacem
strenuamque, hoc est, Non, imprimis ac direct significat. Eoque Res cadit; Ut
innuat Spirirus s^ist jusmodi Empiricos instar Nihili esse: quemadmodum and S.
Paulus Idolu, 1 Cor. 8. 4.
Nihil esse proclamat.

Symmacho estis (...): id est, ficti, sed infecti ac impoliti Medici, and ad
Amussim Asini, Asinique CLassici.

De Caelo propere Veniat Astraea, falcato potentius invecta Curru,
praecinensque Taratantara: and fumosas has Imagunculas Medicorum, de Subselliis
deturbet dejiciatque. Praecoferalis non diu desiderabitur.

Is It haec (...).

Jam, si lubet, Res nostras, collatis ut cunque Signis, discutiamus paululum.

Primo: Inerudite, perinscite, ac illiberaliter inquiritis in Ordines.
Profecto: quantuluscunque sum, Obsequentior Honori modo sum vestro, quam ut
arroganter in publico blaterem, Inquisitionem hanc (ulteriorem Hispanica,)
evidens Indicium esse Animi necdum Ignorantiae Crassae faecibus eliquati.

Haud peragito Controversias, jamdudum a Classicis accisas. Nolim Quaestione^,
tot jam annis consopita^, co^fectamque Senio, exurgere nuc in pedes, ac
repubescere; vos ut divexet. Nec velim sane vestros Ordines (ulcerosos illos
and squalidos, multorumque manibus allevatos, id est, Ordines Elil) in meorum
locum surrogari. Deinde: Castella perpere numeratis, ac tortuosa Negotia de
Rebus cum Regio Milite consutis. Vigilantium Somnia. Sed: Quid haec ad Candorem
Nominis offuscandum pariter minuendumque?

Tandem: Picturas eleganti forma, clamitatis defossas, effossasque. Nihil
uspiam profecto luctuosius: nimirum si vivae spirantesque defossae fuerint.
Denique: Producu^tur in meridianam lucem lucu^enta Testimonia, quibus
illuminatius evi^citur, me neutiquam Officiose liberis operam dare; (Nam a
Juramentis, Carnisque Ludibriis abhorruit semper Animus: habeoque nunc
exploratissimum, esse apud Vos in Udo Mendacium.) Ergo: Si, vobis arbitris,
(...) fuisse^ ac (...): hinc nihil tenebrarum aut labeculae Retiarius
offudisset. Ovestros Oculos emissitios!

En ut fidelis Eclogarius, Accusationis Apices ones adipales sigillatim attigi;
e quorum semilunari Cumulo Tumuloque Nomen meum hostis ille pharetratus veluti
sagittis appetiit (...), vel, ut Symmachus (...): Psalm. 10. 2. ex Sept.
in tenebris Scoticis.

Longu^ esset hujus Fallaciae modo telam (Exitii vestri (...)) retexere, and
omnia Conscribere Solis Radio.

Prove. 28. 6. Ubi Septuaginta transferunt, Sept.
Ambula^s (...): Latinus dat Edit. vulg.
Interpres, in Si^plicitate. Nec Injuria; cum in idem prorsus cadant aliquando
Simplicitas and Veritas. Versus ita Vertitur: Melior est Pauper Ambulans in
Simplicitate sua, quam Dives in pravis itineribus. Quippini? Etenim
simplicitas, Innocentia, perfectio unum volunt aliquoties idemque.

Psalm. 25. 1. Quoniam ego in Innocentia Lect. vulg.
mea ingressus sum. Pro Innocentia, subministrat, licet altum alibi Spirans,
Aquila Simplicitatem. Itaque Sanctus immutat Hieronymus; Aquila. S. Hieron.
Quia ego in Simplicitate mea ambulavi: C^jetanus; in Perfectione mea.

Quinimo and Genesis 17. 1. Ambula coram me, and esto perfectus. Simpliciter Text.
Hebr.
and Candide Fons Hebraeus effundit; Et esto Simplex.

Nazianzenus hanc Morum Simplicitatem S Greg. Naz. Orat. 19.
niveam, suis illustrius depingit coloribus: (...), etc.

In hilce persto.

Vanherum in imis atque infimis habeo, quamvis in Class vestra, ut Idiotarum
utar Idiotismo, Magistellu Sanctissimum: Scilicet qui non solum Pecunias mutuo
comparatas and corrasas importunissime, sed and Ute^silia (Vir bonus) persancte
deflexit in melius, ut nimirum famelicus enutriret Pellearium.

Tookhooro, Homini glirio, (nempe de Somno certanti cum gliribus,) jamjamque
rhoncho Suorum aures everberanti, molestus non ero.

Nighellum, filium Gad, (ludibundu Animal, and Scenae Delicias;) ad pedes
comice in Salutationibus accidente^, ac tanquam Cuniculos agentem cu^ nocturna
Facie, resaluto comiter.

In uno subticuit Adversarius. Haudquaquam in faciem audacter mihi dixit, me
clam, aliquot ante annos, in vestra confugisse Latibula and subterraneas
Voragines; stomach oque sic ebuliisse protinus, ut veram Dignitatem, and omne
Peculium Sapientiae projecerim.

Proinde non sum Frontis adeo inverecundae, tam funesti Oris, aut Fidei
subleslae; ut his Malorum fragoribus fulgetrisque me penitus exima^: quasi
manus auxiliatrices impuris eorum Causis promovendis neutiquam porrexerim.

D^us Adonai, miserere.

(Nam perillustres Hebraeorum Paul. Burgens. 1. part. Scrutin.
Theologi, serio literis tradiderunt; Dei Justitiam inferri per Elohim,
Misericordiam per Adonai.

S. Fulgentius Oraculum Isaiae perpendens, Is. 55. 7. S. Fulgen. ep. 7. ad
Venant.
de Deo miseris accurrente discurrentis: Multus est ad ignoscendum: magnus est
in exponendo. In hoc multo, inquit, nihil deest, in quo est Omnipotens
Misericordia, and Omnipotentia Misericors. Tanta est autem Benignitas
Omnipotentiae, and Omnipotentia Benignitatis in Deo, ut nihil sit quod nolit,
aut non possit relaxare converso.

Huic Sanctus adglutinetur Ambrosius, Psalm. 114. 5.
illustrans illud ab Psalmo 114. Misericors Dominus, and justus, and Deus
noster miseretur. Bis Misericordiam posuit, semel Justitiam. In S. Ambr. de
Obitu T^xodos.
medio Justitia est, gemino Septo inclusa Misericordiae.

Isthoc o quantum lenior malagmamate! In Misericordiam divinam, Laurum and
Oleam quatientem, figo equidem oculos.

Valete, Clas^es, cum inani vestro Antesignano Multitono (sonante cum Naso:)
qui, ni Frons in aes occalluis^et, non, o^septus nigro Satellite, Vanheri
Mendacium Sanctitatis Elogio splendido praenitide texisset; interea Vultu
quoque in Dolum ficto.

Instructus ad Palaestram hic inter miros Voluptatis Opifices, Artifices,
Architectos; abeo peregre militatum, luto eluto, rerumque pertaesus vestrarum.
Nec tamen abreptus improvisae subitaeque Tempestatis quasi turbine,

Enimvero: Ex Ethicae Mammil lis a puero suxi: Eum qui virtutes meditatur,
meditate agere, atque ex Electione; non temere, non motu Praecipiti: atque adeo
laudabilem Finem honestumque omnino sibi proponere.

Vosque Sectae Calvinisticae, sectae, dissectae, subsectae, resectaeque, and
etiamnum sectiles in infinitum, (o and quot in unaquaque in unum coeunt
Monstra!) vobis una precor sanam Mentem, and Elleboro perpurgata Capita.

Prove. 14. 34. Justitia elevat Gentem: miseros autem facit populos peccatum.
Quod apud Septuaginta, versum obtinet 36. (...). In Hebraica Veritate, Verbis
aliud sonantibus haec ultima vestiuntur; Sensus idem subest. Quocirca regerit
Arias Montanus; Misericordia populorum Arias. Mont.
Peccatum: hoc est: Scelus ante omnia miserationem flagitat, cum sit miserorum
miserrimum, efficiatque miserrimos. Symmachus ex Origin; Sym. Chald. Paraph.
(...). Chaldaeus offert in Paraphrasi; Opprobrium Populi Peccatum.

Cujus in Umbraculis temporariis, vos, uti Faunos Satyrosque, prae quam oportet
joculariter lusitantes, palpitantesque juveniliter, lubens ovansque jam nunc
expansis Velis, adflante Aura, praetereo; proque plumis habeo variis pictisque,
delatis ex Orb novo, ut in Orbem novum subinde vos referat rapiatque Turbo
novus omnis Anglicanus.

1 Timothy 1. 17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise
God, be honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.
FINIS.

