A COPY OF THAT LETTER Mentioned in a Letter printed July 12. written out of
Lancashire.

Which was sent in the name of the Army by two Soldiers, to the Soldiery of
Lancashire, to invite and draw them in to adhere to the Army.

Together with a Postscript.

MATTHEW. 23.15. VVoe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for ye compass
sea and land, to make one Proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him two fold
more the child of hell then your selves.

Printed in the year, 1647.

A Copy of that Letter, mentioned in a Letter printed July 12. written out of
Lancashire, etc.
Honored friends and fellow Soldiers:
WE doubt not but various reports of this Armies proceedings, are come to your
ears, which may beget strange interpretations of us and our actions; for
prevention whereof, as also (to unfold our real intentions unto you) we have
here endeavored to possess you with the truth, and right understanding of us.

We are very sensible how ready your envious and malicious are to suggest evil
of us undeservedly, and to blow up the coals of discention betwixt the
Parliament and this Army, by mis-representing all our proceedings, though never
so just, modest, and humble; as witness the harsh, and indeed unjust
proceedings lately against us, for no other thing, then intending to present
our necessary requests to our General by way of Petition, which (though but
intended) so highly crossed the spirit of some, as ye prevailed to have us
declared against as enemies to the State; which dealing of theirs is nothing
correspondent with our deserts, or suitable to the nature of our Petition; and
therefore may (if such ambitious men continue in their as yet uncontrollable
power) equally extend both to you and any other Members of this Kingdom, with
the absolute loss of their Rights and Privileges which were doubly his, viz.
both by birth and conquest: And as at first you and we took up Arms to free
our selves from Tyranny and Oppression; so we doubt not but you resolve to
persevere with us in our humble desires of Justice and equity, the impartial
administration whereof is without doubt, essential to this Kingdoms happiness.

Friends, we hope our diligence and faithfulness in the late service, are
sufficient evidence of our cordial affections to this Kingdoms welfare, they
which we so much tender beyond all other Relations, as that we could willingly
deny our own particulars for a happy and peaceable settlement thereof, that the
Subjects might freely enjoy their proper Rights, without such apparent checks
of Tyranny and Oppression, as this poor Kingdom at present is more subject to
then ever. Our humble addresses have been slighted and rejected (though
reasonable) and had no other answer then a Vote to disband the Army, with an
inconsiderable sum of eight weeks pay; not sufficient to maintain the private
Soldiers in their journeyes home, which so discontented them, as that at the
General Rendezvouze the Army contracted and engaged not to be disbandrd or
divided, but entirely to preserve themselves from such distractions as appeared
to be plotting against us by our malicious Enemies: And if an Army whose
faithfulness has been sealed with their blood, shall be so slighted, as to be
declared Enemies whilst they have Arms in their hands, for only intending an
humble address by Petition, for but what is their due, and no more then was
frequently promised at their first engagement; what may not be done against
them when they shall be disbanded, and so dispersed one from another, we leave
you and the whole world to judge; especially when those men remaining in the
same Power and Authority, who first misrepresented our intentions to the
Parliament, and who begot that undeserved brand upon us, of being Enemies, so
that neither we nor the Kingdom can enjoy freely peace and justice, when such
unjust men shall be Judges still, having the liberty to persist in their
endeavors, to set division betwixt us and the Parliament and Kingdom, by
their raising scandals upon us, and so far as ye can to engage the City of
London and Kingdom of Scotland against us.

And least that you upon misinformation should be induced to strengthen the
hands of these Incendiaries against this Army, whereby they may be better
enabled to tread Justice under foot, nd advance their own unjust proceedings;
We hold it our Duty, as members of one and the same Kingdom with you, to let
you understand both of our just proceeding, and their violent intentions, and
we doubt not but as hitherto you have appeared public friends in this Kingdoms
distress, so you will now demonstrate your selves faithful members thereof,
in endeavoring its preservation from a tyranny and oppression, trusting your
fidelity to the Public good is such as neither the frowns, favors, nor
subtle policies of any whomsoever can move you from your former acknowledged
steadfastness, so as to engage with the Scots, or any other forces against the
Army, whereby to imbroyle this now poor Kingdom in a new and bloody war,
whose former glory has been terror and amazement to its neighbors and other
foreign parts; so hoping God will direct you in improving your utmost
endeavors and abilities for the use of the Public, which if not looked to
will be made sub-serviant to the private interests and designs of particular
men, who intend to raise themselves by its own ruin, which we in our places
(and we hope you in yours) will endeavor to keep off; and to that end the
Lord direct you; so we bid you heartily farewell, resting yours and the
Kingdoms faithful friends and servants, agitating in behalf of the Army.

We have sent you herewith the Declarations of the Army, more fully to satisfy
you of our intentions, with other Papers.

Hdw. Siegeby, John Tailor, Generals Regiment of Horse. William Allin, Sam.
Whiting, Lieutenant General Cromwells Regiment. Anth. Nichson, Tho. Shepherd,
Commiss. Generals Regiment. William Jones, Col, Fleetwoods Regiment. Nich.
Lorkins, Jo. Brachan, Col. Rich his Regiment. Jo. Wllloughby, Tobias Cox, Col.
Nortons Regiment. Edw. Sterr, Edw. Githings, Col. Harris Regiment. Burton
Wilcock, Rich. Clarke, Col. Tomlinsons Regiment. Rich. Salter, Geo. Stephenson,
Col. Scroopes Regiment. Jo. Wilson, Nath. Seuster, Col. Rositors Regiment.
Daniel Abot Major, John Carler, John Cleack, Edm. Rolph, Alex. Brafield, Hen.
Audley, Amos Stoddard, Edw. Twigg, Captains.
Foot Regiments.
Io. Newson, Edw. Vahan, Col. Gerands Regiment. Nath. Forgill, Will.
Bridgeman, Col. Hamonds Regiment. John Millers, Rich. Coulbrand, Col. Lambards
Regiment. Robert Mason, Hen. Anderton, Col. VVhalers Regiment. John Field, Edw.
Swalbie, Col. Lilburnes Regiment. Rich. Andrews, Ra. Prentice, Col. Prides
Regiment. Edw. Garner, Col. Hughsons Regiment.
A Postscript, showing what success this Letter from the Army had among the
Souldery in Lancashire.
THe general Committee of our County, and all the Commanders had a meeting
this week, the Commanders generally have declared their well affection to the
Parliament, and have expressed themselves in high Language to one of the Troopers
that came from the Army in dislike of his course.

FINIS.

