A COPY OF SOME PAPERS Lately passed betwixt The Lord FAIRFAX on the one side,
AND The Earl of Norwich, Lord Capel, and Sir Charles Lucas, on the other, at
COLCHESTER.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

19. Junii, 1648.
THe Committee of Parliament (now under Restraint at Colchester) upon their
humble request for it to the Ld Norwich, Ld Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas, have
obtained leave of them that they the said Committee may make it their humble
proposal to the Ld Fairfax, that there may be a Treaty between both Armies for
a Peace,

W. Row. Tho: Ayloff. To: Smyth. Sam: Sheffeild. Will: Masham. T. Middleton.
Io: Eden. Io: Langley. Io: Barnardiston. Rob: Crane.
IT is the general Peace of the Kingdom we contend for, and therefore we are
content that the Committee shall send their above-written Proposal to the Ld
Fairfax, according unto their request made unto us,

Norwich. Arthur Capell. Charles Lucas.

To the Earl of Norwich, Lord Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas.
My Lords,
THe Paper sent to me enclosed in the Letter from your Lordships and Sir
Charles Lucas of the 19. instant, seems in the first part of it so drawn as
that I could not well understand it, what kind of Treaty, or for what Peace it
meant: But the latter part underwritten by your Lordships, and Sir Charles
Lucas, seems to explain your own meaning, so as you meant a Treaty betwixt the
Armies for the general peace of the Kingdom, and not otherwise for your
selves, or your Garrison: And to the Contents of it in that sense I can only
say, That such a Treaty, and for such a Peace is not the proper work of my
self, or the Army, but theirs that have mployed us. But if the English be to
make way for Conditions to your Garrison, I shall (without the trouble of a
Treaty) let you know what your selves, and those under you may expect from me
(which for the restoring of quiet to this County, and the Kingdom without more
bloodshed) and for the saving of so eminent a Town from the chance of War, I
shall offer) viZ. That if your selves, and the rest with you in Colchester,
shall within 24 hours after notice hereof lay down Arms, the common Soldiers,
and men of that rank, shall have liberty to depart to their several Homes, and
there quietly to remain, submitting to the Authority of Parliament, (and this
I shall make good however to so many of that sort respectively as shall accept
thereof, and do accordingly) your selves and the Officers and Gentlemen engaged
with you in the Town shall have liberty and Passes to go beyond Sea with
equipage befitting their qualities (engaging themselves not to return into
this Kingdom without leave from the Parliament.) And all of both sorts with
the Inhabitants of the Town shall be free from plunder or violence of the
Soldiery (their Arms, Ammunition, and furniture of war within the Town, and
also their Horses, employed in military service (except such Horses and Swords
as shall be thought fit to be allowed to Captains or superior Officers and
Gentlemen of quality for their removal) being first delivered up without
imbeazlement in an orderly manner as shall be further set down, and the Forces
under my command, or such as I shall appoint, being admitted a peaceable
entrance into the Town. I desire the Committee of Parliament now in your hands
(who by their subscriptions to part of the Paper, and by your sending of it as
from them, or at their request, are concerned to know what my Answer is) may be
acquainted herewith, and indeed if it be concealed from any that are concerned
in it, The blame thereof from God and man is like to fall on their Heads, who
shall be the Authors of such concealment.

20. of June, 1648. Your servant FAIRFAX.

To the Lord FAIRFAX, these.
My Lord,
WE have received yours of the 20. which takes notice of the Paper of the 19.
subscribed by the Committee, and of our permission to have it delivered to you.
You have very justly apprehended our intentions to be the public peace of the
Kingdom, And we again own that sense, and no other, as befitting the duty of
Englishmen. And we do believe if both Armies were accorded in such an
endeavor it were the most pious, easy and honorable action wherein they
could be engaged. But why you have taken occasion by that act of ours to offer
Conditions in particular to us, we understand not, nor can it be supposed
without straining, and offering violence to our manner of proceedings. Those
Conditions you proffer to the Officers and Soldiers on our part, we do hereby
make offer of to the Officers and Soldiers on your part. We shall in this
occasion deal frankly and plainly; we do not without evident reason conceive
our selves to be in a condition able to entertain all the force you can make,
and thereby to give courage and opportunity to all truehearted Englishmen to
recover their ancient and known Laws; Or if you shall adventure to attaque us,
we doubt not but by the mercy and assistance of Almighty God to give you such a
repulse as shall give testimony of our force and courage, And at how high a
rate we value the general peace of the Kingdom. You do with more then usual
earnestness desire that your Answer should be communicated to the Committee,
and whom else it may concern. We apprehend you chiefly intend the Inhabitants
of Colchester; we were very unworthy persons if any should exceed us in our
care for this good Town, And we doubt not but God will recompense the
kindness we have received from them, and that he has a reward in store for
them, suitable to the Loyalty and Fidelity they have hitherto manifested toward
the KING, and known Laws of the Kingdom. And because you apprehend it so
important, and necessary to divulge the proceedings in this affair, we will
therefore put it into your power; And therefore we desire your Lordship to
cause the Paper signed by the Committee (of the 19.) and our Answer subsigned,
the Answer of your Lordship to us of the 20. and this our Reply of the 21. to
be all printed, and as many of the prints as you shall send to us, we will
disperse in Colchester, and those parts of the Country under our power, and to
each person of the Committee, one.

Colchester, the 21. of June, 1648. Your Servants, NORWICH. ARTHUR CAPEL.
CHARLES LUCAS.


