A MITE CAST INTO THE Common Treasury: OR, Queries propounded (for all men to
consider of) by him who desires to advance the work of public Community.
December: 18. 1649
ROBERT COSTER.
1. Whether all men (by the grant of God) are not alike free, and all to enjoy
the Earth with the fullness thereof alike, ( Geneses 1. from the 26. verse, to
the end of the Chapter, and the 9. Chap. from the 1. to the 18. verse,) until
they sell their Birthright and Inheritance, for a proud idle life: the 2. of
the Thessalonians, and the 3. Chapter, from the 6. to the 13. verse?

2. Whether the Scriptures in many places, do not complain of man's Lording over
his own kind, (as in Isaiah 3.15. Luke 22.24.25. and 26. verses. Mat. 23. chap.
from the first to the 13. verse,) Calling such men for their nature and
cruelty, Lions, Wolves, Foxes, Dogs, (Isaiah 56.10 11. Ezekiel. 22.27. The men
call some of them, Lords of Man^ors, Ministers, and Lawyers?)

3. Whether particular propriety, was not brought into the room of public
Community, by Murder and Theft; and accordingly have been upheld and
maintained? In which Acts of cruelty, whether those devouring Creatures before
mentioned, have not been chief, and whether such naked shameless doings do not
lie lurking under fig-leave Clothing, such as Sabbath, Fasting, and
Thanksgiving days, Doctrines, Forms, and Worships?

4. Whether the Lords of Manors, do not hold their Right and Title to the
Commons, merely from the Kings Will, (which Will proving a Burden to the
Nation, caused the King to loose his head) and whether the strongest point in
their Law for the keeping up their Title, be not, Take him Jailer?

5. Whether the Common People of England may not seize upon the Land, which is
called after their own name, to wit, the Commons, for to dress and improve it
for their best advantage; for these Reasons following, without paying fines,
Quit-rents, Heriots, or swearing Fealty, (or any other cursed and diabolical
payments whatsoever,) to any Tyrant soever?

First, Because the great Creator of all things, ordained that the earth with
the fullness thereof should be a common Treasury of Livelihood for all, and that
none should Lord over his own kind; but that all should love as Brethren, and
so glorify the Creator in the work of his hands.

Secondly. Because the Common People of England, have (these six or seven
hundred years) been shut out from having any benefit of the Earth, except that
which they have bought by their slavish payments. And all this by and through
the means of that illegitimate Lord and Master propriety, which was ushered
into the Creation, by those two grand disturbers of our Peace, Murder and
Theft; and therefore now it is high time for them (the Common People) to lay
hold upon the wast Land, that so they may receive some benefit freely, and may
no longer live in a starving condition: and this cannot with reason be denied
by the Gentry and Clergy, if they consider what cruelty they have acted toward
their Fellow Creatures these many years, who have a privilege to the Earth
equal with themselves.

Thirdly. Because there is no Statute Law in the Nation that does hinder the
common people from seizing upon their own Land, (but only the mercinary wills
of men,) and therefore where there is no Law, there is no transgression.

Fourthly. Because oppression and cruelty does bear so much sway in the Nation,
that poor men will be necessitated to make a breach of the Laws of the Nation,
if they are not suffered to labor the Earth for their maintenance.

Whether it would not prove an Inlet to Liberty and Freedom, if poor men which
want Employment, and others which work for little wages, would go to digging
and manuring the Commons, and most places of the Earth; considering effects
that this would produce?

As 1. If men would do as aforesaid, rather then to go with Cap in hand, and
bended knee, to Gentlemen and Farmers, begging and entreating to work with them
for 8 d. or 10 d. a day, which does give them an occasion to tyrannize over
poor people, (which are their Fellow Creatures,) if poor men would not go in
such a slavish posture, but do as aforesaid. then rich Farmers would be weary
of renting so much Land of the Lords of Manors.

2. If the Lords of Manors, and other Gentlemen who covet after so much Land,
could not let it out by percells, but must be constrained to keep it in their
own hands, then would they want those great baggs of money, (which do maintain
pride, Idleness, and fullness of bread, which are carried into them by their
Tenants, who go in as slavish a posture as may be; namely, with Cap in hand,
and bended knee, crouching and creeping from corner to corner, while his Lord
(rather Tyrant) walks up and down the Room with his proud looks, and with
great swelling words, questions him about his holding.

3. If the Lords of Manors, and other Gentlemen, had not those great bags of
money brought into them. Then down would fall the Lordliness of their spirits,
and then poor men might speak to them; then there might be an acknowledging of
one another to be Fellow Creatures.

For, what is the Reason that great Gentlemen covet after so much Land, is it
not because Farmers and others creep to them in a slavish manner, proffering
them great sums of money for such and such percells of it, which does give
them an occasion to tyrannize over their fellow Creatures which they call their
Inferiors.

Secondly. And what is the Reason that Farmers and others are so greedy to rent
Land of the Lords of Manors: Is it not because they expect great gains, and
because poor men are so foolish and slavish as to creep to them for employment,
although they will not give them wages enough to maintain them and their
Families comfortably: All which do give them an occasion to tyrannize over
their Fellow Creatures, which they call their Inferiors.

All which considered, if poor men which want Employment and others which work
for little wages, would go to dress and improve the common and wast Lands,
whether it would not bring down the prizes of Land, which does principally
cause all manner of things to be dear?

Whether a Livelihood be not the right and propriety of every man; Look in the
first Query.

Whether this be not intruded into by those which do impoverish their
Fellow Creatures by their buying and selling, and by their enclosing and
appropriating the Earth, with the fruits thereof unto themselves (purposely to
uphold their Lordly spirits) as most men do; and so (in plain English) rob and
steafe from their fellow Creatures, their proper right and Inheritance?

Whether those Scriptures which say, Love thy Neighbor as thy self; and do
unto all men as you would they should do unto you: and He that has this Worlds
goods, and sees his Brother in want, and yet shuts up the bowels of
Compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? Matt. 7 12, John the
first Chapt. the 3. verse the 17.

And many such Scriptures; Whether they are not least spoken of, and less
practiced among men now a days, although in them is contained the whole Law
and Prophets?

The Nation is in such a state as this,
to honor rich men because they are rich.
And poor men, because poor most do them hate,
O, but this is a very cursed State.
But those which act from love which is sincere,
will honor truth where ever it does appear.
And no respecting of persons will be with such,
but Tyranny they will abhor in poor or rich.
And in this state is he whose name is here,
your very loving friend, Robert Costeer.
THough we have been sad
yet now are glad
To see such a joyful time,
Our Misseries they,
Are passing away,
And truth begins too clime.
We shall
be freed from thrall
When Righteousness reigns as King,
The Glory so bright
Shall darken the light
Which comes from the Man of sin.
Though men do us hate,
yet we in this state
Do suffer joyfully,
Though stripes we receive,
We do them forgive,
Which acts such cruelty.
For we
with them must agree,
Who seeks our blood to spill,
And thus we may
Their cruelty slay,
Yea thus we shall envy kill.
The Poor long
have suffered wrong,
By the Gentry of this Nation,
The Clergy they
Have bore a great sway
By their base insultation.
But they shall
Lie level with all
They have corrupted our Fountain;
And then we shall see
Brave Community,
When Valleys lie level with Mountains.
Tyranny have
made many a slave
Within this Land of ours,
But he must pack
For his Power does crack
And the day it will be ours.
The Priests ball.
and after him call
Saying, you must with us abide,
For if you do go
Then comes our woe,
And we shall have no more Tithe.
The Gentry are
filled with the like care,
How they shall their Power maintain,
For they know
If Tyranny go,
They must pack to France or to Spain.
Therefore they
will this gallant stay,
And hide him under a back Gown,
Or else in a Coach
Will keep him very close,
Fearing he should be found.
The time indeed
that this cursed seed
Does as closely in all men;
But chiefly in those
Who are Englands foes,
And we do very well know them.
But the light
that shines so bright
Reveileth this wickedness,
And it must go
I very well know
To a Land of forgetfullnesse.
The time is nigh
that this mystery
Shall be no more abscure,
And then we shall see
Such community
As shall always endure,
The Rich and Poor
shall love each other
Respecting of Persons shall fall,
The Father alone
That sits in his Throne
Shall honored be of all.
The glorious State
which I do relate
Unspeakable comfort shall bring,
The Corn will be green
And the Flowers seen
Our storehouses they will be filled
The Birds will rejoice
with a merry voice
All things shall yield sweet increase
Then let us all sing
And joy in our King,
Which causes all sorrows to cease.
FINIS.

