ASTROLOGY Proved HARMLESS, USEFUL, PIOUS. Being A SERMON Written by Richard
Carpenter.

ROMANS 14. 10. Why do thou judge thy brother? or, why do thou set at naught
thy brother? We shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ. S. Clem.
Ep. 1. ad Jacob. Sunt Homicidae interfectores Fratrum: and sunt Homicidae
detractores eorum. There are Homicides, who kill their Brethren: and there are
Homicides, who detract from them. It was the common Saying of S. Peter,
according to Clemens Romanus, being the Clement here cited. LONDON: Printed by
Ja: Cottrel, for John Allen at the Rising Sun, and Joseph Barber at the Lamb in
Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

Doctissimo Domino ET Amico meo Multis nominibus observando, ELIAE ASHMOLO,
Armigero.
Fortissime Literarum Astrologicarum Atlas:
ETsi Consiliis meis intimum habeam Bernardum; cujus est in Coelo Theologico,
veluti Stella primae Magnitudinis; Haec S. Bern. sermon. 43. in Cant.
mea sublimior Philosophia, scire Jesum and hunc crucifixum: Sublimem tamen
Philosophiam, Corporum Coelestium indagatricem, cum Philosophis ad unum
omnibus, in summis pono. Quippe quae meditationi juxta, and actioni, honorifice
materiam fomitemque suppeditat.

Meditatio and Actio conspirant in Vitam mixtam, quae perfectionis numeros
omnes implet, utpote complexa perfectiones ambarum, licet non in gradu summo
sicutique sunt in ipsis. Quinimo est Vita Angelorum, atque etiam haud incongrue
Solis Radiis assimilatur, qui uno eodemque tempore, substantiae Solis fideliter
adhaerent, and in terras diffuse prolabuntur.

Ait Metropoli Judaeorum Dominus per Ezekielem; Ezekiel. 16. 10. Idierp. Vulgat.
seps.
Calceavi te janthino. Ita vulgatus: Vel, ut habent Septuaginta, (...),
Hyacinthino, i. e. violacei and Coelestis coloris calceo. Ut Symbolice notum
daret; Sanctorum, quibus Ecclesia Matter est, quique ad Civitatem Dei pertinent,
gressus esse Coelestes versusque Coelum versos. Nempe, quod Sancti sanctissimi
Christi, qui descendit de Coelo, ut in Coelum Triumphator ascenderet, vestigiis
insistant, mandatisque divinis respondendo Coelum petant Coelorum: Quin and in
Astrologos quodammodo Calcei quadrant Hyacinthini. Atque ut aurei mali succo
scriptae Literae, tum demum leguntur, cum flammis atque ignibus illustrantur:
ita divinae potentiae Cylindros in humanis accurate pervestigamus, ubi res
humanas ad Astra sapienter transferimus.

Egregie Aristoteles; sed filo solutiore: Cognitio minima Arist. lib. 1. de
Partib. Animatiam, cap. 5.
de rebus maximis, major est, quam cognitio maxima de minimis rebus. Aqua
fluvialis, dum suo contineatur atque agitetur alveo, naribus aut oculis haud se
praebet ingratam: si diverticula quaerat atque otia, mutata res est: Aquas
marinas casus manet idem; idemque sacram deinsuper Astrologiam. Omnium motuum
causa est primus motus. Bonorum omnium Actuum est causa Actus ille qui primus
atque optimus. Utrobique tamen libertas inconcussa consistit. Si namque Stellae
voluntati nostrae victrices admoverent Machinas, totum utique hominem
pervaderent. Rationem ingerit Angelicus Doctor: Quilibet D. Tho. p. 1. q. 5.
art. 4. ad 3.
habens voluntatem, dicitur bonus, in quantum habet bonam voluntatem: quia per
voluntatem utimur omnibus quae in nobis sunt. Unde non dicitur bonus homo, qui
habet bonum intellectum, sed qui habet bonam voluntatem. In omni sententia
novus Achates, Imaguncula nova. Sed Excellentiae atque Innocentiae fraudem
facit Invidia. In longum palma rectumque porrigitur, and, ultra fructuum
delicias, ramos explicat fragrantes: At incommodant ei Serpents ac Ranunculi,
radicibus adhaerentes.

Homo nigellus, quasi umbra ex Hyposcenio, Astrologos persequitur. Non huic
unquam detulit primas, palmamque dedit Alma Matter, non Soror Almae. Preterea,
rumor in vulgus abiit, hunc nescio quibus laborare Paroxysmis; and rursum
semper ad ingenium redire: nec posse cogitationes, vel santerna delinitas,
coercere: scilicet in aegris his exulceratisque rebus, and extrema jam spe
pendentibus. Certe, coguntur in angustum hujus copiae, qui praeter Anglicanae
Linguae petitas e trivio faeculas, haud quicquam venditat: quique surdis
narrare velit fabulam, redolentem profecto hircum, suem; simium, haud
qualemcunque sed imprimis eum qui sit vetus, vietus, veternosus. Adest, and
abest: verba conglobat; idemque rescindit: comparet; ac, velut unguento magico
delibutus, conspectui se, cum voluerit subducit. Deinde Lepus (ut ita dicam) ad
Ovium gregem se recipit, insequentibus a Tergo regiis canibus; non ut Oves
adjungat sibi comites, sed ut odore leporino in Ovium abeunte, canes effugiat.

Scripsit Hieronymus Rorarius Libros duos, quibus Titulus est, Quod Animalia
Bruta saepe ratione utantur Hieron. Rorar. lib. 1.
melius Homine. In quorum primo, non inamoenam de cane texit Historiam: cum
Circitor e gremio Libellum extraheret distinctum notis musicis, ad genua
confestim canis exiliens, canentem perite sectabatur voce nunc acuta, nunc
etiam gravi; modo quidem continuato Spiritu in longum tracta, modo iterum
inflexo delicate variata. Et nunc Circitori plebeius canis accinit, isque
praeterea iratus ac rabidus, nec tamen vel adhuc timendus.

Idem Rorarius in Libro secundo, literis exaratum Idem. lib. 2.
reliquit; homines non paucos aliquoties, imo vero quotidie reperiri, quibus ob
admissa furta tergus virgis intercisum, abscissae auriculae, genae cauterio
signatae, truncata manus altera, oculus erutus; nec tamen a furtis continere se
posse, donec laqueo se pendulos dederint. In hunc ad unguem cadunt haec omnia,
reposito aliquantisper laqueo.

Accipe nunc igitur, Vir optime, in benevolentiae tuae Apothecam, (cujus
cogitatio, instar Nepenthis Homerici, in hac mea tam vitrea, and ancipiti
valetudine, me luxatum and jacentem recreavit ac erexit in pedes) pauculos ex
uberiore mess manipulos. Noli, quaeso, in futurum propendentes praepedire
conatus; fervori sacro noli frigidam offundere. Sub tuo Patrocinii velut
Asterismo, res ipsa mihi praestabit adoream.

Tui observantissimus: Richardus Carpenterus.

To the Honorable SOCIETY OF ASTROLOGERS.
Gentlemen,
AS in our Country, which is Heaven, God is Speculum Creaturarum; The Glass of
the Creatures: wherein the Creatures are resplendent, visible, and presented by
the Beatifical Vision, (though not as it beatifies:) So in our Way, being this
World and Life, the Creatures are Speculum Creatoris, The Glass in which we
behold the Creator. Now because the Creator is Primum Ens, The first Thing: and
therefore the most noble of all Things; those Creatures are the clearer, and
the more Christalline Glass, which are the most noble. In this rank are the
Heavenly Bodies. And to the view of this Glass especially, ye are now invited,
and as it were, solicited by them.

Tertullian observes, That the verbal Salutation of Tert. lib. 5. Contra
Marcion. cap. 5.
the old Jews, when they met occasionally, Scalom lechem, Pax vobis, Peace be
unto you: and that the Apostolical Salutation somewhat differed, being Gratia
and Pax vobis; Grace and Peace be unto you; because the Apostles were the
Preachers of Grace derived from God through Christ. Wherefore, that the noble
Creature may be a fair Glass to you, representing the Creator; my Salutation of
you, shall be likewise Apostolical: Grace be to you, and Peace: Grace from God
the Fountain of Grace; and that Peace which divine Grace produces, and settles.
Grace be to you before your enquiry into the heavenly Bodies; and a gracious
Peace, after it: that your enquiry may be chiefly and primordially, a sober
enquiry into God and his Omnipotency. For, as Saint Gregory Nazianzen, St.
Greg. Naz. in Apologetico.
Theologically teaches: (...), It is the best order, when we begin either a
Speech or a Work; religiously to begin with God, and to end with God
religiously. By the way: I do not here abuse the most holy Name of God, and of
Religion, (although some have done it) as Conjurers in their Incantations; to
perpetrate those Things which are most adverse to God, and most destructive of
Religion: but I use it only in the shutting up of my Apostolical Salutation of
you, as ye are Christians, and as wise beholders of the Glass, wherein the
Creator, though in Himself invisible, visibly appears and shows Himself.

If ye steer this course; (and I am not warranted to judge otherwise of you:) I
shall number your ignorant, yea, impudent Enemies, and those who revile you,
amongst the mad people of this Nation. And now it calls for admittance; I will
open to you a Secret, locked up in the close Cabinet of my Thoughts. But, I
pray, keep it as a Secret, and tell it not abroad: neither let it go into the
cold air. I have experimentally found in the world, that Princes have their
Jayls for Offenders, and their Bedlams for mad People: and I know, that God is
the greatest of Princes; and that Hell is his Jayl. And in good sooth I never
heard of, read of, or beheld a place, which can more appliably be called his
Bedlam than England. But ye will say: How so? England God's Bedlam? are all the
People of England mad? I answer: No: for in a Bedlam-house, the mad People have
their sober Keepers, their wise Physicians, their civil Waiters and Servants;
and also those, whose office it is to whip them, and thereby to awake and recall
their Senses. There Is the Secret. But they who ignorantly and impudently scoff
at you, are certainly in the number of the mad ones. And therefore, be not ye
dismayed; be not discomforted.

The Psalmist sings of Man: Thou have made Psalm. 8. 5. S. Hieron. in Bibl.
him a little lower then the Angels. Saint Hierom gives: a little lower then
God; the Word being Elohim, signifying both God and Angels. And in many
respects, man is priviledg'd before the Angels. One of which I shall propose
here. The Creature purely corporeal is subjected to the Angels, because the
Angels stand above it in order, and because they may naturally exercise their
prevalent power upon it; if God gives the Command: as men also can
supernatually, who are supernatually endued with the power of working Miracles.
But it is not subjected to them quoad usum, to use it as God has subjected it
to men. It is granted: the Angels more acutely, and accurately, more fully and
and plentifully understand the motions and effects of the heavenly Bodies, then
men do: But yet again, they do not, as men do, communicate their knowledge to
men, (nor always to Angels) neither are we rendered more learned by them.

In a Lymbeck, the substance of greatest purity and virtue is sublimated: I
mean: climbes to the top of the Lymbeck: when the sullen drossy matter sinks
downward, and falls to the bottom. Go on therefore, O ye noble Students in
Astrology: and because the soul is immured in the Body, and is like the Bird of
Paradise, when she is cag'd; though your Bodies, being drossy, are not
obedientially subject to your souls in their motions: advance your souls
toward Heaven. And yet as Saturn the most supreme Planets has the slowest
course; so the higher ye are in your Thoughts, be ye the more deliberate in
your actions: and I pray God to strike all our hard and heavy hearts with the
Rod of Moses, Exodus 17. Heb. 12. 1.
that our sins, and every weight in our souls, may run away in tears; and that
we ascending to and above the Lights in Heaven, our conversation may be in
heaven, Philip. 3. 20. Mat. 5. 16.
and shine upon Earth.

Yours in all Christian Respects: Richard Carpenter.

ASTROLOGY Proved Harmless, Useful, Pious.
ALthough God be, as he is described in Dionysius Areopagita; (...): S. Dionys.
Areop. de divin. Nom. cap. 1.
a supersubstantial Substance, an Understanding not to be understood, a Word
never to be spoken: and therefore we know not the mysterious or profound Things
of God, but as they have been chanell'd to us by God himself in divine
Revelation: yet his Creatures, as descended from him, and even those which are
above us (in place or perfection) may be in some due measure, known by us, upon
our own quest and enquiry.

The Reason is Pillar-strong, Because the highest and most perfect of Creatures
are conditioned infinitely beneath God: and betwixt finite and infinite there
is no proportion.

Where Saint Paul writing to the Ephesians, has in the English, The foundation
of the World; and in the Latin, Ephesians. 1. 4.
Mundi Constitutionem: The Constitution of the World Editio vulgaris. Textus
Graecus.
the Original founds, (...), the dejection of the World. Because the World, and
the Things in and of the World, are, by virtue of their Creation dejected, and
cast downwards; having received as it were, an infinite fall in their Creation,
and dejection from God. Wherefore Saint Chrysostom, examining these words of S.
Chrysostom. in cap. 1. Ep. ad Ephesians.
Saint Paul, declares, That there is (...), a great and unspeakable Sublimity
of God, from which the Creatures have in their Creation, fallen. Yea Origin,
believes, Origin in cap. 8. Joan.
That the word (...), was divinely invented and excogitated by the Apostle to
signify the dejection, abjection, and vility of the World in respect of God,
and of his unspeakable sublimity. And sensing the deep saying of our Savior,
Ye are from beneath, I am from above; John 8. 23.
ye are of this world, I am not of this world: in which place, the Latin
yields, Vos de deorsum estis. Ye are from Bibl. vulg. Text. Graec.
downwards; and the Greek, (...), Ye are of the things that are down, or
downward: He says, Recte, deorsum: Nam quomodo mundus iste habere aliquid
Orig. ubi supra.
superne posset, cujus conditio est dejecto? It is rightly said, downward: For,
how could this World have any thing on high, whose condition is dejection? He
infers afterward, Totus itaque mundus, and quae in ipso sunt, in dejectione
sunt. Therefore the whole World, and the Things in it, are in the state of
dejection.

The Marrow-Truth here, which I would bring within my Verge, and lodge in the
Center of my Discourse, is, Visible Things in a dejected condition, and thrown
down infinitely beneath God; may be known in a fit measure by the Prince of all
visible Creatures: yea, he ought to know them in a princely measure; they being
subservient to him, and to his End, which is the Knowledge, Worship, and Glory
of God; and he being directed with his face toward them, above, beneath, and
on every side.

This place my Text claims:

Genesis 1. 14. And let them be for Signs, etc. The Words are the Words of God the
Creator; and they point to the Lights in the Heavens above us: They were spoken
when the Lights were created, instituted and set in order to their end. Where
note, That God's Words here are practical, and effect what they signify.

Let us take into our best and most judicious thoughts, that God is an
intellectual Agent, and the most wise of all others: yea, that he is the first
Agent, upon whom all things depend, both in their Being and Operation; and by
whom all things are obliged to their ends; which ends are prefixed by him. In
which current of sense, the supreme Lights are here expressly referred to an
effect or action, as to an End; though partial, and not ultimate: And let them
be for Signs.

As I would not divide a Star, so neither will I hew my Text into pieces. It is
in the whole, an Act of God's pleasure and power, by which the Lights of Heaven
are designed for Signs to men upon Earth, of such Things, as being signified in
the Heavens, are acted and performed upon Earth.

Of Signs there are two sorts: as adhering to this purpose. Some are theorical
or speculative, others practical. Practical Signs produce into act their
significancy. As a Seal is a practical Sign: which not only represents an
Image, but impresses also the Image it represents into the Wax. In which kind,
the Stars and Planets are Signs: as signifying by their motions, conjunctions,
oppositions, risings, settings, occultations, apparitions, defections, and
various Relations and Aspects; and as acting by their influences. Whence the
Hebrews name the Stars, Massaleth, being a word bred and born of Nazal,
influere, to give influx or influence.

Divinity is called in the Greek Tongue (...): which being interpreted, is
Sermo de Deo, A Speech or Discourse concerning God. Astrology is called in the
Greek Tongue (...): which being interpreted, is Sermo de Astris, A Speech or
Discourse concerning the Stars. Now the Question is: (and it moves in a high
Orb:) Whereas God has ordained the Stars to be Signs; and they cannot be
Signs, except they signify; and they cannot signify, with relation to the
visible World, except unto us, who only of all visible Creatures are capable
of understanding their significations; and they cannot signify to us, except
we diligently search and enquire into them as they are Signs: the Question, I
say, is; Whether, as there is a lawful, divine, and religious enquiry
concerning God, there may not be also, a harmless, usesul, and pious enquiry
concerning the Stars and their Significations?

I prove, That enquiry into the Stars, as they are Signs, is harmless, useful,
and pious: first, by most ancient and most honorable Example. Although I
believe, that Adam, the first Man, exiled now from Paradise, and touching
always at the heavenly Bodies, as he looked up toward God in his Throne;
being also a long liver; was devoted to this enquiry, as highly becoming his
noble and high thoughts: yet I shall not call to my help, R. Solomon's
Argument, who makes Adam so high, R. Solom. in cap. 3 Deuter.
that he touched Heaven with his Head. I shall argue thus only: The common,
serious, diligent and fervorous enquiry, that was made into the Stars and
heavenly Bodies by the Children of Seth, renders it probable, if not evident,
That Adam had authorized the Work, and plained their path before them. And
concerning the Children of Seth, Josephus plainly writes: Filii autem Joseph
antiquit. Judaic. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Seth disciplinam Rerum Coelestium and ornatum earum primitus invenerunt. The
Sons of Seth first invented the Learning concerning the heavenly Bodies and
their bravery. Adam initiated himself into the practice of it: but the Children
of Seth ripened it into an Art or Discipline. And if this Learning first began
(for which, Josephus pulls) in the Children of Seth; it was honorably ancient,
and excellently honorable: because they were the Children of Seth. Suidas
descends to particulars; and, having a quick and unwearied eye in the search of
Antiquities, gives it for certain, That Seth himself invented the Suidas in
verbo (...).
Hebrew Letters, and gave Names to the Stars. And we cannot reasonably think,
that Seth being so near to Adam and his practice; (which, to the god^y part of
Adam's See Genesis 2. 19, 20. and the Expositors. See Moses Barcephas, de Parad.
p. 1. and Perer. in Genes. cap. 2
Children was a Rule and Measure for afteraction;) gave Names to the Stars, but
such as excellently signified their Natures: and therefore his enquiry searched
into the very Natures and Effects of the Stars; and in this enquiry his learned
Children succeeded him. Josephus walks on, and tells, what provision the
Children Josephasbi sapra.
of Seth carefully made, for the preservation of this choice Learning. For,
being warned by Adam's Prophecy, That there should be two destructions of the
World, the one by Water, and the other by Fire; they wrote or engraved the
Rules and Experiments of their Knowledge on two Pillars, the one being of
Stone, the other of Brick: whereof the Stone-Pillar stood firm in Syria, even
to the days of Josephus. The Sons of Seth had questionless entered upon other
humane Arts or Learnings; but they did not fasten or fix any by writing,
besides this; this being the most noble.

It is here also, eminently worthy our observation: That Mechanical, inferior,
and earthly Arts, pertaining to Manufactry, were invented by Cain and his
Children; as abundantly appears in Genesis. But they Genesis 4. 20, 21, 22.
were the Sons of Seth, who looked upwards, and wisely considered the Natures
and Effects of the Heavenly Bodies.

I prove it again by Example. When we first hear of Abraham, we find him by
the Name of Abram. And Genesis 11. 26.
this Name is extracted from Ab, signifying, Pater, Father; and Ram, which is
in Latin, Excelsus, High; Eusebius. de Prae^^a Evang. lib. 11. cap. 6.
in Greek, according to Eusebius, in his Evangelical Preparation, (...),
sublimis, sublime. Which Name, says Eusebius, he obtained, because he
professed the Chaldaical Wisdom, and expended much time upon the contemplation
of the Stars and heavenly Bodies: ascending by the knowledge of those high
Creatures, and of their Effects, to the knowledge of the most high God, who is
the first Cause. And hence was it, that God revealed himself to him; that he
would not worship Fire at Vr of the Suid. in voce, (...).
Chaldees; and that he broke his Father's Images, and departed from him. The
Writings of Philo the Jew, are embellished with this very Observation
concerning Abram, and the Interpretation of his Name. And Philo de Cherub.
above this, Philo calls Abraham's Father an Astronomer; but such a one as
deified the Stars.

Let the Reader set as a Seal upon his Heart: Though God speaks thus to Abram
in his Promise, I will make Genesis 13. 16. Observat hoc R. Solomon. Resert
Abulensis in Genesis 13. 15.
thy Seed as the Dust of the Earth; with an intention to humble him; and that
his Seed might therewith be incited to keep God's Commandments, lest they
should be scattered as the Dust of the Earth: yet quickly afterward, God
raises his Promise to Abram's own Sphere and Science: And he brought him forth
abroad, and said, Look now toward Heaven, and tell the Stars, if thou Genesis 15.
5.
be able to number them. And he said unto him, So shall thy Seed be. Which
weighed as much as if he had said, Thou have long, and with diligence observed
the Stars; thou have learned that they are bright, glorious, numberless, and
powerful in their influence and effects upon Earth and inferior Things: So
shall thy Seed be, if they keep my Commandments.

It may not be lost from this place, That the study of Astrology, was to
Dionysius Areopagita, a blessed means of his coming to Christ: who, beholding
that the Eclipse of the Sun in our Savior's passion, exceeded the model of a
natural Eclipse; received into his Heart and Meditations, Deum Naturae
patientem. The God of Nature, made Man and suffering for us; and afterward
wrote to his Master Apollophanes: Sol in ipsius verae lucis S. Dionys. Areop.
in Ep. ad Apolloph.
occubitu lucere non potuit: The Sun could not shine in the setting of the true
Light. He was brought by that Eclipse of the Sun, concurring with his knowledge
of Eclipses: to Joh. 1. 9.
the knowledge of the true light, which lights every man that comes into the
world.

Secondly, I prove it by Reason. The Doctrine of Aquinas is impregnable, and
stands like a Tower in the Fort of Reason; Angeli illum gradum tenent in
substantiis D. Tho. p. 1. q. 58. Art 3. in corp.
spiritualibus, quem corpora coelestia in substa^^^is corporeis: The Angels
hold that degree in spiritual substances, which the heavenly Bodies have and
hold in the substances that are corporeal. We may lawfully, and without
impeachment of our Duty, enquire into the Nature, Motions and Actions of the
Angels: therefore we may lawfully, and without infringement of our obligations,
enquire into the Nature, Motions and Actions of the Heavenly Bodies: And as
that enquiry is harmless, useful, and pious; so likewise is this: and the
knowledge of the heavenly Bodies is more noble then the knowledge of Earthly
Things: and consequently, the enquiry into those, is more noble: because those
are in themselves more noble then these; as being incorruptible, immutable, and
permanent. Aquinas in the same place, adorns and evens this Truth: Est autem
haec differentia inter Coelestia and terrena Corpora, quod corpora terrena per
mutationem and D. Tho. ubi supra.
motum adipiscuntur suam ultimam perfectionem; corpora vero Coelestia statim ex
ipsa sua Natura suam ultimam perfectionem habent: The difference betwixt
heavenly and terrene Bodies, is; that the terrene Bodies do obtain their last
perfection by mutation and motion; but the heavenly Bodies, presently by their
very Nature, have and obtain their lost persection. And that this Argument may
not want its colors and adornment on my part: The praises of God, which are
occasioned by the knowledge of the celestial Bodies, as also his praises
issuing occasionally from the knowledge of the Angels, are more loud and
sounding: to praise God upon these Subjects, being in a manner, to praise him
upon the loud cymbals, upon the high-sounding Psalm. 150. 5.
cymbals.

Beyond all this: The Heavens follow the Angels, even as they are distinguished
in their Work or Office. For, as of the Angels, some are ministrantes,
ministering Spirits; some assistentes, assisting; who are not sent, but attend
always upon God in Heaven: so amongst the heavenly Bodies, besides those which
are determined ad ministerium Generationum, to the ministry of inferior
Generations; there is a Heaven appointed only, that the holy Spirits and men
may therein for ever wait, and attend upon God; to wit, the Empyreal Heaven,
which is immovable, and so called from its fiery splendour. And therefore the
likeness and agreement betwixt the Angels and heavenly Bodies, (though the
things differ in their kinds) is more then ordinary: and as those being
Spirits, admit of a disquisition; so do these much more, being Bodies.

I prove it again by Reason. As every Agent has a most proper Act, (the most
proper Act of Fire, being an active Substance, is to burn; of Light, being an
active Quality, is to illuminate or enlighten; of God, who is Actus purus, a
pure act, (...), says Synesius, to Synes. in Sententiis.
do good) so every Agent (Celestial especially) has a circumstance of time, in
the which its operation is most potent and vigorous, and in the which it most
shines forth. Now the Stars are powerful Agents, yea, glorious Monuments of
God's power; and yet, neither the proper act of every one in its kind, (or as
compared with others) nor the circumstance of time wherein their Operation is
most predominant; by all which, God's Power, and other divine Attributes offer
themselves to be farther discovered; can be known or discovered ad majorem Dei
gloriam: to the greater glory of God, without a vigilant enquiry. And why he
should not enquire, whom Plato rightly calls (...), an heavenly Plato in Timaeo.
Plant; and to whom therefore Philo (the Jewish Plato) assigns (...), heavenly
nourishment; Reason cannot see a Reason.

I confirm it. As there is no passive power, which has not an active power
answering to it, and bending toward it: So there is nothing scibile,
cognoscible, or able to be known, to the which an intellective and cognoscitive
power does not answer. Which power, though it neither does, nor shall perhaps
actually know, the Things cognoscible by it, (in which sense, Intelligere est
quoddam pati, to understand is in some kind passive; and as there is
intellectus agens, an agent understanding, so there is intellectus patiens, an
understanding that is patient;) yet is in an active readiness to know them.
Otherwise, Frustra esset potentia, quae reduci non posset in actum: The power
would truly be vain in respect of such and such things, which being referred
to them, could not be reduced into act: and there would be (...), a great Chasm
in Nature. And when we speak of powers active and passive, we intend all such
powers, betwixt which there is a fit proportion. And humane understanding
proportionably answers to material Things. Indeed, Many Things are hidden from
us in the belly of the Earth, and in the womb of the Sea; and we know them not,
because there is vel impedimentum ex part medii, vel defectus ob indebitam
distantiam, vel tandem utrumque: Either an impediment in the medium, as being
obstipated, or a defect by reason of undue distance, or both; and thus they are
withdrawn from our sense: whereas, Omnis cognitio a sensu initium habet: all
knowledge of sensible things, begins in the sense. But in the night, the great
Curtain is drawn, and the heavenly Bodies are visible, either in themselves or
by Instruments: and we are then, as it were, Amos 5. 8.
allured to seek him that makes the seven Stars and Orion.

Be it confessed, That we seek God in some sort, if we look upon these
Creatures afar off; and thence admire, and love God. But we have no limits
given to us, when we seek God in his Creatures: and therefore, we seek him in a
more excellent manner, when we seek him through more and more effects and works
of his Power, Wisdom, Perfection, Government, etc. Especially, when we behold
through all the kinds of Things, that God moves and governs inferiora per
superiora: inferior Things by Things which are superior: The Truth of which
appeared, as many other excellent Truths also did, to the Atheistical Brain of
Galen himself: Galenus, lib. 3. cap. 1. De Diebus decretoriis.
who confidently says: Omnia haec inferiora a Coelestibus vim accipiunt, and
certo ordine modoque gubernantur: All these inferior Things receive their
force from the Things which are superior and Celestial, and in a certain order
and manner are governed by them. Let it go again, pro concesso, for a Thing
granted; that, as Stars, which have the least Circuit, are the nearest to the
Pole; so Men, who are least perplexed with temporalities, are commonly the
nearest to God. But I suppose that this Enquiry, is a pious and earnest seeking
of God in more and more Reasons answering to his Attributes: and that thereby
the Student is enabled, as he is a Member and Part of a Christian Society, to
minister helps to his Brethren, which to the present evils are therapeutica,
medicinal; and prophylactica, preservative, in regard of the future. For, as
God in the giving of his spiritual Gifts and Graces, wills and intends that all
possible good should be reaped by them; so in the proposition of his material
Works and Gifts, he wills and intends them to be known, as far as our knowing
and understanding Vessels are capable, if our knowledge ends in him and in his
praises.

Thirdly, I prove it from the evils, which have directly and lineally ensued,
where this Enquiry was not made. No Man that has tasted Learning, is ignorant
of the great Evils which have ensued in the World, by reason that the Eclipses
of the Sun and Moon, and the causes of them, were not justly understood. Let it
pass, that whole Armies have been terrified and degraded from their designs.
Every Waiter at the Door of the School, knows, that the people in the Eclipses
of the Moon, made horrible noises and outcries, thinking thereby to support
and cherish her in her labor. The Christians themselves were grievously
infected with this abominable Superstition, as we find in Maximus Taurinensis,
Max. Taur. Hom de defectu Lunae. S. Aug. sermon. 215. de temp. S. Ambr. sermon. 4.
and in Saint Austin. Saint Ambrose is as much troubled as the Moon in her
Eclipse, and sharply chides the superstitious people, who thought, that the
Moon eclipsed was in great danger of falling; and who did therefore make a
noise, hoping therewith to animate, help, and uphold her; and lest hearing the
charms of Witches, she should by the secret power of them, be seduced and
enticed out of her Sphere. Had the Reason of an Eclipse, Solar or Lunar, been
wisely declared to any of these people, Heathenish or Christian, by men learned
and skilful in the Nature and Motions of the heavenly Bodies or Lights, as they
are Signs; God had not been dishonored by this most impious and filthy
Superstition. Maximus, Saint Austin, Saint Ambrose, and many others, otherwise
taught the Christian people, as their pious Writings testify: but, fools hate
knowledge: Prove. 1. 22.
and Ignorance is the Mother of Superstition: and the Fathers were always
interpreted by the people, to speak of such Things, more piously, then solidly
and knowingly. A known and professed Astrologer would have easily invaded their
Hearts. Moreover: Had these Eclipses been learnedly foreseen, the people would
have been prepared by a Prediction, to receive them as agreeable to Nature. But
the wisest of people in those days, being deficient in the prognosis, could
not so perfectly repair the breaches in the diagnosis.

This Heathenish Practice expounds a Text in Holy Scripture, which has been
hitherto managed against Astrology; but indeed proves and pleads for it, if
annexed unto this practice of the seduced people. Learn Jer. 10. 2.
not the way of the heathen, and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven; for
the heathen are dismayed at them: for the verse. 3.
customs of the people are vain. The Latin ascribes: Juxta vias Gentium
nolite discere: and a signis Coeli nolite metuere, Edit. Latin.
quae timent Gentes: Learn ye not, according to the way of the Gentiles:
neither fear ye any thing injected from the signs of heaven, which the Gentiles
fear. That is, Cast away causeless fear, when the heavenly Signs frown, and
seem dark and troubled; and entertain the Virtue of Fortitude, opposed to the
Fear which becomes not the people of God.

Yea, Ludovicus Vives, the Interpreter of Saint Austin, Lud. Viv. in lib. 10.
de Civit. Dei, cap. 16.
relates of an Ass in his time, which drinking in a River, when the Moon crept
under a Cloud, was thought by the people, to have drunk up the Moon; and was
therefore imprisoned, arraigned before a Judge, cast by sufficient Witnesses,
condemned, and ripped up, that he might restore the Moon to the World. Ye have
in this History, more then one Ass. This egregious and most absurd act of
Ignorance and Folly, was committed; because that part of the World was not so
rich, as to have an Astrologer. Whose enquiry in this respect, would have been
harmless, useful, and pious.

Again, I prove it from evils, ensuing the relapse of this enquiry. Amongst the
many senseless errors wherewith Mahomet has contaminated and polluted the
World, by the pestilential Air of his Alcoran; those hold up the head, which
concern the Heavens.

Mahomet preaches from his Alcoran: That the Vide Alcoranum ubi haec and
hujusmodi plura, sparsa sunt per librum totum.
Heavens are sustained, lest they should fall, by the Mountain Caf; and that by
the repercussion of the color of the Mountain, they become Azure-coloured:
That the Stars are bound with golden Chains, fastened to the Throne of God: That
the Moon fell to the ground in his days, and was broken into parts with the
fall: and that he embracing the parts, rejoyned them into one, and then reposed
the Moon in its heavenly Mansion; and that therefore the Moon has Maculas,
spots: That in the beginning of the World, the Moon enjoyed light equal with
the Sun; but the most glorious part of it was extinguished with the Wings of
the Angel Gabriel, imprudently flying in a full career, through it; and that
therefore now it shines dimly. The Thalmudists Talmudistae in Talmud.
have likewise trespassed in this kind.

Truly, Had there been knowing and prudent Astrologers in Arabia, when Mahomet
was now arising or ascending in his Horizon, as there were at other times; they
might have happily withstood and suppressed him, and prevented this horrible
inundation of error and blasphemy, wherewith many gay parts of the World have
been overwhelmed by him. But Arabia Felix was not then so happy. The Mahumetan
Astrologers Alfarabius, Albumazar, Haly, were engaged: Averroes recoiled: The
like proportionably may be said of the Thalmudists. God complains, and
threatens: My people Hos. 4. 6.
are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou have rejected knowledge, I
will reject thee. This is clear: other proofs will engage me longer.

Fourthly, I prove it by Scripture. The heavens declare Psalm. 19. 1.
the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handiwork. Day unto day
utters speech, and night unto night shows verse. 2.
knowledge. The Latin sanctifies: Opera manuum ejus annunciat Edit. vulgata.
firmamentum: The firmament, wherein the fixed Stars are, annunciates and tells
the works of his hands, to some that piously and seriously attend to such
telling or annuntiation. And afterward: Nox nocti indicat scientiam: One night
shows and reads a Science to another. Sience here reflects upon such as are
capable of it, and acquire it by the multiplication of agreeable Acts: who
comparing night with night, and the heavenly causes with their effects, imbibe
the Sience of Astrology; and who, the more they know of night and night, and of
the connection betwixt the causes and their effects, the more admire God in his
Works, and the more declare God and his Works to others: adding to the thing
done, the very Judge. 5. 20.
manner of its doing; as, how the Stars in their courses fought against Sisera.

The Platonists imagined, the Heavens to have been animate; and that the Sun,
Moon and Stars were fiery, and were therefore nourished and fed with vapors;
fire wanting and requiring its food and nourishment. The Aristotelians or
Peripateticks allowed Intelligences of their own making, to turn and whirl
about the Celestial Orbs; and to be one with them, not by composition, but by
aggregation. Others out of Zeno's Porch, threw their judgments here and there:
He that will admire and declare God in conformity to the Truth of his Creation,
must consult with Scripture and Astrology.

In Christian earnest: such a multitude of Heavens, Stars, Planets, moving so
swiftly, so contrarily, so nearly the one to the other, and with such continual
variery of Effects; the Order, Concord, Subordination, and Wonderfulness, is,
notwithstanding such, that in declaring the glory of God, they very much
outstrip all inferior Things: and therefore they whose employments it is, to
behold this Order, Concord, Subordination, and effectual Operation more nearly,
are called to magnify God in his Works, more transcendently then others who do
not: Job admiring God in this Crder, Concord, Subordination, and efficacy,
cries out without a loud voice: Where is God my maker, who gives songs in the
night? The Job 35. 10.
Latin prefers: Ubi est Deus, qui fecit me: qui ded it carmina Edit. vulg.
in nocte? Where is God, who has made me: who gave verses in the night? He is
more explicit in another place according to the vulgar Latin: Quis enarrabat
Coelorum Job 38. 37. Interp. vulgat.
rationem, and concentum (Hebr. Nabla) Coeli quis dormire faciet? Who will
declare the state of the Heavens, and who will make the melody of the Heaven to
sleep? He See Censorinus de die natali, cap. 13. Cic. in somnio Scipionis. S.
Aug. Ep. 28. ad S. Hier. Leo Castr. in Isaiae cap. 40. verse. 26. Georg. Venet.
in Harm.
seems to speak after a five-years silence, as one of Pythagoras his Scholars,
who thought the Heavens to have been melodious in their motions: and that men
are deaf to the Music by continual assuefaction, as they who dwell ad Nili
Catadupa, where Nilus has a terrible fall; as is observed by Cicero. In good
truth Saint Austin receives with embraces, the Doctrine of proper Music in the
Heavens. So does Leo Castrus: and so Georgius Venetus. And Reason is
favorable. Because a sound is caused not only by the confrication of the Air,
but also by the confrication of all resisting Bodies. Philo the Jew Philo Jud.
lib. de Somniis.
in his Book of Dreams, dreams it out, That the Music and Harmony of the
heavenly Bodies and Orbs, serves in the place of Meat unto those who hear it;
and that Moses was fed therewith in his long-fasting. But Aristotle and the
Philosophers his Followers, reject all this Doctrine as Arist. lib. 2. de Calo.
out of tune. And it is most fashionable to Reason, That Job by Music and
Melody, understands the Concord, and most ordinate motions and courses of the
Heavens, together with the sweet compliance betwixt the causes and their
effects. Wherefore Plato is opinionated, Eyes were therefore chiefly given to
us, that seeing the most regular Plat. in Tim. co.
motions of the heavenly bodies, we might traduce them to the discipline of our
lives, and to the correction of our wandering and erratical motions. And
infallibly the reasonable Soul returns and reduces all the Creatures to their
first Principle, God, by her admiring God in them, and her praising God for
them: and the more knowledge we have of the Things for which we praise God, the
more we praise him with understanding.

I prove it by Scripture the second time. He appointed Psalm. 104. 19.
the Moon for seasons. This place (being like a Star, which is densior pars sui
orbis: the more thick and lucid part of its Orb) is excellently co-incident
with my Text. Assuredly: By how much the Moon is better known, by so much are
the Seasons more seasonable, and by so much is this Appointment, and the Author
of it, more admired. For it is like a Rock in Divinity: He most admires and
praises God, ( caeteris paribus: if other things concur) that sees not the
Things only, but also the Reasons of them.

We all see the Moon afar off, and the Variations of it. But he who sees, that
the Moon being in the last, least, and lowest Orb, runs it in a short time, and
therefore, looks diversely upon the Sun, and varies in the borrowing of its
light, being for this cause now horned, now half-full, now full and whole; sees
more of God, and of his wondrous Works and Appointments, then the Pygmies of
men do; and is a kind of a Giant, or rather, another Atlas.

We all see, That the Moon shines to us, and keeps her Seasons. But he who
beholds, that, although it shines to us, it shines not upwards; as being not
illuminated in the superior part, but only inferiourly; does see more nearly
and clearly, That the heavenly Bodies, although so high, trim, and glorious,
were made for us, low Creatures, and for our use.

We all see the Moon in the full, and when she most shines. But he who sees in
the original, that the Moon does then shine most, when it is most distant and
remote from the Sun; and that, when it comes near to the Sun, it is obscured;
discovers more of God's Appointment, and is more furnished with harmless,
useful, and pious considerations, then down-looking persons.

Finally, We all see, That the Moon receives many Changes: But he who finds,
according co Hippocrates and Galen; that the Moon, because it receives many
Hippocr. lib. de Judiciis infirmitatum. Galen initio Dierum Criticorum.
Changes and Eclipses, inclines men upon whom it has influence, to be
unconstant and unstable, and to rejoice in various Studies and Things, will
have more cause to pull up his Heart into one, and to strive against the Moon
and its influence, by the help of holy grace, which is more near, more
precious, and more powerful then the Sun, Moon and all the Stars; and is able
to remove the Selenites out of his Heart.

Saint Bonaventure Ilustrates this Truth: Frequenter Astrologi vera praedicunt,
maxim circa Homines animaliter See Plin. lib. 36. cap. 10. S. Bonavent in 4
Sent. Did. 14. quest. 3. number. 80
viventes: circa vero spiritualiter sapientes qui dominantur passionibus, pauca
possunt vera praedicere: Hic (ut ait Ptolomaeus) sapiens dominabitur Astris.
The Astrologers oftentimes foretell true things, especially concerning men
that live carnally: But concerning men spiritually-wise, who govern their
passions, they can foretell but few Truths: This wise man (as Ptolomeus says)
will exercise dominion over the Stars. But with his leave, even then they
foretell Truth, according to Nature, though not answerably to Grace. The
History of Socrates and Zopyrus is found on every hedge. Bugufarus himself,
consents in the substantials: Homo sapiens and juvat and impedit Coelestem
Augus. in Commen. super C^n^ loquium Ptolomaei.
effectum, ex virtute sapientiae quae est in eo. A wise man both helps and
hinders the heavenly effects, by virtue of the wisdom which is in him.

Fifthly, I prove it upon this account, that Scripture cannot be rightly
understood without enquiry made into Astrology. It is written in the Prophet
Amos, where Amos 5. 26.
Moloch is introduced: the Star of your God, which ye made to your selves. It
is necessary, for the right and full understanding of this place, that it be
known what Star this was, what Star in Heaven it resembled, and what likewise
is the nature, power and work of that Star. It was a Jewel made Star-wise, and
gloriously set in the forehead of the Idol Moloch. It resembled the Star called
Lucifer. Which Star is also named in the Prophet Jeremy, (and here also there
is want of succor Jer 7. 18.
from Astrology,) The Queen of Heaven: The Verse runs: The children gather
wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough, to make
cakes to the queen of heaven.

Lucifer, if we consider it only as a visible Star in Heaven, is, as Saint
Basil describes it, (...), the S. Basil. Hom. 2. in Hexam.
fairest of all Stars. And although the Lights which are nearest to the Earth,
have, in respect of their neerness to it, a great influence upon it: yet the
fair and great Lights, in regard of their greatness and fairness, supply their
own wants, as being remote; and their influences are more noble.

Yea, the influences of Lucifer, are so eminently noble and powerful, that
Saint Peter, (certainly for some excellent reason) calls divine Grace, (that
unites us with God) Lucifer, in these words: Until the day dawn, and 2 Pet. 1.
19. Edit. Lat.
the day star arise in your hearts. The Latin offers: Donec dies elucescat,
and Lucifer oriatur in cordibus vestris: Until the day begin to shine, and
Lucifer arise in your hearts. The Greek presents the later part: (...), and
Lucifer arise from the east in your Text Graec. Interp. Sit.
hearts. (The Syriack leaves Lucifer and takes the Sun.) The likeness of power
betwixt Grace and Lucifer, is manifold: they both move to cheerfulness and
heroical performance: they move both to the love of light, and cause in us a
horror of darkness: they both move to the dislike of all base and ignoble
actions, etc. Neither is this Text (ye see) grasped and comprehended, if
Astrology be missing.

In this consideration, Saint Austin expounding a place in Job, where the
sacred Text mentions the sweet influences of the Pleiades, and Orion; says:
Nam and Astrologia Job 38. 31. S. Aug. in illud Jobi.
perscrutanda est, ad cognoscendum proprietates istorum syderum, ut hunc locum
intelligere possimus. We must diligently search into Astrology, that we may
know the properties of these Stars, and understand the place.

Once more I prove it, from this Head and Source: It is proposed by the Eastern
Magi: We have seen his Mat. 2. 2.
Star in the East, and we are come to worship him. It follows in due time: Lo,
the Star which they saw in the East verse. 9.
went before them, till it came, and stood over the place where the young child
was. These Texts have been a Rock of offense, and stumbling block, when
assaulted by vessels empty of Astrology. Cardinal Bellarmine, speaking of
Bellarm. lib. de Scriptorib. Ecclesiasticis. See Sixtus Senensis lib. 5.
Bibliothecae sanctae, annotat. 15. and 81. and lib. 6. annotat. 10.
Petrus ab Alliaco, Cardinal and Archbishop of Cambray, attesteth: Unum est, in
quo reprehenditur hic Auctor, quod videlicet sensisse videatur, Christi
nativitatem praenosci potuisse ex genethliacis observationibus, atque ad hoc
adduxerit apparitionem Stellae, quae apparuit Magis. There is one thing, for
which this Author is reprehended; that is, because he soemed to have thought
(he speaks tenderly, in regard he was his brother Cardinal) that Christ's
Nativity could be foreknown from genethliacal observations; and to the proof of
this, brought the apparition of the Star which appeared to the Magi. If Petrus
ab Alliaco had in the least manner, been refreshed from the liquid Fountains of
Astrology, he might have found with ease, that this Star of the East, was not
of the Stars in Heaven, but one moved in the Air, and formed for this purpose;
that it might with more aptness, direct the Wisemen, and design the place
where the Babe was. He might have known likewise, had he been a Cardinal in
Learning, that a heavenly Star could not be widdow'd from her Orb, nor have
room to move so near the Earth; and that the sense of the Text, the Stars shall
fall from Heaven, rises Mat. 24, 29.
above the letter: and that a Star amongst the Stars, could not in a proper
sense, be called Christ^s Star. Ignorance of Astrology ingulf'd Petrus ab
Alliaco almost into as great a depth of madness, as that into which Cardanus
was plunged; who pried into the Horoscope of Christ; and taking his guidance
from the position of the Stars in his Nativity, and from certain finister
Aspects, born when Christ was born, foretold in a kind, it was his fate to die
upon the Cross. I will not be presumptuous; and say, that Cardanus was ignorant
of Astrology, but I will take heart to say, that his Judgment upon this Scheme
was overcurious; and that all Sciences have their modest limits, as they are
hand maids to Diviuity.

Petrus ab Alliaco should have considered, that the Stars go in a brotherly
manner from East to West: whenas this Star traveled alone from East to South;
that this Star maintained its light in the Day, the Sun looking on it, and
shining; that it withdrew, and returned, as the business moved, upon which it
waited; and that it walked in the lower Region of the Air. And verily, God
leading the Magi or Wisemen to Christ by a Star, as most attemperable to them;
justified their Observation and use of the Stars: as likewise, he directed the
Shepherds to Christ, by the Apparition of Angels; the Apparition of Angels
being common and holy to the Jews.

Let me affix here: those Texts in the Gospel, which treat of lunatic persons,
cannot be fathomed, if the Mat. 4. 24.
knowledge of Astrology be secluded. For, as Aquinas Mat. 17. 15. D. Tho. p. 1.
qu. 115. Art. 5. Arg. 1.
wisely discovers: Daemones secundum certa augmenta Lunae aliquos homines
vexant: qui and propter hoc lunatici dicuntur. The Devils do vex some possessed
persons, according to certain augmentations of the Moon, who therefore are
called lunatic. And this they did for two Reasons: first, that they might
throw a dishonor upon the Moon as the Creature of God. This Reason is owned by
Saint Hierom, and Saint Chrysostom. Secondly, S. Hierom. ad 4. cap. Matthew. S.
Chrysostom. hom. 58. in Matthew. Arist. lib. de somn. and vigil. cap. 5.
Because the Devils cannot work but by the mediation of natural things and
virtues; and the Brain being the moistest part of Man's Body, according to
Aristotle, and therefore especially, subjected to the Operation of the Moon,
which is Domina humorum and humidorum: the Lady and Governess of humors and
humid things; the Devils molest and trouble the Fancy, in the secret times,
wherein the Moon and the Brain most concur in the application of Active to
Passive, and the Brain is most disposed to receive the impressions and
influences of the Moon.

Sixthly, I prove it: Because the knowledge of Astrology, administers necessary
help to the Body of Divinity; and very much illustrates, yea, confirms the
chief and bottom-Doctrines of it: there being a strict Concatenation, as in
Virtues and Sciences, so in the Works and Ways of God amongst themselves and
with them.

That part of divine providence, which we call Election and Predestination,
although it be efficacious, does not altogether infringe humane Liberty;
because it only determines in sensu composito, in a compounded sense; as
supposing the composition of our concurse with the decree of God; even then
when to divide, falls into the may and can of humane Arbitrament. True it is,
if the Love of friendship in God, (which he can exercise only toward
reasonable Creatures, whereas others are not capable of elevation sufficient to
such friendship) or the benevolence of God be efficacious affectively, it is
also always efficacious effectively: whatsoever the Reprobates can do with
their helps either physically or morally. Yet Liberty is not impeded, because
the nighest power, which is the will of man, being the power from which Liberty
takes its essence and appellation, is always indifferent; even when the power,
to which it is subordinated, moves this way or that way by predetermination.
(The Confirmation or Illustration descends from the Heavens.) And as that which
the Philosophers and Astrologers call the supreme Heaven, so draws with it, all
the inferior Orbs, that it neither breaks, stops, not interrupts their proper
motions and influences: so God almighty draws all Things after his eternal
Decree, and yet, neither abrogates, nor infringes the peculiar force, motion,
influence, or opposition of any Thing. Yea: this Divine-like and supereminent
kind of motion, was betrothed to the supreme Heaven, that it might be a most
high Emblem of the Divine Operation in respect of reasonable and other
Creatures. God said unto Abram: I am the Almighty Genesis 17. 1.
God: walk before me, and be thou perfect. Which opens it self to receive this
Paraphrase: I move all by my power, at my pleasure: But I leave thee as a free
agent; and therefore I lay my commandments upon thee: walk before me, and be
thou perfect.

If we remove this Theological Explication, assisted and seconded with its
Astrological Illustration or Confirmation, from this grand Matter in Divinity;
the result, from God's absolute and irresistible Decree, (as also from that
unchristian position, which settles an irresistible, and compelling power, and
influence of the Heavens,) will be, that God is the Author of sin. For: Opera
magis ad imperantem and congentem pertinent, quam ad exequentem: Works pertain
more to him that commands and compels, then to him that executes.

But as Fulgentius, who lived and shone in a dark age, argues excellently: Deus
non est Author ejus, cujus est S. Fulgent. lib. 1. ad in omnium Regem, cap. 19.
Vltor: God is not the Author of that, of the which he is the Revenger. And
Reason is wholly ours: For if God were the Author of sin, he were not sum
Bonus, Good in the chiefest manner. The Consequence has Bones and sinews, Ex
loco Causarum and effectorum, from the Causes and their Effects: betwixt which,
there must be some kind of proportion and similitude; which are not betwixt,
Ens sum bonum and pecatum, a Thing good in the chiesest manner, and sin.
Because sin, as such, has no goodness in it self, neither has it existence,
ut peccatum, as sin; sed ut Ens, but as a Thing. It would likewise follow, that
contradictory Propositions are both true: these Assertions containing an
implicit Contradiction; to be God, and not to be most excellently Good; that
is, if we speak out and explicitly, not to be God. And as the Author of sin
cannot be good, so neither can he be holy, just, or the Judge of the World:
which are God's essential properties. Saint Basil is the Author of a Homily
beyond the ordinary level: wherein he throws this thunderbolt: Tantundem est,
S. Basil Hom. Quod Deus non sit Author peccati.
Deum asserere esse Authorem peccati, and negare esse Deum. It is as much to
assert God to be the Author of sin, as to deny him to be God. Yea: He that
consequentially makes God the Author of sin, makes our most holy, most pure,
and most blessed Lord God, and gracious Father of mercies, worse then then the
Devil: Because 2 Cor. 1. 3.
the Devil tempts only, and persuades to sin, and all his motions may be
resisted and cast off: But God, as the spurious Teachers and Carcasses of
Divines teach, wills and procures sin by a powerful, effectual, and
irresistible Decree; even as the degenerating and spurious Astrologer forces
our wills to it by an inviolable influence, to the which (he says) God has
necessarily obliged the Heavens. And these all avouch against the Axiom, the
will to be compelled. But it is most agreeable to the Secret of Symmetry, That
they who have sinned away all Christian Bowels, and are the high and mighty
Scandalizers of Men, should highly scandalize the Almighty God also.

I prove again, That Astrology is an able assistant to the most abstruse part
of Divinity; as being admirably proportioned to it, in materia circa quam, in
the matter concerning which it in part discourses. As appears also in a matter
depending upon the former.

We may avoid all sins, potestate antecedenti, by an antecedent power. The
antecedent power is a power, having whatsoever is antecedently necessary to
operation, on our part, if the will consents; or if the Will will not
consent, whatsoever is necessary to forestall and prevent operation. But we
cannot avoid all sins potestate consequenti, by a consequent and efficacious S.
Aug. lib. 3. de lib. Arbitr. c. 17.
power. It is the received Maxim of Saint Austin: Nemo peccat in eo quod
vitare non potest. No man sins in that which he cannot avoid. That is: which he
cannot avoid, either at first or last; either by precluding the way to sin, or
by not yielding and consenting when the temptation makes its battery. Neither
does the prescience of God, impose a necessity upon the Things fore-known by
him. For: God fore-knows his own Acts, and yet he is a most free Agent. And
that the Things so fore-known, cannot but happen in a manner as they are
fore-known; the reason is, because God fore-knowing them, does not (if we speak
in rigor) foreknow them, but looks upon them as done and present; all things
being present to him in eternity, which is Nunc stans, a standing and
immovable Now. And when a Thing is now done and present, it cannot but be;
yea, although otherwise compared to its causes, it is most contingent: this
being only a hypothetical necessity, not excluding contingency. So that God is
most pure and holy, and acquitted from being entangled in our errors.

Students in Astrology have the Conclusion, wherein all the virtue of the
Premises lies couched, rendered again to them in the way, as they look up, and
also in the heavenly Bodies. God is most pure, and holy, etc. The supreme part
of the Air, which is nearest to the Heavens, is far from troubles and
disorders; it is not drawn into the faction of the Clouds or middle Region; it
is not forced into a Tempest; no Tumults or Commotions are there. And if we
ascend above the Moon; the heavenly Bodies are all quiet, and incorruptible.
Indeed, they act upon us, but they do not necessitate us. In a word: they act
as their Maker acts; who does not irresistbly force our wills; but only they
put us to the trial, as God does, that we may conquer. A wise man repels their
malign influences, and maintains the Calm of the Heavens in his mind and
Heart: even consonantly to the Sentence of a very Stoic: Talis est Seneca Ep.
59.
sapientis animus, qualis Mundi status super Lunam: semper illic ferenum est:
Such is the mind of a wise man, as the state of the world above the Moon. It
is always serene there. The Crest and Spire of all, is: these heavenly Bodies
refer us to look above them, and to call upon God for Grace, which out-acts
Nature, the Stars, and whatsoever else acts in Man; and this also, is God's
course in his permissions of temptation. The Old Testament begins: There is
none holy as the Lord. And the 1 Samuel 2. 2.
New answers: Every good gift, and every perfect gift, is Jam. 1. 17.
from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, with whom is no
variaebleness, neither shadow of turning.

Lastly, I prove it: Because the Objections raised against this enquiry, are
mere bubbles, and of no firmness.

First: Many Texts of Scripture are set in Battalia: which declare God's anger
against Star-gazers, and the like. We must therefore enquire what was the
practice of these unholy Star-gazers, against which holy Scripture Isa. 47. 13.
inveigheth.

I am so far Berosus his Proselyte, that I believe Zoroastres to have been
Cham, (so he is called in the Latin Bible) and that he was the Father of those
who perverted the noble Science of Astrology: the foundation of which, together
with some excellent kind of superstructure, were solid and clean as they were
delivered by the Children of Seth. The new and wronged Astrology, was in
process of time, most disseminated in Chaldea. To this the Fathers and Civil
Laws, are diametrically opposite. The professors of it, differed from the true
Astrologers allied to the Children of Seth; first: Because their Opinion was,
That the influences of the Stars were irresistible, and irresistibly wrought
even upon the Spirits and wills of Men. In which respect, some Councils
(national and provincial) have declared against the Priscillianists, Pagans,
and certain Jews. One defines in short, and anathematizes all Gainsayers: Si
quis animas, and corpora humana fatalibus Council. Bracarense, cap. 9. vide
etiam c. 10
Stellis credit astringi, sicut Pagani, and Priscillianus dixerunt, Anathema
sit. If any man believes, that the souls and bodies of men, are bound to the
Stars acting fatally upon them, as the Pagans and Priscillian have said, let
him be accursed. The Council denies not, That the Stars act directly upon all
inferior Bodies, and by chance and indirectly upon the Souls of Men; as moving
the humors, organs, and parts, as it were, near the soul, and by which it
operates: Only the Council eliminates fatality, that is, fatal necessity.

Another is more conglobate, under a Title sufficiently declarative: Assertio
Fidei ejusdem Concilii Council. Tolitan. primum.
contra Priscillianistas: The Assertion of the Faith of the same Council
against the Priscillianists. And with an eye hither, it is noted, That the
Astrologers in the Primitive Church, were vehement Opposers of Christianity.
These brought and resolved all into a Stoical and fatal necessity: and were at
length the moving and impelling causes that men worshipped the Sun, Moon,
Planets, and all the host of Heaven; as the prime causes of See Jer. 8. 2.
all Things. From which worship, as most profane, Job frees himself: If I
beheld the Sun when it shined, or Job 31. 26.
the Moon walking in brightness: And my heart has been verse. 27.
secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand: This also verse. 28.
were an iniquity to be punished by the Judge; for I should have denied the God
that is above. Kissing of the hand was adoration or worship in those times.
Which was observed even toward Statues: The people not presuming through
reverence to touch the Statues, kissed their hands in sign of worship.

Secondly, These Ignes fatui, foolish and seducing fires, differed from the
true and highborn Astrologers: because they ascertained themselves to the
Devil, by a compact, explicit or implicit. It is a Theorem in the Angelical
part of Divinity, Boni Spiritus non paciscuntur, Good Spirits make no compacts.
And therefore they had images in humane form, composed by Diabolical
Prescription, under certain Asterisms, or Positions of the Heavens, which gave
Oracles and Answers. These were called Theraphim; and had insinuated themselves
amongst the Jews. The word is frequent in the Old Testament. That these
Theraphim did answer those who consulted them concerning future events; is
apparent in the Prophet Ezekiel: where it is said of the King of Babylon: He
consulted with Images: in the Hebrew it is Ezekiel. 21. 21. Text Hebr. Zach. 10.
2. Text Hebr.
Theraphim: And in Zachary; where the Text affirms, The Idols have spoken
vanity: the Hebrew allows the Theraphim. Wherefore the seventy Interpreters for
Theraphim cast up (...), manifestation; and Aquila, (...), Sept.
illumination; being the very words whereby they interpret Urim. Aben-Ezra
delivers, That the Theraphim Aben-Ez. in cap. Genesis 31.
were Images of Men fitly made under certain Constellations, to receive the
influx of the Heavens, and to work by it. And thus-minded was Lyranus: thus
Arias Lyran. in Judic. cap. 17. Ar. Mont. and Caiet. in idem caput Judic.
Oleast. in Genesis cap. 31. operam dans versui 19. R. Eliez. in capitulis,
capitulo 36. Servius in Virgilium.
Montanus, and Caietan; thus Oleaster. R. Eliezer transcends all these bounds;
reporting that a man being the firstborn, was killed, his head cut off, and
conserved with Salt and Spices: Then they engraved the Name of a certain
unclean Spirit upon a plate, which they hid under the Tongue: afterward setting
the head in the wall, they set also burning Candles before it, and worshipped
it; and it spoke to them. And these were his Theraphim. The Trojan Palladium,
or Image of Pallas, in her Temple at Troy, which moved its eyes, and the Spear
in its hand; was thought to have received in the making, Heavens benign influx,
And thus the people were ensnared by these false-stamp'd Astrologers, in
Idolatry. Such Images were dishonourably called by an honorable name,
Telesmes; of which the Scripture has other examples.

Thirdly, they differed from the true and Sethean Astrologers: Because they
entertained open and common familiarity with the Devil; and by virtue of the
secret compact, commanded him as they pleased. Such the Scripture shows to us
in Exodus: Then Pharaoh also called the Exodus 7. 11.
wisemen and the Sorcerers. For Sorcerers, the Latin ingrafteth Valgat. Inter.
Onkelos Aq. Text Hebr.
maleficos, Witches; Onkelos, Magos, the Magitians: Aquila, (...), the knowers
and doers of hidden Things. The Hebrew word, Mecassephim, properly signifies
Jugglers, but is taken for any kind of Magi, and is the word used in the
Hebrew Gospel. And whole Colonies of these Astrologers had been traduced out of
Evang. Hebr. Mat. 2. 1.
Chaldea into Egypt. The Princes of these, were Jannes and Jambres; as is clear
in Saint Paul. Palladius tells 2 Timothy 3. 8. Pallad. in vita B. Macarii.
wonderful Things of the Sepulcher of these men: which, as he storieth, was
placed in a Garden, furnished by them when they lived, with all kinds of rare
and rich Trees and Plants; they hoping, that after death, they should always
life in it, as in a delicious Eden, and Garden of pleasure. But, they being
dead, the Garden was possessed and held by the Devils; and holy Macarius entered
into it. I will proceed no further in the steps of Palladius, lest I should
offend Melchior Canus, who sorrowfully says: Dolenter, dico potius quam
contumeliose, Melch. Can. in Locis Theologic. lib. 11. cap. 6.
mulio a Laertio, and Ethnicis Historicis, Philosophorum vitas severius
scriptas, quam a Christianis vitas sanctorum: I speak it grievingly, rather
then contumeliously; The lives of the Philosophers are written more severely by
Laertiue, and other heathenish Historians, then the lives of the Saints by
Christians.

These Earth-born Astrologers, were men altogether carnal and lustful; and had
therefore commonly a Devil, (as oftentimes the simple and mere Sorcerer had)
which was ventriloquus, a speaker from the belly; and were called Pythones; and
in the Hebrew, Obot, from Ob, which signifies a bottle; because the Devil spoke
with a confused voice, out of their belly, as out of a bottle. And the Devil
seated himself in the belly, it being the seat of lust, and the receptacle of
meats and drinks exciting to lust: And he spoke with a hollow voice from their
bellies, as from a bottle; to show and confess against his will, that the
bellies of these Astrologers, were their best and the most able Orators; and
that nothing was to be found in the Devil, but hollowness and emptiness.

Certainly, there ought no familiarity to be admitted by us, as bearing the
Image of God, and as being returnable to God; with God's professed Enemy the
Devil. And therefore, our holy Savior speaks not to him, but with Rebukes, and
those in the way to Ejection. Yea, he earnestly wipes from himself the stain,
wherewith he was defiled by the Jews, of dealing with the Devil, and using the
power of his Name. Saint Matthew gives an ample example: There was brought Mat.
12. 22.
unto him one possessed with a devil, blind and dumb; and he healed him:
insomuch, that the blind and dumb both spoke and saw. But when the Pharisees
heard it, they said, verse. 24.
This fellow does not cast out devils but by Beelzebub the prince of the
devils. And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said verse. 25.
unto them, Every kingdom divided against it self, is brought to desolation:
and every city or house, divided against it self, shall not stand. And if Satan
cast out Satan, he is divided verse. 26.
against himself; how shall then his kingdom stand? And if I by Beelzebub cast
out devils, by whom do your children verse. 27.
cast them out? therefore they shall be your judges. But if I cast out devils
by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of verse. 28.
God is come unto you, etc. That these words may be understood to the bottom,
and withstand all Objections; and that no opposition may wedge-wise enter upon
them; we must deeply steep in our thoughts; That our Savior here, proves, he
used not the help of the Devil: But how? not from ejection precisely, but from
such an ejection; that is, which was not only against the will of the Devil
ejected; but also against the will of the Prince, and consequently, of the
whole Society of Devils: which ejection truly bended and tended to the
dissoletion and ruin of the Devil's Kindom: as also he proved himself to be
God, by the ejection of the Devil and Miracles, not effected and wrought for
any end whatsoever, or indifferently, but only to the end, that he might
thereby prove himself to be God; whereas the like miracles might have been
wrought by a mere man, assisted with the power of God. It is a Truth of a great
altitude, that one Devil may expel another two manner of ways: either by
force, because he is superior, and by consequence, more powerful; or by
bargain; for, those active Agents, that they may the more involve and envelop
man into sin, and the reward of sin, destruction, contrive amongst themselves,
that one shall depart at the command of another. Moreover: The will of the
inferior Devil, against which he is expelled by the superior in a forcible
expulsion, is a velleity, as the School speaks, or unefficacious will; because
such expulsion is advantageous to the promotion of the Devil's Kingdom. This
happens when the Magitian having compacted with a superior Devil, hinders and
obstructs the way to a Magitian, who has compacted with Mart. Del Rius lib. 2.
Disquisit. mag. qu. 30. sect. 1.
a Devil that is inferior. Which Martinus del Rio learnedly sets in the light.
Our Savior here takes up the Argument, which we call in Logic, Argumentum ad
hominem: that is, when we subdue and convince a man out of his own sayings or
actions: there being then amongst the Jews, Exorcists, who did adjure and
expel Devils.

No marvel now, if the holy Scripture and Word of God, of which, David hymneth,
Thy word is very pure: Psalm. 119. 140.
declares and defines against this pernicious and pestiferous Rabble of
Hell-born Astrologers. But we have a divine Rule, even in Ethics: Abusus non
tollit usum: The abuse of a thing does not antiquate or disanul the right use
thereof.

Secondly: It is objected out of Saint Luke: Neither Luke 12. 29.
be ye of doubtful mind. The Greek assigns: (...): Text. Graec.
and seems to impeach Abram, as he was (...): The Latin handeth to us: Et
nolite in sublime Interp. vulg.
tolli: and be not ye lifted on high. Arias Montanus offers, Ne suspendamini ex
sublimi: that is, as it has reference Arias Mont.
to the Greek, if Aristotle may be the Interpreter of Scripture: Let not your
thoughts hang in the Air like a Meteor. The Syriack throws to us: Neque
distrahatur cogitatio Syrus Interp.
vestra in istis: neither let your thoughts be distracted in these things. If
we desire to go down to the fundamental sense of the place: the Syriack has
given it in a most bountiful manner. For: (...) cannot receive the seal of any
other sense here, then as attending to the reproof of such, who being swallowed
up, and over-exercised with vile and inferior cares, neglect the unum
necessarium: the thing of which our Savior says, But one thing is needful or
necessary. And the evidence of Luke 10. 42.
this exposition shines, first, from the words immediately precedent: And seek
not ye what ye shall eat, or what ye Luke 12. 29.
shall drink: it adheres; neither be ye of doubtful mind. Secondly: from many
places in Saint Basil, where S. Basil in Asceticis.
(...), is, the distraction of the mind, or the avocation of the heart from
those things, in which chiefly it should be exercised; and where (...), implies
a freedom from inferior and other cares, that a pious man may freely vacare
and videre, be at liesure, see and contemplate divine and heavenly things.
Thirdly: the evidence is enlightened from Theophylact: who, searching into this
very Text, speaks to the mark, Sine dubio (...) nihil Theophyl. in hunc locum.
aliud hic est, quam distractio, and mentis instabilis vagatio nunc hoc, nunc
illud cogitantis, and ab uno ad aliud transilientis, (...): without doubt (...)
is nothing else here, but distraction, and the wandering of an unstable mind,
thinking now this, now that, and leaping from one thing to another, and always
phantastically proposing to it self more sublime things. Therefore it looks not
this our way, what (...) are in Aristotle: But it is in reason charged upon us,
to sit reverently at the feet of the Greek-Fathers, who best knew the Life,
Soul, and Sense of Scripture-words in their own language.

Thirdly: It is objected out of Saint Paul: For I Romans 12. 3.
say through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, not to
think of himself more highly then he ought to think, but to think soberly. The
Latin affords it Edit. Lat.
somewhat differently, Non plus sapere, quam oportet sapere, sed sapere ad
sobrietatem: not to be more wise, then it behooves us, but to be wise to
sobriety. In the Greek it is most elegantly woven, or embroidered rather:
(...): Text. Graec.
not to be wise above our Sphere, or with an Astrolabe, but to be wise, as
Irenaeus turns it, ad prudentiam, to prudence: Iren. lib. 5. cap. 20. S.
Chrysostom. in hunc locum. Sir. Interp. S. Aug. Ep. 47. S. Hieron. lib. 1. in
Jovin.
as Saint Chrysostom and the Syriack, ad modestiam, to modesty; as Saint
Austin, ad temperantiam, to temperance; as Saint Hierom, ad pudicitiam, to
chastity and honesty. This holy Text ejects all curious enquiry into Mysteries;
as, into the mystery of the sacred Trinity, of the Incarnation of Christ, etc.
that Faith may have its perfect work; with which Faith Saint Paul dignifies the
end of the Verse: according as God has dealt to every man the measure of
Faith. But whereas Saint Paul had plainly taught in the qeginning of this
Epistle: That the Romans 1. 20.
invisible things of God from the Creation of the world are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made: clear it is, we may climb up by the
knowledge of all visible Things, as the works of God proportionable to us, unto
more and more knowledge of the invisible God: who is apprehended more and more
in the knowledge of his works; and in the conjunction of the effects of Things,
with the Things as with their Causes. And our talent being increased, we may
not bury it; but are engaged to communicate it with all their power, that God's
heavenly power may be further known upon Earth.

We find recorded, that Aristotle ascended so far, and so near to the highest
Heaven, or Heaven of Heavens; making his gradual progress from motion to
motion, that he found out him at the top of the Stairs, who is primus motor,
the first Mover; and that he called upon him in the sad hour of his death.
Aristoteles moriturus Weckerus de Secretis, lib. 15. c. 1
exclamabat, Ens Entium miserere mei; and ob hanc deprecationem, eum aliqui
salvum fore credunt. Aristotle, says Weckarus, being in the shadow of death, I
mean, in some neerness to it, cried out, O thou Thing of Things, which art
above all Things, have mercy on me: and for this prayer, some believed that he
is saved. I wave his salvation: But I argue: If heathenish Philosophers found
out God by the heavenly Bodies, and by the gradations of their motions;
Christian Astrologers, having more illuminated understandings, may thereby
discover more and more of the outward diferences and perfections of his
Attributes.

Fourthly: It is objected: That judicial Astrology reflects a dishonor upon
God, to whom only pertains, as one of his royal Dignities and Excellencies,
cognitio futurorum, the knowledge of future things.

Now you have done your Arrant, take your Answer: There are two sorts of future
things: either such as depend upon natural and necessary causes, which always
work ad ultimum potentiae, to the utmost of their power, and have their known
courses; and these may be foreseen by us in their causes: or such as depend
upon the Free Will of God or of Man, before they come to be effectually willed
by him; or at length, such as depend upon contingent causes, either in
themselves, or in their concurrences with other causes. These God alone
foresees, according to the holy Text: Show the things that are to come
hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods. And he Isa. 41. 23.
only foresees them for two Reasons. The first is: Because future things, as I
touched before, are present to him; and therefore, the knowledge of future
things in him, is rather Cognition, then Precognition or Prescience. The second
Reason is: Because the Divine Will is the Cause of all Events; and God
thoroughly knows his own Will.

Hence the Divines assign five Actions to God, as most proper to him, Creation,
Conservation, which is indeed a continued Creation: Salvation, and the helps in
order to it, as Grace, and the Sacraments: praecognition of future things,
which depend on the will or Event: and to be (...), that is, to know the heart
in the heart it self, not by direction from external Signs.

Astrology therefore, does not in any kind, abstract or derogate from God's
Dignity or Excellency: But only sticks close to this innocent Truth: That as
God has imprinted certain Signs in humane Bodies, which are (...) Affectionum
internarum, declarative of the inward affections; and certain Signs also, which
are (...) Morborum futurorum, foretelling future diseases: and by these the
learned, learnedly, harmlesly, usefully, and piously judge of internal
affections in their kinds, and under the condition or supposition if they be
not bridled; and of diseases to come if not prevented: so the Astrologers
proceed in the Heavens; having observed that such effects are if not always
concomitant with, certainly consequent always to such causes. And as the common
people of Physicians have their critical days from the Moon, without much
looking upwards; by which they wisely judge, how it will succeed with a man in
respect of his disease: and as they have arrived by tradition, yet with no
little benefit, to the knowledge of the climacterical years: so likewise the
Astrologer, making his Addresses nearer to the Fountain, modestly judges of the
Fountain by the Streams, and of the Streams reciprocally by the Fountain.

Notwithstanding all this: The knowledge of God does infinitely excel,
surmount, and transcend all created knowledge, be it humane or angelical. And
this, in many fundamental Respects. As, 1. Ratione Objecti: by reason of the
Object. For: God by his knowledge, knows all things past, present, and to come;
yea, all things possible, and even himself as the vast and immense Ocean of all
things. 2. Ratione modi and perfectionis in cognoscendo; By reason of the
manner and perfection in knowing. For, God knows all things most perfectly, and
all manner of ways in the which they are cognoscible; and therefore, has a
comprehensive knowledge of all things. 3. Ratione medii, By reason of the
means. For, God knows not by species, nor by effects, but sees and knows all
things by his own essence, as by a most clear Glass. 4. Ratione celeritatis, by
reason of the quickness. For, God knows all things, simul and semel, together
and at once, that is, in one view or intuition of himself. 5. Ratione
certitudinis, By reason of the certainty. For, he knows all things, even
contingents (which by themselves, and compared to us, are uncertain) most
certainly. 6. Ratione Aeternitatis, By reason of eternity. For, the knowledge
of God never began, nor shall ever end. 7. Ratione uniformitatis, By reason of
the uniformity. Because the knowledge of God is unvariable, and the same
always; and is neither proficient nor deficient. 8. Ratione simplicitatis and
unitatis, By reason of its simplicity and unity. Because God understands
himself and all other things, with one most simple act of his understanding. 9.
Ratione entitatis, By reason of its entity. For, the knowledge is not
accidentary, as the knowledge of Angels and of Men; but is substantial to God,
and even God himself. 10. Ratione causalitatis, By reason of its causality.
Because the knowledge of God, is the idea and cause of all things that are
made. Lastly, Ratione foecunditatis and communicationis, By reason of its
fecundity and communication. Because the wisdom and knowledge of God, as the
greatest of Lights, and as a Light exceeding all Lights assembled into one
Light; diffuseth it self to Angels, Men, and all sensitive Creatures; and makes
all things that know and are known, to be known and to know.

Fifthly: It is objected: That the Stars are a long way exalted above us; and
that therefore we know but few things concerning them; and the knowledge even
of those things is uncertain. I answer, Scientia est universalium, non
singularium; quippe quae sunt infinita: Arts and Sciences are of universals and
generals, not of singulars or particulars, these being infinite. Moreover:
Sciences are perfected more and more every day. Yea, in Divinity it self, those
Doctrines are matters of Faith in the estimation of some, which to others are
matters of Opinion, and only probable; and to a third sort, pernicious
falsehoods: yet the solid and succous body of Divinity, still grows more and
more torous and quadrangular. Even so in Astrology; some will have, that the
tops of our Mountains are fairly represented in the Globe of the Moon, as in a
Glass: others, that there are Mountains, and Seas, and even another world in
the Moon. But all this while Astrology still gathers up it self, as other Arts
and Sciences, higher and higher, and yet higher. For now the Astrologers have
plainly discovered many things above ordinary, which were unknown to Aristotle,
and the learned Ancients: As, that the Planets, Venus and Mercury move about
the Sun; and are now above the Sun, now under it; that Venus does increase, and
has horns as the Moon: that the Sun and Moon have spots, which increase, move,
and are divided; and now appear, now vanish: that some Comets have their abode
above the Moon: that the Phenomenon which appear, are not Stars; because they
rise without our knowledge, and having saluted us, disappear: etc.

And if in Astrology, many things cannot be penetrated to the heart and marrow;
in the like place and condition is Philosophy. Who can fetch from the deep, the
reason why Ecnephias catches up houses and ships, and having played a little
with them in the Air, carelessly throws them to the Earth or Sea again? Why the
Whirl-winde goes round, and violently carries other things with it? Why the
Winds blow, now here, now there? Why the Lodestone, though divided into
parts, turns one side to one Pole, the other to the other? Why those things act
so and so? for the which we reserve no other Answer, but occulta qualitas, they
act by a hidden quality. If we remove the Court to Divinity, and except the
Mysteries: certain other things will not easily be understood. Original Sin;
and how the sin which Adam committed, is transmitted to his posterity, and made
personal and proper in every one of them, is not perfectly conceivable: how
grace concurs with the will, and how each has its proper force concurring to
the same act, which is both gracious and free, and yet neither is impeached; is
not altogether so liable to humane capacity. These Sciences are like unto
treasure hid in a field. They sharpen desire, Mat. 13. 44.
and heat industry.

Sixthly: It is objected: That in Astrology there are many foolish, frivolous,
and impertinent matters. I answer, So in Divinity there are, questiones
inutiles, unprofitable questions: of the which, the Angelical Doctor complains;
D. Tho. in Prologo ad summum Theologicam.
and whilst he complains of others, such Questions himself adopts; especially,
in materia de Angelis, amongst his Questions concerning the Angels; and excites
others to complain of him. And put the case, the Astrologer justles and copes
often with such trivials in his studies; The wiseman will dis-impeach him: who
boldly says: And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and
Eccles. 1. 17.
folly. For, as Saint Hierom expatiates upon the place: Contraria contrariis
intelliguntur; aequalisque studii fuit Solomoni, S. Hierom. in hunc locum.
scire prudentiam and stultitiam. Quare? Ut in aliis appetendis, and aliis
declinandis, vera ejus sapientia probaretur. Contraries are understood by
contraries; and it was of equal study to Solomon, to know prudence and
foolishness. Wherefore? That in his desiring of some things, and his declining
of others, his true wisdom, as going wisely betwixt the extremes, might appear
true being proved. Now if any man adhere to these errors, follies, and
impertinencies, procreated and proseminated by Astrologers, engendered of the
corruption of Cham, and walking to the left hand: he shall not be Barcoshebas,
the Son of a Star; but Carchasba, the Son of a lie: and howsoever he may move,
as other men a while; yet motus trepidationis, the motion of trembling will
have a terrible influence upon him at last; and he will be utterly deprived of
the benign and blessed-making Aspect of God.

Astrology being thus considered, and restrained within its Channel; is
harmless, useful, and pious: and sweetly resounds to the End of the lights,
appointed for signs and seasons. If any man oppose it in its own station, he
may perhaps as the divine Areopagite speaks, (...), S. Dionys. Areop. de divin.
nom. cap. 8.
cudgel the Air and the shadows valiantly, and like a man. But he will never
get the field, or prevail farther then against himself. He may quickly show
that he has ridiculum caput, atque os patulum sparsumque; a ridiculous head,
and an open and wide mouth: but he will not be able to evince, that he has a
large heart, and a knowing soul.

And now, ye learned Children of Seth; as your Astrology is an Art, let us
descend to a conclusion by the private and clean path of use and fruit. Ye have
heard here of God as the pinnacle of all things: look ye up to him by Faith, as
Saint Stephen looked on him by a kind of vision; of whom it is written: He
being full of the holy Acts 7. 55.
Ghost, looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus
standing on the right hand of God. He looked above your Heavens, into Heaven,
and there saw the glory of God, and Jesus Christ, the Bridegroom of Souls on
his right hand. This teaches you, that you must refer all your actions to the
glory of God; and that the Christian Soul must be adorned as the Spouse of
Christ. Christ, as the Bridegroom, speaks to the Soul which is the Spouse: Thou
Cant. 4. 9.
have ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse: thou have ravished my heart,
with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck. The Latin applies:
Vulnerasti cor meum soror mea sponsa; Edit. Lat.
vulnerasti cor meum in uno oculorum tuorum, and in uno crine colli tui. Thou
have wounded my heart, O thou which art both my sister and spouse; thou have
wounded my heart in one of thine eyes, and in one hair of thy neck. The eye is
the most excellent and most curious part of man's body; and the hair being
excrementitious, is of little worth. Wound ye the heart of Christ day and
night, with your excellent works, and with your common and ordinary works, that
is, with all your works. Likewise: ye contemplate the lights of heaven, as the
eyes of the world, and your temporal affairs, re-cal you to the consideration
of earthly Things, being excrementitious and corruptible. Glorify God, and
wound Christ with the wounds of love, in the pious use of them and these.

Secondly, ye have heard here of Grace, and of the supernatural and
overcommanding power of it. I commend to you the worth of Grace, and the work
of Grace; that being enamored on it, ye may pray for it. The worth of Grace,
as worthily delineated by Thomas of Aquine; who disputing of the difference
betwixt the justification of a sinner, and the creation of the world, in the
worth of the act, says: Bonum gratiae unius majus est, quam bonum Naturae S.
Tho. 1. 2. q. 113. art. 9. ad. 2
totius universi: One degree of grace is of more worth, then the goods of
Nature pertaining to the whole Universe. The work of grace, is the Reason of
the worth of it: Because it conjoyns us with God: who governs the Stars, their
Influences and effects: yea, makes us, as it were, Gods, and, to speak in the
language of Anastasius Synaita, Patriarch of Antioch: Quodammodo Christos in
divinitate S. Anastas. Synait. lib. 7. Hexam. Eccles. 17. 18.
simul and humanitate: in a manner Christ's, as having both divinity and
humanity. Hence the wiseman compares grace with the pupil of the eye: Because
as the pupil receives the image of a man, and therefore it is called in the
Hebrew, Iscon, a little man; so in grace there is the image of God; it being
our highest participation of the Divinity in this world; and we being called by
Saint Peter, partakers of 2 Pet. 1. 4.
the divine Nature.

Thirdly: Ye have heard here of the Angels. Learn, I pray: Angels in holy
Scripture, are always represented to us, (...), stantes, standing. Wheresoever
divine Scripture presents them, we find them neither in a posture of sitting,
nor of lying or leaning, but of standing. It is the wise observation of
Cyrillus Alexandrinus. And his Cyril. Alex. in cap. 1. Zachar.
Reason will not be dis-obliged from his Observation. They stand, says he, to
divulge and evidence their promptness, readiness and erected mind, to bring
all the commands of God to execution. Stand ye therefore always ready to
execute Ecc Eccles. 6. 14
the most royal and holy commands of God, not the most vile and execrable
commands of the Devil: that Gods will may be done by you in earth, as it is in
heaven.

Fourthly: ye have heard here of the Devil. Gaudentius Brixiensis expresses of
him: Post adventum Christi, duplicato Gaud. Brix sermon. 19.
contra hominum genus furore succenditur: after the coming of Christ, he is
fired with a double fury against humane kind. Saint Epiphanius teaches, That
the devil is S. Epiph. lib. 1. in Ephit.
called in Scripture by the name of a Serpent; because the Serpent is omnium
animantium (...), the most winding and turning of all living creatures; and
that he winds himself into circles and knots, and has nothing of right,
straight, or innocent candor. He is called by Theodoret, (...), Theodoret. lib.
1. Hist. cap. 2. Mat. 13. 19. S. Greg. Thaum. Orat. 2. de annunc. S. Basil.
hom. quod Deus non sit Auctor mali. S. Tho. p. 1. q. 63 art. 9. ad 3.
altogether wicked; and in the Gospel, (...), the wicked one. Gregorius
Thaumaturgus calls him, (...), the Prince of evil ones. Saint Basil styles him,
(...), the Receptacle or promptuary of all malice. Aquinas sets a resplendent
and singular observation, as in a Ring: In sacra Scriptura nomina quorundam
ordinum ut Seraphim and Thronorum, Daemonibus non attribuuntur: quia haec
nomina sumuntur ab ardore charitatis, and ab inhabitatione Dei, quae non
possunt esse cum peccato mortali. Attribuuntur autem eis nomina Cherubim,
potestatum, and principatuum: quia haec nomina sumuntur a Scientia and Potentia
quae bonis malisque possunt esse communia. In holy Scripture the Names of
certain Orders of Angels, as of the Seraphim and Thrones, are not attributed to
the devils; because these names are taken from the ardor of charity, (as the
name of the Seraphim) and from the inhabitation of God, (as the name of the
Thrones) which things cannot stand with mortal sin. But the names of the
Cherubim, Powers and Principalities, are in holy Scripture, attributed to the
Devils; because these Names are taken form knowledge and power, which may be
common both to good and bad. Beware, I most humbly beseech you in the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, of him that is now doubly fired against us, that is most
winding and insinuating, of him that is all-wicked, and the Prince of mischief:
yea, the unexhausted promptuary of all wickedness: of him that has much of
power, of Principality, and all this without Piety, without Charity: of him,
that is (...), the destroyer, that wooes and Rev. 9. 11.
courts us to destroy us. Be sober, be vigilant, because your 1 Pet. 5. 8.
adversary the devil, as a roaring lion walks about, seeking whom he may
devour.

Fifthly: ye have seen the Lights of Heaven once more in this Discourse. And ye
your selves must be lights from Heaven. And therefore, let your light so shine
before men, Mat. 5. 16.
that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven. The Lamps in Sepulchers gave light to the dead, and to their dry bones
and dust. It is your duty, to give light unto the living, and to reasonable
Creatures; and therefore, your light must be kindled from him that is Lux
mundi, the Light of the world. So Christ says of himself, I am the light of
the world. John 8. 12.


Lastly, The Motions of the heavenly Bodies, have now been acted again in your
understandings. I shall only in this respect, nakedly propose to you the
sublime example of Laurentius Justinianus: concerning whom Bernardus Bernard in
vita Laurent. Justin. cap. 7.
writes: Erat Verborum Actionumque tanta mensura, ut si inferiora haec
Coelestibus conferri fas est, vix ego motus Caelorum, and revolutiones and
gyros agi majori ordine at que mensura crediderim. There was such a measure of
his words and actions, that if it be lawful to compare these inferior things,
with things heavenly; I scarce think that the motions of the heavenly bodies,
are performed with more order and measure. Here is your ultimate work: here the
chief Praxis of your Vocation. To this I commed you, and this I commend to you,
in visceribus Jesu Christi, in the bowels of JESUS CHRIST.

Isa. 42. 8. My Glory will I not give to another.
Soli Deo, Dei Gloria.
FINIS.

