A Copy of a REMONSTRANCE Setting forth The sad condition of the Army under the
command of the Right Honorable the Lord Baron of INCHEQUINE, Lord President of
Munster.

Drawn by the Council of war the 23 of June, 1647. and sent to both houses of
Parliament

By their Agents, being Members and Officers of the Army, viz.

Lieut. Col. Stubber Major Choppyne. Major Elsynge.
And was accordingly by them presented July 14. 1647.

Together with a short Vindication of the Right Honorable the Lord Inchequin
and other Officers of that Army from a scandalous and seditious Pamphlet,
styled A LETTER from Lieut. Col. Knight in the Province of Munster in Ireland,
setting forth the extraordinary wants of the Soldiers, etc. and published July
22. 1647.

Published by Authority.

London, Printed for M. W. and H. A. 1647.

TO THE HONORABLE THE Commons in Parliament Assembled at WESTMINSTER.
The humble Remonstrance of the several Colonels, and Field Officers of the
Army in the Province of Munster, under the Command of the Right Honorable the
Lord Barron of Inchequin, Lord President of the same.
DEclaring that the sensibility each of us had within himself, of the
condition the Soldier under our particular Commands at the present stands in;
as also the great work we have undertaken in this Province, for the
establishment of Religion, and reducing the Irish Rebels to obedience, (of both
which we know we are to give both God, and this Honorable House an account)
drew us to a meeting the 23. June 1647. where we looked not back to what we
were before the Right Honorable the Lord Lisle his Commission for the
Lievtenancy of this Kingdom was expired, but cast our best eyes on the posture
the Army has been since in, and is at this present day, and by what means the
War might be carried on here, to the best advantage of the public.
Thereupon we thought it our duties, to represent to this Honorable House in
what an existence we were at his Lordships departure hence, and what has
accrued unto us since for the supportation of the Army; by examination of the
providory, as he informed the Lord President we find with him at the Lord
Lieutenant his departure out of this Kingdom the 17. of April last past, but
1300 l. worth of provision of all sorts, in the Treasurers hand of the 25000 l.
the Lord Lieutenant brought over but 6220 l. 14 s. 2. d. of the Excise,
Contribution Money, Customs, Custodium money, (and the like) in the said
Treasurers hand but 486 l. 13. s. 6. d. of the gross sum of 1562 l. 4 s. 6
d. by him received, during his Lordships being here for the same, as the Deputy
Treasurer has delivered unto us under his hand; out of all which there was
paid toward a weeks allowance due to the Army upon his Lordships going away,
1974 l. 9. s. 3. d. so that the whole money then left for the Army was declaro
but 4732 l. 8. s. 5. d. Since which time there was sent over for the Armies
use, 5000 l. in money, which the several accesses of Horse, and Foot sent over
hither to increase the Army, did so suddenly exhaust, (they coming over bare,
and unsupplied) that both the old, and new Soldier has been so scanted of
means, that it has caused a great mortallity in the Soldiers of both sorts,
diverse of them (even to a considerable number) being merely famished, besides
several both Horse, and Foot, who to shun hunger (as we suppose) have run away
to the Rebels, so that of 10606. Horse, and Foot, besides the train (according
to the Commissaries book given in to the Lord President lately) we do verily
believe, there are now not above 9000. sick, and whole; our Ga^rison Streets
present unto us every daysad spectacles of many weak, sick, and feeble
Soldiers, besides what lie sick in their quarters unseen, and in the several
Hospitals, and most of them for want of means; since that 5000 l. there came
1560. quarters of Pease, 360. quarters of Wheat, 22389. weight of Cheese, all
the Wheat, and Pease, except 450. quarters of the Pease (as by the Commissaries
certificate under his hand appears) is spent, whose certificates, as also the
several others formerly herein mentioned, we have sent by our Agents (for our
further justification) there being nothing else to give the Soldier, except
now, and then 6. d. a week in money, when Excise, Contribution, or the like
comes in, And as we have herein represented the sad condition of the private
Soldier, so we cannot but declare herein likewise, the pressing necessities of
the Officers in General, many of them being in a worse condition then the
Ordinary. Soldier, not receiving for many months together any thing at all,
whereby to give them a subsistence, yet notwitstanding the indigency of this
our sad condition, we are willing and ever shall be to engage our lives, and
fortunes, through the greatest difficulties to the promoting of the Protestant
cause in hand, as formerly we have been, having during the time we had scarce a
competent subsistence it self, applied our utmost endeavors to the carrying on
of the service, wherein the Lord blessed us with much success, by taking
Drummanagh, Cappaquin, and Dungarvan, all very considerable Garrisons, but now
our provisions, (the remainder of the Pease, and Cheese excepted) being
exhausted, no money in the Treasury, the Contribution but monthly, the Excise,
and other casualties uncertain, and the Soldier wanting clothes to cover
nakedness, Hose, and Shoes for their Legs, and Feet, whereby they are not
able to march, or lie in the field, and the impossibility of making provision
(if we had it) useful for the Army when it goes abroad, for want of convenient
Carriages, together with the weakness of the Army, coming home from their last
march almost sterved, this Country at this time affording little or no
provisions, we are too necessitated not to engage the whole Army into the
field, or before any Town, until we shall receive fresh supplies to enable us,
and strengthen the Soldier for some future expedition; and we must keep the
Garrisons we have possessed our selves of, with our best endeavors; yet to
prejudice the Enemy as much as our disability will suffer us, we have conceived
it in our opinions (at this debate) most conducible for the advanceing the
business in hand, until the Honorable Houses of Parliament shall please to
look more auspiciously on us, (their poor Ministers in this work) and extend
a larger hand unto us, that the Horse shall quarter upon the Fronteirs beyond
the black water, and as many of the Foot as conveniently can be releived with
such provisions as are left us, so long as they will hold out, shall be sent
out or their Garrisons to lie at or near Mallowe, to the end they may annoy
the Rebels, as oppertunity shall give way. But as we are bold to present our
wants, and by the representation of them, to implore for means of subsistence,
to ripen so good a work, so we heartily desire that this our humble
Remonstrance may not appear to this Honorable House (to whom we labor to
approve our selves) either an expression of our unwillingnesse to go forward
with the work, or a repining at the Honorable Houses dealing with us, but
rather (as in truth it is) to endeavor the contrary, viz. an undoubted
willingness and earnest alacrity to go through with it, according to our
abilities, and supplies, To which purpose that we may not be thought to ask
less then the condition we are in raises expectation, we shall humbly
entreat, that some person, or persons of quality and trust, may be sent hither
to audite exactly the accounts of all the profits, rents, customs
contribution, and Excise, (or whatsoever else is or may be an advantage to the
State) amounts unto, to the end that those that faithfully desire, and second
their desires with endeavors, may not suffer in their reputation under the
severe censure of being careless in their actions for the public, or cold in
their performances. These accounts we the rather desire may be taken by some of
the Honorable Houses own appointing, least it should be conceived, or
reported, that the moneys, and provisions already left, and received here, and
the emergent profits of this place have been, are, or may be sufficient to
carry on the great weight of this War: As also because we here cannot as yet
give any certain intimation to this Honorable House, of so uncertain a
Revenew, which is not yet settled, and therefore not in a capacity to discharge
the weekly burden of this Army. All which we, who can act no further then the
influence of the Honorable Houses will enable us to move, present for our
selves, and the whole Army, who (together with them) acknowledge our selves

Your Honors most humble Servants.

The several Colonels.
Robert Sterling. Percy Smith. William Fenton. Thomas Serle. Francis Courtney.
Sym. Wedham. Francis Roe.
The several Lieut. Colonels.
Will. Kingesmill. Will. Knight. Peter Stubber. John Iephson. Step. Brodrip.
Peter Crispe. Walter Croker. Daniel Watkins. Tho. Dowridge.
The several Sergeant Majors.
Piercy Bavastre, N. Purdon. William Courteney. John Gifford. Warham St. Ledger.
William Patterson. Hayward St. Ledger. John Coppyne. Richard May. Phillip
Pinchon. Tho. Marshall. Christ. Elsynge. Nich. Pyne. William Ryves. Daniel
Bolton. John Daniell. William Harding.
We (whose names are subscribed) being lately employed unto the ^onorable
houses of Parliament by the army in Munster, (whereof ^^e are members) to bring
over the above mentioned Remonstrance, ^^d entrusted also to solicit, and
negotiate a speedy supply unto them, in order whereunto we have delivered the
same to either house of Parliament, whereof we expect a comfortable answer,
and return, Have thought fit to publish the said remonstrance, for two
reasons; First, that all good Christians taking notice thereby in what a
dangerous, desperate, and sad condition that bleeding Province now stands, may
be moved to contribute the more cheerfully in their persons, purses, and
prayers, to the extreme necessity thereof, to the preservation from utter
ruin of many thousands of afflicted Protestants, with the interest of the
English Nation there; And secondly, for that there is come unto our veiw, a
Letter lately Printed, supposed to be written by Lieu. Colonel Knight,
containing many false, scandalous, and ^^alitious invectiv^^ against the
person, and Government of the said Lord President, and much derogating from the
honor and reputation of the Army in general, and of some particular officers
therein, in whose vindication we know, and declare, that the material
objections therein mentioned either against the Lord president, or the rest,
are false, injurious, and unworthy credit, and that (besides what is there
affirmed of the misery, and scarsity of the Soldiers) there is little, or no
manner of Truth mentioned in the said Letter, which we believe the said Lieu.
Colonel Knight did not write, but that it is counterfeited, and contrived by
some disaffected person to the parties concerned therein, of purpose to cast
aspertions undeservedly upon them, And the reasons moving us so to think are,
that the said Lieut. Colonel did contribute his endeavors in the composure of
the said Remonstrance, which is inconsistent with that Letter, and did
subscribe the same, and that a person who holds so eminent a place in that
Army, cannot act so much beneath himself, as to be the Author of so many
palpable, and malicious untruths, as that Letter insinuates.

Peter Stubber. Ioh. Choppyne. Christo. Elsyng.

FINIS.

