THE JESUIT, AND THE MONK: OR, THE Serpent, and the Dragon: OR, Profession, and
Practice. Being a Sermon Preached on the fifth of November, 1656.

By Richard Carpenter.

Job 8. 13. The Hypocrites Hope shall perish.

St. Bern. de Great. and lib. Arb. Utitur Deus Creatura rationali, sed malevola,
ut Virga, quam Correcto Filio, Pater in Ignem, tanquam Sarmentum inutile,
abjicit.

God uses a reasonable Creature, being malevolous, (and seeking the Destruction
of others) as a Rod, which, the Child being Corrected (or terrified) by what
line soever his Childship is descended to him, the Father throws into the fire
as unprofitable.

LONDON, Printed by Francis Leach, 1656.

To all Worthy Persons, that are pure-intention'd, and have noble Thoughts, and
Hearts which abominate Fraud, Fallacy, Falsehood, Lying, Slandering, yea all
kinds of Imposture and Wickedness, especially such as stinks of a Powder Plot.
NOble Souls, who and where soever ye are, Forgive me, if I presume upon your
softness, and humbly implore the Honor of your Patronage. We read in the old
Monuments, of Eunomius, Photius in Ep. ad Ioannem Patricium.
that, he playing upon his Harp in a solemn trial of Skill, and a String
failing him, a Grasshopper presently sat upon his Harp, and so symmetrically
consorted with the Music, that it perfectly supplied the Work of the broken
String; and moreover was in the Cause, that Eunomius went Conqueror. I may
perhaps, in this fervorous Contest, with a quick and cheerful stroke, break a
String; the String of Health, or Life: But more excellent Grasshoppers with
Harps in their Breasts, (it is the Phrase of St. Gregory Nazianzen; S. Greg.
Naz. Orat^ 34.
(...); Who gives to the Grasshopper, the Harp in its Breast?) than you Selves, I
desire not to have in view, for the perfect supplyance of the Music.

Ye state your Quarrel according to the Position of your Consciences: which I
likewise do. But I am principally gashed, and offended with the fruits of
Jesuits, and Monks; because they more strike the Sense; and chiefly, because
our blessed Savior is so very much pressing on that part. Mat. 7. 16.
Ye shall know them by their fruits: Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs
of thistles? v. 17.
Even so every good Tree brings forth good fruit: but a corrupt Tree brings
forth evil fruit. v. 18.
A good Tree cannot bring forth evil fruit: neither can a corrupt Tree bring
forth good fruit. v. 19.
Every Tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into
the fire. It returns in the shape of a Conclusion, proved to the height of
Discourse: v. 20.
Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

Agreeably to my light and sight the Monks and Jesuits st^le and write their
Vices, Virtues; as that impure Person, who called his Whores by the Names of
the Muses; or like the Painter, who preferred the Picture of his lewd Mistress,
under the Name of the sacred Virgin, that it might be honored.

Our Savior being hungry, after long fasting, Matt. 4. 3.
the Devil rejects him to Stones in the place of Bread. Again, he being hungry,
Matt. 21. 19.
the Fig Tree offers him nothing but leafs. And when at the last, Io. 19. 28,
29.
he cried on the Cross, I thirst, he was relieved by the Jews only with
Vinegar. I hope I long ago learned to Matt. 5. 6.
hunger and thirst after Righteousness. But when I thought to have been
plentifully filled, the Jesuits and Monks did not at any Time set any Thing
before me, but Stones, Leafs, Vinegar; or, as they are of the hoggish kind,
Husks: that is, Fraud, Fallacy, Falsehood, Lying, Slandering, Imposture,
Wickedness.

In Chemistry, the Transmutations of Things are superlatively strange, if we
attempt the reduction of them to nothing. I know that your Prolepsis, will
easily prevent my Interpretation. Howsoever the Lot falls, My Spiritual
Appetire lies not in my Ears; and I cannot be fed with gaudy Words, and Pious
Orations concerning Heaven: I must behold Heaven practiced.

This Sermon had been nothing but a Voice, though the Printers were the
Auditors; had not impudent Slander extorted it from me, and bound it over to
the Press. Now therefore, as the Monks and Jesuits are, in our Savior's
dialect, Mat. 7. 16.
thistles and thorns, I shall be as Thorns in their sides; and endeavor by all
means possible and imaginable, to fetch the Gerasen Hog, and the dirty Devil
out of their mouths, that wallows in all the mire, and impurities of Fraud,
Fallacy, Falsehood, etc. and will be there wallowing, until it runs violently
down a steep place into the Sea, and perishes in the waters. (...). 8. 32.
Had they been soul'd with the Spirit of the Primitive Saints, they had been
rapted to a Sublime Course, as reasonably and graciously caught thereunto by
many sublime Considerations. But these are Swine, and Lovers of Pleasure, and
of their Bellies, more than Lovers of God. And when they call me to it by their
new Vncivilities, I will plainly show you, as ye view in the Picture of the
Jesuit or Monk here, the very Hog-Devil in their Teeth, and at the end of their
Tongues; and lay down the Reasons before your Eyes, why I charge the Monks so
highly, and why they are so monstrous in my Glass. I will not at present,
farther soil and defile my self with touching these unclean Beasts: But humbly
remain,

Yours religiously-devoted, and to be commanded by you all. R. Carpenter.

The Jesuit, and the Monk, etc.
IN holy Scripture there occurr Apparitions of Angels. Angels, that they may
suit with the Condition of Men, who are bodily, and to whom they appear, must
assume Bodies.

I observe: When Angels assume Bodies, that they may perform God's Commands,
and converse with us here upon Earth, they never assume Bodies of Fire. (If a
Spirit attempts to make a Compact, he is a Devil; if he takes a Body of fire,
he is a Devil: they are two notable Marks of a Diabolical Apparition.) The
great Aquinas administers the Reason; D. Tho. p. 1. q. 51. art. 2.
Because, if they should take Bodies of fire, comburerent ea quae contingerent,
they would then set on fire all they should touch.

The Angel's Business, is not to be an Incendiary, and to inflame and fire all
where he comes; but proportionably and sweetly to attemper himself to our
bodily and qualified Condition, in the performance of God's holy Will and
Commands.

Our Priests from beyond the Alps, boldly style themselves Angels; because
Angelus est Nomen Officii, Angel is the Name of their Office. They derive this
their honourary Title, chiefly from the Prophet who is named Angel, and whom
Origin therefore thought to have been an Angel; Ita S. Hier. in Prooem. ad
Malachiam.
the Prophet Malachy. Who speaks thus, chapter 2. v. 7. Labia enim Sacerdotis
custodier^ Scientiam, et legem requirent ex ore ejus: quia Angelus Domini
Exercituum est. The English repeats it after this manner, For the Priests lips
should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth: for he is the
Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Sept.
In the Greek it is (...), the Angel of the Lord of Hosts. And in this sense
Christ says of John the Baptist, Mat. 11. 10. Behold I send my Messenger.
Evang. Graec.
The Greek allows, (...): Behold, I send and commissionate my Angel.

I believe, It is the hearty Wish of all Christian People, that these Italian
Angels would not come to us in Bodies of Fire, and burn all as they go.

My Text greets you*
Prove. 4. 14. in the end. Go not in the way of Evil Men.


THe Vulgar Edition delivers it, Edit. Vulgat.
Nec tibi placeat malorum Via: Neither let the way of evil men please thee.

This Reading is more restrictive; and indeed narrows the sense, and binds it
even to the denial of all delight, pleasure, or complacence in the ways of evil
men.

The Context in the Latin Bible, especially touched with the Original, gives
us to know what manner of Evil men these are, and that they have sulphurous
hearts, and that their holy work is to supplant and destroy Princes.

The Text is a negative Exhortation, moving us to decline the crooked way and
evil example of such profane men as are Supplanters of their Brethren.

We must not go in this way, because it is the way of evil men: that is to
say, it is not the way of the Saints and Servants of God, to which we are
called.

Assuredly Jacob was a Saint of God, and the same, a Supplanter of his Brother:
But he supplanted him irrationally, that is, when he had not as yet the use and
exercise of Reason; and he pre-occupied his Brothers Blessing, instructed by
his Mother, who now acted according to the Regulation of a supernatural
Principle: and all this was mysterious, and designed for the signification of
Things afterward to come, by him who only is able to make Things foresignifie
Things.

And the two Brethren now growing to some ripeness of age, are briefly
uncharacterized, Genesis 25. 27. And the Boys grew; and Esau was a cunning Hunter,
a man of the field, and Jacob was a plain man dwelling in Tents. Codex Vulg
Cod..
The Latin says, Vir simplex, a simple man. Hebr.
The word in the Hebrew Basis is Tam: Sept.
which the Septuagint render, (...), not feigned, or daubed over; that is,
exempt of guile and fraud. Sym.
Symmachus reads (...), without fault, or blemish, irreprehensible. Aq.
Aquila gives (...), a plain man, that had nothing of duplicity in him. Where
Simplicity it not opposed to Prudence, but to Craft and Falsehood.

The bottom-Truth is: The Hebrew Tam arises from the Root Tamam, which
signifies to perfect or consummate; and therefore speaks Jacob to have been a
man of a right and good way, of an innocent work, and of a perfect life, yea, a
plain man, dwelling in Tents; that is, continually meditating upon the brevity
and vanity of this life, according to which interpretation it is written of our
Savior Christ, Jo. 1. 14. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us.
Text Graec.
Where the Greek affixeth; (...), And the Word was made flesh, and pitched his
Tent or Tabernacle among us.

Beloved, ye have seen holy Jacob; and ye have seen him differenced from his
Brother Esau. I have seen much of Esau, and somewhat of Jacob in the world. In
all the gleanings of my Experience gathered from the Church of Rome, I cannot
find with a Candle (I had almost said) one Priest (with whom I have mingled
near acquaintance, commerce and conversation) that has not (give me leave to
speak at large; for the Things are beyond ordinary limit and compass) a
thousand Esaus in him, and more than a million of our common and quotidian
Mountebanks and Jugglars. (They are Cunning Hunters after Money, Books,
Apparel, Goods, Provision, and Gifts out of the Country; of all which in their
kinds the good Monks have cheated me; having then in a manner, blown me up,
though not with Powder. And therefore their continual, and most ready
Profession is, that they are poor.) And whither will not the bold and
presumptuous attempts of such high-soaring people ascend? This Diabolical
Fraud, Falsehood, Cunning, is the most unhappy Mother of all damnable mischief.

Now God has moreover declared, that he converseth chiefly, that is,
intimately, and familiarly, with simple Hearts. As Prove. 3. 32. For the froward
is abomination to the Lord: but his Secret is with the Righteous. Edit. Vulg.
The Vulgar Latin speaks it more plainly: Quia abominatio Domini est omnis
illusor, and cum simplicibus Sermocinatio ejus. For God abominates every Mocker
and Deceiver, and his Communication is with the simple. Text. Hebr.
It lies couched in the Hebrew, His Secret is with the right. Aben Ezra in hunc
locum.
To the which Aben Ezra contributes his reason. Because God communicates his
Counsels and Secrets unto those who are right of Heart. Chald. Paraphr.
And therefore the Chaldee diggs it up: Cum rectis Colloquium ejus, He talks
privately, and entertains the sweet Colloquies of Love, with such as are
simple, right and candid, not with such, who, gestant sub pectore Vulpem, who
carry a whole kennel of Foxes, or a Fox in their Breast.

And the Reason, why God admits not of any friendly and familiar Conversation
with Deceivers, Destroyers, and such as have a Powder-mill in their brains, is,
because all such are extracted from the seed of the old Serpent, and are the
Children of Cain.

As soon as we hear of the Serpent in holy Scripture, we hear likewise of his
Subtilty, and that he is pragmatical, busy, yea full of violent action and
mischief. Genesis 3. 1. Now the Serpent was more subtle than any beast of the
field. He was, Doctor Subtilis, a Subtle Doctor. Edit. Latina.
The Latin unsheaths it: Sed and Serpens erat callidior cunctis animantibus
terrae, more crafty, that is (say some, not I) more Jesuitical, more Monkish.
Aq.
Aquila goes to the root, and affords (...), more pragmatical, more acting,
moving, restless, and more fire-like; more ready for every work and shape,
whereby he may deceive; yea, ready to perform, if it were possible, all works
at once, that he might delude all mankind in one manifold performance.

The holy Apostle imitates Aquila, and sanctifies his Translation in this
parricular, 2 Cor. 11. 3. But I fear, lest by any means, as the Serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ. For, through his subtilty, the Greek assumes
(...), in his craft, when he takes all shapes, and works all things to comply
with his detestable and horrible Ends.

Gather your thoughts together now, and, I pray, note with me; that here in the
beginning of Genesis, the first Book of Holy Scripture, the beast into which
the Devil entered, has his Name, a Serpendo, from creeping. He was but a
creeping beast when he first began to plot against us. I utter the words of my
Soul, Heart, and Spirit: The Jesuits and Monks, (if I may religiously say so)
have egregiously outdone him, and gone excessively beyond all that he did or
could have done when he was a Creeper. Now it is plain, that the Serpent, the
Creeper, is in length of time grown into a Dragon; such we find him in the last
Book of Scripture the Revelation, Chap. 7. 12. And there was War in Heaven,
Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought, and
his Angels. Had not the Dragon been a Spirit, and his Enemy Michael, a Spirit,
ye had heard here perhaps, in the introit of the last Times, of the first
Powder Plot. But, however the Devil is grown from a Creeping Serpent to a
Flying Dragon, think not, I beseech you (I am heartily sorry that I have cause
to say it) that the Jesuit and the Monk fly far behind him.

Indeed, and in truth, A Man skilled in the Motions, Promotions, Actions,
Transactions, and Overtures of Rome, would have reasonably thought, that, if
there were any pure and silken threads of true Christian sincerity and
simplicity interweav'd into the Practice of the Church, they would have been
found amongst the Benedictine Monks; these having been the most ancient order,
and the most Sun-beam'd from Christ, as the most near to him. And I grant there
are apparently such amongst the Religious of other Nations.

But casting aside all the vain Follies and Falsehoods of Love, with which, I
humbly confess I have been captivated and enchained; (for, extravagant Love,
and Hatred, are always erroneous, and never sound and piercing in their
judgments) I declare upon my Christian Word, our English Monks, who in the
flourishing days of an old Monk, the Behemoth of humane Policy (for whose Ashes
I have yet so much Reverence, as to conceal his name, though, I believe, the
Chronicling of his notable Actions would yield a great access to the knowledge
of Despotical Dominion) expended no time upon me, to penance and prepare me for
Profession, but much to persuade me, that the Jesuits are the grand Abusers of
Mankind, and the mighty Plot-Masters of the world; are now themselves, in
regard that the Devil is grown from a Serpent to a Dragon, become, (I will hold
my Peace, but I was in the way to say) Deceivers and Impostors beyond a
Parallel, and beyond a Rival. (And to add) never any Dancer on the Ropes,
educated his tumbling Boy; never any vile man tutored his Ape, to so many
strange tricks, and wondrous Faces, as these tumbling and Apish Monks are apted
to, and exactly taught, when they are furnished out, and manumised into this
Nation from their Monasteries. But not a word of this.

Many put it upon the question, What kind of Serpent it was, into which the
Devil entered. Eugub.
Eugubinus thinks it to have been a Basilisk; because he is the King of
Serpents. Perer. Camar. in cap. 3. Genesis
Pererius, that it was a Serpent called Scytales; because the back thereof is
variously colored. Martinus del Rio, Disq. Mag.
Martinus del Rio, a Viper. Camara, a common Snake. Others think otherwise: and
when we have all thought, we have but thought, and can but think.

I would verily believe, if I durst, that it was a Serpent most fitly chosen,
as having certain subtle postures, motions, and tumblings, that our young Monks
and Jesuits now use. My Reason is, The Devil had it in his comm^nds from God,
that he should not assume a shape, but one most showing his nature; to the end,
Eve might thereby be advertised. S. Aug. lib. de Genes. ad literam^ cap. 3.
For as St. Austin divinely admonishes, Had the Work been referred to the
arbitriment of the Devil, he would have rather covered his treachery (let me
not say) his Jesuitism, his Monkishness, under the sweet shape of a Lamb or
Pigeon, as often times the old Monks and Jesuits do. Questionless, It was a
Serpent that could move, turn, wind all manner of ways; and had (Men say so,
but they speak as they please) part of the motions, windings, turnings,
returnings, and overturnings of blessed Father Garnet, when he was religiously
instructing his godly Ghostly Children in Confession, and sub sacro Sigillo,
under the sacred Seal, to blow up the Parliament House: and moreover, had (it
is not I that say it, but another out of the clouds) part of the motions and
mutations of our old Monk and Behemoth, when he was instilling, in his close
and private Chamber, his black Art of Policy into his Novices. But the Dragon
was the complete and master-Workman* and he that polished their high
Performances.

And that these are the children of Cain, all the children of Abel easily
believe, Genesis 4. 8. Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and slew him. These
rose up against many thousand Fathers and Brethren, and would have slain them,
and given them over to a most horrible Death. They had a most pregnant and
efficacious Will to it, and the Effect was not wanting on their part. They did
not impede it, but concurred to the production of it, with the last dram of
their Power. Cain was in the Cause, that his Brother Abel became Hebel, Vanity;
and they would have turned all these their Fathers (the Fathers of their
Country) and Brethren, into Vain smoke.

A man is (...), a little House. Wherefore the Hebrews call a Son Ben, quasi
Domum, as it were a House, quam bana that is, which the Father has built. How
many fair Houses of Flesh, had the Fathers of the Persons then designed for
destruction, richly built and educated, which our base Children of the Serpent
and of Cain, would have most suddenly and most cruelly destroyed? King, Prince,
Bishops, Nobility, Gentry, and thousands of innocent and ignorant people near
to the Place, in the heat of their other Thoughts, should have been fired and
torn without a grain of Mercy.

Let me tell thee, O thou Jesuit, or, O thou Monk, (some other Power offended
at thee, speaks this by me) that now outactest the Jesuit in all the high and
airie motions of transcendent Villainy: the Devil could not have raised the dust
of his Body to this Plot, had he stood a Serpent; he could not, until he came,
through all the Degrees and Ascents of his Experience, to swell into a Dragon;
and until the worst of times offered you for his Instruments.

Some curiously enquire, especially of the Jewish Rabbis; what Sign^ it was
which God set upon Cain, answerably to Scripture, Genesis 14. 15. And the Lord set
a mark upon Cain, lest any finding him should kill him. Rabbini.
Some fancied this Mark or Sign to have been a most horrid yelling and crying;
Some, a ghastly Countenance, accompanied with fury; Some, a Wandriug flight;
Others, a continual trembling of his Body; Others, a Mark impressed on his
forehead, as with a hot iron: and thus on.

The Cain's Mark of a Jesuit or Monk, (when I speak thus of the last of these,
I speak unwillingly) is a Face figuring it self into all the Shapes of a nimble
Fancy, and a Body that croutches, cringes, and winds any way, every way, all
ways, especially, when a Plot's upon the anvile, or, when there is Odor lucri,
any sent of gain; or, of a good Dinner.

This Way, as it was not the Way of the Saints of God, but of the Serpent, and
of Cain: so was it not the Way of the Prince of Saints, Christ Jesus. And
first, because when he came into the World, as delegated by his Father to
direct the World into the good Way, his Forerunner cried out, John 3. 3.
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. Editio Latina.
The Latin inserts, Rectas facite semitas ejus: make his paths right. Text.
Grae^
The Greek word is, (...), right or plain. Secondly, Christ made his Conquest
of the World, by a small and simple Herd of poor and plain Disciples. Thirdly,
His Conquest was not effected by the shedding of other men's Blood, but by the
patient suffering of his own to be shed.

In the four Evangelists, (join to them the Acts of the Apostles,) where have
ye the least apparition, glimpse, or shadow of a Powder Plot?

It is chronicled of Christ, Philip. 2. 8. He humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. And to this he composes and
conforms his Disciples, Lu. 9. 23. And he said to them all, If any man will
come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross daily, and follow
me. And if ye will search into his very bowels, come to the 15 Chap. of St.
Matthew. v. 32. Then Jesus called his Disciples unto him, and said, I have
compassion on the multitude. He had compassion on the People, being hungry both
in Body and Spirit: and these our Commissioners from Hell, would, that the
People should never have eat more, nor have ever thrived more in Spirit or
Body. Text. Grae.
The Greek proposes it, (...), that is, I am moved with a great motion of
affection and bowels toward the People. Vatabl.
Therefore Vatablus offers, Intime miseret me turbae, I have inwardly, and in
my very bowels, compassion toward the People. And hither steers the
Exhortation of the Apostle, Coloss. 3: 12. Put on therefore (as the elect of
God, holy and beloved) (...), bowels of mercies.

Here, Beloved, I am in the way to set before you, that this Way is no way
answerable to their own Profession.

There is a Book newly published, and lately written by a Priest, (I could name
him to you, but I am not yet come so far as to name Persons,) wherein he
divides the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which is of Faith and fundamental,
from the Opinions and various Out-walkings of the Schools. He had rendered
himself more ingenuous, had he divided with an even hand betwixt the Doctrine
of the Church of Rome, and the practice of the same Church. But it is probable,
that Blessed Opportunity will devolve this Work upon me, and I shall dispatch
it with as much haste and fidelity as I can.

As for the (...), the present time, it shall be sufficient to show, that this
abominable way is much out of the way of their own hypocritical Profession.

The Jesuit and the Monk, are the Persons I arraign: the Jesuit, as the most
malicious Author and Plotter of the Gunpowder-Treason; and the Monk, (when I
think of the Primitive Saints abstracted from the world, I sigh, and am loath to
speak; but we are now in a lower Orb;) as one that has of late years, put off
all honesty as a Garment, and come up to all the nimble motions of the Jesuit
in Falsehood and Perfidiousness; yea gone before him, left him behind, and lost
him.

Ye two, Jesuit and Monk, (did ye not hear me sigh?) can not be ignorant, but
that I abundantly know you. And your own hearts, know with me, that neither the
Indies, nor the Dominions of the Great Turk, nor the rugged and ragged skirts
of the Arabian Deserts, nor any other wild place of the World, where God is not
known, can produce two such high-flown and sublimated Men-Dragons as your
selves: and I shall prove it by your professing as Men, and your performing as
Dragons.

First, ye profess as soon as ever ye are born into the World, that your
Conversation shall be white, direct, simple, and innocent. For this very
purpose, ye have put upon you in your Baptism, a little white linen garment;
in the which your Susceptores implicitly promise for you, a plain, just, and
innocent Life. S. Aug. S^ 157. de Temp*
Ye call St. Austin to witness in this Matter, preaching on the Octave of the
Pasch, which is, with you, Dominica in Albis, the Sunday wherein all newly
baptized did appear in their white, that they might appear outwardly no more in
it. Hodie Neophytorum habitus commutatur, ita tamen, ut Candor qui de habitu
deponitur, semper in Cord teneatur; This day the Habit of the Neophyts, (that
is, of the new plants lately baptized,) is changed; yet so, that the whiteness
of the Garment is tetained in the mind or heart; which is afterward to be
manifested in their practice. Iobius apud Photium, Cod. 222.
Jobius in Photius, discovers the manner of it; Candidum amiculum gerebatur
septem dies a baptizato, The white garment was worn seven days of him that was
baptized, that is, from Easter Day, to Dominica in Albis, being the Sunday that
next follows and waits upon Easter-Sunday. S. Dionys. Areop. de Eccl. Hier.
cap. de Baptismo.
To make this strong, ye go back as far as Dionysius Areopagita, the learned
Disciple of St. Paul. Ye contend, that the white garment, not only signifies
your whiteness of Soul after Baptism, but also relates to your future whiteness
of manners; and moreover, that your whiteness of manners has anagogical
reference to the whiteness of the robes worn in Glory: according to St. John in
the Revel. 3. 4. They shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy; and v.
5. He that overcomes; the same shall be ^lothed in white raiment.

I pray now, How does your white Garment in Baptism, agree with the most
Palpable darkness and hideous blackness of the Powder Plot, and with all your
other execrable Actions, Jugglings, Conveyances? And, Are ye of those that
shall wear white raiment in Heaven? Had a man been endued with the Spirit of
Prophecy, respectively unto the futurition of your Actions, and had likewise
been present at your wearing of the white Dress in Baptism, he might have
happily declared against the Lie in white, or the lie of the white Garment, and
have said, These little white ones will deny their white in their black lives,
and attempt to destroy the top and flower of their own Country with a cursed
Powder Plot. O most Hypocritical Profession! O most Diabolical Practice!

Secondly ye profess, that as ye ascend in years, ye ascend in Virtue. Then
presently we hear of the fifteen Gradual Psalms, and of the Priests ascending
the fifteen stairs of the Court, when they sang them louder and louder, as the
Lark: R. David Kimchi in Ps. 119.
and R. David Chimchi is brought forth with his Records. Ye make Scripture
yours in this affair, Psalm. 84. 5. Blessed is the man whose strength is in
thee: in whose heart are the ways of them. The Latin is more open: Beatus vir,
cujus est auxilium abs te: ascensiones in cord suo disposuit. Blessed is the
man whose help is from thee: he has disposed ascensions in his heart. It falls
in opportunely, v. 7. They go from strength to strength. Edit. Lat.
In the Latin, Ibunt de virtute in virtutem, They shall go from virtue to
virtue. The Hebrew has under ground, from Army to Army. The Targ. admits,
from one School to another. Dionysius is called to the vogue, who requires in
the Perfect way of Christian Piety, (...), sacred Ascensions.

Tell me, I humbly pray, Have ye ascended by these holy Ascensions, ( by the
thirty Degrees of Joannes Climmacus) to this horrible Cliff so near a
Precipice, to this Masterpiece of extreme Villainy? When we go from virtue to
virtue, we are brought at last to a sublime performance of heroical and eminent
virtue. No man comes by sacred Ascensions, to the Crest or Spire of unheard
of, and almost unconceivable villainies. Go ye dirty Hypocrites, ye ascend in
Virtue, according to Profession; according to Practice, ye wrap and ingulph
your selves into bottomless mischief.

Thirdly, ye profess your selves to be men of most unblameable lives; and that
as ye are called religious men, so your Practice is most refined, Regular, and
religious, your lives are a continual Presentation to God of the Sacrifice of
Abram, as a Sign that ye shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; as his Sacrifice
was to him a Sign, that he should inherit the Land of Canaan, Genesis 15. 8. And
he said, Lord God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it? v. 9. And he
said unto him, Take me an Heifer of three years old, and a She-Goat of three
years old, and a Ram of three years old, and a Turtle-Dove, and a young Pigeon.
The Goers on the Ground, being in their full strength, shadow forth your strong
Action, and most ahle Performance of the Practical Part: the Turtle Dove, that
your whole life is a mournful Penance, and continual Martyrdom: and the young
Pigeon, the sweetness of your Innocence and harmlesness. It is not far off, to
wit, v. 11. And when the Fowls came down upon the Carcases, Abram drove them
away. It is visible, ye are men consisting of flesh and blood, and the Devil's
Temptations come down upon your Sacrifice, but they carry not a bill-full away.
The Birds fly over your heads, but they do not lodge in your Hair. The Powers
and Faculties that are not in your power, powerfully present idle motions, but
they move you not. Ye wait for another world, and the Apostle's (...), earnest
expectation of the Creature, Romans 8. 19. is in you especially, as the holiest
of earthly Creatures. Ye hold up your heads, and are stretched out in most
earnest expectation, toward the coming of Christ in the East. But do ye hear
me, is it clear as Crystal, that your Practical Part is firm and sincere?

By the way as we go. In some of your Religious men, Lucifer himself is
predominant. We hear continually and vexatiously, from their own humble Mouths,
that they forsooth are of noble birth, that their breeding and Education was
noble and dainty, and that now their Mortification is the greater. In others
Asmodeus reigns. I could furnish you with apposite examples. And of our
Powder-Traitors (...) had full and plenary possession.

In Christian earnest, Men whose intentions are touched with the true loadstone
of Grace, and who purely and piously seek solid and Primitive Perfection, are
not fit Spectators of your Dirtinesse; your filthiness will not endure their
Eyes.

And now, answer me sincerely, Where is the Turtle Dove in your Life's? Ye look
soberly and whiningly sometimes, yea gravely in your Houses, (and ye are most
stately, and require more Courtship than the great Turk, or grand Mogul.) But
when ye come into England, ye are the merriest Men in the Nation, and of all
others, most given away to Idleness, Pleasure, and the Folly of the Tavern.
And there was, I am certain, no news of the little Pigeon in the Powder Plot,
the great Powder Plot. O peerless Hypocrites, ye are indeed, after a sort, as
the Beasts going on the Ground: but the quintessential part of the Practical
part, and the Turtle Dove, and the young Pigeon are quite flown away from you.
And why did ye not drive away the foul Temptation of the Powder Plot, but
entertained it, together with the Foul-one himself, in your Hearts? And your
true and Christian expectation of our Lords coming, is yet expected. They are
your Lives, which torture me. S. Bern. lib. 2. de Consid. ad Eugen.
Here is Seeds prima, and vita ima, as S. Bernard to Eugenius; a high place for
Meditation, and a base low Life, as low as Hell.

Fourthly, ye profess, that ye are men of soluble and melting Hearts; and that
Donum Lacrymarum, the Gift of Tears, is part of your proper Dowry; and that ye
weep continually for your own Sins, and for the sins of the World. Ye avouch,
that Christ calls unto you especially, Cant. 5. 6. Open to me, my Sister, my
love, my dove, my undefiled; for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with
the drops of the night. Chald. Paraphr.
Ye do illustrate it out of the Chaldee: Capili capitis mei pleni sunt lacrymis
tuis, sicut Vir cujus capilli capitis tinguntur de rore caeli: et cincinnus
caesariei meae, repletus guttis est oculorum tuorum. The hairs of my head are
full of thy tears, as a man whose hair is all bedewed and pearl'd with the dew
of heaven; and my locks are filled with the drops of thine eyes. And ye give us
to learn, that the Priests of old times when they celebrated Mass, were wont
to weep whole showrs of tears; and that therefore, they had a Napkin hanging on
their left hand: Amalar. lib 3. de Ecclesiasticis offic. c. 24.
of which Amalarius. Venerab. Beda in Collectan. to. 3.
Venerable Bede, speaking of the Priestly Vestments, calls it mappula, or
amapha; and he says, that the Priest wore it on his left hand. Whence it is
undeniable, that this mappula was in place of the manipulus now worn by the
Priest on the left arm* for, manipulus, is quasi manus mappula, as the
hand-napkin: and the Priest putting on the manipulus, prays, Merear, Domine,
portare manipulum fletus and doloris, ut cum exultatione recipiam mercedem
laboris, Let me, o Lord, bear the Maniple of Weeping and Grief, that with
exultation I may receive the reward of my labor.

A word now, pray: Have ye a fountain of tears in your eyes? or, is the Head of
Christ adorned with your tears, as with Orient Pearls? Have ye wept your eyes
dim in the celebration of the Mysteries? How comes then, this Powder Plot? Is
this the proper Effect of your tears, and weeping? Have ye in the celebration
of the Holy Mysteries, wept your selves into a Powder Plot? Does your weeping
for Sin, produce a sin above all the sins that ever were heard of? I warrant,
ye had great store of the tears of the Crocodile ready too, to shed over the
Parliament House. Go, go, ye are dry and dull Weepers, ye never wept so many
tears, as would have quenched this magazin of sulphur and powder, had it broke
forth into effect. Hypocrites, now ye have a new reason of weeping; weep on,
and drown the memory of this most loathed and odious Mischief, if ye are able.

Fifthly, Ye profess, that ye are great Lovers of Princes; and that Princes,
ordained by your sacred Rites, are sacred Persons. Indeed, the Princes are
they, who chiefly uphold and enrich you. They have multiplied your Religious
Houses, and Monasteries: they have beautified them. Ye know, that the Emperors
of Constantinople were installed in the pronouncing of these words by the
Patriarch, (...), be thou holy; Curiopalus in Hist.
who likewise, in the very pronunciation, did anoint the head of the Emperor,
(...), in the form of a Cross, with oil; and presently added, (...), be thou
worthy; intimating, that nothing could make him worthy of an Empire, but
Holiness. And ye know that Kings anointed with oil, are thereby rendered capable
of Spiritual Jurisdiction, and of the giving of Benefices, as in whom there is.
Jus Patronatus, the Right of Patronage. And ye know again, that Kings are
certain foundations of their kingdoms; and that they are called Mich. 6. 2. the
strong foundations of the earth. And therefore, a King is named in the Greek
Language, (...), quod sit (...), populi basis; because he is the basis and
foundation of the people: And if the foundation be subverted, all is ruinated.
And the Hebrew word Adon, from whence comes Adonai, signifying Dominus, Lord,
is borrowed from Eden, a basis or foundation.

Me thinks now, that ye having had so many Princes your most royal
Benefactours, might have been loyal, and spared your own Prince for their
sakes, with whom your oil and Ceremonies still remained; which enstated him,
even in your judgments, holy and inviolable. And me thinks ye should not have
adventured to destroy the foundation of a kingdom; the People, together with
the foundation on which they stood, root and branch. I thought, that the hands
of the Clergy had been set apart from all blood; especially, from the blood of
their lawful Princes. How can the bloody Hands of a Priest, consort with an
unbloudy Sacrifice? Ye are still Hypocrites, and your Profession and Practice
are diverse in their Generations.

Sixthly, ye profess, that ye mortify the lusts of your Bodies; and that ye
act over again, every day, the severe execution of St. Hilarion upon his
Body: S. Hieron. in vita Hilarionis.
who speaks to his Body in St. Hierom, Ego te, Aselle, jam non hordeo, sed
paleis alam, ne calcitres, O my Body, my Ass, I will not feed thee now with
barley, but with chaff, lest being high-fed, thou should kick. And the
People are diligently taught, that Beasts were not offered unto God under the
old Law, until they were dead, and the blood, which is Passionum vehiculum, the
Chariot of the Passions, was clean run out. Yea, these mortified Men, are as
Cloth before the Tailor, ready to be cut into any fashion; or, like a dead
Corpse on the shoulders of the Bearers, apt to be carried, without the least
repugnance, even whither they will carry it. They would make us believe, that
they are excellently knowing in Custodia Cordis, and Sensuum; in the keeping of
the Heart, and of the Senses; and when they are in their Postures, they will
not look beyond the length of a Grave. They bring Scripture, by a kind of
material Concurrence, into their pious Juggle, Proverbs 4. 23. Keep thy Heart
with all diligence: for out of it are the issues of life. Edit. Lat. Text. Grae.
The Latin holds up, Omni custodia serva Cor tuum, Keep thy Heart with all
guard. Text. Grae.
In the Greek it runs, (...), Which word is brought from the Wars, and
signifies the keeping of a place with a military Guard. And there were in war,
(...), Guards for the securing of such places both by day and night. Those were
by the Romans, properly called Excubiae, these Vigiliae. Therefore these
dead-will'd men stand close to it, That They keep continual Guards over their
Hearts and Senses.

But had they kept their Hearts, they had never entered such a damnable Plot
into them. Had they kept a guard upon their own senses, and not looked beyond
the length of their own Graves, they had never found the way to the
Parliament House upon such a monstrous and menstruous occasion. O Hypocrites,
load not our ears with your Ass-bodies, and your sacrificed Beasts, with your
similitudes of the Tailor and his Cloth; and of the Bearers, bearing the dead
Body. Trouble us not with your (...). Tell not us of God in your Profession,
when we see with our eyes, Baalzebub; (...), the God of corrupting Flies, and
with him a whole Legion of Devils in your Practice.

But I must needs parl here a little with our Monk. (And yet, not I, but my
Angel) If ye Monks are such rigid Mortifiers of your Hearts and Senses, how
comes it to pass that the Popish Alewife yonder, bedaubs a strict-liv'd Man
amongst you, whom ye have lately sent to hear the Confessions of the Nuns at
Cambray. I confess, Her Tongue is the foulest and filthiest of all that ever I
heard word it; but she is of your own Ravenfeather, your practical feather; and
we hear not of her satisfaction. Besides, our Hamborough-Merchants report (but
I hope they speak it not out of the Tavern) that variety of choice Dishes,
strong Wines, good Beer, and special Tobacco were the greatest Mortifications
they ever saw at the English Monastery in Lambspring; and it is every where
known, (some say, I know it not) that the Monks in the English Monastery at
St. Mallows, come ordinarily drunk into the Quire. These are but the fragments
or Segments of what I can produce. And all this while your Procurator for Paris
lies dormant, but I shall have time to wake him.

Seventhly, ye profess, that ye are always on the wing, always in your high
Thoughts and Meditations. The Jesuits will stuff our ears with the crambe of
their Spiritual Exercise; and the Monks with their Meditations, according to
the Rule of St. Bennet; and those amongst the Bonedictines, are able to entice
the Soul out of the Body: Meditations are admirably useful, and Scripture sets
Gods mark upon Meditations, Cant. 6. 5. Thy Hair is as a Flock of Goats. The
Hairs of our Head are our Thoughts; and the Goats feed always on high places,
as on the tops of Rocks and Mountains. But if your Meditations are high, ought
they not likewise to be pure and harmless? The Prophet David exalts his voice,
and cries, Psalm. 55. 6. O that I had wings like a Dove: for then would I fly
away, and be at rest. He wishes not to himself, the feet of a Dove, that he may
walk upon Dunghils; or the wings of a Hawk or Eagle, that he might pursue
others to destruction; but only the wings of a Dove, a meditating Creature,
that he might fly to some hidden place of Recollection, and there meditate. A
righteous heart walks in her Meditation, super montes aromatum, upon the
Mountains of Spices, as it is Cant. 8. 14. where every step is sweet,
odoriferous, and harmless; and such a one dies at last like the Phoenix, in the
delicious odours of a Christian life.

Now in this pious Meditation, or Spiritual Exercise, which prepared you, in a
Dark Chamber, wherein light assisted you no farther, than in the fight of some
horrid Picture, before this high attempt of blowing up the Parliament House:
Pray, which was your Punctum Primum, first point? Sans doubt, it was that the
King and his family must be extirpated. But hear a little, was this the
Meditation of the Dove? Or, were ye then footing it upon the Mountains of
Spices? O Hypocrites beyond all Hypocrites, Strike not our Ears with your
Meditations, whereof the Puuctum ultimum, last point, is Fire, Sword, Blood,
Massacre.

Eighthly, Ye profess, That ye sing God's Praises in the holy Quire, day and
night. Ye throw abroad, that in this regard, ye are stated in the highest
Degree of Perfection. Ye pull home, and apply the two last gradual Psalms to
your selves, Psalm. 133. 1. Behold how good and how pleasant it is for Brethren
to dwell together in unity. Sept.
The Septuagints read, (...), to dwell together into the same thing, the same
faith. St. Hieron.
St. Hierom gives: Ecce quam bonum, and quam decorum, Bohold, how good, and how
comely, The Hebrew word is nahhim, which signifies fair, and comely. The word
nahhim is attributed to the Bridegroom, and interpreted fair; Cant. 1. 16.
Behold, thou art fair, my beloved: And Psalm. 234. 1. Behold, bless ye the Lord,
all ye Servants of the Lord, which by might stand in the house of the Lord. v.
2. Lift up your hands in the Sanctuary, and bless the Lord. Ye note, that where
it is said Ps. 1. 2. and in his Law does he meditate day and night: The Hebrew
word signifying night, comes from a Root, interpreted, he howled; and thence ye
raise, that ye sing God's praises by night, when the Wolves howl, and when
wicked men sing and revel in Taverns, and loose Houses, and there wallow in the
sink of all impurity. Yea, this Quire-Monk will farther press upon us, that in
the year of Christ 459. in the Church of Constantinople, Gennadius being
Archbishop thereof, a Monastery was erected which they named Coenobium
Acoemetarum, the Monastery of those that sleep not, from the Greek (...), who
sang God's praises without pause, and without end. The Secret is, they were
divided into three Quires; and while the one Quire sang, the other slept; and
so they went the round, and thus represented the Singers of Heaven, that sing
God's Praises for hereafter in all Eternity. Drexell. de Eternit. Consid. 3.
They bring in the Rere Drexellius a Jesuit for their Author.

And now ye precious singers of God's praises, either by day or night, what
kind of praises did ye sing to God in the dark night, when Guido Faux held a
Guide or Candle to your Brethren? was it your good and pleasant unity, that was
employed in this most horrible Conspiracy? Ye beat into us, that in the end of
all your Prayers and Meditations, ye build, as it were a Sconse of good
purposes. Did your lifting up of your hands in Gods House by day or night,
produce this black purpose, this ugly Monster of the Night? Is this fair and
comely, and like the Bridegroom? Can ye be so unreasonable as to think, that
any Miscreant in the whole world was as wickedly busied that black night as
your selves? And if ye could set up all your Monasteries, to praise God without
stop or intermission; while some of your Brethren, who are not so Quire-strong,
are let loose for such horrid employments, that is, to thunder out Gods praises
in Powder-plots; we shall think you as ye are, Superlative Hypocrites; and
that, while ye profess to sing God's praises, your performance sings Hymns and
Lands to the Devil.

Ninethly, Ye profess, that ye are Missiouers, Apostles, and appointed for the
Conversion and Salvation and Souls. Ye firm it by Scripture, Psalm. 132. 16. I
will also cloth her Priests with Salvation. Paraph. Cha^d.
The Chaldee annexeth, vestibus redemptionis, with the Garments of Redemption.
Ye make us know, That the Image of Christ, carrying home the lost Sheep upon
his shoulders, was very ancient and famous among you, and that this figure was
enstamped upon your Patens and Chalices, Tert. lib. de Pudic. cap. 4.
as Tertullian has left upon Record. Isid. Pelus. lib. 1. Ep. 136.
And Isidore Pelusiot has committed to Posterity, that the Bishops were wont
to wear a certain Superhumeral, called (...), made of Wool, and signifying
(...), the skin of the Sheep, which Christ having found, carried home upon his
shoulders. Sim. These. in Bibliothec. Patrum.
Ye put into our mouths out of Simeon Thessalonicensis, the very form of words
which the Bishops used in their putting it on. And the Virtue attending upon
this duty is, in your own style, Zelus Animarum, the Zeal of Souls.

Now confess ingenuously, were ye clothed in this Powder Treason with Sarments
of Redemption, or of Destruction? Are ye the Disciples of him that carried home
the wandering Sheep, and restored it to the Flock ( O Lord of the whole earth,
thou knows, such Hypocrites are not extant in all the earth) or, of him that
devours both Sheep and Flock? Have not ye given the scandal unto this Age,
which some dissolute and careless Christians gave to the Romans in the infancy
of the Church; who therefore called Christ, not Christum Christ, but Chrestum,
quasi (...), utilem, as profitable, because his Name and Religion were very
profitable to those his Professors, Lamprid. in vita Al^xandri Severi.
as Lampridius has commended to Posterity. Is this the way of your Zeal of
Souls? Psalm. 29. 9. The voice of the Lord makes the Hindes to Calve. The
Interpretation is, The Hindes do bring forth with much difficulty: But when it
thunders, they fear; and then bring forth. And so the voice of God here, is
Gods thunder in the Clouds. These heavenly Men found, that the Protestants did
not easily bring forth according to their Sense, and therefore their mind was
now, to thunder them into a fear and trembling, and so, make the Hindes to
Calve. O Hypocrites, Mar. 3. 17.
the Sons of Thunder did not purchase their Name upon this horrid account.

Tenthly, ye profess. That ye have Devotions and Aspirations tuned and
accommodated unto all Times and Places. Petr. Chrysostom. Sermon. 9.
Ye drop into us, out of Petrus Chrysologus, In plateis, and in triviis, suum
Pietas habet Secretum, In the Streets, and where sundry ways meet, Godliness
has its Secret. S. Hier. Ep. 22. ad Eustoch. Virg. Idem ibid.
Ye bring to your hive, out of St. Hierom, Sanctisetiam ipse est Somnus Oration,
The very Sleep of the Saints of God is a Prayer. They lay them down to sleep
with an Aspiration, and it is an Aspiration that wakes them. And again from the
same Epistle, Esto Cicada noctium, Be thou the Grasshopper of the night. Ye give
it sinews from Scripture; As, Cant. 4. 11. Thy lips, O my Spouse, drop as the
honeycomb: honey and milk are under thy tongue; That is, Thou have most sweet
expressions of Love, which thy Heart continually sends forth to thy Tongue, by
which thou do sweeten the bridegroom to thee: Thou keep both honey and
milk under thy Tongue; thou have Lessons lying always in ambush under thy
Tongue; and expedited both for the production of Spiritual nourishment and
Profit, and of Pleasure: For profitable nourishment, as Milk; for Pleasure, as
Honey. These are addressed to meet and congratulate with all Occasions, and
whatsoever offers it self.

I beseech you, answer me plainly, What divine Aspirations and Ejaculations had
ye, wherewith to spiritualize this most damnable Plot? What choice Texts of
Scripture could Faux produce to concur with his dark-Lanthorn; or, with the
sight of the Cellar thronged with Gunpowder and Bars of Iron? What Milk or
Honey could lie waiting and watching under the Tongues of Garnet or Oldcorn, to
salute in the language of Chanaan, this horrible overthrow? or under the tongue
of Tompson, who vaunted at Rome, that he dug and delv'd under the
Parliament House, beyond the sweat of his Brows? O Hypocrites, ye have
prostituted all the sweet Delicates of Devotion, to the contempt of men, by the
most wicked Practices that ever humane ears entertained.

Eleventhly, Ye profess, That ye are Persons of most excellent Charity, and
Humility, and that yours is the tried, exercised, and perfect Faith, of which
St. Paul, Galat. 5. 6. Faith which works by love. Tho. a Kemp. de Imitat.
Christi, lib. 3. cap. 13.
Your Novice hears daily from you out of Thomas a Kempis, Disce obtemperare,
Pulvis; Disce te humiliare terra et limus, et sub omnium pedibus incurvare --,
ut omnes super te ambulare possint, et sicut lutum platearum conculcare. Learn
to obey, O thou Dust; Learn to humble thy self, O thou Earth and mud, and to
bow thy self under the feet of all Persons --, that all men may walk upon thee,
and kick thee as the dirt of the Streets.

The Holy Ghost appeared in the form of a Dove, and of Fire. S. Aug. Tract. 6.
in Joan.
And S. Austin speaks learnedly to it, Ne Spiritu sanctificati dolum habeant,
in Columba demonstratum est: ne Simplicitas frigida remaneat, in igne
demonstratum est. Lest those who are sanctified by the Spirit, should have
Craft and Deceit, (without which Deceit and Craft none are, but such as are
profoundly humble,) it is demonstrated in the Dove: lest Simplicity should
remain cold, (and without Charity,) it is demonstrated in the fire. So that,
from your Charity and Humility, ye strongly deduce, that ye are of the Holy
Ghost.

Now I gently entreat you, Whither was your Seraphical Charity gone a
Pilgrimage, when this grand Plot was on the wheel? And, where in the ground had
your Profound Humility hid it self? Ye were low-minded indeed; for ye dug deep
under the Parliament House; and whatsoever the inflammations were, wherewith ye
were inflamed, ye would have inflamed thousands of others, with your new and
strange Fire. O new Humility! O strange Charity! And yet ye are in your own
Looking-glass, the only humble Souls, the only charitable persons; People out
of a Cloister, are dross, dirt, dunghil-filth, if set in the same balance of
comparison with you. O Hypocrisy of a deep die!

Twelfthly, and lastly; (for, Time checks me,) Ye profess, That ye come at
last, even in this world, to be Gods; and this, not only in Power, as Princes,
Judges, etc. but also in Holiness and Perfection. Moreover, That ye grow more
and more Gods while ye live. And your invincible reason is, Quia nullus est
Deificationis terminus; because Deification has no end. S. Dionys. Areop. lib.
1. De Divin. Nom.
Ye pull to you Dionysius Areopagita, calling those who are studious of
Perfection, Deiformes, and se Deificantes, Deiform, and Deifying themselves. S.
Doroth. Sermon. 1.
Ye send us to St. Dorotheus, Bishop of Tire, a Greek Author, who calls the old
Fathers near Christ, Deiferos Patres, Fathers carrying God in and about them.
Ye make it fast by Argument, Whereas God and Christ are proposed for our
imitation, we are invited, as it were, to an infinite Perfection. Texts are
cited to appear, 1 Pet. 1. 15. As he which has called you, is holy; so be ye
holy in all manner of conversation. Matthew. 11. 29. Learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in heart. Matthew. 5. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father
which is in heaven is perfect.

Judge, O ye Angels, and Men; Were these Viri Sanguinum, Men of Blonds, Gods,
or Devils? Did they imitate in this vast Sea or Mischief, God? Did they imitate
Jesus, a Savior? Were they made partakers of the divine Nature? or, were they
Devils incarnate? Are these (O my God!) the Deiform Saints, and they who deify
themselves? Are these, as one says, Christ's in the Divinity and Humanity? O
Antichristian hypocrites! They profess Christ; they perform Antichrist: They
profess God; they perform the Devil.

I could wade exceedingly further. But by what ye have heard, it is plentifully
evinced, that they wondrously dissent from their own Profession. And if ye look
upon them generally, in their other Actions; ye will find their Lives to jarr
and and quarrel with their Doctrines. Their Pens speak one thing, and their
hands and hearts another. This Discovery I promise to the World.

Take especial notice, I pray, that the Powder Treason is privately applauded by
many, and that nothing is disliked in it, but the want of success; and
therefore, these Objections are in force, and militant against all such, in
regard of their Will of Approbation, and their Affection to the Saintship of
Garnet, and his holy Medals.

I infer, first, These damnable Plotters know not the way of God, Exodus 34. 6.
God is merciful, and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth. Micah 7. 18. he delights in mercy. 2 Cor. 1. 3. He is the Father of
mercies. These Carcasses of Christians, have no mercy. Prove. 12. 10. A
righteous man regards the life of his beast: but the tender mercies of the
wicked are cruel. Hence in Scripture, a just man is called Chasid, that is,
pious and merciful: and Justice is called chesed, that is, Piety and Mercy.
The Reason is at hand, Because the Charity authorized by true Faith, which
acting in the virtue of it, constitutes a man just, constitutes him also
merciful; it being the proper Work of Charity, to love all, and to do good to
all. On the other side, A wicked man is void of Charity, and full of the love
of himself.

A reason, ab extrinseco, from without, why these Men are so cruel and
bloud-thirstie, may be, because they run often from the Spanish Army in
Flanders, to be Jesuits and Benedictives; (ye shall know one of them by this
Mark: He speaks like a Magnifico concerning Hebrew and Greek, and hardly
understands Latin.) And such are commonly, Men framed and fashioned for
Cruelty, and Falsehood, and even all the Sins of a lewd Camp.

I infer, secondly, These Hell-instructed Plotters, know not the way of
Christ; of whom it is prophesied, Is. 9. 6. The Government shall be upon his
shoulder. Text. Heb.
The Hebrew, for Government, gives Misra, being, as the Hebrew Doctors teach, a
Contract of Missir sara, Ex spina Imperium; that is, The Crown of his
Government, shall be of Thorns. He was a King devoted to Griefs and Sorrows;
See Is. 53. 4.
and therefore, his Crown was agreeable. And if this King, who wears a Crown of
Thorns, be angry; he does not presently go a plotting, he is quickly pleased
again. S. Hill. in Psalm. 2.
S. Hilary s^eaks like himself, Virga de radice Jesse floruit, ut virgae
severitatem floris suavitas temperaret; A rod flourished from the root of
Jesse, that the sweetness of the flower should assuage the severitie of the Rod.

These our greedy Suckers of Blood, are cruel without mercy; and they call
their Cruelties, Mercies: Ammian. Marcell. l. 39.
as Valentinian the Emperor merrily called his She-Bear Innocence, which in
sport (but in earnest) had devoured many poor Christians.

I infer, thirdly, These Villainous Plotters, know not the way of God's Church.
The Spouse sings of her self, Cant. 5. 5. My hands dropped with myrrh, and my
fingers with sweet smelling myrrh. Edit. Lat.
The Latin somewhat differs, Manus meae stillaverunt myrrham, et digiti mei
pleni myrrha probatissima; My hands dropped with myrrh, and my fingers were
full of most approved myrrh; that is, of myrrha prima, and electa, the first,
and chosen myrrh, which flows of it self, without cutting and gashing the
Tree. Myrrh is an Enemy to Corruption. The Spouse lays up her Treasure in
Heaven: and no corrupted Works fall from her singers. Her Actions bring no man
to untimely death and Corruption; but her aim is, to carry all before her to
incorruption and immortality.

These Ghosts of the old Christians, have corrupted hands, they do not forgive
sins, or absolve the Penitent in Confession, without corruption, without a fee.
They reserve the old phrase amongst the Jews, their hands must be filled, or
they scarce think themselves to be Priests, or their Ordination valid; and in
verity, their hands are moreover filled with wildfire, not with Myrrh. Their
chief work is, The persons which they cannot assimilate to themselves, they
will assimilate to fire, and convert into miserable Ashes.

I infer, fourthly, This way was worse than the way of the old Infidels under
Nero. Tacit. Hist. lib. 5.
They burnt Christians, as Tacitus recounts, in usum nocturni luminis, that
they might have light to see by night. Our appointed Victimes of this matchless
cruelty, should not have been suffered to shine by day or by night, but should
have been thunderstruck, and torn, yea caught away, in a moment of time, as
with a whirlwind; and they should not have showed themselves in their departure.

And this way was worse than the Sicilian Vespers, in which at the Toll of the
Bell, the Frenchmen were massacred. No Bell should have sounded in the
departure of our Elect Members.

And truly, the massacre of the Protestants in France, was in no kind to be put
into the balance with this Machination; for they saw Destruction, at some
distance, coming toward them; and a time of Preparation, did ansam praebere,
hold a Cup of blessing, with the handle toward them. It was obstinately denied
here, by these Holy Ghostly Fathers.

And is not all this, founded and grounded upon the cursed Position of the
Donatists? S. Aug. Ep. 48. contra Vincent. Donatist.
of the which, St. Austin, Quod volumus, sanctum est, That which we will have
done, is holy, whatsoever it be.

I infer, fifthly, This is the malignant way, and these are the true Malignants;
Malignus, or, a Man of a malign Heart, is he, that is male ignitus, inspired
with an ill fire; and therefore, is ready to blow up all, and to mingle Heaven
and Earth. Ruffin. in Psalm. 5.
Ruffinus, is of this judgment, Malignus, says he, quasi malo igne plenus
dicitur. A Malignant is he that is full of evil Fire. This is the Malignant
Spirit, that, like fire, cannot rest, until every combustible matter be
consumed. These are truly the Children of Belial, as the word is gathered from
beli ol, that is, sine jugo, without yoke: S. Hieron*
So, many times, S. Hierom turns it; and with him, Aquila. They are like the
Wild Boar of the Forest. No force can impale them. They break, burn, blow up
all Bars, Yokes, Ligaments, Civil, Ecclesiastical, Divine, of Nature, of Man,
of God.

I infer, lastly, That these black Saints, having gone in the Devils high way,
may justly partake of the Devils Titles.

Ye^, when we have looked every way, and put all our Abilities upon the quest,
the Names of Serpent and Dragon, are their proper Names, the Names that are
most proportionable to their Nature: because these Names most comply with the
Devil, whose (give the word a pass) natural Children they are; and because they
denote their crooked and uneven motions, turnings, and windings, which produce
more indirect Angles, than ever Euclid or Geometry took notice of.

Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 13.
Sozomenus commits to our Thoughts concerning Pachomius the Abbot, that he was
the head of a thousand and three hundred Monks; whom that he might the better
distinguish and govern, he divided into four and twenty Classes; according to
the number of the Letters in the Greek Alphabet; so far forth, that in what
Letter soever they were placed, their Natures and Manners should be deciphered
and repre^en^ed by the shape of the Letter. Those whom Nature had endowed with
a direct and simple Disposition (for in those times there were many such) he
put into the Classis of Iota, and they bore that Name. Now is the plainest and
simplest Letter of all others; it being but one right little line struck
downwards. But his involved, cunning, and obscure-hearted Monks, if less
cunning, he called z, if more x, because these are Serpentine, Dragonish, and
winding Letters.

Verily-Verily (they are our Saviors holy Words) I never saw (I would I could
say the contrary) an Iota Jesuit or Monk in all my life, but of ^ and ^ Jesuits
and Monks I have seen whole swarms, being people of dark and crooked Hearts,
and of tongues having all irregular motions, and moving through every dark
place in the whole Labyrinth of a Lie.

Allow me freedom a little. I know a Yorkshire Knight. Mistake me not, He is no
Monk, but his Brother is their Lord Prelate in Germany (for such they prefer,
beyond the Seas, who are allied to rich persons in England) and there governs
(another would say a nasty crew, I may not, I dare not, I will not) a few Monks
whom he multiplies with his own poor kindred; yea, there he sells strong drink
to the drunken Germans. The Knight will tell you in his Yorkshire Language,
that he has been a Pilgrim at Jerusalem; and that there he thrust his right
arm, even up to his shoulder, into the hole on the top of Mount Calvary,
wherein the Cross of our Savior was fastened. My scope is, This Arm,
notwithstanding it was straight in the ground, where the foot of our Saviors
Cross stood, turns and winds it self in the world, and has more strange motions
of the Serpent in the business of gain and lucre, than any other Arm in
Yorkshire, yea of those that never were enquiring into the hole at Mount
Calvary.

Their Arms will wind and turn, their Hands, their Tongues, their Hearts.
These great Professors without performance are, as they are called, Phil. 2. 5.
Natio prava and perversa, a crooked and perverse Nation; and belong to the
crooked Serpent, Job 26. 13.

To shut up this Note. Nieremb. Hist. Naturae, lib. 6. c. 9.
Nierem^ergius writes of a stinking beast in India, the excrement of which is
living Snakes. Reflect, at your leisure, upon a Passage in Geffrey Chaucer;
unto which I add my grain; If that stinking Beast the Devil, were in a
condition of exercising vital operations, that is, the acts of life, I will not
say, in his old shape of a Serpent, but as a Dragon, he could not analogically
and agreeably have other Excrement than an English Jesuit, or (my Heart bleeds
Tears) Monk; they, are so Dragonish, so fiery, so full of new shapes, so lying,
so like the Devil.

I am now yours, Beloved. First, think with your selves; Had this Prodigy of
mischief marched on, and caught effect; as in the death of the little Infants
St. Cyprian. Ep. 24.
(for, as St. Cyprian takes into Consideration, Infantia innocens ob nomen ejus
occisa est, Innocent Infancy was fitly killed for his Name.) As, I say, in the
death of the little Infants, Mat. 2. 18. Rachel wept for her Children, and
would not be comforted, because they were not: How many Rachels should we have
had weeping amongst us? Rachel in the Oriental Tongues signifies a Sheep, and
she mighr well weep for her little Lambs, cruelly slain in the cause of the
Lamb of God.

Secondly, Beloved, Let me commend unto you, the Exhortation of St. John (who
as he was the beloved Disciple, most and chiefly exhorted his Disciples to
Love) 1 Jo. 3. 18. My little Children, let us not love in Word, neither in
tongue, but in deed, and in truth. Little Children love sincerely, Mat. 18. v.
2. 4.
and therefore our Savior set one in the amidst of his Disciples, exhorting
them to be as that little Child. The Word is here distinguished from the
Tongue. An unprofitable word may perhaps break loose for want of continual
attention; but he that gives over the iustrument of Speceh, which is the
Tongue, unto Fraud and falsehood, is himself altogether unprofitable. If ye
cannot love spiritually, love morally.

Psalm. 139. 4. There is not a word in my Tongue. Others set it forth. Non est
dolus in lingua mea, There is no deceit in my Tongue. S. Chrysostom. in hunc
locum.
Or, as another in St. Chrysostom, Non est (...), there is not another and
another Speech; there is no Contradiction betwixt my mind and my Mouth; I
concentre my Heart and my Countenance in my Tongue.

Thirdly, Beloved, Ye will hear all this Powder Plot contradicted by them, and
thrown back upon those who then wore the Names of Puritans. This, as other
Things of the same badge, makes evidently plain, that as it is, Jo. 8. 44. They
are of their Father the Devil, and that the lusts of their Father they will
do: he was a liar and a murderer from the beginning, They are Liars,
Slanderers, etc. Plin. not. hist. lib. 8. cap. 22.
Pliny speaks truly, Nullum tam impudens Mendacium est, ut Test careat, There
is not a lie so impudent, but it is furnished with a witness.

Now do I greatly want Raphael Urbinus, an Italian Painter, who having pictured
St Peter and St. Paul with red faces, and being demanded the reason by a
Cardinal his noble Customer, answered, That he pictured them, as now they were
in Heaven, mainly blushing in the sight of their wicked Successors. I would
have St. Ignatius Loiola painted with a very red face, a face as red as fire;
and (be not offended if I modestly use thy name in the cause of Eternity) St.
Bennet with a face red beyond fire, and as if he had been even now (O sad
News!) plentifully entertained at Lamb spring, where his Monks sell Beer that
paints a deep red in the faces of the merry Germans. Now I have said this, I am
sorry; I have a relenting heart beyond Decency.

Fourthly, Beloved, Let us heartily bless God, that has delivered us. There
is, Laus Mentis, Laus Oris, Laus Operis, the praise of Mind, the praise of
Mouth, the praise of Work. Let us praise him chiefly, with our utmost praise;
that is, with holy lives and Conversations.

For Mouth-praises: God's praises in Job are excellently coincident with our
Deliverances, Job 5. 12. He disappointeth the Devices of the Crafty, so that
their Hands cannot perform their Enterprise, v. 13. He takes the wise in their
own Craftiness, and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong. And so
forward.

The Greeks and Eastern Christians use a very pious manner of Salutation
betwixt Easter and Whitsuntide. One meeting an other, says, (...), Our Lord is
risen. The other answers, (...), it is true* he is risen. He that began,
replieth^, (...), he lives and reigns for ever and ever. It were pure
Devotion, if for some days after the Celebration of this Deliverance, we did
salute in our meetings, one the other, after some remarkable Form: wherein we
might join Spirit to Spirit, as in a holy Kiss: As thus, One should begin, By
the Goodness and Mercy of God we were delivered; The other might answer, It is
true, By the Goodness and Mercy of God, and by those alone. And then the first
again, We are as men risen from the grave: Coloss. 3. 1.
and if we be risen with Christ, let us seek those things which are above. And
the other might conclude, It is most just, that God should live and reign in
us, to him be glory for ever and ever.

Finally, Beloved, It is a good Mark when we are afflicted. The Hebrew Divines
observe, That Jona, signifying a Dove, is so called from Janah, which is
latin'd afflixit, moerore affecit, he has afflicted, he has grieved, Because
the Dove is persecuted by Hawks, and other Birds of Prey, Psalm. 34. 19. Many
are the afflictions of the righteous; but the Lord delivers him out of them
all. God make you righteous.

I do assure you, It is my Glory, that I bear in my face, a Mark of barbarous
cruelty, given by one linag'd from such like Saints, with an Irish Dagger; and
this, in the maintenance and Defense of Virtue, and Reprehension of Vice.

Let me send forth one sigh, and a groan after it, O that unwise Ewe, and
ignorant of future Things, that gave suck to the forsaken whelps of the Wolf;
which afterward would have destroyed her, and her young, and all the Flock!

One word more: I seldom see a Jesuitical or Monkish Good Man (so they are
called) but methinks I behold a stately Swan in his swimming. The swimming Swan
shows his white feathers; but he hides his black legs under the water. Take
the Swan from his swimming, and ye will quickly perceive his black Walkings.

Go now, O ye Jesuits, to produce and print several shapes of Garnet's Straw
(which I have seen:) All your shapes, and all the shapes of the Straw, are not
wor^h one poor untainted Straw, that has the shape wherein God made it.

A Word now to you, as ye are a Company. That ye, if ye concur with the end
of your Vocation, are great Instruments of the Advancement of God's Glory, and
of Learning, is a Truth plain to the Eye of Reason; but what it is to concur
with the end of your Vocation, is not easily discernable. Therefore, to concur
with the End of your Vocation, is, to Print and advance divine Truths and true
Learning, by the which only, God is glorified. For, if ye walk otherwise, ye
advance God's dishonor, and are Enemies to sound and true Learning: and ye
print Garnet's Straw in several shapes.

Ye are the Conduit-Pipes, and Channels, by the which, water is conveyed to the
World: But ye are reasonable Conduit-Pipes, and Channels, no senseless, and
inanimate; and therefore, be ye sure and secure, that the Water be not foul and
infectious. As the Case, and the Die of Chance falls now, It is your Duty to
know the Subjects of the Discourses which ye Print; and Ignorantia non excusat
hominem in his quae pertinent ad Officium ejus, Ignorance does not excuse a man
in the Things which pertain to his Office or Duty. Indeed, when that Office
was an others, who might act at Pleasure, there was a large difference. Give me
leave to speak the Words of my own Duty.

One Thing more, Because Learning is so deeply concerned in your Vocation; ye
more comply and are more congruous with your Vocation that have received some
tincture of Learning. Learning is helpful to all Christians; especially to
those, into whose Vocation it falls.

We read, Psalm. 71. in the end of the fifteenth Verse, and in the beginning of
the sixteenth, I know not the numbers thereof; I will go in the strength of the
Lord God. Edit. Vulg.
The Vulgar Latin clothes it; Quoniam non cognovi literaturam, introibo in
potentias Domini: Because I have not known Learning, I will enter into the
powers of God; as if they had more of the Power of God, and drew nearer to him,
that are ignorant of Learning. Sept.
The Septuagint gives us also, (...), Learning. Text. Heb.
The Hebrew word is Siphrot; and signifies Ciphers, numbers. Sym. Rabbini.
Arnob. S. Chrysostom. S. Aug. in Psalm. 71.
Thus Symmachus translates it; thus the Rabbis: to whom Arnobius, St.
Chrysostom, and St. Austin do fully and freely consent; who take the word
(...), negotiation, or merchandising; or, if ye will pragmatizing: which
indeed, throngs a man with temporal business, and diverts him from knowing the
Works and Wonders of Gods ower; when true Learning enables him to a further
Compliance with divine Power.

I shut up all, in the Commendation of one serious Matter to you. I have not
any Thing of this Orb or Nature, more fitly to commend to you, in the
Publishing of which, ye may advance the Wonders of God's Power; than such
Matters as declare the Goodness and Power of God, in the blazoning of this most
horrible Plot* ^d of the Discovery attending upon it.

It is clear, That as a Flower may be painted with it is own color, and survive
it self; so this most horrid Wickedness has black enough in it self, wherewith
to be painted in it is own foul hue. But the Tongues and Pens of Scholars are
also needful, as the skillful hand of the Painter; that it may be translated,
in it is own Color, from Age to Age, from Day to Day, until we come to the
black Day, (which the Plotters would have represented amongst us) the Day of
Doom.

And as the Children, and Common People, were taught in the Primitive Church,
commonly to sing and say, Allelujah, Praise ye Jah, or God who is: St. Hieron.
Ep. ad Laetam, and ad Marcellam.
So let it be in use with us. And let the Reason follow with a Train: For he
has delivered us from the Devil, and the English Jesuits, and --, (I will here
lose the Word that should follow) that cursed Rabble which blows up all; in
this our blessed Deliverance from the Powder Treason.

I have here eatnestly defended those whom God has wonderfully delivered: and
in effect, I have defended God and his wonderful Deliverance. I have been
vehement against wickedness and wicked Persons, wheresoever I found them: So
was Christ, and his Apostles, and all the Fathers. I have inveighed against
unpriestly Priests, and irreligious religious Men: Thus did St. Austin,
Salvianus, Gildas, and Armies of others. Ma-Many will hastily let fly their
uneven Censures concerning the ground of my Quarrel against the Monks;
Assuredly, it is greater, yea more intricate and winding than to be comprised
presently by an ordinary Fancy: but I may be able to express it hereafter. Let
it suffice here, that one Action, wherein they and their envenomed Friends were
busy Bees and Competitors; was more than a Powder Plot against me, and against
that which the Law of God, of Nature, and of Nations called mine, until they
came with their Volumus and Jubemus, we Will and Command.

Laus Deo Liberatori.

Praise be unto God o^ Deliverer.


FINIS

