ARTICLES OF IMPEACHMENT, ^greed upon by the ARMY under command of His
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, SENT To the Honorable House of Commons,
together with their Charge, and Signed John Rushworth, Secretary;

AGAINST Sir John Clotworthy. Sir Will. Waller. Sir Philip Stapleton. Sir John
Maynard. Sir William Lewis. Maj. Genesis Massy. Col. Hollis Esquire. Mr. Glyn. Mr.
Nichols. Mr. Walter Long. Colonel Harlow.


Members of the House of Commons.

Together with the gallant Answer of the said Members, to their Impeachment.

LONDON, Printed for George Whiting. June 19. 1647.

Articles of Impeachment proposed by the Army, under command of His Excellency
Sir Thomas Fairfax, against Eleven Members of the House of Commons read in the
said House, June 17 With their Answer to the said Charge.
SIR,
FOR yours which I rec^ived, I thank you; and for the Army, to satisfy you in
what you desire to be resolved in, in those two great points of Mona^chie and
J^stice. I shall tell you my opinion of them. They take not Holland, but Gods
Word for a Rule to walk by, and to look ^n Monarchy, shall we think our
Neighbors the Hollanders more kind or less cunning then States are wont to be
that thus by way of Empress, they publish to the World the wellspring of
their own prosperity, and the grand root whereby all other States may both
perpetuate and enlarge themselves. I believe rather, that as Physicians make
not nice to give a receipt which they think some others know, and those that
do not cannot procure the ingredients so the Hollander conceiving this
Benedictum medicamentum, such as Commonwealths cannot be ignorant of, and
Kingdoms hardly make use of, have bin willing to boast this Motto, as the
honor of Demacracies, and the reproach of Monarchies. The first of these have
no being without it, since by concord, I suppose is here understood, a
unanimous consent of the parts to pursue one and the same end, that is the good
of the whole; and what constitutes a Weal-publike, but this? Whereas in
Monarchies (I say not what should be, but what is) the two constitutive parts
thereof, the King and People, have still such opposite interests, the one of
more liberty, the other of more absoluteness, that it is hard to assign an
object proportionate to both their happiness wherein to reconcile and
concentricate their aims. I err to say, it is hard to assign such an object,
since the happiness and flourishing of a Kingdom in general, is confessed by
that wherein both Prince and Peoples felicity consists; but the difficulty
lies in engaging both parties, in such zeal and ardence to promove that one
and common end, as may overbear the more sensible intrests of their own
individuals that shall urge them contrary ways.

The difficulty of kindling on both sides this uniting and evertuating ardour
proceeds principally from three causes, one peculiar to each, and a third
common to both.

First, that Princes seldom or never reflect upon the originals of their
authority and pre-eminence.

Secondly, that the people think as rarely of the reasons of their subjection.

And thirdly, that neither do rightly consider themselves in their noblest
condition of relation to the whole, but in the abstractednesse of their
inferior and personal beings.

For did Kings but remember how they became such, by the peoples confidence in
their virtue, and why that fee'd, as it were by dignity and honor above all,
they might make the tranquillity and comfort of all their care; and did the
people weigh the voluntarinesse of their own subjection how their Votes were
given for Monarchy in their predecessors assents, or the motives thereunto,
their own greater quiet and security, by conferring more cares then honors on
their superintendent. Or lastly, did both but ponderate what a superior thing
in nature to either of them, is that result from them both which we call a
Kingdom; and of what greater dignity even they are, as co^stitu^ive parts of
that whole, then as headless or bodilesse subsistents of themselves, it were
unpossible but both Prince and people must flame into as strict an union of
affections to advance that excellent end, as we see all parts of nature it
self combind in for the preservation and ornament of the universe. In God,
Unity and E^ernity are convertible, in nature, the best imitation of his
perfection, union, and duration, are unseparable, and in States permanence
without u^animity imp^ssible.

And for Justice and Righteousness, to satisfy you in that also as concerning
the execution thereof, they defire the ex^end ^o all persons, and in all cases.
But to give you account to that which you desire more particularly, in relation
to charge against Members; it is thus.

For the settling and securing of the common right, freedom, and peace of the
Kingdom, whereof the Army have a share: they have received such informations as
have been brought to them concerning diverse persons, some of whom are persons
of eminency: yet they have proceeded to a charge, which they have drawn up, and
sent to the house of Commons against 11 of their own Members. I. The Army has
charged them in a general way to appear. 1. To have a will, confidence,
credit, and power to abuse the Parliament. 2. To have the like will,
confidence, credit, and power to abuse the Army. 3. To be unjust and high in
the proceedings against the Army.
II. The Army has sent up a particular Impeachment against them, consisting of
several heads, As acting things tending to the subversion of the Laws and
Rights of the Subject To stir up persons against the Parliament. To hinder
the business of Ireland, and other general things Signed by John Rushworth
Secretary, by their appointment, expressed in their papers sent to the house of
Commons.


If these Gentlemen, upon trial, shall appear innocent, then it will justly
appear, that the Armies designs are dangerous, and that be clear which now
is made an obstruction.

As for the Lords, there are no Members of the house of Pieres charged by the
Army, as yet, nor any Citizen of London But the Army have another Proposition
concerning the houses, and that is to have them purged of such Members as they
shall make appear to be Delinquents, etc. Something also they have to bring,
Deputy Lieutenants of Counties, Members of Country Committees (and others who
have been entrusted with the States Money) to account: And the protest, the
uttermost of their ends in all this to b^ chiefly for Gods glory, and for
justice and Righteousness. God grant a firm peace, and prevent further
bloodshed: so prays,

St. Albanes this ^8. of June 1647. Your most humble serva^^ R. CORBET.
We wayt in great expectation of the City Commissioners.



Upon Thursday last being the 17. of this instant June, the house of Commons
took into consideration the Impeachment of their Members, and read their charge
sent up from the Army: at reading whereof, the Members charged delivered in
their Answers, which was to this effect,

That they desired their Charge might be speedily put into a way of trial,
declaring their willingness to deny themselves, and their own privileges, to
give satisfaction to the whole Kingdom.

The Names of the Eleven Members of the House of Commons, impeached by the ARMY.
Sir John Clotworthy. Sir William Waller. Sir Philip Stapleton. Sir John
Maynard. Sir Will. Lewis. Maj. Genesis Massy. Denzil Hollis Esquire. Mr. Glyn. Mr.
Nichols. Mr. Walter Long. Col. Harlow.
FINIS.

