ADVICE TO SINNERS UNDER CONVICTIONS, To prevent their Miscarrying in
CONVERSION.

By Samuel Corbyn. M. A.

Isa. 66.9. Shall I bring to the Birth, and not cause to bring forth, says the
Lord?

LONDON, Printed for Robert Gibbs at the Golden Ball in Chancery Lane, 1669.

Advice to Sinners under Convictions, to prevent their miscarrying in
Conversion.
Poor undone Sinners,
I Send these truths from the Eternal God to you in love and faithfulness,
unfeignedly desiring that you may be convinced of your unbelief, and of all
your sins, and of your present accursed and condemned state, and may be taught
of God to rely upon Christ, who died for the ungodly, without which you will be
certainly ere long undone for ever, although you now enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season, or the world in its glory. Since diverse of you were awakened, I
hope that God may have thoughts of everlasting love to some of your souls:
therefore as I have warned you to flee for refuge from the wrath of God which
is coming upon you, and without delay presently to come out of this dreadful
condition to Christ who will embrace you; so I write to you, and to all others
to whom these truths may be communicated, to prevent their miscarrying in
conversion.

1. Seek to know and be convinced by the Spirit through the Scriptures, that
you are born dead in sins and children of wrath, without Christ and without
hope, Ephesians. 2.3, 12. and that you are every day and every moment under Gods
curse, and wrath, in danger of eternal condemnation, Gal. 3.10. The wicked
shall be turned into Hell, Psalm. 9.17. and the soul that sins it shall die,
Ezekiel. 18.4. and unbelievers shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on
them, though they are insensible of it. The Lord says, Except a man be born
again, he cannot see the kingdom of God; and he that believes not is
condemned already, Joh. 3.3, 18, 36. Consider seriously then each of you I
beseech you, what will become of me who am not born again, nor ever had a work
of grace? O that your eyes were open to behold all the sins of your hearts and
lives in order before you, which cry aloud day and night for vengeance against
your guilty souls! 'twere enough to make you tremble who are now most
senseless. Get alone quickly, and reflect upon your ways as in the fight of
God. Ask your selves, have I not sometimes lied, or stole, or swore an oath?
have I not profaned the Lords Day? was I never proud, nor wanton, nor
malicious? have I never taken the Lords Name in vain? have I not been
disobedient to my parents? have I not a carnal, unclean, hard, and unbelieving
heart? did I never break Gods Laws? Yea surely; I must cry out guilty, guilty;
my conscience condemns me; what will become of me if I die in this dreadful
condition? He that spared not the Angels when they sinned, but cast them down
to Hell; he that spared not the old world, nor the Cities of Sodom, but
condemned them with an overthrow, making them an example unto those which after
should live ungodly, will not spare me long. Does not Hell gape for me? Is
there any hopes that such a sinner as I have been may yet be washed in the
blood of Christ? God may righteously damn me for these sins, or for the least
sin, Romans 3.23. It is the Lords mercy that I am not consumed, and now in Hell
howling among the damned, crying out for a drop of water to cool my tongue,
Lam. 3.22. Luke 16.24.

2. Seek the Lord in secret for his Spirit while he may be found, Isa. 55.6.
Cry out each of you for the blood of Christ, as condemned malefactors do for
mercy; as they did, Acts 2.37. Or as the keeper of the prison said trembling,
What must I do to be saved? Acts 16.30. Rest not one day nor hour longer
quietly or securely, till you have some good hopes that Jesus Christ will plead
your cause at the day of judgment; for without the imputation of his
righteousness there is no remission. Follow Christ, crying after him as the
blind men did, Lord, that our eyes may be opend, Mat. 20.30, etc.

3. If the Lord by his Word and Spirit makes you sensible of your fearful
undone condition, beware of resting short of a thorow-work of grace, lest you
fall short of union with Christ, through the teachings and drawings of the
Father, lest you rrest in a false peace, Luke 11.21. compasting your selves
about with sparks of your own kindling, through slight wounding, or slight
healing, Isa. 50.11. Take heed of building foolishly upon the sand, Mat. 7.26,
27. And lest thou prove at best but a foolish Viring walking with the wise,
Mat. 25. fear lest you should make a Christ of duties, of praying, weeping,
purposing, or reforming; for the sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the
Lord, Prove. 15.8. There is away which seems right to a man, but the end
thereof is the ways of death, Prove 12.14. And there is a generation that are
pure in their own eyes, and yet is not washed from their filthiness, Prove.
30.12. A man may go very far under the awakenings of conscience, and have a
zeal of God, and yet being ignorant of Gods righteousness, go about all his
life time to establish his own righteousness, and get nothing at last but the
hypocrites hope which shall perish, whose trust shall be a spiders web, and he
shall lie down in sorrow; for Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to
every one that believes, Joh 8.13, 14. Romans 10.2, 3, 4. By the deeds of the
Law there shall no flesh be justified in the sight of God, Romans 3.20. If ever
thou find mercy, thou must be justified freely by the grace of God, through the
redemption which is in Christ Jesus by faith, without the deeds of the Law,
Verse 24, 28. It Is true faith comes by hearing, and it is our duty to attend to
Gods appointments where the Spirit works; but if righteousness come by any work
of the Law, then Christ is dead in vain, Gal. 2.21. To him that works not in
the point of justification, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly,
his faith is counted for righteousness: blessed is that man to whom God
imputes righteousness without works, Romans 4.5, 6.

4. Look to the Lord to convince you of sin, because you believe not in Jesus
Christ which is promised, Joh. 16.7, 8, 9. In your attendance on the means of
grace, be willing to be convinced by the Comforter, that your hearts are so
desperately wicked that you will not come to Christ; and to feel your
impotency, that you cannot believe in him unless the Lord put forth the
exceeding greatness of his power, Ephesians. 1.19.

5. Know assuredly, and welcome these glad tidings, that Christ is come of a
truth into the world on purpose to save sinners, and the chiefest of them, 1 Timothy 1.15. God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life, Joh.
3.19. Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. Flee to this refuge when thou see thy
self ungodly and accursed by the Law of God, and fear thou shall be damned.
Consider with thy self, though I am ungodly, yet there is a dying Christ for the
ungodly, Romans 5.6. Though I am an enemy, yet Christ has reconciled enemies to
God by his death, verse. 10. Though I am rebellious, and so abominable, that I
fear lest the earth should open and swallow up such a wretch sometimes, and so
God should righteously sink me to Hell living, and in his wrath; yet here is
good news and encouragement for me, that Jesus Christ when he ascended on high
received gifts for men, yea for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might
dwell amongst the rebellious, Psalm. 68.18. Though I am accursed, and I see
plainly God threatens to damn me in many Scriptures, yet is there hopes for
such a condemned sinner, since Christ has redeemed accursed sinners from the
curse of the Law, being made a curse for them, that we might receive the
blessing of Abraham, and the promise of the Spirit, Gal. 3.13, 14.

6. Believe in Jesus Christ, because it is the command of God and pleasing in
his sight, and thy duty, though thou can see no other warrant or ground of
encouragement. This is his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of
his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 3.22, 23. Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shall
be saved, Acts 16.31. Christ tells hypocrites that sought him for their
bellies, This is the work of god that ye believe on him whom God has sent,
Joh. 6.28, 29. Apply the Word thus to thy self; the righteous God that knows
all my heinous sins, in stead of damning me for them, commands me to believe on
his Son, and assures me that I shall be saved. The Lord give thee the spirit of
wisdom and revesation in the acknowledgement of Christ, and the obedience of
faith.

7. Rejoice to hear that Jesus Christ is become an earnest suitor for thy love;
he will bear thy sorrows and love thee freely, Isa. 5.3, 4. Hos. 14.4. Christ
once crucified now says to thee, Behold I stand at the door and knock, if any
man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in to him, Rev. 3.20. I am not
come to call the righteous, but sinners, says the Lord, Mat. 9.13. Come unto
me all ye who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.18.
Ho every one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that has no money,
come ye, Isa. 55.1. The Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that hears
say come, and let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will let him take the
water of life freely, Rev. 22.17. Hearken therefore to the ravishing voice of
Christ, although thou may judge thy self the vilest and chiefest of sinners,
and may verily think there may be mercy for others, but there is none for
such a great monstrous sinner as thou have been; yet here is the joyful sound,
that the Son of man God manifest in the flesh is come to seek and to save that
which is lost, Luke 19.10. How dreadful soever thy condition may be in thy own
thoughts, yet Christ says, Him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out,
Joh. 6.37. Though you therefore feel hard and dead hearts, yet come as sinners
unto Christ who came to seek and save such. The Lord calls stour hearted
sinners who are far from righteousness to hearken unto him, Isa. 46.12, 13.

8. When your hearts are sinking under the sense of Gods wrath, then resolve in
the strength of Christ to rely upon him, to cast and roll your selves upon him
whatever be the issue. If I perish I will perish at the feet of Christ, for
other wise I am sure to perish; if he condemn me he is righteous, if he save me
'twill be riches of free grace for ever to be admired. Venture thus upon Christ
against a thousand discouragements, as the Lepers ventured into the tents of
the Syrians, a King. 7.4, 5, 6. Press in upon Christ resolving to take no
denial, as the woman of Caenaan did, Mat. 15.22, etc. These had a blessed
issue out of their difficulties, and thou shall find at length that the bowels
of Christ will yearn over thy fainting soul, lying at his feet for a crumb, and
he will embrace thee with unspeakable love, Thus let the Kingdom of Heaven
suffer violence; press thou into it, and take it by force.

9. Never attempt to believe or repent in thy own strength, but look unto Jesus
in whom it has pleased the Father all fullness should dwell, Col. 1.19. As thou
would not prove a rotten hypocrite, beware of a dead faith of thy own
forming, which is not the faith of the operation of God, Col. 2.12. Look not
for that in thy self which is to be found in Christ, nor for that in the Law
which is to be found in the Gospel: this has been the cause of the long
troubles of many precious souls. When thou fear thou shall die eternally
because thou can not believe, look out of thy self unto Christ who is full of
grace, and behold his glory, Joh. 1.14. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the
ends of the earth, Isa. 45.22. Look unto Jesus the beginner and finisher of
faith, Heb. 12.2. Christ never comes expecting to find faith or repentance, but
looks upon a filthy soul polluted in his own blood, and says unto him, live;
and this time is the time of love, Ezekiel. 16.6, 8. The grace of the Lord is
exceeding abundant to the chiefest of sinners, with faith and love which is in
Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 1.14. When thou turnest thine eyes inward, and think
the hardness and impenitency of thy heart will surely be thy ruin, flee to
that reviving word, Act. 5.30.31. God has raised up Jesus and exalted him with
his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel and
remission of sins. The Lord has promised in the latter days to destroy the
veil of unbelief which is spread over all Nations, Isa. 25.7. Do thou find by
experience that word true, No man can come to me except the Father which has
sent me draw him. Behold in the next Verse what a full promise of help is made
to thee, They shall be all taught of God; every man therefore that has heard
and learnt of the Father comes unto me, Joh. 6.44, 45. And Psalm. 25. Good and
upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners in the way. And Christ
says, I am the way unto the Father, Joh. 14.6. Follow the Lord at the throne
of grace with cries and groans unutterable without ceasing; O draw me to
Christ, help me to close with and to be united to Christ. If thou find still
it is impossible for thee to believe, hear the Lord saying to thee, Let him take
hold of my strength that he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace
with me, Isa. 27.5. He gives power to the faint, and to them that have no
might be increases strength, Chap. 40.29. Therefore trust ye in the Lord for
ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, Chap. 26.4. It is my
earnest desire and prayer to God, that this may be the time of Gods special
love and the day of his power, that you may be united to Christ by faith
wrought in you by the power of Gods Spirit, that you may thirst after, and
receive a full assurance of Gods love, and that you may have the love of Christ
shed abroad in your hearts, and may abide in Christ, being strong in the grace
which is in him, which is sufficient for you in your greatest straits, and that
you may be taught of God to sing his praises, and to rejoice with trembling,
and may never lose your first love, nor fall into a spirit of slumber or
delusion, but may grow in the knowledge of Christ, and being planted in the
house of God, may bring forth much fruit, denying your selves and taking up the
Cross of Christ, walking worthy of the Lord all your few days, to the praise
of his free grace, who has called you into his Kingdom and glory. O that
these lines may not hereafter rise up in judgment at the last day against any
of you which slight them, and condemn you, and that they may be the voice and
call of God, his arm and power revealed to your salvation. The grace and peace
of the Lord, and the abiding presence of the Comforter, be with you for ever.

FINIS.

