A COPY OF A LETTER Written to A Private Friend, To give him satisfaction in
some things TOUCHING the Lord SAY.

LONDON, Printed by R.B. for I. O. and are to be sold by I. S. 1643.

To the Reader.
REader, I having received a Letter from a friend, whom I do give credit to,
in answer to some things I proposed to him to be satisfied in, by which I am
abundantly satisfied, touching that Noble person who is the subject of the said
Letter; I thought my self bound for the information of others, to commend the
same to public view, not doubting but some who are prejudiced by the Reports
that have flowne abroad, will be thereby set right in their judgments, which
is all I desire in publishing it.

A Copy of a Letter written to a private friend, to give him satisfaction in
some things touching the LORD SAY.
SIR,
TO satisfy you concerning my Lord Say, because I perceive you to be so
prudent, as not willingly to forfeit your discretion by running with the giddy
multitude into those distempers of heats and colds, but would receive
information from those that know more then your self before you will judge. It
becomes every wise man to be constant to the principles which he has laid down
to himself upon the most mature deliberation: and this, as to things, so to
persons, otherwise I should without prejudice to him, call both his Reason and
Religion into question. And therefore concerning that Lord give me leave to be
confident (and I think you will believe me) that I know him much better then
those that talk so much against him, having had 28 years experience of him; in
which time he has passed through very many various conditions, the times at
sometime courting him with their smiles, at other times falling foul upon him
with their frowns; yet has he been the same in all: for if hopes or promises
of promotion on the one hand, or threatening and imprisonment on the other,
would have altered him from a Patriot to a Courtier, he had been one long ago.
To pass over his suffering imprisonment nine months together in the nineteenth
or twentieth year of King James, for discountenancing a benevolence in the
County of Oxford, when the Court began first to run extravagant courses to
get money, that so they might rule in an arbitrary way without Parliaments. And
that in the following Parliament in the one and twentieth year of King James,
when the now King, then Prince, and the Duke of Buckingham were returned from
Spain, he was as much courted with offers of preferment by him that had them
at his dispose as he was before discountenanced with imprisonment and other
pressures which I could more fully declare unto you, but that I would not be
tedious; And how it cost him some hundreds of pounds in opposing the
ship money, and his refusing that dangerous oath at York; but I will not
trouble you with too large a discourse, only this let me be bold to say in
the general. That as he has had a repute of being famous both for Religion,
and Reason, I that have had the happiness to live near unto him for many years
have always observed him in all the various changes he has met withal, never
to vary from his principles, but how ever things have gone abroad or at home,
whether he has had applause and encouragement from men on the one hand, or
hard measure on the other (for he has had experience of both) he has been
the same still, walked as closely with God, and done his duty as faithfully
toward men, it being always a settled principle in him, That want of success
from God, or finding unthankefulnesse from men must not hinder a pious man from
doing his duty to both. And whereas you gave me a touch that many men, yea,
honest and godly men, question whether he be right for Religion or no, believe
me Sir, I speak it from my heart, and in the uprightness of my spirit, I do
not know a man in this Kingdom right and sound for the power and truth of
Religion if he be not. And I would have you believe me, that I know him well,
as having had the advantage of a long time of experience.

Again, they charge upon him, that he favors Papists and Malignants, because
he protects two of their houses; will they not allow him a house or two instead
of three houses of his, and 2000 l per annum land, which is kept from him for
doing them service, and yet they do not that, for he is to pay such Rent for
that house in the Country which is allowed him to refresh himself sometimes
with fresh air, as the Committee for Sequestrations shall lay upon it.

Another instance by which they would prove he favors Papists is a report from
one of the Captains at Windsor, that he wrote a Letter to Colonel Venne on
the behalf of two Popish women, who had Popish Trinkets and some money taken
from them there, that it might be restored unto them; now to show you that this
is most false, I will show you upon what foundation this slander was built: one
of those women came to his LPs Secretary with a Petition expressing how their
money and Truncks were taken from them by some of Colonel Vennes soldiers. as
they were traveling into Wiltshire, whither they had a Pass, and desired him
to procure my Lord Say to get their Petition read at the Committee for the
safety of the Kingdom; but he knowing the multitudes of business his Lord had
still upon him, told her he would write himself to Col. Venn, having intimate
acquaintance with him, to desire him to examine the business, and do them
right, which he did upon his own interest and acquaintenance only, in his own
name, not thinking that either of them had been Papists till he received
Colonel Vennes answer, which signified so much, and then he stirred no further
for them.

And for the great sum of money, hundreds of thousands pounds charged upon
him, though it be ridiculous to think that any man could get such vaste sums,
and convert to his own use without being discovered to many, yet I dare assure
you, having heard it confidently affirmed by him that receives and issues out
all moneys for him, that he never converted a hundred pounds, or a hundred
pence to his own particular use, for it so passes through his hands, that he
could not be ignorant of this business, he receiving and disbursing all that he
has had from the State, save only what has bin paid upon bills of Exchange to
some Bristow men, which he had orders for, and can give full satisfaction for
upon account; and for what money he received during the short time he was
Colonel, the account lies upon his Secretary, and not upon my Lord, who meddled
not with a penny of that money: Nay, I will add this further, that he has
lent, besides 1000. l. which he lent upon the propositions, sometimes 200. l.
sometimes 300. l. sometimes more out of his own purse, and has borrowd sometimes
to lend for the service of the State. And for Sir William Wallers business,
me thinks they should give a Peer of the Lords House liberty to use his
reason, what he did in that he did only concur with others in both Houses,
and by the same reason they charge it upon his Lordship, they charge it upon
the Houses; and if so, they appeal to themselves, and place the Judgment not
in the Parliament (which they pretend too) but in the People; This let me
add, that in my weak opinion, that Commission (in which though power was
derived to Sir William from his Excellency, yet his Instructions were to issue
from the Parliament, and at this rate how could his Excellency command Sir
William Waller, and how was his Commission consistent with this desired
Expedition: Besides, two Generals in one Expedition speak too much consusion.
Another thing is, that this Lord was the occasion of Mr. Nyes going into
Scotland, and that he went purposely to hinder the Scots from coming in
because they would hinder the setting up of an independent Government in
Churches; the falsity of that appears (besides what he has said to Gentlemen
of trust, of the necessity of the Scots coming in) by the effects, for the
Scots do come in, and both Mr Nigh and that Lord have taken the Covenant, and
are forward instruments in furthering that work all they can: And as for
Accommodations of peace which he is charged to be forward in; he was never
further for it then what Religion and Reason calls for at every man's hand, that
is, if that could be obtained peaceably, which we labor for with so much
effusion of blood and hazard of all, he rather desires it, and so I hope do
you and every honest man: Others say he has made his peace at Court, but give
no reason of this their belief, and I am confident can procure none by all
their Arts; the wiser of men know, that if the Court could have tempted him and
violated his principles, he need not have been so much wanting to himself, as
now to have his peace to be made up, he might have maintained it at an easier
rate then now he could (if any such thought could enter into him) regaine it.

But who can imagine that a prudent man should run the hazard of his honor,
estate, and every thing, and this in pure opposition to the Court, and yet with
design to comply with it: why should the Court inveigh against him more then
any man, charge him again and again with treason, and yet he a friend to them?
When the Parliament affairs were at the lowest, why did not he run to Court
as others have done? Why has both his Excellency and this Lord suffered with
so much patience the peoples calumnies from passions, surmizes, jealousies, (or
I know not what to call them) but only their integrity to this cause has
supported their endeavors (notwithstanding) for the public interest which
they make their own; and as it has pleased God to take away the mist from the
peoples eyes touching my Lord General by his last expedition, so I doubt not
but God in his good time will disperse the clouds as to that good Lord also, at
least to disabuse the honest party: This as to reason. But then in point of
Religion, can any Christian be so uncharitable as (upon a very surmise) to
question that foundation of piety which God has laid in him, and de facto,
maintain that doctrine, which in his understanding ^e ha^^s (falling from
grace) and so by practice contradict his own principles; surely if most
deliberately I have once judged a man in the condition of grace, I am not (but
upon most weighty Reasons) to call that happy case into question; I would say
to you and every honest heart, make this Lords case your own throughout the
whole story of it: I will not abuse your patience longer, this let me beg of
you and every good man that you would not so easily take upon trust such
Reports, either of that Noble Lord, or any other Lord or Gentleman (entrusted
by the State) as you meet with in every high way (and most likely given out at
first by some Iesuited Malignant out of design) lest you become guilty of
wounding the innocent in their good names and Honor, which is as great a sin
as wounding their bodies, but I hope better things of you: and I could wish,
that as to this Lord when you meet with any thing that makes you doubt either
his Religion or Reason for any act he does in order to the Commonwealth (where
the question now unhappily rests with some) address your self to him, and if
he does not satisfy you or any reasonable man, I will forfeit my reason, and
question whether there be an honest man to be found: Thus you may see my
confidence (and I trust not unreasonable, considering my many years
uninterrupted experience.) I say no more, only this I confess, it is a wise
man's part to be suspicious in these evil times, but to be jealous without
reasonable grounds, becomes no prudent man. I have unbottomed my heart to you,
that I might give you satisfaction, and do profess unto you, that there is no
one assertory passage herein, but my conscience bears me witness I have spoke
the truth in it. I rest,

Your assured loving Friend,
October. 17. 1643.
FINIS.

