THE Court Career, DEATH Shaddow'd to life. OR SHADOWS OF LIFE and DEATH. A
Pasquil Dialogue Seriously perused and highly approved by the clearest
Judgments.

depiction of a naked long-haired male figure or Charles I, wearing a crown
surrounded by a halo, holding a lit torch among classical columns; and a naked
long-haired male figure or Oliver Cromwell, holding a lit torch in a cave
surrounded by flames

Printed in the Year 1659.

The COURT Career.
Charles. HOW now NOLL! what wind blew you thither?


Noll. The fiercest and furiousest Whirlwind that ever breathed on the middle
Region.


Charles. Sure, Nol, you could not be sensible of any such Blast, having entered
such straight Lists in your combat with Death: and after so many Parliamentary
dissolutions, to prepare for your own.


Nol. It is true, if any hope had been left to such a forlorn wretchling, it
was high time for me to prepare for that which I never before thought on.
Furies without me; fears and frights within me constantly encountered me:
horror, horror; despair and horror, my sole dis-consolate consorts at my
departure. O how hard a task is it for that man to die, who has no other hope
then to die for ever! And such was my irreparable condition.


Char. In this so fiery and furious a conflict, your ears surely, Nol, were
secured from the noise of any Whirlewind: your storm within barracado'd your
senses from hearing any tempest abroad.


Nol. It did so, but after my hapless and hopeless descent to this infernal
Lake, the just portion of my usurped command; Eridamus an active nimble Spirit;
by Pluto's express order, being appointed our State-Scout or Emissary, (this
relation is true upon my Naked Honor) he returned me a Pasquil from the middle
Region, writ by some stigmatizing pen (as what quil now not set a work to
divulge my shame?) in these lines: It Is an ill wind does good to no man bring,
To Oliver Protector, upon the Whirlwind. Sep. 3. 1658.

Which was made good by our usurping King;
Whose braving pomp far lighter then a feather
Flew in a Whirlwind, the Lord knows whither.



Char. But by this, Nol, you know sufficiently to what coast the wind has blown
you: and to what port Charon has brought you.


Nol. O do not jeer me in my misery! your piety has seated you in a Throne of
glory; my tyranny has stated me in a depth of boundless infelicity. Do not
forget your former goodness: you had a heart richly indew'd with princely pity.


Charl. So should it be heartily opened unto thee, though my professed enemy, if
my pity could redeem thee, or that it were lawful for me to pity thee. I may
safely appeal to those who have persecuted me and mine without a cause; if my
heart has not been ever a stranger to revenge, but a ready harbourer of
remorse: None ever came to me with a tear in their eye, which my hand could not
wipe off.


Oli. This is all true; yet the jealousy of our Council was such, as they
durst not believe you. Which distrust, it was our part who were fishing with
others lines in troubled waters, to foment and enlarge; lest those who by
Covenant had made themselves ours, might by confiding in your clemency, fail
and fall from us. It was mine highest artifice therefore to deliver other
principles then they had till then received: such doctrinal grounds as I by the
assistance of my faithful Chaplain Hugh Peter's, (whom after the recovery of his
wits, I hope to see here ere long) infused into the credulous ears and
malleable hearts of our Church militant: as our godly hearers disavowed all
trust to your promises; holding them only such as served for your own
interest, and no further.


Char. Pray thee Nol, what arguments or instances might thou and thine active
accomplices use to caiole thy assembly into this belief.


Oli. Surely you cannot forget your ingratitude to your wisest and faithfullest
servant Strafford; in so highly approving and publicly attesting the actions
of his life; and after all this in signing and subscribing his commission for
death: this it was, I must freely tell you, that much disadvantaged your cause,
and advanced ours. For we told them, and they easily acquiesced to our reasons,
how could they possibly believe him, who deceived his own Creature, the Rudder
of his State, who so constantly relied on him?


Char. I must confess that was pressed to purpose: neither did any thing in my
thoughts ever un-king me more then that unprincely action; but timing Rabbyes,
God forgive them, if they may be prayed for, wronght too strongly by force of
their opinions on my resenting conscience. Fathers and Doctors of the primitive
Church they alleged, but whether truly or falsely quoted, the importunity of
the state, and necessity of mine own condition would allot me no time to
examine. Only one real Prelate I had, who well deserved that reverend Title:
and like a person of a pious and conscientious quality advised me in that case
to do what I ought, and not what I might. And how derogatory it was from the
prerogative of a Prince, either to be enforced by menaces, or induced by
promises, to act any thing below his Honor or course of judicature.

In the recollection of these I have no less ingenuously then penitentially
acknowledged my error; nay, so precious was the memory of his life, and so
resentive the impression of his loss, as I be-became nothing amated at the
sight of the Block, nor presentment of the Ax: holding the Sacrifice of my Head
unfit to hold in competition, with the inexcusable though not inexpiable
quality of his death.

So much have I published to the whole world, wherewith I hope it rests
satisfied: howsoever, sure I am, that His indignation, to whose mercy I
appealed, became appeased.


Ol. O my tormented soul; how happy thou, if thou were in the same condition!


Char. Yea, NOL, but all those wishes now will not make thee so happy an
Houshoulder; thou see now in that eternity of thy affliction, what difference
there is betwixt a just Monarchy and an usurped Tyranny.


Ol. O how I fry in the renewal of that ambitious story!


Char. Desist then to aggravate my mistakes, in disesteeming my own; and
fostring those Snakes in my Bosom, who designed my ruin. Thou feel now by
bitter experience that in the passage of injuries, it is far better to suffer,
then inflict, to appear a patient, then an Agent, be it in relation to our
selves never so important. This was my temper, and it has re-doubled mine
honor.


Ol. But my humor was clear of another nature; there was nothing of harder
digestion with me, then bearing of an injury; one disgust once imbosom'd, would
raze out an Iliad of years service. I was ever a serious observer of that
example of Dionysius, who was said to use his friends, as he did his bottles;
when he had use for them, he kept them by him; when he had none, that they
should not trouble him and lie in his way, he hung them up. This might be
instanced in my disregard to LAMBERT for whom, though I ever cunningly reserved
a familiar hugg, and a civil carress, yet I never appeared really the same I
professed: witness my discommissionating of him, and the prejudice I did to his
Relations: Not one of them escaped my scourge.


Char. Trust me NOLL, this was ingratitude above all degrees of comparison; for
how could thou in common civility so slight or disvalue him, who had been
such an incomparable assistant in all your State-service?


Ol. It is confessed; no Commander exposed himself to more personal danger,
advanced our State-service better, nor came off with more gallantry and
accomplished honor: But whereto tended all this? All this, or whatsoever
displat'd the Sails of his Victorious Fame, (as none ever archieved more with
less strength) begot in me more hate then love. Envy is ever Ambitions Darling:
Sovereignty partaks so much of self-interest, as it will admit of no
Competition.

Seianu's splendour struck him quite out of Tiberiu's favor Had not his success
brought him to swell so high, he had never shrunk so low. And to unbosome my
self unto you (for now it skills not much if all my thoughts were legible) it
was my firm purpose, as I had intimated to T H. with others of my secretest and
confidentest Favorites; not only to make his name odious, but all such as had
performed any eminent service; that their Eclipse might enlarge my light, their
contempt secure my rising. For howsoever I pretended or had formerly
dis-avowed, a Diadem was my aim; so as Lamberts opposition of it, and his
dissuading me from it, was the first occasional ground of that irreparable
breach betwixt us; and had fallen heavy upon him, if Fate had not prevented me,
and given him new breath. For so inveterate grew my hate, as my resolution was
to change his plantation by removing him from Wimbleton: and bestowing on him
an Habitation more obscure, and less popular. The Yorkshire General likewise,
could not for all his retirement secure his person from censure; though I
feared not his Head, I knew he had a doing hand, and a daring heart. In a word,
I had a yellow eye over all such persons as had been observed to appear eminent
in any action; and lest their spirits should rise above their just bounds, I
brought them by one device or other under a cloud: or cooled their courage by
enjoining them to more remote and inconsiderable quarters. The main work was
done, which made me neglect the workmen; whom I removed from the building lest
they should boast of the work they had done, and consequently detract from my
fame, wherein my continued success reflecting on the glory of mine actions,
would admit no Corrival.

In making Barkstead Lieutenant oth' Tower, I pleased my own fancy; holding him
not much unlike those Beasts that were kept there: and usually shown rather for
affrighting those that looked on them, then preserving those Places that kept
them.

In his advancement to that place, I had my design. It was my intendment to
create him my Ieweller: wherein as it was his office ignorantly to admire them,
and numerously gather them; so was it in my thoughts when he least looked for
it, to seize on them, and adorn my Relative Damasella's with them.


Char. Mean time Nol, it seems you kept a brave Quarter at Court.


Oli. Neither much state, nor great store. Not a dish but it was served up with
more care then cost: More providence in preserving the scattered fragments of a
needy reversion, then former times had done for a whole months provision.


Chapter It seems your frugal Court was wholly guiltless of surfets.


Olli. In very deed, it was more frugal then frolic, unless at the marriage of
some of our own Relations, and then upse freze, He was not modish that would
not be drunkish. Nol himself knew then how to lay aside his staff of state. No
Page nor Lacquey in the Lobby could play the Tom-boy more nimbly nor actively;
for throwing of cushions, ruffling young wenches, snatching Allamodian favors,
scrambling of junkets, bowzing of bride-possets: (one draught now of such
cooling liquor were worth an Empire:) all this I did to the honor of those
Nuptial Revels, and to congratulate the aerie happiness of my relations. For
matter of entertainment nothing could be too dear for my new initiated Son in
Laws, nor indeed more cheap for my self, for I paid them no Portions: my
Exchequer was empty; so as they must rest satisfied with the enjoyment of a
naked fancy: with some fruitless hopes and golden promises, which proved as
windy. No matter; to enter marriage with the Protectors Daughter; was a portion
without Exception: and to press the contrary, might no doubt in time have
inclined to a Branch of treason.


Char. O Nol, how unhappy it is to have been once happy!


Nol. O how happy I, if I had never been happy! Since the stream of mine
unhappiness runs through so many Channels, as it terminates not with me; but
derives it self in a line to my Posterity.


Char. That Is not possible; it was your wisdom (as none could outstrip you in
the dangerous track of humane policy) to ordain and nominate your son
Richard lineall Successor, or Successive usurper.


Ol. Never any such matter; my Secretary highly traduced me. I left the
Succession to Divine Providence: that as it had unexpectedly fallen, so it
might descend to whom Fate had decreed it. And though many disturbances in the
State, had bred desperate distempers and distractions in my brain; especially
those sad meanacings and impressive admonitions which my dearest daughter BESS
CLAIPOOL left with me, and near the hour of her departure, recommended to me,
which I must freely confess, did most startle me. Notwithstanding all these
madding occurrences and dis-passionate incounters, I never walked so
irrationally as to make my cross-graind Progeny Heirs to your Family. Only a
very little time before my landing at this Port (a place not to be compared to
my Back-staires at Westminster) ambition had raised such a flame in my
thoughts, as my only Note was a Crown, a Crown; neither did my ambition admit a
period, till my breath expired. Such desire I had to own, what my self could
not keep, nor my own attain. Neither indeed, did I hold any branch sprung from
my extraction, in relation to their abilities, fitting to execute the place of
an inferior officer, much less the office of a Protector: and rather born to
be State-pensioners, then Commanders in a State. For I could never account of
them, upon a due survey of their actions, and discovery of their tempers, for
Cocks of Game, nor native Osiers of an Oliver. Thus justly might I play the
part of an expert and bitterly-experienc'd Limner in portraying, and Herald in
deblazoning my infelicity, not in my self alone, but in my degenerous
Posterity. High Flyers, but their flight is for feathers in the air; the
highest pitch of their ambition. So as (and for one of my Tortures I take it)
my Divination touching them became true: for by Eridamus our Intelligencers
transitive relation, they have already acquiesced to a weak mercenary
submission. Whence I conclude, that as my blemished fame was formerly blasted;
so the memory of our Family on earth is quite razed, my posterity shamefully
debased; and all to their former obscurity reduced.


Char. This was a just judgment, NOL, and you are to acknowledge it; It was
your Design sometimes, and you pursued it by your power and policy to an Act,
that none of the STUARTS Race or Line should ever be in a capacity of Election
either of Protector, or any other office or place of Command in the
Commonweal: and are you not now in your own discarded Name and Famiie justly
requited? Sir T. W.
The Speaker, you know, modestly opposed it: but so strong grew your Faction,
and so despicable my condition, as poor CHARLES adn his were made Aliens to
their own, and wholly excluded. And was not this hard measure?


Ol. O me! this aggravates my torments above measure, especially when I
recollect my self, and reflect upon you, seated in a sphere of glory; to take a
view of my misery; where I am become a spectacle to Angels in my suffering, and
a reproach to men in their censuring.


Char. Surely NOL, thy fury appeared toward me implacable, not only in my
life, but after my death: where in humanity hatred should sleep, Christiani
nunquam inventi sum Cassiani. Tertul.
and Revenge, were it never so deeply rooted, should resolve into remorse. For
mine Head divided from its liveless Trunk could not satisfy thy groundless
wrath: ( for my innocence never wronged thee) but to insert this amongst many
other of thy matchless cruelties, the relation whereof will require large
Annals to succeeding ages; re-call to mind, and it cannot choose but affright
thee, how ingloriously thy domineering State insulted over my dislaughter'd
Corpse; using these words with a scornful contempt over it: Go to; thou were
shaped better for an honest Subject, then a good King.


Ol. It is true, I sad so, and ever held so; for my opinion was from the first
time I saw you, or took observation of you, that you would partake more of an
honest then heroic temper.


Char. This NOL, I impute rather to an error of your disaffection toward me,
then any grounded reason for your aversion from me: But it was that turbulent
spirit within you, which brewed those disloyal whimsies in your brain. My
actions were so clear and harmless, as they could not fomentate in you such
distempers. If Masks or Theatral presentiments could so strangely operate, as by
the free and frequent use of them, to depose Princes, and aliene Subjects from
their allegiance, it were an act that exceeded all Presidents.


Ol. And this it was which the purity of our Zeal first wrought on: but your
Corrupt Council epecially; the eager pursuit whereof afforded swifter wings to
our Designs.


Char. Unhappy wings that spread themselves to the ruin of the Flier, by
making the Pursuer a prey to his Follower! But after thy pitiful Triumphal
over my breathless Trunk, (the poor remainder of an unfortunate Prince) what
might be the occasion of thy delaying of my Burial?


Ol. That neither tended to your disadvantage nor dishonor, for your Tragical
Scene was alreay acted; this was purposely done for the Soldiers benefit:
where, as your enemies breathed nothing on your Corpse but words of ignominy; so
your few Funeral Attendants made gain their aim, receiving money for sight of
your Body. An useful Spectacle of Mortality.


Char. How pitiful my usage! exposed to sale both living and dying!


Ol. Yet never any less pitied: for the Scots, who were your first Chap-men,
could not: and we who were the second, would not: so marble-temper'd were we
both, as our neglect to your Obsequies, expressed the coolness of our affection
to your self. Tears, unless they steam'd in he eyes of your own Relations, were
held too precious Victims for such Funerals. For mine own part, though I could
feign a tear as well as any Crocodile, I was so infinitely pleased with your
passage out of the world, as I could not change my countenance for a world. I
was steeled all over: and as different to a Niobe, as compassion could be to
the heart of an Enemy. Your death secured my Title: wherein, though many might
by way of propriety challenge as much right, and show as fair Cards as my
self, being equal sharers in the Conquest: yet it was ever my happy fate (O how
unhappy now may I call it?) to be esteemed the prime Agent in that succeseful
service.


Char. It is true; yet I found others more destructive to my proceedings: for
it is well known how in the very first beginning or infancy of those Civil
Wars, your account was but in the rank of inferior and inconsiderable
Officers, ^^y, of so low and despicable a quality, as your place scarcely
merited the Title of a Commander; being as then, not admitted to the trust of a
Colors.


Ol. That redounded more to mine honor. For it could not be ascribed to any
thing less then my indefatigable industry or incomparable policy, or what else
you please to term it, that raised me from that low quality, to such a pitch of
humane felicity.


Char. Miserable felicity, that for a blossom of humane glory, no sooner
appearing then vanishing, forfeits his interest in that state of Eternity. For
who is he, if sensible of a future condition, that for a moment of delight,
would willingly suffer a perpetuity of torments: or lose his Claim in the
fruition of Happiness, for the fading pleasure of one Nights dalliance?


Ol. Why, Sir, you need not seek far for this till you find it; I my self have
done it: and my honest Colleague too TOM PRIDE, (for I dare not call him Lord,
for fear of the Prohibition) who now snorts in Lucifers bosom, Tom. Pride did
wisely in preventing Censure, and dying in his Honor.
and laments nothing more then his Butchery of the Bears: cursing his rash
valor in committing so hidelous a slaughter: wishing with all his scalded
heart, that he had reprieved one Bear at least, if it had been but to stop the
foul mouth of that bauling Curre cerberus, who keeps such a racket, as he will
not suffer his Hon. Taplash, having discharged his shoulders of his barmy Dray,
to take any rest: nor his ears nor eyes, hourlie affrighted with Lightning and
Lapland Thunder, to allay the horror of those affrights with one minutes
slumber.


Char. Alas, poor Tom.


Ol. Not so poor neither. His Name is so anciently precious, and of such
general alliance to our principal Grandees here in Tartarie, as he is lately
made Prime Tapster for the Regiment of the Scullerie; an office of credit and
profit: for nothing here so dear as liquor: nor can any courtesy be more
thankfully tendered to a thirstly Sojourner, then a bottle of clear
Stygian-water, lightly spiced or sprinkled with Sulphur. O had we such
Wassel-cups, we should hold them more precious then Rivolets of delicious
Nectar! Mean while, I cannot choose, amongst many other melacholly dumps which
incessantly seize on me, but remember how pitifully (though destitute of
pity) my servant PRIDE howled out last night: (as what is all our Plantation
but a Region of Night? or the surface of our Sovereignty but a Tragic Stage
hung round with Sable Ensigns of baleful melancholy?) Would you hear, I say,
how that Infernal Lord bellowed, being seated, on a Kilderkin of Lethaean
liquor? I shall not detract one tittle, nor vary in one syllable from that
doleful complaint of his Honor. Oh that I were now (said he) haling those
refractory Members, which sometimes displeased brave OLIVER, into Hell at
WESTMINSTER! how cheerfully might I quench that thirst which now torments me!
O then, so far had a blast of Honor transported me, or security belulled me,
as I vainly thought there was none but that: but I feel One now of another
nature: and which I never dreamed on, till I came thither? O that those
Parishioners, who first found me, and charitably made me a Child of the Parish,
had left me swathled as they found me: so had their care been less, and I less
sensible of my misery!

The shrieks of one to my self so well known, and who from his Mash-fat had
served me so long, enforced me to look back upon my self; and recall to mind
that momentany shaback upon my self; and recall to mind that momentany shadow
of earthly felicity which I here partak't: my frequent visits and progresses to
HAMTON-Court and WINDSOR, where your incensed and unrevenged Ghost oft-times
affrighted me: which caused me to discontinue my visit of that place; so
strongly did your Apparition work upon me? and so terribly did my guilty
conscience check me, and combat within me, as that Progress which I took for
pleasure, discomposed my soul, and made me in my return disconsolately heavy.
Buy Music and frolic society, quickly cured the bite of this Tarantula. -- Oh
me! How now it gripes me to remember those Court-ayrs, Pavans, Almans,
Coranto's, Sarabands, all my Court-frolicks, with that merry Musical air of my
never to be forgotten Oliver; which though it spitefully played on me, it acted
infinitely upon my fancy: being heated, and heightened with exquisite wines and
sociable humorists, who held it their highest honor, to fit the humor of
their OLIVER. But all that jollity is now past, and I alone left to my self
(and well were it for me, were I so left:) the Court-gate shut, White Hall made
black with suffering, set at sale; Saint Imaes waits for a Purchaser; Greenwich
to her ver Materials become a sufferer: No access to Hyde-Park, nor
Spring-garden, nor Oxford Kate may be admitted to friendless Oliver. -- My
Studds and Stallions dispatched by a Contagion: and their Master by a frenzy,
to quicken his dissolution. My deserted Parasites, like Beetles or Dung-worms
returned to their Ordure: My Family with infamy branded; my Race rooted; my
Line razed; my Allies by marriage disgraced; my titular Lords degraded; my old
Mab fooled into a Quaker. House and Household all indisorder.


Char. Why, NOL, all this is nothing to what thine actions have deserved, if
duly weighed, and answerable to their quality, judicially measured. Superior
Powers, though they have leaden feet, they have iron hands. Their judgments
may sleep, but they never slip. Thou exclaimest amongst other of thy
aggrievances, how some Princely houses were set at sale; whereto thou could
pretend no Title. While I reigned and on earth sojourned, the impudence of
malapert Subjects was such, not long before these Civil Wars broke forth, as
they stickt not to paste on my Gate at White Hall, This House is to be Let.
Neither was it sufficient for them to derogate from my personal honor, but to
throw aspersions on the purity of her fame, whose blameless demeaner had raised
its splendour above the reach of censure. And for my self, to such an indigent
condition hand my misfortunes brought me, as there was no House left me, which
I might properly call mine own, to lodge in nor Bed to lie in; no, nor after
my death, any other Burial Place for my dislaughter'd Corpse to rest in, but an
obscure and unprincely interment.


Ol. There was good reason for that. I had read so much in Plutarch, How there
was nothing that enraged the people more against the Actors of Caesar's murder,
then the showing of Caesar's ghastly wounds by Mark Antony: that was the sight
which begot in the people compaision generally. This it was that sprung a tear
in every eye, and a now of revenge from every hand. The only was to bring
discontents asleep, was to bring you to your rest in quiet. And for your bed of
earth, sure I am your private unpolished vault accrued more to your honor,
With this Inscription on the Wall: Great in Policy, but matchless in Tyranny.
then all my costly forty thousand Funeral Structure. Mine was more
magnificent; but yours more permanent. For our sprightly intelligencer
Eridamus, informs me upon his return from that Coast, how my Shrine was no
sooner raised, then it was razed; no sooner erected, then defaced: and upon the
splinters of it, these wormwood lines endorsed: Upon his Shrine.
NOLS Statue broke in pieces! what hand could,
Had it Briareus sinews, be so bold?
Why not? It by those sractures nothing lost,
Pieces were Emblems of the coin they cost.
NOLS Funerals are past, his shrine set up;
Hey Boys let us Cant it over our Wassal-Cup;
Had NOL such liquor as we birle here,
He Would think he were in Hell at Westminster:
But such a censure has befaln this Hector,
As he must Sulphur bouze instead of Nectar.
-- O Huntington, Huntington, little did thou dream
That NOL should by Charon lancho're the Stygian stream:
Or become such a Brewer where now he remains,
As to furnish all Tartary with Ala and Grains!
O ye Ptotectors Brood, observe his Fate,
And cease from seizing an usurped State!
For though the Bait seem pleasing to Ambition,
The wound is mortal, and disclaims Physician.



Char. It seems NOL, thy cruelty had so far abroad spread thine infamy, as it
whetted pens in all places to inveigh against thee. Neither was it wisdom in
thine to bestow on thy Monument such cost; when the sight of it could present
nothing less then an Object of scorn, or a Spectacle of shame, shose might be
the charge?


Ol. Only His, whose command might not unfitly be compared to those short-lived
Flies that breed near the banks of Hymetus, who no sooner begin to quicken then
they expire: for so it fared with the short life of his Protection. Whence I
observe the levity of popular favor: and how inconsistent it is to the
foundation of honor. O with what humble Addresses have I and mine been
courted! what vows of Allegiance and Fidelity tendered! what left unpresented,
that might either oblige them, or assure us of their zeal and devotion toward
us? And these Congratulations came from all places and persons of all
qualities. But sure, those Coasts are either sunk, or those good-pretending
people dead; for those Addresses in very short time run themselves quite out of
breath. Neither was this all; for some I had near me, and whom I had made mine
by my bounty, (an act which I was never much addicted to) who knew how to
protest, and seemingly to engage their persons in any action for my sake, while
I was living; who could sport and skip like Satyrs at my dying: Yea, even in
that last and longest conflict which I had with Nature, and wherein I
expostulated with my Maker, saying, How do thou now mean to deal with me! I
might hear a soft whispering voice uttering these words near the Curtain,
Roughly enough, if he mean to deal justly with you.


Char. This was cold comfort from your own Family: but the Hare may insult
safely over a dead Lion.


Ol. Which a Critic of my Court, and to whom I had shown some civil favors,
made use on: who, to ingratiate himself with one who never wished me well,
bestowed his pen upon a Poem, enttling it my VISION; which he bitterly pursued
in this manner. His Vision.
Who are you that distract my Soul with fear?
-- Torture and horror! -- What art thou stalks't there?
Ay me! my Sovereign Liege reft of his head
By thy perfidious hand. -- Whence streams that blood,
That Purple Ocean which invirons me?
From those pure hearts that di'd for Loyalty.
What mean those Scarlet veils hung in that sort?
The Sanguine Hangings of thy Justice Court.
Who Is he finds fuel to my boundless fury?
THURLOE. -- who doomes me? A supernal jury.
-- What hostile noise is this! whence may it come?
It seems thy Guard's approaching by the Drum.
It Is all in vain; what guards can shelter him
Who has so many enemies within?
-- O how this Warr-charge does my spleen provoke! Here he displayes his
various distempered passages during the time of his sickness.

Send forth commands they do not strike a stroke.
This sound of Drums and Trumpets which I hear
Presents a frightful language to mine ear.
Leave me; oh leave me; i am for ever lost;
And for a Crown in Baths of torments tossed.
Farewell to earth; my Burden is so great,
I find no Mercy, though I see the Seat.
PETER'S be gone; I Am run upon that shelf,
Thou can not save me, nor I fear thy self.
So raw's thy Doctrine, and so ripe my sin,
PETER will find no keys to let us in.
-- Avaunt despair! my Convoy mounts to bliss, Quicquid ex me mihi deest, usurpo
mihi ex visceribus domini mei. Aug. Manual. c. 21.

Though Sin abound, Grace more abundant is.
A brave exchange beyond comparison,
For three rent Kingdoms, to inherit one.
One, and a rich one too; a glorious Nation;
Where the Stat's secure, though got by Usurpation.



Char. It seems, Nol, though he begun with you roughly, he ended smoothly. It
had been happy for thee Nol, if this Poet might have had such influence over
Pluto's Court, as to procure thy remove, or so much favor as to change thy
lodging: or a fair progress after thy late exile from Hampton to the Elysian
fields: but there is such a report of thy field-service, as it is much to be
feared: that the keepers of those peaceful fields would appear shy in admitting
so fiery and furious a blade into their society. Truth is, thou had no more
right to England, then thou had to Elysium; who then could blame thee in
doubling thy files, or aspiring to some new-created Protection in another
region.


Oli. O Sir, could I dispense with my suffering as I can now with Ambition, I
should account my self happy, in the lowest and obscurest condition that could
befall me. I should neither repine at others greatness, nor bemoan my own
lowness. I should never spend time in remembering what I was, or how great I
was, but in laboring to appear what I was not. But my heavy fate hasting my
fall through the Career of my unexemplary actions, has thrown me upon that
Prceipice; as my complaints would in all ages return me pittiless; and my
forlorn condition remedless.


Char. It is reported Nol, that thou had a Dream which divined no less.


Oli. I had, indeed; then which none ever wrought more strongly nor strangely
on the senses of a sleeping man: but imputing it to some melancholy fancy,
whereto, by giving way to choler and other incident distempers, I was much
inclined; I made so small account of it, as I would not suffer it to act, as it
had done formerly upon my thoughts. Till one day, Ad Sceptrum manum, procax
ambitio vertit; in Centrum fallax mentis conditio vergit. Emblem.
being in a merry humor, I chanced to repeat it; wishing a quick wit then in
presence, to render it in verse; which he did in this sort: NOLS Dream.
I rode me thought, in the Chariot of the Sun,
With six black Barbs, by journying grown Dun.
Impaled with Sunbeams was my Head to the Navel;
But waking, found those Beams resolved' to Gravel.
A Triple-Crown, me thought, was my adventure,
But reaching failed, and made the Earth my Center.



Char. This was a good divination, and well rendered, if thou had seasonably
made use of it; but the confluence of thy victories; the applause of thy
flatterers: and the foreign fame of thine actions; begot in thee an oblivion
of the injuries thou had done; with a secure confidence against all
oppositions whenever or wheresoever they came. Small doubt may be made, but
that thou could wipe off all those matchless indignities done to me and my
Distressed family with a light sponge. Thy continued success in affairs had not
only estranged thy thoughts from a coneit of loyalty, but from a sense of thy
Sovereigns injury.


Oli. Nothing more true; long time were your wrongs steeped in Lethe, but now
they return fresh to my memory. Neither shall I stick now to discover freely to
you, what I should never have done, if I had lived Nestors years, in the world.
But my commands being now shut out oth' House, and no hope of succession to my
kace, I shall not be nice in discovering what did sometimes highly concern me,
and which now concealed, would little avail me.


Char. Thy Genius argues thee more ingenuous dead then living. hold on and be
mindful of thy Catalogue.


Oli. I shall go on in order, though I remain confined here, where there is no
order but horror:

You cannot, Sir, but remember the necessitated remove, which your misfortunes
had forced you to, and with what mean equipage accommodated in your adventure
from your dear Foster-mother the City of Oxford to Newark: and with what
beamelings of hope you were enlivened (but those weak beams struck out from a
Scottish Horizon) in that so tedious and incommodious a journey. There by means
of mine useful agents did I set mine Engine on work. The hopes which you
reposed in old LASHLEY and his adherents, were soon blown up by mine Ordinance,
being laden with no other shot, then fear of our power, and promise of reward;
which being at Newcastle accordingly effected; your groundless hopes became
frustrated, your trust betrayed; and your person to my commands delivered.
Afterward, having you then in my hands, and resolving to delude the world with
a pretended clemency, or shroud of honesty; you were ordered, or rather
cunningly trapan'd, for the Isle of WIGHT; where out of our tender zeal to your
safety, you were to have your cause judiciously debated, and by convenient
addresses to our Parliament, seasonably composed: But then and there, Sir, and
never till then did I play my Master-prize. My Scene was acting along in that
grand treaty. No action undertaken, no article of agreement proposed, whereon
my negative voice, though not publicly, yet with a peaceful innocence and
smooth privacy, (as a close conservator of the rules of policy, the main
principles of my religion) ever had a special influence. The purchase of your
peace was the only Rock to my aims. It behooved me then to obstruct all ways of
condescension. Which I found to be an easy work by plowing with your own
Heifers: and making the neraest to your Person, the only instruments for mine
advantage: and who were these, but those Divine Organs that sounded so sweetly
in your ears? and was not this a gallant Prelacy, that could for
self-interests, dispense with Loyalty! But truth is, Sir, promotion was their
idol. This made them feed upon the better side oth' hedge. They wisely
considered, how by my thriving discipline and weakness of your forces, you were
going down the weather: The only way then, as they conceived, both to secure
their persons, and to feather their nests (a principal which they found not in
all Hookers Ecclesiastical policy) was to imitate those Persian Priests, whose
superstitious adoration became reserved only for the Suns rising, but none for
his setting. Thus went the game on, but shuffled ever to your disadvantage.
Solinus.
In a word, I neither slept nor slipped any opportunity that might decline your
peace, or advance mine aim. Your proposals, by my party were wholly slighted,
your letters misconstrued; all future addresses barred; and this Treaty,
contrary to all hope and loyal wishes, no less suddenly then unexpectedly
dissolved. Which done; holding secrecy and celerity to be the main moving
wheels of every weighty action: and that more advantage did arise by dispatch
then delay; present course was taken for hurrying your from that Isle to
Windsor; there to measure out your Grave; for so it was irrevocably intended.


Char. I expected no less upon my first approach at that place. Nothing was
presented to my sight; nothing sounded in mine ears, which rendered me not
formidable Accents and Omens of my ensuing ruin. So sad was every object to my
apprehension.


Oli. You could look for nothing else. For it had been my care to fit to you
with such Attendants, as presented nothing less then death, and horror in their
countenance. And by these were you accompanied, as became a remorseless guard,
to your judicial Doom, long resolved on, before you were sentenced.


Char. I might easily understand that by the Charge drawn up against me; and
the face of the Jury impanneld to try me. Wherein none ever partak't of more
justice with less equity or mercy.


Oli. O Sir, you were no ordinary offender, and therefore not to be proceeded
withal in ordinary manner. And in all these, it rejoiced me not a little, to
be the principal Agent, and yet undiscovered or suspected. Wherein, me thought,
(and this imagination pleased me) I might be compared, for my winding and
subtle conveiances to the River Alpheus, that by subterranean passages runs a
while unseen through the Country of Elis, but afterward breaking out, repairs
to the Sea, though with no great Stream. Such was my course: and as I then held
it, no less prosperons my chance. For you found that our justice, were it right
or wrong, and wings to quicken your dispatch for the Block. Where you had many
spectators but few open mourners: for the Soldiers threats and fury attach't
them with that fear, as they stopped the Current of their tears: and stilled the
noise of their groans.


Char. I had once a purpose to resist your Executioner; till I was by my pious
and Reverend Chaplain seasonably-disswaded from it.


Ol. That would have availed you nothing: By my commands (being jealous of such
resistance) secret Engines, Hooks and Pulleys were contrived, forcibly to hale
you to the Block; if you had not submitted to it. You might rather wonder, how
it could possibly come to pass, that you at your Court gate, and in the eye of
your eminent'st City, where some could not choose but love you, should act such
an unexemplary Tragedy, and have not one revenging hand held up to defend you:
nor tender the zeal they ought you.


Char. O blush at thy self, Nol, in this Relation. who more obliged to thy
Sovereign then thy self, yet who more treacherously tyrannous to thy
Sovereign? Finchinbrook abhorred thee. None had relation to thy loyal Uncle
OLIVER, but abjured thee.


Ol. Yet all this wrought nothing in me. I gloried much in your Death, but more
at the Place of your Death. For my imbosom'd Sovereignty told me, it enlarged
my Power, and abridged my fear: For what could he fear, who had the power to
sacrifice without resistance his Princes life at his own door? In which action,
(the wonder of all ages) though Some might have opposed me, they could not have
o'repowr'd me. So strongly had I won in upon the affections of the Soldiery;
as my Commands gave them Laws: my Proposals were their Interests.


Char. This was such an Interest as my Lenity culd never attain to.


Ol. O CHARLES, you had never the knack on it: your Grandfather could have told
you that Kingship was a quaint kind of Craft, and that there were many ways to
the wood, which stood with the expedience of a Prince to discover, before he
came to be a prudent Governor. It was one of my Arts (neither did I lose my
self in it) to mint Treason, purposely to make the ignorant admire my
Clemency: wherein it was my glorious gloss to pretend Mercy in pardoning those
whom I knew to be innocent. But in this Iuncto, wherein I seemed to sail as on
a calm Sea; I could not walk so closely in the Clouds, but I might show the
fierceness of my fury, and eagerness of my talons. A large Rubric Calender of
the Innocent Blood I have shed, is hourly here presented to me. LOVE, GERRARD,
VOWEL, etc. infinitely torment me; and of those, my ingratitude to Love for his
friendly office and faithful service done to our Cause at VXBRIDGE. But there
is no torture afflicts me more, then when I call to my unhappy memory, (for
many things am I forced to remember, which I would gladly forget) that HIGH
COURT OF JUSTICE, and those unpresidental proceedings of my Obsequious
President LISLE: whose Labell (for Libell I cannot call it, being so near
truth) I shall mention, as it was brought me by Eridamus from the middle
Region. A President for Presidents.
LISLE, let these Presidents of Judgment win thee,
Lest vengeance raise such fatal Furies in thee,
As that High-Court of Justice where thou sat
Hung round with Scarlet, manifest thy State
Of all most cursed, since thou had the sense
To act such Sins against thy Conscience.
So strangely Names, from Natures disagree,
As may appear by Sir GEORGE LISLE and thee.
He shed his blood in zeal unto his King,
Thou shedst their guiltless blood who honored Him.
He lost his Being to support a Crown,
Those who support it, thou have thrown them down.
Never sit more in a Judicial Court,
Lest the Court of Conscience impeach thee for it:
And cry O'sace through all this Purple Isle,
"No Crimson-Dyer may compare with Lisle.
HEWYT'S affrighted Ghost shall startle thee,
And ach thy guilt to all Posterity;
And tell this Grand Conveene, whereon relies
The redress of those who suffer injuries,
That if this Murder which for vengeance calls,
Sleep still secure, the Sentence heavy falls
O Those who by Discussion fully know it,
And may revenge his Blood, yet will not do it.
NOW, do not think, thou horrid man of sin,
That Price, Prayer, Power shall a Connivence win;
It were a lasting stain to Womanhood
Who Wedlock love, to sell their husbands blood.
Such satisfaction must not stand for pay
Lest the purchase style the field Akeldama.
Eye for an Eye the ancient law decreed,
Then for an Head what ransom but an Head?
Yea, more then that should b required in reason,
For his was loyal, thine a mint of treason.
"Though Titus head were like another man's,
"'It Was worth a thousand of Domitians.



Char. This struck home, NOL, so far as it went: but His pen should have given
thee a touch of more butcheries committed by thy command, and that instrumental
President.


Oli. O Sir, that had been needless; I have them all in red Capital Letters
writ within me: and as they are houtly presented to me; so they hourly torture
me. Your Capel, Lucas, Lisle, Slingsby, Ashton, with other numberless objects
(such is the terror of an afflicted conscience) constantly affright me.

Neither was it my meaning, but that others should by sentence of that Court,
have speedily followed them. So as, there was nothing that enraged my spirit
more then the hearing of Mordant and Bennet to be freed. That indulgence,
though just enough, ranckled ong within me, and begot in me a fatal distemper.
For thirst of blood was grown in me so insatiate, as guilt and innocence fell
together in the scale: and became equally liable to a censure. Upon my review
of these, and my tyranizing in these, I cannot but acknowledge my self worthily
branded with all infamy on earth, but justly suffering all torments here where
I am eternally to remain: Yet being plunged in this depth of misery, me thinks,
humanity should afford me more pity, then to Libell me. Neither would it so
much greive me, if they disgorged their poison in strong lines: but in base
Ballad stuff to bring in my Ghst, calling upon my Son RICHARD; and he not to
believe me to be his Father (as he might well, for never was NOL known so void
of Sense) were unsufferable, if mine arm could reach so far as to punish it.


Char. It seems then, that NOL will sooner loose his hair then his condition.
Fury and revenge lodge in thine heart, wheresoever thou keep'st Garrison.


Ol. O What other Music then Division can be heard in these quarters, where we
are all enemies before we know one another! where we act revenge without
ground: and practice hostility at first sight! Thus men divined; and this have
I found That I should pass over the Stygian Lake,
And as I had brewed, so might I bake.


And have I not brewed bravely, when I thirst perpetually, and can find nothing
to quench me? -- O that this surly Governor here would take my Parole, how it
would refresh me!


Char. True NOL, But what security would thou enter for thy return? What
Bondsmen would untertake for thee?


Ol. O none, none. I have forfeited the Bond of my fidelity so often, as none
will credit me.

O that the English Peerage had been endued with more valor; so might they
have clipped my wings: and staid me in my Career: the pursuit whereof rendered me
in this most unhappy; in that I never felt what misfortune was, being ever
accompanied with success and victory! and what has all this purchased me, save
dishonor on earth; torture in my recede from earth: and a mark of infamy to
the remainder of my scornful family, so long as they shall live upon earth?
Now, was not this continued conquest a precious purchase? O how I am enforced
to see, what my discontented eyes would gladly turn from! Methinks I am now
smoothly contracting with Davy Lashley for foreslowing his March, or making him
an easy enemy by his cool assistance: which chaffer or martial merchandise went
on prosperously: for I found him by mine Agitators as ready to receive, as they
were to offer. So as, though he were colourably taken Prisoner, he was
privately a State Pentioner: living where he may be most secure; for in his own
country, he cannot promise himself any safety. So despicable he is to those
that know him: being rich in fortunes, but poor in friends. Such is the reward
of his disloyalty, as he knows not whom to trust, nor with whom to consort in
his times of discontent.


Charles. Surely, NOL, thy calamity has read to thee an excellent Lecture of
Loyalty. Which timely perused and digested, had salved thine honor: and
secured thee from those terrors and tortures which thou do now suffer. -- O
NOL, had thou known how betwixt Finite and Infinite there is no proportion,
thou would never have given such reins to thy restless ambition!


Ol. O Sir, but he that has his Heaven upon Earth, never takes time to think on
any other Heaven then earth! This moves me though all too late, to recall to
mind that momentany shadow of earthly felicity (as I formerly termed it) which
I there partak't: and to compare it with the present condition of my remediless
pitiless and endless misery; where I can neitehr expect release, not hope of
mercy. And amidst these, to remember my Court Gamboils, music, exquisite wines
and sociable humorists; and compare them with those Sulphur brimstone Carouses,
and ugly fiends I consort with: into what a gulf of bitterness am I plunged?
the fluentest tongues would appear mute in these expresses.


Char. I wonder, NOL, how such an Headpiece, in comparison of whom, Machiavel
might be justly accounted a Novice, could retain, after so many successful
battles and titular honors, so little sage in your magnetic sconce, as to
exchange the specious splendour of an imperial Britanny, foir the hideous horror
of an infernal Tartary.


Ol. In answer, it was PROVIDENCE; a change not by my choice. But my hope was,
before I descended to it, to make it mine own, and erect a New Court of Justice
in it, as I had formerly done in other countries.

And being now removed, and taken napping before I was prepared; I wonder much
how the Cardinal MAZARINE, that Arch-Engineer of all Division, and professed
enemy to civil peace, should have his term of life so long continued, and mine
so soon contracted! Should I relate to you shadowingly our secret counsels,
association, with our mutual and intercursive Characterisme, by way of
intelligence, touching the taking in of Dunkirk and Mardike, our transactions
in relation to Flanders; you would hold poor Nol a simple Sophister in the
School of Machiavelisme, compared to the Cardinal: being of a prompt wit, and
profound judgment. One so sociably wise, as his company would infinitely
content me. And he demeans himself so as I hope, e're long (if his Relations
will give way) to see him here, and enjoy his company in this Region.


Chapter If he should, NOL, he would not thank thee either for thy society, or that
Courts hospitality. He holds himself well where he is: and would not change his
lodging in Paris for all the small hope he has in Paradise: much less for
Pluto's bustling Court, where there are no conferments of honor, nor
projectments suitable to his humor: His Check roll there would be both too
numerous, and too regardless: The Cardinal is a person of reserved State: and
stands mainly on his punctilio.


Ol. Howsoever, it would glad me much to see him; if it were but to chide him,
for the dis-esteem he had of me, after my remove from him.


Char. How; dis-esteem from your sworn Brother!


Ol. Or else he forswore himself. -- Yet no sooner had the report of my
phrentick death (for so they famed it) crossed the Sea, and sounded in his ear;
then with winged speed he addressed his course to your sWiddow-Queen; telling
her, that he had brought her the happiest tidings that ever befell her: for her
greatest enemy she had in the world, was dead: which he expressed with such
cheerfulness and alacrity, as if it infinitely concerned himself.


Char. And so it did: for then he might hold himself the only wise man in
Europe.


Ol. Pray Sir, was not this done like a Brotherly Cardinal? But, indeed, my
long experience of his pretended intimacy had schooled me sufficiently, if I
had retained so much grace as to have made use of it: for there was never any
exploir nor design tending to my disadvantage or dishonor, which I was not put
upon by him, or his Beagles. Witness that unfortunate voyage to Iamaica,
wherein so many old Soldiers laid down their lives, finding graves where they
could find no ground to fight. But that was nothing Soldiers might be
recruited; but the vast charge which was in that dishonorable attempt
expended, neither is, nor ever will be, I think, discharged. In which pitiful
adventure, I appeal to mine attendants in ordinary and private assemblies, with
what extemporary prayers, dissembling tears, and heartless sighs I wearied
heaven as well as my hearers for the good success of those seafaring Soldiers:
wherein I am persuaded, as the time was afterward computed, that my devotion
was liable to a Romish error, being offered long after they were masacred. So
little available were all our Fasts and Humiliation to those distressed and
dislaughter'd Soldiers. The more I held forth to the people, the worse news
heard the people of them.

Other Ports and Holds too by his advice took I in; the holding whereof cost
more, then the revenues or conveniences of those Places would defray. And one
of the considerablest which I there left, will be shortly, I am pereswaded, by
a Trustee of your betraying Nation, freely rendered: and for a money matter, by
way of sale, just as they dealt with you, clearlie acquitted and conveyed. Now,
from whence came all these mercenarie contracts, or bargains of sale, but from
the Cardinals Hat? which has found a Cap of Maintenance fot those factious
spirits of France, for many years together.


Char. Vice having once got an habit is not quickly removed. Ambition when it
rides on Cock-horse, scorns to be dismounted, till it be unhors'd. So fares it
with that Statizing Prelat; who, though it be his securest way to fish in
troubled waters, he must perish on dry land, when his pretending Favorites
shall desert him; and the Queens side leave him to himself. His unfeather'd
policy will not then save him. -- But tell me NOL, why would thou have that
Cardinal translated?


Ol. That he may more sensibly feel what I through his counsel and my own
designs shall and have suffered.


Char. No, NOL, that is not it. I smell thy drift; thou would have the
Cardinal removed, that by his descension thou might be made his Chaplain.


Col. Not so Sir; though I have been in my time a stipendiary predicant; I
would not stoop so low as become any such Machiavilian Deacon. I was lately the
enjoyeer of your Royal Exchequer; having the State-purse at command: wherewith
my necessities made me so bold, as by my vast expense occasioned from some
desperate and unfortunate adventures, I have laid such an heap of stones at
WALLINGFORD Court-gate, as will not be easily removed: six millions thick (the
Commonwealth being already so much exhuasted) will not be so quickly
discharged. This makes me grin and laugh beyond measure amidst my sufferings.


Chapter And I will leave thee in that posture of malicious laughter. -- Bid thee
farewell, I will not; that salute were useless.

Thine actions were such strangers to all goodness, as they have estranged thee
from all hope of happiness.

Rest in thy rest less condition, Elysium Charides, Hic Acharontam petit.
hapless, helpless, hopeless. -- Adue, adue.


Ol. Thus must I here remain ever dying, ever living, relinquish't of all
humane Society, reft of all visible comfort to Eternity. -- Adue, adue.


FINIS.

