The Countries Plea AGAINST TITHES A DECLARATION sent to diverse eminent
Ministers in several Parishes of this Kingdom, showing the grounds and Causes
wherefore Tithes ought to be detained: proving by Gods Word and moral Reason,
that Tithes are not due to the Ministers of the Gospel; and that the Law for
Tithes was a Leviticall Law, and to endure no longer then the Leviticall
Priesthood did; and that there being a change of the Priesthood, there ought to
be also a change of maintenance thereof.

Written for the general benefit of all, as well Ministers as People.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for S. P. 1647.

The Countries Plea against Tithes.
To all Parsons these present.
SEeing there is much Suite, variance and Contention between many Ministers in
this Kingdom, and their Parishioners concerning the tenth part of corn and
other edicimations which they claim as due by the name of Tithes, and whereas
diverse honest, sufficient, and understanding Parishioners have received certain
papers or Shedules from the said Ministers, pretending to prove that Tithes are
due unto them by Authority of Scripture: The Parishioners in the said several
Parishes have made this joint Declaration of their Opinion concerning Tithes,
and do prove them to be no ways agreeable to the Word of God now in this time
of the Gospel, and do withal show what are the grounds which do persuade
them to detain them.

Our present Opinion concerning Tithes is the same now that it ever was, though
we never did show it by making any refusal of paying them until now, for we
have ever said and held that they were ordained by a Jewish Ceremonial
Leviticall Law, and that it ended, and ought to end and determine, as all other
Leviticall Laws did, at the end and determination of the Leviticall
Priesthood, for whose maintenance it was Ordained, which was at the coming of
Christ in whom the Leviticall Priesthood with all other Leviticall Laws,
whereof that of Tithes was one did take an end, and surely had not that Law
been then at an end it would have been in use among the Apostles and their
successors as all other Moral Laws were, but most certain it is that neither
in the Apostles times nor in any of the succeeding ages in all the times of the
Primitive Churches, that this Law for Tithes was ever in use, for the Apostles
and their succeeding Ministers of the Gospel for near about 300. years after
Christ his Ascension lived of the free liberality of the people, never once
taking, nor so much as demanding Tithes. But when superstition and heresy
crept into the Church, the corrupted Ministry finding that the Christian
liberality of the people failed as well as true Religion, then did they bring
in Tithes again by little and little, for to maintain their corrupted, and
superstitious Ministry, which otherwise would have wanted maintenance.

The Ministers know as well as our selves and much better, that Origin, Cyprian
and Gregory, do all witness that near three hundred years after Christ,
Urban Bishop of Rome, began to bring Tithes into use, for maintenance of his
Clergy, until which time there was a community of all things among
Christians, as Turtullian witnesses. But long after Bishop Vrbans time, at the
Laterane Council, Tithes were again condemned as Ceremonial and utterly
suppressed, as says D. Carleton, and M. Roberts: afterward in the more
grosser times of Popery they did wind them in again by little and little, by
which aforementioned Authors and many more, it plainly appears, that in the
very declining times of the Gospel, nay even then when the true light of the
Gospel began to be wholely obscured, there was yet much trouble and a great
deal of stir to bring this old Ceremonial Law into use again, and much
opposition there was then against it, and a long time it was before it could be
brought to pass: We know you have read the Ecclesiastical Histories, and do
know much better then we can tell you, (had you but the conscience to
acknowledge it) how and in what manner Tithes were brought into use in the
Church by the Pope and his superstitious Adherents; for you know and cannot
deny, how that until the Pope and Popery grew up, there were no Tithes in use,
no nor so much as once required, therefore it is not as you say, that they were
in use and were paid throughout all the times of the Gospel. The
covetousness of the Clergy got them into use by blind folding the poor blind
ignorant people, when they had brought in (as it were) a general ignorance
among the people, (and that they say is the mother of devotion) then they
brought in Tithes and not before; for Tithes they could never bring in, until
they had first brought in a general ignorance of the truth: the covetousness
of the Clergy is it, and not conscience that moves them to endeavor the
continuance of them? for you all well know, that by the Law of the Gospel they
are not to be, but that another form of maintenance is appoinned for the
Ministry, in the room thereof.

If you will needs have that Law of Tything to be a Moral Law, why then do
you not observe it in all the parts thereof? In the Leviticall Law they had
Priests and Levites, the Levites took the tenth of the peoples increase, and
the Priests took the tenth of the Levites tenth part for their portion, Numb.
18.26, 27, 28, 29, 30. etc. If you will have a Leviticall maintenance, you must
have a Leviticall Priesthood, and no other; if the Leviticall Priesthood be
removed, and another Priesthood come in place thereof, then are Tithes the
maintenance thereof removed, and another maintenance come in room thereof
also. For how can the thing maintaining remain any longer then the thing
maintained does remain? and so much the Apostle does set forth in that saying,
Hebr. 7.12. if there be a change of the Priesthood, there must be also of
necessity a change of the Law, that is of the Law for the maintenance of the
Priesthood; if that Law of Tithes were a perpetual Law, and to be observed and
kept now in the time of the Gospel, then must the third years Tithe be given
partly to the poor, for so the Lord commands, Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29. where the
Lord says, at the end of three years thou shall bring forth all the Tithe of
thy increase the same year, and shall lay in up within thy gates, and the
Levite and the Stranger, and the Fatherless and the Widow shall come and eat,
and be satisfied: The like is again commanded, Deuteronomy. 26.1^. from whence it is
clear, that every third year the Tithe ought to be said up by the payer
thereof, and the most part thereof to be distributed to the poor, the Levite
was to have but only a share thereof: The same was the practice of Tobia, and
the third years Tithe (says he) I gave it to whom it was due, Tob. 1.6, 7, 8.
and the same was the practice of all the Jews (as by many Scriptures it may
and does appear) until the coming of Christ. And so i^ must be now at this
time, if that Law be still in force; but where is now that Parson that ever
left this third years Tithe to the use of the poor? and yet by the same Law
that he takes it the two years he is to leave it the third; if this Law be to
be observed and kept in one part, it is to be observed and kept in another, for
all the parts of it make but one Law. Again, by the same Law every seventh
year the Land must rest, and not he plowed, tilled, or sowed, but that seventh
year is to be a Sabbath of rest unto the Lord, Levit. 25.3, 4, 5. If this Law
be a Moral Law and to endure for ever, why then is it so much altered, as now
it is, from that it was at the first institution? if any man can hereof give us
an answer by the Word of God, or by Moral reason either, we shall be of his
opinion, otherwise we could wish him to be of ours.

By the Leviticall Law the people paid to the Priests and Levites first fruits,
for whatsoever was first ripe in the Land was the Lords, so also was the first
borne both of Man and Beast, The first borne of man and of unclean beasts was
to be redeemed with money, Numb. 18. Now we demand why these same things are
not now in use as well as Tithes, being that they were ordained by the same
God, and by the same Law, and for the same end that Tithes were.

It is true that you allege, that God gave a blessing upon the fulfilling of
this Law, and pronounced a curse upon the neglecters thereof, Ezekiel. 44.30.
Malachie 3.8. and Proverbes 3.9, 10. But those Blessings and Cursings are
proper to the fulfilling and neglecting of the Leviticall Law as it was a
Leviticall Law and not as a Moral Law. God did require as exact performance of
all his Leviticall and Ceremonial Laws during the time of their continuance,
as of the Moral Laws, and did as severely punish all offenders, that did in
any ways offend against the Ceremonial Laws, as he did those that did offend
against the Moral Law; And reason good, that whatsoever God did command though
it were to endure but for a time, should be observed for that time it was to
endure, as if it had been commanded and ordained to endure for ever, we see
diverse Laws and Statutes have been made in this Kingdom, to endure and be in
force for a time, as, until the first Sessions of the next Parliament, as may
be seen in the Book of Statutes at large, and for that time they were to
endure, there was as exact observance of them required, as if they had been
made perpetual, much more then of Gods Laws made in the like nature.

And where you allege that of Numb. 18.19. by a Statute for ever, to prove the
Law of Tithes to be perpetual, we answer to that; That those words for ever,
do prove the Law of Tithes to be no more perpetual or Moral, then the same
words for ever in Deuteronomy. 18.5. Do prove the Priesthood of Levi to be a
perpetual Priesthood, for the Lord there says of that Tribe of Levi and
Priesthood, The Lord thy God has chosen him to stand to minister in the name
of the Lord, both him and his sens for ever; The word ever, in many places more
in these Leviticall Laws is used to the same purpose but does not prove the
Law to which it is added to be perpetual; So that by the same very Argument
that you would prove Tithes to be perpetual, we can as well prove the
Leviticall Priesthood to be perpetual, and all one, and we know you will deny
that Priesthood to be perpetual, and so by consequence you must do that other
of Tithes. The word ever in that place and many other the like, can extend no
further then the Laws did, which was until Christ came, who was the end of
the Law, for all the Ceremonial and Leviticall Laws and Ordinances that God
made to the Jews, were but shadows and Types of what was to come; Now when
the thing shadowed and Tipified is come, the Type and shadow must needs vanish
away. And if the shadow or thing giving shadow be vanished, or taken away, then
the supporter of the thing giving shadow, must needs be removed also. The
Leviticall Priesthood was but a Type, a shadow of the true Priesthood that was
to come, and if the true Priesthood be come, and the shadowing Priesthood taken
away; Then must Tithes the supportment of that shadowing or tipicall Priesthood
be also taken away, and a new Priesthood being come, a new maintenance must be
had to support and maintain the same.

The Apostle says 1. Cor. 9.13, 14. That they that preach the Gospel must
live of the Gospel; To them that a Minister preaches the Gospel, of them
must he be maintained. It is the desire of all Gods people, (and so it ought to
be) that the Ministers of the Gospel should have a sufficient maintenance
allowed them though not by way of Tithes, nay not only a sufficient
maintenance, but an abundant, a large and rich maintenance, such a maintenance
as they may live liberally without any other employment but the Ministry, the
work of the Ministry is the work of the whole man both of body and mind, and
therefore ought to have no other employment neither of body or mind but only
the study of the Gospel, and therefore not sitting he should be troubled with
gathering of Tithes. Neither is it sit or becoming Christians that their
Minister should live in a mean condition either for diet or clothing, but as
he is more excellent in calling, so ought he to have a more large and better
maintenance in those respects then others, for he feeding the souls with
spiritual things the Word of God, the people ought to feed his body liberally
with their base Temporal things.

If Tithes were due to the Ministers of the Gospel by a Divine Right, by a
perpetual Law, why are they then taken away from the Ministers by
Impropriators? God that ordained this Law, we are sure never ordained
Impropriations neither under the Law before Christ, nor under the Gospel since
Christ; should it be granted that this Law of Tithes were a Moral Law, then it
must be also granted, that it was ordained only for the maintenance of the
Ministry, and not for Laymen as now it is, by impropriations in too too many
places. Had Tithes been ordained for maintenance of the Ministers of the
Gospel, and to continue now in the time of the Gospel, surely they should
never have been suffered to be impropriate to the use of Laymen as now they
are: This strange change is a very good Argument, to prove that Law to be now
void and of no effect; It is well known that where Parsonages are impropriate,
and nothing left fot the Ministers maintenance but the small Tithes (as they
call them) that many able and worthy Ministers, who take great pains in their
Ministry, and are of good life and conversation, and therefore deserve well,
yet have so poor a maintenance from those small Tithes, that it is not in any
ways sufficient to maintain them in any reasonable good sort according to the
worthiness of their calling and pains therein. Nay they have so little left
them that they cannot cloth themselves in good and handsome apparel, but are
enforced to go in poor and thredbare Coats in no way becoming the Ministers of
the Gospel, and yet many of them are enforced and content to become
Physicians, and some Schoolmasters, even to teach children in their A, B, C.
thereby to enlarge their poor living and for a help to maintain themselves
their wives and children, which employments must needs be a great hinderance to
their study in Divinity, it being a work enough for the whole man without any
other, and is it not a shame for a rich and flourishing Commonwealth to have a
poor and bare Ministry either in the general or in some particulars, and yet
into such a condition Impropriations brought the Ministry of this Commonwealth
in very many places.

The only strongest Argument and proof you have, or can produce for Tithes is
from the example of Abraham, Genesis 14.20. Where Abraham gave to Melchisedeck
the tenth or tithe of all the spoil which he had taken from the Kings; from
whence you strive to prove that Tithes are by the Moral Law due to the
Ministry, and not by a Ceremonial or Leviticall Law, and therefore to be and
continue to the end of the world, and your reason is, and so you conclude that
whatsoever was ordained and in being before the institution of the Leviticall
and Ceremonial Laws were made, is not Leviticall but Moral and to endure for
ever, as well under the Gospel as under the Law; But we cannot find nor you
cannot prove that Tithes were ordained by that example of Abraham, Abraham was
not commanded by God to pay the tenth to Melchisedeck, Melchisedeck met Abraham
and blessed him, and then Abraham gave him the tenth of the spoil; it is no
where to be found, nor any where said that Abraham paid the tenth, but that he
gave it, nor is it to be found that God did command him to give, or pay the
Tenth unto Melchisedeck or to any other at any time, no nor that Melchisedeck
did require it of him, but it appears to be a free and voluntary act of
Abraham. Neither can you find in any place that the Patriarchs before the Law,
paid any Tenths or Tithes to any person until the Leviticall Laws were
ordained, wherein God did expressly command them, and not before. Nor can we
learn by that of the Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb. 7. that they were ordained
at that time of Abraham's giving the Tenth to Melchisedeck, nor at any time
before or after, but only at the giving of the Leviticall Laws, and therefore
it may safely be concluded they are of a Leviticall Ordination and so
consequently a Leviticall Law, and therefore at an end.

Had Tithes been ordained before the Leviticall Law, there would have been
without doubt some mention made of them in one place or other, for we find no
Law ordained by God and observed by the people but some mention is made of the
Ordination, commanding or appointing thereof by God in some place or other of
the holy writ; But we find that the Apostle makes it plain that Tithes ended
with the Leviticall Priesthood, Heb. 7.12. for the Priesthood (says he) being
changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law, that is as much
as if he should say, the Priesthood being changed there is also a change of the
maintenance of the Priesthood, and these words as it were a conclusion of what
went before in the former verses, what else can he mean by these words, change
of the Law, as well as of the Priesthood, but only of that Law which concerns
the maintenance of the Priesthood? And how can it otherways be, even by common
Moral reason, but that the supporter, the maintenance must of necessity be
removed, be taken away, when the thing supported and maintained is removed and
taken away. There cannot be continued a Leviticall maintenance for the
Priesthood, without continuing a Leviticall Priesthood to be by it maintained.
That reverend and most excellent Divine M. Calvin says; They are more then
fools that draw any Jewish Law so far as unto us in this time of the Gospel,
for as much as we know that all things then in use with the Jews do cease by
the coming of Christ, Lib. 3. Chap. 5. you compare the Ordination of the
Sabbath and the Ordination of Tithes, affirming them both to be as one, and say
that man may as well take away Gods time, his Sabbath, as his Tithes; But sure
the Ordination of the Sabbath and Tithes was much different; The Sabbath was
ordained and commanded by God at the first beginning of the Creation, and after
that again commanded to Moses in the two Tables of the Moral Law, and renewed
again by Christ and his Apostles, and was ever since the first creation
continued and kept both before Christ, and ever since, without any
intermission, so was not Tithes; they were ordained and commanded long after
the creation, with the other Leviticall Laws, they had no other beginning but
Leviticall, neither can they have any other end, there is not one word of
command for them but only in the Leviticall Law.

You say, you wonder with what conscience men can detain their Tithes from
their lawful Parson: But I demand of you with what conscience can the Parson
take Tithes of people, there being no such thing allowed in or by the Word of
God? nay when the Word of God is plain against it, as is that Hebr. 7.12. from
whence it is plain, that both the Priesthood and the maintenance of it, is
changed: Again, if Tithes were lawful, it is but the tenth part of the
increase; but you take the tenth of the whole crop where there is no increase;
nay where there is a decrease, as for example; a man labors all the year
long, upon his Land, he plowes it, again and again and dungs it, and sowes it,
and weeds it, and at last reaps it, and when he has done all this, his whole
crop is not worth so much money, a^ his labor and charges (to bring it to this
maturity,) (...) ^ounteth unto; It many times happens that by reason of the
barrenness of Land, or unseasonablenesse of the time and season, that the crop
of harvest is so mean and poor that it is not worth the cost and charges
bestowed upon it by far; As when a man has bestowed upon a crop of Wheat, or
other corn, forty pounds, and when harvest comes, it is worth but thirty
pounds, and sometimes but twenty pounds, here is ten pounds or twenty pounds
decrease, yet the Parson takes away the tenth of that crop, as fully as if
there were an increase; and so makes the poor Farmers loss greater then it
would be, by so much as the Tithe is; If you took away but only the tenth part
of the increase, according to the first institution, where there is an increase
it were something tolerable, but you by this way you go in, take the tenth,
where there is no increase; nay the tenth of all a man's labor, cost, charge
and care, which is no less then the sixth part; If a man bestow forty pound on
a crop of corn, and at harvest it be worth fifty pounds, then there is ten
pounds increase, whereof the tenth part which is one pound, is the Ministers
due, and no more if Tithes were now due, according to the first institution.

If the tenth of all increase belong to the Minister, why then is it, that men
living in Towns and follow gainful Trades pay no Tithes at all of their
increase? it is most certain that some men that live in Towns and follow a
Trade, as Drapers, Grossers, Chandlers, Tanners, Vintners, and many others, in
one year, with less pains, cost, and care, do gain more then the Farmer does
in all his life time, which does most plainly appear by their continual buying
and purchasing of Farmers, Yeomans estates, even of such men as are honest,
painful, and industrious in their places and Countries, and yet these men pay
no Tithes or Tenths at all, of all their great increase, except it be a Pig, a
few Apples, or some such small thing.

Tithes indeed were established by Act of Parliament and have been so for many
years, (but the first institution or acting of them was i^ time of Popery.) So
was the Common Prayer Book the Authority of Bishops, and other things else
established by Act of Parliament, but they are by Act and Authority of
Parliament, happily removed and taken away again, and so may Tithes also.

These considerations (and not covetuousnesse, or any affection to
Independency) have moved us to this opinion, that Tithes were only Leviticall
and ended with the Leviticall Priesthood, and thereupon to refuse the payment
of them any longer, and if these considerations and many more, (which you if
you please can call into remembrance,) may prevail so far with you, as to
convince your wills and opinions concerning Tithes, and move you and other
Ministers, to join in one with their people, to seek and sue to the honorable
Court of Parliament for a Reformation in this particular of Tithes, as is
happily done in other particulars, and to establish instead thereof such a
form of maintenance of Gods Ministers as is most agreeable to Gods Word, and
the practice of the most pure primitive times; So should you become helpers of
a through Reformation, and instruments of much good to Gods people; Which that
you would be, is the earnest desire and prayer of your Parishioners.

FINIS.

