THE CONTROVERSY Concerning Liberty of Conscience IN Matters of Religion,

Truly stated, and distinctly and plainly handled, By Mr. JOHN COTTON of Boston
in New England.

By way of answer to some Arguments to the contrary sent unto him, Wherein you
have, against all cavils of turbulent spirits, clearly manifested, wherein
liberty of conscience in matters of Religion ought to be permitted, and in what
cases it ought not, by the said Mr. COTTON.

London, Printed for Thomas Banks, and are to be sold at his shop in
Blackfriars on the top of Bride-well Stairs. 1646.

Scriptures and Reasons written long since by a witness of Jesus Christ close
prisoner in Newgate, against persecution in cause of conscience, and sent some
while since to Mr. Cotton, by a friend, desiring to be instructed, whether
persecution for conscience be not against the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. The
Scriptures and Reasons are these, which were alleged against persecution.
1. BEcause Christ commands that the Tares and Wheat (which some understand are
those that walk in the truth, and those that walk in lies) should be let
alone in the world, and not plucked up till the Harvest, which is the end of
the World, Math. 13.30.38, etc.

2. Because Christ commands, Math. 15.14. that they that are blind (as some
interpret led on in false Religion, and are offended with him for teaching true
Religion) should be let alone, referring their punishment to their falling into
the ditch

3. Because Christ reproved his Disciples, Luke 9.54. who would have had fire
come down from Heaven to devour those Samaritanes which would not receive him,
in these words; Ye know not of what spirit ye are of, the Son of man is not
come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

4. Because Paul the Apostle of our Lord teaches, 2. Tim. 3.24. That the
servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be gentle toward all men,
suffering the evil men, instructing them with meekness, that are contrary
minded, proving if God at any time will give them repentance that they may
acknowledge the truth, and come to amendment out of the snare of the Devil,
etc.

5. According to these commandments the holy Prophets foretold, that when the
Law of Moses (concerning Worship) should cease, and Christ's Kingdom be
established, Esaias 2.4. Micah. 4.3.4. that they should break their swords into
mattocks, and their Spears into Sithes, and Esaias 11.9. Then shall none hurt or
destroy in all the Mountain of my Holiness, etc. And when he came the same he
taught and preached as before, and so did his Disciples after him, for the
Weapons of his warfare are not carnal, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.4. And he
charges his Disciples straightly, that his Disciples should be so far from
persecuting those that should not be of their Religion, that when they were
persecuted they should pray, ( Math. 5.) when they were cursed they should
bless, etc.

And the reason seems to be because they who now are Tares may hereafter become
Wheat; they who now are blind may hereafter see, they that now resist him may
hereafter receive him; they that are now in the Devils snare by adversenesse
from the truth, may hereafter come to repentance, they who are now persecuters
and blasphemers (as Paul was) may in time become faithful as he did, they that
are Idolaters as the Corinthians once were, (1 Cor. 6.9) may hereafter become
true worshippers as they; and they that are now no people of God nor under
mercy (as the Saints sometimes were) 1 Pet. 2.20. may hereafter become the
people of God and obtain mercy as they. Some come not till the 11. hour.
Math. 20.26. if those that come not till the last hour should be destroyed
because they come not at the first, then should they never come but be
prevented: Thus for the Argument from Scripture.

But a. Because this persecution for cause of conscience is against the
profession and practices of famous Princes.

First, you may please to consider the Speech of King James, in his Majesty's
Speech in Parliament, 1609. He says, It is a sure rule in Divinity, that God
never loves to plant his Church by violence and bloodshed. And in his Highness
Apology, page 4 speaking of such Papists who took the oath, thus: I have good
proof, that I intended no persecution against them for conscience sake, but
only desired to be secured for civil obedience, which for conscience sake they
are bound to perform. And page 60. speaking of Blackwell (the Archpriest) His
Majesty says; It was never my intention to lay any thing to the said
Arch-Priests charge (as I have never done to any for cause of conscience,) And
in his Highness exposition on David. 20. printed 1588. and after 1603. His
Majesty writes thus:

Sixthly, The compassing of the Saints and the besieging of the beloved City,
declares unto us a certain note of a false Church, to be persecution, for they
come to seek the faithful, the faithful are them that are ^^^ght: the wicked
are the besiegers, the faithful are the besieged.

Secondly, The saying of Stephen King of Poland, I am King of (...), not of
consciences, a Commander of bodies, not of souls.

So the King of Bohemia writes thus: And notwithstanding the success of later
times (wherein sundry opinions have been hatched about the subject of Religion)
may make one clearly discern with his eye, and as it were to touch with his
finger, that according to the verity of holy Scriptures, and a Maxim
heretofore told and maintained by the ancient Doctors of the Church; That men's
consciences ought in no set to be violated, urged, er constrained. And
whenever men have attempted any thing by this violent course, whether openly
or by secret means, the issue has been pernicious, and the cause of great and
wonderful innovations, in the principallest and mightiest Kingdoms and
Countries of all Christendom.

And further his Majesty says, So that once more we profess ^^^^^ God and
the whole World, that from this day forward we are truly resolved not to
persecute or molest, or suffer to be persecuted or ^^lested, any person
whomsoever for matter of Religion, us not they (...) profess themselves to be
of the Romish Church, neither to trouble (...) disturb them in the exercise of
their Religion, so they live confornable to the Laws of the States, etc.

And for the practice of this, where is persecution for cause of conscience,
except in England and where Popery reigns, and there neither in all places, as
appears by France, Poland, and other places, nay it is not practiced amongst
the Heathens that acknowledge not the true God, as the Turk, Persian, and
others.

3. Because persecution for cause of conscience is condemned by the ancient and
latter writers; yea even Papists themselves.

Hillary against Auxentius says thus: The Christian Church does not persecute
but is persecuted, and lamentable it is to see the great folly of these times,
and to sigh at the foolish opinion of this world, in that men think by humane
aid to help God, and neither worldly pomp and power to undertake to defend
the Christian Church.

I ask you Bishops what help used the Apostles in the preaching of the
Gospel? With the aid of what power did they preach Christ and convert the
heathen from their Idolatay to God: when they were in prisons, and lay in
chains, did they praise and give thanks to God, for any dignities, graces and
favors, received from the Court? or do you think, that Paul went about with
regal Attendants, or Kingly Authority to gather and establish the Church of
Christ? sought he protection from Nero, Vespasian?

The Apostles wrought with their hands for their own maintenance, traveling by
land and water from Town to City; to preach Christ; yea the more they were
forbidden, the more they preached Christ. But now alas humane help must assist
and protect the faith, the same against the Arrians: The Church which formerly
enduring misery and imprisonment, was known to be a true Church, does now
terrify others by imprisonment, banishment, and misery, and boasts that she
is highly esteemed of the world, when as the true Church cannot but be hated of
the same.

Tertullian ad Scapulam, it agrees both with humane reason, and natural
equity, that every man worship God uncompelled, and believe what he will, for
it neither hurts nor profits any one other man's Religion, and belief:
neither beseems it any Religion to compel another to be of their Religion,
which willingly and freely should be embraced, and not by constraint; for as
much as the offerings were required of those that freely and with good will
offered, and not from the contrary.

Jerome. in poeni. lib. 4. in Jeremiam, Heresy must be cut off with the sword
of the Spirit, let us strike through with the arrows of the Spirit, all Sons
and Disciples of the misled Heretics: that is, with testimonies of holy
Scriptures, the slaughter of Heretics is by the Word of God.

Brentius upon 1 Cor. 3. No man has power to make or give Laws to Christians,
whereby to bind their consciences, for willingly, freely, and uncompelled, with
a ready desire and cheerful mind, must those that come run unto Christ.

Luther in his Book of the Civil Magistrate says, the Laws of the Civil
Magistrates government extends no further then over the body or goods, and to
that which is external, for over the soul God will not suffer any to rule,
only he himself will rule there. Wherefore whosoever does undertake to give
Laws to the Souls and Consciences of men, he usurpeth the Government
himself, which appertains unto God, etc. Therefore upon 1. Kings 5. In the
building of the Temple, there was no sound of Iron heard, to signify that
Christ will have in his Church a free and a willing people, not compelled and
constrained by Laws and Statutes.

Again he says upon Luke 22. It is not the true Catholic Church which is
defended by the secular arm, or humane power, but the false and fained Church,
which although it carries the name of a Church, yet it denies the power thereof.

Again upon Psalm. 17. he says, the true Church of Christ, knows not Brachium
seculare, which the Bishops now a days chiefly use. Again, in Postil. Dom. 1.
post. Epiph. he says: Let no Christian be commanded, but exhorted; For he that
willingly will not do that, whereunto he is friendly exhorted, he is no
Christian, wherefore they that compel those that are not willing, show thereby
that they are not Christian preachers, but worldly Beadles. So upon 1 Pet. 3.
he says, if the civil Magistrate shall command me thus and thus: I should
answer him after this manner. Lord, or Sir, Look you to your wordly or civil
government, your power extends not so far as to command any thing in Gods
Kingdom. Therefore herein I may not hear you: For if you cannot hear it, that
any should usurp authority where you have to command, how do you think that
God should suffer you to thrust him from his seat, and to seat your self
therein?

Lastly, the Papists the inventers of persecution in a wicked book of theirs
set forth in King James his reign thus; Moreover the means which Almighty God
appointed his Officers to use in the conversions of Kingdoms and Nations and
people, was humility, patience, charity, saying; Behold I send you as Sheep in
the midst of Wolves, Math. 10.16. he did not say, behold I send you as Wolves
among sheep, to kill, imprison, spoil and devour those unto whom they were
sent.

Again, verse. 7. he says, They to whom I send you will deliver you unto
Councels, and in their Synagogues they will scourge you, and to presidents, and
to Kings shall ye be led for my sake: He does not say; You whom I send, shall
deliver the people (whom you ought to convert) to Counsels, and put them in
prison, and lead them to presidents and Tribunal seats, and make their
Religion Felony and Treason.

Again he says, ver. 32. when ye enter into a house, salute it, saying; Peace
be unto this house, he does not say you shall send Pursevants to ransack or
spoil his house.

Again he said John 10. The good Pastor gives his life for his sheep, the
Thief comes not but to steal, kill and destroy, he does not say, the
Thief gives his life for his sheep, and the good Pastor comes not but to
steal, kill and destroy.

So that we holding our peace, our adversaries themselves speak for us, or
rather for the truth.

But it is objected, that it would be a prejudice to the Commonwealth, to
permit liberty of conscience.

We answer, it is not any prejudice to the Commonwealth if liberty of
conscience were suffered to such as fear God indeed, as is or will be manifest.
Abraham abode among the Cananites a long time, yet contrary to them in matters
of Religion, Genesis 13.7. and 16.13. Again, he sojourned in Gecar; and King
Abimelech gave him leave to abide in his Land, Genesis 20.21, 22. Isaac dwelt in
the same land, yet contrary in Religion, Genesis 26. Jacob lived 20. years in one
house with his Uncle Laban, yet different in Religion, Genesis 31. The people of
Israel were about 430. years in that infamous Land of Egypt, and afterward
70. years in Babylon, all which time they differed in Religion from the States,
Exodus* 22, and 2 Chronicles. 36. Come to the time of Christ where Israel was under
the Romans, where lived diverse Sects of Religion, as Herodians; Scribas, and
Pharisees, Saduces, and Libertines, Th^deans, and Sa^^ritans, besides the
common Religion of the Jews, Christ and the Apostles. All which differed from
the common Religion of the State, which was like the worship of Diana, which
almost the whole world worshipped, Acts 19.20.

All these loved under the government of Caesar, being nothing hurtful to the
Commonwealth, giving unto Caesar the things that are (...): And for their
Religion and Consciences toward God, (...) them to themselves, as having no
Dominion over their souls and consciences. And when the enemies of the truth
raised up to (...), the wisdom of the Magistrate most wisely appeased them,
A^s 18.14. and 19.35.

The Answer of Mr. John Cotton of Buston in New England to the aforesaid
Arguments against persecution for cause of conscience.
THe question which you put is, whether persecution for cause of conscience be
not against the doctrine of Jesus Christ the King of Kings.

Now by persecution for cause of conscience, I conceive you mean either for
professing some point of doctrine; which you believe in conscience to be a
truth, or for practicing some work which in conscience you believe to be a
Religious duty.

Now in points of Doctrine some are fundamental, without right belief whereof
a man cannot be saved; others are circumstantiall or less principal, wherein
men may differ in judgment without prejudice of salvation on either part. In
like ^o^^, in points of practice, some concern the weightier duties of the Law,
as, what God we worship, and with what kind of worship; whether such, as if it
be right, Fellowship with God is held; if corrupt, Fellowship with him is lost.

Again, in points of Doctrine and Worship less principal, either they are
held forth in a meek and peaceable way, though the King be erroneous or
unlawful, or they are held forth with such arrogance and impetuousnesse, as
tends and reaches (even of it self) to the disturbance of civil peace.

Finally, let me add this one distinction more; when we are persecuted tor
conscience sake, it is either for conscience rightly informed, or for erroneous
and blind conscience. These things premised, I would lay down my answer to the
question in certain conclusions.

First, It is not lawful to persecute any for conscience sake rightly
informed, for in persecuting such, Christ himself is persecuted in them, Acts
9.4.

Secondly, for an erroneous and blind conscience, (even in fundamental and
weighty points) it is not lawful to persecute any, until after admonition
once or twice, and so the Apostle directs, Titus 3.10. and gives the reason
that in fundamental and principal points of Doctrine, or Worship, the Word of
God is so clear, that he cannot but be convinced in conscience of the dangerous
error of his way, after once and twice admonition wisely and faithfully
dispensed. And then if any one persist it is not out of conscience, but against
his conscience, as the Apostle says Ver. 11. he is subverted and sins,
beidg condemned of himself, viz. of his own conscience: So that if such a man
after such admonition, shall still persist in the error of his way, and be
therefore punished, he is not persecuted for cause of conscience, but for
sinning against his own conscience.

Thirdly, in things of lesser moment, whether points of Doctrine or Worship, if
a man hold them forth in a spirit of Christian meekness and love (though with
zeal and constancy) he is not to be persecuted, but tolerated, till God may be
pleased to manifest his truth to him, Phil. 3.17. Romans 14.1, 2, 3, 4.

Fourthly, but if a man hold forth, or profess any error, or false way, with
a boisterous and arrogant spirit, to the disturbance of civil peace, he may
justly be punished according to the quality and measure of his disturbance
caused by him.

Now let us consider of your reasons or objections to the contrary.

1. Object. Your first head of Objections is taken from the Scripture, because
Christ commands to let alone the tares and wheat to grow together till the
harvest, Mat. 13.30. etc.

Answ. Tares are not briars and thorns, but partly hypocrites, like unto the
godly, but indeed carnal, as the tares are like the wheat, but are not wheat:
or partly such corrupt doctrine or practices as are indeed unsound, but yet
such as come very near the truth, (as tares do to the wheat) and so near, that
good men may be taken with them, and so the persons in whom they grow, cannot
be rooted out, but good will be rooted up with them. And in such a case Christ
calls for toleration, not for penal prosecution, according to the third
conclusion.

2. Object. In Mat. 15.14. Christ commands his Disciples to let the blind
alone till they fall into the ditch, therefore he would have their punishment
deferred till their final destruction.

Answ. He there speaks not to public Officers, whether in Church or
Commonwealth, but to his private Disciples, concerning the Pharisees, over
whom they had no power: And the command he gives to let them alone, is spoken
in regard of troubling themselves, or regarding the offense which they took at
the wholesome Doctrine of the Gospel; as who should say, though they be offended
at this saying of mine, yet do not you fear their fear, nor be troubled at
their offense which they take at my Doctrine, not out of sound judgment but,
out of their blindness. But this makes nothing to the matter in hand.

3. Object. In Luke 9.54. Christ reproves his Disciples, who would have had
fire come down from heaven, so consume the Samaritans, who refused to receive
him.

And Paul teaches Timothy, not to strive, but to be gentle toward all men,
suffering evil patiently.

Answ. Both these are directions to Ministers of the Gospel, how to deal (not
with obstinate offenders in the Church that sin against conscience, but) either
with men without, as the Samaritans were, and many unconverted Christians in
Creet, whom Titus (as an Evangelist) was to seek to convert, or at best with
some Jews or Gentiles in the Church, who though carnal, yet were not
convinced of the error of their way: And it is true, it became not the spirit
of the Gospel to convert Aliens, to the faith of Christ (such as the
Samaritans were) by fire and brimstone, nor to deal harshly in public
Minist^^ or private conference with all such contrary-minded men, as either had
not entered into Church Fellowship, or if they had yet did hitherto sin of
ignorance, not against conscience: But neither of both these do hinder the
Ministers of the Gospel to proceed in a Church Way against Church Members,
when they become scandalous offenders, either in life or doctrine, much less
do they speak at all of the civil Magistrates.

4. Object. From the prediction of the Prophets who foretold, that carnal
weapons should cease in the days of the Gospel, Esa. 2.4. and 11.9. Micah
4.3.4. And the Apostle professes, the weapons of our warfare are not carnal,
2. Cor. 10.4. and Christ is so far from persecuting those that would not be of
his Relgion, that he charge his Disciples when they are persecuted themselves
they should pray, when they are cursed they should bless: the reason whereof,
seemed to be, that they who are now persecutors, and wicked persecutors, may
become true Disciples and converts.

Answ. Those predictions in the Prophets do only show, first with what kind of
weapons he will subdue the Nations, to the obedience of the faith of the
Gospel, not by fire and sword, and weapons of war, but by the power of the Word
and Spirit, which no man doubts of. Secondly, those predictions of the
Prophets, show what the meek and peaceable temper will be of all the true
converts to christianity, not Lions, or Leopards, etc. not cruel oppressors,
nor malignant opposers or biters of one another: but does not forbid to drive
ravenous wolves from the sheepfold, and to restrain them devouring the sheep of
Christ.

And when Paul says, the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
spiritual, he denies not civil weapons of Justice to the civil Magistrate,
but only to Church Officers; and yet the weapons of such of such Officers he
acknowledges to be such, as though they be spiritual, yet are ready to take
vengeance of all disobedience, 2. Cor. 10.6. which has reference (amongst
other Ordinances) to the censure of the Church against scandalous offenders.

When Christ commands his Disciples to bless them that curse them, and
persecute them, he gives not a rule to Public Officers either in Church or
Commonwealth, to suffer notorious sinners either in life or doctrine, to pass
away with a blessing, but to private Christians to suffer persecution
patiently, yea and to pray for their persecu^^rs.

Again, Christ, it is true, would have his Disciples to be far from
persecuting (for that is a sinful oppression of men) for righteousness sake,
but that hinders not but that he would have them execute upon all disobedience
the judgment and vengeance required in the Word, 2 Cor. 10.6. Romans 13.4.
Fourthly, though it be true, that wicked persons now may by the grace of God,
become true Disciples, and Converts, yet we may not do evil, that good may come
thereof, and evil it would be to tolerate notorious evil doers, whether
seducing teachers, or scandalous livers. Christ had something against the Angel
of the Church of Pergamus, for tolerating them that held the Doctrine of
Balaam, and against the Church of Thiatira, for tolerating Jezabell to teach
and seduce, Rev. 2.14.20.

Your second head of reasons is taken from the profession and practice of
famous Princes, King James, Stephen of Boland, King of Bohemia. Whereunto a
treble Answer may briefly be returned.

1. We willingly acknowledge that none is to be persecuted at all, no more
then they may be oppressed for righteousness sake.

Again, we acknowledge that none is to be punished for his conscience, though
misinformed, as has been said, unless his error be fundamental, or
sediciouslie and turbulentlie promoted, and that after due conviction of
conscience, that it may appear he is not punished for his conscience, but for
sinning against his conscience.

Furthermore, we acknowledge none to be constrained to believe or profess the
true Religion till he be convinced in judgment of the truth of it; but yet
restrained he may from blaspheming the truth, and from seducing any into
pernicious errors.

2. We answer, what Princes profess and practice, is not a rule of conscience,
they many times tolerate that in point of Srate policy, which cannot be justly
tolerated in point of true christianity.

Again, Princes many times tolerate offenders out of very necessity, when the
offenders are too many or too mighty for them to punish; in which respect
David tolerated Joab and his murders, but against his will.

3. We answer, that for those three Princes, named by you, who tolerated
Religion, we can name you more and greater, who have not tolerated Heretics
and Schismatics, notwithstanding their pretense of conscience: For example,
Constantine the great, at the request of the general Council of Nice,
banished Arrius with some of his fellows, Sozom. lib. 1. Eccles. Hist. cap.
29.20. The same Coostantine made a severe law against the Donatists, and the
like proceedings were used against them by Valentinian, Gratian and Theodosius,
as Augustine reports in Epist. 166 only Julian the Apostle granted liberty to
Heretics, as well as unto Pagans, that he might by tolerating all weeds to
grow, choke the vitals of Christianity, which was also the practice and sin of
Valens the Arrian.

Queen Elizabeth as famous for Government as any of the former, it is well
known what Laws she made, and executed against Papists: yea and King James
(one of your own witnesses) though he was slow in proceeding against Papists
(as you say) for conscience sake, yet you are not ignorant how severely and
sharply he punished those whom the malignant word calls Puritans, men of more
conscience and better faith, then he tolerated.

I come now to your third and last argument taken from the judgment of ancient
writers, yea even of Papists themselves, who have condemned persecution for
conscience sake.

You begin with Hilary, whose testimony we might admit without any prejudice to
the truth; for it is true the Christian Church does not persecute, but is
persecuted, but to excommunicate a Heretic is not to persecute, that is not
to punish an innocent, but a culpable and damnable person, and that not for
conscience, but for persisting in error against light of conscience whereof it
has been convinced.

It is true also what he says, that the Apostles did, neither may we propagate
Christian Religion by the Sword, but if Pagans cannot be won by the Word, they
are not to be compelled by the Sword: Nevertheless this hinders not, but that
if they or any other should blaspheme the true God and his true Religion, they
ought not to be severely punished, and no less do they deserve, who seduce
from the truth to damnable Heresy or Idolatry.

Your next writer, (which is Tertullian) speaks to the same purpose in the
place alleged by you, his intent was only to restrain Scapula the Roman
Governor of Africa from the persecution of Christians, for not offering
sacrifice to their Gods; and for that end fetches an Argument from natural
equity not to compel any to any Religion, but to permit them either to believe
willingly, or not to believe at all; which we acknowledge, and accordingly
permit the Indians to continue in their unbelief: Nevertheless it will not
therefore be lawful openly to tolerate the Worship of Devils or Idols; or the
seduction of any from the truth.

When Tertullean says, another man's Religion neither hurts nor profitteth
any: It must be understood of private worship, and Religion professed in
private, otherwise a false Religion professed by the Members of a Church, or by
such as have given their names to Christ, will be the ruin and desolation of
the Church, as appears by the threats of Christ to the Churches of Asia, Rev.
2.

Your next Author Jerome crosses not the truth, nor advantageth not your
cause, for we grant what he says, that heresy must be cut off with the sword
of the spirit: But this hinders not but that being so cut down, if the
Heretic will still persist in his heresy to the seducing of others, he may
be cut off by the civil sword, to prevent the perdition of others. And that to
be Jeromes meaning appears by his note upon that of the Apostle [a little
leaven leaveneth the whole lumpe] therefore says he, a spark as soon as it
appears, is to be extinguished, and the leaven to be removed from the rest of
the dough, rotten pieces of flesh are to be cut off, and a scabbed beast is to
be driven from the sheepfold, least the whole house, mass of dough, body and
flock, be set on fire with the spark, be sowred with the leaven, be putrified
with the rotten flesh, perish with the scabbed beast.

Brentius (whom you quote next) speaks not to your cause, we willingly grant
him and you, that man has no power to make Laws to bind the conscience: out
this hinders not, but that men may see the Laws of God observed, which do
bind conscience.

The like answer may be returned to Luther, whom you next allege.

First, The government of the civil Magistrate reaches no further then over
the bodies and goods of their subjects, not over their souls, and therefore
they may not undertake to give laws to the souls and consciences of men.

Secondly, That the Church of Christ does not use the Arms of secular power to
compel men to the faith, or profession of the truth, for this is to be done by
spiritual weapons, whereby Christians are to be exhorted, not compelled. But
this hinders not that Christians sinning against light of faith and
conscience, may justly be censured by the Church by excommunication, and by the
civil sword also, in case they shall corrupt others to the perdition of their
souls.

As for the testimony of the Popish book, we weigh it not, as knowing
(whatsoever they speak for toleration of Religion, where themselves are under
the hatches) when they come to sit at Stern, they judge and practice quite
contrary, as both their writing and judicial proceedings have testified to the
world these many years.

To shut up this Argument from testimony of Writers; It is well known, that
Augustine retracted this opinion of yours, which in his younger times he had
held, but after in riper age reversed and refuted, as appears in his second
book of retractations, cap. 5. and in his Epistles 48.50. and in his first book
against Parmenianus, cap. 17. he shows that if the Donatists were punished
with death, they were justly punished, and in his 1. Tractate upon John, they
murder says he souls, and themselves are afflicted in body, they put men to
everlasting death, and yet they complain when themselves are put to suffer
temporal death.

Opta^^s in his third book, justifies Macharius, who had put some Heretics
to death, that he had done no more herein, then what Moses, Phineas, and Elias
had done before him.

Bernard in his 66. Sermon in Cantica, out of doubt (says he) it is better
they should be restrained by the sword of him who bears not the sword in
vain, then that they should be suffered to draw many others into their error,
for be is the Minister of God for wrath to every evil doer.

Calvin's judgment is well known, who procured the death of Michaell Servetus
for pertinacie in heresy, and defended his fact by a book written of that
Argument.

Beza also writ a book de Haereticis morte plectendis, that Heretics are to
be punished with death, Arelius likewise took the like course about the death
of Valentius Gentilis, and justified the Magistrates proceeding against him, in
a history written of that Argument.

Finally, you come to answer an objection, that it is no prejudice to the
Commonwealth if liberty of conscience were suffered to such as fear God
indeed, which you prove by the example of the Patriarchs and others.

But we readily grant you, liberty of conscience is to be granted to men that
fear God indeed, as knowing they will not persist in heresy, or turbulent
schism, when they are convinced in conscience of the sinfulness thereof.

But the question is whether an Heretic after once or twice admonition (and
so after conviction) or any other scandalous or heinous offender, may be
tolerated either in the Church without excommunication, or in the
Commonwealth, without such punishment as way preserve others, from dangerous
and damnable infection.

Thus much I thought needful to be spoken, for avoiding the grounds of your
Error.

I forbear adding reasons to justify the contrary, because you may find that
done to your hand, in a Treatise sent to some of the brethren late of Salem,
who doubted as you do.

The Lord Jesus lead you by a spirit of truth in all truth. JOHN COTTON.

FINIS.

