THE COURT OF ROME. Wherein is set forth the whole government thereof; all the
Officers belonging unto it, with the value of their Offices, as they are sold
by the Pope Also the Original, Creation and present condition of the
Cardinals: Together with the manner of the now Pope Innocent the tenth's
Election; Coronation, and riding in State to take possession of his Lateranense
Church. Besides many other remarkable matters most worthy to be known. And a
Direction for such as shall Travel to Rome, how they may with most ease, and
commodity view all those Rarities Curiosities, and antiquities, which are to
be seen there. Translated out of Italian into English By H. C. Gent.

London, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Anchor in the Lower walk of the New Exchange. 1654.

To the most worthily honored Sir Justinian Isham Knight and Baronet.
SIR,
HAving met by accident with this ensuing Treatise in Italian, and read it
over, I judged it, in respect of the rarity and curiosity of the matters
therein contained, so little known to our Nation, worth my labor to translate
it into English: Whereupon, having in the best sort my ability could extend
unto performed the same accordingly, and purposing to Publish it in print, the
powerful custom of Dedicating works of this kind to some worthy person, has
induced me thus to present it unto you, as well in regard of the particular
obligation, wherein I stand so deeply engaged unto you for your many noble
favors from time to time conferred on me; as of the general esteem is had of
your virtuous and generous inclination to grace and cherish all that may any
way conduce to the advancement of knowledge and good Arts. Be pleased then,
Sir, to receive in the same manner, as it is with all affection tendered unto
you by him, who, I cannot doubt but you are assured, is really

Your no less faithful, then humble servant HENRY COGAN.

The Table.
OF the sacred College of the Cardinals. p. 1. Of the Secretary of the sacred
College. p. 3. Of the National Clark of the sacred College. p. 4 Of the
caster up of accounts of the sacred College ibid. Of the Masters of the
Ceremonies to the Pope. ib. Of the Master of the sacred Palace p. 6. Of the
Popes Lord vestry-Keeper p. 7. Of the Popes Secretary, and under Secretaries.
ibid Of the Master of the Popes horse; and others of the said Court p. 9. Of
the Popes Secretaries of State p. 15 Of the Secretary of Brieves that go under
taxation p. 17 Of the Secretary of the sacred Brieves p. 18 Of the General of
the Popes Guard p. 19. Of the General of the Holy Church p. 20 Of the
Prefectship of Rome p. 24 Of the governor of the Castle St. Angelo. p. 25. Of
the General of the Popes Galleys. p. 26. Of the Popes Vicar. p. 27. Of the
chief Penitentiarie. p. 28. Of the Vicechancellor p. 30. Of the Chamberlain. p.
35 Of the Prefect of the Signature of Justice p. 37 Of the Prefect of the
Signature of grace. p. 39. Of the Prefect of the Brieves. p. 40. Of the Library
keeper. ibid Of the congregations of the Cardinals, and first of the Cong
regation of the holy Office. p. 41. Of the Congregation concerning the affairs
of Bishops and Regulars. p. 42. Of the Congregation of the Council. ibid Of
the Congregation of the Ecclesiastical immunitie. p. 43. Of the Congregation
of State. ibid Of the Congregation for the propagating of the faith. p. 44. Of
the Congregation of Rites. p. 45. Of the Congregation for waters. p. 46. Of the
Congregation for fountains and streets. ibid Of the Congregation for printing
of Books. p. 47 Of the Council for the Government of the State of the Holy
Church ibid Of the Congregation for the easing of the People, et de bono
Regimine p 49 Of the Congregation concerning the mint p. 50. Of the
Congregation for the examining of persons destined to Bishoprics. ibid Of the
congregation for consistoriall affairs. p. 51. Of the three Arch-priests which
are in the persons of Cardinals. p. 53. Of the Ruota. p. 54. Of the reverend
Chamber Apostolical. p 57. Of the Lord Governor of Rome. p. 59. Of the Lord
Treasurer General p. 60. Of the Lord Auditor of the Chamber. ibid Of the Lord
President of the Chamber. p. 62. Of the Advocate of the poor. ibid Of the
Advocate of the Exchecquer. ibid Of the Proctor of the Exchecquer. p. 63. Of
the Commissary of the chamber ibid Of the Marshall of Rome. ibid Of the Senator
of Rome. p. 64. Of the conservators of Rome. p. 65. Of the Masters of the
streets of Rome. p. 67. Of the Chamberlain of the Water-bank. p. 68. Of the
Referendaries both of the one and the other Signature. p. 69. Of the Governor
of the Borough. p. 71. Of the Datarie. p. 72. Of the Under-Dater. p. 73. Of
the Summist. p. 80. Of the participant Pronotaries. ibid Of the Consistoriall
Advocates. p. 81. Of the Prefect of the provision of corn. p. 83: Of the
General visitation of the prisons. p. 84 Of the Prefect of flesh and
white-meats. p. 85. Of the Judge of Confidences. p. 86. Of the Auditor of the
contradictions: ibid: Of the Apostolical Subdeacon. p. 87. Of the solemn
Benediction, which the Pope uses to give three times in the year. p. 89. Of
the solemn Benediction of the Agnus Dei by the Pope ibid Of the Benediction of
the Golden Rose, by the Pope. p. 92. Of the manner of the Canonization of a
Saint by the Pope. p. 95 Of the Popes washing of poor men's feet. p. 101: Of the
Cardinals, and their Original. p. 102. Of Deacons, and priests Cardinals. p.
105: Of Bishops Cardinals. p. 108: Of the Cardinals Titles. p. 110: Of the
creation of Cardinals. p. 114: Of those that are made Cardinals being absent
from Rome: p. 117. Of the order which is observed when a Cardinal dies. p.
127. Of the manner of the shutting and opening of a new Cardinals mouth: p.
130. Of the election of the Apostolical Legate de Latere. p. 132. Of the
election of Archbishops and Bishops. p. 134: Of the Arch-Bishors Pall, and the
tradition thereof. p. 141: Of the public Consistory: p. 146: Of the secret
Consistory: p. 151: Of the Conclave. p. 152: Of the vacant Sea of Rome, and the
manner of the election of the now Pope Innocent the tenth: p. 155: Of the
manner of the coronation of the said Pope Innocent. p. 169. Of the manner of
the said Pope Innocent's riding in state to take possession of his Lateranense
Church. p. 184: Of the sickness death and obsequies of the Pope p. 191.
A RELATION Of the Court of ROME.
Of the Sacred College of the Cardinals.
THe High Bishop has for his Collateralls Seventy Cardinals, that is, Six
Bishop-Cardinals, Fifty Priest-Cardinals, and Fourteen Deacon-Cardinals: This
number being determined by a Bull of Pope Sixtus Quintus, are all of them
togethe called the Sacred College of Cardinals; And amongst these Cardinals
there is always one, who is Chamberlain of the Sacred College; an Office
distinct from his Holiness Chamberlain of whom in its place shall be spoken:
That being granted for life, and this of the Sacred College but for one year.
The Cardinals which are resident in the Court, succeeding unto it by order of
seniority, have during the said year the charge of the revenues of the sacred
College; and at the end of his Office he gives to every Cardinal his portion,
which they that are absent do not enjoy longer then six months after they are
parted from Rome. Their eminent Lordships make a Secretary of the College, a
National Clerk, and a caster up of accounts. The Secretary is always an
Italian. The Clerk exercises his Office one year only, and so long, and no
more, do every one of the following Nations hold it in their turn, namely the
Germans, French, Spaniards, and the English; but the English do not enjoy it
at this day. All these have good and honorable Entertainment from the Palace,
and each of them has of the heirs of every Cardinal that dies five and
twenty ducats of the Chamber a piece, and as much of every new Cardinal.

Of the Secretary of the Sacred College.
THe Office of the Secretary is to enter into the Conclave, and write the
letters in the name of the Sacred College, which are subscribed by three
Cardinals, Heads of the Orders, that is, the first Bishop-Cardinall, the first
Priest-Cardinal; and the first Deacon-Cardinal; which letters are sealed with
their three seals. He is present and assists in the general congregations
which are made every morning at that time; and in the Congregations of the
Heads of the Orders, setting down all the Orders and Decrees which are made in
those Congregations. He keeps a Register also of all the resolutions, which
are taken in the secret Consistories, given unto him by the Cardinal
Chamberlain of the sacred College, in which consistory he officiates in a
long red habit down to the ground, and with an hood of the same color on his
shoulders, but at the extra omnes, he also goes out of the consistory.

Of the National Clerk of the Sacred College.
THe National Clerk is simply the Secretaries substitute, in whose absence he
is to supply his room, who also stands in the Consistory with the same habit
as the Secretary does.

Of the caster up of the accounts of the Sacred College.
THe Caster up of the accounts, is to keep good reckoning of the revenewes and
incomes of the Sacred College, and render an account thereof to the Cardinal
Chamberlain abovesaid.

Of the Popes Masters of the Ceremonies.
THe Pope has four Masters of the Ceremonies, whereof two are called
participants. These have good entertainment from the Apostolical Palace, and
the heyrs of every Cardinal that dies pays them fifty ducats of the
Chambers, and they have likewise an hundred and twelve Ducats of every
Cardinal that is newly created, so that their Office yields them seven hundred
Ducats yearly a piece: The others are called supernumerary, unto each of whom
is given by every new Cardinal twelve ducats of the Chamber; and of them the
most ancient only has intertainement from the Apostolical Palace:
nevertheless they are all four Masters of the Ceremonies to the Pope, and the
Sacred College, and have equal authority in ordayning the Pontifical
functions, advising the Lords Cardinals what they are to do, and commanding
every person. They all of them likewise are present in the Congregations of
Rites, and one alone in the Ceremonial Congregation, entering all of them into
the Conclave. When the Pope sends any Gardinall Legate de Latere, he puts
unto him one of those Masters, who are continually attired in Purple, after the
manner of the secret Grooms of the Chamber to his Holiness, amongst whom they
are numbered, but whilst they are in their habit, they do not give place unto
any other, but to the Master of the Chamber, and the Popes Cup Bearer.

Of the Master of the Sacred Palace.
THe Master of the Sacred Palace inhabits continually in the Palace of the
Vatican, with two followers. An Office that always belongs to the Fathers of
the Religion of St. Dominick, whose charge it is to oversee all the works that
are to be printed in Rome; of which after he has approved of them, he keeps a
copy; and when they are subscribed by the Lord U cegerent, his Reverend
Paternitie setts his hand also unto them, or one of his fellows, who are
Masters, and Fathers of quality, of the same Order. The said Master is present
also in the Congregation of the Judge, and has place in his Holiness Chapel
under the Lord Deacon, or the most ancient Auditor present, della Ruota is the
Exchecquer house in Rome.
Ruota. There is given him daily from his Holiness intertainment of his own
person, the Fathers his fellows, and diverse servants, together with a Coach,
and other commodities.

Of the Popes Lord Vestry-keeper.
THere lives also in the said Palace the Lord Vestry-keeper, the which charge
always belongs to the Fathers of the Order of the Augustines, who have the
care of the Popes Vestry, wherein is stuff of great value. He always serves
his Holiness at Mass whenever he celebrates, either pontifically or
privately; and it appertains unto him to provide the Wine, the Water, and the
Host, that are to be consecrated. When he is a titular Bishop, he has place
in the Chapel amongst the Bishops assistants and if he be not a Bishop, he
goes notwithstanding in the habit of a regular Prelate. He sits in the Chapel
above the Dean, and Auditor della Ruota, waiting upon the Popes Myter, who
gives to him daily great intertainment, in the very same manner, as he does to
the most reverend Master of the sacred Palace.

Of the Popes Secretary and under Secretaries.
THe Pope Keeps a noble and numerous Court, divided into diverse Classes; The
sirst is the Secretary, which is alway's the Cardinal Nephew, or Nephews, who
has many Secretaries under him; and this Cardinal writes, and subscribes the
letters made by his Holiness Order to all Princes, Nuncio's, and others. He
signs also the Pattents of many Governors, Podestates, provosts Marshalls: and
other officers of the State-Ecclesiastical: But the provisions of the
Goverments of Cities, and great Territories, Presidentships, Vicelegations, and
Legations of Provinces, and al dispatched by Brieve sub annulo Piscatoris: And
all those on whom these charges are conferred do take their oath before the
Lord Cardinal Chamberlain, in the presence of a Notary of the Chamber, and
swear on the Brieve it self; they that are absent do it by their Proctor.
All the Ambassadors of Princes, at their deparure from negotiating with the
Pope, give an account of their negotiation to the said Cardinal Nephew, and
the like do all the Ministers of Rome. The said Nephew uses to have the Title
of Superintendent General of the State Ecclesiastical, which his Holiness
gives to him by Brieve, and by Prieve also he gives him the Title of Secretary.

Of the Master of the Popes House, and others of the same Court.
THere is moreover the Master of the House, who is always a Praelate; (for you
must know, that the Pope never gives the title of Majordomo to any) as also the
Master of the Chamber; the Cupbearer, the Sewer; the chief Harbinger, the
Carver; the under-master of the Chamber; the under cupbearer; the under-Sewer;
and the under-Master of the House; together with secret Chamberlaines, of whom
the Pope declares seven or eight participant-chamberlaines, as seems good to
his Holiness. And one of these secret Chamberlaines is always secret
Treasurer, who bestows his Holiness Donations and Alms. There is besides an
other secret Chamberlain, that is Wardrobe-keeper, who has an
under-Wardrobe-keeper, and goes in purple. There are other Adjutants likewise.
Now it is to be noted, that the said Wardrobekeeper has not in his charge,
either hangings, beds, or other such like stuff, but only Jewels, Relics,
Gold, Silver, and other things of great value. They do also distribute daily
the blessed Agnus Dei's, which are made in the said Wardrobe. The Popes were wont
to make the Agnus Dei's every seven years, but Pope Clement the eighth in the
year 1600. made them many times, as also great store of Shrines, which he
caused to be distributed freely.

The entertainment of a secret Chamberlain amounts to a thousand crowns a
year, and he that is a participant-chamberlaine has eight or nine hundred
crowns more then those that are not participants, because they participate of
the rewards and donatives, which are given to the Popes Chamber, and of some
profits of the Apostolical Chancerie.

The same entertainment, or little less then these Chamberlaines, have the
secret-Chamberlaines, who help the Pope to officiate and serve him at Mass,
when he says it privately: One of them carries the Cross before his Holiness;
and when he goes on foot, another bears up the train of the gown. Pope
Clement the eighth always kept six secret chaplains, amongst whom was a
German, a Spaniard, a Frenchman, a Polander, and a Iapponese, who was attyred
after the manner of his country, but in purple color, all of them nobly borne.
His Holiness has for the Master of his Chamber the Lord Silvio Antoniani
Romano, who exercises also the charge of Secretary of the secret Brieves much
to his commendation, who for the goodness of his life, and eminency of
learning was created a Cardinal. Moreover his Holiness keeps a secret Clerk
of the private Chapel who has a good entertainment, and some perquisites;
and when the Pope goes to the Chapel pontifically, it belongs to the said
Chaplains to carry the triple Crown and the precious Miters, going before the
Cross in the same red habit, which the secret Chamberlaines wear.

There are also the Chaplains of the Guards and Palfreymen, to the end they
may hear Mass every morning, who are called common Chaplains.

There are secret Adjutants of the Chamber, who have half the entertainment
of the Chamberlaines aforesaid; and they also do participate of some fees and
perquisites, which do not appertain to the secret Chamberlaines.

There are besides them Chamberlaines of honor, all persons of quality, and
illustrious both for birth, and learning. Then are there the Chamberlaines
della Bussola; the chamberlaines extra muros; and the chamberlaines Scudiere;
every one of the which keeps the watch, and has his office distinct, saving
the chamberlaines of honor, who do not appear in the Palace, but when they
will; and by them the Popes use to send the Hatts to the new Cardinals.

There is a Sewer, and a Carver of the Sacred College, who has both of them
good entertainment and provision.

There is also a Sewer and Carver of strangers, and a Sewer for the poor, who
waits every morning on those poor, which eat in the Palace at his Holiness
charge; an institution introduced by Pope Clement the eight, who ordained, that
the Father Rector of the Penitentiaries of St. Peter of the Society of Jesus
should take care to bring in every morning twelve Pilgrims to eat in the
Palace, as is beforesaid. All the above mentioned Officers have good
entertainment, and provision, and are attyred in purple, according to their
quality, in a long habit down to the ground. Likewise there are two Physicians
for the Family, with good entertainment, and a purple habit, besides the
secret Chamberlain's Physician.

His Holiness keeps a Gentleman of quality with the title of Master of the
Stable, (for the Popes do not use to give the title of Master of the Horse) who
has good entertainment, provision, and enjoyes many perquisites. This same
alone, besides the Chamberlaines of honor of the Popes Court, goes with a cloak
and sword, and has under him many persons with honest provisions, whom he may
place and displace at his pleasure; and in the stable he has two hundred
Horses, with many Mules for Litters, and carriages. Clement the eight
introduced the conferring of the title of secret Chamberlain on Cavaliers of
the Cloak and Sword; and those same held that title only for honors sake,
without employing themselves in any thing of service. Pope Leo the eleventh
also gave this title of Master of the Horse to Signior Pompeo Frangipani, a
principal Roman Cavalier, and a soldier of great merit.

There are other Underofficers, which have the custody of the Popes furniture,
and Household Stuff; and these are to take care to see the rooms accommodated,
when there is a Consistory, a Signature of Grace, and a Congregation.

Then there are secret and public sweepers, who are apparelled in Purple,
with an under-coat to the calf of the leg, and were formerly the Popes
Coachmen, when he was a Cardinal; as also Palfreymen, which are always above
forty; for you must know, that every new Pope uses to take for his Palfrey
men, all the Deans of the Cardinals, and Ambassadors Palfreymen, that are in
Rome at the time of his Assumption: which custom is inviolably observed, and
they are attired in red, or white cloth, as they will themthemselves, but at
the Popes charge, with a purple cloak, and guilt sword. There are likewise
twelve Macebearers, and twelve Vergers, both of them vendible Offices, and each
one is worth six hundred crowns, or thereabouts, yielding them fifty crowns a
year a piece.

There are moreover a great number of lower Offices, which shall be noted in
the end of the present Relation.

You are to understand, that the Gate of the Palace stands always but half
open, and through it in that manner does every Cardinal, Ambassador, and other
person pass, that go to negotiate with his Holiness; but both the leaves of
the Gate are opened when the Pope himself passes thorough it, or any of the
Brothers, or Nephews of his Holiness who are then living.

Of the Popes Secretaries of State.
BUT the highest Officers are the Secretaries of State, who have great
entertainment from the Pope, and are attired in purple, and do altogether
dependon the Cardinal-Nephew aforesaid; and allthough they negotiate with the
Pope, yet they take their directions from the said Cardinal, and to his
Eminency they send their letters to be subscribed. These Secretaries have
distributed amongst them the Nuntiatures Provinces, and one of them is a
Secretary of the ciphers, which has but half the entertaintment of the other
Secretaries, who do all live in the Popes Palace, and each of their
entertainments is fifteen hundred crowns a year, besides the emoluments of
their Secretaries place.

Then are there Secretaries of secret Brieves, and of Brieves that go under
taxation, as shall be spoken of in his proper place. Also the Secretary of the
Council; the Secretary of Memorialls, who usually is the Master of the Popes
Chamber; and Secretary of the Congregations de bono regimine, and ex gravi, and
two, or three others which serve under each of them. Every one of these has,
besides emoluments, great entertainment from the Pope; and every one of his
Holinesses Officers are apparelled in purple, but distinctly according to the
place he holds; howbeit the secret Chamberlaines, and those of honor use to
wear an under, and upper Garment, the former of Tarzanello in the winter, and
of taffeta-sarcenet in the summer, and the other of serge, or say; both of them
in every season of purple color. The Secretaries also are apparelled either
with the purple habit of a Prelate, or conformably to the secret Chamberlaines,
as aforesaid; the rest are ordinarily clothed with woollen, light or heavy,
according to the season. Pope Clement the eight, in the holy year 1600 caused
all his Family to be apparelled in cloth, and this order was observed until
his death: and all the said year his Holiness kept no furniture in the rooms
where he usually abode; no more did the Cardinal Nephews, nor the other
Cardinals that lived in the Palace, which were Tarugi, Baronio, Mantua,
Bellarmino, Antoniano, and Deti.

Of the Secretaries of Brieves that go under Taxation.
THE Secretaries of the Brieves, that go under Taxation, are four and twenty,
and every Secretaries place is worth a thousand crowns, yielding between seven
or eight hundred crowns a a year; His Holiness declares one of these four and
twenty superior to the rest, who goes in the habit of a Referendarie, or
Domestique Prelate, is lodged in the Palace as an Officer thereof, and has
great entertainment. All the Brieves dispatched by this Secretary do pay,
except the Indulgences, ad tempus; and all the said Brieves are taxed by one of
the four and twenty Secretaries, it belonging to every one of them in his turn
to be over the Taxation, and the Originalls of these Brieves are reviewed by
the Cardinal Prefect of the Brieves, of which Office shall be spoken in its
place: Then are the Brieves sealed with the Fishers Ring, and subscribed by
that Secretary who lives in the Palace.

Of the Secretary of the secret Brieves.
THe Secretary of the secret Brieves is ordered to make them, either by the
Cardinal Nephew, or by one of the Secretaries of State; the Originals whereof
are seen by no man, nor subscribed by the Cardinal Prefect of the Brieves, for
he has no authority over this charge: And after the said Brieves are sealed
with the seal of the principal Secretary, they are examined with the
Originalls, and then signed by him. One of these Popes Brieves is allwaies
accompanied with a letter of the Cardinal Nephew aforesaid. There is great care
taken of the Original of those Brieves, and upon the death of the Pope are
carried into the Castle Saint Angelo; whither also the Cardinal Nephew, or
Nephews Secretaries, do carry all the Registers of the businesses which have
passed thorough their hands; and likewise all the letters that came in the time
of their Administration.

Of the General of the Popes Guards.
THere is also in the Palace the Genenerall of the Guards, declared so by his
Holiness Brieve, with two hundred crowns a month entertainment, and he has
under him a Lieutenant, who between money, and entertainment in the Palace,
has as good as four score crowns a month, paid him by the reverend Chamber;
which Lieutenant is made by his Holiness Brieve. In the said Guard are
ordinarily two Troops of light Horse, of fifty in a Troop, whereof the
Captains, and Cornets are made by his Holiness Brieve; A company of three
hundred Switzers, with a Captain and Officers of the same Nation, and twelve
demy-Launces, which are all Captains Reformadoes, having each of them fifteen
crowns a month a piece. All the Captains, and Officers of the soldiers, as
well horse, as foot, are paid after the manner of the Wars; besides the which
they have many vailes, and perquisites, still accrewing unto them in the
Apostolical Palace, where there is continually a guard kept, of fifty
Switzers, twelve light horse, and four demi Lances, divided into two bodies.

Of the General of the holy Church.
THE General of the holy Church is likewise made by his Holiness Brieve, and
his staff, and an Oath is given him privately in the Chamber: In time of peace
his pay is a thousand crowns a month, and in the time of War three thousand.
His authority, and jurisdictions are very great, for five hundred Officers hold
their places of him by Patent; which are the Master of the Camp of the
Provinces, the Sergeant Majors thereof, the Collateral General, the
Paymaster, the Captains of horse, the the Captains of the Militia, the
Colonels of Ancona, of Spoleto, and of the Mount San Giovanni; the Colonel of
the little Regiment of Corsi, the Captains of the Corsi, the Collateral, and
paymaster of the same; the Collateral, and Paymaster of Ferrara, with the
Captains of the horse; the Captain of the Halberdiers, the Captain of
Bergantino, and all the other Captains of the souldierie of that Garrison, and
State; as also the Captain of the horse of Bologna; the Collateral, and
Paymaster of Avignion, and the Captains of the horse and foot which are in
that Regiment; many Captains of Forts, and all the Captains of the sconces,
and strong holds, which are on the Sea side, and upon the consines: There are
likewise two Generals of the horse, who hold of him by Patent. He has
authority to command over the General of Ferrara, and over the General of
Avignion; both which Generals have each of them two hundred crowns a month
apiece, besides the entertainment of some demy-launces.

He has also under him a Lieutenant-Generall, with three thousand crowns a
years entertainment; and a Sergeant Major General, with five hundred crowns a
years entertainment; but these four last places are granted by his Holiness
Brieve; who likewise makes the General of the Artillery, with an hundred
crowns a months entertainment. No soldier can be imprisoned without a License
under the Generals hand, who has supreme authority over them. The Soldiers
of the Bands or Battagliaes, (whether you will, which are enrolled throughout
the whole state of the holy Church) are fourscore thousand foot, and three
thousand and five hundred horse: And none of these soldiers have any pay, but
only enjoy diverse exemptions, and privileges, of wearing arms, and others:
so that his Holiness in time of need, may serve himself of them without
giving impediment to the husbandman in manuring the ground for the mantenance
of the City with provision of victual: And all these stand ready armed upon
any sudden warning, as in the time of War, being continually disciplined by
their Officers, whereby they become very good Soldiers.

The before-named Generals of the horse, have each of them an hundred crowns a
month entertainment; the Commissaries of the horse, which are two, have fifty
crowns a month apiece; the seven Marshalls of the Camp of the Provinces, fifty
crowns a month apiece; the seven Sergeants Majors of the Provinces have each of
them five and twenty crowns a month; the Collateral General seventy crowns a
month; the Captains of the bands, 20 crowns a month apiece, with their
howsrent defrayed, and other perquisites; the Colonells beforenamed thirty
crowns a month apiece. The Colonel of the Corsi, with the Collateral,
Paymaster, Captains, Officers, and soldiers thereof, are paid after the manner
of War: And these are thoroughout all the holy Church employed againgst the
Banditi, and sometimes in the Popes Galleys.

It is also necessary to know, that Pope Clement the eight by the means of
Signior Mario Farnese, at that time General of the Forces of Ferrara, made in
that fortress an Armory, replenished with all kind of arms, for the arming of
five and twenty thousand foot; and another Armory in Bologna, for the arming of
ten thousand: And in the Papacy of Paul the fifth, the same Don Mario
introduced into Tivoli, a City distant sixteen miles from Rome, excellent
workmen for the making of all sorts of arms of War; and of those arms framed
in Tivoli, he made an Armory in Castle St. Angelo for the arming of twelve
thousand foot; and another Armory for the arming of five thousand; and in the
Vatican Palace two like Armories; as also one in Ancona, and one in Ravenna. He
likewise caused fourscore pieces of great Ordnance to be cast. By this it may
be seen how great the forces of the Pope are, who has arms to arm an hundred
thousand men, and all his Vassalls are apt for the Wars, being naturally
addicted thereunto. The state of the Holy Church abounds with Captains, and men
of command; and in the Castle Saint Angelo are millions of ready coin in Gold,
besides a million and an half in Jewels.

Of the prefectship of Rome.
THE Prefectship of Rome, a most noble and antientdignity, was constituted with
much authority by the Roman Emperors, and always since continued by the high
Bishops; being enjoyed by some of the chiefest Families, amongst the which it
was a long time in the noble Families of the Orsini, and Rovere: After the
death of Francesco Maria, the last Duke of Urbin, it was granted by Urban the
eight to Don Taddeo Barberino, and his heirs to the third generation. It has
many and diverse prerogatives, and it is the office of him, that possesses it,
to carry immediately before the Emperors in their solemn riding the Imperial
sword.

Of the Governor of the Castle Saint Angelo.
THe Pope makes the Governor of the Castle Saint Angelo by his Brieve, with
five hundred crowns a month entertainment; and he has under him a Deputy
Governor of his own making, who assists in the charge of the Castle, with fifty
crowns a months entertainment, and as much in perquisites. There is also a
Proveditor, who holds his Office by Patent from the Governor, and it yields him
four hundred crowns a year; Another has the care of the Armory, with the
entertainment of twenty crowns a month, having under him many young fellows,
paid by the Chamber. Then there are two hundred soldiers, with their Captain,
Ensign, Sergeants, and Corporalls: which are paid according to the manner of
the Wars: all the Officers, together with the Master-Gunner, are made by the
Governor; but but the Corporalls, soldiers, and Chaplains, are at the
disposing of the Deputy Governor, whose charge it is to inroll the adjutants of
the Castle, which are ordinarily five hundred, and do enjoy the privilege of
wearing arms.

Of the General of the Popes Galleys.
THE General of the Galleys is made by the Pope's Brieve, and takes his usual
oath, as in like manner do all the great Officers, before the Lord Treasurer
General, with the entertainment of three hundred crowns a month, and pay for
twelve demy-Launces. The General makes a Lieutenant by his Patent, who has an
hundred crowns a month entertainment, and pay for four demy-launces. All the
Captains of the Galleys, the Captains of the foot, and the Ensigns, hold their
places by the Generals Patent, with the usual pay; as also the chief Master,
the Auditor, and Notarie: But the Proveditor, the Paymaster, the Patron of the
Galley, the Munition-Master, and the Apothecary, are made by the Lord Treasurer
Generals Patent: Every other person, as the Chaplains, Officers, soldiers,
Barbers, Mariners, Masters, Masters-mates, Pilots, and Counselors, depend
immediately on the General; who has not power de jure, to free men from the
chain, which is used to be done by a Council of War, but the General does it
sometimes de facto.

Of the Popes Vicar.
NOw we will speak of the Offices which are in the persons of the Cardinals,
beginning with the Popes Vicar, which Office is most ancient, having been a
long time out of the sacred College of of the Cardinals, and exercised by
such as were but simply Bishops; but Pius the fourth brought that dignity to
the said College, having declared Cardinal Jacomo Savelli for his Vicar; whose
jurisdiction is over the Priests, and Regulars inhabiting in Rome, as also over
the companies of Laymen, Hospitalls, pious places, Jews, and Curtezans, within
the precincts thereof. The Cardinall-Vicar has for his entertainment an
hundred crowns a month, paid him by the reverend Chamber. This Office has
four Notaries, every one of the which exercises his Office apart, with eight
or nine Clerks under him; It has likewise two Lieutenants, the one for civil,
who is commonly a Referendary Prelate, and the other for criminal causes; and
also a Vicegerent, a Prelate too; but for some years past, he still has been a
Titular Bishop, to the end he may perform all Episcopal functions in Rome: and
he has the superintendance, or particular care of the Monasteries of Nuns;
he is present likewise with the other Officers in the Congregations, which are
made before the most eminent Cardinal-Vicar, for matters, and causes of that
Tribunal; and has under him a Provost Marshall, with good store of sergeants.

Of the chief Penitentiarie
IN the time of Saint Cyprian, and of Cornelius the Pope, two hundred years
after Christ our Lord, many Christians having sacrificed to Idols, there was
great contending, wehther the relapsers should be admitted to reconciliation,
whereupon sprung the schism made by Novatianus; finally the Major part
prevailed, that they should be accepted: But because some had sinned less,
then others, there were Priests deputed, which pro modo culpae admissam
poenitentiam indulgent: From whence grew the use of Penitentiaries, and all
that intervenes in those cases: Whereupon it was constituted, that in each of
the Patriarchall Churches of Rome, there should be two Priests, who should have
the care of imposing penance according to the penitential Canons, which are
most ancient, as the Bibliothecarie makes mention; and this is all that is
found written of it. Now it is likely, that those Priests constituted in the
said Churches, had a head, with whom they were to confer, which upon occasion
communicated important cases to the Pope; and this was the Penitentiary, who in
truth ought to be very ancient: but the most ancient mention that P. Panvino
has of it, is in that of Gregory the tenth in capit. ubi periculum.

The charge of the chief Penitentiarie is exercised at this day by a most
eminent Cardinal, conferred on him by his Holiness, and yields him about eight
thousand crowns a year. He has under him a Prelate with the title of the
Regent of the Penitentiaria; whose jurisdiction is over the cases referred to
his Holiness, granting absolutions gratis ubique, directed to approved
confessors in Parliament, sealed with the usual seal of the Penitentiaria.

The Cardinal Penitentiarie sits with much solemnity, sometimes in one, and
sometimes in another of the three Cathedral Churches, that is of Saint John de
Lateran, of Saint Peter in the Vatican, and of Santa Maria Maggiore, upon a
seat three or four degrees high, in form of a Tribunal, with a staff of
Office in his hand, to hear the confessions of cases reserved: he makes his
Congregation also with the intervening of his regent, of the Prelate that keeps
the Seal, and two or three Divines, which which are ordinarily Jesuits, as
also some one Canonist. He has likewise under him certain Offices, that are
vendible, and his illustrious Lordship has part of the disposing of them.

Of the Vicechancellor.
THE Chancellors wrote all that which anciently occurred to the Pope to write,
both when he gave answer to doubts of faith, which were demanded of him by the
Provinces, and Bishops; as also concerning any other thing: And the chiefest
person of the Popes spiritual Dominion had that authority, which at this day
the Secretaries of the Brieves, and the Secretaries ab intimis have; and
moreover the same, which in the Kingdom of France, and in many other States,
the Chancellor has Lucas de Penna, reciting a certain Epistle of Saint
Isidores, sets down what the authority of this Office is. He had under him
twelve, which were called Schrinerari, and one Protoschrinerario; all which
assisted him in sustaining the weight of his charge, according as he directed
them.

The most ancient mention, which is found of this Office is in Saint Jerome, in
an Epistle of Monarchy ad Gerontiam, who was Chancellor.

This Office until Gregory the eight was always given to Bishops, or
Cardinals; and about the year 1100. the Bishop-Cardinal of Saint Rufina was
ever Chancellor, for so had Benedict the eight granted it by dispensation. It
fell from that custom in the year 1071. under Alexander the second, after
whose time it was always in the hands of Priests, or Deacon-Cardinals. Gregory
the eight, who had this Office, being made Pope, began to give it out of the
College of Cardinals, and conferred it on a Lateranense Canon, who, because
he was no Cardinal, entitled himself Cancellarij vicem Agens. The giving that
Office out of the sacred College continued an hundred years; and the Ministers
vicem agentes, were called Vicechancellors, as a more commodious word.

This Office under Boniface the eight, returned into the sacred College of
Cardinals, and was given to Ricardo Pelroni, a Nobleman of Siena, who being
made a Cardinal, never remembering the ancient institution, continued
Vice Chancellor, and so thorough heedlesnesse it came to be the name of the
Office.

He that had this Office was called Chancellor or Bibliothecarie, which is
as much in effect, because he was likewise Prefect of the Library. In the time
that the Emperor nominated the Pope, the Master of the Rolls called himself
Archicancellarius Imperij pro Italia, and Apostolicae Sedis Bibliothecarius,
vel Cancellarius, seu Archicancellarius, and they that were in Rome said; Datum
Romae per manum N. Diaconi Cardinalis Vicecancell. Archiepiscopi Colonien.
Apostolicae Sedis Bibliothecarij, seu Cancellarij: whence it is to be noted,
that the date was put down by the said Chancellor.

Nor was the Office of the Datarie distinct from the Chancellor; which
distinction was established at Avignion, and therefore it is to be considered,
that the Datarie in his date said not, per manum B. but Simpliciter.

An eminent Cardinal exercises the charge of Vicechancellor, and it yields
him between fifteen and sixteen thousand crowns a year; whose jurisdiction
is over the dispatches of Apostolical letters concerning all matters, whereof
the supplications are signed, except those which are dispatched by Brieve sub
Annulo Piscatoris: And in his Palace three times a week, that is, Tuesday,
Thursday, and Sunday, do the Officers of the Chancery Apostolical assemble
together; which are the Regent, and the Abbreviators de Parco magiore, being
twelve Prelates besides the Regent; and who are all attyred in the purple habit
of a Prelate, and their Offices are sold, the Regentship for two and twenty
thousand crowns, and every Abbreviator for eleven or twelve thousand crowns;
their money yielding them between eight and ten in the hundred: and six of the
Abbreviators Offices, together with that of the Regent are at the disposing of
the Cardinal Vicechancellor. These thirteen Prelates have place in his
Holiness Chapel, but the Regent never goes thither in respect of precedencie
with other Prelates. They are also Refendaries, both of the one and the other
Signature; and the Regent moreover has power to commit the causes of Appeals
in Rome, which he committs to the Auditors of the Ruota, and to the
Referendaries, distributing them by order, so that every one may have a part in
them.

The Office of the Abbreviators, is to make the Originalls of the Bulls upon
the supplications already signed by his Holiness, and to review the Bulls
after they are fair written in parchment. The Abbreviators de Parco minore,
the Clerks, and other Officers, which are there, who have bought their places,
and whose profit is founded on the emoluments of such dispatches, and annates,
assist in the taxing, reviewing, and signing the Bulls; receiving their fee of
the sum taxed, which is paid by him that dispatcheth the Bulls. Furthermore,
the Cardinal Vicechancellor is he, that in the secret Consistoreis take the
collatio^s of the Cardinals tithes, and the declarations of promotions, and
collations of Bishoppricks, which the Pope makes pro tempore, as also of
consistoriall Abbeys, giving forth the scedules of such provisions.

Of the Chamherlaine.
THe Head of the Deacons, which had the care of the revenues, was the
Archdeacon, who was the Cardinal, and his dignity, that was most ample,
continued to the year 1100. at which time in regard of the too much greatness
thereof, (for many of them bearded the Popes, and with the power that they had,
made their way to the Papacy) that dignity was taken away, and in stead
thereof another instituted, called Chamberlain, which was conferred on a
Cardinal, to whom Coadjutors were given, which were styled Clerks of the
Chamber Apostolical, whose Office from the institution thereof is that of the
Chamberlain: Now there was added unto it the Treasurer, for a difference which
the Popes would have between it and the Chamberlain; and afterward for the
same respect the President was also added.

The Cardinal Chamberlaines place yields him, one year with another, between
twelve and fourteen thousand crowns, and his jurisdiction is to take
Cognizance of all the causes, which appertain to the Chamber Apostolical, and
the Clerks thereof, of whom I will speak in its place jointly, and of some of
them likewise severally. He sits in the Chamber, when he is not kept from
thence by the Consistories, and the most part of the dispatches there pass
under his name, although they be discussed, and subscribed by the Clerk. Now
you must know, that in the Chamber Apostolical the Cardinal Chamberlain, and
all the other Prelates, sit with their purple Pontifical Coape Rochett; and
the other Officers, which assist also in the said Chamber, with other habits
different from the ordinary.

Moreover the Chamberlain is Judge of the Appeals from the sentences given by
the Masters of the streets, of whom shall be spoken in due time. He takes
cognizance of the causes concerning Buildings, Bridges, Streets, and other
things. During the vacancie of the Sea, he abides in the Palace in the Popes
Lodging; goes up and down Rome with a guard of Switzers, which always waits
upon his person, and coins money with his arms stamped thereupon. It is his
care to see the Conclave made which he gives, after the Pope is elected, to
whomsoever his Eminence pleases. He he keeps one key also of the Treasury
that is in Castile, Saint Angelo; the Cardinal Deacon keeps another, and his
Holiness a third.

Of the Prefect of the Signature of Justice
THe Charge of the Prefect of the Signature of Justice is exercised by an
eminent Cardinal, who has an hundred ducats a month entertainment, and his
jurisdiction is the References of all the supplications, and commissions of
causes, which are delegated for justice. And every Thursday, except it be in
the vacation time, in his Eminencies own Palace is the Signature of Justice
held for those Commissioners, and References, concerning the which there is
contention between parties. There are Officiating in it, twelve voting
Prelates, the ancientest Referendaries, together with the Auditor della Ruota,
and the Cardinal Vicars Lieutenant Civil, who are there only to defend the
jurisdiction of their Courts, and have no vote.

Now because many of the causes, which are so delegated, are some of them
dispatched by Letters subscribed by the Cardinal Prefect, and others by
Breive, therefore over this are two Officers, the one called the Prefect of the
Originalls of the Brieves, who having made the Originals, consignes them to the
other Officer, called the Master of the Brieves, and he according to the
Originals given to him, and subscribed by the former, makes the Brieves, which
he afterward consignes to the Secretary of the Brieves that are under
taxation, to the end he may cause them to be sealed. The first Office is worth
twelve thousand crowns, the second thirteen hundred; and the money both of
the one, and the other, yields between nine and ten in the hundred.

There is also another Officer, called the Revisor of the Commissions of the
Signature of Justice, and all those three which have those Offices, are attyred
in Purple like unto the Popes Chamberlaines.

Of the Prefect of the Signature of Grace.
THe Office of the Prefect of the Signature of Grace is awaies in the person of
a Cardinal, who has an hundred ducats of the Chamber a month
intertainement; and his Office and Jurisdiction is principally to assist at the
Signature of Grace, which is made before the Pope; and to seal every
supplication, and grace passes therein, where also the twelve voting Prelates
are present, which usually are the same that vote in the Signature of Justice.

There are likewise who Officiate, the Cardinal Prelate of the Signature of
justice, the Cardinal Vicar, the Cardinal Prefect of the Brieves, the Lord
Datarie, and a more or less number of Cardinals, according as his Holiness
has been pleased to depute them; but they are never fewer then twelve:
Moreover, there are intervening at the said Signature, the Lord Auditor of the
Chamber, his Lieutenant Civil, the Lord Treasurer General, an Auditor della
Ruota, the Cardinal Vicars Lieutenant Civil, a participant Protonotarie, a
Clerk of the Chamber, an Abbreviator de Parco Maggiore, together with the Lord
Regent of the Chancery, and every one of these are present there to defend the
jurisdiction of his Office. The said Signature is held once a week before his
Holiness, upon Tuesday or Sunday, if it be not vacation time.

Of the Prefect of the Brieves.
THere is the Cardinal Prefect of the Brieves, who has the entertainment of
an hundred Crowns of the Chamber a month, and his care is to review and sign
all the Originalls of the Breives, which are under taxation.

Of the Library Keeper.
THere is the Cardinal Library Keeper, who has an hundred Ducats of the
Chamber a month intertainement; and his charge is, to oversee the Printing,
and the Vatican Library, as also those men which work in it, where classick
works in the Original tongue are likewise printed.

Of the Congregations of Cardinals, and first of the Congregation of the Holy
Office.
THere are many, and diverse Congregations of Cardinals, whereof the
Congregation of the holy Office is one, which assembles twice a week; on
Wednesday in the Convent of the Dominicant alla Minerua; and on Thursday before
the Pope, concerning causes, and matters of the Inquisition, and other Heresy;
where many Cardinals intervene, at the least twelve, or more, as are by his
Holiness deputed; together with a good number of Prelates, and other Divines,
Religious Orders, all of them with the title of Consultors of the Holy Office;
the Seal whereof is kept by an eminent Cardinal; who has a Palace, with a
prison, and many Officers, and Ministers; amongst whom is the Commissarie,
which Office always belongs to the Fathers of the Order of Saint Dominick; and
the Assessors, a Prelate, or one of his Holiness Chamberlaines of honor, whose
care it is to report the causes in the Congregations.

Of the Congregation concerning the Affairs of Bishops, and Regulars.
THere is the Congregation concerning the affairs of Bishops, and Regulars;
whose jurisdiction is over the differences which arise between Bishops and
their subjects; and also amongst Regulars; and likewise in providing for the
occurrences of Bishops, which have need of consultation. The head thereof is an
Eminent Cardinal, in whose house it is held every week upon Friday.

Of the Congregation of the Council.
THere is the Congregation of the Council, whose jurisdiction is to interpret
the Text of the Sacred Council of Trent. It is held in the house of the oldest
Cardinal, who is Head thereof, but another Eminent Cardinal keeps the Seal.
And it is held once every week, either on Sunday, or three days ad libitum of
the Cardinall-Head.

Of the Congregation of the Ecclesiastical Immunitie.
FOr that delinquents in many, and sundry causes enjoyed not the
Ecclesiastical immunitie; and because the judgment thereabout was through the
diversity, and mixture of offenses oftentimes rendered very doubtful, Pope
Vrbane the eight instituted and erected the Sacred Congregation of the
Ecclesiastical Immunitie which uses to be held on Tuesdayes in the ancientest
Cardinals house. Many Cardinals are there present, as also an Auditor della
Ruota, a Clerk of the Chamber, a voter of the Signature, and the Secretary,
that usually is a Referendarie, both of the one and of the other Signature,
together with the Cardinal Prefect thereof, who keeps the Seal, and has the
entertainment of a thousand crowns a year from the Cardinal.

Of the Congregation of State.
THe Congregation of State uses to be held sometimes before his Holiness, and
sometimes before the Cardinal Nephew of the Pope living, and therein do
usually sit all the Cardinals, which have been Apostolical Nuntions, together
with his Holiness Secretary of State.

Of the Congregation for the propagating of the Faith.
THe Congregation abovesaid was erected by Gregory the fifteenth for the
finding out of all ways, and means of propagating the Catholic Faith in all
parts of the world; and of what was most conducing to the utility of a
business of that importance. It uses to be held once a month before the Pope
on a monday, and oftentimes in the Palace of the College, surnamed de
propaganda fide. In it do many Cardinals sit, as also an Apostolical
Pronotarie, his Holiness Secretary of State, the Judge, who usually is a
Referendary both of one and the other Signature, the Assessor of the holy
Office; and the Secretary of the same Congregation. There is now a Palace
building, of no ordinary greatness, in the Piatza of the most holy Trinity de
Monti, for the receiving all those which being converted to the Catholic
Faith, come to visit the holy place of Rome; as also of many poor Bishops and
Priests; who are all supplied with things necessary for their diet, and
lodging: It maintains a Printing House for all sorts of strange Languages,
where continually are printed Missalls, Breviaries, and other kind of books
appertaining to the Catholic Faith, which are sent into those parts where
there is need of them. Cardinal Antonio Barberino is at the present Prefect of
this Congregation.

Of the Congregation of Rites.
THere is the Congregation of Rite, whose jurisdiction is about the differences
arising concerning Rites, Ceremonies, Precedencies, Canoniziations of Saints,
and the like; whereof the Antimtest Cardinal of the deputed is Head; and in
his House the Congregation is also held ordinarily once a month, and oftener if
need be; it belonging to the Cardinall-Head to intimate it, as it does likewise
to all the other Cardinals, who are Heads of Congregations.

Of the Congregation for Water.
THere is the Congregation for Water, wherein are handled matters concerning
River, Brooks, Bridges, and the like; and a Cardinal is Head thereof, in
whose House the Congregation is held, only at such times as there is need,
wherefore there is no set day for it.

Of the Congregation for Fountains and the Streets.
THere is also a Congregation concerning Fountains, and the Streets, of which
the Cardinal Chamberlain is Head; but the Congregation is held in the Senior
Cardinals house, and has no set day for meeting. The business of it is
concerning the Aquaeducts which bring water to Rome, and the manner of
distributing it over the City; as also how the streets may be made more
commodious and enlarged.

Of the Congregations for Printing of Books.
THere is the Congregation for the correcting, and Printing of Books, whereof
a Cardinal is Head, in whose house it is held, but they seldom meet, and
therefore there is no set time for it.

Of the Council for the Government of the State of the Holy Church.
THere is the Council wherein the Government of the whole State of the Holy
Church is managed, and the Head of it is the Cardinal Nephew to the Pope pro
tempore, in whose lodging in the Palace it is held twice in a week, upon
Frydayes and Tuesdayes, whereat are five or six Cardinals, seven or eight
Prelates, and a Secretary, who is always a Prelate, and a great confident of
the Cardinal-Nephews. In the said Council is the whole government of the
State of the Church handled; for the Vice-Legates, Prefects, Governors,
Podestaes, and other Officers, give an account to the Council at Rome, of all
the important causes which happen in their Governments; and the Council
determines by Decree what shall be done in those cases, whereupon the
Secretary draws up the Letters of Order, and the Cardinal Head subscribes
them. Amongst the Prelates, which assist in the Council, are the Provinces
divided, and they afterward read the business of their Provinces in the
Council. But the Legation of Avignion, the Government of Benevento in the
Kingdom of Naples, of the City of Ceneda in the State of Venice, are not
submitted to the Council at Rome, but they who govern in those places are
free Masters of them; neither is the Government of the State of Fermo, and
Spoleto subject thereunto. The Prelates of the said Council have three parts
of the Palace, and a thousand crowns a year a piece in perquisites: the
Secretary has two thousand.

Of the Congregations for the easing of the People, and de bono Regimine.
THere are the Congregations for the easing of the people, and de bono
Regimine, whereof the Popes Cardinal Nephew pro tempore is the Head; unto them
have the Comminaltie recourse for the easing of their grievances, wherewithal
they are oppressed: they are held on the Saturday in the very same rooms,
where the Council uses to sit; the Congregation de bono Regimine in one, and
that for the easing of the people in another, both of them in their turns,
with the intervening therein of five or six Cardinals, and seven or eight
Prelates, with one Secretary being always present, and all of them ever the
same in the two Congregations.

All the Letters and Orders proceeding from them, are Subscribed by the Popes
Cardinal Nephew; and the Prelates have the same emolument, which those of the
Council have; every one of the said congregations, with the Secretary thereof,
go attyred in purple, and carry the title of his Holiness servants.

Of the Congregation concerning the Mint.
THere is the Congregation for the Mint, in which all matters are handled that
concern the coining of money, and all other moneys of other jurisdictions, to
the end they may be spent in the State of the Church. In it are four
Cardinals, and four Chamberlaines: The head of it is a Cardinal, in whose
house the Congregation is always held, when there is occasion for it.

Of the Congregation for the examining of persons destined to Bishoprics.
THere is a Congregation for the examining of new Bishops, which is held before
his Holiness, and it consists of nine or ten Cardinals, some Prelates, and
others, Fathers of certain Orders of Religion; wherein are examined all such
persons as are to be promoted to Bishoprics, for the Churches only of Italy.
The party that is to be examined remains always kneeling on a cushion before
the Pope, and every one of the Congregation has power to examine him: after he
is examined, and approved of, he is written down in a book, which the
Secretary of the Congregation keeps. A Bishop that is once examined, if he
changes his Church, goes not again to examination, one time only sufficing
for it: But if a Bishop, that was never examined, be promoted to another
Church, he must go to examination: The Cardinals alone are exempted from
this examining. And this Congregation was instituted by Pope Clement the eight,
who used to examine those persons himself, which made profession of the Law,
but the professors of Divinity were examined by Cardinal Bellarmine.

Of the Congregation for Consistoriall Affairs.
THere is a Congregation concerning Consistoriall matters, whereof the chief
Cardinal Deacon pro tempore is the Head. It is held very seldom, because
there are very few particularmatters to be handled in it, but such as are, his
Holiness appoints a day for them; and they use to be resignations of
Bishoprics, the interests of taxations of the Church, of Consistoriall Abbeys,
and such like. This Congregation is held in the house of the Cardinal Head.

In every one of the Congregations before named many Cardinals do assist, and
particularly in that of Bishops, and Regulars, are four and twenty: every
Congregation has its particular Secretary, who draws up the Letters,
according to the Decrees which are established in full Congregation, and every
Cardinall-Head subscribes the letters of his own Congregation, which are
afterward sealed by each Secretary, with the Seal of that Cardinal who has
subscribed them; and the Register of them remains in the hands of each
several Secretary. It is to be noted, that whilst there is a Consistory, no
Congregation is ever held; and if any one be intimated, and the Pope holds a
Consistory, they leave the Congregation and go to the Consistory; which is
always held every week, either on Monday, Wednesday, or Friday: And that
Congregation which was entitled before, is usually held after dinner the same
day, for the Consistory is ever held betimes in the morning.

Of the three Archpriesthoods which are in the persons of Cardinals.
THere are also in the persons of some Cardinals, three Archpriesthoods of the
three chief Churches of Rome; that is, of Saint Peter in the Vatican, and of
Santa Maria Magiore: All three are esteemed great dignities; and every one of
these Cardinals deputes a Vicar for his Church, and assigns them such
emoluments for their persons as seem good to them, which commonly is the profit
of a commons place of that Church. These three Archpriests have the power of
conferring, each of them in his Church, all the Benefices, Livings,
Chaplaineships, and others, that fall void therein. The Archpriest of Saint
John de Lateran administro Justice, both in criminal and civil causes, to all
those persons which inhabit above that Church, for a certain extent, according
to the jurisdiction thereof, and in the holy year every Archpriest goes
pontifically to his Church, accompanied with a great train of horses, to open
the holy Gate; and to that of Saint Paul the Cardinal Deacon goes: And the
very same order is kept in shuting the holy Gate; but the holy Gate of Saint
Peter's is not opened nor shut by the Cardinal Archpriest, for that function is
performed by the Pope himself.

In which Church the Fathers of the Society of Jesus are Penitentiaries; in
that of Saint John de Lateran the Fathers of the order of Saint Francis are
penitentiaries; and in that of Santa Maria Magiore are the Fathers of the order
of Saint Dominick Penitentiaries: In each of these places is a Penitentiarie,
with good lodgings and commodious, where the said Fathers Penitentiaries do
continually reside, hearing confessions daily in their Churches; and amongst
them are diverse Fathers, which confess in diverse Languages, yea even in the
Oriental, and one of them for each several place is Rector of the
Penitentiaries.

Of the Ruota.
AFter those Offices, and Magistrates, in the person of the Cardinals,
follows the Ruota, which has twelve Prelates, whereof there is a Germane, a
Frenchman, two Spaniards, and eight Italians, that is, a Bologresse, a
Ferraese, a Venetian, a Toscan, a Milanese, and three Romans. Every Auditor
has four Notaries, and they assemble in the Apostolical Palace twice a
week, unless it be Vacation time, namely on Monday, and Friday. The
jurisdiction of it is the beneficial causes, both of the Catholic Provinces,
as of those that are in Schism, and as well of Rome, as of the State
Ecclesiastical, most of all in terms of appeals. This Court gives over
sitting the first week of July, and the last Ruota his Holiness makes the
Auditors a great banquet in his own Apostolical Palace, where he gives to
every Auditor an hundred Ducats of the Chamber, and to the Deacon two hundred;
and they eat in the very same room where they assemble together when they
hold the Ruota.

This goodly custom was instituted by Pope Clement the eight, for that his
Holiness had been Auditor of the Ruota, being made so by Pope Pius Quintus of
happy memory. The first of October the Ruota opens, and the first Ruota
belonging to the two last Auditors, who go Pontifically on their Mules, with a
great train of horse, and alight at the place where the Ruota is held: howbeit
every Auditor rides alone by himself. Now it is to be noted, that in this
riding of theirs, the Prelate Auditor goes formest, and all these who accompany
him come behind, for a difference between the ryding and the Lords Cardinals,
before whom their train and attendants do always ride, and their Eminencies
follow after them. The Office of every Auditor of the Ruota yields him a
thousand crowns a year; and in the first Ruota the lowest Auditor makes an
Oration. The Popes are wont to give unto those Auditors, for a recompense of
the great pains they take, and because they are prohibited from receiving any
fees for the sentences they pronounce, good Ecclesiastical revenews, and
afterward they are sometimes made Cardinals, as Pope Clement the eight used
to do, who created five Auditors of the Ruota Cardinals, which were
remarkable, and eminent persons, namely, Arigone, Bianchetto, Mantica,
Cerafino, and Panfilio; now what these five were, does appear by their works,
which are in print.

Of the Reverend Chamber Apostolical.
THere is the Chamber Apostolical, which uses to sit twice a week in his
Holiness Palace, upon Monday, and Friday, and on such days as the Consistory
is held. There sits in it the Cardinal Chamberlain, the Lord Governor of
Rome, a Vicechamberlaine; the Lord Treasurer General; the Lord Auditor of the
Chamber; the Lord President of the Chamber; the Auditor of the poor; the
Fiscall Advocate; the Commissary of the Chamber; and twelve Clerks of the
Chamber, four of which are always, the one Prefect of corn and victual; one
Prefect of flesh, and white meats; one Prefect of the Prison, and one Prefect
of the States, as shall be declared in its place. The jurisdiction of the
Chamber Apostolical is over all matters wherein the interest thereof is
concerned; over all the writings and deeds concerning the Prefects, and
revenewes of the Sea Apostolical; over the Treasurers of the Provinces of the
State Ecclesiastical; over causes of the Comminalty, and Ecclesiastical
Feudes; over causes of reprisall, and causes of account with the Officers, and
Ministers of the State, over the coining, and causes of money; over causes of
Appeals from the Masters of the Streets about buildings, and jure congrui;
over matters of Customs, Taxes, and impositions, and other such like. The
whole Chamber together has nine Notaries, every one of the which holds of his
Office apart by himself, with a substitute, and many others, that write under
him. All the causes before mentioned are distributed by assignement amongst the
said Clarks, together with the proportions that are made in the said Chamber. A
Clerks place of the Chamber is worth two and forty thousand crowns, and
yields three thousand crowns a year. The Chember Apostolical gives over
sitting at the same time, the Ruota does; and at the holding of the last
Chamber his Holiness makes a great banquet in the Palace Apostolical, for all
that are belonging to the Chamber: and another that is made the first of August
by the Cardinal Chamberlain. Upon Saint Peter's Eve all the tributes of the
Feudataries of the Holy Church are paid into the Chamber, whereof the ready
money remains in the custody of the reverend Chamber; but some plate, as
cupps, and such like, are the Treasurer Generals Fees, and the wax is divided
amongst the Clerks of the Chamber. Every one of the Officers aforesaid, which
belong to the Chamber, has his jurisdiction distinct, and several.

Of the Lord Governor of Rome.
THe Lord Governor of Rome has Ordinarily in Civil causes two Lieutenants:
and he takes cognizance of matters of salaries, wages, and of the estate of
poor persons. In criminal causes he has one Lieutenant, and has general
jurisdiction in Rome, as also prevention with all the Tribunalls. He has many
Judges, and an Head Notary that has a number of Clerks under him, all whose
emoluments go to charitable uses, so that his Office is called the Notariship
of charity. He has provost Marshall, together with three hundred sergeants;
and when his Lordship goes through Rome, he is waited on by a good guard of
Halberdiers, which are apparelled all alike, at the charge of the reverend
Chamber; They are Italian Soldiers, and have a Captain over them, who is
commonly a creature of the Lord governors, and has his intertainment from the
said Chamber.

Of the Lord Treasurer General.
THe Lord Treasurer General has the cognizance of reprisalls, of Priests, and
Ecclesiastical persons, of Fountains, of unwholesome fruit, and unlawful
negotiations. He has particular care of exacting the revenewes, and rents of
the Chamber, and Sea Apostolical, and of giving out Mandates to them that are
to receive them. He oversees the accounts of Ministers, Officers and Fathers,
being ready in every occasion where the said Sea and Chamber is concerned. The
Treasurers place is worth seventy thousand crowns, which money his Holiness
disposes of at his pleasure; and it yields between eleven and twelve thousand
crowns a year.

Of the Lord Auditor of the Chamber.
THe Auditor of the Chamber has most ample jurisdiction over all, being the
ordinary Judge of the Roman Court, and of all the Courtiers, Merchants, and
Strangers which are in Rome, as also of Barons, Princes, Ambassadors, Bishops,
Patriarks, and Cardinals: He is also ordinary Judge of all Appeals, as well
within the State Ecclesiastical, as also those without, which appertain unto
the Ecclesiastical Court. He is Executor privative quoad omnes of the Chamber
obligation, and cumulative of all Letters Apostolical, and of all writings
upon oath, and without oath; as also of all the sentences de partibus sulminata
censura and he has likewise most ample criminal authority. He has two
civil Lieutenants, which are always Prelates, and one criminal, with many
Judges. He has ten Officers for Notaries, every of the which is sold for
fifteen, eighteen, and sometimes twenty thousand crowns, and each of them
keeps his Office apart by himself, with two substitutes, and ninteene or
twenty young Clerks. The Auditor of the Chambers place is sold ordinarily for
seventy thousand crowns, which money belongs to his Holiness; and it yields
about twelve thousand crowns a year. He keeps a Provost Marshall, together
with a great number of Sergeants.

Of the Lord President of the Chamber.
THe President of the Reverend Chambers Charge is, to review all the accounts
of the Treasury of the Chamber, and Sea Apostolical; and he which exercises
that Office goes in a purple habit: His place is worth thirty thousand crowns,
and the money yields seven or eight in the hundred.

Of the Advocate of the Poor.
THe Advocate of the poors care is, to write gratis for all poor and miserable
persons.

Of the Advocate of the Exchequer.
THe Advocate of the Exchequer defends in jure the rights of the Exchequer
before all the Tribunalls in all causes accurring.

Of the Proctor of the Exchequer.
THe Proctor of the Exchequer defends in facto all the rights of Exchequer,
before all Tribunalls in all causes.

Of the Commissary of the Chamber.
THe Commissary of the chambers charge is, to defend the interest of the said
reverend Chamber in civil matters, and to assist the Lord Treasurer General
in reviewing the accounts of the Rents and Revenewes of the Chamber of the
customs, and assesments, of the provision of corn, and of the coining of money.

Of the Marshall of Rome.
THe Marshall is an ancient Dignity, and at this present is in the noble family
of the Savelli, which the Head of that House does exercise. He has the
custody of the prison of the Court of Savella, and takes cognizance of slight
criminal causes, where no blood has been shed. He has pro tempore the
custody of the Conclave, with a certain number of Soldiers placed there by
his Excellency, and a Captain over them, who is always a noble person, and
depending on the illustrious Houses of Savelli.

Of the Senator of Rome.
BEsides the said Office and Magistracies, there is the Senator of Rome, who
resides in the capitol, and is made by the Popes Brieve: he has under him
two Judges in civil matters, one called the first, and the other the second
collateral; as also a criminal Judge of Malefactors. The Senator and his.
Judges have the jurisdiction, and cognizance of the causes Civil and Criminal
amongst the Citizens and Inhabitants of Rome: Causes of Appeal from the
Sentences only of the Senator, and his Judges, do devolve unto the Captain
of Appeal, a Magistrate resident in the Capitol, so called. This Senator in
public actions appears always in a Senators habit of cloth of gold down to
the ground, with long sleeves, lined with crimson silk, and a great chain of
gold after the Ancient Roman Fashion. He has place in his Holiness Chapel
under the Emperors Ambassador; and is not at any time a Roman, but a
Forreigner, being for the most part a Doctor of the Law. His place he holds at
his Holiness pleasure, which yields him two thousand crowns a year. He goes
also every week to have audience of his Holiness, and the Cardinal Nephews,
giving them an account of the causes of his Tribunal; wearing in that action a
black Senatorian garment, in the summer commonly of plain satin, and in the
winter of velvet.

Of the Conservators of Rome.
IN the same Capitol are the Conservators, a Magistracy consisting of three
Roman Gentlemen, and the Prior of the Caporioni pro tempore, which Caporioni
are fourteen; and every three months as well the Conservators, as the
Caporioni, and other A Caporinio is as an Alderman of a ward in London.
Officers of the Roman people are renewed, and the choice of them is made
before his Holiness, the Cardinal Chamberlain, and the Popes Cardinal
Nephews: the day after their election, they go to take their oath at the
Popes hand, and in the first month the Senator gives them possession of their
places in the Capitol. Their Office and jurisdiction is concerning the
Custody of the Antiquities of Rome, and the observation of the Statutes
thereof. They punish the sellers of Victuals, either for want of weight, or
excess of price, causing just weight and measure to be made, and about that
they minister justice. They are also ordinary Judges of all Appeals, brought in
by the consuls of trads, and husbandry, who reside in the same Capitol; and
they grant likewise the privileges of a free denison. They take care of the
walls, and of the Aeequeducts: They depute Officers in the lands that are
properly belonging to the Roman people; They have a Notary and an Attorney
General; and in the said Capitol they have a prison, where they keep a
Provost Marshall with a great many of Sergeants. The fourteen Caporioni, after
they have taken possession of their places, which is given to them by their
Senator, do all assemble together in the Vestry of Araceli, where they choose
from amongst themselves one to be their Prior; who assists in the
administration of Justice, and in every other matter with the Conservators; and
all four of them are apparelled alike in a ancient Roman Senators habit, and
on their heads they wear a great cap after the old fashion. They have all
four places in his Holiness Chapel, sitting above the secret Chamberlaines,
and in the holy year 1600. the three Conservators, with the Prior of the
Caporioni, used the Senators habit of cloth of gold. Every one of them also
keeps four Lacqueys in a Livery of red velvet trimmed with gold. Now though
the conservators, and Prior, do not lodge in the Capitol, yet do they there
in the days of Audience make solemn feasts, whereunto they invite many of the
Nobility both of Rome, and of fortaine parts.

Of the Master of the Streets of Rome.
THere are also in the Capitol the Masters of the Streets, which Magistracy
consists of two Roman Gentlemen, an Assessor, who is a Doctor of the Law, and a
Notary. Their Office is, to survey the Streets and Bridges, to keep them
accommodated, and to terminate the differences, that arise thereupon, they
hear the causes of controversies, which fall out among neighbors, about
building, cutting out of houses, making of windows, and the like; every one of
the Masters of the streets office yields him an hundred crowns a month, and is
conferred on him by his Holiness Brieve, to be enjoyed by him during the Popes
pleasure, and no longer, but he is seldom removed, if he carry himself well.

Of the Chamberlain of the water-Banke.
THere is also at the great water-bank a Magistracy, which is wont to be
conferred on a Roman Gentleman, with the title of Chamberlain of the
Water-Bank; who exercises jurisdiction amongst Mariners, that will not give
security, and other such like differences, and for maritine conducts, from whom
there is appeal to that Clerk of the Chamber Apostolical, whose lot is to have
the Presidentship of the Water-Bank; and the same Clerk has a Judge, who
administers justice to mariners, and Barge-men that trade in that place; where
likewise the Cardinal Chamberlain appoints with his patent, a Commissary over
the wood, to the end no fraud may be used to the prejudice of the buyers.

Of the referendaries, both of the one, and the other signature.
THere is also in Rome, the College of the Prelates, Referendaries of the one,
and the other Signature, of whom there is no determinate number, and to get
into this College, first the Popes favor must be obtained, then the Cardinal
prefect of the Signature of justice, commits to a Minister of his, the making a
Process thereof; for he who is to be admitted, according to a Bull of Pope
Sixtus Quintus, must prove himself to be a Doctor of both Laws; that he has
dwelt in Rome two years, that he is above five and twenty years of age, and
that he is so far forth accommodated with the goods of Fortune, that he can
with decorum maintain the dignity of a Prelate: These being proved, and the
process thereof being made in forma; the said Cardinal

Prefect causes him to propound two commissions, in a full signature; so that
carrying himself well, and being approved of, his eminency gives him
afterward his usual oath, with putting on him the habit which is ordinarily for
Prelates, that is, a Cassock with a little train, and a short Cloak, of color
black; for the twelve voting Prelates do always go in Purple, by a privilege
granted unto them by Pope Paul the fifth. The jurisdiction of these, is, to
propound the commissions, and both the contentions, and gracious supplications
in the signatures of justice and grace, respectively; and to take cognizance of
the causes which are daily committed unto them, not exceeding the value of five
and twenty Crowns of Gold; for if they exceed that sum, they are committed to
the Ruota. Every one of these when he is created a Prelate, is obliged to visit
the sacred College of Cardinals, and out of courtesy, he is also to visit
the twelve voting Prelates, as all other Prelates likewise which are made ought
to do: as also the Prelates their colleagues; but I do not mean either
Archbishops, or Bishops, for it is sufficient for them only to visit the
sacred College the Lord Auditor of the Chamber, the Lord Datarie, the Lord
Treasurer general, and some such like Prelates; but I speak of the participate
Pronotaries, the auditors Della Ruota, the Clerks of the Chamber, the
Abbreviators, di parco magiore, and the Consistoriall Advocates.

Of the Governor of the Borough.
THere is also the Governor of the Borough, made by the Pops Brieve, with two
thousand crowns a years entertainment, who keeps a Judge, and an Attorney
general, resident in the Borough: a formal Court, a Palace with a prison, an
head Notarie, which has many young Clerks under him; a Provost Marshall, with
fifteen sergeants, and administers justice over all the Buroughs, so far as
Settignana: his Judge has every week audience of the Pope, giving him an
account of the affairs of his Tribunal.

Of the Datarie.
THen there is the Datarie, which though it be a moveable office, yet is it the
most esteemed of all others, being usually given by the Pope to Prelates of
worth, and oftentimes for many years past to Cardinals, through whose hands,
the vacancy of all Benefices, which are not expressed to be above the value of
four and twenty ducats a year, do pass; and he does cause supplications to
be signed, even without the participation of the Pope; and for other benefices
of greater value, dignities, and Canons places, the Datarie may in carrying the
supplications to his Holiness, and exposing the concurrents unto him, favor
the merits of one more then another: It stands in his power to pardon that part
of of the compositions, wherein certain sorts of graces are taxed; for the
which, according to the style of the Datarie, is paid, sometimes a greater,
sometimes a lesser sum, as the matters are.

He and his under-Dater, have every day audience of the Pope, carrying the
supplications to be signed by his Holiness, under the which supplications, he
puts the date, that is, Datum Romae apud, from whence he is called the Datarie:
albeit such Cardinals, as have exercised that place from the time of Cardinal
Arigone, until now, have been cased of the labor of dating the supplications,
causing them to be dated by others.

Of the under-Dater.
HE has under him the under-Dater, whose office is to consider all the
dispatches, which passes through the Datarie, except the vacancies of the
benefices that happen by death, for they go through the hands of the Dater
himself, or of his substitute expressly deputed by him for that purpose, and it
is named the office of per obitum, which gives an account of them to the
Dater, for to have them afterward signed, when they are all carried to the
Popes audience. This under-Dater goes apparelled in purple.

He that is Dater has two thousand crowns a year entertainment from the Pope;
the under-Dater a thousand, and so proportionably all the other lower officers.

He has also Revisors, which help him to review the supplications after they
are signed, whereunto they put such restrictions, as to them seem convenient;
all the supplications of the Datarie passing through their hands.

He has moreover an officer, who has his name of the petty-Dates, through
whose hands pass all the supplications, at the foot whereof the petty Date
uses to be put, that it may be afterward extended, whenever the suppliant
will go on with his supplications; for many times, for want of money to defray
the charge, or in regard of some other lawful cause, he stays many months in
making the dispatch, before they will cause the said great Date to be extended
unto the supplication, after it is signed.

He has another officer having his title from the compositions, unto whom
those supplications signed, and reviewed by all the other officers, are sent,
which ought to pay compositions; nor do they part from him, until the sum of
money wherewith the aforesaid supplications are taxed, be satisfied, sending the
others which do not pay composition, to the Register, of whom shall be spoken
hereafter.

He has another officer of the missives, whose care is to send generally the
supplications past, as abovesaid, by the Datarie to the Registers, that is, to
the public, and to the secret Registers, with making distinction of those
which are to be sent to the public Registers, and in resignations, and
pensions, to set down the day when they are sent to the Registers; by means of
which missive the consents have at other times been extended, according to the
Clementina, which, after Gregory the thirteenth, has been no longer in use.

He has an other officer, called the revisor of Matrimonial dispensations,
who has no other care, but to cause all supplications to be signed, which
concern dispensations in the degrees of consanguinitie, and affinity, as also
excommunications, ad Revelationem, called Significavit.

Of all the aforesaid Officers, which the Dater has under him, there is not
any that buys his office, but he of the compositions, all the rest being
chosen by the Dater, except the under-Dater, who is wont to be chosen by the
Pope.

There are twenty Officers, who are called Registers of Supplications, which
Offices are sold; and it appertains unto them to Register all the
Supplications, de verbo ad verbum, that are signed by the Pope, or others his
Officers deputed for the same: and after they are registered, they are sent to
the Chancery, to cause the dispatch of the Bulls, according to the tenor of the
said Supplications.

There are also four Officers, which are called Masters of the Register, unto
whom it belongs to hear the Supplications, registered by the Registers, read,
to see if the Register agrees with the original; and they themselves set on
the backside of the Supplications the Registratio^, which is a great R. within
the which are their names written. These Masters of the Register of
Supplications are vendible Offices, and are sold for four thousand crowns a
piece.

There is the Office of the Lead whereunto go all the Bulls for the affixing
of the Lead to them, which universally are seen by all the Popes pro tempore.
This Office is bought for three thousand crowns, and yields about three
thousand crowns a year.

There is the Register of the Bulls, which are registered in it by Officers
deputed thereunto, and are vendible after they are dispatched ad aeternam Rei
memoriam.

In the Register of the Bulls are the Masters of the Register of the Bulls,
which is a venall Office. To them it belongs to conferr the Registers with the
Originalls; and having compared them together, they set on the backside of the
Bulls the Registration, which is a great R with their names written within the
said letter.

The Bulls and Graces in forma Dignum, are those provisions of Benefices, and
Dignities, which the Pope committs to the Ordinary, to be conferred on the
supplicant, if he shall be found fit.

The Bulls of Grace are they, wherein the Pope provides, and conferrs
liberally of himself, without committing the Collation to the Ordinary, or
others.

That is said to be an obreptitious supplication, wherein the suppliant
delivers that which is false.

A Surreptitious is that, wherein the truth is concealed, but they are often
put for one and the same, and in sum obreptitiousnesse and surreptitiousnes
are committed, when that it is said which is not, or that is concealed which is.

Between the dispatches of Spain and France there is no other difference, but
that in those of Spain, all the Bulls or Brieves are dispatched; in those of
France, there is no dispatch of Bulls at all, such as concessions, and
resignations are, wherein the signing of the supplication alone is sufficient,
except it be of Monasteries and Abbeys, which are taxed in libris Camerae,
whereof the Bulls are also dispatched, it being established in that manner
between Pope Leo the tenth, and the said Kingdom of France, and Germany
likewise.

Furthermore the Apostolical dispensations, granted to diverse French
Cardinals, enabling them to confer Benefices, takes away a great part of the
dispatches.

Besides the Office aforesaid, there are the under written venall Offices, that
do not exercise jurisdiction, which are worth the ensuing sums.

Writers of the Penitentiaries. Ducats 2900 Apostol call writers. 1800
Apostolical Chamberlaines. 1700 Apostolical Squires. 1300 Apostolical
Secretaries. 9000 Writers of Brieves. 800 St. Peter's Knights. 1500 St. Paul's
Knights. 1600 Knights of Flower de luce. 500 Pious Knights. 500 Lauretan
Knights. 500 The Rolls. 2200 The President. 600

Offices of the Palace.
The first Chain. Duck. 300 The second Chain. 300 The Iron Gate. 300 Keeper
of the Pictures. 1000 Vergers. 600 Macebearers. 600

Which Offices are all for life, and being vacant are sold anew; the money
accrewing thereof is at his Holiness disposing, and is a revenue of great
consideration, although some of them appertain to the Cardinal
Vicechancellor, of which he is the free Master.

Of the Summist
THere is the Summist, who has one of each of the said Offices of the said
Court in his Gift; he is now a Cardinal, and the Office is worth thirty
thousand crowns, yielding between three and four thousand crowns a year.

Of the Participant Pronotaries.
THere is the College of the twelve Prelates, called the Participant
Pronotaries, which was instituted by Clement the first Pope. Their Office is to
write the lives of Saints: at this present a Pronotaries place is bought for
seven thousand crowns, and yields four hundred crowns a year. These
Prelates are attyred in purple, and do precede all the Prelates that are not
consecrated. They make request for the cononizing of Saints, and also when the
Pope performs any great action, he causes one of these Prelates to make
request for it; as Pope Clement the eight did, celebrating in the City of
Ferrara the nuptials of the Catholic King Philip the third, per
Procuratorem, and the high and mighty Duchess Margaret of Austria then
present, where his Holiness ordained, that my Lord Barberino, a Florentine
Nobleman, and a participant Pronotary, afterward Cardinal, and lastly Pope,
should make request for that action, as accordingly he did. The said Prelates
have power each of them by himself, to create Doctors and Notaries, but only
out of the walls of Rome; and ordinarily every Pronotary is a Referendary, both
of the one and the other of his Holiness Signatures, and have place in the
Popes Chapel.

Of the Consistoriall Advocates.
THere are also twelve Consistoriall Advocates, who are all made by his
Holiness especial Grace. Their Office is to make Orations in the public
Consistories, and to that Advocate, which makes the Oration, is twelve ducats
paid by the Chamber. They enter into the secret Consistories to demand the
Palls for the new Archbishops; and to the Advocate that makes the instance, is
paid by the Cardinal for whom he has moved twelve ducats of the Chamber. All
these Advocates have power to create in Rome Doctors, both of the one and the
other Law, I mean, being all assembled together, Collegially in their habit,
and at their usual residence, which is La Sa ienza; for every one by himself
has not that power. One of them also has the title of Rector della Sapienza,
who has the Charge of receiving the revenues of the Students, and of paying
the Lecturers. For the conferring of the Chair belongs to a congregation of
Cardinals, deputed thereunto. This Office yields every Advocate three hundred
Crowns a year; I mean the five last, but the first seven, as they are in
senioritie, have six hundred Crowns a year apiece: Their habit when they
assist in public actions, is a long purple garment of wool, faced with red
silk; and a hood about their necks of the same, lined with Ermins; but
ordinarily they go up and down in Rome clothed in black, with a Cassock, and a
Cloak reaching to the ground, open on the sides to put forth their arms: any
one that is a Referendary Prelate, a Bishop, an Archbishop, or a titular
Patriarch, may also be a consistoriall Advocate.

Of the Prefect of the Provision of Corn.
THe office of the Prefect, of the provision of Corn, is given by his Holiness
to one of the Prelates of the aforesaid Clerks of the chamber, during pleasure:
his jurisdiction extends over the whole patrimony of Saint Peter, even to the
confines of the state of Siena, through all Tuscany, so far as Marni, through
all Savina, Latio, Campagna, and the Maritina, to the very Borders of the
Kingdom of Naples: he keeps ten men under him, which serve him in the said
office; that is, a Commissarie General, a deputy Commissarie a caster up of
accounts, a keeper of the Grain, a keeper of the keys of the granaries, by the
Lord Treasurer General, and another keeper for himself, two overseers of the
measure, a receiver, and one that is sent to the gates of Rome to take from the
keepers thereof a note of all the grain and Corn, that comes into the City, and
a Secretary.

He keeps Commissaries in diverse places, as well to contract and give earnest
for corn at a certain price, as for other businesses which daily occur: he has
his tribunal, together with a notarie, a provostmarshall and marshalls men;
and in all causes concerning the office of provision of Corn, that is in
matter of Grain, he is Judge Privative quo ad alios,

Of the General visitation of the Prisons.
EVery Thursday in the week is the visitation made, where there is present
intervening the Lord Governor of Rome, and his attorney General, the Lord
Auditor of the Chamber, and every other Minister that exercises jurisdiction,
with a Clerk of the Chamber, which has the title of Prefect of the Prisons,
and holds supreme authority, whose care it is, that the Prisoners be not
oppressed: He stays but only one year in the said office, which the Clerks
draw by lot amongst themselves. In the visitation, the needs of the poor
Prisoners be handled, and there is a course taken for their delivery, as
accordingly it follows in a short time; for the Popes will not endure, that
men for want of ability should dye in Prison. The Prisoners throughout Rome are
visited one by one every Thursday, until all of them are visited, and then
they begin to visit them over again as they did before: upon Easter and
Christmas Eve, is the visitation, called Gracious, made, wherein many graces of
liberty are conferred on poor People, imprisoned for small offenses, which they
have purged with their imprisonment.

Of the Prefect of Flesh, and White-meats.
THe price of Flesh and White-meats, is set in the Chamber, by one of the
Clerks thereof, who is drawn by lot from amongst them for that Office; wherein
he continues only one year, with the title of the Prefect of Flesh and
White-meats, and has the care of altering, and moderating the prices thereof,
according to the need and service of the City.

Of the Judge of Confidences.
THere is a Judge of Confidence, an Office that is bought for three or four
thousand Crowns, and that money yields between seven and eight in the hundred.
He that has this Office, goes in the purple habit of a Prelate, wears a
Rochet, and has place in his Holiness Chapel, under the participant
Pronotaries. His care is to decide, whether there be any simony, or confidence
in the resignation of Benefices, or permutation in causes beneficial.

Of the Auditor of contradictions.
THere is also an Auditor of Contradictions, an Office very ancient, and they
pay three thousand Crowns of Gold for it, which, in regard of the great
exemptions it has, yields but little profit: howsoever, he that exercises it
goes in the purple habit of a Prelate, wears a Rochet, and in his Holiness
Chapel has a place amongst the Prelates aforesaid: His Office is to set his
hand to all the Bulls, wherein the clause Vocatis is, that is to say, in all
the Bulls of Si in evidentem, and such like things.

Of the Corrector of the Contradictions.
THere is moreover the Corrector of the Contradictions, who is as it were the
said Auditors substitute. This place is worth twelve thousand Crowns, and
yields twelve hundred Crowns a year, he also that possesses it, goes in the
purple habit of a Prelate, wears a Rochet, and has a place in the Chapel:
His Office is to correct the Bulls, which pass through the hands of the
Auditor aforesaid.

Of the Apostolical Subdeacons.
THe Participant Subdeacons, are in number five. Their Office is, for one of
them to carry the Papal Cross before the Pope, whenever he goes forth in
public about Divine, or humane affairs, either on Horseback or on foot, as
the occasion requires. When the Pope repaires to the Chamber of Ornaments, to
put on his sacred vestures, two of them are there ready, to help the Deacons
Cardinals, in attyring him with them, which being done, one of them takes up,
and carries the Cross before him: Between the Cross and the Pope, none are to
go, but only the Cardinals, and such as do sit on their seat. The Master
doore-keepers do always associate the Cross, the one on the one side, and the
other on the other, with their silver verges. When the Pope either after the
Sermon, or at the end of Mass, is to give his solemn Benediiction, the
Subdeacon takes up the Cross, and places himself just before the Pope,
turning the Crucifix toward him; for it is to be noted, that whenever the
Cross is carried before the Pope, the Sub deacon ever turns the Crucifix
backward upon him, and when he is not present, he turns the Crucifix forward.
Of the several services which the Subdeacons perform in diverse acts unto the
Pope, and their administration about the Pall, is sufficiently spoken of in
other places; these are all the offices of the Court, that are of most eminency.

Of the Solemn Benediction which the Popes use to give three times in the
year.
THe Popes by an ancient institution use to bless the people solemnly thrice a
year, that is, on Maundy Thurseday, Easter day, and Ascension day. Anciently
they were wont to fulminate excommunicants every time before they gave their
benediction, but now that is only done upon Maundy Thursday. The places
wherein they accustomed to celebrate them, were formerly four; the Church
Porches of Saint John de Lateran, of Saint Peter of the Vatican, of Saint Peter
in Vincola, and of Saint Mark. But now they are five, Pope Urban the eight
having added to those aforesaid the Porch of the Squirinall Palace, where first
of all he gave the Benediction on Ascension day, 1639.

Of the Benediction of the Agnus Dei by the Pope.
EVery Pope in the first year of his Papacy, uses to celebrate the
Benediction of the Agnus Dei, and every seven years renews it in the manner
following.

The chief of the Vestry being a Bishop, or else the Master of the Popes
Household, on Easter day blesses the Water, and the next day his Holiness,
after he has privately celebrated Mass with some Cardinals, goes into the
Chamber of Benediction, where first of all he consecrateth the Water, which was
blessed as aforesaid, by pouring Balsamum into it out of a vial, in the form
of a Cross, saying, Vouchsafe O Lord, to consecrate and sanctify this water
by this oil of Balsamum, and our Benediction, in the name of the Father, of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. Then pouring out of another Vial into
the said Water, Holy Chrisme, in the form likewise of a Cross, he says
again, Vouchsafe O Lord, to Consecrate, and Sanctify this Water, by this
Unction of Holy Chrisme, and our Benediction, in the name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. That done, he blesses the Agnus Dei, as
they lie accommodated in casses before him; and makes this prayer over them. O
Almighty Lord of Lords, whose goodness is Everlasting, and without end: we
most humbly beseech thee, that as thou did command thy servant Moses, to
offer up immaculate Lambs in sacrifice unto thee, so thou will vouchsafe to
bless and sanctify these waxen figures of innocent Lambs in such sort, that
whosoever shall be are them about them, may be safe and preserved from all the
assaults of the world, the flesh, and the Devil; from Pestilence, Famine and
sudden death; from all perils of Land and Sea; from Lightnings and Tempests;
and from abortive births, and misacrrying in Childbearing, through the
intercession of thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ our Lord. After this
sitting down with the Cardinals, close by the consecrated water, he takes the
Agnus Dei, which are presented to him in silver Basins, and dips them one by
one in the said water: whereupon, they being wiped dry, he again blesses them
anew, praying in this manner. We most humbly beseech thee, most merciful
Father, that thou will vouchsafe so to sanctify, and consecrate these
immaculate Lambs, which we have formed of pure wax, to thy honor and glory:
that whosoever shall devoutly be are them about them, may be kept and defended
from all dangers both of soul and body, through the merits of Jesus Christ,
our only Lord and Savior. Then the Agnus Dei being laid in their cases again,
his Holiness departs away, usually carrying those Cardinals which served
him in that function to dinner with him.

We read that Pope Urban the fifth, sent three Agnus Dei's to the Greek
Emperor, with these ensuing verses.
Balsamus, and munda cera cum chrismate unda,
Conficiunt Agnum, quod munus do tibi magnum
Font velut natum per mystica sanctificatum:
Fulgura de sursum depellit, omne malignum
Peccatum frangit, ut Christi sanguis and angit:
Pregnans servatur, simul partus liberatur:
Dona defert dignis, virtutem destruet ignis.
Portatus munde, de fluctibus eripit undae.
Of the Benediction of the Golden Rose by the Pope.
THe Popes are accustomed on the fourth Sunday of Lent, when as Laetare
Jerusalem, is sung in the Church, to bless the Golden-Rose, and to give the
same to some great Prince, if he be present in the Court: but if there be no
Prince in the Court worthy of so great a gift, it is sent abroad to some King
or Prince as seems best to his Holiness, with the advice of the sacred
College: for the Pope uses either before, or after Mass, to call the
Cardinals into his Chamber, or to some other place according as it pleases
him; and deliberateth with them, to whom the said Rose shall be given or sent:
whereupon there is a little Altar prepared, with two silver Candlesticks on it,
to which the Pope repairing, he kneels down before it, and thus prays. O Lord
God, by whose word and power, all things are made; and by whose providence the
whole world is governed, which art the joy and gladness of all the faithful:
we humbly beseech thy Majesty, that thou will of thy goodness, vouchsafe to
bless and sanctify this Rose, which at this present, in sign of spiritual
joy we hold in our hands: And because the Church does this day to the glory of
thy name, triumph and rejoice in this sign, be graciously pleased to impart
unto it perfect gladness, so that to all them which with devotion shall
receive it, thou will grant remission of sins, increase of faith, thy merciful
protection, and all prosperity; for his sake who with the lives and reigns
in the unity of the Holy spirit, God for ever and ever, Amen.

This prayer ended, the Pope anoynts the Golden Rose with Balsamum, puts Musk
upon it, sprinkles it with holy water, and perfumes it with incense; all which
are ministered unto him, by the Lord keeper of the vestry. After this, the Pope
departs away, and carries the said Rose to his Chamber, where, if he, unto whom
he intends to give it, is present, he is called for, and to him, kneeling at
his feet, he gives the Rose saying: Receive from us, who, though most unworthy,
do hold the place of God on earth, this Rose, whereby is signified, the joy of
both the Hierusalems: namely, of the Triumphant and militant Church; receive
it, I say, beloved son, who according to thy noble extraction art endued with
greatness, and power, to the end thou may be the more enabled with all
virtue in Christ our Lord, as the Rose planted on the banks of many waters;
which grace vouchsafe he to grant unto thee of his infinite mercy, who is three
in one from everlasting to everlasting, in the name of the Father, of the
son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. Then he unto whom the Rose is given, after
he has kissed the Popes foot and hand, departs to his own home, accompanied
with the whole College of Cardinals, in the midst of two of the ancientest of
them, and attended upon by the foot posts of the Roman Court, who use to
receive from him, unto whom the Rose is given, great rewards.

Of the manner of the Canonization of a Saint by the Pope.
AFter that the Fame of the excellency of life, and Holiness of some certain
person, together with the miracles he has done, have been spread abroad, and
that the Pope has been made acquainted therewith, by some King, Prince or
people, which do pray, that the said person being dead, may be enrolled in the
Catalogue of Saints, and be declared and honored for a Saint; his Holiness
does advise of the matter with his Brethren, whereupon if he thinks it fit to
proceed to inquisition, he requires some Prelates, which are resident in those
parts, where the said person lived, and lies buried, diligently to inform
themselves, and carefully to enquire of the fame, opinion and peoples devotion,
concerning the said person: which inquisition they are to make without the
Legal examination of witnesses; and what they find, faithfully to report by
their Letters unto the Pope, who does then propound all that has been related
by the said Prelates unto the sacred College, and with them, deliberates
whether their relation seem worthy enough of a further inquiry, which if it
do, the same, or other Prelates are required most diligently to enquire of the
matter, to examine witnesses, and thoroughly to search into all things which may
conduce to the finding out of the truth thereof; and articles and
interrogatories, are sent under the Apostolical Bull to the said Prelates,
wherewith they are to examine witnesses upon oath, concerning the excellency
and sanctimony of life, and purity of Faith of the said person; as also
touching the miracles he has wrought: which being accordingly performed by
them, they are to send all that they have done, together with the depositions
of the witnesses, faithfully written in their Letters, sealed with their
seals, to the Court; which the Pope having received, commits the examination
thereof to some Auditors of the sacred Palace, who make processes, to the end
they may see whether the inquisition, and probation be legitimate, and
sufficiently made: Then if they report that all is as it ought to be, the Pope
again, by the advice of his Brethren, appoints three Cardinals, diligently to
examine the inquisitions, proofs, and depositions of the witnesses, and
carefully to consider all things, that are to be considered, especially
concerning the said persons excellency of life, and purity of faith, which if
they shall be judged by the College to be well proved, and worthy of
sanctification, the Pope with the consent of the Cardinals, proceeds to the
approbation of the said persons life, and miracles, which have been so
sufficiently proved, and decrees the Cannonization of him: After this, all the
Prelates of the Court, with the Pope and sacred College, assemble together in
the secret Consistory; where his Holiness briefly propounds to what end they
are there met, and declares with what diligence and faithfulness the
inquisition of this matter has been made, how full and legal the attestation
thereof has been, and with what instance, Princes and people have sued unto
him about it: wherefore he requires them, that in discharge of theri
consciences, they would each of them in particular deliver their opinion freely
and sincerely; and when they have done so, he gives them thanks for their good
counsel, exhorting them to pray unto God, that he will not suffer them to err
in so weighty a business, and so they all go away. The day of Canonization
being determined, there is in the mean time a wooden Scaffold erected in Saint
Peter's Church, of that bigness, as upon it may be fitted a Chapel, with an
Altar, a Pontifical Throne, seats for the Cardinals assisting the Pope, for
Ambassadors, for a quire of singing men, and places for all the orders of the
Roman Court, like unto the Chapel of the Apostolical Palace, with Lattice
windows, and of that capacity, and with such manner of seats: there is also a
fair pair of Stairs made to ascend unto that Scaffold, which on the outside
is strewed all over with herbs and flowers, and on the inside is hung with
goodly pieces of Tapestry: the Church too is very richly adorned, and the Arms
of the Pope, and of the Church, as also the image of him that is to be
Canonized hanged round about it. The day of Canonization being come, the Pope
in all his Pontificalibus, and with his triple Crown on his head, goes under a
Canopy of State, borne over him in Procession, with all the Cardinals,
Prelates, and Officers, each of them with a new wax light burning in his hand,
unto the said Church of Saint Peter; where being arrived, his Holiness ascends
the said Scaffold, and sitting down in the throne prepared for him, all the
Cardinals come, and do him obeisance. After that, he repaires unto the Altar,
and places himself in another seat, made ready for him; where he makes a
speech, relating summarily, and in general terms, all that has been done in
the business, as also the life, and miracles of the person aforesaid;
exhorting them all, to join with him in prayer unto God, that he would not
permit his Church to err in this affair. That done, the Proctor of the cause
humbly beseeches the Pope, in the name of the Princes, or people, which are
suitors to him for it, that he will pronounce and declare N. to be a Saint; and
that he will cause him to be enrolled in the catalogue of Saints, and as a
Saint to be honored of all faithful Christians. Whereupon the Pope with a loud
voice says thus: To the honor of the invisible Trinity, for exaltation of the
Catholic faith, and augmentation of the Christian Religion, We by the
authority of the said God Almighty, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and the
blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, do by the advice of our Brethren Decree and
declare N. of blessed memory to be a Saint; and to be enrolled in the
Catalogue of Saints: Ordaining, that his feast shall by the Church Universal
be on such a day every year devoutly, and solemnly celebrated. And do moreover
by the same Authority grant unto all, that, being truly penitent, and confessed,
shall with devotion visit the shrine of the said Saint N. pardon of their
sins for an hundred and forty days. Now some Popes do grant plenary
Indulgence to such visitants, as we read Boniface the ninth did, when he
Canonized Brigid for a Saint: The Pope having finished in the manner aforesaid,
Te Deum laudamus is sung by the Gentlemen of the Chapel, at the end whereof
the Deacon says, Pray for us blessed Saint N. whereunto the Pope adds, He
are us, O Lord, for the prayers, and merits sake of holy Saint N. After this
his Holiness sings the Mass of the day, with the commemoration of the said
Saint; and whilst the Creed is sung, three Cardinals offer unto the said
Saint in the Offertory three white wax lights, three turtle doves also white,
and other birds. Mass being done, the Pope departs away, accompanied with the
Cardinals, as he uses to be.

Of the Popes washing of poor men's feet.
UPon Monday, Thursday, after the solemn Benediction, the Cardinals accompany
his Holiness, who is carried in his chair by his Palfreymen, unto the Ducall
Hall, where being arrived, he puts off his Papal ornaments, and by the Deacon
Cardinal assisting him being adorned with a purple stole, a red pluniate and a
Pluniate is a black long coat.
plain Miter, he sitts down in the Pontifical seat prepared for him: Then
putting incense into the Censer, he blesses the Deacon Cardinal, who is to
read the Gospel. That done, he kisseth the Text which is held forth unto him
by the Apostolical Subdeacon; and so being Censed by the said Cardinal
Deacon, the Anthem of Mandatum novum, beginning to be sung by the Singing men,
he lays by his pluniate, and an aprone before him, in which habit he washes
the feet of twelve poor men, unto each of whom he causes to be given by the
Treasurer General successively certain Medalls of gold and silver; and by the
Master of the Household the Towell, wherewith their feet were wiped. That done
the Pope returns unto his seat, after he has put off his aprone, washed and
dried his hands, the basin of water being held unto him by the greatest secular
Noble man, or Prince there present, and his hands wiped by the chief
Priest-Cardinal. Then putting his red pluniate on again, and laying down his
Myter, he says the Pater Noster, together with the verses, and prayer them.
After this he places himself anew in his seat, puts on his Miter, goes on
foot to the Chamber of dressing, and so returns to his lodging.

Of the Cardinals, and their Original.
THis word Cardinal, signifies no other, then Presbyter principalis; nam
altissimae Caeli portae vocantur cardines, ventique inde venientes appellantur
cardinales. In Parochia in qua erant plures Clerici; qui caeteris praeerant in
ea parochia, and qui suberat Episcopo, appellabater Presbyter Cardinalis, and
ista convertebantur, habebat curam annimarum, et erat Presbyter Cardinalis.

This word, as it is likely, was found out in the time of Pope Higinius, an
hundred and fifty years after Christ, whereas many Priests were placed in
Parishes, and degrees of them settled, whereupon the Office being found, it was
probable the name was then also found.

The first mention of the word Cardinal was in the time of Saint Silvester,
three hundred years after Jesus Christ our Lord appeared by the Synod held in
Rome under Saint Silvester.

This word Cardinal is at this day common to three degrees; to Priests,
Deacons, and Bishops. At the first, as we see before, it was given to Priests
only, whose Office it was then in particular, to have a care of the burial of
the Faithful, whereunto the other Priests were not admitted, as is extant in
Anastasius the Bibliothecarie in the life of Pope Marcellus. As for the rest,
the Priests were equal, in preaching, in administering the Sacraments (except
Baptism as I have already said) in assisting the Pope, in being employed as
Legates; and this before Constantine.

After Constantine, the Priest Cardinals began to have I know not what kind of
more prerogative above other Priests that were not Cardinals; so that leaving
off that particular care of Baptism, and Burialls, they only went forth in
Legations, and of them above for the most part was the Pope made, having power
over the Priests, and Clerks of their jurisdiction.

This continued six hundred years, until Gregory the seventh; at which time,
as well by the Emperor, as of the rest of the Clergy, and people from the
election, the authority of the Cardinals increased, for that they were they
alone, which made the Pope, and commonly out of their own order. Now that they
might maintain their dignity, the revenew of their Titles not being sufficient
for many of them, they began to have in commenda simple Benefices, Canonships,
Archpresbyters, and the like.

When a Bishopric was given to any of these, the dignity of Cardinal was
void, as inferior to the other. Afterward, when they were made Bishops, they
demanded that by way of grace they might retain the nomination only, leaving
the title of Priest, calling themselves Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinales,
without title, but Cardinales Ecclesiae Dei. In the time of Pope Alexander, the
third, after they were made Bishops, perceiving that to be a Cardinal was a
great importance for their attaining to the Papacy, and for their intervening
in their election of the Pope, they began to retain the Title, as to be both
Bishop of a place, and a Cardinal of Rome together, howbeit with this
advertisement, that no Bishop was made a Cardinal, because it was reputed a
descending in degree: but if the Cardinal was made a Bishop, he retained both
the one and the other.

In process of time, the Bishops beginning to desire to be Cardinals, sought
for means to make Cardinals that were no Priests, but they were not able to
do it until Boniface the eight was Pope, when as the Court went to Avignion,
where every thing going to confusion, both Bishops, Priests, and Deacons were
made Cardinals; and Cardinals had Bishoprics, and Abbacies more then one,
given them in commenda: upon this occasion too the Cardinals began to proceed
Bishops, that were mere Bishops; and this precedencie began not absolutely,
but in Avignion.

Of Deacons and Priests Cardinals.
DEacons Cardinals were anciently seven, like unto the seven Deacons which
were instituted by the Apostles; the chief of the Deacons was called
Deacon-Cardinall, or Archdeacon, that signified as much in imitation of the
Priests Cardinals, who were in title above the other Prelates, as appears in
the Synod of Saint Silvester.

These Deacons had care of the revenues of all the Churches, and the Alms of
the faithful, providing for all the Priests, as well Priests Cardinals, as
others, and for the Pope also; and this unto the time of Constantine. But here
is to be noted, that the Subdeacons had the care of receiving the revenues,
and the Deacons of keeping and dispensing them, according as it was ordained.

In the time of Constantine, persecutions ceasing, those seven Deaconships, not
sufficing Deacons for the service of every title were appointed in the parishes
where there were Priests and Priests-Cardinalls, who had a care of the Popes,
that is, the Church of Romes revenues; and those were called Deacon Cardinals,
until the year a thousand, in the time of Pope Silvester, or thereabout.

At which time, the Deacons attending no longer on the revenue, whereof there
was a new particular Officer constituted, they were left only to the reading of
the Gospel before the Pope; in which time, because the number of the seven
regionary Deacons were increased, for Rome was then divided into so many
Regions, and every one of them had the charge of reading the Gospel in the
Church of his Region, when as the ^ope went to say Mass in either of their
said Churches; and they were called Cardinals of the first, of the second, and
of the third Region, according as the Region was named, whereof they were
entitled Cardinals.

The other four Deacons were called Palatine Cardinals, in the Lateran,
Altaris Ministri, because they read the Gospel before the Pope in Saint John
de Lateran.

These Deacons had their settled dwelings in Rome, near to certain Churches, or
Oratories, without cure of souls; from which Churches leaving the name of
Regions, they began to have their denominations; that is, Petrus Diaconus,
Cardinalis sancti Adriani, whereas they said before, Regionis talis, and this
was five hundred years ago, or thereabout, in the time of Paschall the second,

The reputation of these grew up together, with that of the Priests Cardinals,
in regard they had all of them the name, and prerogative of a Cardinal, and
assisted in the Election of the Pope.

Of Bishops Cardinals.
THere are here to be noted three things, the first, in regard the translation
from one Bishopric to another was anciently held inconvenient, for three
hundred years space together, namely, to the year nine hundred, none that was
a Bishop of another place, was ever chosen Pope of the Church of Rome, but one
still that was either a Priest or a Deacon of the said Roman Church; and the
reason thereof it may be was, because the Priests of Rome would have none
elected but one of their own number: the first that was otherwise elected was
Formosus Bishop of Porto, in the eight hundred nintie and one: whereupon arose
many uproares for transgressing the ancient Custom, as may be seen in Platina.

The second, that a City being once possessed by the enemy, the Bishop thereof
was admitted into some other Bishopric that was void, with condition, that
upon restitution to his own Church, he should return to his flock, and be
called the

Priest or Bishop of that place, which had been committed unto him: as if Fundi
had been taken by the Turks, thus it would be said, Petrus Episcopus Fundanus
et Sacerdos, Cardinalis Ferracinens. If so be the charge of the Bishopric of
Ferracina had been conferred on him, as appears in Saint Gregory, where there
are four or five examples of it.

The third, that in the consecration of the Pope, there were deputed seven
Bishops, namely, Albanus, Ostiensis, Portuensis, Sanctae Rufinae, Tusculanus,
Prenestinus, Sabinensis: And these in the beginning did not intervene in the
Election, but only in the consecration.

Four hundred years after, or there about, in the time of Alexander the third,
they were admitted to the Election, and then they began to be called Bishops
Cardinals, like unto the Priests and Deacons Cardinals, which intervened in
the Election of the Pope: but before that, there was never any called Bishop
Cardinal.

Of the Cardinals Titles.
THe Titles of Priests-Cardinalls, were of a determinate number, that is, eight
and twenty, as those of the Deacons eighteen, and those of the Bishops seven.
Now in Rome there were five Churches built, which were called Patriarchall;
that is, Saint John de Lateran, representing the Pope: Saint Peter,
representing the Patriarch of Constantinople: Saint Paul, that of Alexandria,
Sancta Maria magiore, that of Antiochia, and Saint Laurence without the Walls,
that of Jerusalem.

To the Ministers of the Lateran (for that it was the Cathedral) were deputed
the seven Bishops Cardinals, to that of the others (because they were of less
dignity) seven Priests Cardinals for each of them; and this number was settled
for twelve hundred years, until the time of Innocent the second; before whom,
Cardinals were not made many together, but one by one as they came to be void.

Innocent the second, finding diverse Cardinallships void, began first to make
many Cardinals together, which was continued until about four hundred years
since; at which time the number of Cardinals seeming to be too great, they
began when Cardinals dyed, not to put others in their rooms, but to give them
in commendum to other Cardinals or leave the Government of them to the
Cardinals Archpriests; so that in process of time it came to that pass, as
no longer minding the ancient number of fifty three, they grew to be
exceedingly diminished: howbeit, Pope Leo the tenth, not only restored them to
the said number again, but it was by him, and Pope Paul the third, and Pope
Pius the fourth exceeded, insomuch that the eight and twenty titles of the
Priests Cardinals not sufficing, Pope Leo made thirteen, Pope Julian the
third, three, and Pope Paul the fourth one more: Now it is to be noted, that
before Pope Leo, they never exceeded the number of fifty and three.

It was an ancient custom observed in the Church, for fourteen hundred years
together, that no opposition was amongst the Cardinals; for a Deacon made not
himself a Priest, unless he lost his Deaconship, and then took upon him the
title of Priest; and in like sort, if a Priest became a Bishop, he left the
title of Priest, but continuing a Priest he never changed his title, neither a
Bishop his Bishopric, nor a Deacon his Deaconship.

One of those actions sprang from the Schism of the Council of Pisa, where
the Cardinal yielding to the one and the other obedience, some Cardinals of
Avignion and Rome, being of the same Cardinallship, it was necessary that one
of them should relinquish his, and for this they began afterward to change,
which has been the ruin of the Churches, where there were Titles of
Deaconships.

It was an ancient custom likewise, which lasted five hundred years, even to
the time of Pope Sixtus quartus, that a Deacon should have no title, nor a
Priest a Deaconship, it being a thing repugnant to give the cure of souls to a
Deacon, and to a Priest a Deaconship.

Pope Sixtus quartus was the first that confounded this Cardinalship, giving to
Priests Deaconships, and titles to Deacons; and the matter went so far
forward, that there is not a title, which has not had a Deacon: wherein yet is
to be noted, that the Deacon, although he has a title, as the Cardinal
Montallo had of San Lorenso in Domaso, yet he uses not the name of title, as
to say, Alexander Sancti Laurentii, and Damaso Diaconus Cardinalis, without
mention of the title: and contrarily the Priest Cardinal, that has a
Deaconship, whereas he ought to speak of the title, not because it has no
title, yet he adjoynes it, as Jacobus Sabellus of the title, etc.

Of the habit of the Cardinals.
THe Cardinals, before Innocent the fourth, until the year a thousand, two
hundred and fifty, went in the ordinary habit of a Priest, like to that of the
Monks. Innocent the fourth first of all added to it the red Hatt; afterward,
in the time of Boniface the ninth, they had the red and violet habit, in the
same manner and form as it is used at this day. Pope Paul the second gave the
Myter of silk, the red cap, the red cloth for the Mule, and guilt stirrops.
Gregory the fourteenth gave the red cap to the Regular Cardinals, going
otherways apparelled in that color, which those of the order, whereof they
were then used, but of the same fashion and stuff as the other Cardinals (...)
howbeit they wore no Roche^^ (...) sock of cloth; and when they adorn
themselves, instead of a Rochet they put on a coat with wide sleeves, and
adorn themselves over that; the other Cardinals, which are not Regulars, put
on the Ammitts over the Rochet, which they wear ordinarily, and then their
ornaments; in like manner the Regular Cardinal ought to put on the Ammitt over
the Coat. The shaven Crown is the common badge of all the Clergy men; the
Manipule is the badge of the Subdeacon; the crosse-Stole of the Deacon; the
Planeta of the Priest; the Myter of the Bishop; the Pall of the Archbishop, of
the Primate, and of the Patriarch; and the Diadem of the Pope, which for six
hundred years together was adorned with only one Crown, but at the return
of the Apostolic Sea from Avignion to Rome, the Popes began to wear the
triple Crown.

Of the Creation of the Cardinals.
THe Pope does use to make Cardinals two several ways; the first is this:
Those persons which are abiding in Rome, whom his Holiness purposes to
promote, have notice given them thereof over night by the Cardinal Nephews,
whereupon the next morning they repair to the Palace at the usual hour.

The Pope, when as the secret Consistory is shut up, pronunceth the Cardinals,
whom he intends to make; and in the same Consistory causes them to be called
in, where kneeling down at his Holiness feet, the Pope puts the red hatt on his
head, and making the sign of the Cross on it, he says to him, Esto
Cardinalis, and wear this red hatt, as a sign, that thou will without fear
expose thy self even to death, and the effusion of thy dearest blood, for the
exaltation of the holy faith, for the peace and quiet of Christian people, and
augmenting the state of the holy Roman Church; in the name of the Father, of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Amen. Then the new Cardinal takes off the
Hatt from his head, and kisseth his Holiness feet.

The second way is this. In the secret Consistory the Pope pronounces in order
of dignity the Cardinals which he has made, and then gives a list of them to
the Cardinal Nephew, who sends his Master of the Chamber with his own Coach
to fetch those persons which are promoted, from out of such parts of the City
as they live in, and bring them to his Eminencies Lodgings. There they have
their Crowns shaven, and are attyred in purple like Cardinals; the garments
wherewith they were apparrelled before are the vailes of the Cardinal Nephews
adjutants of the Chamber; and the Cardinal Nephews Barber that shaved their
crowns receives from them five and twenty ducats for his fee. After dinner
the same Cardinal having feasted the new Cardinals, conducts them to his
Holiness, before whose feet kneeling on their knees they have the red hatt put
upon their heads in the manner before declared; and after many words of
humility, and thanks, they depart away: and so go all in the habit of a
Cardinal together to visit his Holiness kinsfolks, as well men as women
continuing afterward in their houses until the public Consistory, always
clothed in purple till the day of the said Consistory, though it be extra
tempora, and giving audience to every one that comes to visit them. Now all the
time before the public Consistory the new Cardinal ought not to accompany
any one, and if he does so, he does ill; for albeit Cardinals come to visit
him, he cannot, nor ought not to accompany them farther then the Chamber door,
where he received the visit: But the ancient good rule was, that the
Cardinals did not visit the new. Cardinals before the public Consistory;
and if they chanced to do it, by occasion of kindred, as otherways, they went
to them by night, and were not seen.

Of those that are made Cardinals being absent from Rome.
HE, who in his Holiness name is advertised, that he is created a Cardinal,
must presently cause a shaven Crown to be made him, and himself as a
Cardinal, but in purple; for he may not use red, until he have received the
hatt sent unto him by the Pope: and from that time he is to be called
Cardinal, and so he may subscribe himself.

The red hatt is always carried by one of the Popes Chamberlaines, accompanied
with his Holiness Brieve, for which the new Cardinal pays an hundred ducats
to the Chamber. Now the ceremony of conferring the hatt upon him, is
performed, where there is no Nuntio by the Emperor, the King, the Archbishop,
or Bishop of the place.

The news of the Cardinalship, before the Hat is brought, together with the
Popes, or one of his Nephews letters, is carried by a Currier, unto whom a good
reward is given, as also to the Chamberlain that brings the Hat, there is a
great reward also given, which usually, from them who are present in Rome at
their promotion, is at least five hundred Ducats, and from them which receive
the Hat out of Rome, a thousand Ducats, with three hundred more at the public
consistory, when they are confirmed in their Dignity; which reward is divided
amongst the secret participant Chamberlaines; and to the Chamberlain that
carried the Hat, belongs an equal share, although he be none of the
participants. Of the rewards given to the Currier are three parts made, one to
the Cardinal Nephews secretary, one to the Master General of the Posts, and
the third to the Currier himself, the expense of the voyage being first
deducted out of it.

The Cardinal which goes to Rome to take the Hatt, is to go in the traveling
habit of a Cardinal, but of purple color, and on his head an ordinary hatt,
with a Gold band, and faced with red silk: being arrived at Rome he will be
met with the Caroches, which the Cardinals send, and in particular with the
Cardinal Nephews, wherein he shall be conducted to the Apostolical Palace, and
being come to the said Cardinal Nephews Lodgings, he must complement with his
eminency, and then by his Barber, he must have the Cardinals shaven crown
made on his head, and putting off his traveling habit, he must put on a long
Robe with a Rochet, and so he must be conducted by his Eminency to the Pope,
upon the sight of whom, the new Cardinal must kneel down before him, and then
after other bowings of himself; he must go and kiss his Holiness feet, and
hand; that done, having been admitted ad osculum, used many words of
thankfulness for the dignity of a Cardinal conferred on him, and taken leave
of his Holiness, he must accompany the Cardinal Nephew to his lodgings, where
he must complement him anew, and from thence he must go and visit the Popes
Kinsfolks, who most commonly dwell in places remote from his Palace.

Having performed all this, he must repair to his own house, out of which he
may not stir until his Holiness give him a public Consistory; howbeit, he
may in the mean time receive visits, but privately without going forth of his
Chamber, and without accompanying the visitors, let them be what they will, as
is delivered before.

On the day of the public Consistory, the accustomed pomp of the solemn
riding is used, and the new Cardinal, if he be an Archbishop or Bishop, wears
on his head a black Pontifical hatt, faced with Green; but if he were before
only a Priest, a Prelate, or of the short robe, he must wear a hat in the same
manner, but faced with black, and must go attired in red, if the day do permit
it; and his cloak must be of raterd Grogeram, being accompanied with all the
Cardinals, and so he goes to receive the red Hat from the hands of his
Holiness: In which solemnities many ceremonies occur, but one cannot err
therein, because all is guided by the Masters of the ceremonies.

The same day, the Popes Cardinal Nephew feasts the new Cardinal; he is
afterward to visit the whole sacred College with all his train, and in his
habit, beginning at the Deacon Cardinal, and then the rest one after another,
without order: and in the same habit he is to receive, and render the visits
of, and to the Ambassadors of Kings, and Princes, and other great personages.

In the first secret Consistory, after the public Consistory, the Pope
performs the ceremony of shutting up the new Cardinals mouth, his Holiness
speaking and praying, and the new Cardinal not saying a word. This shutting up
of the mouth, deprives the new Cardinal of his active and passive voice.

In the second Consistory, his Holiness opens his mouth, declares his title
unto him, and espouses him with a Gold Ring, that has a Sapphire set in it, for
which in times past, the Cardinals heir (in case he dyed) paid five hundred
ducats in the Chamber: Pope Gregory the thirteenth gave this fee of the Ring
to the German College of Rome, but afterward Pope Sixtus Quintus took it from
thence, and by Gregory the fifteenth, it was assigned to the sacred College de
propaganda fide, and it was by a Pontifical Bull ordained, that it should be
always done by every Cardinal from the very day of his promotion.

Any one that shall be made a Cardinal, and before his coming to Rome shall be
declared a Legate; he may exercise his Legatship, if his Holiness pleasure be
not otherwise, until he has first the Hat; and in that case the Pope uses to
send it unto him with a Brieve: afterward when that Legation is finished, and
that the same Cardinal comes to Rome, he is at any hand to have a public
Consistory granted to him, together with the wonted solemn riding. Every
Cardinal has the Hatt, which his Holiness puts on his head, brought home to
him to his house by a secret Chamberlain, in a silver and gilt Basin, that is
carried by the Popes cupbord-keeper, unto whom is used to be given a reward of
five and twenty crowns of Gold.

Besides these, the new Cardinal is to give the rewards which are mentioned
hereafter.

Every Cardinal passes the Bull of his Cardinalship, which being subscribed
by the Pope, and all the Cardinals present in Rome, the usual seal of lead is
put to it, and sometimes one of Gold.

The rewards which the new Cardinals are to give, after the public consistory.
To the Popes secret Chamberlaines, Ducats 25 To the Popes Vestry-keeper, 25
To the participant Masters of the Ceremonies, 100 To the not participant
Masters of the Ceremonies. 36 To the Secretary, Clerk, and Accomptant of the
Sacred College, each of them apiece. 25 To the Popes singing men. 30 To the
Popes secret Chaplains. 20 To the general Keepers of the Popes Vestments, 10
To two Clerks of the Popes secret Chapel. 6 To the Popes
under-Chamberlaines. 6 To the Deacons, and Subdeacons of the Chapel. 4 To the
Clerk of the Chapel. 2 To the Keeper of the Chapel. 2 To the Popes
Palfreymen. 25 To the Popes Mace-bearers. 15 To the Popes footmen. 10 To the
Keeper of the iron Gates. 6 To the Keeper of the Chains. 4 To the Popes
Harbinger. 5 To the Keeper of the secret Gardens. 3 To the Popes four secret
Sweepers. 4 To the Musicians of the Castle Saint Angelo. 6 Moreover to the
participant Masters of the Ceremonies for the coverings of the public
Consistory. 12 Duck: 370.

So the new Cardinal, for avoiding of contention, uses to give the said three
hundred and seventy ducats to the Masters of the Ceremonies, whose care it is
to distribute them. And to the participant secret Chamberlaines is given by the
Cardinal which is present in Rome at his creation, five hundred ducats at the
least; and by him, who out of Rome receives the Hatt, is given to them, besides
the thousand ducats due for the Hatt, other three hundred ducats: But
Cardinals which are Princes, do give betwixt five and six thousand ducats,
as also good rewards to the Masters of the Popes Cardinalle Nephews chamber:

The chief Cathedral Churches of the six Bishops Cardinals are these.
OStia Porto, whereunto is adjoined the Church of Santa Rufina, Albano, Sabina,
Palestrina, and Frascati.

The Churches of the fifty Priests-Cardinals titles are these.
SAnta Maria in frastenere, Santa Potentiana, Santa Lorenzo in Lucina, La
Trinita de Monti, Santa Marcello, and Pietro, Santo Agustino, Santa Caelia,
Santa Prisca, Santa Maria in Aracaeli, Santo Hessio, Santo Prassede, Santa
Maria della pace, Santa Maria de gl' Angeli nelle Ferme, Santi quatro Coronati,
Santi Giovanni, and Paolo, Santo Pietro in Vincola, Santa Maria sopra la
Minerva, Santa Sabina, Santa Susanna, Santi Nereo and Archillea, Santo Lorenzo
in Pane, and Perna, Santa Croce in Gierusalem, Santo Martino ne montis, Santa
Maria nel Popolo, Santa Balbina, Santo Giralomo delli Schiavoni, Santa
Anastasia, Santo Sisio, Santo Honofrio; Santo Silvestro in Campo Marzo, Santa
Maria invia, Santi Apostoli, Santo salvatore del Lauro, Santo Pancratio, Santo
Matteo in Merulana, Santo Bartolmeo, in Isola, Santo Clemente, Santo Giovanni
in nanzi porta Latina, Santo Tomaso in Parione, Santa Agnesse in Piazza Mavona,
Santo Marcello, Santo Marco, Santo Stefano nel monte Celio, Santa Maria della
Traspontina, Santo Biagio dell' Anello, Santo Eusebio, Santo Pietro Montorio,
Santo Grisogono, Santo Quirico and Jovita, Santo Celso.

The Deaconships of the fourteen Deacons-Cardinals are these.
SAnta Maria in via lata, Santo Eustachio, Santa Agata, Santa Maria in Portico,
Santa Angelo in Pescaria, Santa Maria Nova, Santa Maria in Cosmedin, Santo
Nicolao in Carcere, Santo Giorgio, Santa Maria in Aquiro, Santo Adriano, Santi
Cosmo and Damiano, Santa Maria in Domenica, and Santo Vito and Modesto.

The Order which is observed, when a Cardinal dies.
WHen a Cardinal is deceased, he is carried by night to the Church which is
nearest to the place where he dyed, and is laid on a high scaffold upon a
counterpoint of mourning cloth of gold, adorned with sacred ornaments, of that
sort which the order of his Cardinalship required, and the wonted Myter on his
head, and at his feet his pontifical red Hat. The next day after dinner, the
whole fraternity of Friars go to the same Church, and there say the Office of
the dead over him; during the which the Cardinals in purple habits, and
cloakes of the same color enter into the Church, where after they have prayed
to the Holy Sacrament they go to the feet of the Corpse, and sprinkling it with
holy water, they say the Paternoster, with the prayer, Absolve Domine, etc.
and so repair to, and sit down in their ordinary seats: All this is done by
every Cardinal severally if they come in single, but if many come in together,
then the most ancient of them performs the ceremony for all the rest that are
present in the Church.

The four Masters of the Ceremonies wait upon the Corpse, in their upper
garments of fine purple Say; as likewise all the Apparitors in long purple
habits down to the ground, with silver maces in their hands, and for a reward
each of them has a Priests Cap given him: There are also standing two of the
dead Cardinals Palfreymen, clothed in mourning, carrying two banners of black
Taffeta, with the deceased Cardinals Arms on them. The Church too is all hung
with black, and the same Arms, together with the trophies used in Funerals.

They are buried for the most part in the Churches of their Titles; and he that
will have it done with pomp, has, besides the fraternity with great lights,
the Master of the Household, the assistant Prelates, and participant
Apostolical Protonotaries, riding pontifically on their Mules; together with
their Masters of the Ceremonies, and his Holiness Family, in long red robes,
namely the Squires and Chamberlaines extraordinary. And this ceremony is
always performed about two of the clock in the night. But such as will be
buried without Pomp, are carried to the place, where they are to be interred,
about two hours within night secretly in a Coach.

Cardinals which are of great families, and have rich kindred, have their
obsequies celebratedi n the Churches, where they are buried, with stately
Horses, where all the sacred College assist at the saying of Mass, making
Orations in the praise of of the Cardinal deceased, and performing all the
other Ceremonies before related.

The assistant Prelates are such Patriarchs, Archbishops, as his Holiness
declares to be so: their Office is to assist and serve the person of the Pope
in the pontifical Chappells, in holding the Missal, and candle to him; as also
in singing Mass before him, at such time as it does not belong to the
Cardinals to do it. In his Holiness Chapel they have the chief place next
to the Cardinals, and are reckoned as a part of the Popes family, having a
daily allowance of the bread, wafers, and wine of the Palace. Upon the first
Mass, that one of these Prelates sings in the Chapel Pontifically, he is to
give a great reward to the Masters of the Ceremonies, and to others of the
Chapel.

Of the manner of shutting and opening a new Cardinals mouth.
IN the first Consistory, the Pope shuts the new Cardinals mouth, and
prohibits him from presuming to speak any thing in the Consistories, or
Counsels, until such time as by the advice of his Brethren he shall be
induced to open his mouth.

In the second or third Consistory, the Pope uses to open his mouth in this
manner. After all the Cardinals, both old and new, are there congregated
together, the Pope commands the new Cardinals to go forth, which accordingly
they do, and in a decent place without the Consistory wait his Holiness
pleasure whereupon the Pope propounds unto the old Cardinals, whether it seems
fit unto them that the mouths of the new Cardinals should be opened, and they
severally consenting, the new Cardinals are called in again: Then the Pope
exhorts the new Cardinals, standing before him, with words full of Fatherly
love, to behave themselves gravely, courteously, and discreetly in all things,
to speak in the Consistories with reverence and modesty, to deliver their
opinions, not by way of contradicting and impugning that of others, but
respectfully observing every one to declare their minds with that judgment and
wisdom, which the Lord should vouchsafe to indue them withal, to have God
always before their eyes in giving their counsels and votes, to govern their
houses and families with all moderation and honesty, not suffering in them any
gamsters, quarellers, riotous, or infamous persons; for that commonly the vices
of the Master, do appear in the lives of the servants, according to the saying,
such as the King is, such are the people; to bestow themselves when they are
free from public affairs, in the Study of good Letters; and always to have
some part of the holy Scriptures read at their Tables. This exhortation ended,
he opens their mouths, saying: We open your mouths to speak in all Counsels,
in Electing of the high Bishop, and in all acts, both within the Consistory,
and without it, which appertains to Cardinals, and which they are used to
exercise, in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.

This done, the new Cardinals approaching one after another to the Pope, the
first of them kneels down before his Holiness, who taking a precious Ring,
prepared for that purpose, puts it on the Ring finger of the new Cardinals
right hand, saying: To the honor of Almighty God, and of the Holy Apostles
Peter and Paul, we commit unto thee, the Church of Saint N. together with the
Clergy, people, and Chapels thereof, according to the form wherewith it uses
to be committed to Cardinals, which have the title of the said Church.

Of the Election of the Apostolical Legate de Latere.
THe Pope does in the secret Consistory propound the causes for which the
creation of Legates seems necessary unto him, and requires his brethren to
vote whether any shall be created, and how many: After they are agreed of them,
they name the persons, who upon their nomination go straightway out of the
Consistory; and when the Fathers have resolved who they shall be, they are
called in again: Then his holiness as they are all sitting, declares unto
them one by one how considing in his prudence, wisdom, virtue, etc. he has
with the advice of his Brethren designed him to be an Apostolical Legate into
such parts, and enjoins him to take the charge thereof upon him. Now he unto
whom the Pope addresseth his speech, rises up on his feet, and when he has
done speaking unto him, he, with his Hat off, gives the Pope, and the sacred
College many humble thanks for their good opinion of him, notwithstanding his
insufficiency; and with modest words excuses himself, and desires them to
commit that charge to some such person, as is more experienced, and better
fitted for it then he: But the Pope still pressing it upon him, at length he
offers his obedience to his Holiness pleasure; and reiterating his thanks
unto him, he falls down on his knees before him, and kissing his feet and
hand, he is received ad Osculum Oris, both by the Pope and all the Cardinals,
who do afterward go, and accompany him to his house, where he prepares
himself for his journey, being in the mean time visited by all the
Cardinals. The day of his departure come, a secret Consistory is held, at the
end whereof, taking leave of his Holiness, he is conducted by all the
Cardinals to the gate of the City, and there having given them thanks, and
kissed them all one after another, he goes away in peace. After the Cardinal
Legate has past out of the Territory of the City, where the Pope resides, he
begins to bless, puts on a red Cloak, and has the Cross carried before him.
Now all the while that he is in his Legation, he does not participate of the
emoluments of the Apostolical Chamber, or of the Annats.

Of the Election of Archbishops, and Bishops.
POpe Clement the eight with much prudence ordained, that a person destined to
a Church in Italy, should go and submit himself to the examination of certain
Cardinals, Prelates, Divines, and Canonists. Now this is the order which is
observed with a person that is destinated to a Church: he must go to his
examination before his Holiness, where he must be all the while upon his
knees, kneeling on a Cushion: If he does not carry himself well, he is
rejected; if he does carry himself well, they approve of him, and he is
interrogated in that faculty, whereof he has taken the degree of Doctor, or of
some other which he has made profession of. The examination then ended, and he
approved of, the Pope appoints some Cardinal to propound that Church; but
before it comes to the proposition, these things ensuing are to be done.

First, the person destinated must make profession of his faith, before the
Cardinal Ponente; then in the presence of his Eminency must the oath be given
to the witnesses which are to be examined, as well concerning the state of that
Church, as of the quality, birth, and manners of the person destinated to be
Bishop thereof: That done, the Cardinal gives order to his Auditor for the
drawing up of the process, which is made by the Cardinal Vicars, or the
Auditor of the Chambers Notary: howbeit, he that is destinated to the Church,
must first produce the privilege of his Doctorship, and others, if he have
any, as Patents and such like, which may any way make for him, then are the
witnesses to attest, that he is borne of lawful marriage, that his Parents
were never suspected of heresy, and that he is above thirty years of age,
according as it is ordained by the Council of Trent, de vita, et moribus.

Afterward, other witnesses are examined concerning the estate of that Church;
as what is the revenue of it, of what quality the City and Province is,
wherein it is seated; and whether it be immediately subject to the Apostolic
Sea, or else is a suffraganship of some Archbishopric.

What Lands and Towns it has in its Diocese, how many thousands of souls it
contains, how many Monasteries and Relics there are in it, what Clergy, how
many Canons and dignities, how many Convents of Friars and Nuns, how many
Parishes, how many Bells, and how many such like things it has.

The Process being compiled, the Cardinal Ponents subscribes it, and then
sends it to be reviewed by the three Cardinals, heads of their Order, who
having reviewed it, subscribe it also, and so return it to the Cardinal
Ponents, with whom it always afterward remains: In the first Consistory, then
it is published, and in the next following, it is propounded, delivering
briefly in Latin that which is contained in the Process. Now before the
Cardinal Ponents propounds the Church, two Schedules are sent to the Caster up
of the accounts of the sacred College, which are made at the instance of the
person elected, who therein promises to pay unto the Cardinal Ponents, to the
sacred College, to the reverend Chamber, and to the Officers of the Chancery,
all the money which is to be paid for the dispatches in the passing of that
Church.

The day before the Consistory of the proposition, the Cardinal Ponents sends
a memorial by one to all the Cardinals, wherein is succinctly set forth all
that is expressed in the Process; to the end, that if any Cardinal will say
ought against it, he may know what he has to speak of. When as the Cardinal
Ponents have finished the proposition, the Pope turns to the Deacon Cardinal,
and asks him whether he has any thing to say in contradiction of it; unto
which, rising up on his feet, his Eminency answers no; whereupon his Holiness
decrees that Church to such an one. Of all this, the Cardinal Vice Chancellor
takes cognizance, and afterward gives forth the Decree made in the Consistory;
upon which decree, the Cardinal Ponents frames the Schedule subscribed with
his hand, by virtue whereof, together with another like it, made by the
Cardinal vice chancellor, and called the contra-Schedule, the Bulls are
dispatched.

The person propounded, is not to go out of his house that morning when his
proposition is to be made, but then is to have his Crown shaven; after dinner
he must attire himself in the purple habit of a Bishop, and so go to the Popes
Palace, where by the Lord Master of the Chamber he is brought to kiss the feet
of his Holiness, who with his own hands, puts the Rochet, which Bishops use
to wear, upon him, and then he is to give the Pope thanks, etc.

After this, the new Bishop is to visit all the sacred College, beginning at
the Deacon-Cardinall, whom he must always visit first; for the rest, he
needs not to observe any order, but to visit them one after another as it
shall fall out: The next he is to visit, are the governors of Rome, the Auditor
of the Chamber, the Treasurer-Generall, and the Datarie, from whom he is to
procure the Patent dell' Alternative, before he departs to his residence.

From the day he received the Rochet, he is styled Elect, and as soon as he is
consecrated he is absolutely called Bishop, but not before. Archbishops are
not Elect until the Pall be given to them.

There are to be three Bishops to the Consecration; he that consecrates, who
for the most part is a Cardinal, and two other Bishops likewise consecrators:
In the day of the consecration the new Bishop precedes the other more ancient
Bishops, in regard it is the day of his nuptials; and ordinarily, that
Cardinal which consecrates, invites the consecrated Bishop to dinner, as also
the assistant Bishops, the Master of the Ceremonies, and some others.

Every Archbishop, or Bishop, ere he be consecrated, must before the Prime
Deacon Cardinal, swear upon the Evangelists fealty to the Apostolic Sea,
and obedience to the Roman high Bishop, and this is required to be done by the
Master of the Ceremonies, in the presence of witnesses; during the performance
whereof, the said Cardinal sits in his seat with his Hatt on, and the Prelate
is bare-headed, kneeling on a cushion.

All these things before mentioned does the Archbishop also, yea something
more; for a Consistoriall Advocate demands the Pall for him in the secret
Consistory, and and then the said Archbishop enters into the secret Consistory
for it: If the Archbishop be not present in Rome, he takes it per procuratorem.

All these Prelates, until they are consecrated, may not wear a Ring with a
rich stone in it on their finger, nor when they celebrate Mass may they have
any other vesture, save only that of a Priest; neither may they perform any
other ceremony, which Bishops use to do.

Lastly, the Archbishop and Bishop is to go into the Chancerie, and kneeling
bare-headed on his knees, must once more swear before the Lord Regent of the
Chancerie (who sits with his hatt on his head, as in like manner do all the
other Prelates, which are named Abbreviators di Parco Magiore) to be obedient
to the holy Mother the Church, and to the high Bishop, as he did formerly
before the Prince Deacon Cardinal; if any of them be absent in that case, all
is dispatched by a Bull containing the same, and they are to perform every of
those things, except it be going to examination, per procuratorem.

The Cardinals are exempted, as well from doing all that is before mentioned,
as going to be examined, their dispatches being made by a secret way: And when
any of them is to be provided of some Church, he is provided of it in the
Consistory by his Holiness: whenever the Pope propounds either Cardinals,
or no Cardinals, there is no process, much less any publication thereof, his
attestation of the person by word of mouth sufficing.

The Cardinal Ponents has ordained de jure fifteen ducats of the Chamber
for every hundred, whereat that Church which is propounded by him is taxed: but
when as his Holiness propounds one, that fee goes to the Apostolical
Secretaries; and when he propounds a Church in a person of a Cardinal, that
was never at Rome, he must pay fifteen in the hundred, but if he be present in
Rome, or has been there at other times, he is exempted from such payment.

Of the Archbishops Pall, and the tradition thereof.
SUch as are promoted to be Metropolitan Churches, are not called (though they
be consecrated Bishops,) either Archbishops or Patriarchs, nor may they in the
mean time consecrate, celebrate a Synod, or exercise many other Pontifical
functions, before they receive the Pall, taken from the body of blessed Peter;
which they are to demand by themselves, or their Proctor, within the space of
six months. The care of making and keeping the Palls appertains to the
Apostolical Subdeacons, who make them of pure and white wool in this manner.
The Nuns of Saint Annes Monastery do offer every year two white Lambs on
the Altar of that Church in the Festival day of Saint Anne, whilst the Agnus
Dei is singing in solemn Mass. Now those two lambs are delivered to the
Canons of the Lateranens Churches, and are afterward consigned by them to the
Apostolical Subdeacons, who put them to feed in certain pastures, until the
time of shearing them be come: then they sheare off their wool, and mixing it
with other like pure and white wool, they spin it into yarne, wherewith the
Palls are woven three fingers broad into an orbicular form, so as it may
compass the Archbishops shoulders: The Pall has a kind of labell hanging down
before to the breast, and two more behind, on each shoulder one, hanging down
to the reins, an hands breadth and an half long; upon the end whereof are
thin leaden plates of the same breadth, round at the bottom, which are covered
over with black taffeta, that is sowed down upon the said pendant labells
before and behind. The Palls being made after this sort by the Subdeacons, they
are carried to the Cathedral Church of the Prince of the Apostles, and by the
Canons thereof are laid upon the bodies of the Apostles Peter and Paul under
the high Altar, where being watched one night, according to the wonted custom,
they are taken from thence, and restored again to the Subdeacons, who
carefully keep them in a convenient and decent place. The use of the Pall, so
far as we can find, is very ancient, and had its original from Pope Linus,
the immediate Successor of the Apostle Peter; for so we read written by Bishop
Maximus in an Homily of the Sacerdotall vesture, who there says, our
Patriarchs do hold that our Ephod (namely the Pall) was instituted by Linus,
the second Roman Bishop after Peter, and given by God to our Prelates for a
singular and special privilege of power. And Eusebius Caesariensis in a
sermon of the Epiphany writes thus; Nothing is more ancient then that
Sacerdotall vesture of our Prelates, which succeeded to that made of the silk
and gold in the old Testament, wherewith Linus first of all was adorned, in
sign of plenary power, and whereunto as we have received from ancient writers,
he gave the types, and name, calling it a Pall. When as any Prelate wants the
Pall, it is first demanded by some one of the Consistoriall Advocates, whom to
that end he has especially constituted for his Proctor, of the Pope in the
secret Consistory with much instance. The Pope having commanded the Advocate
forth, requires the opinion of the Fathers, whether the Pall shall be given
accordingly, or no: Then he committs to the chief Deacon-Cardinall the
consigning of the Pall to the said Prelate, or his Proctor; whereupon the said
Cardinal appoints the place and day, where, and when the Pall shall be
consigned, which for the most part is in the Chapel of the said Cardinals
house, but sometimes in Saint Peter's Church at the high Altar. The day being
appointed, the Prelate comes to the place ordained, where are present the
Deacon Cardinal, and the Apostolical Subdeacon with the Pall, which he
spreads over the midst of the Altar. Then the Prelate kneeling on the stepps of
the Altar before the said Deacon Cardinal, prays the Pall may be given unto
him in these words: I. N. Elect of the Church of N. do most instantly desire,
that the Pall, taken from the body of blessed Peter, wherein is the plenitude
of the Pontifical Office, may be consigned unto me. Upon this the said Deacon
Cardinal taking the Pall from off the Altar, puts it upon the shoulders of the
Prelate, kneeling still on his knees, saying; To the honor of Almighty God, of
the blessed Virgin Mary, and of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and also
of our holy Father the Pope, and of the holy Church, we give thee this Pall,
taken from the body of blessed Peter, wherein is the plenitude of the
Pontifical Office, together with the title of Archbishop, that thou may use
it on certain days, which are expressed in the privileges granted by the Sea
Apostolical in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen. This
said, he is admitted by the said Deacon Cardinal ad osculum pacis; then the
Master of the ceremonies takes the Pall from off his shoulders, and having
before witnesses made an act of that which has past, he folds up the Pall, and
carries it to the said Prelate, or reserves it in some sacred place, until the
Prelate goes away, and then gives him the Pall, together with the public
instrument drawn thereupon.

They who are to receive the Pall, after it is demanded, and granted to him in
the Consistory, do usually compound with the Subdeacons, who, as we have said,
do keep the Palls, and do receive from the Prelates, sometimes more, sometimes
less in the hundred, according to the value and taxation of the Church: The
Masters of the Ceremonies too, in regard of their Office, and the drawing up of
the instrument, have certain fees, according to the proportion of the value,
and taxation of the Churches, but not so much as the Subdeacons.

Of the public consistory.
FOrasmuch as we have mentioned the public Consistory, and may do so again
hereafter, we have thought meet to explain the order and manner of the same. In
the Apostolical Palace there are two Pontifical Halls, which are contained in
the Conclave, the greatest of them is used to be furnished, and made ready for
the public Consistory, when as either Kings or their Ambassadors are to be
received, and the Canonization of a Saint is to be celebrated. In the other
hall, are the Ambassadors of Princes, and commonwealths, when they come to
yield obedience to the Pope, received; as also the Apostolical Legates,
returning from their Legations, and new Cardinals coming to the Roman Court:
In it too are the new Cardinals published, and all causes handled which require
a public Consistory. At the upper end of the Hall, is a Pontifical Throne
erected, with an ascent of three ample steps unto it, the form of the Throne
is almost foure-square, and about twelve hand-breadths broad, in the midst
whereof is a seat joining to the Wall, with a great and little footstool; all
the floor of the Throne is covered with Scarlet cloth, and so is the great
footstool, but the Wall is adorned with cloth of Gold, and likewise the seat,
over which hangs a cloth of State of the same stuff; on the right hand within
the Throne are the seats of the Bishops, and Priests Cardinals, two hands
breadth from the Wall, having a back to lean against as high as their
shoulders, and a step seven or eight fingers high to set their feet upon, unto
which is adjoining another seat, that stands athwart the Hall, so that they who
sit upon it do look the Pope in the face: On his holiness left hand is the
seat of the Deacons-Cardinalls, betwixt the which and the seat that goes cross
the Hall, is a void space, about an eleven or twelve hands-breadth, which
serves as a door into the entrance of the Consistory. These seats are adorned
with Arras and Tapestry, and are of one and the same length and breadth; all
the room about the seats is overspread with green cloth.

The Pope goes to the public Consistory arrayed in the same manner as he goes
to the Chapel, with the Cross and Cardinals preceding him; when he comes
there, he sits down in his seat, and so do the Cardinals in theirs, after
they have done their accustomed obeisance to his Holiness. The Archbishops,
Bishops, Pronotaries and all the Prelates, sit upon the three Steps of the
Pontifical Throne, and with them last of all the Subdeacons, Auditors, and
Clerks of the Chamber: The long robed Courtiers sit on the ground between the
Cardinals seats; the Chamberlaines and Secretaries do sit also on the ground,
betwixt the Prelates, and the long robed Courtiers: If the Popes Nephews, or
some great Princes are present, which are not to sit on the Cardinals seats,
they stand near to the Pope: The Ambassadors of Kings, and Princes, and great
noblemen, stand on the Popes right hand, between the steps of the Throne and
the Wall; the Popes domestic servants, and Courtiers, stand on his left hand
between the steps of the Throne and the Wall: the Consistoriall Advocates,
stand behind the Priests and Deacons-Cardinall seats: the Procurators of Kings,
Princes, and religious orders, stand behind the Bishops-Cardinalls seat,
betwixt the Wall and the seat; in the space between the Priests, and
Deacons-Cardinalls seats stand the Sergeants at arms, as it were at the door of
the Consistory, and there do they that are to come unto the Pope enter: The
Master of the sacred shoushold stands before the Sergeants at arms, at the end
of the Priests Cardinals seat, and in the head of the Deacons-Cardinalls seat,
are the Masters of the Ceremonies, that they may be always ready to execute
the Popes commands, and to give order for any thing that is to be done.

When the Consistory is held for judicial causes, which the Pope uses to do,
at such time as it is not held for other causes, the Proponent Advocate stands
behind the Priests Cardinals seat just opposite to the Pope, and opening his
cause, does in the end cast the Schedule of his supplication amongst the long
robed Courtiers which sit on the ground, who transmit it unto the hands of the
Vice Chancellor: Now if any of the other Advocats will contradict him, and
answer for his adversary upon the finishing of the debate, the Pope answers
plainly by word of mouth Placet, or with a limitation, that he will advise upon
it, and the Vice Chancellor with his own hand signs the supplication,
according to the Popes answer, and writes the same down in a Book, which he
has always there by him; causes being so dispatched, all riseup, and the Pope
returns to his Chamber, in the same manner as he came.

Of the secret Consistory.
THe secret Consistory is held in some remoter room of the Apostolical
Palace, at this day called the Papal Chamber; where in the midst of it is a
Pontifical seat erected against the wall, which is raised from the ground
without steps or degrees; and has a great footstool, on which the the Pope
setts his feet, and another little one, whereby one may ascend higher. The
Cardinals seats are placed before the Pope, on the right, and left hand,
everyone in its order. The Popes seat is adorned with cloth of gold; the
Cardinals seats are bare, but painted red with his Holiness Arms upon them.
The place between the Popes seat and the Cardinals is usually covered with
tapestry. The junior Deacon Cardinal has a little bell by him, wherewith he
gives notice to the Keepers of the Consistory, if the Pope or Fathers will have
them to do any thing. In the space between the Cardinals seats are two
forms placed round at a pretty distance the one from the other, until all are
come in, so that the Cardinals may betwixt them, as through a door, pass to
their seats; but when all of them are congregated, those two forms are put
close together again in their place. When as Consistoriall matters begin to be
treated of; all other Prelates, besides the Cardinals are shut out. Two secret
Chamberlaines wait without at the door of the Consistory, that they may be
ready upon the ringing the bell, for any command. The Pope propounds such
businesses as are to be handled in the Senate, and in order requires their
opinions, which are called votes, then each of them rising up gives his vote;
whereupon his Holiness, according to the major part, decrees.

Of the Conclave.
THe place of the Conclave (for so is that called at this day wherein the
Fathers are shutt up for election of the Pope) is in the Apostolical Palace;
and it contains two Halls, and Chappells, with some other rooms, and houses
of Office: all which are so closed up with a wall that one can see no windows,
but what are very high, those only excepted by which you pass unto the
Chappells, and second Hall. The Halls are for the Cardinals to walk in, and
recreate themselves in, when they are not employed in the Election; the other
rooms are for the use of such, as are also shutt up with the Cardinals in the
Conclave. The gate at the entrance into the first Hall has a wicket in it,
through which the Cardinals diet is brought in unto them; and the said gate
and wicket are made safe with strong iron bars, and four locks. In the lesser
Chapel the Fathers meet to celebrate Divine Service, and to make the
election. In the greater Chapel are so many Cells made, as there be
Cardinals voting in election; which are distant about a foot one from another,
and are not separated asunder by any wall, or such like matter, but by
curtains or thin cloth, which hang upon rafters set up all along in a decent
manner for that purpose. Now these Cells all are marked with the letters of the
Alphabet, and on the day before the Cardinals enter into the conclave, and are
severally assigned to each of them; not by order, but by lot: and then do
their servants in that interim make provision of curtains, beds, and other
furniture for them. The Conclave being thus prepared, especial order is taken
that none may go, stand, or abide above, below, or on any of the sides of the
Conclave, nor that any may see, speak, or any way send, or cast any thing unto
them that are shut up in it, lest thereby any might be enabled to search into
their Counsels by voice, sign, sound, or any other device. Moreover there are
four guards of the further Conclave appointed: the guard of the first gate of
the Palace is committed to some great Prelate, or Nobleman, who with two or
three hundred soldiers, is to guard the Palace and the Fathers night and day.
The second guard is within the first gate, as one goes up unto the Conclave,
and is under the charge of the Conservators, and Caporioni of the City of
Rome. The third guard is a little higher at the second gate, and is entrusted
to a select number of noble personages. The fourth and last guard is at the
immediate entrance into the Conclave, and is in the hands of seven or eight of
the worthiest Bishops of the Roman Court. The guard of the first gate of the
Palace is settled as soon as the Pope is dead, but so are not the others until
the Cardinals enter into the Conclave. The gate and wicket at the entrance
into the first Hall is, as I have said before, made fast with four locks, one
to the outside of the gate, and one on the outside of the wicket; also one on
the inside of the gate, and one on the inside of the wicket: the two keys of
the locks on the outside of the gate and wicket are kept by the guard of that
place, the other two keys of the locks on the inside of the gate and wicket,
are in the custody of the Masters of the Ceremonies, so that neither the Gate
nor the wicket can be opened without the consent both of them that are within
and without.

Of the vacant Sea of Rome, and the manner of the Election of the now Pope
Innocent the tenth
HAving treated of all the things which are done in Rome, it seems convenient
unto me that I should say somewhat of the vacant Sea of Rome, and all that past
during the vacancie of the said Sea, by the death of the late Pope Urban the
eight.

Ceremonies performed in St. Peter's upon the entering into the Conclave.
THe Lords Cardinals having finished the nine days solemnity of the funeral
pomp celebrated for the late Pope Urban the eight, who after he had reigned in
Peter's Throne twenty years, eleven months, and twenty three days, passed from
this transitory to Eternal life: the Mass of the Holy Ghost was by Cardinal
Lanti, Dean of the sacred College, sung in Saint Peter's Church, and an elegant
oration de eligendo Pontificem recited by the Lord Jacomo Accaressio: after
which Domenico Belli Master of the Ceremonies taking up the Papal Cross,
marched on with the Gentlemen of the Chapel before him, singing the hymn,
Veni creator Spiritus, etc. and these ensuing eminent Cardinals following
after him processionally.

Lanti, the Dean, a Roman. Crescentio, a Roman. Cennino, a Senese. Bentivoglia,
a Ferrarese. Capponi, a Florentine. Roma, a Milanesse. Cneva, a Spaniard. St.
Onofrio, a Florentine. Arach a German. Spada, of Brisighella. Cornaro a
Venetian. Sachetti, a Florentine. Santa Cecilia, a Genovess. Pamphilio, a
Roman. Abernotio, a Spaniard. Lione, a Frenchman. Rocci, a Roman. Pallota, of
Calderola. Monti, a Milanesse. Brancaccio, a Neopolitan. Bichi, a Senesse.
Carpegna, of Vrbin. Franciotti, a Luchese. Durrazzo, a Genovese. Machiavelli, a
Florentine. Filomarino, a Neopolitan. Bragandino, a Venetian. Cesis, a Roman.
Verospie, a Roman. Maculano, of Fiorenzola. Mont' Alto, a Roman. Poly, of
Cassia. Falcomeri, a Florentine. Mattei, a Roman. Fachenetti, a Bolognesse.
Grimaldi, a Genovesse. Rossetti, a Ferraresse. Altieri, a Roman. Theodoli, a
Roman. Rapaccioli, a Roman. Ceva, a Piemontese. Giorio, of Camerino. Lugo, a
Spaniard. Medici, a Florentine. Francesco Barberino, a Florentine. Ginetti, of
Velletri. Antonio Barberino, a Roman. Colona, a Roman. Trivultio, a Milanese.
Gabrielli, a Roman. Este, a Modenese, Costaguti, a Genovese. Rondanino, a
Roman. Valenze, a Frenchman.
Ceremonies performed in the Conclave.
ALl those before mentioned, being entered into the Conclave, went directly
into Pope Sixtus the fourth his Chapel, where the Cardinal Dean made certain
prayers; after which, every Cardinal repaired to his own seat, and there sat
him down, whereupon every one being shut out of the Chapel, and no others,
besides the Cardinals remaining there, but Signior Gioseppe Frenfanelli,
Secretary of the sacred College, and the five Masters of the Ceremonies, the
Bulls appertaining to the creation of the new Pope, were read and allowed by
the said Secretary, and by Domenico Belli, and Francesco Maria Febei, two of
the Masters of the Ceremonies; they being so read, the Cardinals one after
another swore the observation of them: afterward retiring to their several
Cells, and having made an end of eating, they repaired again to the said
Chapel, where the Prince Savelli, perpetual Marshall of the Holy Church, and
doorkeeper of the Conclave, together with the Lord Bonvisio, Clerk of the
Chamber, the Governor of Borgo, and many other Prelates, which were all deputed
for the custody of the passages, took their oath before the Cardinal Dean.

That done, all the Cardinals returned back to their Cells to give audience to
the Lords Ambassadors, and the titular personages of the Court, until three
hours within night, at which time upon the ringing of a Bell by one of the
Masters of the Ceremonies, they fell to immuring and doing all that was
needful for the shutting up of the Conclave; which being finished, the
Cardinal Dean and Cardinal Chamberlain went over all the Conclave to see that
it was thoroughly walled, and well closed up every where, and thereof the Master
of the Ceremonies made a public instrument; after that, every one of the
Cardinals retired to his Cell, none remaining within the Conclave besides
themselves and their Conclavists*, (whereof each of them had no more then two,
only the aged and infirm had out of grace three granted to them) saving the
Lord Vestry-keeper, with his adjutant, five Masters of the Ceremonies with
their Servants, the secretary with an adjutant, Father Valentino Mangioni a
Jesuit, the Confessor, two Physicians, a Surgeon, an Apothecary, with two
adjutants, two Master workmen, the one a Mason, the other a Carpenter, and
sixteen Laborers; all which were elected by secret votes inclusive in the
Congregations, which were held in Saint Peter's Vestry every morning, before
their entering into the Conclave; after the saying of the Mass of Requiem. In
the said Congregations also, besides the election of the aforesaid Ministers of
the Sacred College, there were orders given necessary for the good government
of Rome, and all the Estate Ecclesiastical, as likewise audience given to all
Ambassadors; to the Prince Prefect; to the Governor of Rome; to the Governor
of Borgo; to the Governor of the Conclave; to the Conservators of Rome; and to
others.

A Description of what was without the Conclave.
FIrst of all in all the passages there were good Guards placed by the Prince
Savelli, as keeper of the Conclave, and perpetual Marshall of the Holy Church;
which Guards never stirred from thence night nor day, until the creation of
the new High Bishop. On Saint Peter's Piatza were also four Courts of Guard of
Levaes Soldiers, set there by the Lord Don Taddeo Barberino, as General of
the Holy Church, by the appointment of the Sacred College, during the vacancie
of the Sea.

Upon the Stairs of the Apostolical Palace, that looks to the Piatza, the
Switzers of his Holiness guard made a baricado of Tables, with two courts of
Guard; and another within the Court yard of the first Gate: and on the stairs,
whereby one descends unto Saint Peter's were two others likewise.

The Conclave was walled up by the Masons, and all the doors, every little
crany, together with the great, and lesser windows of the Lodgings were close
made up; leaving only on the top an overturne of four, or five hands breadth,
covered with linen cloth, whereof part was nailed down, and part of it was
not.

There were on diverse parts seven passages, whereby the Diet entered, coming in
this order: first of all, came two of that Cardinals Palfery-men, unto whom
the Diet went, with two long purple colored Maces of wood in their hands,
having their Masters Arms on them; next to them went the Mace-bearer with a
silver Mace, and other Gentlemen; after whom came the Sewer with a Napkin on
his shoulder, followed by two Palfrey-men, who carried cups, goblets, and
silver chasingdishes; two others with manchett, and two others with glass
bottles of wine and water; all which went in rank one after another with a
purple colored Mace of wood borne before them; the said deputy Prelates, who
had the charge to see what entered into the passage, and which was changed every
several meal, assisting at every passage, and diligently searching every
thing that was carried in. As soon as all the diet was entered, an Apparitor,
assisting for that purpose, in a purple robe, with his Mace of silver, shut up
the Passage; whereupon the assisting Prelate went to see whether the said
passage was well shut, and then with a paper sealed up the lock; the like was
done on the inside by the Masters of the Ceremonies.

Ceremonies performed after the shutting up of the Conclave.
IN the morning, after the shutting up of Conclave, the Deacon Cardinal
celebrated the Mass of the Holy Ghost, and gave the Communion to all the other
Cardinals, making a brief exhortation to the whole sacred College for the
election of the new High Bishop. In the end after many scrutinies for the space
of thirty and seven days concerning diverse persons, and the vacancie of the
Sea for a month and seventeene days, on Thursday the fifteenth of September
1644. the most eminent Cardinal Pamphilio, having said his Mass in the
Paolina Chapel, according as he used to do every morning, entered with the
other Cardinals into the Chapel of Sixtus Quartus, and seating himself in
his place, the Mass pro Electione Romani Pontificis commenced, which was sung
every morning by the Lord Vestry-Keeper: After which began the Scrutiny for the
most eminent Cardinal Pamphilio, wherein he had fifteen votes, and then in
the access thirty and three; the said scrutinie continuing for the space of
six hours. Afterward, the said Chapel being opened, the Lord Vestry-Keeper
with the five Masters of the Ceremonies, and the Secretary entered into it, and
burnt the Schedules. That done, the first Deacon Cardinal, the first Priest
Cardinal Caporini, and in the stead of the Prince Cardinal de Medici, who was
sick of the gout, the second Deacon Cardinal Barberino, went and made humble
suite unto the most eminent Cardinal Pmphialio, that he would accept of the
Papacy according to this Election that was made of him by the sacred College,
which he accepted of, and took unto himself the name of Innocent the tenth:
Thereupon the two Deacon Cardinals, Barberino, and Ginetti, conducted him
between them to the backside of the Altar of the said Chapel, where, with
the assistance of the Lord Vestry-keeper, and the Masters of the Ceremonies he
was dispoiled of his Cardinals Vestments, and attired in the Papal habit, and
so they placed him in the Pontifical seat, before the Altar of the said
Chapel, where the Cardinal Deacon beginning first of all to do him
reverence, by kneeling before him, and kissing his feet, and his right hand,
his Holiness raised him up, and gave him the Osculum pacis, both on the one
and the other cheek; after which, all the other Cardinals successively did him
reverence in like manner, and acknowledged him for the high Bishop: Then
Cardinal Barberino, and signior Domenico belli one of the Masters of the
Ceremonies, took up the Cross, and whilst the music of the Chapel sung the
Ecce Sacerdos Magnus, etc. they went, his eminency going foremost to the
lodging of Benediction, where having caused so much of the wall of the window
of that Lodging to be broken down as they might well pass through it with the
Cross, the Cardinal showed it to the people, who with great desire stood
expecting it on the Piatza, in sign that by the grace of God there was an
Election made of a new Roman high Bishop, and his Eminence with a loud voice
declared it to the people with these ensuing words. Annuncio vobis ^ gaudium
magnum, habemus Papam eminent ssimum, et reverendissimum, Dominum Johannem
Baptistam Pamphilium quisibi nomen imposuit Innocentium decimum.

Hereupon all the people that stood on Saint Peter's Piatza, fell out into great
acclamations of joy, and ran up and down the streets, striving a vye who should
first give notice of it to their friends, and kindred; so that there was nothing
but shouting for joy every where, long live Pope Innocent the tenth, long live
the new high Bishop, long live the house of Pamphilio: and at the very same
instant was the wonted sign given to the Castle Saint Angelo, which shot off
all its great Ordinance, for a clear demonstration to the whole City of the
creation of the new Pope, upon the thundering whereof, there was not a Bell in
all Rome, which was not rung for joy, being accompanied with the sound of
Drumes and Trumpets, and volleys of shot, as well from the foot as the Horse,
which stood quartered on Saint Peter's Piatza, and diverse other places. To
conclude, such, and so great was the gladness, as no tongue is well able to
express it.

Ceremonies performed in going out of the Conclave.
WHilst his Holiness and the Cardinals were making a collation, and reposing
themselves, the Conclave was by a great number of Masons every where unwalled
and unclosed; after which, the Cardinals aforesaid went again into the said
Chapel, to make the second adoration, and the Pope being seated before the
Altar in his Pontifical robes, the Deacon Cardinal began first, as before, to
do him reverence, and then all the rest of the Cardinals, one by one, did the
like: that ended, the Cross, and the music of the Chapel, singing diverse
Anthems, and going before him; the Pope was carried in a Pontifical Chair to
Saint Peter's, where being placed on the high Altar, he was the third time
reverenced by all the Cardinals, in the manner as aforesaid, the music of the
Chapel singing in the mean time, te Deum laudamus; etc. which once finished,
together with the Cardinals adoration, the Deacon-Cardinal read in Cornu
Epistolae certain verses, and prayers concerning the new high Bishop, who all
the while sat upon the Altar, from whence descending, he turned himself to the
people, and gave them his Benediction; and then going out of the Chapel with
the said Cardinals, whom he saluted on every side of him as he went along, he
put himself into a close Pontifical chair, and so was carried to his lodgings
with a great train of attendants.

The same evening, and the two others following, the Castle of St. Angelo shot
off all its great Cannon, and over all Rome were huge Bone-fires made, and
stately lights set forth, in every window too of the Cardinals, Princes, and
Ambassadors, were great Torches of white wax, which after they had burned a
little, were thrown for joy amongst the people.

Thus ended the Ceremonies of the creation of the new Pope, and the peoples
external rejoicing, because they hoped, that by the benignity, wisdom, and
goodness of Innocent the tenth, they should see an innocent Golden age
established in the World.

Of the manner of the Coronation of the said Pope Innocent.
ON Tuesday the fourth of October 1644. Pope Innocent the tenth, a Roman, sung
a solemn Mass, and performed other Ceremonies for his Coronation in Saint
Peter's Church of the Vatican, which was hung all about with most rich Arras, by
Cardinal Barberino, who was Archpriest thereof. Now the manner of this solemn
Coronation we will endeavor to describe hereafter, as briefly, and with as
much fidelity, as possibly we can.

On Tuesday aforesaid, then about seven of the Clock in the morning, his
Holiness passed from his lodgings to Pope Sixtus quartus his Chapel (which
served for a room of preparation in that occasion) in his Chamber habit, being
supported on either side by the Lord Master of the Chamber, and the Cup Bearer,
attired in red cloakes, with hoodes lined with red taffeta sarcenet, as all the
other secret Chamberlaines of honor, and the Chaplains in like sort were,
before whom in long red robes, but without hoodes, were the Chamberlaines,
extra muros, and his Holiness Squires: before the Pope also went the Emperors
Ambassador, Don Camilo Panfilio, General of the Holy Church, the Ambassador of
Bologna, and the Governor of Rome, then on either hand were the Captains of his
Holiness guards, both of Horse and Foot, after whom followed the Cardinals
in red habits, which coming to Sixtus his Chapel, went in to the rest of the
Cardinals who were there attired in like sort. The Pope being in this manner
arrived at the said Chapel, entered with the aforesaid Master of the Chamber,
Cup Bearer, Cesars Ambassador, Don Camillo, and the Governor of Rome, into a
little room of the Vestry, where there was a long table covered over with a
great table cloth adorned with gold purple, upon the which was set ready
prepared by his Wardrop-keeper, who stood thereby in a Chamberlains red habit,
a great gathered Vesture of Taffeta Sarcenet, which by the Master of the
Chamber, with the assistance of the Masters of the Ceremonies was girded about
his Holiness, and then taking from him his Hatt, they put a red satin
nightcap on his head, in which manner he passed with the rest of the persons
aforesaid into Sixtus his Chapel; where he no sooner appeared, but all the
Cardinals standing up with their heads uncovered, made a most low obeisance
unto him, and he returned them a very fatherly salutation; all the Cardinals
followers, which were in a great number there, being all the while on their
knees. The Pope then went and stood leaning against the Altar of the said
Chapel, whereupon the two Deacon Cardinals, Barberino and Ginetti, with
their usual obeisance came and took from him his red satin nightcap, and
instead thereof put on his head another of white taffeta sarcenet. In the mean
time all the Cardinals circled him round about, and were bidden by the chief
Master of the Ceremonies to put on their hats; then the said two
Deacon-Cardinalls received from the hands of the Apostolical Subdeacons the
ensuing ornaments, which had been taken out of his Holiness Vestry, and laid
ready by them on the said Altar, that is, an Amite, an Albe, or Surplice, a
Girdle, a Stole, a red Rochet embroidered all over with gold twist, and a great
Brouch of Gold, wherewith they attired his Holiness; after which, the chief
Deacon having put upon his head a most precious Myter, the Master of the
Ceremonies cried out with a loud voice Ex^ra, whereupon the Apostolical
Subdeacon took up the gestatory Cross, which is usually carried before the
Pope, at the passing by whereof all the Cardinals put off their hatts; before
the Cross went the Popes Squires two and two in a processionall manner, after
whom followed an infinite number of Courtiers, decently apparelled; then came
the Chamberlaines extra muros, with a great company more of Courtiers, next to
them went the Consistoriall Advocates, the Popes secret Chamberlaines of
honor, the Referendary Prelates of the Chancery, the Bishops, Archbishops,
and Patriarchs; as also seven of his Holiness Chaplains, each of which
carried in his hand a most precious Crown or Myter: then came the Cross
aforesaid, and the Deacons, Priests, and Bishops Cardinals having at parting
made a most low obeisance to the Pope, who stood all the while leaning against
the Altar as aforesaid) marched two and two with their train of followers
before them; next went the three Conservators of Rome, and the Priors of the
Caporioni in their long gowns of black Velvet, the Ambassador, the Prince, and
the other persons aforesaid: After all this, the Pope was by the two Deacon
Cardinals, and his Master of the Chamber, conducted from the Altar to his
gestatory Chair, wherein being seated by the Masters of the Ceremonies, they
made a sign unto his Holiness Palfrey men, who were attired in long
Rose-coloured garments that reached to the ground, to advance the said Chair:
On either side of the procession were the guard of Switzers with naked swords
on their shoulders, and halberds, who with the launcespezzadoes made way
through the great throng of people, which were in an infinite number dispersed
over all the places thereabout.

And thus was his Holiness carried to Saint Peter's Church in the said
gestatory chair under a goodly rich Canopy, which was born up by the Knights of
Saint Peter and St. Paul.

Being arrived at the Porch of the said Church, where near to the Holy Door
was a Throne erected under a cloth of State, with a rail about it to keep off
the press of the people, and accommodated with seats for the Cardinals to
sit on, His Highness then, being placed on the said Throne, admitted the
Chapter, and Clergy of Peter's Church, to kiss his feet; which ceremony
performed, he entered with great Majesty through the chief Door into the
Church, whilst the people that were numberless, cried out in the Piatza, in
the Porch, and in the Church, Long live Innocent the tenth. And being come
before the Holy Sacrament he kneeled down on a carpet there prepared for him,
and prayed: then arising up he went to Saint Gregory the great Chapel called
the Clementine, where under a most rich cloth of State was a chair placed, in
the which being set, with the Ambassador of France, and Don Camillo Panfilio
on his right hand; and the Conservators of Rome, and the Prior of the Caporioni
on his left, all the Cardinals, and other Prelates came and rendered him
obedience; the Cardinals by kissing of his hand, and the Bishop by kissing of
his knee. After this his Holiness having his Papal Cross before him, gave a
solemn benediction to the people, who with their propitious acclamations made
that great Church to resound again.

This Ceremony ended, the Cardinals, Bishops, Prelates, and others, fell to
putting on their Holy white Ornaments, whilst his Holiness was reading the
prayers, and preparations for Mass.

When his Holiness had done reading, and the music the Benedicamus Domino, he
washed his hands, the chief Conservators holding the water unto him the first
time, and at Mass, Don Camilo, General of the Holy Church, his Nephew, the
second time, the Ambassador of France the third time, and the Emperors
Ambassador the fourth time.

After this there was brought in by the Acolythite is a Clerk inferior to a
Subdeacon.
Apostolical Acolythits other Ornaments for his Holiness, covered over with
very white fine linen, which they delivered unto the Cardinal Deacon of the
Gospel; whereupon the Pope putting off those he had on him, till then he was
arrayed with those that came in last, and had put upon his head a rich Miter,
imbroidered with gold, and set all over with pearls and precious stones.

That done the most eminent Prince Cardinal of Tuscany ordered the manner of
the going of the procession, wherein his Holiness Chaplains carried the
Crowns aforesaid, in the order above mentioned, but with different habits,
having now such as were sacred on them, and before the Cross went an
Acolythite with a Censor and an Incense-pan in his hand: After the Procession
went the Dean of the sacred Ruota, in the midst of his Holiness Master of the
Chamber, Cup Bearer, and secret Chamberlaines, which were followed by the
Pronotaries, and other Prelates in their Coapes. In the space between Saint
Gregory's Chapel, and that of the Apostles, the Ceremony of the Blaze was
performed thrice, with some distance of time between, by one of the Popes
Masters of the Ceremonies, who holding a bundle of Flax in one hand, and a
burning light in the other, set the Flax on fire, and so making the blaze,
said, Pater Sancte, sic transit gloria Mundi. When as his Holiness was come
near to the Altar of the Apostles, he kneeled down on a Cushion prepared there
for him, and prayed without his Myter, then rising up on his feet he made the
confession for Mass in this order.

On his right hand stood Cardinal Lanil the Dean, as the assistant Bishop; on
his left was Cardinal Barberino, Deacon of the Gospel, and behind them the
Deacons Cardinals assisted: In the mean while the Gentlemen of the Chapel
began to sing the introit of the Mass: The confession ended, his Holiness
having his Myter upon his head again, went and sat down in the gestatory
chair, wherein he was brought thither; whereupon three Cardinals, Lanti,
Roina, and Cheva read each of them a prayer for the Pope, who being come out of
the said Chair and his Myter taken off, the Prince Cardinal of Tuscany, and
first Deacon, with the help of the second Deacon, put upon him the Pall, saying
thus, accipe Pallium sanctum plenitudinem Pontificialis officii, ad honorem
omnipotentis Dei, et gloriosissime Virginis Mariae, ejus Matris, et Beatorum
Apostolorum Petri et Pauli, et sanctae Roman Ecclesiae. Upon the doing hereof,
the Cardinal aforesaid of the Gospel stuck in the three Labels of the said
Pall three Pins, having each of them on their heads different Jewels, one in
the labell in the breast, another on the right shoulder, and a third in the
labell on the left shoulder. Then his Holiness with his Pall upon him, and
without a Myter, went to the Altar, which he kissed, as also the Book of the
Gospel; and putting Incense into the Censer, he censed the Altar, and then
gave the Censer unto Cardinal Antonio Barberino Deacon of the Gospel: that
done, the Prince Cardinal of Tuscany, having the help of the other assisting
Cardinal, put the Myter on his Holiness head again; he was three times censed
by the said Cardinal Antonio, and as well the said Cardinal Antonio, as the
other two Deacon Cardinals kissed the Pope on the left cheek, and on the breast.

After this, his Holiness went and sat down upon the Throne, where all the
Cardinals and other Prelates, as well Patriarchs, Archbishops, and Bishops; as
Abbots, and Penitentiaries of Saint Peter, came in their sacred vestures, and
reverenced him: the Cardinals were admitted ad osculum pedis, manus, et oris;
the other Prelates kissed his foot and knee, but the Abbots and Penitentiaries
his foot only.

The obeisance being finished the Pope standing up on his feet read the
Introit, and the Kyrieleson, and after which the Gloria in Excelsis Deo,
together with the prayer of the Mass de die Coronationis being sung, he went
and sat him down again in his seat.

Then the Prince Cardinal of Tuscany, with the Apostolical Subdeacons, the
Auditors of the Ruota, the Consistoriall Advocates, and other Officers, divided
into two ranks descended to Saint Peter's confession place, where with a loud
voice the Cardinal said; Exaudi Christ, and the rest answered, Domino nostro,
Innocentio decimo, a Deo decreto Summo Pontifici, and universali Papoe vita:
the which words, as well the Exaudi Domine, as the Domino Nostro, etc. were
repeated three times. Afterward in like manner the said Prince Cardinal of
Tuscany, said three times also with a loud voice, Salvator Mundi, and was still
answered, Tu illum adjuva Sancta Maria, tu illum adjuva. That done, the Latin
Epistle was read by the Apostolical Subdeacon, and the Greek by the Greek
Subdeacon; as also the Gospel in Latin by Cardinal Antonio, and the Greek by
the Greek Deacon. Many other ceremonies besides, that are usual when the Pope
sings Mass, were performed, which for brevities sake are omitted.

Mass ended, his Holiness with all the ornaments, wherewith he had celebrated
it, being seated in his gestatory Chair, he was presented by Cardinal
Barberino, Archbishop of Saint Peter's, and the chief Canons of that Church,
with a purse of white taffeta sarcenet, imbroidered with gold purle, and assels
of the same, wherein were five and twenty Giulio, a Coin made by Julius the
Pope.
giulii of the High Bishops ancient coin, and was told in Latin by the said
Cardinal, that the Chapter, and Canons of Saint Peter's, gave him that the
accustomed reward for the Mass so well sung by him, and his Holiness
presently gave it to Cardinal Antonio, who had read the Gospel.

After this being followed by all the Cardinals, Prelates, and Officers, the
Pope was carried in his gestatory Chair after the usual Processionall manner
to the Hall of Benediction, under which Canopy, borne up by the Lords
Conservators, and Caporioni of Rome, with two Palfreymen by him in red habits,
as usually they do, two great Ventaglio, an kind of Fan to make wind (...).
Ventaglios of white Peacocks feathers, having his Holiness Arms, and
Impresaes upon them. Being arrived at the said Hall, where a Throne was
prepared upon an high stage, he sat down in it, and being assisted by the
Prince Cardinal of Tuscany, and the Cardinal Barberino, after the Music had
sung the verse, Corona aurea super caput ejus, with other versicles, and
answers, Cardinal Lanti, the Deane said this ensuing Prayer for his Holiness.

Oremus.
Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, Dignitas Sacerdotii, and Auctor Regni, da g^a^iam
famulo tuo Innocentio Pontifici nostro Ecclesiam tuam fructu se regendi; ut qui
tua clementia Pater Regum, and Rector omnium fidelium constituitur, and coro
nature salubri tua dispositione cuncta been guberne^rur per Christum Dominum
nostrum.

This prayer being said, Cardinal Barberino took off his Holiness Miter, and
the Prince Cardinal of Tuscany, chief Deacon, put upon his head the Triple
Crown, all set with precious stones, saying these words; Accipe Tiaram, tribus
Coronis ornatam: and scias te esse Patrem Principum, and Regum; Rectorem Orbis;
in terra vicarium Salvatoris nostri Jesu Christi, cu^ est honor and gloria in
seculaseculorum, Amen.

That done, his Holiness reads the Bediction, which began, Sancti Apostoli,
and coming to the words, Benedictio Dei Patris omnipotentis, he stood up on
his feet, and three times blessed the people, who in great numbers were there
in expectation of it, receiving with propitious acclamations the Benediction,
and plenary Indulgence, which was published in Latin by the most eminent
Cardinal of Tuscan, and in Italiam by Cardinal Barberino. Then his Holiness
once more gave his Benediction, and so returned to his lodgings, after he had
been disabled of his Pontifical ornaments in Sixtus his Chapel, where he
received from Cardinal Cappone, in the name of the sacred College, the
auspicious wish of ad multos annos. After his Holiness had blessed the people,
a sign was given unto the Castle Saint Angelo, which thereupon discharged all
its great Ordinance, and so did likewise the Germans many volleys of shot in
Saint Peter's Piatza.

There was in this Church near the Apostles altar, on the right, and left
hand, two great scaffolds erected, hung with rich crimson damask imbroidered
with gold, which were full of Ladies; amongst whom the excellent Lady Donna
Olimpia Maldachini Panfilia, his Holiness sister in Law, the Marchiones
Ginstiniana her daughter; Donna Anna Collona; the Dukes of Saint Gemini, the
Princess of Nerida, the Princess of Sulmona, the Princess of Rossano, and a
great number of other titular Ladies, which for brevities sake we will not
mention. It is impossible to describe the infinite company of people, which
stood ramping in the air, some on the tops and eves of houses, others in
inches, over windows, and many such places; amongst others, there was a great
frame in manner of a Castle upon four wheels, made to clean the Church, and
almost as high as the roof thereof; on the which partly siting and partly
hanging, and holding by it in very great danger, were above three hundred
persons.

The same evening and the next, a world of bonfires were made over all the
City, and an infinite company of lights set out in the windows of most of the
houses thereof, all which was accompanied with the sound of Drums and Trumpets,
and the thundering of great Ordnance, and volleys of musket shot.

Many other particularities there were, which not to exceed the bounds of a
brief relation are omitted, only it shall suffice to say, that for many and
many years before, Rome was not seen so full of gladness and rejoicing, as it
was at this present, for the happy exaltation of this their new Bishop.

The manner of the said Pope Innocents riding in State to take possession of
his Lateranense Church.
UPon wednesday then the 23. of November 1644. about seven of the clock in the
morning, all the ways being filled with an innumerable company of people, the
Pope set forth from the Apostolical Palace in this order.

After some Trumpets, and a vantguard of Horse, rode certain of the Cardinals
servants by two and two, each of them carrying his Masters valise of Scarlet
embroidered with Gold; next to them went so many of their Mace-bearers, with
their silver Maces at their Saddle bow, having their Cardinals arms engraven
upon them: then immediately came the said Cardinals train of followers,
together with those of Ambassadors, Princes, and Nobility of the Court of Rome,
all of them in rich apparel, as such an occasion required, and mounted on
gallant steeds.

Those were followed by a many of Lanspezzadoes, armed in white arms, who rode
up and down for the well ordering of the pomp; next to them were four of the
Popes Squires attired in red, and then two of the valise-bearers in red
jackets, and valizes of red velvet trimmed with gold.

After them were led by Grooms of the Stable, clothed with red mandilions, the
Palfreys, whereon the Pope used to ride in his occasions, that are yearly
presented unto him by the King of Spain, by way of tribute for the Kingdom of
Naples; and which were adorned with foot-cloths and trappings of silk and
gold, enriched with imbost work of silver plate.

By some of the said Grooms were also the Popes mules lead, all of them with
trappings of red velvet, embroidered with gold; and then came his Holiness
litters, whereof some were of Scarlet, and some of Crimson velvet, adorned with
gold, and studded with broad-headed guilt nails.

Next to these rode a great number of Noble persons, Roman Barons, and others
sumptuously apparelled, with footmen in rich liveries, every one of them in
such a place as they best liked, without observing any order of precedence.

Then came there five of the Popes Mace-bearers, in gowns of purple cloth,
guarded with black-velvet, carrying silver Maces.

After whom went fourteen Drummers on foot in jackets of red satin, trimmed
with gold, and Feathers in their Hats, beating a march on their Drums, which
were adorned with the arms of the Pope, and the Roman people, these were for
the service of the fourteen wards of Rome.

Next to them were his Holiness Trumpeters, with Banners fastened to their
Trumpets of silk and Gold, and the Popes Arms on them.

Then appeared the Chamberlaines called extra muros, and a great company of
secret Chamberlaines, being followed by the Consistoriall Advocats, and the
four Participants, carrying the Popes four hatts of crimson velvet upon Maces.

After them rode the forty Magistrates of the Roman people, the Justices, the
co-adjutor, the Fiscall Advocate, the Scriba Senatus, the Secretary, the
Notary, and others. The said forty Magistrates were apparelled in long black
Senatorian velvet gowns reaching down to the feet, with Bonnets of the same,
and their horses covered with foot-cloths of black velvet.

There were also seen marching in order the Abbreviators di parco majore, the
Auditors di Ruota; and the Master of the sacred Palace, who were followed by
the fourteen Marshalls of the Roman People, attired in white satin, with
purple satin jackets, and velvet caps, appertaining to the fourteen wards of
Rome.

Then rode the fourteen Caporioni, attired in crimson velvet gowns, lined with
cloth of silver, and under them in white satin suites imbroidered with gold
twist, having black velvet caps on their heads, enriched with Jewels.

To these succeeded the Senator, and the three Conservators of Rome, all richly
apparrelled, who were followed by the Lord Governor of Rome, and the Emperors
Ambassador; after them the two chief Masters of the Ceremonies, and then the
Apostolical Subdeacon, carrying the Cross in the midst of the two Officers,
called the red vergers, from a red verge of crimson velvet, which they bear in
their hand: Next to them were fifty young Noble youths, attired in white
satin, embroidered with gold, who went with their heads uncovered close to the
Popes Litter, which was all embroidered, and studded with broad headed nails
of gold, and wherein his Holiness was. Then came the Popes Master of the
Chamber, his Cup Bearer, Secretary, and Physicians; and on each side the
Switzers, armed in white arms, and with Halberds; then followed in order all
the great Cardinals, the Patriarchs, the Archbishops, the assistant Bishops,
the Pronotaries, and Referendaries. Last of all marched in good array the guard
of horse, in red cassocks, and before them the Captains, and Cornets, most
richly and pompously attired, with great feathers in their hatts.

The Ceremonies performed in the Lateranense Church.
IN this order the Pope went to the Church Porch of Saint John de Lateran,
where, being lighted out of his Litter, Cardinal Colonna, Archbishop of the
said Church, gave his Holiness the cross to kiss, which he did kneeling
upon his knees: That done sitting down in a seat prepared for him in the said
Porch, the Canons, and Clergy came in order to kiss his feet. After that the
Cardinal Archpriest made a most elegant Oration, and then presented to his
Holiness in a silver basin, garnished with flowers, the two keys, one of
gold, and the other of silver, of the said Church, and the Lateran Palace, in
sign of his power of opening, and shutting, and of binding and loosing. Upon
the finishing hereof the Pope went on foot from the said Porch to the great
Gate of the Church, where the Aspersorio, is a brush wherewith holy water is
sprinkled.
Aspersorio was given into his hand by the said Cardinal Archbishop,
vvherevvith he sprinkled himself, and others, and so returning the Aspersorio
unto him again, he was by the said Cardinal censed three times. That done he
mounted into his gestatory Chair, and was carried by his Palfrey-men, clothed
all in red, under a canopy of State borne up over him by the Canons of the
Church unto the Altar of the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, where all the
Cardinals came and did obyseance unto him; upon that his Holiness going to the
high Altar stood and blessed the people, saying, Sit nomen Domini benedictum;
and then aseending again into his gestatory chair, he was carried unto the
great Hall of the Lateran Palace called the Council Hall, and there placed in
a seat at the upper end of it, prepared for him, where he gave unto every
Cardinal one medal of Gold, and another of silver, and to them which had more
Offices, he gave for every office one medall of gold; after he stood up, and
taking out of the assistant Chamberlaines lap as much coin as he could hold in
his hand, being neither silver nor gold, he threw it to the people, saying,
gold and silver have I none, but such as I have I give unto you. This done, he
went in procession to the lodge of Benediction, and there having given a
solemn Benediction; the Prince Cardinal of Medici published a plenary
indulgence in Latin, and the like did Cardinal Antonio Barberino in the
Italian tongue: Then did his Holiness again, give another Benediction to the
people, whereof there was an infinite company there present, crying out with a
loud voice, long live, long live Pope Innocent the tenth; which acclamations
of theirs was accompanied with the sound of Trumpets, Drums, and Bells, and the
shot of great Ordnance, and other smaller pieces, this Ceremony finished, the
Pope returned to Saint Peter's, being accompanied with all the Cardinals, and a
great number of Princes, and Lords.

Of the sickness, death, and obsequies of the Pope.
ALbeit the Roman high Bishop does excel all mortal men in dignity and
authority, and is able to bind and loose all things on earth, yet cannot he
avoid the extreme necessity of Fate; for the disciple is not above his Master,
nor the servant greater then his Lord God did not spare his only begotten
son, but would have him dye, that he might deliver man from Eternal Death,
to the end all may know, that none is exempted from corporal death: The Pope
is to think, that though he be the highest of all, yet he is mortal, and ought
carefully to bear in mind that Ceremony of the blaze which is used amongst
other solemnities of his Coronation: Holy Father, thus passes away the glory
of the world; all flesh is grass, and the beauty thereof as the flower of the
field. Wherefore he should accordingly be always prepared, as a good Pastor
and a diligent Steward, to render an account of his stewardship unto his Lord,
desiring to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, and carefully endeavor to
perform with praise that last act, wherewith the elect are wont to be Crowned.
Now if the Pope does not know whilst he is sick the danger of his disease, the
Physicians that are about him, as soon as they are in doubt of him, do exhort
him privately with prudent words to do all that is behoofefull for the good of
his soul, promising in the mean time not to be wanting in any thing that may
conduce to the recovering of his health; after which they acquaint the Popes
Confessor with the state of hs body, who more plainly, yet secretly, and with
much reverence and charity, declares unto his Holiness the peril he is in,
admonishing him to submit himself unto the pleasure of the Almighty; and
considering what place he does hold to direct other Princes by his words and
example in the way of Salvation. The Pope of his own accord, which is best, or
incited by the said admonitions, taking notice of the approach of his last day,
first of all devoutly confesses himself of all his sins to his ghostly
Father, and desires a full absolution of them from him; then in a convenient
time he commands all his domestical Prelates, and the chief of his family to
be convented before him, in whose presence, and of that of the Holy Sacrament
of Christ's body, he makes an open confession of his faith, which he affirms
he has ever constantly held, and therein will by Gods grace live and dye.
Afterward he prays them all to forgive him, if by chance he has unjustly
offended any one, bestows some spiritual graces on them, and desiring them to
pray for his soul, he requires of the Vestry-keeper, or of some other
Prelates, that he may receive the Sacred Viaticum; and that when it shall seem
seasonable unto them, they will administer the other sacraments of the Church
unto him. This done, whilst he is in good and perfect memory, he sends for the
sacred Senate of the Cardinals, before whom he again makes confession of his
faith, craves pardon if in his government he has offended any of them,
entreats them to pray for his soul, commends the Church of God to them,
exhorts them to be diligent, and unanimous in the election of his successor,
and to choose such an one, as might feed the flock of Christ more abundantly,
then he could do, naming, if he thinks good, one, or more, whom in his
judgment he holds to be most fit: He also opens unto them his debts, and what
is owing to him; manifests likewise unto them his writings, moneys, and Jewels,
makes his Will, and appoints the place of his burial: Furthermore he
recommends unto them his family, and retainers, and conferring on them such
spiritual graces, as they desire of him, he dismisseth them with his blessing.
Hereupon the Cardinals perceiving the Pope to be drawing to his end, elect
three of the College, namely, one of every order, who together with the
Chamberlain, take an inventory of all the goods that are in the Apostolical
Palace, and put them up in a safe place under good custody: they look over all
that is in the Lord Vestry-keepers charge, continuing it still in his hands,
because he is a perpetual Officer: The College of Cardinals do also take care
that no tumult may arise in the City, if the Pope does die there, prudently,
and in time introducing the Ecclesiastical Militia, which they dispose of in
the most opportune places of the city: They likewise provide for the provinces
of the Church, sending grave and wise men Commissaries unto them. The Pope
being as it were at the last gasp, some of his domestical Prelates, still
offer him the Cross to look upon and kiss, putting him in mind of Christ's
passion: The Vestry-keeper also Ministers the sacred unction unto him, and
commends his soul to God after the usual manner; whilst the Penitentiaries
stand round about him, reading the penitential Psalms, and other devout
prayers, as he is expiring: After then that he has yielded up his spirit unto
his Creator, his Chamberlaines prepare hot water with odoriferous herbs, and
having washed his Body clean therewith, they wash it all over again with warm
aromaticall White Wind, fill up all the places thereof, whereat dead persons
do commonly purge, with Mirrhe and Aloes, stuff his Nose and Ears with musk,
and rub his whole body over with Balsamum. All this performed, the
Penitentiaries put on him his ordinary Clothes, and over them such his sacred
vestments as he was used to celebrate Mass with, and in that manner lay him on
a Bier covered with cloth of gold, having the Popes and the Churches arms
hanging upon it: under his head they put a pillow of cloth of gold, and at his
feet they put two other such like, with two Pontifical Hatts upon them. The
Corpse is thus adorned in the Popes privy Chamber, where if his Holiness dyed
in the night, it is kept until the next day by the penitentiaries, watching
and singing all the while about it: Morning come, the Corpse is carried by the
Penitentiaries at a convenient time to the great Chapel, the Subdeacon going
before it with the Cross; as also the Gentlemen of the Chapel, singing
Subvenite, together with fifty or threescore burning torches, borne by the
deceased Popes equires, and all the whole family following after. There the
Penitentiaries singing the Vespers, and Vigils, until the coming of others of
Religious Orders: At length the College of the Clergy, and the convents of
Friars repair thither, and immediately falling to fing the Vigils they
sprinckle the Corpse with holy water, cense, and absolve it. That done, the
deceased Pope is carried with many torches before him, and the whole following
after him, to St. Peter's Church, and placed in the midst of it, where he
remains two or three days, to the end the people may visit him, and kiss his
hand: Then is he returned back to the great Chapel, and in the night interred
there: In the mean time preparation is made for his obsequies; an hearse is
erected in the said Church, which is hung all about with the Popes Arms, as
well as the said hearse, and on every side of it are forms placed for wax
lights to be set upon them, as also round about the Church are great wax
lights distant from one another the space of a spears length; and on every of
the said forms are a dozeon wax lights more. All things being well disposed
then, the Messengers of the Roman Court, do on the evening of the appointed
day of the Obsequies give intimation unto all the Cardinals, Prelates,
Ambassadors, and Officers of the Court of Rome, that the next day the Obsequies
of the late Pope of blessed memory do begin; whereupon the morrow following at
a convenient hour, the said Reverend Cardinals do all in mourning repair
unto the said Church, and set themselves down near to the high Altar on
seats prepared for them: the like do the Prelates, Ambassadors, and other
Courtiers: and the deceased Popes domestic servants do likewise early that
day march from the Apostolic Palace by two and two all in black, to the said
Church, where they are placed round about the Hearse. Then is the Celebration
of the deceased Popes Obsequies begun after the funeral manner of the Church
of Rome: and on that first day are two hundred Masses said, and large alms
distributed to men and women of several Orders of Religion for the soul of
the said Pope; as also a sermon made in the praise of him. On the ninth day
likewise (for so long do the Obsequies last) are as many Masses said as on the
first, and every day about an hundred. The same ninth day, after the Mass of
the dead, is also the Mass of the Holy Ghost sung, and an exhortatory sermon
made for the election of the new Pope.

Upon the death of the Pope the College of Cardinals do signify the same by
their letters to Princes, and great Prelates, using the Apostolical style,
calling the former sons, and the latter brethren, in the manner as the Pope
does.

This Vicechancellor also assooneas the Pope is, dead, takes away the Bulls,
wherewith the Apostolical Letters are sealed, from the Keepers of them; and
that part whereon the name of the Pope is inscribed, he causes publicly, and
before many persons to be razed, and made altogether unfit for sealing: the
other part, whereon the heads of the Apostles are engraven, he delivers tied up
in a linen cloth, and sealed with his seal, to the Chamberlain; taking
special care that no Letters may be sealed after the death of the Pope.

A DIRECTION FOR SVCH AS shall Travel unto ROME, How they may with most ease,
and convenience view all those rarities, curiosities, and Antiquities which are
to be seen there.

London, Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Anchor in the New Exchange. 1654.

The Italian Author to the Traveling Stranger.
MAny ages are past (says Saint Jerome, ad Laetam de instit. fill.) since of
the old Rome there has no longer been seen the beauty of the Forum, the
excellency of the Temple of Tarpeian Jove, the magnificence of the Thermae, or
Baths built in the form of provinces, the riches of the Pantheor; and of
infinite other edifices, at the sight where of Ammianus Marcellinus stood
amazed: and after the time of St. Jerome, the City of the Roman Gentles
changed face in such sort, as Fuligines says, et arenarum telis omnia Romae
Templa cooperta sunt: movetur urbs sedibus suis. But now it is so strangely
renewed, that we cannot know what we read thereof in ancient writters. It
changed face I say in St. Jeromes age, at such time as mundanus populus ante
delubra semiruta ad Martyrum tumulos currebat. And after the cruel spectacle
of the killing of the Citizens for the faith of Christ, it was purged from
Idolatrous blood; and impiety and gentilisme being at one time extinguished,
trophies were every where erected to the preaching of the holy Apostles Peter
and Paul. Finally the Empire of Rome was renovated with a strange
Metamorphosis, and made, as Rupertus the Abbot says lib. 3. cap. 2. de Divin
offic. Caput mundi, Domini Christi Regis aeterni vehiculum, et habitaculum
currus atque Thronum. Yet were not the ancient Temples for all that taken away,
but the superstitions were converted to Godly, and the wicked and impure to
chaste and religious uses; yea the very Baths and Theaters were all sanctified:
But these too afterward became the prey of the Barbarians, and of time; so
that dispoiled of their precious ornaments, and in part destroyed, they
remained deformed relics, altogether unsufficient to excite in any the
marvel of the ancient magnificence. At last the new City rose up again, with
Palaces, Churches, Gardens, Pyramides, Columns, and other fabrics, no less to
be regarded then the ancient: There wants not in it an infinite number of
Marbles, and other stones of great price; exquisite Mosaique works, excellent
Pictures, and rare statues, and sepulchers: In it also are noble Libraries, and
Hospitals for all infirmities, and nations; besides Colleges and seminaries
for youth, with large and spacious houses for the receiving and relieving of
Orphans, and Children, both of the one and the other sex, that are abandoned
and left to the wide world: It is likewise replenished with convents of Friars,
Monasteries of Nuns, and Oratories of laymen, who exercise themselves
continually in the works of piety, charity, and devotion.

Passing then oftentimes up and down this City, either for recreation, or
devotion, and diligently observing it on every part, illustrated with many
famous antiquities, modern rarities, and superbe-edifices, which for their
multitude can not without danger of the truth be trusted to the memory of the
spectator, I resolved to note all briefly with that order, which seemed to me
most easy for the convenient viewing of them. Having done so then, and showed
it to my friends, they judged it to be very necessary for the traveling
strangers, who roaming many times intricately thorough Rome, part from it
afterward confounded with the magnificence of a Chaos, and not satisfied in
their desires: wherefore I thought fit to publish it for their better
accommodation and benefit.

Now it may be some of them will complain, that I guide them with too Laconick
a discourse for the understanding of that which is to be seen; but believe me
if they would be informed of the beginnings, augmentations, and quality, of
all the Temples, Palaces, Gardens, Piatzaes, Statues, Pictures, Hospitals,
Colleges, Fraternities, Monasteries, and other things of the City, many
books would be required for the contenting of their Curiosity: But my intent
only is to signify so much briefly as will be sufficient for the speed of a
strangers travel, who if he can have time enough for it, he may arrive to the
full knowledge of all the sacred and profane antiquities of the City, with
the study of certain Authors in print; of which that he may not be confounded
with the multitude of them that have written thereof, I will quote some few
that will very well serve to give him satisfaction.

Let the traveling stranger then furnish himself with Andrea Fulvio, de
Palestrina, who wrote in latin, and was translated into Italian by Paolo del
Rosso, in the year 1543. and newly printed by Franzini in Venice 1588. with
figures, and the Annotations of Giralomo Fernucci.

Next with Giovanni Bartolomeo Martiano, but he must be sure to get that of the
last Edition in folio, for the other printed in octavo is not right, and
reproved by the author himself.

All the editions of Fauno, Lucio Mauro, and Bernardo Gamucci are good.

Of all the Churches of Rome Ottavio Pancirolo has written, the Title of his
book being Tesori Nescosti; and after him Pompilio Torto Stationer, under the
name of Lodovico his son, whose book is entitled, Ritratto di Roma moderna.

Of all the pious works of Rome Camillo Fanucci has written exceeding well.

Of the Churchyards of Rome, Bosio has treated, but he did not finish the
work. It was printed with the revisall of Giovanni Severani, and an edition of
many figures; being entitled Rom^ Sotterranea.

Of the Statues, Ulysses Aldrovanda has written, and Francesco Perrior has
designed and cut an hundred of the most famous Statues of Rome.

Of the pictures which are in some Churches frontispices, and Palaces, Gasparo
Celio, and Giovanni Baglione have written.

The feasts which are daily celebrated in Churches and other places of the
City, he shall find printed in a sheet of paper, which is yearly published,
and entitled Diario Romano.

Finally, though I am certain that I have not set forth anything in this
treatise, which I have not read in some good Author, or seen with mine own
eyes, or received from persons worthy of Credit, or established in the most
common opinion of the World; yet do I not for all that profess to take from
any one that is of more understanding, the liberty of holding that opinion
which shall seem better unto him.

Thus communicating unto thee Reader, either stranger or other, that which I
have done for mine own use, commend it if it may serve thy turn also; but if
no, leave it to that end whereunto I directed it, which was only to show me how
to walk in the City with some rule and contentment.

An Index of every days walk.
BY il Borgo Vaticano. The first days walk. By il Frastevere. The second.
From Strada Guilia tho l'Isola di Saint Bartolomeo. The third. From Saint
Lorenzo in Damaso to Monte Aventino. The fourth. From la Piazza di Pasquino by
monti Celio, and Polatino The fifth. From Saint Salvatore del Lauro by Campo
Vaccino, and by le Carine The sixth. From la Piazza di S. Apollinaro by il
monte Viminale, and Duirinale. The seventh. From la Piazza Nicosia to le Term
Dioclesiane. The eighth. From la Piazza Borghese to Porta Pinuana. The ninth.
To the Seven Churches. The tenth.
The first days walk. By ill Borgo Vaticano.
THe street, which in regard of the multitudes of lodgings in it, is most known
to strangers, called della tenta; as also those others dell' Orsa, and di Tor
nona, seem to me to be most necessary for the beginning and ending of every
days walk, which the traveling stranger shall make to view the most curious
things of Rome.

In going from home, then direct your way to Elius his bridge, built by the
Emperor Elius Adrianus, at this day called Ponte Sant' Angelo, and di Castello:
at the entrance into it are two statues of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, very
worthy of regard; the first being the handy work of Lorenzeto Fiorentino, and
the second, the better of the two, of Paolo Romano. Adjoining to the said
second Statua is a Court, appointed for the execution of justice, although for
great and heinous offenses it is done in the hithermost Piazza of the Bridge.

On the left hand in the Tiber you shall see the relics of the ancient
triumphall Bridge between two Mills, whereof there are many on that River, which
they say was the invention of Bellissarius.

In the forefront of the bridge you shall discern il Castle Sant Angelo, whose
tower of Massy building was made in imitation of Augustus his Mausoleum, which
stood just over against it on the other bank. It served the said Elius Adrianus
for a Sepulcher, Bellisarius, the Greeks, and the Goths, in several times for
a Fortress: Afterward it fell into the hands of Narsetas, sent by the Greek
Emperor to the aid of the Romans, who fortified it anew; but the Goths
dispoiled it of its statues and other ornaments; ever since the time of Saint
Gregory it was called Castle Saint Angelo, from the apparition of an Angel on
the top of it, for a sign of the end of the plague which was then very great in
the City. In the year 985. it was named the Castle and Tower of Crescentius,
from one Crescentius a Nomentan, for that he had fortified it with new works;
and though many have done the like, yet was it most notably fortified by Pope
Alexander the sixth: and lastly it was exceedingly bettered with new Bulwarks,
Ramparts, and Ditches; and abundantly furnished with great Ordnance, and all
sorts of arms and ammunition, by the late Pope Urban the eight.

Having past the Castle, you shall see on your right hand certain Arches united
unto it, which were built by the said Pope Alexander, from the Pontifical
Palace to the Castle, for the commodity of the Popes: and the said Urban the
eight caused them to be covered with a roof, restored them in many places, and
separated them from the houses for the more security.

On the left hand betwixt the Hospital di St. Spirito, and Borgo Vechio was
the Gate Aurelia of the ancient City, and according to some named the
triumphall Gate.

Then go straight unto Borgo Nuova, which was first called the Alexandrine
street, from Pope Alexander the sixth, who levelled and paved it; where in the
midst on the right hand, you shall see a fair Church of Santa Maria
Traspontina, under the government of the Carmelite Friars.

Over against that is the Tribunal, and prisoners of Borgo.

A little beyond is the Piazza, in the midst whereof is a fountain, erected
there by Pope Paul the fifth. On the right hand is the Palace of the Bolognesse
Campeggi, the architecture of Bramants; on the left hand that of the Madruci of
Trent; on the West side is the parish Church di St. Jacomo Scossa Cavalli; and
on the east is the Palace of the Genovesse Spimoli, belonging in times past to
Cardinal Babiena, in the which during the Papacy of Sixtus Quartus dyed
Carlotta Queen of Cyprus, and so did Rafael d'Urbin the famous painter in the
time of Leo the tenth. It is at this day in the possession of Cardinal
Spinola, of the title of Saint Occilia.

A little further on the right hand you shall find the Church of the Cardinals
train bearers,, then the Palace of the late Cardinal Rusticucci, which gives
the name to the hithermost Piazza: Beyond that on the same hand is the Oratory
of Saint Caterina, governed by a lay confraternity.

When you are entered into the Piazza observe the beauty of the fountain, set
up there by Pope Paul the fifth, with a cup, or boul all of one piece, of a
certain speckled stone, called a Granito. On the left hand stands the Obelisck,
brought out of Egypt, and erected to the Emperors Augustus and Tiberius in
Nero's Circque, the place where Saint Peter's Vestry is now, from whence Sixtus
Quintus removed it, and erected it anew with four Lions of gilded metal
which seem to support it, consecrating it to the Holy Cross: the bigness of
it below is fourteen yards, and forty two minims, the height of it two and
forty yards and an half, the upper part of it is three yards big and four
minims.

In this Piazza are the Palaces of the Priorie of Malta, and of the Family of
the Ciboes, as also the College of the Penitentiaries of Saint Peter, which
are religious men of the company of Jesus, and the Vatican Seminary.

Entering into saint Peter's Church, observe in the porch the number, greatness,
and beauty of the pillars; the riches of the gilded imagerie work; the Holy
Gate, and the Gate of Brass, made by Pope Eugenius the fourth. In the Church
observe the quantity of Pillars, small and great, which which are at the
Altars; the exquisiteness of the pictures over them; the Navisella of Mosaique
works, done by Jorto a famous painter of his time; the statue of piety, the
handy work of Buo Naroto; the statues and sepulchers of brass and marble,
which are to be seen there; the infinite company of Mosaic works; the huge
Pillars of fine cast marble, the quantity and riches of the gilded Imagerie
work; the Sepulcher of the Prince of the Apostles, superbly adorned by Pope
Paul the fifth; the Altar of the same covered with a Tabernacle, supported by
four great wreathed Pillars of metal, richly gilded by the late Pope Urban
the eight, and enriched in the four inches of the plasters of the roof, with
the four Collossian statues, of the Veronica, of Saint Andrew, of Saint
Longino, and of St. Elena, made by the most famous men of that profession. And
in sum, consider the immensitie of the whole Church, in the site whereof
were in times past two ancient Temples of Apollo and Mars, two falls Gods of the
Gentiles: Omit not going into the Vestry, and into the Grott, beautified with
many curiosities, and suptuously adorned; use means to get up into the steeple,
and there admire the beauty and vastness of the frontispice, vaulted roof,
and great Lantern of the Church, and enter if commodiously you can into the
boule, which is on the top of it, with a companion, and your own wonder.

Being come down, go directly through the porch to see the Pontifical Palace,
diligently observing the excellency of the stairs, Courts, porches, and their
pictures: Enter also into the new palace, built by Sixtus Quintus, that you may
enjoy the goodly object of the Clementine Hall, which Clement the eighth caused
to be adorned with fine marbles, and curiously painted from the Cornish
downward by Cherubina Alberti, and from the Cornish upward by Balddassarino of
Bologna, and the brother of Alberti: and lastly, the magnificence of all the
Pontifical Lodgings; likewise the old Lodgeings rarely painted by Rafaele
dVrbino, Guilio Romano, and other renowned painters; the Royal and Ducall
Halls, with their pictures; the Chapel of Sixtus Quintus, painted by
Buonaroti, the new lodgings over the tarrace, made by Urban the eight, with the
rare picturs thereof; the two Galleries, namely that in the Lodge, and the other
over the Library, whose pictures the said Pope Urban caused to be refreshed:
the Urban Army; the Vatican Library, restored, and increased by the said Pope
Urban, and the Vestry and Wardrobe. Descend then to see at the end of the
Tarrace in a Court, which some call Pius Quartus his garden, the famous Statues
of Laocoon, Hercules, Antinonus, and two of Venus, with those of the renounced
Rivers of Nilus, and Tiber, found in former times in Constantines Baths at
Monte Cavello: Go afterward into the great Garden most delectable, and goodly
to behold, for the sumptuousness of the fountains, bascage, walks, and all
kinds of curious flowers, and a world of simples.

Having left the Garden, pass into the great Court of Belnedere, and through
it go to the Guard of Switzers; then toward Campo Santo you shall see the
guard of high horse; the Palace, and Prisons of the holy Office, for the most
part built by the said Urban the eight: Near unto it is the Palace and Garden
of the Cesi, adorned with Statues, and ancient inscriptions: From thence, where
was the street of the Lombardi, who dwelt there in the time of Charles the
Great, you shall walk along by the Palace of the Marquis Vincenzo de Nobili to
the Church of St. Michael the Archangell; and to the Hospital of St. Spirito,
called Sasia, from the Sapons, who for a time inhabited in that place; there
observe the Church, the Palace, the Speciaria, and Hospital for infirm and
hurt persons; the receptacle of Nurses, and infants, and of a world of young
children, exposed to the wide world; all maintained with unexpressible charge,
and charity. And thus much shall suffice to have seen in the first days walk.

The second days walk. By il Frestavere.
Return by il Ponte Saint Angelo to see the goodly Church of St. Onifrio: Then
in Longara (directly from the Gate of Sancto Spirito to the Settimiano of
Julius the second) you shall see the Palace of the Duke Salviati; the Church,
and Hospital of the Ereniti Camoldolici Monks; the Church and Monastery, which
the Princesses, Donna Colonna Barberini lately founded; the Church and
Monastery of St. Jacomo, built from the ground by Cardinal Barberino; and
against it is another of the Penitents.

A little beyond on the left hand is the Palace caled de Ghisirith lodgings
painted in fresco by Raphaele d'Vrbino; and on the left hand is a Palace of the
Riarii.

Within a while you will go out of the Longa through the Gate called
Settimiania, and vulgarly Settignana, from Septimius Severus the Emperor, who
built his Baths with an Altar to Janus, named Settinniano; the title thereof
endured over the gate until the time of Pope Alexander the eight, who took it
away: It was called according to some Porta Fontinale, because in the Temple
thereunto adjoining was the feast of the Fountains celebrated, Crowning the
Wells with flowers, and casting Garlands into the Fountains: although others
believe, that the like feast was kept near to Saint Sebastino's Gate.

Being out of this gate you shall go up on the right hand to see the fountain
of the Alsetina water, built of Marble stones, drawn out of the Emperor Neroa's
Forum by Pope Paul the fifths order, who caused the water to be conducted, for
the space of five and thirty miles, from the lake of Bracciano: This water was
called Augusta from Augustus, who, as some will have it, conducted it thither
from the Lake Alsietino; but if it be true, as Marliano and others write, that
this water was the conveyance of Pope Adrian the first, it must then be said to
be the water Sabbatina from the Lake of Anguillara.

Then enter into the Convent of Franciscan Friars, di S. Pietro Montorio,
wherein there is a notable Chapel of Bramantes design, in the place where
Saint Peter was crucified, and enjoy the sight of the pictures and Statues,
which richly adorn the neighboring Church; amongst the which is worthy of
perpetual memory that famous piece of the transfiguration of our Savior, done
by Rafael de Urbino-

Upon this hill was Statius the Poet buried, and under it Numa Pompilius the
second King of the Romans; whose body with some of his books, was found there
five hundred and five and thirty years after, as Pliny writes lib. 13. cap. 13.

From thence go down to see the Church della Madona, della Scala, of the
Reformati Carmelitani; then pass on to the Church and Monastery of the Nuns
di Santa Maria del Carmine, for the conducting of you to the next most ancient
and beautiful Church of Santa Maria in Frastevere, built over the Lodgings of
the soldiers of the Army, which Augustus kept in the port of Ravenna, called
Taberna Meritoria, where in the time of Augustus, and at the birth of our
savior Jesus Christ, a fountain of Oil sprung up, which continued running for
a whole day together.

Being come out of Saint Mary's, you will find on the right hand the summer
Palace of the Benedictine Monks of Santa Giustina, who have in their charge the
Cathedral Church of Saint Paul without Rome; and turning on the right hand,
you shall see the Church of Saint Calisto, the Pope, wherein is the Well, into
which he was thrown by the Gentiles.

Somewhat further on the left hand is the Church and Monastery of the Nuns of
Saint Cosmato, built in the place where Cesars Naumachia, a place where Navall
fights were represented by the Romans.
Naumachia was: toward Porta Portesse you will find the field wherein the Jews
are buried; but leaving it on the left hand you will come to the devout Church
and Convent delli Reformati di S. Francesco; then to Ripa grande, and from that
to the goodly Church and Hospital di S. Maria dell Horto, situated in the
Mutian Meadows, which were given by the public to Scerola in reward of his
valor.

At your going thence take your way toward Saint Giovanni de Genovesse, which
is annexed to their Hospital, and from that through the postern gate enter
into the most devout and lovely Church di Santa Cecilia, built where her house
stood, and where in the Bath near to the Vestry, she suffered Martyrdom.

Then set your self to retiring home, and that you may enjoy that which
remains worthy of regard in this part of Frastevere, go to see the ruins of
Ponte rotto, from whence look on your right hand to behold on the other shore
the ancient mouth of * Cloacca Massina, standing betwixt the round Temple, and
the Garden of the Cenci.

From thence enter into the high street, and address your self to Saint
Salvatore della Corte; where in the time of the Gentiles was a Court of
Justice, and it may be that which some Antiquaries call the tribunal of
Aurelius.

Then to Saint Grisogono, a Temple worthy of admiration, observing near unto it
the Church of Saint Agato, which was the Paternall house of Pope Gregory the
second, governed by the Fathers of the Christian Doctrine: afterthat the
Monastery of the Nuns of Saint Ruffin, and those of Saint Margarita, and of
Saint Apollonia: Last of all go to see the Farnasses Garden, hard by Ponte
Sisto, by which you make your return to your Lodging.

The third days walk From Strada Giulia to l'Isola di St. Bartolemeo.
In going from home direct your course to the Church of Saint Giovanni de
Fiorentini, and when you have seen it, pass on through the Guilian street, and
observe the Palace of Giovanni Riccio, Cardinal of Montuplicano, now in the
possession of Acquavini.

The Church of Saint Biagio della Pagnotta:

The Church of Saint Maria dell Suffragio.

The Church of Santi Faustino, and Giovita de Bresciani, the model of
Buonatoti.

The Church of Saint Pilippo Neri.

The Church della Spirito Santo de Napolitatani, heretofore called St. Aura.

The Church of St. Caterina de Senase, and the other della Campagna della morte.

Enter into the Palace of the Farnese, and endeavor to see that famous statue
of Dirce tied to a Bull, with other statues, inscriptions, fair lodgings, and
a gallerie, and two goodly fountains in the Piazza.

Then go through the street Giulia to see the Hospital of old men and women,
founded by Sixtus; then the Church and Hospital of the healthy, and the
pilgrims of the most Holy Trinity, in whose Oratory is preaching every Sabbath
day to the people of the Jews.

Beyond that in the Palace of the Cardinal Spada, see the Hall and Lodgings,
with most excellent pictures, Imagerie works, and a very delicate Garden.

Turn into the Piazza of the Farnesse, and use means to get into the Palace of
the Lords Pighim, that you may see that famous statue of Adonis, besides others
that are there.

In this Piazza see the Church of Santa Brigida, which was her house whilst she
lived, and wherein as it is said she made a very holy end.

Pass on to Saint Girolamo della Charita; near unto the which is the fair
Church of St. Tomaso of the English College; a little further is the prison of
Corte Savella; the Church of St. Maria de Monteferrato, the Parish Church of
St. Giovanni in Aino; the Palace of Cardinal Rocci: then go to the Church of
St. Lucia dell Gonfalone, almost just against which is the parish Church of St.
Stephano in Piscimula.

In the same street you will find the Palace of the sometime Cardinal
Roderico Borgia, now inhabited by Cardinal Sachetti; and under it is the
residence of the Popes footmen.

Proceed on to the Church della purificatione della Madonna; a little before
the which is the parish Church, and the Churches of St. Celso, and St. Giuliano.

Then take your way to Monte Giordano, to see the Palace of the Duke di
Bracciano, from whence descend unto the Piazza de Regattieri, enlarged by Pope
Paul the third, go to visit the sumptuous and devout Church of Santa Maria
della Valicelta de Padri dell Oratorio, with entering into the Vestry Oratorie,
and house, rarely built with the design of Signor Francesco Barromini; and
reverence the miraculous body of the glorious St. Filippo Neri, as also the
chamber wherein he lived, and dyed, adorned with much splendour and religion.

From Porta grande pass into Strada nuov, and at the going out of it observe
on the right hand the modesty of the House of Dominico delle Rovere, a
Cardinal in the time of Sixtus Quartus, on the which he caused to be engraven
the two verses at this day thus read.

Stet domus haec, donec fluctus formica marinos Ebibat, and totum testudo
perambulet orbem.

This place is called Pozzo bianco: On the left hand of the said Strada nuova
is the house of the Lord Cerri; then is there that of the Goldsmiths, and of
the Pilgrims, which will lead you to Campo di Fiore, this, they say was so
named of Flora, a woman beloved of Pompey; now it is a Piazza, wherein Horses,
all kind of Corn, and other commodities are sold, and it is a place appointed
for the cxecution of those offenders, whom the holy office consignes over to
the secular Court: This Piazza was first of all paved by Lodovico Scarampo, a
Cardinal in Eugenius the fourths time, and there he terminated the bowing part
of Pompeys Theater, as does appear by the bowing of the Orsinies Palace, built
on the ruins of it, and some have written, that in the age before ours, certain
remains were to be seen of it. Before this Theater Pompey built a Palace,
called the Curia, wherein Caius Caesar was killed: Behind this Palace was a
goodly Atrium is a Porch, Halb, or great Court:
Atrium, from which the vulgar corruptly surnamed the place Satrio. The said
Palace of the Orsini, was built by Francesco Condolmerio, a Venetian Cardinal
Vice Chancellor, and adorned with pictures and statues, by Cardinal Regino, a
Sicilian.

Go along by those that sell doublets and breeches to the Palace of Don Taddeo
Barlerino, Prefect of Rome, and nephew to the late Pope Urban the eight.

There in the Piazza is il monte de Pieta, reduced not long since into an
Island, for the better conservation of the Pawns, and the Church di St.
Martino, beyond the which is the Palace, and Piazza of the Family Santa Croce;
then the Church di Saint Maria in Cacabarii, the Church della Madonna del
Pianto, and the Jews Piazza, wherein observe an antiquity which Lucio Mauro
writes, was a ruined Portico, is any kind of Porch be. fore a Cate, or an open
Gallery underset with Pillars.
Portico, called by the vulgar Ceura, built by the Emperor Severus, but for the
platform which Serlio speaks of in his third book of his Architecture one may
argue, that all the precincts within the compass of the houses of the
Cantacroci, of the Churches Cacabarii and dell Pianto, are seated upon the
ruins of Pompeys sumptuous Portico, which others hold to be the house of
Marias, and it may be from thence the vulgar have corruptly called it
Cacabarii, instead of Casa Marii; then is there the Church of Santa Maria, near
unto the which are seen even until this day great ancient ruins.

Enter into the dwelling place of the Jews, and come forth at Ponte quatro
Capi, by the which go to the Island, called in times past villa de Languenti,
to reverence the Church and Body of St. Bartolomeo the Apostle, built on the
Temple of Esculapius, where the diseased are cured, and also the Church of
Santo Giovanni Calibita, governed by the Religious Brethren aell B. Giovanni di
Dio.

The fourth days walk. From Saint Lorenzo in Dumaso, to Monte Aventino.
BEgin your walk from the Church of Santo Lorenso in Damaso, and therein view
the pictures done by men of great esteem in their profession, the Chancell
richly adorned by Cardinal Francesco Barberino, Vice Chancellor of the
Sepulchers, and other ornaments thereof. There was the first confraternitie of
the holy Sacrament da Teresia enriques instituted, near adjoining was the
Emperor Tiberius his arch.

See the Palace of the Cardinal Vice Chancellor, begun by Cardinal Lodivico
Mezzarota Padovano, and finished by Rafael Cardinal Riario, with materials
taken from the Colossus, and an arch of Gordians, which stood a little distant
from saint Vito.

Then through the Poulterers street go to saint Andrea della valle of the Padri
Theatini, and to saint Carlode Catinari of the Padri Barnabiti, both of them
worthy of great regard.

Pass through the street de Catinare, and go to Piazza Mattei, observing in
the same the fountain, with two Dolphins, and Statues of mettle, which the
Roman people caused to be made in the year 1585. by Taddeo Lantlini the
Florentine at the charge of 1200. Crowns; the palace delli Patritij, sold to
Costagui; and from thence through a lane to the Church, and Monastery of the
Nuns of St. Ambrogio della Massima; and to the Pescaria, or Fishmarket: there
you shall find the most ancient Temple di Sant' Angelo, situated in Circus
Flaminius, and it may be where the Temple of Bellona, or of Mercury was; and as
others will have it, where the Temple of Juno stood.

Being come out of Pescaria, pass on to the Palace of the Savelli, built on
the ruins of the ancient Theater of Marcellus; and then to the street behind
the Church of St. Nicola in Carcere, where the old Fishmarket of the Romans
was; and by this way you will arrive at Ponte rotto.

There observe an Ancient Temple with chamfred Pillars, dedicated Santa Maria
Egittiaca, and was in times past the Temple of Chastity, or according to some,
of Fortune.

A little beyond on the right hand is a round Temple with Chamfred pillars, now
the Church of Sancto Stephano, long ago painted, as Fulvio writes, by Pacuvius
the Poet, Nephew to Ennius, and dedicated to Hercules, or as others will have
it to Juno Matuta.

Adjoining to this is a most delicate Garden belonging to the Cenci, and
between it, the said Church of St. Stephano does the Cloaco Massima empty it
self into the Tiber.

Over against the said Garden is the Collegiat Church of Sancta Maria in
Cosmedin, otherwise called Schola Graeca.

In this Parish were the Stews in Clement the sevenths Papacy, as Andrea Fulmo
reports.

Continue your walk to the bank of Tiker, where you will find a Salara, which
is salt pits
Salara, in the very same place in which it was anciently.

Further forward at the foot of Monti Aventino, under the Church of Santa Maria
del Priorato de Molta you will see the marks of Cacus his Cave, a shepherd
famous for his robberies, and stealing of Hercules his Oxen, by whom he was in
the same place killed with his Club, for which worthy deed the Gentiles erected
a Temple unto him, by the name of Hercules the Conqueror. By this Temple were
the Gemonie stairs, so called from the lamentation of the condemned to death,
who were thrown down headlong from off those stairs, some think that the said
stairs were near to the Campidoglio.

In this place were the Arches of Horatius Cocles erected to him in memory of
that generous act of his in maintaining the Sublician Bridge against the
Tuscans, the marks whereof you will see at the right hand on the Tiber.

In this place likewise was, as some believe, the ancient Gate Trigemina,
before the walls of the City were enlarged by Claudius, Frontino saying that
Cacus dwelt at the salt pits, where the Gate Trigemina stood.

Being gone from thence you will meet with a Bulwark on the left hand, built by
Paul the third, and on the right hand a little further ill monte Testaccio,
made all of broken potts, heaped up in this place by the Potters, who wrought
there hard by, being forbidden to cast them into the River for fear of choking
it up.

In this place was a Portico, called Emilio, near to the River in this part a
fair was wont to be kept; there also were the glassmakers

In the wall of the City you will see Cajus Testius his great Piramide, by the
vulgar believed to be the sepulcher of Remus, and on the forepart of it is this
inscription.

C. CERTIVS L. F. POB. EPVLO. PR. TR. PL. VII. VIR. EPVLONVM. And close to it
in lesser letters.

OPUS ABSOLVTVM EX TESTAMENTO DIEBVS CCCXXX.

ARBITRATV PONTI. P. F. CLAMEL AE HAEREDIS ETPONTHI. L.

Go not out of the Gate, but keep within the City close along by the wall,
and descending this way from Mount Aventine, so called from Aventinus King of
Alba, therein buried, it will lead you to Antoninus Caracallaes Baths, called
Antonianiane, and by the vulgar Antignane; for the service whereof one branch
of the Appian water was conveied thither: they are now under the custody of the
Ministers of the Romans Seminary; and by the judgment of Serlio it is a better
fabric then Dioclesians Baths.

Thereby is the most ancient Church of St. Balbina, adjoining unto the which
was in old time the Temple of Silvanus.

By a little street behind the said Church you will go to St. Saba, where is
the Sepulcher of Titus the Emperor, which at this day is seen in the Porch
thereof.

Then to Santa Prisca, near to the ancient Temple of Diana, where, as some
Antiquaries write, were the Baths of Decius, the Palace of Traian, and the
Varian Baths.

Following along by the said hill you will see the Church of Santa Sabina,
built, as some will have it, in the very place where the said Temple of Diana
stood, within the convent lived St. Dominick, the founder of the Order of the
Dominican Friars; and to it does the Pope with the College of Cardinals ride
in pomp on the first day of Lent. Adjoining thereunto was the Temple of Juno
Regina.

Then to Saint Alessio, where was the Monastery of Saint Bonifacio, which
before was the Temple of Hercules, near unto the same was the Romans mustering
place, where either they set up, and kept their Arms, or trained their men.

Finally toward the Tiber go to Santa Maria Aventina dell Priorato di malta,
where they say was in times past the Temple of the good Goddess, unto whom
none might sacrifice but women.

The fifth days walk. From La-Piazza di Pasquino, by li Monti Celio et
Palatino.
THe beginning of this days walk shall be from la Piazza di Pasquino.

The Piazza is called so from an ancient statua, reputed excellent, although
through the injury of time it is reduced to one only as it were deformed
trunck; the name thereof is thought to be feigned, and to us is the similitude
of it unknown; It serves the officers of the Popes Court, and holy places, for
the publishing of proclamations, Bulls, decrees, indulgences, and such like; it
is situated at one corner of the Orsinies Palace.

From thence go to the Piazza of Saint Pantaleo, where the Court of justice, de
Mattarazzari is kept, and if you desire to see a work of true Charity, enter
into the Church and house de Cadri delle scuole pie, and there admire the
education of poor youth in learning and Christian manners.

Further forward you will see the Palace of the Massini of the Architecture of
Baldassari da Siena, and painted on the outside by Daniele da Volterra: In this
house which now belongs to Pietro and Francesco Massini, was the mavelous art
of printing first of all exercised by Conrad Suveinheym, and Arnold Pannartz in
the year 1455. during the Papacy of Nicholas the fifth.

Proceed on toward la Valle, to see a collection of curious things in the
Palace of Signior Pietro della valle, called ill Pelegrino; then to the Palaces
of the Duke Cesarino, of the Olgiati, of Cardinal Ginnasio, made a Monastery
of Nuns, and a Seminary of students; to the Monastery of the Nuns and young
girls of Santa Saterina delli Funari, built in the midst of the Flaminian
cirque, whereof the beginning was in Piazza Margana, to the Palace de signior
Mattei, where the said cirque ended, to the Piazza de Capisucchi, with the
fountain and Church of Santa Maria de Campitello, and to the Palace of the
Marquess Paluzzi Albertoni: On the left hand of that Piazza you will see an
angel of the Monastery di Torre de Sperchi, founded by santa Francesca Romana.

Go then to Piazza Montanara, where anciently herbs were sold, and where the
Gate Carmentali also was; and there too, from an Altar of Juno, the president
of Matrimony (who therefore was called Juga) begun the street Jugaria, which by
the foot of the Campipoglio lead to the Roman Forum.

In this very Piazza was anciently a pillar, named Lattaria, because, as Festus
writes, Infants were brought thither to have suck given to them.

There on the right hand you will see a part of Marcellus his Theater, upon
which stands the dwelling of the Family Savella.

Beyond is the Church of Santo Nicola, and St. Maria in Portico, erected as the
most part of Antiquaries beleev in Octavius Augustus his sisters sumptuous
Portico: In it is seen a pillar of transparent Alabaster, and there do the
Paari della Madre di Dio inhabit.

On the left hand is the Church of Santo Giovanni de collato, near into the
which is the burying place of executed offenders, and the Temple of Saint
Eligio de Ferrari; as also the Temple of Saint Giorgio, which was in old time
that of Scipio Africanus, and before it runs the little brook della Murana,
anciently called la valle Murtia or Mirtia, of Venus, so named of a Myrtle
there dedicated unto her; then pass along by Circo Massino, where stood the
Obelisck which Sixtus Quintus erected in the Piazza of Santo Giovanni Laterano,
with another likewise erected by him in the Piazza dell Popolo

Between this Cirque and Monte Palatino, you will see the ruins of an Imperial
Palace, and where you are turning to Saint Gregorio, was the ancient gate of
Romulus, called Romanula.

Leaving Saint Gregorio on the left hand go to the Church of the S S. Nereo,
and Achilleo, built, according to some in the place of, or near the Temple of
Isis.

Then to Saint Sisto situated in the fish pond, which was a Bath, wherein the
people used to wash themselves; and from that fish pond did the adjoining parts
take their name.

A little beyond is St. Cesario, from whence go on to Porta Latina, in which is
the place where Saint John the Evangelist was put into a Cauldron of boiling
Oil; as also a Church of his, which was formerly the Temple of Diana.

From the part within the City along by the wall you will come to Saint
Giovanni in Font, and in Laterano, as also to the holy stairs, in which
places you are to observe many things of value, beauty, and devotion, which for
brevities sake I omit.

In the Piazza mark the Palace built by Sixtus Quintus, the Obelisck engraven
with Egyptian Hieroglyphics, placed in times of old by Augustus in the great
Cirque, and from thence transported by the order of the said Sixtus Quintus
into this place, adorned with fair Bases, whereunto Paul the fifth adjoined a
goodly fountain: Under the Portico of Saint Giovanni, you will see through an
Iron grate the statua of Henry the fourth King of France in Brass.

You will in like manner see the Hospital of men and women dell salvatore; and
then go and reverence the Church of Saint Stefano Rotondo, which some think was
the Temple of Claudius the Emperor: of it, Matteo Silvagio, who wrote in the
time of Paul the third, says, Quam tecto nunc carentem marmoreis columnis, et
crustatis varii coloris, marmore, parietibus Mosaicoque opere inter primas
Urbis Ecclesias ornatissimam fuisse judicamus: You will see in this street the
conveyance of the Appian water.

Near thereunto is the most ancient and devout Church of ^anta Maria della
Navicella, so named from a Navicella, is a little Boat, ship, or Pinnace
Navicella of Marble placed before the Church upon a vow made: there you will
also see the famous and most delicious Garden of the Mattei; wherein amongst
other statues, imbossed works, inscriptions, Urnes, and obeliscks, is an Apollo
fleaing of Marsias; a modern Andromeda, an ancient Amazon, an ancient Antoninus
in a Collossean form, three Boys, a sheep cowring on the ground, and an head
of Marcus Tullius Cicero, very ancient, and above all the rest most worthy of
observation.

Pass on along by the defaced Church of Saint Tomasso, to the house and now
the Church of Santi Giovanni and Paolo, wherein they were secretly beheaded,
and buried by the commandment of the Emperor Julian the Apostate: There too
was the Palace and Court of Tullius Hostilius, the third King of the Romans; as
also the dwelling of some Popes.

Descend from this place to the Piazza made by Cardinal Antonio Maria
Salviati, where you will see the Church of Saint Gregorio, by him built in the
place where his own house stood, and dedicated to Saint Andrea.

Then go up to Monte Palatino through a street which stands in the face of the
Piazza, and every where you will discern the ruins of the Imperial Palace
called Maggiore.

Upon the top of the Hill on the left hand is another Garden of the Mattei, and
on the right hand you will meet with the Hippodrome, or Emperors Quierie or
stable, where saint Sebastian was shot to death, near to the which is the
Church dedicated to the said saint, lately restored from the very foundation,
and richly endowed by Prince Taddeo Barberino, Prefect of Rome, who had the
patronage of it. Under this Church is salt Peter dug, and against it are the
famous Farnesian Gardens, at the gate whereof toward Campo Vaccino, was Cesars
house situated.

Being come out of the Garden, you will see the Church of santa Maria
Liberatrice, in the place where the Temple of Vesta stood, as Andrea Fulvia
writes, which place is famous, either for the Lake, whereinto on that part
Metius Curtius the Captain of the Sabines fell; or for the gulf, into which
the Roman Curtius precipitated himself: It was afterward closed up upon the
occasion which Cardinal Baronius recounts, in the year 324. by saint Silvester
the Pope, who built upon it this Church; before the which are three chamfred
pillars seen, with their Chapters, and Corniches, of admirable workmanship, and
it is thought that they belonged to the Portico of Jupiter sta^or.

Following on your way by the side of this hill, you will find the round
Church of san. Teodoro, called vulgarly san Toto; in it was the ruminall
figtree, under which the two Royal Infants Romulus and Remus were suckled by a
she-Wolfe, and afterward by Acca Laurentia the wife of Faustulus the
shepherd; here was also the Temple of Quirinus, in which was the Altar of
Laurentia, where the Supercalian, and Laurentian games were wont to be
celebrated, and were afterward abolished by the Popes, with dedicating the
ancient Temple to san Teodoro, and introducing the use of carrying thither
young Infants, oppressed with hidden infirmities, to the end they might be
freed from them by the intercession of the said saint.

This Church had been reduced to manifest ruin, had not the piety of Cardinal
Barberino provided for it, by covering the roof all over anew, restoring the
walls, and the Mosaique work of the Chancell.

Before this Church there was a wood, and a Fen, or moorish ground, occasioned
by the waters falling down from the neighboring hills, and settling in this
low place, which was by Tarquinius Superbus filled up with earth, and the wood
cut down, so that being made dry and firm ground, it was by the conveyance of
the Cloaca Massina converted into the Roman Forum

From thence go to see the fair Church della Madona della Consolatione, which
was built upon occasion of the miracles which an Image, painted by Master
Antonazzo on the side of a wall next to the Capitol, began to work on the six
and twentieth of June 1470. and was consecrated on the third of November the
same year, as Stephano Infessura reports in his Diarie: Next of all see the
Hospitalls of diseased men and women, together with a little Church called
Madonna delle gratie, wherein is an Image painted by Saint Luke. Thus having
seen enough for this day, you shall do well to return home.

The sixth daiys walk. From Saint Salvatore dell Lauro by Campo Vaccino, and
by le Carine.
IN the beginning of this days walk visit the Church of Saint Salvatore del
Lauro, built by Latino Cardinal Orsini, together with the other della Madona
della Pace, of the Lateranense regular Cannons, and that of Santa Maria
dell'Anima of the German nation, against the which is another of Saint Nicola
de Lorensi.

Enter into Piazza Navona, anciently called the Agonall circque, either because
the Games of Janus Agonius were there in a green meadow celebrated, by the
commandment of Numa King of the Romans; or because the Emperor Alexander did
there make the cirque named Agonal. Observe in that Piazza the Brothel-house
Cell, whereunto Saint Agnes was carried for to be bereaved of her Virginity,
but was in the same place delivered by an Angel, and now it is converted into
the Church of the Minorite Friars; another of St. Jacomo belonging to the
Spaniards, with their Hospital; the Palaces of the Family Cupis, of Cardinal
Pamfilio, the present Pope; of the Orsini, of the family Torres; and three
fountains, built by Gregory the thirtenth.

Then the College called Sapienza, begun by Eugenius the fourth, wherein is at
this day a goodly Church built, the design of Signior Francesco Boromino, the
Palace of Cardinal Lanti, the Piazza della Dogane, the Monastery of Santa
Chiara, the Palace of the Nari, the Palace of the Vittorii, and from thence
turn on the left hand to the Palace of the Sannelii.

Proceed on to the Piazza and Church of St. Giovanni della Pigna; to the Palace
of the Duke Muti, to the Palace of the Cardinal Altieri, to the Piazza and
Church of Jesus, wherein admire the magnificence of the fabric, the
sumptuousness of the Chapels, the splendour of the sacred furniture, and in
the house the library, with the Chapel of the holy founder, whose body you
may reverence in the Church.

Ascend to the Campidoglio, observing in the midst of the Piazza the famous
statua in mettle, of Marcus Aurelius on Horseback; the fountains, statua's,
pillars of marble trophies, and other ancient monuments.

Go up into the Church of Araceli, built in the place where the Temple of
Jupiter Feretrius stood, before the which is a pair of stairs of above an
hundred Marble steps, taken from the ancient Temple of Quirinus.

Then pass on to the Senators Hall, which serves him and other Magistrates for
a Court of justice, and therein you will see statuaes, inscriptions, and the
prison of the Capitol; all built at first by Boniface the ninth on the ruins
of ancient edifices.

Enter into the Palace of the Conservators, built with the design of Buonarota,
where in the Court yard, porticoes, stairs, hall, and lodgings, you will see
statua's, Imagerie, pictures, and diverse inscriptions.

Get up to Monte Caprino, otherwise called the Tarpeian Rock, and from thence
in descending for to go to Campo vaccino, you will see on the right hand a
Portico, with rows of pillars belonging to the ancient Temple of Concord; on
the left hand you will discern three pillars rarely chamfered, with their
Chapters, and Corniches, which are the relics of the Temple of Jove the
thunderer.

Somewhat beneath you will perceive Septimius Severus his Arch, and on the left
hand the church of St. Giosepe, under the which is the Mamertine and Tullian
prison wherein St. Peter and St. Paul and infinite other Martyrs were
imprisoned, consecrated as Fulvio writes, by St. Silvester the Pope.

Near thereunto is the Churches of Santa Martina, and of S. Luke, of the
painters Academy, said to be in three Forums, in regard of the adjoining Forum
Romanum, that of Julius Caesar, and that of Augustus: In the last Church is the
Body of the said Saint conserved in a place richly adorned by Signor Pietro da
Lortona, a famous painter.

Then is there the Temple of St. Adriano, with gates of metal, anciently
built to Saturn; thereby was the public treasury, and before that Church was
a golden pillar, from whence all the high ways of Italy took their beginning.

Further forward is a Portico with rows of pillars seen, as also the Church of
Santo Lorenzo in Miranda de spetiali, which was in ancient times a Temple
erected to Faustina, and Antonius Pius her husband.

Fast by that Temple was the Fabian Arch erected to Fabius the Censor, who for
the subduing of Savoy was called Allobrogus, and there a statua was erected
unto him.

Not far from that arch was the Puteale, is a well or Pit.
Puteal of Libonus, and the Antiquaries say it was called Puteale, from a well
adjoining to the Pretors Tribunal built by Libonus.

Here also is another Church dedicated to St. Cosino, and St. Damiano, which at
first was wholly under ground, and in regard of the dampishnesse thereof
altogether impracticable, but the late Pope Urban the eight reduced it with a
Massy pavement to a good condition, and adorned it with pictures, and other
rich ornaments. Some Antiquaries report, that this Temple was in times past
dedicated to Remus, others to Romulus, and others to Castor and Pollux; it has
a gate of Brass.

After this you will see the relics of the most ancient Temple of peace, built
by Vespasian, where was an Arch called Latona, and corruptly Ladrone.

Hereunto is adjoining the Church of Santa Maria Nuova, wherein lies the Body
of St. Francesca Romana: in the Garden of this Monastery are the ruins of two
ancient edifices to be seen, which some think were two Temples erected to the
Sun, and Moon; others to Concord and Esculapius; and others to Isis and
Serapis.

Within a little of this is the Emperor Titus his Arch, which by the
Ecclesiastical writers was called Septem Lucernarum, from a Candlestick there
seen curiously engraven: In the roof within is the image of Titus rarely cut:
Not far from this in that part of mount Palatine which stood on the sacred way,
was the Temple of Rome, whose roof was covered with sheets of Brass, that
were carried to the Vatican Church, by Pope Honorius the first.

Coming from under the said Arch, go and see on the right hand the first Arch
that was erected to Constantine the Emperor; there are in it Imagerie, and some
statuaes, whereof the heads were carried by Lorenzo Medici to Florence.
Marliano observes, that the superior part of this Arch, was made with the
remains of Trajans Arch.

It is a probable opinion that here stood the old Curiae where the Priests
inhabited.

Then next in your sight is the most stately Amphitheater of Titus Vespasian,
half ruined, called il Colisseo, more famous for the trophies acquired by the
holy Martyrs, then for the excellency of the Fabric.

The first that made a grant of the stones of this edifice, was Theodoric King
of the Goths, at the request of the Roman people, with these words. Saxa ergo,
quae suggeritis de Amphithe atro longa vetustate collapsa, nec aliquid ornatu
publico jam prodesse nisi solas turpes ruinas ostendere, licentiam vobis eorum,
in usus duntaxat publicos, damus, ut in murorum faciem surgat, quod non potest
prodesse, si jacet. But Paul the second pulling down that part which looked to
Saint Giovanni, and to St. Paolo, employed the marble thereof in building of
St. Marks Palace, and afterward Cardinal Rafaele Riario built with the same
stones the Palace of the Chancerie at St. Lorenzo in Damasco; and Cardinal
Farnesse (who was Paul the third) built his Palace therewith in Campo di Fiore;
all of them as stately edifices as any Rome has.

At this Colisseo began the Labican way, which from the Church of St. Clemente,
and then from St. Pietro and St. Marcellino, went out of Porta Maggiore to
Labico, a place not far distant from Rome, which is thought to be called at
this day Valmontone.

Keep on your course toward St. Giovanni Laterano, which will lead you to the
most ancient Church of St. Clemente; from whence go up on the right hand to
Monte Celio, and see the ancient devout Church delli Santi quatro Coronati,
which was destroyed by the Emperor Henry the second, and restored by Pope
Paschall the second, as also adorned with a most rich Chancell by Cardinal
Millino; on this point of the Mount is a Monastery of Nuns, and of young
orphan girls.

Further forward, having past the Salviati Colleges Vineyard, you will see on
the left hand the devout little Church of santa Maria Imperatrice, called in
the ancient book of rites and Ceremonies, St. Gregory in Martio, from the near
adjoining conveyance of the water, called Maria.

Being parted from thence, ascend up through a little street to St. Clemente,
for to go to the set Sale, a place now shut up, and there take your way by
the hill named delle Carine, to the Monastery of the Nuns della
Purificatione, and to the Noble Temple of san Pietro in Vincoli, surrounded
with the relics of the Emperor Titus his Baths, and Palace. In this Temple you
will see saint Peter's sacred Chains, together with a Moses, and other goodly
statuaes, the works of Buonarota.

Behind this same Temple in a Vineyard stands the reserve of the water of the
Emperor Titus his Baths, called the set Sale, worthy to be seen.

In the Piazza of the said Temple, you will see a modern and fair Church of
san Francesco di Paolo, built by the College of the Minimi Friars; and a
little lower a modern Monastery of Nuns.

Afterward descending, enter into Vico Scelerato, so called from the
wickedness committed by Tullia in riding in her Coach over the Body of her
Father; and go to a little Church of Santa Andrea, seated in the place, named
Busta Galica, from the bones of the Frenchmen there heaped up together, as
Varro writes, and of the vulgar called in Portogallo, where see the most
delectable Garden of Cardinal Pio, formerly belonging to Cardinal Lanfranco.

In this place the Antiquaries seat the Tigello Sororio, which was a long pole,
or rafter, laid acrosse the street, for the purging of the parricide committd
by that Horatius, who after the slaughter of the Curiatii, returning Conqueror
killed his sister there.

Here also between the Colisseo and Trajanus adjoining Forum, do the
Antiquaries place an Arch, called Aurea.

Proceeding on you will see la Torre de Conti, built by Innocent the third, and
was not many years since more then half pulled down, because it threatened
ruin; and direct your way to an ancient wall made like the point of a Diamond,
which was the Confine of Nervaes Forum: pass from the same to an arch, where
on the left hand are three chamfred pillars, upon which rises up the steeple
of the next Church of St. Basilio, and it is said they are remains of the
Emperor Nerva's Temple, although others have written that the said Church was
built by Pope Symmachus upon the ruins of Trajanus Forum. These parts were all
Gardens, and by Pope Gregory the fourteenth made streets, which were
replenished with edifices in less then two years space.

Pass on to the Monastery of the Nuns of St. Vrbano in Campo Carleo; then
to St. Maria in Campo Carleo, and to the Monastery of St. Eusemia, and so you
will arrive at the Piazza of Santa Maria di Loreto, wherein Apollodoro, a
famous Architect, placed that most stately pillar, all engraven with stories,
in the honor of Trajan the Emperor, being an hundred and eight and twenty foot
high, and it is ascended to the top on the inside by an hundred fourscore and
five steps.

You may terminate this days walk at St. Marco the Pope, where his body is
conserved, and at his Palace, whereof Platina writes in the life of Paul the
second: Aedificavit etiam splendide, ac magnifice apud St. Marcum. Afterward
Silvagio writes of Paul the third: Ampliavit et auxit plateas cicumcirca St.
Marcum, id est circa Palatium ejusdem, quod Papale Palatium nuncupavit, pro
oestivo tempore mutatorium, ob aeris salubritatem; Item Pontem a dicto Palatio
usque ad Capitolinum montem a part altera Monasterij S. Mariae de Ara Caeli
suis construxit expensis, magnoque artificto manu fabrefactum artificis, ita ut
ubi pons desinit Palatium unum quod partem capit montis; partem alteram capit
Monasterij S. Mariae de Ara Caeli pro se extruxit, quod non modicum Vrbem
exornat.

In the Piazza of the said Church is a fountain, with a very goodly Concha, is
a great shell of a Fish, such as is seen, of Mother of Pearl.
Concha, which was found in a Vineyard at S. Lorenzo without the Walls, and set
there by Cardinal Farnesse in the lieu of a greater taken away by him from
thence, and carried to his Palace.

The seventh days walk. From la Piazza di S. Apollinario by ill monte
Viminale, and Quirinale.
IN the Palace of the Duke of Altemps, you will see a most noble Library, made
by Duke Giovanni Angelo; as also a Chapel, with pictures, marbles, sacred
furniture, and a very rich Vestry, wherein is reserved the Body of St. Annicet
the Pope.

View near thereunto the Temple of St. Apollinare, and the Germane College,
where every festival day you may enjoy most excellent music.

Then the Palace of the great Duke, built all as it were from the very
foundation by Melchiore Capis, a Cardinal in Pope Alexander the Sixths time;
and rebuilt the last year in the Piazza of Madama, so called from the Emperors
Daughter who dwelled in the said Palace; behind it you will see the ruins of
the Emperor Alexanders Baths.

Go afterward to the Church of S. Luigi del Franzesi.

To the Palace of the Marquess Justiniano, full of statues and pictures.

To the Church of St. Eustachio.

To the Church of Santa Maria supra Minerva, with the Convent of the Friars of
St. Domenico: Observe the Chapel of St. Tomaso, the work of Pietro Perugino;
the Christ, with the Cross done by Buonaroti, the Chapel of the
Aldobrandini. In the site of this Church was the Temple of Isis.

To the Church of St. Stephano.

To the Church of Santa Maria, and to the Monastery of Nuns, wherein digging
this year were two inscriptions of the Gentiles found, which together with the
ruins of a Christian Priest also found in the ruins of the Monastery of Santa
Eusemia, at the foot of Monte Esquilino, were by me copied out, and by Signior
Silvio Zaccagniana, Chamberlain of St. Marta, thus registered to eternal memory.

In the Monastery of St. Marta.

D M

Optatae Onesimus

Conjugi suae Pientissime B. M. F.

Quae vixit an. XXVI.

D M

Pago Filio

Qui Vixit M. IXD. IV.

Horas IV.

Been Mer. Parents Fecerunt.

In the ruins of St. Eusemia.

Hic requiescit corpus Presbyteri Roberti Marci de Sara Gosa de Insula
Siciliae, qui obiit in hoc Ven. Mon. An. Dom. 1387. Ind. 10. tempore Sanctiss.
Patris et D Vrbani Papae VI. die 2. mensis Aprilis. Presbyter Matthaeus ejus
frater dedit, et dotavit de denar. Capellam pro anima ipsorum C. Floren. auri,
quos dedit dictis monialibus.

To the Roman College over against the Duke Salviati's Palace.

To the Collegiate Church of Santa Maria in via lata, in time of old the
dwelling of St. Peter, of St. Paul, of Luke, Martial, Mark and others; where
in a fair Chapel built by the Cavalier d'Asti, is the Image of our Lady,
drawn by St. Luke, conserved.

To the Palace of the Aldobrandini, built, if I do not err, by Nicolo,
Archbishop of Capua, a Cardinal in the time of Eugenius the fourth, as
appears in the third book of Biondoes Roma Restorata; but some will have it
begun by Cardinal Agriense, and finished by Cardinal Fatio Santorio, who gave
it to Julius the seconds Nephew.

From thence pass on to the Piazza of the holy Apostles, and there see the
Palaces of the Constable Colonna, of the Prince of Gallicano, of the Muti, and
of the Marquess of Cassano.

So up by the little hill of Signiori della Mallara, and come down to the
Church of Santa Caterina di siena, within which Monastery is the Tower, built
by Pope Boniface the Eight, in the place where Trajan the Emperors soldiers
inhabited, for which cause it was called Turris militiarum. From thence with a
little walk on the right hand you will arive at the Museo, is a Schole, or
Study.
Museo of Cavalier Gualdi; then to the Church of St. Quirico, and to la Madonna
dei monti, where is the College of the Neofti, and house of the Catecumini,
newly built by the Cardinal di S. Onofrio.

Ascend up by the Saburra to see the Churches of de Monti, of Santa Lucia in
Selci; of S. Matteo in Merulana; of S. Croce in Jerusalem, and of St. Bibiana.

There see the arches of the ancient Aqueduct of the Martian water, which
disgorged it self at the end of the street, that leads to St. Bibiana, and the
place is vulgarly called Trofei di Mario; though all those parts betwixt the
said Church, and the others of St. Eusebio, and of St. Matteo, are named by the
Ecclesiastics Merolano and by some Mariana, but it is probable it should be
Martiana, from the running of the Martian water there.

See the Church of St. Eusobio, and the Quire thereof, made of Wal-nutt tree,
excellently carved: There is some controversy amongst Antiquaries, whether
this was not the Emperor Gordians Baths.

Then the Church of St. Antonio, in whose Monastery is the old Church, called
St. Andrea in Cata Barbara, with a most ancient Chancell of Mosaic work, made
by Pope Simplicius; the Church and Hospital were built and endowed by
Cardinal Pietro Cappocci, as Fanuccio has written in the pious works of Rome,
Fatio Santorio, a Cardinal in the reign of Pope Julius the second, built the
Palace and Granarie adjoining.

Before the Church was a little obelisck erected of Granite stone, adorned with
a Ciborio, is the Tabernacle, wherein the Hostia is kept in Church:
Ciborio, supported by four pillars, in the Papacy of Clement the eight.

Pass on further toward Suburra by Galiens Arch, now called St. Vita, from
the neighboring Church, and go to the ancient beautiful and devout Church of
S. Prasside, erected in the Baths of Novatus, in the place at this present
named Lateritio; and therein the devout Chapel called anciently the Oratorie
of S. Zenone; afterward the Garden of Paradise, and otherwise Santa Maria
libera nos a poenis inferni, made and adorned by Paschall the first Pope; where
amongst other relics is the pillar, unto which our Savior Christ was bound
and whipped.

From thence walk on to the Piazza of St. Maria Maggiore, observing the pillar
transferred thither from the ancient Temple of peace, by Pope Paul the fifth,
and the forefront thereof in Mosaic work, which is thought to be built in the
very place where Juno Lucina was with false worship adored.

From the back part of it you will go to the most ancient and devout Church of
Santa Potentiana, seated at the head of the Urban street, anciently called
Vicus Patricius, which was the house of S. Pudentius the Senator, Father to S.
Potentiana, and S. Prasside, and St. Peter's first host. In it enjoy the sight
of the rich Chapel of the Gartani; it is governed by the barefooted Monks of
St. Bernard.

Thence forthright you will arrive at San Lorenzo in Font, which was his
prison in the house of St. Ippolito the Roman Cavalier lately renewed with
fabrics, and adornings, by the congregation of the Courtiers, erected by the
last Pope Urban the Eight.

From this you will ascend to San Lorenzo in Panisperna, where according to the
tradition established by the Antiquaries, S. Laurence the Martyr was broiled
upon a Gridiron; but the building of the Church, and theetymologie of the
surname in Panisperna, are uncertain. In this Monastery do the Nuns of the
order of Santa Chiara inhabit, and herein dyed St. Brigid, as some writers
think.

It is the opinion of many, that in this place were the Olympiad Baths: Behind
the which in that place toward the Quatrinal were also the Baths of Agrippina
the Mother of Nero; and toward the Subburra was, according to some, the Palace
of Decius the Emperor.

Go down then to St. Agata, which was in times past restored and reverenced by
the Goths, afterward reduced by St. Gregory the great to the Catholic
worship, and lastly beautified with new buildings by the Cardinals Francesco,
and Antonio Barberino.

And there over against the Church, and Monastery of San Barnardino, and in
the face of the Aldobrandinies villa, a little further on the left hand, is the
Church and Monastery of S. Domenico.

When you are on the top of the hill, corruptly called Bagnanapoli, from the
Baths of Paulus Emylius, seated below the Monastery of Santa Caterina, turn
on the left hand on that hill, which is a part of Monte Quirinale, and go to
see the Church of San Silvestro, belonging to the Fathers Teatino, in whose
Convent is an excellent Library, and a very fair Garden.

Being gone from thence, endeavor to see Cardinal Mazzarino's Palace, built
by Scipione Cardinal of Borghese upon the ruins of Constantine the Emperors
Baths, with the Architecture of Flaminio Pontio, Giovanni Vansantio, Carlo
Madonna, and Sergio ventuti, and sold to Giovan' Angelo Duke Altemps, then to
the Marquisse Bentivogli, and by both of them augmented with Fabrics, and
adorned with the picutres of Guido Reno, and other good Masters; there is a
delicate Garden also belonging to it.

In the Piazza you will see two great Horses, with two men of an extraordinary
stature in marble, which has given the name of Monte Cavallo to this part of
the Quirina'e; they were transferred into this Piazza from the said Baths for
an ornament to the Pontifical Palace, and they were cut or engraven by
Phideas, and Praxiteles, who flourished in Sculpture in the age going before
the birth of Alexander the great.

Descend then, leaving the Pontifical Palace on the right hand, toward the
City, and at the bottom of the hill you will find on your left hand the
Monastery delle Virgini, and that deli' Humil'ta under the care of the Friars
of St. Domenick.

Pass on to the Church of S. Marcello, nell Corso, which was sometimes the
house of Santa Lucina, where St. Marcellus the Pope was put to death by the
Tyrant: near to this place is the Palace of Cardinal Cesi.

After that to the Piazza di Sciari Colonna, where Don Guilio, Prince of
Carbognana, has new made up his Palace very stately.

From thence take your way to the Oratory of St. Francesco Xaverio, and to the
sumptuous Temple of St. Ignatio, Founder of the company of Jesus; then to San
Bariolomeo de Bergameschi, before the which, is an Obelisck engraven with
Egyptian Characters.

Further forward in that street stands the Roman Seminary of foster-children,
governed by the Fathers of the Jesuits; from this same go to the Piazza della
Rotonda, where is a Fountain, erected by Pope Gregory the thirteenth, and a
goodly vessel of porphyrie, which served the ancient Romans for the washing of
themselves in their stoves or Baths. There also will you see that famous
Temple, called by the ancients, the Pantheon, and now Saint Maria Rotonda: It
is held to be the fairest, and best piece of workmanship of all others
whatsoever of that kind. The Founder of it is thought to be Marcus Agrippa, and
it was built in the fourteenth year after Christ's Birth. Out of the observation
made by skillfull Architects it is conceived, that the Portico was made at a
different time from the Temple, in regard that the work is disjoined the one
from the other. It was stricken with lightning, and burnt in the year of Christ
113. and was restored by Lucius, Septimius, Severus, and Marcus Aurelius,
Antonius, Emperors. The roof or vaulting thereof, by reason of age, and an
Earthquake, threatened ruin, but it was repaired, and covered in some places
with lead by Eugenius the fourth, and other succeeding Popes. Observe the
magnificence of the Portico, in the quality and greatness of the pillars,
which measured with the Roman span are six spans, and 29. minuti thick; the
Gate of brass, restored by Pius the fourth, twenty spannes, and two minuti
wide; the breadth of the whole Temple from one side to another, being an
hundred, and ninety spannes; and so much is the height thereof, from the
pavement to the mouth of the overture above. It has one only light in the
superior part thereof, which is thirty six spannes and an half wide; the
thickness of the wall, which compasses the Temple is thirty and one spanns.

So the Chapel of St Gioseppe della Confraternita de vitruosi, wherein are
the Sepulchers of diverse illustrious men; as also the Chapel, and Sepulture
of Rafaele a'Urbino; and so return back to your home.

The eighth days Walk. From la Piazza Nicosio to le Term Dioclesianae
BEgin your walk from the Clementine College, ercted by Clement the eighth in
the Piazza Nicosia; then go unto that part of Campo Marzo, where the Palace of
the great Duke of Toscan stands; proceed on to the Palace, of the Pallavicini,
now inhabited by Cardinal Palotta; and turning on the right hand, enter into
the street, where the Palace of the Count of Marescotto is, and so pass to
Santa Croce de Montecitorio, a Monastery of Nuns; to the Palace, and College
dei Capranici, in the Piazza whereof is the Church of Santa Maria in Acquiro,
with the House of the Orphans, and the College Salviati.

Go into the Piazza di Pietra, which should be said dei Preti, as Fulrio
writes, from the Priests, who there dewelt in the ancient edifice, adorned with
great chamfred Pillars, which is thought to have been the Hall of the Emperor
Antonius his house.

Further forward you will see the Hospital of miserable madmen, and toward
the Piazza di Sciarra, you will pass to the Monastery of St. Jacomo delli
Moratri; then to the the Piazza della: Fontana di Frev; after that to the new
Palace of Cardinal Carpegna; and so go up to see the Pontifical Palace of
Monte Cavallo, with the Lodgings, Gallerie, Chappells, and Garden thereof,
which was reduced into an Island by the late Pope Urban the eighth.

From thence direct your course to the street, which begins with the Monastery
of the Nuns of Santa Maria Madalena, toward the four Fountains, and in that
street you will find the Monastery of the Capuchine Nuns, built where the
Temple of Quirinus stood, which was afterward the Vineyard of Geronimo
Genutio, Auditor of the Chamber in the Papacy of Clement the seventh, and made
a Cardinal by Pope Paul the third.

As also St. Andrea, where there is a very fair garden; the Garden dei Beondi;
the house of the Carmelitans Spain with their Church; St. Carlo de i Reformati
Spagnoli de Riscatto, built with the ingenious and excellent design of Signor
Francesco Borromini.

There turning on the right hand you will find the house delli Reformiti
Francesi del Riscatto, with their Church, dedicated to St. Denis; and will
suddenly arrive at a little row of houses, which stand in the valley of
Quirinus, so named from the Temple of Romulus, called Quirinus.

A little beyond is the Church, and Monastery of the Monks of Saint Norberto;
finally you will come to the Piazza, where stands the Pyramid, which was taken
from Augustus his Mausoleum by the order of Sixtus Quintus.

Visit the Church of Santa Maria Magiore, and labor to see the Vestry thereof,
and those other two of Sixtus Quintus, and Paulus Quintus their Chapels;
observing the Mosaique work, the statuaes, pictures, pillars, shrines, and
sepulchers of the said Church.

Go to have a sight of Cardinal Montaltoes sumptuous Garden, from the which
pass to the Piazza of Dioclesians Baths, which you will observe to have been
most stately, and were built by the Christians at the commandment of that
Tyrant, being afterward converted into the Church, and Monastery of the Monks
Certosini. In the time of Clement the seventh were certain heads, and fragments
of statuaes of the Emperors found, whereof some were carried into Campidoglio,
and others sent to Florence.

See the public Granaries which Gregory the thirteenth, Paul the fifth, and
Urban the eight caused to be made, with the Church first dedicated to St. Paul,
and afterward upon the occasion of the victory at Prague, called Santa Maria
della Vittoria of the barefooted Carmelitan Friars, Sixtus Quintus his
fountain; the Church and Monastery of the Nuns of Santa Susanna, augmented
by Cardinal Barberino: the Church of St. Bernardo, where is also the Convent
of the Monks of the said Saint: the Church of St. Cajo the Pope, built by Urban
the eight: the Church della Santissima Incarnatione of the Barberinies Nuns,
and the other adjoining of the barefooted Carmelitan Nuns; from thence go
down and see the Barberinies Palace, with the most stately Portico stairs, and
Hall curiously painted by Signior Pietro di Cortona, and in it also you may
enjoy the sight of Cardinal Barberino's great Library, and beautiful Garden.

Over against this Palace is the Scotts College, built by Signior Jacomo
Quorli, a Florentine Gentleman, for his own dwelling, and afterward bought by
Clement the eight, for the education of Scottish youth, under the government of
the Jesuits.

In the Piazza which heretofore was named dei Sforzi, you will see the most
goodly fountains, erected by the late Pope Urban the eight, with the design of
Cavalier Bernino.

Direct your course then to Madonna di Constantinopoli; to the Church dell'
Angelo custode, and a little beyond them to the Palace of Cardinal Cornaro;
afterward by the Piazza della Fontana di Frevi, to the Convent and Church de
Crociferi; to the Palace of the Duke di Cere; to the Church of Sti Maria in
via, with the Convent de Frati Serviti: next you will see in the Piazza
Collonna Antonius the Emperor Coclids pillar, into which you may go up; it is
an hundred and seventy six foot high, and has two hundred and six steps, which
receive the light from six and fifty little windows.

In the same Piazza is the Church of S. Paolo della Padri Bernabites, la
Madonna della Pieta de Pazi; the Palaces de Bufali, de Veralli, de gli
Aldobrandini: and also a beautiful fountain, which Gregory the thirtenth
caused to be made.

The Ninth days walk. From la Piazza Borghese, to Porta Pinciana.
HAving past the Clementine College, go to see the Palace of the Prince
Borghesse, with the winding stairs of Bramantes doing, and the pictures of
Capuccino, the Church of S. Girelamo de Schiavoni, the Church and Hospital of
S. Rocco, built in Augustus his Mausoleum, which served for the Sepulture of
the Emperors, the Church of Santa Maria di Loreto; the Palace of the Capponi;
the Piazza and Church of Santa Maria dell Popolo, where Pope Gregory the
thirteenth caused a Fountain to be made, and Sixtus Quintus erected a Piramide,
taken from Circus Maximus, which was set up there by the Emperor Augustus, and
dedicated to the Sun.

Turning toward the City, enter into the street dell Corso, which was
levelled and paved from the foot of the Campidoglio by Paul the third; and you
will see the Church and Hospital of San Jacomo de gl'Incurabili; and over
against that the Church of Giesu Maria, San Carlo dei Milanesi; and the Palace
of the Gasteni, heretofore belonging to the Ruccellai.

Then will you meet with the Church of San Lorenzo in Lucena, conjoined to the
Palace of Cardinal Montalto, which was first of all built by an English
Cardinal about the year of Christ 1300. upon the ruins of Domitians Palace, so
called at that time; afterward amplified and respectivly restored by the
Cardinals Morinense, Calandrino, Cibo, Vlisbonense, Fatio, di S. Sabina, and
lastly augmented by the Prince Peretti; the house de poveri putto di Latt rato;
the Palacs of Cardinal Teodoli; the Church and Monastery of S. Maria
Maddalena delle convertite; the Palace of Cardinal Verospi, adorned with
ancient statuaes, the Church and Monastery of S. Silvestro de Capite; and the
other della Madonna di S. Giovannino; the Church of S. Andrea of the order of
the Minimi Friars; the Church of the Urban College de propaganda Fide; the
Church and Monastery of San Gioseppe delle Carmelitane.

Afterward ascend up to go toward Porto Pinciana, and in a corner of the
street which leads to S. Isodoro, you may see Signior Francesco Angelonies
famous study.

Proceed on to view the Church and Convent of S. Isodoro of the Irish Friars of
St. Francis, where is a very fair Library; near to the same is the Church and
Convent of the Capuchines, built from the foundation by Cardinal Antonio
Barberino; a little further is the Church of S. Nicola da Tolentani, of the
reformed bare-foote Augustinian Friars.

Parting from thence, go and find out Porta Pia, through which you must pass
to see the two most worthy Temples of Santa Agnese, and of Santa Costanza, rich
with pillars, Marbles, Mosaic work, and a great Sepulcher of Porphyrie,
believed of the vulgar to be that of Bacchus.

Turning back to the City, before you enter, see the Prince Borghesies Garden,
made by Cardinal Scirione Borghese, in the Papacy of Paul the fifth, which is
replenished with such abundance of various and several rarities, as the like
is hardly to be found elsewhere: wherefore after you have diligently observed
them all, pass into the Palace unto which it belongs, and admire all the
adorned parts thereof; the great number of statuaes, Urnes, Conchaes, antic
and modern Vasses, wherewith it is encompassed, and pargetted: ascend up into
the Lodgings thereof, full of statuaes, and stately seats, and first of all
into the hall, in which, besides a multitude of arms of all sorts, and other
ornaments, you will see twelve heads of the twelve Cesars, some ancient, and
others modern, bigger then the life, with breasts of several Marbles; two like
heads; the one of Scipio Africanus, and the other of the Carthaginian
Hanniball; an ancient Sepulcher with a cover of Marble, and a woman lying along
upon it; twelve pillars, whereof four are of Porphyrie, two of green, and two
of speckled stone, upon the top of which are figures of marble. In the first
Chamber is a David with his sling, done by Cavalier Bermino, a Seneca of touch
in the Bath, by Africano, and a she Wolf of red marble, with Romulus and Remus
sucking at her Teats: Every one of the other Chambers is adorned with the like
in diverse kinds, besides a world of most stately hangings, sumptuous Beds, and
brave furniture; besides rich cupbords of plate, Cymbals, Virginals, Organs,
antic Vasses, and great mirrors, all which I leave unto you to behold, and
remarke with wonder and astonishment.

No less wonder of seeing it is another Palace of the great Duke of Toscan
within the City, as also one belonging to Duke Loudoviso over against the same.

Finally, view the Church, and convent of the Minimi Friars of the most holy
Trinity on Monte Princio, wherewith you are to conclude this days walk.

The tenth days walk. To the seven Churches.
THis days walk shall be destinated for the seven Churches, and I hold it most
convenient to begin at the going to see that of San Pietro in vaticano.

This Church was begun in the year 1507. by Pope Julius the second, who on the
fifteenth of April laid the first stone with this inscription.

JULIUS II. P. M. AEDEM DIVO PETRO DICATAM.

Vetustate coilabentem, in digniorem, amplioremque formam, ut erigat.

FUNDAMENT A JECIT A. CHRISTI M. D. VII.

THE designer and Architect thereof unto the year 1514. was Bramante Lazari da
Castle Durante. Afterward the fabric of it was continued by Rafaele d'Urbino,
Giuliano di S. Gallo, Fra. Giocondo da verona, Baldassarre Per^zzi and Antonio
di S. Ga lo unto the Papacy of Paul the third, who committed the care of that
building to Michelangelo Buonarota the Florentine: This same took the charge
thereof upon him, and of brick, that it was before, made it of stone, after a
new model; reuniting and agiusting it with a stately pargetting of beaten
marble on the outside, and within adorning it with most goodly ornaments. To
Buonaroti succeeded Jacomo Barozzi da vignola, who continued it to the year
1575. Then Giacomo della Porta Romano, being elected thereunto, went on with
the work until the Papacy of Clement the eighth. Under all them aforesaid the
fabric advanced no further then the Gregorian, and Clementine Chappells: But
Pope Paul the fifth, with the design of Carlo Maderno, caused the old part to
be demolished, as far as the said Chapels extended toward the forefront, in
the year 1606. and made a new addition of fix Chappells, of the Portico,
frontispiece, and Lodge of benediction. The Popes have given full remission of
sins to them that pray in this Church on certain days. The Chapel wherein
Gregory the thirteenth lies is most rich, and the Sepulcher of Paul the third
is very stately. The statua of Saint Peter under the Organs, was made as it is
thought, of the same mettle, whereof Jupiter Capitolinus was composed.

To the second Church of San Paolo.
To go to San Paolo, you must take your way to the street, called Longara; then
toward Santa Maria in Frastevere; so proceed on to the Bridge, di quatro
Capi, and passing l'Isola di San Bartholomeo, and the other Bridge, turn on the
right hand to arrive at Santa Maria di Scuola Greca, at Marmorata, Piazza di
Testaccio, and at the Gate of San Paolo, otherwise called Trigemina, and
Ostiensia.

This Gate stood anciently where Caius his Cave was, called ^rigemina, from the
three Horatij their going out of it to fight with the Curiatij. It was brought
into this place, according to some, by Claudius the Emperor, who enlarged the
wall of the City on this part unto St. Sebastiano's Gate: it was also called
Ostiense, and di San Paolo, because it leads to Ostia, and to the Church of the
said Saint.

A little further on the left hand is a little Chapel, from whence you are to
go unto Monte Aureo, and so within a while you will come to the Church of St.
Paolo, which was first built by Constantine the Emperor; afterward renewed by
the Emperor Honorius, and by Eudoxia the daughter of Theodosius, and wife to
Valentinian. It stands upon fourscore and eight pillars of Marble, in four
rows, each pillar being but of one stone; and has a very fair spacious
Chancell, adorned with most excellent and ancient Mosaic work; as also a
pavement of most fine and polished Marble, with a most majesticall Altar upon
Arches, supported by ten great pillars of Granite stone, whereunto one ascends
by two rows of marble steps; under the midst of the Altar lies the Body of St.
Paul, and in the Portico are four holy Gates, which are used to be opened,
sometimes one, sometimes another in the year of Jubilee. This Church is governed
with much religion and splendour, by the Cassimensi Monks of Santa Justina,
introduced thereinto in the year 1425. by Pope Eugenius the fourth.

To the third Church of San Sebastiano.
In your way to San Sebastiano you will first of all see an ancient Borough,
seated in the Appian way, called Capo di Bove, which though it be decayed, the
Walls of it only remaining, yet does it retain the ancient splendour of that most
ancient and stately sepulture of Metella. This and such like edifices, built
with infinite cost, and incredible art, were placed in conspicuous places, and
principal streets for the wonder of posterity.

Then you will come to the Cirque, which Antiquaries think was made by Antonius
Caracalla; in the midst whereof is an Obelisck lying broken on the ground, with
its Basis likewise overturned.

And so you will arrive at the Church of San Sebastiano, wherein you may see
the place called Catta comb, from the which there is a way under ground to the
Tombs of the Martyrs; and thither did the Pope and Cardinals in the greatest
persecutions repair to perform their functions.

To the fourth Church of St. Giovanni in Laterano.
From the aforesaid Church of San Sebastiano, return back into Rome by the
said San Sebastiano's gate, and turning on your right hand by the City Wall,
ascend the little hill called Celiolo, in distinction from the other greater,
named Celio, upon which you will see the Gate called Latina, and going on still
about by the Wall, you will meet with the little brook of Marana, from the
which passing by the Church of San Sisto, you will arrive at the Church of San
Giovanni in Laterano, so called from the habitation of Plautius Lateranus, a
most noble Roman, put to death by Nero under pretext of his conspiring against
him.

In this Church built by Constantine the great is a most stately font, wherein
that Emperor was Baptized, adorned with eight great pillars of Porphyrie, with
as many of white marble, which support a little arched vault over it: In this
Font the Popes use twice a year, namely at Easter, and at Whitsontide, to
Baptize with with great solemnity.

Near to this Church those stairs, commonly called Scale Sante, being six and
twenty in number, divided into three rows and they be all of Marble, and were
brought as they say from Pilates house in Jerusalem. In this Church also is
the Chapel, called Sancta Sanctorum, where there is an entire Image of our
Savior, which for its antiquity and devotion was cased up in silver by Pope
Innocent the third.

To the fifth Church of Saint Croce in Gierusalmine.
FRom Saint Giovanni in Laterano you will in a little time arrive at the Church
of Saint Croce, which was built by Constantine the great, and consecrated by
Saint Silvester the Pope, in it Helena, the Mother of that Emperor built a
Chapel, named Jerusalem, for that she brought thither a ships lading with
Earth from the place where our Savior was crucified; no woman may enter into
this Chapel but only once in the year, and that is upon the twelvth of
March. This Church is governed by the Monk of the Cistercien Order, in whose
Vineyard you may see the relics of the Castrense Amphitheater, as also those
of Venus, and Cupid.

To the sixth Church of Saint Lorenzo without the Walls.
FRom St. Croce keep on your right hand till you come to the City Gate called
Maggiore, whereof observe the ancient Ornaments, with the inscription of
Tiberius Claudius: Going from thence turn on your left hand, which will lead
you to the Patriarchall Church of Saint Lorenzo, built in the place, called
Campo Verano, from the Matron of that name, who was famous for her piety and
Religion. Under the high Altar are the bodies of Saint Laurence, and Saint
Stephen, Martyrs conserved with much splendour. This Church is adorned with a
pulpit of white Marble, and most fair Ophir stones, and at the door with a
Sepulcher of Saint Eustatius of white Marble curiously carved. It is governed
by the regular Chanons, and he that goes to this Church every wednesday in the
year shall deliver a soul out of Purgatory.

The seventh, and last Church of Santa Maria Maggiore.
YOU must go to the Gate of San Lorenzo, so called from his Church, which is
not far from it; and entering into the City, you must leave the street, where
you will see an Arch of Sixtus Quintus his water, and keeping on the left hand
you will come to Santa Maria Maggiore; in whose Piazza Paul the fisth erected a
Pillar, taken from the Temple of peace.

It was called the Church of Liberio, because it was built in the time of his
Papacy; and it is named Maggiore, because it is such amongst all the Churches
of the holy Virgin, as also Sixtina from Sixtus the third, who made it anew
from the very foundation, in the form that now it is. This Church is adorned
with forty marble pillars, and over them in the midst of the body thereof are
the figures of the old and new Testament in Mosaic work, done by the order of
the said Sixtus the third; and on the right hand over the door of the Belfrey
is a most excellent piece of the Resurrection of Lazarus, done in oil by
Girolamo Mutiano. There is also in it the stately Sepulcher of Pope Nicholas,
with his statua of white marble, and many other extraordinary things, which for
brevities sake I omit.

Now for a conclusion you are to note, that I have spoken of these Churches,
but cursorily, and as it were by the way, without mentioning the many
Chappells, shrines, relics, indulgences, altars, statuaes, pictures,
sepulchers, antiquities, and a world of other most rare, rich, and precious
things, which are in all variety to be seen in them; as will ocularly appear
unto you, when you come to review and exactly observe them to your no little
admiration and marvail.

FINIS

