THE GROUNDS and ENDS OF THE BAPTISM OF THE CHILDREN OF THE FAITHFVLL.

OPENED In a familiar Discourse by way of a Dialogue, or Brotherly Conference.

By The Learned and Faithful Minister of Christ, JOHN COTTON, Teacher of the
Church of Boston in New England.

LONDON, Printed by R. C. for Andrew Crook at the sign of the Green Dragon in
Pauls-churchyard, 1647.

To the READER.
THe compiling of the ensuing discourse, and in this familiar style, was put
upon me by a more then moral inevitable necessity. Paul acknowledges there
is a constraining power in the love of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.14. And surely the love
which through Christ I bare to some gracious Saints in Lincolnshire, (now with
Christ) constrained me to reserve a tender affection to their surviving
children. One of them being formerly well affected to the ways of Christ, and
accordingly respected of the godly where he lived, He coming over into these
parts, was received into fellowship in a Neighbor Church, and well approved.
But falling into acquaintance with some who stood aloof to the Baptism of
Children, and receiving some Books from them against the same, He withheld his
child from Baptism (as others had done theirs) to the offense both of the
Lord, and the Church, whereof he was a member. The Elders of that Church took
much pains with him to convince him of the error of his way: and I suppose
some of their learned and elaborate discourses are sent over by this Ship, for
more public satisfaction. Withal they advised him to confer with other
friends, and acquaintance in other Churches. To me therefore he came, and
acquainting me with some of his Scruples, I thought what I said to him, might
have satisfied; and so it seemed to me, it did for the present. But he told me,
other scruples he had, which were all comprised in a printed book: the Author
I forbear to name: but he was then reputed one of the chiefest note of that
way, for moderation and freedom, from the leaven of other corrupt opinions,
which are wont to accompany the denial of Infants Baptism. Since then other
Books have been published, of the same argument, but with more learning and
better method. But this Book which he brought me, containing all his
scruples, he desired, that it might be answered, and he should so rest
satisfied. I was then full of other business, and could not possibly (though I
much desired it) gratify his desire. In this strait, a young Scholar, (but of
pregnant gifts and parts) Mr. Benjamin Woodbridge, dwelling then in my house,
seeing me solicitous for the young man, undertook the answer of the Book:
which God helped him speedily and acutely to perform. But the young man took
not that satisfaction from it he well might have done: but excused himself, it
was so full of Scholarship and terms of Art, that he could not well understand
it, and so could not satisfy his conscience with it.

Whereupon I was forced, either to suffer an hopeful Son of gracious Parents
(and my dear friends) to fall and lie under that burden, or else I must Answer
the book my self, and that in such a familiar language, as might best suite
with his capacity. Which by the help of Christ having done, other friends
perusing it, pressed me to give way to let it pass to more public use of
other, as well as of him. I was very loath to hearken to them, the Book
(whereto I give answer) being so immethodicall and confused, and my self being
forced to follow him in like confusion, that the young man might not complain
(as he did before) of too much Art or of Omission of Answer to any thing
material in his Book.

Thus have you a short and plain account of this present labor of Love. You
will receive I hope by other hands from hence, more Elaborate Answers to more
Elaborate discourses in the same and other Arguments.

Now the God of Truth and Peace accompany all the Labors of his Servants
(which bear witness to his Truth) with a Spirit of Power to cast down all
false Imaginations, and to bring into captivity every thought to the obedience
of Christ Jesus.

John Cotton.

To the READER.
THe due Application of Baptism to all those Persons Christ would have it
administered unto, cannot but be apprehended, by all that have any insight into
the Controversies of these times, to be of a very high importance; whether we
respect the Ordinance it self, the Persons right, or the Consciences of those
in Error about it. For the Ordinance it self; as it was one of the first of
those institutions of the Gospel, so in respect of the things sealed up
therein, it is the Greatest: our first Union with Christ, the great promise of
the Spirit, (the foundation of all grace and glory.) Our representation by, and
communion with Christ in his death and resurrection, being hereby at once
sealed up by God to the persons that partake thereof as belonging to them, and
to have all these m^splaced, to persons not capable, through want of divine
warrant, of any benefit thereby, cannot but be esteemed a great profaning of
it: As on the other side, the withholding it from such as Christ has
bequeathed this Legacy unto, would be found as highly derogatory to the great
goodness and rich grace of the Testator. And so withal an injury unto the
Persons of Infants having right thereunto, in those whom Christ has made
Administrators of these his Mysteries. Great also is the moment thereof to the
Consciences of many good souls, as in the consequents of the contrary Opinion
of denying Infants Baptism, is in some (I must not say of all) too apparent.
The vindication therefore of this great Truth, does deserve and challenge the
choicest abilities of the Divines of this age: it being in the days of this
second Reformation with us, afresh, if not as much controverted, as in the
times of the first Reformation it was in Germany. And it is more light and less
violence (though in truths taken generally for granted) that must end this and
all other controversies of this elevation that are amongst us. And it will
surely be rewarded by Christ at the latter day, as a work of more then
ordinary Charity, to have pleaded and maintained the right of these poor
members of his, who want a tongue to speak for themselves.

In a manner half the Church of God, and that, purissima pars Ecclesiae, the
purest part of it, elect Infants, dye, (as well-nigh half the rest of mankind)
in their bud and infancy, and grow not up to partake of the dewes and influence
of any other outward Ordinance; and were they deprived of this, should go out
of this world, (into which God only sent them to receive that which should
make them meet for the common inheritance of the Saints) without any outward
owning them, or visible way of blessing from him, that has blessed them and us
with his choicest heavenly blessings in Christ. Yea, and the other half of
those that grow up to glorify God in their riper years, whereof many are also
holy even from the womb, these also should during their years of nonage want
an outward badge, and any outward acknowledgment of what they are, even fellow
heirs of the Kingdom with their brethren, which even in the infancy of the
world it self, whilst all were under Tutors and Governors, was their
privilege. To clear therefore their evidences, and set right their title to
this Kingdom, and to show forth a writ and warrant for their enstallment and
admission into it, by Baptism, is an act of the greatest Justice as of charity.

These and the l^ke weighty considerations have stirred up the Spirit of this
learned, grave and holy Man, (though full of other labors and employments, and
now therewith of years) to bring forth of his rich Treasury things both new
and old for the asserting this so important truth. Of the Author himself, what
is said of Ezra his search into the Ordinances of the Law, that his heart was
prepared to seek the Law of the Lord, and to do it, and to teach in Israel
Statutes and Judgments: The same I may say of him concerning the Institutions
( those heavenly things, Heb 7.^3.
as in comparison of the other, the Apostle speaks) of the Gospel. Much of his
thoughts and attention have been spent thereon, both to sever them from the
additions and inventions of men, and to preserve them in their Dignity from the
disregard of others. And he was a chosen instrument of God to hold forth the
purity thereof in a great measure, well-nigh from the first of his settled
Ministry, with much constancy and integrity, and with an eminent blessing both
of protection and success upon his Ministry in those evil times, which since
has been further crowned with further light herein. Who continues still to
esteem the clearing any part or portion thereof, a sufficient reward of his
choicest pains. And yet he has not made those lesser, and more outward things
of the Gospel, the chiefest or first born of his strength, but in a due
proportion the greater matters of Faith, and of the common salvation: which he
has more universally traversed, even the whole circle of Theology, and in his
Ministry gone over; besides many select Books of Scripture opened by him
therein, then most Divines alive.

I shall add nothing for the present about the subject matter of this
Treatise, I having already in my public Ministry at large delivered my self
of what I have to say in this Argument, which though I have been provoked
enough to make more public, yet hitherto through many, what more urgent
diversions, what personal infirmities to deal in many things at once, I have
been hindered from casting that worthless Mite into the public Treasury.

Tho. Goodwin.

The Grounds and Ends of Baptism of the Children of the Faithful. Opened in a
Familiar Discourse by way of a Dialogue or Brotherly Conference. PREFACE.
Silvanus.
BRother Silvester, for the love I bear to you, and your godly Parents, I have
been much provok^d in Spirit, to endeavor the pulling you forth of that error
into which you are so deeply plunged. I doubt not your Elders and others of
your Brethren have not been wanting to use the means for your conviction and
satisfaction. But if the Lord espied an Idol set up in your heart, he might
justly leave you to see nothing but according to your Idol. If the heart be
once taken with the love of an Error, it is all one (if not worse) as not to be
taken with the love of truth. And in such a cas^, God is wont to give up the
soul to strong delusions to believe lies, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. But (besides your
own Elders and Brethren) you wanted not other friends (the Elders and Brethren
of some other Churches) whom you have bin wont to consult withal in less
matters, and them you acquainted not with your scruples, which whether it were
out of loathnesse to grieve them, or out of loathnesse to be removed from your
way, I do not know.

Silvester.
I am not so wedded to my way, but I am willing to hear counsel from the word
of God: And therefore neither am I unwilling to acquaint your self with my
scruples in this point,

(...) The Grounds and Ends of Baptism OF THE CHILDREN OF THE FAITHFVLL,
Opened in a Familiar Discourse by way of a Dialogue, or Brotherly Conference.
PREFACE: Showing the occasion of the Conference.
BRother Silvester, I feel your loss at my heart, for the love I bear to
you, as to your godly Parents before you; I hear God has lately burnt your
house over your head, and most part of your goods with it. And it troubles me
the more for your sake, because I fear this hand of God is gone out against
you, to visit upon you and your family, your breach of Covenant with the Lord
and his People. For though I know that all outward things fall alike to all
(the Sheep and Servants of Job were burnt as well as your house: and many a
godly man has been struck with sickness for his trial, as well as Moses for
neglect of an Ordinance) yet whilst Moses lay under the neglect of an
Ordinance, in suffering his child to lie by him uncircumcised, Silvanus.
it had been no rash judgment in others, nor want of holy wisdom in himself
to think, that God by making a breach upon his health, did visit upon him his
breach of Covenant with the Lord, in delaying and neglecting, (though it may
be for his wives sake) to bring his child under the Seal of the Covenant. We
may in brotherly love well conceive, that God has made this B^each in your
estate, to try your faith and patience, as he did Jobs. But surely it will be
your wisest and safest course so to construe Gods meaning, That your breach of
Covenant with God, did kindle a fire in his wrath, which brake forth upon your
house, and burnt up so great a part of your Estate. For even our God (the God
of the New Testament) is a Consuming fire, as well to Christians now, as to
Jews of old. And when does the Iealousy of God most kindle, but against the
Violation of his Ordinances? which being delivered to us in the 2.
Commandment, are ratified by a Sanction from the Iealousy of the Lord our God.
Exodus 20.5. You saw, not long before, a like fire of Gods wrath breaking forth
in burning the houses of others of your brethren and neighbors, who had a
while before turned aside into the way same of error with your self; which when
you took no warning by, the same fire burst for that last upon your self. How
wise and righteous was the hand of the Lord, that when water was neglected to
Baptize your child, water should be wanting to quench the fire that consumed
your house?

Silvester.
I cannot think, that the delay of my child's Baptism could kindle that fire,
that burnt up my house. For (if I know mine own heart) I was very ready even
at that time, to hear Counsel, and to receive conviction from our Elders and
other brethren, if they could show me any error in this way.

Silvanus.
I doubt not your Elders and other brethren have not been wanting to use the
means for your conviction, and satisfaction. But if the Lord espied an Idol
set up in your heart, then he in his just displeasure would leave you to see
nothing, but according to your Idol. If the heart be once taken with the love
of an Error, it is all one (if not worse) as not to be taken with the love of
truth. And in such a case, God is wont to the give up the soul ^o strong
delusions to believe lies, 2 These. 2.10, 11. But (besides your own Elders and
brethren) you wanted not other friends (the Eders and brethren of some other
Chuches) whom you have been wont to consult withal in less matters, and them
you acquainted not with your scruples, which whether: it were out of loathnesse
to grieve them, or out of lothnesse to be removed from your way, I do not know.

Silvester.
I am not so wedded to my way, but I am willing to hear counsel from the word
of God: And therefore neither am I unwilling to acquaint your self with my
scruples in this point which I have gathered out of some books, chiefly out
of those which seem to me most orthodoxall. For they do not (as some others
of that way do) deny Magistrates, nor Predestination, nor Original Sin: Nor
do they maintain Freewill in conversion, nor Apostasy from Grace: but only
deny the lawful use of the Baptism of children; because it wants a word
both of Commandment and Example from the Scripture.

It is well that any of that way do condescend so far unto the truth, in
these controversies, Silvanus.
which do so nearely concern the grace of Christ and power of Godliness and
Public peace. And I am bound in Christian love to believe, that they who yield
so far, do it out of conscience, as following herein the Example of the
Apostle, who professed of himself, and his followers, We can do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth. But yet I believe withal, that it is not
out of love to the truth, that Satan yields so much to the Truth, but rather
out of another ground, and (as his manner is) for a worse end. He knows the
times, that now (by the good and strong hand of God) they are set upon purity
and Reformation. And now to plead against the Baptism of children upon any of
those Arminian and Popish grounds, which be so grossly ungratious, as those
abovenamed, Satan knows, and sees they would utterly be reject^d. He
chooses therefore, rather to play Small Game (as they say) then to lose all.
He now relinquisheth all those gross and ungratious tenants, whereby he was
wont to plead against childrens Baptism, and now pleads no other Argments in
these stirring times of Reformation then may be urged from a maine Principle of
Purity and Reformation, to wit, That no Duty of Gods Worship, nor any Ordinance
of Religion is to be administered in the Church, but such as has just warrant
from the word of God. And by urging this Argument against the Baptism of
children, Satan transformeth himself into an Angel of light: and the Spirit
of Error and Profaneness into a Minister of Truth and Righteousness. And so
he hops to prevail, either with those men who do believe the lawful and
holy use of childrens Baptism to renounce that Principle, and so to renounce
also all Reformation brought in by it: or else, (if they stick to that
Principle) then to renounce the Baptism of children: And so the Reformation
begun, will neither spread far, nor continue long. For if Godly Parents do
withdraw their children from the Covenant, and from the Seal of the Covenant,
they do make void (as much in as them lies) the Covenant both to themselves,
and to their children also. And then will the Lord cut off such souls from his
People. Genesis 17.14 And so the Reformation begun with a Blessing, will end in a
curse, and in a cutting Separation either of Parents or of children, or of both
from the Lord, and his People.

That place in Genesis (17.14) speaks not of Baptism, but of Circumcision:
Silvester.
Between which though there may be some Resemblance in regard of their common
Nature, and use, yet this difference between them chiefly sticks with me,
That Abraham and his natural Posterity had an express Commandment and word of
Institution from God, for the circumcising of themselves and their Infant seed;
But the Believers of the New Testament, though they have a Commandment from God
to be Baptized themselves, yet they have neither Commandment, nor Example for
the Baptism of their Infant seed.

It is a Tempting of God, even limiting of the Holy one of Israel, Silvanus.
to put upon him to deliver his will only by Commandment or Example, or not at
all; As if God might not deliver his will, by promise or threatening, by
Proportion, or deduction, by Consequence, as well as by express Commandment,
or Example. What Commandment or Example is their for women to partake of the
Lords Supper? yet the Proportion of the Lords Supper with the Passover, and
Deduction from such Scriptures as put no difference between male and female,
make it to be received as the will and Ordinance of Christ, That women able to
examine and judge themselves should partake of the Lords Supper, as well as the
men: Every shred of Gold hammered, or drawn out of the wedge of Gold, is as
well Gold, as the whole lump and wedge. Whatsoever is drawn out of the
Scripture by just consequence and deduction, is as well the word of God, as
that which is an express Commandment or Example in Scripture. But to help you
(if the Lord will) over this stumbling block (which you stick at) the Baptism
of children is not without a Commandment, and word of Institution from
Scripture as may appear two or three ways.

Silvester.
Show me any Commandment, or word of Institution for the Baptism of children,
and it suffices me.

CHAPT. I. Declaring and Maintaining the first ground for the Baptism of
Children.
FIrst, the Commission of the Lord Jesus given to his Apostles, does give us a
Commandment, and word of Institution for the Baptism of children. Mat. 28.19,
20. Go (says he to his Apostles) and make Disciples (as the word signifies)
all Nations (some at least of all sorts in all Nations) Baptizing them into the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to
observe whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you to the end of
the world. In which Commission the Lord Jesus gives commandment to his
Apostles, and to their Successors to the end of the world,

To perform three Acts 1 To make Disciple. 2 To Baptize them. 3 To teach them
to observe all the Ordinances of Christ.


From whence two Arguments offer themselves for the Institution of the Baptism
of the children of the faithful.

Argument. 1. Such as be disciples they are to be Baptized.

But the children of the Faithful, they are disciples; Therefore children of
the Faithful, they are to be Baptized. The former proposition is clearly
expressed in the Text, Make disciciples and baptize them: All Disciples therefore
are to be baptized.

The latter proposition, That all the children of the Faithful (in which is
all one, all the children of the Church, for the Church is a Congregation of
the faithful) that they are all of them Disciples, may appear by the
Testimony of the Prophet Esaias: who speaking of the times of the Church in the
New Testament, All thy children (says he) shall be taught of God, Esaias 54.13.
and if they be taught of God, then are they Disciples, for that is the meaning
of the word Disciples. Disciples are taught or learnt of God. Do not put me
off with that Evasion; That the Promise is made not to the children of the
visible Church, but of the Invisible: For look what promises are made to the
Invisible Church, they are for their sakes offered to all the Members of the
Visible Churches, whereof the lively Members are the chief.

By the children in Esaias may be meant, not Infants, but men of years, unto
whom the whole Church may be counted a Mother, and they to her, as children.

I deny not, but that may be part of the meaning: yet so, as not to exclude the
Infants, or children of the Faithful, from the number of the children of the
Church. For the same Prophet speaking of the same Church, Silvester.
fetches in Infants among the blessed ones of the Church, and blessed with
such spiritual light, and life from Christ, as if they had lived an hundred
years in the Church. Silvanus.
Esa. 65.20. There shall be no more (says he) thenceforth an Infant of days,
nor an old man that has not filled his days. For the child shall dye an
hundred years old, but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be
accursed. How shall the child dye as at an hundred years old, but that he is
so well instructed and enlightened by Christ, and thereby as capable of entrance
into heavenly glory, as a grown disciple of an hundred years old? The
Allegorical sense which some force upon Infants (as if by them were meant
young Converts, though of riper years) the Text will not bear it. For the
Text makes an express opposition between these Infants, in the Church, and
sinners of an hundred years old. Where the two extreme periods of man's life,
old age of an hundred years, and Infants being set one against another, Infants
cannot be fitly meant of any but those of fewest days, even Infants of a few
days, of a year or two old. And besides, the Holy Ghost in the Text gives a
Reason of this Grace (together with some other like favors) unto Infants in
the Church above Sinners of an hundred years old, taken from the Covenant of
their blessed Ancestors v. 23: For they are (says he) the seed of the blessed
of the Lord, and their offspring with them. And evident it is, that the
Apostle Peter reckons Infants of the Church for Disciples. For in Acts 15.10.
reproving the way of false Teachers who would have put Circumcision upon the
Gentile Churches, and their seed, Why tempt ye God, says he, to put a yoke
upon the neck of the Disciples? If the Infants of the Church had not been
Disciples, the false Apostles could have pretended no power to have put that
Ordinance upon them. And Peter rejects it, not because Infants were no
Disciples, but acknowledging them to be Disciples as well as their Fathers, the
yoke of Circumsion was now too heavy for them, as drawing upon them the yoke
of the Ceremonial Law. It is to the same purpose that Christ speaks of such
little Children, Silvester.
Mark 10.14. Luke 18.16, 17. Of such (says he) is the Kingdom of God; which
argues, that even little Children are the members of the Church (which is the
Kingdom of Grace) here, Silvanus.
and heirs of the Kingdom of Glory hereafter: and therefore Disciples, for to
whom Christ is a King, he is also a Prophet.

Christ does not say, that of Infants is the Kingdom of God, but of such (as
Infants be:) that is, of such simple ones, so free from pride and malice.

Then he might as well have said, Suffer Doves and Lambs to come unto me: for
of such (such simple and harmless ones) is the Kingdom of God. But that
christ speaks of little children (as such) may appear further from the Text?
In that he says, Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God, as a little
child (to wit as a little child receives it, for so much the Grammar
construction requires) he shall in no wise enter therein. Now it cannot be
said of Doves and Lambs, Whosoever receives not the Kingdom of God, as a Dove
or a Lamb receives it, he shall in no wise enter into it. 2. Wherefore should
Christ command little children to be brought unto him, and be so angry with his
Disciples for rebuking them that brought them, if they were not at all capable
of spiritual fellowship with Christ in his Kingdom, but only served to fetch
a Similitude from their Simplicity and Innocence? Did he ever say, Suffer Doves
and Lambs to come unto me: for of such is the Kingdom of God? 3. Why does
Christ put it for all one, for little children to come to him, and to be
brought to him (as he does Luke 18.15, 16.) but that he accepted the Act of
Prents in bringing their children to him, as all one with there Act of children
in coming themselves to Christ Jesus? for Chist says, Suffer little Children
to come to me: and yet they came not to him but as their Parents brought them.
4. Christ his Imposition of hands upon them argues their consecration unto
God, not as Sacrifices of Bulls and Goats to be slain, (which was one use of
laying on of hands Levit. 1.4.) nor to ordain them unto office, (which was
another use) but as partakers of spiritual blessings, and of Adoption into the
family of Israel, which was another use of laying on of hands. Genesis 48.5. with
14. So that let all this Testimony of Christ concerning little Children and his
carriage toward them be well weighed; and it will evidently evince that for
which it is alleged. That little children born in the Church, are accounted by
Christ amongst those blessed ones of Christ, of whom his Church and Kingdom
consists: And so are taught of God, as the Disciples of Christ: And therefore
are commanded of Christ to be baptized with their believing Parents.

Silver.
The blessing of Christ upon these infants was for bodily cures, as is manifest
by the d^sires of those that brought them to Christ, which was not that he
should baptize them, but that he would touch them and lay his hands upon them,
and pray, as Mar. 5.23. Mat. 19.13.15. This was the ordinary way of healing in
the time of the Law, by such as were enabled by God thereunto, as is clear by
these Scriptures compared together, 2 Kings 5.11. with Mat. 19.13. Mat. 8.3.
Mat. 9.18. Luke 4.38.40. Never were any so brought to Christ but for some cure,
and for his blessing of them, which was in respect of that temporal Mercy he
bestowed upon them, according to that they came to him for: and to show his
Bounty and Humility, that he was no respecter of Persons; as such might seem
to be, that suffered others to come, and would have kept back children: And for
such to belong to the Kingdom as those children did, and therefore they ought
to come, as well as any others. For they were children of the Jews, and at
that time Members of that Church, and so of that Kingdom, and had as much
Interest in Christ for outward blessings as any else.

And further Christ is pleased to make use of childrens Humility and Innocence
to reprove the high-mindednesse of his Disciples, and to draw them forth a
pattern from the same, as Mat. 18.1, 2, 3. with Mark. 10.5. 1 Cor. 14.20. so
that all this makes nothing for the Baptizing of Infants they being not
brought to Christ for Baptism.

Neither do I allege this place for to prove that Christ baptized these
Infants. Silvanus.
For it does not appear that their fathers who brought them, were baptized
themselves: and therefore neither might their children be baptized according to
rule. But I allege the place to prove that the Infants of believers are
amongst the blessed ones of Christ, such of whom his Church and Kingdom
consists: and so come under the fellowship of his Disciples whom Christ
commands to be baptized; neither will your exception against this prevail.
Your exceptions, or rather evasions are two: You say that Christ his laying
hands on these children, was only to reach forth some bodily cure to them, it
being the ordinary way of healing in the time of the Law.

Whereto I answer, 1. You bring not one Scripture to prove, that healing of
diseases in the time of the Law was wont to be wrought by laying on of hands,
but only one: which speaks of Naaman the Syrian, who had such a misconceit
that the Prophet would have so healed him, but was therein foully mistaken. All
the other places alleged by you do show, that Christ was wont sometimes to
heal diseases by laying on his hands. And so indeed he did, as did also his
Disciples after him, by gift from him. But why you should make this an ordinary
way of healing in the time of the Law, I see not how it stands with truth.

An. 2. There is not one word in the Text, nor any circumstance of the place,
that makes any mention, or gives any notice of any bodily disease, which
these children were subject to; or that their parents come to Christ for the
healing thereof. And to give that for the meaning of a Text, which neither the
words of the Text, nor the circumstance of the place does hold forth, is to set
up an Image in our own heart, and to bow the Text to our own Imagination.

An. 3. It is not credible that if these children had come with any disease
about them, or if their Parents had brought them for healing thereof, that the
Disciples would have been so inhumane, unnatural, and barbarous, as to have
rebuked them that brought them. The diseases of little children do affect all
men (that have but the bowels of humanity) with as much compassion as the
diseases of Elder persons, or rather more. And withal the Disciples knew that
the Lord Jesus was wont before that time to vouchsafe to cure the diseases of
young children, as well as the diseases of Elder persons, Joh. 4.49, 50. Mar.
5.41, 42. and therefore they would never have rebuked their Parents, if they
had brought them to such an end. But say you, Never were any so brought to
Christ, but for some cure and for his blessing of them: which was in respect of
that temporal mercy, which they came for, and he bestowed upon them.

If you mean never were any so brought to Christ, to wit, in the Arms of
their Parents. It is true we never read of any other in the Gospells, brought
to Christ in the Arms of their Parents at all, neither for bodily cures,
neither for any temporal or spiritual blessing. But what is that to the
purpose? that will not argue that these Infants were only brought for bodily
Cure. If you mean none were brought at all but for bodily cures, what mean
you then by so brought? It is true the Palsy man was brought by four men in a
Couch for a bodily cure, Mark. 2. but Christ blessed him not only with a
temprall, but a spiritual cure in the pardon of his sins, Mark. 2.5. which
was more then they came for; why do you therefore deny the like spiritual
blessing the these Infants upon this ground, because their Parents come for no
more, unless you think, they had no sin to be pardoned? But if none were
brought to Christ for spiritual blessings besides these Infants, the greater
was the Faith of these Parents: and the greater was the sin of others.

Your second Evasion is, That these Infants being children of the Jews were at
that time members of that Church, and so of that Kingdom, And had as much
interest in Christ for outward blessings, as any else.

Answ. 1. If that be all, then there were some children of the kingdom of
Heaven, which had only Interest in Christ for outward blessings; and then
indeed they had no Interest in Christ, nor in his kingdom at all.

2. If the Infants of Christian Parents be not the children of the kingdom of
Heaven (as well as the infants of the Jews were) then the encouragement which
Christ gave to these Jewish Parents then, will not reach to Christian Parents
now, to bring their children to him now, so much as for bodily cures. Suffer
(says Christ) little children to come unto me, to wit, (say you) for bodily
curer, for of such (says Christ) is the kingdom of Heaven. True (says you)
such were the children of the Jews. But then it will follow by your Doctrine,
That we Christians are not allowed to suffer our children to come to Christ;
no not for bodily cures: for of such as our children be, the kingdom of heaven
is not.

A second argument for the Baptism of children may be fetched Exodus 12.48.
that if a man will come and keep the Passover, all the males in his house
must be circumcised: and the reason given, is, for no uncircumcised Person
shall eat thereof, which plainly argues, that a man is uncircumcised
himself, and (as an uncircumcised person) is to be debarred from the
Passover, until all his males be circumcised. If then our Lords Supper come
in the room of the Passover, and our Baptism in the room of Circumcision,
look as he that had not circumcised his males, was accounted as one
uncircumcised himself, and so to be debarred from the Passover, so he who
has not baptized his children, is accounted of God, as not baptized himself,
and so to be debarred from the Lords Supper. If therefore you forbid Baptism
to children, you evacuate the Baptism of their Parents, and so make the
commandment of God, and the Commission of the Apostles, and the Baptism of
believers of none effect.

In the Apostles Commission, by Disciples is meant believers, Silvester.
for so when the Evangelist Mark records the same Commission he rehearses
it thus, Go (says Christ) into all the world and preach the Gospel unto every
creature. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved: he that believes
not shall be damned. Mark. 16.15, 16. So that unless children were believers,
they are not subjects capable of Baptism: no Faith, no Baptism.

If children have no Faith to be baptized, Silvanus.
then have they no Faith to be saved. For the words of the Apostles commission
are as plain and pregnant for the one as for the other. He that be^ieveth and
is baptized (says Christ) shall be saved, he that believes not shall be
damned, Mar. 16.16. If therefore children as being unbelievers cannot be
baptized, then as being unbeleevers, they cannot be saved.

Silvester.
It is very doubtful to me, neither has the Scripture revealed it, that such
as dye Infants are in a state of salvation; for without the hearing of the word
no faith, and without faith no salvation.

Silvanus.
See what uncomfortable and desperate conclusions these ways of error drive men
unto; Jacob while he was yet in his mothers womb was in a state of election,
Romans 9.11.13. and therefore in a state of salvation, though he had dyed then:
John Baptist was filled with the holy Ghost from his mothers womb, Luke 1.17.
and if he had then dyed, the spirit of life which dwelt in him had quickened
him to immortality. To what end were the children who dyed Infants in the old
Testament circumcised? what did their circumcision seal to them? Canaan they
did never live to see, much less to inherit: if it did not seal unto them
spiritual and saving blessings, it was to them a seal without a thing
signified; what though children do not receive faith by hearing of the gospel,
as the Nations of the Gentiles do (of whom the Apostle speaks, in the place
whereto you allude:) yet as children can see the light, and be taken with it,
and turn their eyes to it: so the Lord can shine into the dark hearts of
children, and give them faith to see his light, and to be taken and affected
with it, though they never heard of it by the hearing of the ear.

Silvester.
What the Lord can do in inlightening Infants, is a secret known to himself;
the Lord can even of stones raise up children unto Abraham, Matthew. 3.9. In
which sense children may also be said to be capable of the Spirit; to wit, as
well as stones. But if children should be said to be capable of the spirit, so
as to comply with the Spirit in hearing, receiving and believing the Spirits
testimony, and so to be capable of regeneration, faith and repentance, this I
deny: and to affirm this to be the way to bring persons to the faith by working
so upon them by his Spirit in their infancy, argues some ignorance of the true
nature and work of graces, as the Gospel holds it forth.

Silvanus.
There is a middle way between both these two, in which God can and does convey
the spirit of grace unto infants: for neither are infants so incapable as
stones, (for stones must first have a reasonable soul conveyed into them,
before they can be capable of the spirit of grace, whereas Infants have a
reasonable soul already:) Neither yet are infants so capable of complying (as
you call it) with the Spirit, as to hear, believe, and repent, yet
nevertheless, Infants being reasonable creatures they are also capable, though
not of apprehending, yet of receiving the holy Ghost from their mothers womb:
for even then John Baptist was filled with him, Luke 1.15.

It is one thing to be filled from the mothers womb, Silvester.
with the holy Ghost, as John was: another thing to believe, Act. 6.5. and
4.31. Secondly, all such so testified of as John was, I shall acknowledge; but
to affirm that what God testified of John Baptist in the womb, holds true of
all other infants likewise; this indeed were weaker then infancy to affirm it,
and grosser then ignorance to believe it: Job is said to be a guide to the
distressed from his mothers womb, Job 31.18. shall it thence be concluded, that
in his infancy he was a guide to such? or if he were so, must it needs follow
that all infants are capable guides also, because it was so said of him?

To be filled with the holy Ghost, Silvanus.
does always imply thus much at least, as to be filled with the gifts of the
holy Ghost; or if men had received the gifts of the holy Ghost before, yet when
it is said again, they were filled with the holy Ghost, it implies they were
filled with a greater and fuller measure of those gifts then before. And that
is the meaning of those places which you quote out of the Acts; whence it will
follow that John being filled with the holy Ghost from his mothers womb, was
therefore filled with the gifts of the holy Ghost, as the gift of faith, the
gift of wisdom, and zeal, and patience, etc. Although he was no more able to
exercise them, or put them forth, then he was able to put forth any act of
reason, and yet his soul wanted not the faculty of reason from his Mothers
womb.

There is no man so weak or ignorant as to believe or affirm that all infants
are in the like sort filled with the holy Ghost, as John Baptist was. But yet
if you believe or affirm that none else were filled or sanctified with the
gifts of the holy Ghost but John Baptist only, or that all infants are not
alike capable of those gifts, as well as he; I may say as Christ said in
another case, You err, because you know not the Scriptures, nor the power of
God. David says, as of Christ in substance, so of himself in type, Thou did
make me to hope or trust at my mothers breasts, Psalm. 22.9. Esaias says in like
sort, The Lord has called me from the womb, Esa. 45.1. and the Lord says the
same of Jeremy, I sanctified thee before thou came forth of the womb, Ier.
1.5. Yea little children are so far forth capable of receiving the holy
Ghost, or (which is all one) the kingdom of God (for by his Spirit he sets
up his kingdom in us) that our Savior expresses it generally, that whosoever
shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child (to wit, as a little
child receives it, for so the syntax carries it) he shall not enter therein,
Mar. 10.15. What though it be said that faith comes by hearing? so it is
also said, the Spirit comes by the hearing of faith, Gal. 3.2. And yet you
see as some have received the Spirit, that never heard of faith, so the same
h^ve received faith, that never heard the word.

As for Job, the place which you quote, Job 31.18. argues the like of him that
has been said of the former, that Job from his mothers womb was endued with
an indoles or inbred disposition and affection to pity and succor the
fatherless and widow; which d^ubtlesse was wrought in him by the holy Ghost,
as all other good gifts be. And all other infants as well as he are capable of
the same and the like gifts, if the spirit of the Lord be pleased to work them.

Silvester.
I am not against any that have faith, but am absolutely for all that believe,
whether infants or others, so that their faith appear by such effects as the
word of God approves of. But whereas some say, that infants are capable of the
Spirit of God, and of the grace of the Covenant, though not wrought in the same
way, and by the same means, yet the same things, and by same Spirit so far
as is necessary to union with Christ, and justification of life thereby (else
children were not elected, nor should be raised up in their bodies to life) I
wish it may be minded, that touching union with Christ three things are
essential to the same.

1. Gods revealing and tendering of Christ, as the all-sufficient and only way
to life.

2. An heart fitly disposed by faith to apprehend and receive Christ so
tendered.

3. The spirit of grace uniting and knitting the heart and Christ together.

And this I understand to be that effectual and substantial union with Christ
to the justification of life, which the word of God approves of. For
justification to life, ever presupposes the parties knowledge of the thing
believed, Romans 10.14. Heb. 11.6. Now let this be well examined by the rule of
truth, and then see how capable infants are of union with Christ, and
justification to life thereby. As for some evil consequences, which some (to
darken and obscure the truth) do say, would follow thereupon, that then
infants were not erected, nor should then their bodies be raised again to life,
etc.

I would first enquire of such, whether infants with reference to their nonage,
were the subjects of Gods election?

Secondly, if infants so considered, are capable subjects of glory? And if not,
as I suppose none will affirm, then why are they any more capable of grace
then of glory? The word of God shows, that he has elected persons to the
means, as well as to the end, the means being the way unto the end; and that
was the adoption of sons, to be called and justified by believing on Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Romans 8.29, 30. 1 Pet. 1.2. 2 These. 2.13, 14. etc. And to
return free obedience unto him again; as Romans 9.23, 24. Ephesians. 1.6, 12. And for
the raising of infants, it is the power of God that raises the dead, and not
union with Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. And when any of Gods electcan by the
Scriptures be showed to dye in their infancy, then it will be granted their
bodies are raised to life eternal.

When you say, you are not against any that have faith, Silvanus.
whether infants or others, so that their faith appear by such effects as the
Word approves. I demand what if their faith appear not by the effects? is it
not enough if it appear by divine testimony? Christ has said, that of such is
the kingdom. And that all that receive his kingdom, must receive it as little
children do, as has been shown above; and is not his testimony of their faith
as good an evidence of their faith, as the effects of their faith can be? As
for the 3 things which you would have to be minded as essential to union with
Christ: The first of them (the revealing and tendering of Christ as the
all-sufficient and only way of life) if you mean the revealing and tendering of
him by the Ministry of the gospel, you know the Ministry of the gospel is but
an outward isntrumental cause of faith, and no outward isntrumental cause is
essential to the effect, whether we speak of natural or supernatural
effects: certain it is that the spirit of God, who is the principal cause of
faith, though he be wonted to work it by the Ministry of the Word, yet he can
also work it without the Ministry, or else how came the Wisemen from the East
to seek after Christ; and to worship him by the sight of a star? If you say
that was extraordinary, but you speak of ordinary means; that will not serve,
for that which is essential to a thing, the thing cannot be without it,
neither ordinarily, nor extraordinarily; a thing cannot be, and be without his
essence, or that which is essential to it. Besides, Christ speaks of it as
no extraordinary thing for infants to receive the kingdom of God; and they
cannot receive it without Christ, nor without faith in Christ; and yet they
never received either Christ, or faith by their own immediate hearing of the
Wo^d. And for the second thing which you make essential to union with Christ
(an heart fitly disposed by faith to apprehend and apply Christ:) Be not
unwilling to understand that which is the truth:) The heart is fitly disposed
by faith to apprehend or apply Christ, when faith is begotten in the heart: for
by this gift of faith begotten in us, Christ apprehends us; and by the same
gift of faith, the heart is fitly disposed to apprehend Christ, even in
infants, for when faith is wrought in infants, the heart is quickened with
spiritual life, and made a sanctified vessel fit to receive Christ; which
reception of Christ, though it be passive, (as Dr. Ames calls it, in Ch^p.
26. de Vocatione, lib. 1. Medullae Theologiae) yet it is all one with
regeneration, wherein not infants only, but all men are passive: which gave
the Lord Jesus occasion to say, That whosoever receives not the kingdom of God
as a little child, he can in no wise enter into it, Luke 18.17.

It is true, in men of years, the Spirit (as you speak) works faith by the
hearing of the Word, and by revealing and tendering Christ as the all-sufficient
and only way of life. And faith being wrought, apprehends and applies
Christ, not only habitually and passively, (as in infants) but actively to the
justification of life. And in such it is true also (which you say) there is
ever in the party a knowledge of the thing believed. But I will not say as you
do, "That faith ever presupposes the knowledge of the thing believed, unless
you mean habitual knowledge, which is never wanting, no not in infants) where
faith is. For knowledge and faith are put one for another, Esa. 5.3.11. John
17.3. So that now, take your own word, having examined what you say (as you
desire) by the rule of truth, we have seen and found that infants are capable
of the holy Ghost, and therefore of faith: and being in the faith, and faith in
them, they are in Christ, and so united unto Christ, 2 Cor. 13.5. And being in
Christ, there is no condemnation to them, Romans 8.1. And if no condemnation,
then justification belongs to them. And if union with Christ and
justification by Christ belong to them, then were they elected and
predestined thereto. For none are called to union with Christ, nor justified,
but those whom God has predestined thereunto, Romans 8.30. When therefore you
enquire, whether infants with reference to their nonage be the subjects of Gods
election. And secondly, whether infants so considered be subjects capable of
glory? And when you further suppose, that none will affirm either. Be it known
unto you, that as we firmly believe both, so we doubt not confidently to
affirm both: both that infants are subjects of Gods election, and also
subjects capable of glory. Jacob was an elect vessel in his mothers womb,
Romans 9.11. neither was this his singular privilege but common with him to all
the elect of God, who were elect vessels before the foundation of the world;
and therefore so too in their mothers womb: To say, and grant (as you seem to
do) that though infants be subjects of Gods election, yet not with reference
to their nonage; it would imply that you hold the election of God has
reference to their foreseen faith or works, which they grow up unto in riper
years: otherwise in their nonage (when you hold them incapable of faith and
obedience) it seems you hold them also incapable of election; which is rank
and palpable Pelagianisme and Arminianisme. But seeing election it self is a
grace of God, infants being capable of election, are capable of grace. And
thereby it comes to pass that heaven and heavenly glory is as fit to receive
them, as they are fit to receive the holy Ghost, such is the fruit of election.
And if they receive the holy Ghost (as has been showed above) then are they
subjects equally capable of grace and glory. But (say you) if God have elected
them unto the end, to wit, unto glory, then he has elected them also unto the
means and way that leads to that end, to calling, to justification by
believing, and free obedience unto him again.

All this is true; for elect infants if they die in their infancy, are made
partakers of the holy Ghost, by whom faith is begotten in their hearts, in
which they are in Christ, and united to him, which is their calling. By the
same faith dwelling in them they are justified; yea, and sanctified also, and
so their free obedience is fulfilled to that great commandment both of law and
Gospel (which contains all the rest.) Be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am
holy Lev. 19.2. 1 Pet. 1.16.

And as concerning the resurrection of infants from death to life, which (was
argued above) could not be without union with Christ. You answer, First, it is
the power of God that raises the dead, not union with Christ.

But the reply is ready, the power of God raises indeed all the dead, yet none
from death to life eternal (which is the life meant in the argument) but by
virtue of their union with Christ, Romans 8.11. 1 Cor. 15.49.

Secondly, you answer again, that when any of Gods elect can be showed by the
Scriptures, to die in their infancy, then it will be granted that their bodies
are raised to life eternal.

Reply, first, it seems then, that till the death of some elect infants be
showed out of Scripture, it will not be granted by you that their bodies are
raised to life eternal. So that it appears by your Tenent, all the children
that dye in their infancy, none of them are elected nor saved; an ungracious
and uncomfortable doctrine, which has been refuted above: whereto may be
added, that then there is some sort of mankind, to whom the grace and
redemption of Christ never reached. It has been said by the holy Ghost, that
Christ gave himself a ransom for all, that is, for some of all sorts. But now
there is a sort of mankind found out [even all that die in their infancy, which
are many thousands] for whom Christ gave himself a ransom.

Reply 2. If infants be elect before they be born, and remain elect whilst they
are living, can they not dye whilst they are infants, as well as any other of
the elect of God of riper years?

Reply 3. What if it could not be showed by the scriptures, that any elect of
God dyed in their infancy? will it therefore follow that no infants are the
elect of God? What if it cannot be proved by Scripture that any elect Queens
dyed in their Regency? will it therefore follow, that either no Queens are
elected, or if they be, they cannot die in their Regency?

Reply 4. It has been expressly showed above from scripture that infants have
dyed as at an 100 years old, only because they were as truly seasoned with
grace, and as ripe and ready for glory in their infancy, as if they had
fulfilled the age of an 100 years, Esa. 65.20.

Reply 5. If none of Gods elect did dye in their infancy, then all outward
things did not fall alike to all, contrary to the Scripture Eccles. 9.2. death
may (by your Tenent) befall (and often does) to carnal infants, but never to
elect infants. And thus elect infants, whilst infants should be immortal,
which is a paradox I suppose the Church of God never heard of (before now)
since the world began.

Reply 6. If none of Gods elect did die in their infancy, then in ease any of
the faithful should come to bury any of their children in their infancy (as
many do) they might have cause to sorrow for them, as without hope; for they
can have no hope of their salvation or resurrection to life; seeing their
infants dying infants, were never subjects capable of Gods election, and so
must needs dye incapable of glory. But for Christians to sorrow for their dead,
as others that have no hope, is contrary to the precept of the Apostle, 1 These.
4.13.

I would not be understood so to oppose infants, Silvester.
as to exclude them from salvation, but leave all in respect of them, as a
secret thing to the wisdom and grace of God in Christ.

This does not excuse your former harsh expression concerning infants, but
rather aggravate it with a contradiction to your self: Silvanus.
for you disputed against it above, as against the rule of truth, to say, That
infants were capable of union with Christ, and of justification to life
thereby. And sure if they be not capable of union with Christ, how can they be
saved without Christ? unless you conceive a salvation reserved by the wisdom
and grace of God for infants; which is not only without the word, but expressly
contrary to the revealed word of God, Act. 4.12.

Again, when you said soon after, that you supposed none would affirm, that
infants with reference to their nonage, were subjects capable of election, nor
subjects capable of glory, and therefore demanded how they could be capable of
grace, how can you now say, you do not so oppose infants, as to exclude them
from salvation? Can they be saved, and yet not be capable subjects of glory,
nor of grace, nor of union with Christ, nor of justification unto life?

God has proclaimed, Silvester.
that all are by nature the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. And therefore I cannot
believe that any are naturally born in grace, and so believers from the womb,
though the opposite doctrine teaches and affirms the same.

Silvanus.
The opposite doctrine (if you mean the doctrine of the Baptism of infants)
teaches as the Apostle does, that all by nature are the children of wrath,
(even believers and their seed as well as others) neither did I think that any
had been so ignorant, as to believe or teach, and affirm, that any are
naturally born in grace, and so (that is naturally) are believers from the
womb; I never heard nor read of any such before, nor do I believe it now. All
that for ought I know do hold the Baptism of infants, they teach, that by
nature all Infants (Christ only excepted) are born in sin, and children of
wrath: and none of them born in grace naturally, but only by virtue of the
Covenant of grace, which is above nature. Neither do they say that all that
are born under the Covenant, are borne believers (or partakers of faith) from
the womb, but that some by the blessing and grace of the Covenant are made
partakers of faith, and of the holy Ghost from the womb: and that all are
capable of the same grace from the womb; yea, and God has promised to work
the same sooner or later, in all the elect children of the Covenant absolutely:
in the rest according to his Covenant, he offers to work the same in his
own time, if neither their parents nor themselves reject or neglect the means
which the Lord offers them. For as the second Commandment (whereby the
instituted means of grace and worship are established) is moral and
perpetual: So is the sanction or ratification of that Commandment moral and
perpetual also. Now in the sanction of that Commandment, as God threatened to
visit the neglect of his ordinances (which are the means of grace) upon the
fathers to the children, to the third and fourth generation of them that hate
him; so he promises to show mercy unto thousands of them that love him and
keep his Commandments, Exodus 20.5, 6. whence it was that God promised to bring
upon Abraham all the good which he had spoken to him of (which was chiefly to
be a God to him and to his seed) because he knew that Abraham would command hi^
children and and his household after him, to keep the ways of the Lord, Genesis
18.19

Silvester.
The Scripture in Matthew. 28.19. being well considered, and rightly understood,
would stop men's mouths for ever, from having a word to say for the baptizing of
infants. This blessed commission of Christ to his Apostles, was chiefly for us
Gentiles, saying, All power is given to me both in heaven and earth, Go ye
therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, etc. As if Christ had said, Go now into all Nations,
and preach the gospel freely, as well to one Nation as to another, for the
gospel shall not now be confined any more to one place or people, then to
another, God is now a God of the Gentiles, as well as of the Jews; go
therefore as well to the Gentiles as to the Jews, even unto all Nations, and
there preach the gospel, and so make disciples by teaching them; and such so
taught, them baptize in the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, that is,
into the true and orderly profession of that which they have been taught and
believed. So that here teaching goes before baptizing, and presupposes
understanding and faith in that which is taught, this being the only place of
Christ his instituting the order of baptism. And further explained, Mark
16.15, 16. Go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature; He
that believes and is baptized shall be saved. So from these Scriptures brought
to prove the baptizing of infants, it is clearly manifest, that infants are not
the subjects of baptism appointed by Christ. For all the external benefits and
privileges of the gospel are given only to external and visible faith. And
so the sealing and confirming ordinances of Christ, do even presuppose faith
in the subject to seal unto, and to be confirmed: So here is no ground for
the baptizing of infants, but the contrary.

For clearing this Text in Matthew, Silvanus.
let it be first agreed what is the gospel which the Apostles are commanded to
preach to all Nations; then what it is to teach them; and then it will more
clearly appear who are to be baptized. By gospel is not meant that promise
only recorded by Mark 15.16. much less the curse annexed to it, He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved: he that believes not shall be
damned. For the gospel is glad tidings; nor is the promise of salvation to
believers and baptized persons, glad tidings, (as the word signifies, as the
Apostle declares, Romans 10.15.) but only to such as do believe; otherwise to
unbeleevers, the curse lies upon them, and they that groan under the want of
Christ, and of faith to receive him, they may languish for want of comfort, if
all the gospel were comprehended in that promise. For they will object against
themselves, salvation is indeed promised to believers; but I neither do
believe, nor can believe. Those words therefore in Mark are not the sum of
the gospel, though part of the gospel be contained in them. They are indeed a
double motive unto such to whom the gospel is preached, to urge them to receive
and believe the gospel: The one taken from the benefit of believing it; He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved: the other from the danger of
unbelief, He that believes not shall be damned. What then is the sum of
the gospel which Christ commanded his Apostles to preach to all Nations? your
self do truly express it in general terms. That God is now a God, not of
the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles. But to speak more particularly and
fully, the Gospel is summed up in these heads of doctrine.

1. That God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. by
world is meant Jews and Gentiles.

2. That God has committed this word of reconciliation to his Ambassadors and
Ministers, to persuade all the Nations of the world to be reconciled unto God,
2 Cor. 5.19, 20.

3. That God has given the Ministration of this gospel to be the ministration
of the Spirit of grace to work faith, whereby we receive Christ, and
reconciliation with God through him, and all the gifts of the Spirit from him,
2 Cor. 3.8. Gal. 3.2.

4. This is another head of the glad tidings of the gospel, that to whomsoever
he gives faith to receive Christ and his gospel, to them he gives himself to
be a God to them and to their seed or house.

For so Paul and Silas preached the gospel to the Jailer, Believe in the Lord
Jesus and thou shall be saved, and thine house, Act. 16.31. And so when Zacheus
was become a child of Abraham (to wit, by faith) the Lord Jesus promised
salvation to him and his house, Luke 19.9. And this was the very same gospel
which God preached before unto Abraham, when he gave him that Covenant of grace
to be a God to him and his seed; for this was the Covenant which was before
confirmed of God in Christ, Gal. 3.16, 17. And the Covenant confirmed by
Christ, is no other then the gospel of Christ. And this Covenant to a believer
and his seed, is glad tidings, not only to the believer touching himself, but
touching his seed also. As it was indeed exceeding glad tidings unto David,
that God had promised not only mercy to himself, (but as if that had been a
small thing in Gods sight) to his house also for a great while to come, 2 Samuel
7.19. which though it concerned a Kingdom, yet that also was a branch of the
Covenant of grace, and concerned the spiritual kingdom of Christ. And surely
the promise of salvation, and of the kingdom of heaven, which by the Covenant
of grace is granted to us, and our children, is a greater blessing then the
Kingdom of Israel, and makes us partakers of the kingdom of Christ.

Thus have we seen what is meant by the gospel which the Apostles were to
preach to all Nations: Now what is it to preach this gospel, (as Mark calls
it) or as you translate it out of Matthew, To teach all Nations? to preach the
gospel, is so to publish and apply it in the demonstration and power of the
Spirit, as that disciples may be made by it, for so the word in Matthews own
language expresses it, Go and make disciples all Nations. Now who are Christ's
disciples? Disciples are all one with Scholars; and Christ's disciples or
Scholars are such as Christ takes into his school to teach. And they are not
only believers, but their seed also, whom (according to the tenor of the
gospel opened even now) Christ undertaketh to teach, and teach them he does,
taking his own time, from the belly to their old age. Christ taught John
Baptist from his mothers womb, though not by the hearing of the ear, yet by
the holy Ghost, Luke 1.15. He sanctified Jeremy before he came forth of the
womb, Jer. 1.5. And was the God of the Psalmist from his mothers belly, and
caused him to hope when he was upon the breasts, Psalm. 22.9, 10. Do not think
that though God took the pains to teach such little ones in the old Testament,
yet now in the days of the new Testament he will no more teach such petties.
The great Doctor of his Church is not ashamed now, no more then of old, to
stoop to such mean work. No verily, Christ in the new Testament affects
less state and pomp in all his dispensations, then he was wont to use in the
old Testament: He puts forth as much hidden Majesty and glory in riding upon
an Ass, as ever he did by ruling his people by Solomon in all his royalty. He
requires still little children to be brought unto him, and knows still how
to ordain praise to himself out of the mouth of babes and sucklings. And
though it be recorded in the old Testament, yet it is a prophecy of the estate
of the children of the Church of the new Testament: All thy children shall be
taught of God, Esa. 54.13. Which has been proved above, to be meant not only
of the members of the church of riper years, but even of infants: so that an
argument from this Text in Matthew. does easily conclude it self into this form.

All the disciples of Christ are to be baptized.

Parents that are brought on to hear and believe the gospel preached, they and
their children are the disciples of Christ.

Therefore they and their children are to be baptized.

But you straiten and darken the counsel of God and commandment of Christ,
when you limit his meaning to such disciples so taught, as to have
understanding and faith in that which is taught. For though such a description
do agree to the Parents (who are disciples and Scholars of a higher form:)
yet when Christ receives the parents, who receive him by faith, he receives
also their seed even from the least to the greatest, to be his disciples, and
all his disciples to be baptized.

But that you may see you fight against God, in seeking to thrust out infants
out of Christ's school, and out of the number of Christ's disciples. Observe (I
pray you) how God leaves you to such a forced mis-interpretation of the Text,
and therein of the very form and essence of baptism, as utterly overthrows
the nature of it. Make disciples (say you) by teaching them; and such so taught
them baptize in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; that is, into the
true and orderly profession of that which they have been taught and believed.
What? is it now come to this pass, That to be baptized into the name of the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, is to be baptized into the true and orderly
profession of that which they have been taught and believed? Why, the true and
orderly profession of that which we have been taught and believed that is, of
our faith, is but a work of our own, though wrought in us by Gods spirit.
Faith it self is but a created gift, and so a creature: And the profession of
it is but the exercise of faith. And are we now come to be baptized into the
name of Creatures? It is easily granted, a man by his baptism may be engaged
to the performance of this or that duty: but can it be given for the exposition
of the form of baptism, to be baptized into the name of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, that is, into the true and orderly performance of this or that
duty? But thus God takes men in their own wiliness, whilst they go about to
shoulder out infant from being disciples unto Christ, and so from baptism,
they exclude themselves from the chief benefits of the baptism of Christ
(which is to have God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost to be a God to themselves
and to their seed:) and in stead of approving themselves to be the Disciples of
Christ, they take out a wrong lesson from the words of institution, and turn
the glorious name of the blessed Trinity into the weak performance of a
Christian duty, and that but an outward duty neither. Only because infants are
not able to perform such a duty, they shall therefore be debarred from baptism
into the name of the Father, Son and holy ghost, seeing Baptism into that
name, is but into the true and orderly profession of the faith. But the Lord
redeem your soul from such guile and falsehood. Let the name of the Father,
Son, and holy ghost be (as Christ means it) the Adoption, protection, and
government of the Father, Son, and holy ghost (as to have the name of one
called upon another, is so meant in Scripture, Genesis 48.16.) And then infants
are as capable of that grace, and of such a baptism, as their Parents be.

Do not put off your self nor me, with this pretense, that here teaching goes
before baptizing, etc. For though the Parents must be taught being gentiles and
Pagans before they can be disciples; yet the children of disciples are
received into the number of Christ's disciples by himself, though themselves
understand not what is t^ught them by the hearing of the ear. Neither put your
self off with that other pretense; That Matthews words are explained by Mark
16.15, 16. For though it be true that one of those places gives some light to
the other, yet either you must take disciples in a larger extent then
believers, or else you must account of the children of believers, as God does,
not as infidels (as the children of Pagans be) but as holy and under the
promise of grace and faith; and so as believers in their fathers right, till
themselves renounce it; or else you cannot avoid it (though you do disclaim
it) that if infants be unbeleevers, and so cannot be baptized, then as
unbelievers they cannot be saved. For the Text is express, He that believes
and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned.

Neither yet suffer your self to be put off from the truth by that other
pretense, That all the external benefits and privileges of the gospel are
given only to external and visible faith: And so the sealing and confirming
ordinances of Christ ever presuppose faith in the subject to seal unto, and to
be confirmed: For all this, and the baptism of infants, may well stand
together. For the benefit and privilege of external baptism is not given to
infants, but in respect of the external and visible profession of the faith of
their Parents, or of one of them at least. And this ordinance of Christ seals
and confirms the Covenant of grace to the believer (for himself and his seed)
yea to the whole Church of believers, and to their seed also, when they grow up
to understand the nature and use of it.

Chap. II.
THus then at length having (by the help of Christ) cleared this first Argument
for the baptism of infants of believers from the commandment of the Lord
Jesus: let us now (if you please) proceed to another commandment, a
commandment of the holy Ghost, with whom Peter being filled in the beginning
of his public administration of the Apostolic office, he exhorted the
penitent Jews, them and theirs, to be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus:
His words are thus recorded, Acts 2 38, 39. Repent ye (says he) and be
baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord Jesus for the remission of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost, for the promise is to
you and to your children, etc. From whence the argument that these words hold
forth, arises thus:

They to whom the promise is made of remission of sins, and of receiving the
holy Ghost, they have a commandment to be baptized every one of them.

But to such as do repent, and to their children, the promise is made of
remission of sins, and of receiving the holy Ghost. Therefore they that do
repent, and their children, have a commandment to be baptized every one of
them.

The former Proposition arises from the reason which the Apostle gives of his
exhortation, Repent ye (says he) and be baptized every one of you, For the
promise is made to you and to your children, as who should say, let every one
of you be baptized, both you that do repent, and your children. For the
promise is made to you, (that is, to you that do repent) and with you to your
children also.

Silvester.
The text says not, let every one of you, and of your children be baptized, but
repent ye, and let every one of you (to wit, who do repent) be baptized.

Silvanus.
The Reason of the commandment gives the sense of the commandment: now the
reason of this commandment, Repent ye, and be baptized every one of you, is
this, For the promise is made to you (to wit, to you who do repent) and to
your children. And therefore the sense of the commandment of the holy Ghost is
this, Repent ye, and let every one of you, both you that do repent, and your
children also be baptized. For the promise is to you, and to you^ children. And
so much is employed also in the change and different expression and extent of
the verbs of command; he does not say, Repent ye, and be baptized, as if he
commanded two duties to the same persons, no more to be baptized, but such as
do repent: But repent ye indefinitely, and be baptized every one of you,
universally and singularly, not only ye who do repent, but your children also.

But the event shows, Silvester.
that Peter intended only them that did repent to be baptized, and not their
children: for so it follows in the Text, verse 41. Then they that gladly
received his word were baptized, which shows that none else were baptized,
but persons that were grown up to years of understanding, such as were
affected with the word, and received it gladly.

It is true indeed the Apostles forced baptism upon none, Silvanus.
but administered it only to such as gladly received the Word. But those
penitent Jews and Proselytes, who understood that promise was to them and to
their children, they gladly received the whole Word, both the word of promise
which they received by faith: and the word of commandment, they and their
children to be baptized, which they received by offering themselves and their
children unto baptism; in which respect it is therefore said, They that gladly
received his word were baptized; because both their own baptism, and the
baptism of their children was the immediate fruit of the parents gladsome
receiving of the word; the act of the parents in such a case is accounted of
Christ as the act of the children, as in Mark 10.13, 14. The act of the parents
in bringing their children to Christ, is called the act of the children in
coming to him, as Levi paid tithes in the loins of Abraham, (Heb. 7.9, 10) so
in like sort these children here gladly received the word in the arms of their
parents.

But the ground of all this argument seems to me very weak, Silvester.
for you take that for granted, which to me seems very uncertain, (if not
untrue) that by the children to whom the promise is made, should be meant their
natural children, whereas he rather means the children of their faith
(spiritual children) such as God called to repent as well as themselves.

Silvanus.
The children to whom the promise was made if they were only the children of
the faith of their parents, that is, as you mean, not the children for whom
the parents believe, but their children that believe and repent as well as
their parents, then a double absurdity would follow.

First, that whereas in the days of the old Testament, upon the faith and
repentance of the Proselyte parents, the Covenant and promise did belong to
them and to their children: now in the days of the new Testament, the faith
and repentance which admits the parents, excludes their children: For the
children of these Jews and Proselytes (who heard the Sermon) were in Covenant
with God before the Sermon. But now upon hearing this Sermon, and being wrought
upon effectually by it unto faith and repentance, though themselves be
received, yet their children are cut off from the Covenant. A strange doctrine,
that the faith of the Parents should set their children further off from God
and his Covenant, then they were before.

Secondly, to say the children to whom the promise was made, were meant only
their penitent and believing children, would make the Apostles argument a vain
and superfluous flourish, whereby he encourages these Jews and Proselytes to
repent and believe, upon this motive taken from a promise made, not only to
themselves, but to their children. For by this doctrine the promise belongs
no more to the children of believers, then to the children of Pagans. For even
the children of pagans (whilst their children remain Pagans) have the promise
belonging to them, as soon as themselves do repent and believe. And what more
have the children of believers belonging to them then so? Yea, the Apostles
argument is made no argument at all, so far as he urges them to repent and
believe, by the blessing of the promise thereby redounding to their children.
For whether they repented and believed or no, the promise would belong to their
children, when the children came themselves to repent and believe. Otherwise if
their children repented not, the promise would not belong unto them though
their parents did repent. Let me add for confirmation an argument or two more;
take this then for a third argument, conversion unto faith and repentance, is
it self given by the Covenant, to the children of the Covenant. And therefore
the children of the Covenant, were under the Covenant before their conversion,
and so before their faith, even by the faith of their parents. For so the same
Apostle Peter (in his next Sermon to the Jews) testifies, Ye are the children
of the Covenant (says he) which God has made with our fathers, etc. unto you
first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, has sent him to bless you, in
turning away every one of you from his iniquities, Acts 3.25, 26. If Christ
then be given by the Covenant, and conversion by Christ to the children of the
Covenant, then the children of the faithful are not first converted, and so
come under the Covenant, but are first under the Covenant, and so come to be
converted.

A fourth argument may be taken from the easier engraffing of the natural seed
of holy Parents, into Christ, then of the posterity of Pagans; which could not
be but in respect of their interest in the Covenant, and the benefit redounding
to them from thence. For otherwise the Apostles reasoning ( Romans 11.24.) will
not hold, If thou (Roman) were cut off the olive tree wild by nature, and
graffed contrary to nature into the good olive tree; how much more shall these
Israelites which be the natural branches, be graffed into their own olive
tree? What reason can be given why the Israelites should be much more capable
of engraffing into Christ, then the Roman Pagans were? Surely, not in respect
of the greater ingenuity and better indoles (or disposition) of nature, that
will be found in the Israelites, above what was found in the Romans: (for by
nature all are alike corrupt and averse from Christ, one as another, Romans 3.12.
and Psalm. 14.3.) but only in respect of Gods greater propension to show his
saving and converting grace to the children of his confederates. And so indeed
the Apostle explaineth himself verse 26, 27, 28. There shall come (says he)
the deliverer out of Zion, and turn away ungodliness from Jacob. And this is
my covenant when I shall take away their sins: As touching the gospel, they are
enemies for your sakes: but as touching the elelection, they are beloved for
their Fathers sake.

The words in the place in hand, Silvester.
Acts 2.39. are not unto your seed, but unto your children, wherein there is a
great difference. For by seed in Scripture, is often meant a natural
generation, begotten, and born after the flesh. But by children a spiritual
generation, walking in the steps of the faith of such as have gone before them,
as Act. 3.25. and 13.26.33. and so John 8.37.39. Romans 9.7.8. And so the words
import as much, which is to you, and to your children, and to all a far off,
even as many as the Lord our God shall call; so that the promise is only to
such as the Lord our God shall call, and none else.

Silvanus.
You much mistake it, if you take it, there is any such difference to be put
between seed and children: for both of them are taken alike promiscuously.
Sometime seed is put for the spiritual children, and children are put for the
carnal seed. And sometimes again the seed are put for the carnal children,
and children for the spiritual seed, in Gal. 3.26. when the Apostle says, If
you be Christ's, then are you Ahrahams seed, and heirs according to the
promise; there seed is put for spiritual children. But when he says,
Jerusalem that now is, is in bondage with her children, ( Gal. 4.25.) there he
puts children for the carnal seed: And so he does also even in some of
those Texts, which your self allege to the contrary, as in Acts. 3.25. when
the Apostle says, Ye are the children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant
which God made with our fathers, he speaks of such whom he exhorts to
repent, and to be converted, ver. 19. And therefore yet they were the carnal
seed. And he speaks to them to whom he says, Christ was sent to turn every
one of them from their iniquities, verse. 26. And therefore he knew no other of
them, nor spoke no otherwise to them, then as to men yet in their sins. And so
in that other place which you quote out of Acts 13.26, 33. the Apostle plainly
calls them the children of the stock of Abraham; who were the natural seed
of Abraham, and whom afterward he calls despisers, verse. 41. And amongst whom
many of them contradicted and blasphemed his doctrine, verse 45. So that from
the word children, it cannot be gathered that in this Text, the Apostle
means, children walking in the steps of the faith of their fathers.

No, nor from those other words of the Text, which you say import so much,
which speak of the promise made to you and your "children, and to all afar
off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call; for these words do not
import what you say, that the promise is only to such as God shall call, and
to none else: as many as the Lord our God shall call, is not a limitation of
those remote words, you and your children, but of the next words immediately
going before, all that are afar off, lest it should be thought, that the
promise is to all that are afar off, that is, to all Pagans, and infidels, he
explaineth himself in the words next following, even to as many as the Lord
shall call from amongst them. And all they indeed from among the Gentiles, whom
the Lord shall call, they still partake of the same promise of grace with the
Jews, that as the promise of grace is made to the Jews and their children, so
is it now to the Gentiles called, and to their children: there is no difference
now between Jews and Gentiles, in respect of any spiritual privileges or
promises. The children of the believing Gentiles are now as holy as the
children of the believing Jews, and the promises pertain to both alike.

But it is not said in the Text, Silvester.
the Covenant is to you and yours, but the promise. Now we know that every
promise is not a Covenant, there being a large difference between a promise and
a Covenant. Let it then be well considered, what is here meant by the promise:
and that is Gods sending of the Messiah, or the seed in whom all the Nations
should be blessed; and so the sending of a Savior or a Redeemer unto Israel,
as these Scriptures manifest compared together, Esa. 11. 1 Jer. 23.5, 6. with
Luke 1.68.74. Acts 13.23. and 3.25, 26. This was performed by Christ's coming,
First, in the flesh, in which respect he came of, and to the Jews only by
promise, as Joh. 4.22. Romans 9.5. Matthew. 10.5, 6. and 15.24. John 1.11.
Secondly, in the preaching of the Gospel, by which he was held forth as a
Savior to all that by faith laid hold on him. And this way also Christ was
first tendered to the Jews for a Savior to save them from their s^nnes, Acts
4.12. And for to be their King, as to save them, so into whose State and
government they were to submit; as Luke 19.14, 27. Acts 2.36. In which sense
the Apostle speaks, when he says, the promise is to you and to your
children, and to all far and near, as God shall call. That is, the promise,
or the promised Savior is come, and is now according to Gods promise tendered
to you by the Gospel, calling you and your children, and all else, where the
word of grace shall come, to believe and receive him by faith, who is now come
to save you and all that believe, from their sins, Acts 3.25, 26. And
therefore it is said, as many as gladly received or believed these glad
tidings, the same was sealed or confirmed to them by Baptism, Acts 2.41.
according to John 1.11, 12, 13. By all which it is manifest, that the promise,
Acts 2.39. is meant of the sending of the Messiah, or a Savior to the house of
Israel, to call them to repentance, and to save such as believe from their
sins, as is clear also by these Scriptures, Esa. 59.20. Act. 13.23, 26, 32,
38, 39. And thus the promise is to you and your children, that is, the promised
Savior is offered, and offers himself freely to save you, notwithstanding
your crucifying of him, yet now repent and believe; for his promise is upon the
same, freely to forgive and to save you from all your sins. Thus the promise is
applied to faith, which is the way of preaching the gospel, and not an absolute
conclusion of persons to be in the Covenant of grace and life, whether they
have faith or not. What is this, but to keep the wicked from leaving his way,
by promising them life? This God did not in making of his Covenant at the
first, nor the Apostle by his applying of the same, at the last.

Silvanus.
In this your long answer, some things are impertinent, some things false, some
fraudulent, and some confused; but one thing only alleged out of the Context
that may seem to the purpose, and that also misapplyed. 1. It is impertinent
to put a difference between the promise and the Covenant. As it was before
curious to put a difference between seed and children. For though every
promise be not a Covenant: yet there is no such large difference (as you speak
of) between the promise of God and his Covenant, but that they are ordinarily
put one for another. The Covenant of not drowning the world any more with a
flood, was no more then a promise: yet it is called a Covenant, Genesis 9.11. and
the Promise that God gave to Abraham of the inheritance of the world ( Romans
4.13.) was by the Covenant, confirmed by the sacrifices of beasts, divided
asunder, Genesis 15.5.9, 10.17. And that which God calls the promises, Gal.
3.16. he calls the Covenant in the next verse, verse, 17. Besides, whatsoever
difference there may be between the promise and the Covenant, it is here
pleaded altogether impertinently. For if it were granted you which you plead
for (though there be no mention of it in the Text) That by the promise is here
meant the promise of sending the Messiah: yet that promise is either given by
the Covenant of grace, or by the Covenant of works. If Christ be given and
sent by the Covenant of grace, then the promise that gives him is the Covenant
of grace. So that if the promise of sending Christ be to them and their
children, (as the Text speaks) then the Covenant in which that promise is
given, is to them and their children. And so indeed the same Apostle telle^h
them in his next Sermon. Acts 3.25, 26. Ye are the children of the Prophets,
and of the Covenant which God made with our Fathers, etc. Unto you first God
having raised up his son Jesus sent him to bless you etc. the promise
therefore of sending Christ, was given by Covenant. And then what difference is
there between promise and Covenant, in this case?

2. It is false (which you say) that Christ came only to the Jews by promise.
For though he came to the Jews, and to the Jews first, and to them by
promise: yet God gave a more ancient promise of the coming of the Messiah, to
our first parents, Genesis 3.15. And they were then the common stock and root
both of Jews and Gentlies. If Job had not a promise of Christ his coming to
be his Redeemer, how does he challenge him to be his Redeemer? I know (says
he) that my Redeemer lives, Job. 19.25.

Again, It is a very truth, which you falsely deny, to wit, an absolute
conclusion (as you call it) of any persons to be in the Covenant, whether they
have faith or not. For what think you of Isaac and Jacob, and all other elect
infants borne of faithful parents: may not a man say, that all such are
absolutely under the Covenant even before they believe? yea their very
beleiving which in Gods appointed time is given to them, is it not the effect
of the grace of the Covenant; and not the cause of it?

It is also another falsehood, to say, That the concluding it of persons
(meaning of Infants who may want faith) to be in the Covenant of grace and
life, does keep the wicked from leaving his way, by promising him life.

For we do not promise life to any by the Covenant, unless they be elect.
And though they be elect, yet because it is unknown to them, and to us too,
till they do repent and believe, we tell them they cannot partake in any
saving benefit of the Covenant till they be regenerate and quickened by the
Spirit, as Christ told Nicodemus.

And it is yet another falsehood to say, That God did not conclude absolutely
any in Covenant of grace when he first made it, nor that the Apostle did so
apply it at the last.

For when God first made the Covenant, he did absolutely conclude Isaac, and in
him all the Elect seed under the Covenant. For it is a branch of the meaning
of that promise of God, when he first made the Covenant, My Covenant (says he)
will I establish with Isaac, Genesis 17.21. And yet it does not appear that Isaac
had any faith, much less visible. And for the Apostle his applying of the
Covenant, or the promise (call it whether you will, all is one to me) certain
it is, the Apostle does not suspend the childrens being in Covenant upon their
own faith, but upon the faith and repentance of their Fathers. Repent (says
he, speaking to the fathers) and so let every one of you be baptized, etc. For
the promise is made to you and to your children. Whence the scope of the
Apostles exhortation fitly arises into this argument, and concludes after
this manner; as has been shown above.

To whom the promise is made, they ought to be baptized every one of them.

But to you repenting, and to your children, the promise is made.

Therefore you and your children ought to be baptized every one of you.

And besides, the Apostle in his next Sermon so expounds the Covenant, as
given not only to them that are converted, and so brought on to believe: but
to them who yet want faith and conversion. And therefore he says, Acts 3.25,
26. Ye are the children of the Covenant unto whom God having raised up his Son
Jesus, has sent him to bless you, in converting (or turning away) every one
of you from his iniquities. Their being in Covenant (who were the children of
the faithful) was not the fruit of their own turning to God; but their turning
to God is held forth by him as a blessing and fruit of their being in Covenant.

3. This is fraudulent, that you hold forth the coming of Christ in the gospel
to be for this end, to call upon men to repent and believe, and submit
themselves to his State and government. Which though it be very true, yet it is
like the fraudulent practice of Ananias and Saphira, to pay part of the price,
that they might more cunningly conceal the rest. So you in like manner, hold
forth this end (which is indeed part of Christ's coming in the gospel) the more
closely to conceal another part of it, which is, to give faith and salvation
to the children of believers, and accordingly to call their parents to submit
their children and households, as well as themselves, to the state and
government of the Lord Jesus. For why should Christ encourage children to come
to him ( Mark 10.14.) if it were no end of Christ's coming, to come to save
them?

4. These things are very confused in your answer, that you put it for all one,
Christ to come to save men from their sins, and to call men to believe.

For though these follow one another, yet they require a far different state
of the subject, unto whom this different grace is tendered. For if you speak
of saving from sin (or justifying) Christ justifies or saves none from sin,
but believers, or such at least, as have faith. But when he calls men to
believe or to repent, he comes to them not as having faith or repentance, but
as wanting both. And yet when he comes to call them unto faith and
repentance, he does it out of respect of his Covenant with their Fathers, whose
children they were: yea, and in this call of them, he comes to give them
repentance and forgiveness of sins, Acts 5.31. And in giving it to their
Fathers, he promises also to give the same unto their children, Acts 16.31.

Lastly, there is one thing alleged out of the context, which may seem
pertinent to the purpose, if it were fitly applied. You truly allege that in
Acts 2.41. It is said, As many as gladly received his word (or as you call it,
glad tidings) they were baptized, or as you say, the same was sealed and
confirmed unto them by baptism. But this will not prove that which you allege
it for, that therefore it is manifest, that by the promise ( Acts 2.39.) is
meant the sending of the Messiah. For the text will every way as fitly (and
more fitly) carry it to be meant of the promise of remission of sins, and of
receiving the gift of the holy Ghost; so the words run directly; Repent ye
(says he) and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for
the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost, for the
promise is to you and to your children: What promise? Here is no promise
mentioned before, but the remission of sins, and gift of the Holy Ghost: And
the gift of the Holy Ghost is called a promise, verse 33. and Acts 1.4, 5. But
it is not material to the purpose, whether by the promise you understand the
coming of Christ, or the gift of the Holy Ghost, or remission of sins
purchased by the one, and sealed by the other. For all these promises are given
by one and the same Covenant of grace. And if any one of these promises
belonged to them, the whole Covenant of grace belonged to them also. But to
deal ingenuously and faithfully with you, the Text which you quote (out of
Acts 2.41.) might hold forth a just color of an Objection (if you had so
applied it) against the argument gathered out of verse 38, 39. for the baptism
of infants. For if they who were baptized were such as gladly received his word
( verse 41.) then it does not appear out of this place, that infants were at
that time baptized with the rest: because they could not receive the word, much
less gladly, least of all express their gladness by any visible profession.
This objection (I confess) would have prevailed with me to have forborne any
proof of the Baptism of infants out of this place; were it not partly for the
Reasons which have been alleged above (from the words of verse 39.) partly
also for that I find, the Lord Jesus is wont to accept the acts of Parents (in
the duties of the second Commandment) as done for themselves, and for their
children, as has been touched above. For look as when Levi is said to pay
tithes in Abraham, it was because Abraham in paying tithes was reputed of God,
as paying them for himself, and for Levi, Heb. 7.9. And as when Parents came
and brought their children to Christ, their coming was reputed of Christ as
the coming of their children, as well as of themselves, Mar. 10.14. So when
Peter's hearers received the word gladly, they gladly received in both for
themselves and their children, to wit, both the word of promise, which was
expressly given to themselves and their children: and also the word of
Commandment (which was grounded upon the promise, and urged as far as the
promise extended) Be baptized every one of you: and thereupon they in receiving
his word gladly, did gladly give up both themselves and their children to be
baptized.

Silvester.
But before you take the baptism of infants concluded out of this place,
consider what you will say to another interpretation, which I have seen made of
this place. For there be that say, That by the promise to you and to your
children, is not meant the Covenant of grace to you and to your children; but
the promise of sending the Holy Ghost to enable them, and their sons and
daughters to prophecy: Which promise Peter quoted out of Joel, Act. 2.16, 17.
which promise Christ received of the Father, and had now shed abroad in their
sight and hearing, verse 33. and which Peter promised to them upon their
repentance and baptism, verse 38. because the promise was to them and to their
children.

Silvanus.
Thus sometimes you will have the promise to be understood of sending Christ,
and sometime of sending the holy Ghost, but the truth is, both are but effects
of the same grace, and both given by the same Covenant. The English proverb
speaks of such men as are loath to see what they do see, that they cannot
see the wood for trees: so these men cannot see the Covenant for the promises;
what is the wood but a storehouse of trees? and what is the Covenant of grace,
but the storehouse of the promises of grace? In the Covenant of grace when God
gives himself to be the God of the faithful and of their seed, the Father
promises himself to be their Father, Christ promises to be their Redeemer,
and the Holy Ghost promises to be their sanctifier. You may as soon separate
the persons in the Trinity from being one God, as separate the gift of one of
these persons to us and to our children, from the gifts of the other; or
separate all these gifts, or the promises of these gifts from the Covenant of
grace.

But if the gift of the Holy Ghost be here promised to these Jews and
Proselytes and to their children, Silvester.
that they might speak with new tongues, and prophecy, then in this place by
children cannot be meant infants; for infants are not capable of speaking with
tongues and prophesying.

The Apostle Peter, Silvanus.
though he speak of the promise of the gift of the Holy Ghost, which in the
former part of the chapter did enable the Disciples to speak with new tongues,
and prophecy; yet he did not intend to limit and confine the gift of the Holy
Ghost to that work in these Converts here; for that would have been small
comfort to them who were pricked in heart, and enquired the way of salvation,
to put them off with a promise of the Holy Ghost, to work such gifts of
tongues and prophesying, as were common to hypocrites, Matthew. 7.22, 23. 1 Cor.
13.1. The Apostle therefore who better knew how to satisfy and heal these
wounded souls, he promises to them such a gift of the Holy Ghost as is
joined with remission of sins, and accompanyeth salvation, Act. 2.38, 39. And
though infants (whilst infants) are not capable of speaking with tongues, and
prophesying, (which is but one gift of the Holy Ghost, and but a common gift
neither) yet they are capable of the Holy Ghost for regeneration and remission
of sins, which are the chief blessings of the Covenant, which these Converts
then stood in need of, and for the effectual working of which, the Apostle
tells them, The promise was made to them and to their children; which indeed
cannot be wrought, but by the gift both of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost.

And now having said enough (as I conceive) if not too much for the clearing of
these two first Arguments for the Baptism of the infants of believers; Let us
now proceed to add a third taken from the Analogy of the Circumcision of the
seed of Abraham, and the Commandment of God for the same.

Silvester.
I have heard much agitation of such an argument (and more of that then of any
other) but I am very slow to believe the baptism of infants upon that ground.

CHAP. III.
Silvanus.
Do you not believe that God made a Covenant of grace with Abraham and his
seed? Genesis 17.7. etc.

Silvester.
What if he did?

Silvanus.
Did he not by that Covenant give him a Commandment to receive the sign of
Circumcision, the seal of the Covenant of grace to him and to his seed?
Silvester.
Genesis 17.9, 10.

Silvanus.
What of that?

Has not the Lord given that Covenant of grace which was then to Abraham and
his seed, now to believers and our seed?

Silvester.
What then?

Silvanus.
I demand further, has not God abolished Circumcision, and given us baptism in
the room thereof?

Silvester.
What of all this?

Silvanus.
Then out of all these it follows, that if the same Covenant of grace be now
given to believers and our seed, which was given to Abraham and his seed; and
if baptism be now given to us as a seal of the Covenant, in the room of
Circumcision, then the same Covenant, which gave a Commandment, or a word of
institution for the Circumcision of Abraham and his seed, gives the same
Commandment, or a Word of Institution for the baptism of believers and our
seed. As by like proportion, it is justly gathered, that if Baptism be given
us in the room of Circumcision, and the Lords Supper in the room of the
Passover, then as no uncircumcised person might eat of the Passover: so now
no unbaptized person may eat of the Lords Supper.

Silvester.
Here are many things presupposed, but not proved: as, first, that the Covenant
which God made with Abraham and his seed, was a Covenant of grace. For some say
it was a Covenant of temporal blessings (as of the inheritance of Canaan) not
spiritual. Others say, it was a Covenant of works, not of grace. And others
say, that though it was a Covenant of grace to Abraham (and to his faithful
seed) yet it was a Covenant of works, at least to his carnal seed.

Secondly, it is presupposed, but not proved, that Circumcision was a seal of
the Covenant of grace to Abraham, and to his natural seed.

Thirdly, neither is it proved, that God has made a Covenant of grace now with
Believers and our natural seed.

Fourthly, Neither is it proved, that Baptism with water is given us of God in
stead of circumcision.

It is true, Silvanus.
the Devil has bestirred himself mightily to call in question all these
truths of the Covenant of grace; that so he might make the Covenant of none
effect both to Parents and children. Now the Lord rebuke him, and make us wise
to discern his enterprises. But to clear all these points, let us (by the help
of Christ) prove them one and other, as well as presuppose them. We must not
lose nor cast away any Divine truth, because it is questioned, but rather
contend for it, and the more earnestly, because it is opposed.

For the first there is a truth in it, though not the whole truth, that the
Covenant made with Abraham, was of temporal blessings, (such as deliverance
from Egypt, and the inheritance of Canaan) but not of temporal blessings only
nor chiefly, even as the Covenant of grace with us, though it chiefly convey
spiritual and eternal mercies, yet it reaches also to temporal blessings
also, Hos. 2.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Reasons hereof from the word are plain
and strong. 1. From the Tenor of the Covenant, I will be a God to thee and to
thy seed after thee, Genesis 17.7. Now God to be a God to us and our seed, is more
then a temporal blessing, even all-sufficient goodness for us and ours, for
our souls, and for our bodies, for this life and for ever: God giving himself
to be our God, the Father gives himself to be our Father; God the Son gives
himself to be our Redeemer; and God the holy Ghost gives himself to be our
Sanctifier and Comforter. And indeed, that Christ was promised and given in
this Covenant, is clear from Luke 1.54, 55. and Verse 69, 72, 73. The holy
Ghost also is here promised and given in this Covenant as well as Christ the
Angel of the Covenant, Esa. 63.9, 10, 11.

Secondly, in the words of this Covenant, God giving himself to be a God to
Abraham and to his seed: he therein promised life to them, yea life after
death. For the Covenant was so rehearsed by Moses, after the death of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, Exodus 3.6. Whence Christ undeniably concludes that God
promised and gave to them resurrection from the dead, and eternal life, Mat.
22.31, 32. Luke 20.37.38. Surely resurrection from death, and living to God
after death, are not temporal blessings.

3. Canaan it self was not given as a mere temporal blessing: but as a
pledge of a spiritual inheritance, a seal of the Church, a type of Heaven.
Genesis 47.21 to 31. and Chap. 50.25. Heb. 11.22.
Hence it was that Jacob gave such a solemn charge by oath unto Joseph, and
Joseph to his brethren, the one to bury his dead body in Canaan, the other for
the transportation of his bones to Canaan: which they would never have done for
an earthly inheritance, but to nourish in the hearts of their posterity, faith
and desire of their communion in the Church, and of their rest in heaven,
whereof the rest in Canaan was a type, whereunto not Moses, but Joshua must
bring them, that is, not the law, but Jesus, Heb. 3.11. with Chap. 4, 5.8. And
their casting out of that Country by captivity was their casting out of Gods
sight. 2 Kings 17.28. Whereby their Church Estate was dissolved, the Communion
of Saints scattered, the Ordinances of his public Worship removed from them,
and their hopes of heaven.

Silvester.
But I have read it strongly pleaded, that the Covenant made with Abraham was an
old Covenant, a Covenant of works, which Christ has therefore disanulled as
old and weak, Heb. 8.13. Now still to plead our own and our childrens right
unto that Covenant, and to the Seal thereof, is to confound the Old and New
Testament, Law and Gospel; besides Circumcision (which was a Sign and Seal of
the Covenant with Abraham) bound them that received it, to keep the whole Law,
Gal. 5.3. And therefore the Covenant to which it was annexed was a legal
Covenant, a Covenant of works, and not of grace.

The Old Covenant spoken of Heb. 8.13. was not the Covenant made with Abraham,
but with the Israelites on Mount Sinai, when God brought them out of Egypt, as
is expressly said, Heb. 8.9. which Covenant coming 430. years after the
Covenant with Abraham, is expressly distinguished from it, as that which could
not disanull the promise or Covenant, which went before unto Abraham. Ga. 3.17.

Silvester.
But why should the Covenant with the Israelites on Mount Sinai be called old,
in comparison of the Covenant with Abraham which was 430 years older then it?

The Covenant made on Mount Sinai is not called old in comparison of the
Covenant made Abraham: bur in comparison of the Evangelicall dispensation of
the Covenant of grace by the Lord Jesus: in whom the sacrifices and Leviticall
Ceremonies being accomplished and abolished, we look for atonement not in blood
of Bulls and Goats, nor in Legal Ablutions, but in the blood of Christ only.

And as for Circumcision, though the Apostle say, that every one circumcised,
is bound to keep the whole Law; yet that does not argue, that circumcision was
to Abraham a sign and seal of the Covenant of works; for a double answer may
justly be given to it.

First, they that hold that the Covenant given on Mount Sinai, was the Covenant
of works, (as do Melancthon, Chemnitius, Piscator, etc.) They would answer
that circumcision was a sign of the Covenant of works, not as circumcision
was given to Abraham, but as it was given by Moses, for Moses also enjoined
circumcision as a Leviticall rite, Lev. 12.3. But Christ himself observes a
difference between circumcision as given by Moses, and as of the Fathers, John
7.22, 23.

Secondly, but they that hold the Covenant on Mount Sinai to have been a
Covenant of grace, but only veiled under types and shadows, (as do Calvin,
Bucer, Bucan, etc.) they would answer, that circumcision did bind to the
keeping of the whole Law; not as it was given either to Abraham, or to Moses,
but as it was urged by the false Apostles who expected justification from the
observation of it. To such indeed it is truly alleged, that if they look for
justification by the observation of circumcision, they are then bound to
observe the whole Law. For it is not the observation of one commandment of the
Law, that can justify, but the observation of the whole Law, for he that
breaks any one commandment of the Law, is guilty of all, James 2.10. Whence
it is that Paul puts the observation of circumcision (to wit, in the sense
of the false Apostles) as all one with justification by the works of the Law,
Gal. 5.3, 4. And thereby proves that if the Galatians be circumcised, Christ
should profit them nothing, ver. 2. they were fallen from grace, ver. 4. And
yet Timothy who received circumcision, not in the sense of the false Apostles,
as necessary to justification; but for other respect, to avoid offense, he did
not thereby fall from Christ, or lose his profit in Christ Jesus. But to put it
out of doubt that circumcision given to Abraham was a sign and seal not of
the Covenant of works, but of grace, the Apostles words are evident, Romans 4.11.
Abraham (says he) received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the
righteousness of faith. Now righteousness of faith is not found in the
Covenant of works, but in the Covenant of grace only. The Covenant of works
holds forth no righteousness but by the works of the Law.

Silvester.
I would not deny that the Covenant made with Abraham was a Covenant of grace
to him and to his faithful seed, and consequently Circumcision was a sign and
seal of the same Covenant of grace to them; but to the carnal seed (such as
Ismael and Esau) it was not a Covenant of grace to them: for then as they fell
away from that Covenant; so they had fallen away from a state of grace, which
would too much countenance and cherish the Arminian and Popish error of
Apostasy from grace. Neither could circumcision be to them a sign or seal of
the Covenant of grace, nor of the righteousness of faith given in that
Covenant, for neither had they faith, nor righteousness by faith before their
circumcision, as Abraham had; nor after their circumcision, as the elect seed
had. And how could then God set his seal to a falsehood?

Silvanus.
What if that were granted you which you say (which yet many good Divines will
not admit) that the Covenant of God with Abraham was a Covenant of grace only
to him and to his faithful seed, and to them Circumcision was a seal of the
same Covenant: but to the carnal seed, the Covenant was a Covenant of works,
and circumcision a seal of the Covenant of works? Though all this were
granted, yet still it remains good, that all the seed of Abraham (spiritual
and carnal) were in Covenant with God, one Covenant or other, either of works
or grace; and were all partakers of the seal of the Covenant, to wit,
circumcision, though in a different respect. But then it will unavoydably
follow, that if the Covenant given to Abraham and his seed be given to
believers and our seed; then as all the seed of Abraham (whether carnal or
spiritual) were in Covenant with God, and so circumcised: so all the seed of
believers are in Covenant with God, and should now be baptized. If you say,
then Baptism shall be a seal of the Covenant of works to the carnal seed of
believers, and that were an absurdity now in the days of the new Testament.

Answ. No greater absurdity then to say, that circumcision was a seal of the
Covenant of works to the carnal seed of Abraham. For Paul speaking of the two
Covenants under which the twofold seed of Abraham lay, he says, As it was
then, so is it now: As it was then in the old Testament, so it is now in the
New: Gal. 4.29. Read from verse. 24. to the end of that chapter. As it was then,
so is it now; not only in this respect, that he that was borne after the
flesh, persecuted him that was borne after the spirit: But in this also, that
as then some of the seed of Abraham were born of Hagar, that is, born of the
Covenant of works, and born after the flesh: and some were born of Sarah the
freewoman, that is, born of the Covenant of grace, and born after the Spirit;
so is it now, in the days of the new Testament.

But to give you a further answer and safer, and more generally accepted; Let
me show you, how the carnal seed of Abraham might then, and may now partake
(after a sort) in the Covenant of grace, and in the seal of the Covenant of
grace, and yet fall away from grace: and nevertheless their falling from grace
be no countenance to the Arminian error of apostasy from grace.

There is a double state of grace, one adherent, (which some not unfitly call
federall grace) sanctifying to the purifying of the flesh, Heb. 9.13. another
inherent, sanctifying of the inner man. And of this latter there be two sorts,
one, wherein persons in Covenant are sanctified by common graces, which make
them serviceable and useful in their callings, as Saul, Jehu, Judas, and
Demas, and such like hypocrites. Another whereby persons in Covenant are
sanctified unto union and communion with Christ and his members in a way of
regeneration and salvation. In respect of adherent or federall grace, all the
children of a believing parent are holy, and so in an estate of grace. In
respect of inherent common graces, Saul, Jehu, and Judas and Demas were
sanctified of God to their several callings for the service of his people, as
Apostates may be, Heb. 10.29. Now there is no doubt but men may fall away from
adherent federall grace, as also from inherent common graces; and yet without
any prejudice to the perseverance of sincere believers, and without any
countenance to the Arminian error of Apostasy from grace, to wit, from such
grace as accompanyeth salvation. And as for the circumcision of Ismael (and
such as he) it was a sign and seal of the righteousness of faith, not of that
which he had received, but of that which God offered to apply to him in the
use of the means of grace in Abraham's family; which means, as Abraham having
circumcised him (and so having set God^ seal and property upon him) was bound
to apply to him, ( Genesis 18.19.) to prepare him for grace. So Ismael being
circumcised, was bound (as he grew up to understanding) to yield up himself in
professed subjection, both to the Lord and his father, in receiving and
following the means of grace applied to him: for God having by Covenant
offered himself to be a God to Abraham and his seed, the Lord did thereby
promise to afford both to him and his seed, the means whereby they might come
to enjoy the Lord for their ^od. For he which promises the end, promises also
the means that lead to that end. And Abraham for his part accepting the
Covenant for himself and his seed, and so having circumcised himself and them
in token thereof, he had now bound himself to train up and educate all his
seed in the means and ways of grace, whereby they might come to enjoy that
great promise of the Covenant, to have the Lord for their God, which also
Abraham was careful to do, as the Lord testifies of him, Genesis 18.19.

Yea, and Ismael himself with the rest of Abraham's seed having been received
into the Covenant of God, and to the seal thereof, he and they all were bound
to yield up themselves to the Lord, and to Abraham, in attending to the means
of grace dispensed to them in that Covenant, that so they might come to enjoy
the sure mercies of the Covenant, to have the Lord for their God. But now when
Ismael rejected the means of grace, as he did by mocking at Isaac, and as did
Esau also, (by selling the birthright of the Covenant for a mess of pottage)
now their circumcision was made uncircumcision, as Paul speaks in a like
case, Romans 2.25. And so they did discovenant themselves and their posterity
from the Covenant of grace, and chose to be (as the bewitched Galatians did,
Galat. 4.21.) under the Covenant of works. It is therefore a groundless and
false collection, which some of your way do make, that because there was in
Abraham (when God made a Covenant with him) a double seed, (the one a
spiritual seed, the other a fleshly seed) and accordingly because there were
in the Covenant some spiritual blessings, and some outward and carnal
blessings: therefore they must be thus distinguished, that the spiritual
blessings belonged to the spiritual seed, and the outward blessings to his
carnal seed.

For all the blessings were promised to all the seed in the Covenant. To the
spiritual seed, both spiritual and outward blessings were promised and given
effectually: To the carnal seed, not carnal blessings only, but spiritual
also were promised, and offered: So as that their falling short of the grace of
God, was not from the defect of the Covenant, but from their profane refusal
of it, and of the means of grace offered in it. For it is an evident and
confessed Truth, and the Text is clear for it, That in the Covenant, God
offered himself to be a God to all the seed. Now God is not an outward or
carnal blessing: but as himself is a Spirit, so is he also a spiritual
blessing to whomsoever he is dispensed.

Well then, Silvester.
though it be granted that the Covenant which God made with Abraham and with
his seed, is a Covenant of grace, and that circumcision was given as a seal of
that Covenant unto his seed; yet still, this is not proved, that God has made
a Covenant of grace now in the new Testament with the seed of believers,
especially our natural and carnal seed: Or that our Baptism is given to us
of God in stead of circumcision, to confirm such a Covenant with such a seed.

Both these may be well proved, rightly understood; Silvanus.
rightly understood I say. For if by carnal seed of believers be meant the
children of believers walking after the flesh, and carnally rejecting the
Covenant of grace, as Esau sold his birthright for a mess of pottage; and the
Jews rejected the righteousness of Christ, to establish their own
righteousness, (which are properly called by the Apostle the carnal seed, and
Israel after the flesh) then we willingly grant you, that the Covenant of grace
is not extended to the carnal seed of believe^s. Or if by carnal and natural
seed, be meant the children of believers begotten of their bodies, and
considered as descending from them only by power of nature, and carnal
generation, then we consent unto you herein also, that the Covenant of grace
does not extend to the children of believers considered as their natural and
carnal seed. For the children of believers, though begotten of their bodies,
yet are born under the Covenant, not by any power of nature, or any force of
carnal generation: but, by the grace of Christ offering the Covenant to
believers and to their seed, and by the faith of believers receiving the
Covenant for themselves and for their seed. But that the Covenant of believers
begotten of their bodies, are borne under the Covenant of grace, by the grace
of Christ offering the Covenant to them, and by the faith of their parents
receiving the Covenant for them, and for their seed, may be proved from sundry
testimonies of Scripture.

First, from the testimony of Paul to the Galatians, Gal. 3.14, 15, 16. where
he teaches us, that by Christ his redemption of us from the curse of the Law,
the blessing of Abraham is come upon the Gentiles, verse. 14. This blessing is
called the Covenant, verse 15, 17. And this Covenant he calls the promises,
verse 16. And these promises he there tells us were made to Abraham and his
seed: and by seed he means Christ. And by Christ he means Christ mystical,
that is, Christ and all that are in Christ, whether by election, or by their
own faith, (as all the living members of Christ be) or by adoption, as all the
Israelites were, for whom Paul had continual sorrow, Romans 9.4. Or (which is of
like extent) by participation in the stock of Abraham, the stock of the
faithful, as Paul calls the Jews, the children of the stock of Abraham, to
whom the word of salvation is sent, Acts 13.26. And such are in Christ, as
branches in the true olive, or in the vine, till they come to cut off
themselves, by casting off the Covenant, and the faith of their parents. For
the Apostle there in that place of the Galatians, speaks of the blessing of
Abraham as come upon us Gentiles: And the blessing of Abraham was the Covenant
and promises of the Covenant made unto Abraham, and unto his seed in Christ.
Now that seed in Christ was of such large extent, as that Ismael at first
partaked in the Covenant made to it, and in the seal of it (as being himself
one of the seed and stock of Abraham, as well as Isaac) until he rejected the
Covenant in rejecting Isaac, and the grace of Christ in him, and so was cast
out of the family of Abraham, and out of the Communion of the body of the
faithful.

For Paul speaks not there (as some of your way would have it) of a different
dispensation of the Covenant of Abraham, in the old Testament, and in the new:
as if it were dispensed in the old Testament unto him and to his carnal seed:
and now in the New, to him, and to his seed in Christ; no, no such matter. But
he speaks of the Covenant as it was dispensed unto Abraham and to his seed of
old. And his seed of old, was meant Christ, and all in Christ, then, as well as
now. And therefore, if then Ismael was received to the Covenant, and to the
seal of the Covenant, as the seed of Abraham, and yet no seed of Abraham, was
accounted in the Covenant, but the seed in Christ, it is evident that Ismael
was at first accounted to be in Christ, though not as elect in Christ, nor as
united to Christ by his own faith; yet as abiding like a branch in the stock
of Abraham, in the body of the faithful, in the adoption of God, and in the
communion of Abraham's family, till by persecuting Isaac, and by mocking at the
grace of Christ in him, he was cut off from that vine, and cast out of the
Covenant. Whence it follows, that if the blessing of Abraham be come upon us
Gentiles, and this blessing of Abraham be the promises and Covenant made to
him and his seed, and if the seed of Abraham be accounted all that are in
Christ, and all are accounted to be in Christ, (in respect of the outward
dispensation of the Covenant) not only which are elect, and which are
faithful, but also which are of the seed of the faithful, and live in
communion with them, (till they come to reject Christ, and the faith in him)
then it stands undeniably firm and certain that the Covenant of Abraham is
made with believers now, and and with our seed too, even in these days of the
New Testament.

The same truth is witnessed unto by the Apostle Peter also in Acts 2.39. as
has been opened above. The promise (says he) is made to you and to your
children; where by promise is meant (as appears by the former verse) the
promise of remission of sins, and of receiving the holy Ghost; which are of the
principal sort of the sure mercies of the Covenant of grace.

It will be a vain shift to distinguish between the promise and the Covenant
here. For every promise of God, is a promise of one Covenant or other. Now in
the Covenant of works there is no free promise of remission of sins, or of the
holy Ghost: but all the promises are given to workers, Do this, and thou shall
live: do it not, and die and be accursed. In the New Testament therefore there
is a Covenant of grace to believers and to their children, as was to Abraham
and to his seed. If it be said, this Promise and Covenant was to the Jews, and
to their children, but not to the Gentiles and theirs.

The answer is plain and easy, it is a promise of the New Testament; and in
the new Testament, the Jew has no privilege above the Gentile. There is
neither Jew nor Gentile, there is no difference of any Nation in the spiritual
privileges of the New Testament: but all are alike in Christ Jesus. If it be
said again, the promise is to them, and to their repenting and believing
children, and not else.

This exception has been refuted above. To which let me add, that the
promise was not only to the repenting and believing Israelites, nor only to
their children repenting and believing; but God had promised also to pour his
Spirit upon their children that they might repent and believe; when Jacob is
thirsty, and like the dry ground, God promises he will not only pour out his
Spirit like water upon him thus dry and thirsty; but also I will pour (says
he) my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring, Isa. 44.3.
For it is the same water of the blood and spirit of Christ, of which God
speaks, when he promises to pour clean water upon them, and therewith to
take away their hard and stony hearts, which must be removed by the spirit
given them, before they can come to repent and believe, Ezekiel. 26, 25.

It is to the same purpose that upon the repentance and faith of Zacheus, the
Lord pronounces salvation to be unto his house, Luke 19.9. This day (says
he) salvation is come to this house, forasmuch as he also is the son of
Abraham: which is not only in respect of the Religious care, which Zacheus
would take to teach his household the way of salvation, but also in respect of
the Covenant, by which not only Zacheus was bound to teach his household, but
the Lord also had bound himself to bless the means of salvation to his
household, as it is written, The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and
the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God, etc. Deuteronomy. 30.6. And again,
those that dwell under his shadow shall return, Hos. 14 7. The like promise of
grace does Paul and Silas preach to the Jailer, that upon his faith, salvation
should redound to his household; Believe (say they) on the Lord Jesus, and thou
shall be saved and thine house, Acts 16.31. which also was done and took
effect the same night, before that the Jailer could take any great pains for
the instruction of them, verse 34. All which do plainly argue, that the faith
of the parent does bring the children and household of a Christian, even now in
the days of the new Testament, under a Covenant of salvation, as well as the
faith of Abraham brought his household of old under the same covenant. Whence
also it is, that Paul proves the conversion of the Jews (after the fullness of
the Gentiles be come in) from the Covenant of God made with their Fathers
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For (says he) when the fullness of the Gentiles is
come in, all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, There shall come out of
Zion a Redeemer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. For this is my
Covenant unto them, when I shall take away their sins: As concerning the Gospel
they are enemies for your sake, but as touching the election, they are beloved
for the Fathers sake, Romans 11.25, 26, 27, 28. which plainly argues, that for
the Covenant sake made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the Lord will convert
and call home the Jews in the latter days, although for the present they be
rejected for their unbelief. Therefore the Covenant of grace (the Covenant of
Abraham) is of like force and extent now (now in the days of the New
Testament) unto the faithful and their seed, as it was in the days of the Old
Testament.

If it be said, that this proves no more, then this, that when the Jews shall
turn unto Christ by faith in their Redeemer, then they shall inherit the
Covenant of Abraham, as all believers do.

Answ. Yes, it proves not that only, but this more, that before their faith
in Christ, whilst they are yet enemies, the Lord will turn unto them, and give
them faith and repentance to turn to him, and that out of his Covenant, even
for the love that he bears to them for their godly fathers sake. Howbeit, we
willingly grant that those Jews who shall be converted in the latter days,
are no otherwise under the Covenant of grace, then in respect of Gods election,
as the Apostle speaks, Romans 11.28. But otherwise in respect of the actual
enjoynment of the privileges of the Gospel (such as Church Communion, and the
seals of that Communion be) they are rejected as enemies, not for their
privative want of faith, but for their positive rejection of the faith, and of
the righteousness of faith, and of Christ himself. But when they shall turn
unto the Lord, then the Covenant shall run along to them and to their seed, as
it did of old unto Abraham and to his seed. For so Esaias prophecyeth of those
times, This is my Covenant to them that turn from transgression in Jacob, my
spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth
of thy seeds seed, from henceforth and for ever, Esa. 59.20, 21.

Finally, that known place in 1 Cor. 7.14. though it have been much wrested
and racked to look and speak another way, yet it cannot but bear witness to
the truth in hand, that by the faith of either Parent, the children are
received into a state of holiness, and so are accounted amongst Gods holy
people, which is by fellowship in the Covenant. By the text and context it
appears, that in the church of Corinth, sometimes the wife had been converted
to Christianity, when the husband still remained an infidel (or as it is
translated, an unbeleever;) and sometimes the husband had been converted, when
the wife remained an infidel; whereupon it grew a just and weighty doubt,
whether the believer were not bound in conscience to put away the unbelieving
yoke fellow. And the doubt seemed to have just ground from that which might
seem to be a like case in the old Testament, in the days of Ezra and Nehemiah;
where such as had married strange wives, were commanded of God, and covenanted
among themselves, to put away both their strange wives, and the children
begotten of them, Ezra 10.2, 3. Nehem. 13.23, 24, 25. For resolving this doubt
(as well as of some others) the Corinthians by letter consulted with the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.1. etc. And to this doubt the Apostle answers, that the
believer should not put away the unbelieving yoke fellow. And for this he
gives a double reason.

First, from the sanctification of the unbelieving yoke fellow to the believer,
verse 14.

Secondly, from the hope, or possibility at least, which the believer has of
converting the unbelieving yoke fellow to the faith, verse 16. Now the former
of these reasons (taken from the sanctification of the unbelieving yoke fellow
to the believer) the Apostle proves it by the state of their children; Else
were your children unclean (says he) but now they are holy.

The force of this Reason stands thus,

If the unbelieving yoke fellow were not sanctified in the believer, and to the
believer (that is, if the believer had not a sanctified use of his marriage
communion with his unbelieving yoke fellow) then were your children unclean.

But your children are not unclean, but now they are holy:

Therefore the unbelieving yoke fellow is sanctified in the believer, and to
him.

Where, in the assumption, the Apostle puts a manifest difference between
the estate of the children now in the days of the New Testament, and their
estate in the Old, as in Ezra and Nehemiah's time. In the Old Testament, as the
unbelieving yoke fellow was unclean to the Israelites, so were their children
unclean also: And therefore both wives and children to be put away. Why so?
Because then there was a partition wall between Jew and Gentile, the Gentiles
were then strangers from the Covenants of promise ( Ephesians. 2 12.) and all
communion with them was accursed, Nehem. 13.25. more fear, then, that the
infidel should pervert the Israelite, then hope that the Israelite should
convert the infidel. But now, (to wit, now in the New Testament, now that the
partition wall is broken down between Jew and Gentile, now that the Covenant
is extended to every believer in each Nation, and to his seed) now God is a God
to the seed of every believer as to himself, God has promised to be a Father
to his children; and so they are holy by the holiness of his Covenant. And if
the children be holy, then the marriage fellowship of the Parents is sanctified
to the believer, though the other yokefellow remain an infidel. And if the
marriage fellowship be sanctified, then the married Parents may lawfully cohabite
together, though the one a believer, the other an fidell. This is the plain
meaning and scope of the Apostles words, and discourse. Which plainly and
strongly holds forth, that the grace of the Covenant is extended to the
children of believing Parents in the new Testament, as much as in the Old, yea
and more too. For in the Old Testament the Covenant reached not to the
children, in case an Israelite had children by a Pagan wife, (whether Moabite,
Ammonite, or Canaanite) but now if either of the Parents be believers, and so
in Covenant, let the other Pagan Parent be of what Nation soever, yet the
children are in the Covenant, and so holy also.

These Scriptures which you have brought to prove that God has made a Covenant
of grace with believers and their seed, Silvester.
now in the days of the New Testament, I have heard sundry exceptions made
against them. As first touching the place in Gal. 3.16. It is said, that if the
place be well considered, it will help forward the truth against the receiving
of children non-elect into the Covenant: For the Apostle here speaks of the
Covenant, as comprehending Christ, and the seed in him elect, unto everlasting
life. In which sense, the Covenant of grace was not made to Abraham, and to all
his seed without exception: for then all his seed must either be saved, (which
no man will say) or if they perish, then must they fall out of the Covenant of
grace. And if neither, then there were some of the seed of Abraham comprehended
in the Covenant in one sense, and admitted to the seal thereof, whom God
excepted against in another sense; some of which were Ismael and Esau, who in
Abraham's generation signified a fleshly seed, as well as Isaac and Jacob a
spiritual. Between which seeds God ever held forth a distinction in all
generations, from Abraham until Christ, who put an end to the type and the
flesh, to al privileges of that nature thereunto belonging, 2 Cor. 5.16. Phil.
3.3, 4, 5. So that now all is laid up in Christ only for such as believe.

Silvanus.
It is a taking away from the Text, I mean a straitning of the sense of it, to
say that Paul in Gal. 3.16. speaks of the seed elect in Christ unto eternal
life. For he speaks of all the seed in Christ: now there are a seed in
Christ, which are not elect in Christ, for Christ himself speaks of branches
in him (the true vine, the fat olive tree) which yet bare no fruit in him, and
so are cut off from him, cast out and wither, John 15.2, 6. And such branches
though they were in Christ by the fellowship of the Church, and by the Spirit
conveying from Christ common graces to them, yet they were never elect in him
to everlasting life, nor united to him by a lively faith. For if they had been
so in him, they had never been cut off from him.

It is true, the Covenant of grace was not to all the seed of Abraham without
exception; that is, to such of the seed as rejected the Covenant, or the faith
of it, as Ismael and Esau did in riper years. But the Covenant was to all the
infant seed of Abraham without exception, and to all the infants of his
believing seed. And the seal of the Covenant was in like sort dispensed to
them all without exception, to Ismael as well as to Isaac, to Esau, as well as
to Jacob.

Yet nevertheless, it will not therefore follow, that some of the seed of
Abraham were comprehended in the Covenant, and admitted to the seal thereof in
one sense, whom God excepted against in another sense. For he excepted not
against the infant seed of Abraham, or his family in any sense: but only
against the seed apostate in elder years. In respect of which Apostasy (which
God fore-knoweth, all the non-elect seed of Abraham will fall into) though God
receive all the infant seed of Abraham's family (that is, of the Church) into
the fellowship of the Covenant, and of the seal thereof, yet he gives a
peculiar blessing to the elect seed, even the sure mercies of his Covenant,
Esa. 55.2. And though you say, that between these two seeds, God ever held
forth a distinction in all generations from Adam to Christ; yet that
distinction was only this; the seed of all the flesh, and the seed of the
promise, Romans 9.8. But he excluded neither of them in their infancy from the
Covenant, or from the seal of it: Indeed the children of the promise, being
the elect of God, God has not only given his Covenant to them and the seal
thereof, but has also established it unto them for ever. But the seed of the
flesh, though the Lord gave his Covenant even unto them also, and the seal
thereof; yet he has not established it unto them for ever; whence afterward it
comes to pass that they reject the Covenant and the faith of it. But when
you further say, that Christ has put an end to the type, and to the flesh, and
to all privileges thereunto belonging; so that now all is laid up in Christ
only for such as believe, and for that end quote 2 Cor. 5.16. Phil. 3.3, 4, 5.

It is readily granted you, that Christ has put an end to all types and to
fleshly Ordinances, and to the purifying of the flesh, by the Ceremonies of the
Law ( Heb. 7.16. and 9.13.) But that Christ has put an end to all privileges
either of the Covenant, or of the seal of the Covenant to the seed of
believers, there is no word in the New Testament that teaches us any such
doctrine; the places alleged (opened above by me) prove the contrary; and
those alleged by you will not make good what you say, for the place in 2 Cor.
5.16. that a man regenerate knows no man after the flesh, argues only thus
much, that a man in Christ rests in no outward privileges, no not in seeing
and knowing Christ in the flesh, nor in eating and drinking in his presence,
nor in hearing him preach in their streets, but in the spiritual and lively
fellowship of his death and resurrection, which makes him whosoever knows
Christ, a new Creature. And so say we too; and so it was with the faithful in
the Old Testament as well as in the New. It was not the outward participation
of the Covenant, nor of the seal of it, that a sincere Israelite could rest
in, but in the grace of the Covenant, and Circumcision of the heart in the
Spirit, not in the Letter. But this does not at all argue, that the children of
the faithful, who are yet in the flesh, are not partakers of the Covenant of
grace, nor of the seal of it, now in the New Testament, as well as they were
in the Old. But only argues, that though before regeneration, men are apt to
rest and boast in the outward Letter of privileges and Ordinances: yet after
regeneration they do not acknowledge such things as their comfort and
confidence. John Baptist endeavored to beat off the Jews from resting in such
outward privileges, Matthew. 3.9. And so did the Prophets before Christ, Jerem.
9.25, 26. as well as Paul after him, both in this place of the Corinthians, and
that other which you quote out of Phil. 3.3, 4, 5.

When you say, that now all is laid up in Christ only for such as believe.

If you mean all spiritual blessings of life and salvation, you say true, but
nothing to the question: For so it was in the Old Testament, as well as now.
But as it was then, the seed of believers partaked of the outward dispensation
of the Covenant, and of the seal of it; so is it still, unless you could show
us some Scripture whereby they are more excluded now then in the old Testament.

Silvester.
Now first in Christ by faith, and then to the Covenant and privileges
thereof, Gal. 3.29. None by the Gospel are approved to be the seed of Abraham,
but only such as walk in the steps of his faith. For as none invisibly before
God are by him approved at all to have right to any privileges of grace, but
only as he looks upon them in his Son: no more are there any before man
visibly to be approved of, so as to have right to the same, but as they appear
to be in Christ, by some effect of faith declaring the same. And so much the
more, in that God excludes all from his holy Covenant, so as to have right in
the outward dispensation thereof, but only such as believe, Romans 11.20. Heb.
3.18. and 4.1, 2, 3. and 11.5, 6. Romans 9.7, 8. Gal. 3.22, 26, 29.

Silvanus.
Surely in the old Testament, the children of believers had first Christ by
Covenant, and then faith also to receive him. For in the Covenant with Abraham,
when God gave himself to be a God to him and his seed, the Father gave
himself to be their Father, the Son to be their Redeemer, the holy Ghost to
be their Sanctifier, when yet the children were unborn, without life, and
therefore without faith. And surely in the New Testament God has not changed
this order of his blessings. For in rehearsing the Covenant (which continues
in the New Testament) he gives the writing of the law in their hearts by
Covenant, Heb. 8.10. Amongst which laws, surely the law of faith is one, and
indeed the chief of all other laws. And therefore it is not as you say, first
faith, and then to the Covenant; but first the Covenant, and then faith written
and wrought in their hearts by his Spirit to fulfill his Covenant. The place
which you quote in Gal. 3.29. does not prove that none are the seed of Abraham,
save those that be in Christ by faith. But that those who be in Christ by
faith, they are that seed of Abraham, who partake in the sure mercies of the
Covenant: who are therefore called heirs according to promise. The faithful
seed of Abraham, they only partake in the sure mercies of the Covenant: so it
is now in the New Testament, and so it was, and no otherwise in the Old. But
that does not at all hinder, but that all the seed of Abraham, though yet
destitute of faith in their own persons, have right to the outward dispensation
of the Covenant and to the seal of it.

When you say, none are approved by the Gospel to be the seed of Abraham, but
only such as walk in the steps of his faith; the place whereto you alude, is
in Romans 4.12. which only holds forth, that such as walk in the steps of the
faith of Abraham, they are the seed of Abraham, who are justified in the sight
of God: for Abraham himself was so justified. And thus it is in the new
Testament, and thus also it was in the Old: And yet Abraham then had, and so
have the faithful now, other seed who are partakers of the covenant, and of
the seal of the covenant, and yet are not justified for want of faith.

You say, none invisibly before God, are by him approved at all to have right
to any privilege of grace, but only as he looks upon them in his Son: no
more are there any before men visibly to be approved of, so as to have right to
the same.

This saying (that none have right to any privilege of grace before God, but
as he looks upon them in his Son) it is true, rightly understood, but nothing
availing to your purpose. If you mean by grace, saving grace, it is true; none
have right to any privilege of saving grace, but as God looks at them in his
Son, either by faith, or by election unto faith. If you mean by grace, the
outward dispensation of the covenant of grace, and of the seal thereof, it is
true, none have right to any privilege of the covenant, or of the seal of it,
but as they are in Christ either by faith, or by election unto faith, or by
their fellowship with the church, whereof Christ is the head. In which respect
all the members of the church, and their seed are in Christ, as branches in the
vine, or olive, and may be cut off from him for want of faith to make them
fruitful in him. But what avayleth this to your purpose? Thus it is in the new
Testament, and thus it was in the Old.

But when you say, none have right to the same, but as they appear to be in
Christ, by some effect of faith declaring the same.

This you cannot make good from Scripture light. For though you say, that God
excludes all from his holy covenant, so as to have right in the outward
dispensation thereof, but only such as believe.

And to prove that, you allege many Scriptures; yet none of them bear
witness to any such matter. All the Scriptures which you allege will easily
prove one of these two things, (both which we willingly grant) First, that some
branches in Christ were broken off from Christ, though not through want of
faith, but yet through infidelity, rejecting the faith of Christ, either in
themselves or in their parents. Secondly, that through faith we receive the
spiritual saving blessings of the covenant, and through want of faith fall
short of them; both which are everlasting truths, as well before Christ as
since.

To run over all your places briefly, that you may see how your Leaders
mis-leade both themselves and you. In Romans 11.20. it is said, the Jews were
broken off through unbelief: So the word is translated; but the true sense of
it is, through infidelity: and so the same word is translated, 2 Cor. 6.15.
What part has a believer with an infidel? The meaning of that place in the
Romans is, the Jews were broken off from Christ, and from their church estate
and Covenant in him, by their professed infidelity, their open rejection of
Christ and his righteousness, and that not out of ignorance, but out of
wilful obstinacy against the light of the gospel revealed to them. For the
Apostles still kept communion with them, as with a church, a people in covenant
with God, notwithstanding their want of faith in Christ; yea, notwithstanding
their crucifying of Christ, until they wilfully and obstinately rejected and
persecuted the Gospel of grace, and the righteousness of it, Acts 13.45, 46.
And persisting therein, then indeed they were broken off; but yet this argues
that they were in Christ before; or else how could they now be broken off? Your
next place is quoted out of Heb. 3.18. where the Israelites are said to fall
short of their entrance into Canaan because of their unbelief; the word is as
before, because of their infidelity. For it is not likely that all the
Israelites who wanted saving faith, were kept out of Canaan: Acban who troubled
Israel, does not appear to be a true believer. But the body of them who were
kept out of Canaan, had carried themselves like infidels, they thought scorn
of the land of promise, and preferred Pagan Egypt before it. And therefore for
rejecting the promise and the faith of it, were justly rejected from entering
into Canaan. But what makes this to the purpose in hand? how does this prove,
that in the Gospel God excludes all from his holy Covenant, and from right in
the outward dispensation of it, save only such as believe? For all these were
in the Covenant, and had been circumcised in Egypt, and so had the privilege
of the outward dispensation thereof, though they believed not: Besides, this
concerned the times of the Old Testament; of which your self and your leaders
confess, that the outward dispensation of the Covenant, and of the s^ales of
it pertained, not only to the spiritual and b^lieving seed, but to the
carnal also. Your next place in Heb. 4.1, 2, 3. proves only, that such as do
not mix the word with faith, will fall short of entering into Gods rest. So it
was in the Old Testament, as well as in the New. And the Apostle himself does
so express it; The Word (says he) which was preached to them, (to wit, the
Israelites in the old Testament) did not profit them, because it was not mixed
with faith in them that heard it: From whence he also argues, that neither
will the Word preached to us now, profit us, if it be not mixed with faith. But
what makes this to prove that God excludes all from the outward dispensation
of his holy Covenant, but only such as believe? Is it all one to partake in
the outward dispensation of Gods Covenant, and to enter into Gods rest? or to
profit by the Word? your Leaders should make more conscience of alleging and
applying Gods holy Word impertinently, impertinently I say, both to Gods
meaning, and to their own: which is one kind (but too frequent) of taking
Gods holy name in vain.

The next place which you quote out of Heb. 11.5, 6. shows us, that without
faith it is impossible to please God; which argues indeed, that no man either
in his person, or in his work can be acceptable to God without faith: but does
not prove that God cannot receive any into the outward fellowship of the
Covenant without faith; much less does it prove, that the New Testament does
exclude all unbelievers from the Covenant, more then did the Old Testament; for
those words in Hebrews 11.5, 6. were spoken of Enoch, who (I need not tell you)
lived in the days of the Old Testament.

Your next place in Rom 97, 8. shows indeed, that all the children of the
flesh of Abraham, are not the elect seed of Abraham, (which we willingly grant)
but does not show, that the children of Abraham's flesh, were not the seed of
Abraham's Covenant. Many were called and received into his Covenant, who yet
were not chosen to partake in the sure mercies and everlas^ing blessings of the
Covenant.

Your last place out of Gal. 3.22, 26, 29. argues the same that the former
places have done, that believers are partakers of Christ by faith, and of
adoption by Christ; that they are the justified seed of Abraham, and heirs
according to promise. So was it in the Old Testament, and so is it still to
this day. But this does not prove now, no more then it did then, that all are
excluded from the outward dispensation of the Covenant but believers only.

But notwithstanding all this, though the Covenant which God made with Abraham
before Christ, Silvester.
and this under Christ, be in some respect in substance the same, yet in the
outward dispensation and profession of them, the difference will appear to be
very great, both in respect of persons and things, wherein our dissent chiefly
lies. 1. That Covenant admitted of a fleshly seed, this only of a spiritual,
Genesis 17. Romans 9. 2. That in the flesh, this in the heart, Genesis 17.13. with Jer.
31.33. Romans 2.28, 29. 3. The seal and ordinances of that Covenant confirmed
faith in things to come; this, in things already done. 4. That Covenant was
National, and admitted all of the Nation to the seals thereof: but this
personal, and admits none but such as believe. 5. That Covenant begot
children after the flesh, as all Abraham's natural posterity: But this only
begets children after the Spirit, and only approves of such as are begotten
and borne from above, in whose hearts God writes his Law, Jer. 31. Ezekiel. 36.
Heb. 8. John 3.5. 6. That Covenant with Abraham and his posterity, comprehended
a civil state, and worldly government, with the like carnal subjects for the
service of the same: But this Covenant now under Christ comprehends only a
spiritual state, and an heavenly government, with the like spiritual subjects
for the service of this also. 7. That Covenant held forth Christ in the flesh
to the heart vayled; this holds him forth after the Spirit to a face open, 2
Cor. 3. In all understand the visible profession of the Covenant, and the
outward dispensation of the privileges thereof.

There is indeed some difference between the Covenant made not only with
Abraham in the Old Testament, and with us in the New; but also in the Old
Testament, Silvanus.
between that made with Abraham, and that with his posterity. And yet the
Covenant both in the Old Testament, and in the New, both to Abraham and his
posterity: yea, and to us also, one and the same for substance, to wit, God to
be a God to believers and to their seed. To Abraham some blessings were given
by this Covenant, which were not given to all his posterity, as to be the
Father of Christ, to be the Father of many Nations. To some of his posterity,
and not to all; it was given to enjoy the land of Canaan for an inheritance:
which in the Letter belongs not unto us, though in the spiritual Antitype we
also in the New Testament partake therein, in that it is given to believers and
our seed to enjoy the inheritance of the church whereof Canaan was a type.
Besides that Covenant made with the seed of Abraham by Jacob, admitted the
holding forth of Christ in sundry vailes and shadows which were not given to
Abraham; and from us in the New Testament they are taken away.

But nevertheless, the differences which you put between the Covenant with
Abraham and with us, so far as they are brought to exclude the seed of
believers from the fellowship of the Covenant, they will not stand nor abide
trial by the Scriptures.

Seven differences you put, let us weigh them in the balance of the Sanctuary,
and see if they be not too light.

"First, say you, that Covenant admitted of a fleshly seed; this only of a
spiritual, Genesis 17, with Romans 9.

Answ. The place in the Romans speaks of the seed of promise to be the seed
of Abraham, and to be accounted not only in the New Testament, but in the Old
also. For the Oracle (in Isaac shall thy seed be called, Romans 9.7.) was given
to Abraham in the Old Testament, Genesis 21.12. And that after Ismael was cast out
of the Covenant for his mocking and persecuting of Isaac. So that this
Scripture in Romans 9.15. is three ways wrested and wronged in this Quotation.

First, in that it is brought to prove, that the Covenant of grace in the days
of the new Testament admits only of a spiritual seed; whereas Paul
speaks not of the Covenant of grace, but of the election of grace.

Secondly, in that the place is brought to show what is now the seed in the New
Testament different from that of the Old; whereas Paul speaks of the same
seed both in the Old and New Testament alike.

Thirdly, in that Ismael is accounted by you as a fleshly seed, and so as
rejected out of the Covenant from the womb; whereas he was not cast out of the
Covenant, till himself cast off the Covenant by mocking and persecuting Isaac.

The second difference you put is, that that Covenant in the old Testament was
in the flesh; this in the heart, Genesis 17.13. with Jer. 31.33. Romans 2.28, 29.

Answ. This difference is put by you, but not by the Spirit of God in
Scripture. For as that Covenant (that is, the sign of the Covenant) was in the
flesh: so is Baptism (the sign of the Covenant now) upon the flesh.

Secondly, as our Baptism signifies and seals the washing away of the filth
of flesh and spirit; so did their circumcision of the flesh signify and seal
the circumcision of the heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6.

Thirdly, as in our Baptism the Lord does not regard nor esteem the outward
washing of the flesh, (1 Pet. 3.21.) So neither was the circumcision of the
flesh without circumcision of the heart of any account before God, either
before Christ, or since. It was not only so adjudged in Paul's time in the New
Testament, that Circumcision of the flesh, was nothing without Circumcision of
the heart, but also in Ieremies time in the Old Testament. For Jeremy
threatens that God will punish the circumcised with the uncircumcised, Egypt,
Edom, Ammon and Moab with Judah: for all these Nations are uncircumcised; and
all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart, Ier. 9.25, 26. It has been
said of old, shall a man make Gods to himself, and they are no Gods? So may it
be said in some proportion, shall a man make differences to himself to turn him
off from the way of God, and they are no differences?

To the third, there is as little difference in that as in the former: for as
the seal of that Covenant confirmed faith in things to come, but the seal of
this confirms faith in things already done: so the seal of that Covenant
confirmed the faith of Abraham in the righteousness of faith, which he had
already received; and the faith of those that were in Canaan of the possession
of it: And our Baptism seals up to us mortification of sin, deliverance out
of affliction, resurrection of the body, whereof some are yet to come in part,
some wholly. The like may be said of the other Ordinances of the Covenant. But
what is it to the purpose? what if sundry ordinances of the Covenant, as it was
dispensed in the old Testament, confirmed faith in things to come? and what if
the Ordinances of the New Testament confirmed faith in things past? yet what is
this to argue that children of believing Parents are excluded from the Covenant
of grace in the new testament, though not in the Old?

To the fourth, when you say, that Covenant was National, and admitted all of
the Nation to the seals thereof: But this personal, and admits of none but
such as believe.

This difference is founded in an untruth: for it is untrue, that the Covenant
given to Abraham was National, it was rather domestical at first: and did not
comprehend the whole Nation of any of Abraham's seed, till Jacobs time. And
Jacob speaks of his blessing (which was a proper adjunct, and peculiar
privilege of the Covenant) that it did exceed the blessing, and so the
Covenant) of his progenitors, Genesis 49.26. For whereas in Abraham's house, though
Isaac was received to the blessing of continuance in the Covenant, yet Ismael
and the seed of Keturah were excluded: and in Isaac's house, though Jacob
inherited the blessing, yet Esau was excluded, yet in Jacobs family all his
sons were received to the blessing of continuance under the outward
dispensation of the Covenant, and not themselves only, but all their
posterity, the whole twelve Tribes, which proceeded from them. Now it is not
said in Scripture, that the blessing of Jacob is come upon the Gentiles, (for
then none of our posterity might cut themselves off from the outwa^d
dispensation of the Covenant, and then our Covenant would be National, and
admit all of the Nation to the seals thereof) but the Scripture says, that
the blessing of Abraham (and so the Covenant of Abraham) is come upon the
Gentiles, Gal. 3.14. that is, upon the believing Gentiles, and their seed,
whereby it comes to pass, that believing Gentiles, and their Infant Seed are
admitted to the Covenant, and to the seal of the Covenant, as Abraham and his
Infant seed were: But if when they be grown up to years, they shall grow to
mock and slight the Covenant, as Ismael and Esau did, then they and their
seed are cast out of the Covenant, and that keeps the Covenant from being
national. And so it was in Abraham's time, and so it is now.

When you say, this Covenant with us is personal and admits only of such
as believe.

It has been refuted above, and this truth cleared, that upon the faith of the
Parents, the grace of the Covenant is promised also unto their seed. And if the
Covenant did admit only of such as believe, then the faith whereby we believe,
were not given to any by Covenant. Whereas it has been shown above, that
faith, and the saving knowledge of God by faith, and the writing of the Law of
faith (as well as of love) in our hearts, is given by Covenant, Jer. 31.33.34.

Your fifth difference is like the rest, devised in your own imagination, not
founded in Scripture. That Covenant (say you) begot children after the flesh;
but this only begets children after the Spirit, and only approves of such as
are begotten and born from above, etc.

Answ. Do you any where read in Scripture, that the Covenant of Abraham
approved of any then, more then now, but such as are begotten from above? Did
not Abraham and Israel of old renounce the owning and acknowledgement of such
children of theirs, as were degenerate from their faith and obedience? Esaias
63.16.

When you say that that Covenant begot children after the flesh, do you not
mean, that men under that Covenant begot children after the flesh? And if that
be your meaning, do you think it is not so now, that men under the Covenant
of grace, now in the days of the New Testament, as well as in the Old, do
beget children after the flesh? It is true, those believing Parents who do
beget children by believing the Promise and Covenant of grace to them and to
their children they do bring forth, and bring up spiritual children, or as
you call it, children after the Spirit. But so did Abraham and other faithful
parents in the Old Testament, as well as now.

The places which you quote out of Ier. 31. Ezekiel 36. Heb. 8. Ioh. 3.5, 6. do
neither prove your assertion, nor disprove ours, but rather approve it. For in
Ier. 31. the Law of faith and saving knowledge is written in our hearts by the
Covenant: so it is now in the New Testament, and so it was in the Old.

In Ezekiel. 36. God takes away the heart of stone, and gives an heart of flesh,
and a new spirit; so he does now to his chosen; and so he did then, Numb.
14.24. The place in the Heb. 8. is the same with that in Jeremy 31. That in
John 3.5; 6. argues that none born of flesh can enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but are carnal and fleshly. But thus it was in the Old Testament, as
well as in the New; there is no difference in this point.

Your sixth difference is, that that Covenant with Abraham and his posterity
before Christ, comprehended a civil state, and a worldly government, with the
like carnal subjects for the service of the same: But this Covenant now under
Christ comprehends only a spiritual state, and an heavenly government, with
the like spiritual subjects of this also.

Answ. 1. The Civil State and worldly government was not expressed in the
Covenant given to Abraham, but in the Covenant, and blessing of Jacob. It was
Jacob that blessed his son Judah with a scepter, Genesis 49.10. But to Abraham it
was foretold, that his seed should be a stranger and a servant, and in an
afflicted estate 400 years. And though the Lord did not deny them civil
government, yet neither did he expressly promise it to his seed. And (as was
said above) it is the blessing of Abraham that is come upon us, and not of
Jacob, so far as that of Jacob, exceeded the blessing of his progenitors.

Answ. 2. It is more then can be proved, that the Covenant of Abraham, and his
posterity after Christ, does not comprehend a civil State: for the prophecy of
Daniel promises, that after the destruction of the four Monarchies, the
Kingdom and the Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole
heaven shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High, etc. Dan.
7.27.

Answ. 3. Civil State and Government is but an accessory to the Covenant; And
though the people of God in the new Testament should never enjoy it, (which is
not to be granted:) yet what is this to the maine promise of the Covenant, That
God will be a God to his people, and to their seed, throughout all generations?

The seventh and last difference which you put is as little pertinent to the
cause, as all the former. For what if that Covenant held forth Christ in the
flesh to an heart veiled? And this holds him forth in the Spirit to a face
open, 2 Cor. 3.

Yet this argues only a different dispensation of the Covenant by Moses and
by Christ; But the Covenant of Abraham which was given 430 years before the
Covenant of Moses, did not so veil, nor darken the face of Christ, but that
Abraham saw Christ, though afar off, yet clearly, and rejoiced, John 8.56.
And so did all his spiritual seed after him, more or less, as well as we.
But what if the dispensation of the Covenant had been more vayled in all the
times of the Old Testament to all the seed, then indeed it was? yet what is
this to the maine promise of the Covenant, that God will be a God to a believer
and his seed, throughout all generations?

Silvester.
But let the differences of the Covenant before or since Christ, stand or fall
as they may: yet it is no good consequence from the Covenant, that as infants
were in that Covenant then, and circumcised, so infants are in the Covenant
now, and to be baptized. For let these four things be well considered, and
they will clear the contrary.

"1. What the Covenant is?

"2. What is that which admits into the Covenant?

"3. Who are the true approved subjects of the Covenant?

4. Whether all have not one and the same way of entrance into this Covenant?

Silvanus.
What do you take the Covenant to be?

Silvester.
The Covenant it self is a Covenant of grace and salvation, by which God of his
grace takes a person or a people to himself above all others, to be their God,
and to manifest upon them the riches of his grace and glory.

And the manner of this is in effect, Gods calling of a man to an agreement
with himself in his Son, wherein he promises to be his God, and to give him
life and happiness, and all things in Christ; and that he shall believe and
rest upon his faithfulness and truth, and so take him for his God, etc. So
that the Covenant consists of 3. Essentialls: 1. The persons (two or more)
disposed to agree. 2. Something to agree upon. 3. Their mutual consent, which
is the agreement it self.

Silvanus.
As the heavens are higher then the earth, so are the ways of God higher then
our ways, ( Esa. 55.9.) and in special the ways of his grace, and of the
Covenant thereof, with men indeed mutual agreement and consent is necessary to
a Covenant, but with God, Gods appointment makes a Covenant, whether the
creature consent to an agreement or no. God sometimes made a Covenant, and
established it, not only with Noah and his seed, but also with the Fowls and
Beasts, and every living creature, that he would never send a flood to destroy
them from off the face of the earth, Genesis 9.9, 10, 11. And this Covenant was
only an appointment of God, it did not require any consent or agreement of
man, much less of other creatures, to make it a Covenant. It is therefore a
manifest error, to make the agreement or consent on man's part essential to a
Covenant between God and man.

It is a second error, that in describing the Covenant of grace, you omit the
seed of believers, and exclude them from the fellowship of the Covenant, as
being unable to express their consent and agreement to the Covenant. Let it be
considered in the fear of God, whether ever God made any Covenant with any man
or people, which did not comprehend their posterity also? God made a Covenant
with Noah did, it not reach his posterity also? Genesis 9. God made a Covenant
with Abraham, Genesis 17. did it not reach his posterity also? God made a Covenant
with the people of Israel, Exodus 19. did it not reach their posterity also? God
made a Covenant with Phinehas, Numb. 25. did it not reach to his posterity
also? God made a Covenant with David, Psalm. 89.28. did it not reach to his
posterity also? If then the Scripture never hold forth any Covenant which ever
God made with any of the sons of men, but it did reach and comprehend his
posterity also; why should the Covenant of grace be conceived to run a
different course from all the rest of Gods covenants, namely, to reach unto
believers, but not to their posterity? We are shallow and narrow our selves,
and so we measure the grace of God, and the Covenant thereof, according to our
own scantling, our narrow capacity. Proceed then to declare, what is the
second thing you wished might be well considered: to wit, what is that which
admits into the Covenant?

That which admits any into the Covenant, Silvester.
and gives right to enter thereinto, is the promise of God in Christ, and
faith in the same, as Nehem. 9.8. The Covenant has these essential parts and
visible branches. 1. Grace in the agent, God. 2. Faith in the subject, Man. 3.
An uniting or closing of these together: which is that mutual consent and
agreement, by faith in the same grace revealed by the gospel, which is the word
of reconciliation. So that it is the blessed word of life and faith in the
same, that gives right and admits into Covenant with God.

We deny not that faith in the subject does admit into the Covenant rightly
understood; to wit, faith in Christ, Silvanus.
and in the word of reconciliation, admits not only the faithful person,
but his seed also (though yet wanting faith) into the Covenant. The text which
you quote against it, (as it usually falls out) makes strongly for it: the
words are plain, thou foundest his heart faithful before thee, and made a
Covenant with him, to give to his seed the l^nd of the Canaanites. And your
self with your Leaders do easily acknowledge, that in the old Testament, the
Covenant of Abraham admitted his carnal seed into the fellowship of it. And
doubtless Nehemiah speaks of Abraham, and of his faithful heart, and holy
Covenant, as it stood in the days of the Old Testament. How comes it then to
pass, that his faithful heart, whereby he received the Covenant to himself
and his seed, should be alleged to prove, that the faith of Abraham admitted
him into the Covenant, but not his seed? But proceed to your third thing which
you would have to be well considered, and consider (I pray you) how far off it
is from concluding your purpose.

Silvester.
The third thing to be considered, is, who are the approved subjects of this
Covenant; and they are only such as believe. For God in his Word approves of
none in Covenant with him out of Christ, nor of any in Christ without faith.
Nay, God denies his approving of any in fellowship with him, that do not
believe, as John 3.5, 6, 36. Heb. 11.6. Nor does he approve of any subjects of
his gracious Covenant, but only such as he has elected and chosen in Christ,
and so appearing by some fruits and effects of the same, as these Scriptures
(with many other) witness, Romans 8.9.29, 30. Romans 11.7. Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6. 2 These.
2.13, 14. 1 Pet. 1.2. Acts 2.47. and 13.48.

Silvanus.
There is a broad difference between these two; who are the true approved
subjects of this Covenant; and who are approved to be the true subjects of this
Covenant. For it is certain (and your self admitted it above) that God
approved all the seed of Abraham (even his carnal seed) to be admitted as
subjects of the covenant and of the seal thereof. But it as certain, that God
never approved such true subjects of the Covenant, whom himself never elected,
nor themselves ever received the gift of faith, without which it is impossible
to please God. Many are truly called to the fellowship of the Covenant, and of
the seal thereof, who were never elected nor approved in their spiritual
estate as heirs of salvation. It is in the same sense, that Paul speaks (
Romans 2.28, 29.) He is not a Jew, which is one without, neither is that
Circumcision, which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew, which is one
inwardly; and Circumcision is that of the heart in the Spirit, whose praise (or
which is all one, whose approbation) is not of men, but of God. But dare any
man therefore infer, that God did not approve it, that any should be
admitted unto the Covenant of Abraham, or unto the seal thereof
(Circumcision:) unless he were a Jew, or Israelite within, and circumcised
with the circumcision of the heart? To what purpose then are all the texts of
Scripture alleged by you? which prove no more then we acknowledge, that by
natural generation all men are carnal; that without faith it is impossible to
please God; that whom God electeth he calls; that the election obtains
what they seek for; that the elect are chosen to be holy, and partakers of the
sprinkling of the blood of Christ; that the elect are brought on to faith. But
what is all this to prove that such as are carnal by natural generation,
cannot be holy by the grace of the covenant? or that it may not please God to
admit them to the outward dispensation of his Covenant, whose inward spiritual
estate he is not pleased with?

Surely all the Israelites in the wilderness were sometimes admitted into
Covenant with God: yet with many of them God was not pleased, 1 Cor. 10.5. What
though those whom God elcteth he calls (to wit, by an effectual calling,
according to his purpose:) yet may he not, yea, does he not call many to place
in his vineyard, (the Church) yea, to office also whom he has not chosen?
Mat^h. 20.16. What though the elect obtain (what they seek for) the sure
mercies of the Covenant, and the rest come to be hardened? May not therefore
the non-elect partake in the outward dispensation of the Covenant, and yet
afterward be hardened in hypocrisy? What though the elect only come on to
believe, though not with a justifying faith, yet with an historical and
temporary faith? May they not be holy by Covenant, who yet are not holy by the
Spirit of Regeneration? May they not be sprinkled with the blood of sprinkling
unto the common graces of the Spirit ( Heb. 10.29.) who yet are not sprinkled
therewith to the remission of their sins? Finally, what though it be said, the
Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved, Acts 2.47? were not
Ananias and Sapphira added also, and Simon Magus too, who yet (for ought that
appears) were none of them saved?

Proceed we the^ to the fourth thing, which you wi^h might be well considered,
and see if there be any more weight in that.

The fourth and last is, Silvester,
whether that all persons now in the Gospel, have not one and the same way of
entrance into the covenant? let the holy Word of God be judge, and I find the
Gospel of Christ to approve of none in the Lords holy Covenant of grace, but
such as believe: nor any approved of to be in the way of life, but such as are
in Christ by Faith. And therefore no other way of coming into the Covenant of
grace and salvation, but only by Jesus Christ; for in him are all the promises
confirmed, and made over only unto such as do believe, as 2 Corinthians. 1.20.
Romans 10.4. 1 John 5.11, 12. Romans 8.9.

You now labor again of the same fallacy, which was noted in you before. It
is readily granted you, that the Gospel of Christ approves of none in the
Lords Covenant, but such as believe.

Neither did the Old Testament approve any in the Lords Covenant, but such as
believed. But as has been said, it is one thing to approve them in the
Covenant, another thing to approve them to be in the Covenant. See it in a
similitude, God did never approve either Saul or Jehu in the Kingdom of
Israel; yet he did approve it that both of them should be admitted to the
kingdom. So is it here, God did never approve Ismael in Abraham's house, nor
Esau in Isaacs. And yet he approved it, that they should be in their Fathers
houses, and also be admitted to the Covenant of their Fathers, and to the
seal thereof, till their own profaneness cast them out.

And therefore what though there be no other way of coming into the Covenant
of grace, but only by Jesus Christ? And what though in Christ all the promises
are confirmed, and made over only to such as believe? Yet nevertheless Christ
has opened a way for the coming of the Covenant and promises through
himself, not only to such as believe, but also (for their sakes) to their
children and households. In the Old Testament God prospered Ismael for Abraham's
sake, Genesis 21.13, 17, 18, 19, 20. In the New Testament God visited with grace
and salvation, the Families of Zacheus, and of the Jailer for the householders
sake, Luke 19.9. Acts 16.31.

Silvester.
The holy Covenant consists of three essentialls for entrance thereinto.
First, the word of God to reveal the same. Secondly, Christ to open the way,
and to enright the party therein. Thirdly, faith, without which none can enter
thereinto, for as none can come unto God, or into Covenant with him, but by
Christ; so none can come unto Christ, but by faith, Job. 14.6. with John 6.44,
45. Heb. 11.6. Let all this be well considered, and then see how infants can be
discovered to be in the Covenant, and what way of entrance has God by his word
appointed for them to come in, and denied the same unto other.

I will not strain at your word Essentialls; Silvanus.
though all things that are necessary to the entrance or being of a thing, are
not straightway essential to it. Gods providence is necessary to the being and
entrance of sin, but it is not essential to it. But I willingly admit of your
three necessary Ingredients for entrance into the Covenant, and find none of
them wanting to enstate and interest the Infants of believing Parents into the
Covenant.

First, the Word of God reveals such a Covenant of grace, wherein God gives
himself to be a God to the faithful Parent, and to his seed. So he gave
himself to faithful Abraham and to his seed, Genesis 17.7. This Covenant of
Abraham, the Scripture reveals to be come upon the believing Gentiles and
their seed, as has been showed above.

Secondly, Christ himself has opened the way to enright the children of
believing Parents into the Covenant, by redeeming us (Gentiles, as well as
Jews) from the curse of the Law, that the blessing of Abraham might come upon
the Gentiles, Gal. 3.13, 14. And the blessing of Abraham is to a believer and
his seed, Gal. 3.16. And this has been further cleared above.

Thirdly, faith is not wanting, to enstate the seed of believing Parents into
the Covenant, seeing God has promised upon the faith of the Parent, salvation
to his household, Acts 10.31. Luke 19.9.

It is a vain exception to say, that if infants be entered into the Covenant
by the faith of their Parents, that then they who be not naturally begotten
and born in the Covenant, are denied the same way of entrance into the Covenant
which is granted to infants.

For first, we do not say, that any man is naturally begotten and born in the
Covenant: For the children of believing parents are naturally the children of
wrath, as well as others, Ephesians. 2.3. But yet nevertheless, though naturally
they be the children of wrath, yet by virtue and grace of the Covenant, they
are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14.

Secondly, though they who are not begotten and borne of faithful Parents,
cannot plead right in the Covenant, by the faith of their Parents: yet they may
claim it by their own faith, if God grant it to them. If not, it is no
marvel to a Christian heart, that the faith of believing Parents conveyeth a
greater blessing to their children, then unbelieving Parents can expect to
themselves, or theirs. Does not obedience to the Law convey a far greater
blessing unto a godly man and his seed, even to a thousand generations, then a
wicked carnal parent can expect to him and his? Exodus 20.5, 6. And if so, then
doubtless the obedience of faith may expect a far greater blessing to a
believer and his seed, then an infidel or unbeliever can hope for in his
natural and carnal estate and course to himself or his.

Silvester.
If infants be in the Covenant of grace by virtue of their birth from believing
parents, then such infants are borne in a saving state of grace, and were never
out of the same. Which doctrine makes void many heavenly and divine truths,
which speak to the contrary: which lay all under sin and curse, till Christ
by his blood redeem them, and by his heavenly voice call them, and by his
Spirit beget them unto a lively hope: who are therefore said to be borne
again from above. For none can be under grace, and under wrath and curse at
one and the same time, in the outward dispensation of the same.

Silvanus.
It does not follow that if infants be in the Covenant of grace by virtue of
their birth from believing parents, then such infants are borne in a saving
state of grace. For the Covenant of grace does not give saving grace to all
that are in the Covenant, but only to the elect: Nor does it give saving grace
to them always in their birth, but in the season wherein the Lord in his
purpose of election had fore-appointed to give it to the children whom God has
not elected. The Covenant of grace does not give them saving grace at all, but
only offers it, and seals what it offers.

Neither does this make void any heavenly and divine truth at all. For though
all be under sin and wrath and curse til Christ by his blood redeem them,
and by his heavenly voice call them, by his Spirit beget them: yet Christ was a
Lamb slain (in respect of the virtue and efficacy of his death) from the
beginning of the world. And though elect vessels may be under the curse till
they be called and regenerated from above, yet are they at one and the same
time under grace, but in diverse respects: Under the curse and wrath by nature;
under grace by the election of God, and the Covenant of their fathers. At one
and the same time Apiathar was a man of death by desert, and yet by the Kings
favor a man of life, 1 Kings 2 26. The Israelites at one and the same time
were enemies for our sakes, and yet beloved for their fathers sake, Romans 11.28.
And in very truth, if the elect children of God were not under grace before
Christ call them by his heavenly voice, or before he regenerate them by his
Spirit, how is it possible they should be effectually called, or regenerate at
all? For in the fear of God consider, is not effectual calling a
regeneration, a work of Gods grace in Jesus Christ? is it not a fruit of Gods
electing and redeeming grace in Christ? The one wrought for us before the world
was made, the other before we were borne? And can the sin of our nature which
followed after, extinguish or make void the rich grace of Christ, which was
before all causes in us? If effectual calling and regeneration be the work
of Gods grace, then it is the effect of Gods grace; and if it be the effect of
Gods grace, then the grace of Christ is the efficient cause of our effectual
calling and regeneration; and the efficient cause is always in nature, and
ordinarily in time before the effect. And therefore it cannot be, but that the
elect children of God are under grace before their effectual calling and
regeneration. It is not our Doctrine therefore but yours, that makes void many
heavenly and divine truths, even the fundamental truths of the free grace of
Christ. which your predecessors in this way did plainly discern; and therefore
they thought it best not to contradict themselves as you do, To say, that
children are not under grace, nor under a Covenant of grace, till they be
called by Christ's heavenly voice, and by his Spirit begotten from above; and
yet withal to grant election and regeneration to be of grace.

But they seeing plainly these could not stand together, the utterly denied
election to be of grace, but of foreseen faith or works. And they denied also
regeneration to be of Gods free grace, but of man's free will: which whether it
make void many heavenly and divine truths of grace, let the word and Spirit of
grace judge. Well, thus at large we have examined the exceptions, which you
wil^^ to be considered against some of those proofs from Scripture, which were
alleged to confirm, that as in the Old Testament God made a Covenant with
Abraham and his seed, so now in the New Testament, the faithful inherit the
same Covenant with us and our seed. But you said above, you had heard sundry
exceptions against the rest of the proofs from Scripture, which were alleged
to the same purpose. If you please, then let us now consider of those other
exceptions, if there be any more weight in them then the former.

Silvester.
It is true, I remember you alleged above, that speech of Christ to Zacheus,
Luke 19.9. to prove, that when Zacheus was converted, his household was received
unto a Covenant of grace and salvation: Because Christ said, This day is
salvation to this house, in as much as he also is the son of Abraham; you
alleged also Romans 11.27, 28. to prove that the Jews (the posterity of
Abraham) shall be converted to the faith, out of respect to the Covenant of
their Fathers. And likewise you alleged the Apostles speech (in 1 Cor. 7.14.)
to prove that the faith of either Parent did bring their children under the
holiness of the Covenant. And I said no more but truth; that I have heard some
exceptions against all these proofs.

Silvanus.
Let us hear and consider of them: And first what have you heard alleged
against that proof from Luke 19.9?

Silvester.
I cannot say that I have read the exception in any printed Book, but in
conference I have heard it interpreted thus, This day is salvation come to this
house, that is, Christ (who is salvation,) came into Zach^us his house, to dine
with him, because Zacheus was now become a penitent and faithful child of
Ahraham.

Silvanus.
This gloss if it had been printed, had been never a whit the more authentic
interpretation, but only the more notorious corruption of the Text.

For 1. it is not said in the original, this day is salvation come to this
house (though it be so translated) but this day salvation is to this house,
which argues, Christ spoke not of his commi^g to dine in Zacheus his house;
but of his salvation resting upon the family.

2. The reason which Christ gives, why salvation is to the house, will not
stand with the gloss; for (says he) salvation is to this house, inasmuch as
he also is the son of Abraham. Now if Zacheus his becoming the son of Abraham,
had been the reason of Christ his coming into his house to dinner, it would
have argued that unless he had been a penitent convert, Christ would not have
come into his house to dine. But the same evangelist tells us the contrary,
That Christ went into the House of one of the Pharisees to dine with him, whom
yet he sharply reproves, as one whose inside was full of ravening and
wickedness, Luke 11.37, 38, 39.

But what exception have you heard or read against the conversion of the Jews,
out of respect to the Covenant of their Fathers, according to Romans 11.26, 27,
28?

I have read that there be diverse difficulties that will not be granted about
the Jews coming in; Silvester
I shall therefore let that stand by until that time comes, or till it be
revealed from some Scripture how the same shall be.

The Books in which you read of diverse difficulties about the Jews coming in;
they speak not without cause, Silvanus.
there be difficulties indeed about the same: And I may tell you more, they are
difficulties impossible to be assoyled, according to the Tenants and
Principles of those Books. For grant that for truth which the Apostle
expressly teaches for a Mystery, That after the fullness of the Gentiles be
come in, (to wit, come in from their Antichristian Apostasle) that then all
Israel shall be saved, (upon whom in the mean time blindness lies, Romans
11.25, 26.) And grant this also for a truth, (which the Apostle likewise
expressly adds, Verse 27, 28.) that this shall be out of respect of Gods
love Covenanted with their Fathers, then this will prove a difficulty
inexplicable, how God in the New Testament shall convert the posterity of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob out of his love to their Fathers, and yet no man is
partaker of grace by the Covenant of his Fathers, till himself does actually
believe. For can men actually believe till they be converted? And is not
conversion it self made a fruit and effect of Gods love? (his Covenanted love)
unto their Fathers, and for the Fathers sake unto their seed?

Besides, this will be another difficulty (and as hard to be resolved as the
former) how the Apostle can call the Jews the natural branches of the good
Olive tree, and make their conversion much more kindly, and as it were, more
easy and natural, then the conversion of the Gentiles was; and yet hold (as
your Books do) that in the New Testament, God has not respect in his
Covenant to the natural seed or branches at all. It is easily acknowledged and
justly bewailed by the fall of our first Parents, corruption of nature is alike
in all men: Conversion unto grace is as much above and against the corrupt
nature of the Jews, as of the Gentiles. But yet presuppose a covenant of grace
with the believing Ancestors of the Jews to continue in the days of the New
Testament to their natural posterity. And then it will be easy to conceive, how
the Jews though by corrupt nature they are as averse to be graffed into Christ
as the Gentiles be, yet by nature of the Covenant, they are much more easily
graffed in then the Gentiles. More easily (I say) not in respect of their own
(...) (the goodness of their own nature, or natural disposition, and
propension to grace, for they are naturally as stiffenecked as any people) but
in respect of the nature and kind of the Covenant of grace given to their
Ancestors, and to their seed: According to which, God is more readily inclined
to pour out the Spirit of his grace upon the seed and offspring of his
covenanted people, then upon strangers and aliens. But take away the Covenant
of grace from believing parents to their children; and truly this difficulty of
the more easy conversion of natural branches will prove (as the former did)
inexplicable.

Moreover, there will yet be another difficulty (and as hard as both the
former) how to make good sense of the Apostles Argument, whereby he proves the
conversion and holiness of the Jews in future ages, from the holiness of
their godly Ancestors in times past: and yet deny (as your Books do) the
continuance of the Covenant of grace, from believing Parents to their natural
children now in the days of the New Testament. The Apostle in Romans 11.11. and
so forward, declaring the ends of the rejection of the Jews, he made this to
be one, the reconciliation and salvation of the Gentiles, to be a means to
provoke the Jews to emulation, that at length they also might come on to
salvation by the example of the Gentiles; which he further declares will be a
great advantage to the Gentiles. And that he proves verse 15. by an argument
from the less to the greater: if the cas^ing away of the Jews was the
reconciling of the world, what (says he) shall the receiving of them be but
life from the dead? And that there shall be such a receiving of them; he
proves, from the holiness, which by the institution of God is derived from
the first fruits to the whole lump; and by the Covenant of God from the root
to the branches, ver. 16. For (says he) if the first fruits be holy, so is
the whole lump; and if the root be holy, so are the branches.

The force of this Argument depends upon the force of the Covenant of grace,
and the continuance thereof from parents to their natural children, even now
in the days of the New Testament, as well as of the Old. For by the tenor of
the Covenant God is a God to holy Fathers, and to their seed after them. And if
God be a God to their seed, it reaches forth a twofold blessing to their seed,
that all their seed are holy by Gods adoption ( Romans 9.4.) and so by their
appropriation and relation unto God, till themselves do reject him.

Secondly, that some or other of them God will ever reserve (to wit, all the
elect seed) to be called effectually to the fellowship of his holiness, and to
the holiness of their holy Ancestors. And these blessings being presupposed
and granted by Covenant, the Apostles argument is plain and strong: That if
the Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob be holy, (who were the first fruits,
and the root of the house of Israel) then, as all the house of Israel were an
holy people till they obstinately rejected the Lord Jesus. So will God reserve
an elect seed of them to be called and received to the fellowship of his
holiness, and the holiness of their Ancestors in his due time. But if you
abrogate the continuance of the Covenant of grace from holy Parents to their
natural children now in the days of the New Testament, it will be a
difficulty (in my weak judgment) past all resolution, how the Apostles
Argument can be of any force to prove the conversion of the Jews unto holiness
from the holiness of their Ancestors, seeing their Ancestors are no first
fruits and root unto them, till they come to be converted, and being
converted, do believe as well as their Ancestors. And whether ever they will
come to be converted or no, is as uncertain (for all their relation to their
holy Ancestors, and for all their Ancestors Covenant with God) as is the
conversion of any other Infidels.

The Gospel holds forth Abraham for a root of Jews and Gentiles: Silvester.
and that is only in respect of his faith and faithfulness; and so is he the
pattern and Father of the faithful, that resemble him in the same. So that
Jews and Gentiles are Abraham's branches, only as they spring out of the same
root by faith, which declares them to be his true natural branches, so far
only as they appear to be of the same faith as he was. But now for the
Jews, that they were broken off, it was only for want of their actual
believing the Gospel, (as Romans 11.) and opposing the same, Acts 13.46. And so
were the Gentiles received in, only upon their actual believing and receiving
the same. For as the Word condemns none, but with respect to actual sin;
no more does the Word justify any, (Jews or Gentiles) but with respect to
actual Faith. And as every ones own faith inrighteth to life; so everyones own
faith inrighteth to the privileges of life.

Silvanus.
It is true, the Gospel holds forth Abraham for a Father, and so for a root
both to Jews and Gentiles that believe, Romans 4.11, 12. But in Romans 11.16. the
Apostle holds forth Abraham as the root of the Jews who were his natural
branches, not by faith, as you would have it, but by natural generation
through grace borne under his Covenant, in opposition to the Gentiles, yea, to
the believing Gentiles. For he makes the rejection of the Jews, a means of
the conversion of the Gentiles: and the conversion of the Gentiles a means of
the conversion of the Jews at last: and the conversion of the Jews a means
of awakening and reviving of the Gentiles, verse 15. And this he proves from
the holiness of their root Abraham: and thereupon infers the calling on of
the Jews unto holiness, verse 16. And though for the present the Jews be as
branches broken off through their infidelity; and the Gentiles by faith
received into their place, verse 17. yet he exhorts them not to boast against
the Jews, verse 18. nor to be high minded in themselves, verse 20. For if the
Gentiles, which had been branches of the olive tree wild by nature, were
contrary to nature graffed into the good olive tree; then much more shall the
Jews, which are the natural branches, be graffed into their own Olive tree,
verse 24. which argues evidently, that he speaks of the Jews as the
natural branches of Abraham; and that not by faith (for then why were they
broken off? as it is said. God spared not the natural branches, verse 21.) but
by natural generation borne (through grace) both of the Ioynes and Covenant of
Abraham; and so their conversion is inferred to proceed more kindly and
naturally, then did the conversion of the Romans and other Gentiles. For they
were not cut off from the wild olive, as the Gentiles were: but only broken
off from the good olive for a season, that they might much more readily and
freely be graffed into their own olive again; to wit, with much more liberty
and free passage of grace, in the channel of the Covenant.

Again it is not true, that you say, that the Jews were broken off only for
their want of actual believing the Gospel, and for their opposing of the same
simply. For Stephen bears witness against them, they had resisted the holy
Ghost from the days of their Fathers. And that there was none of the Prophets,
but whom their Fathers had persecuted, as themselves had also betrayed and
murdered the Lord Jesus, Acts 7.51, 52. But yet after all this actual
unbelief in Christ, and their opposition against Christ, the Apostles still
kept communion with them as the Church and people of God (as has been showed
above) Acts 3.1. and 13.15, 26. until they did not only not believe, and
actually oppose the Gospel, but wilfully and obstinately, malignantly and
blasphemously resist and persecute the clear light of the Gospel, Act. 13.45,
46. And as upon the Parents actual malicious persecution of the Gospel, not
only themselves, but their children also were cast out of the Covenant, who
had yet no hand in their parents blasphemy and persecution; so the Gentiles
upon their actual believing and profession of the faith, they were received
into Covenant, and by like proportion their children also, who did not express
their actual faith for receiving in, ^o more then the children of the Jews did
express their actual unbelief for their casting off.

Again, it is not true that you say, the Word condemns none but for actual
sin. For by the offense of one (to wit, of the first Adam) judgment or guilt
came upon all men to condemnation, Romans 5.18. And by that one man sin entered
into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, even upon
them that had not sinned, after the similitude of Adams transpression, (to wit,
actually, and of their own accord, as Adam did) Romans 5.12, 14.

And whereas you say, the Word does not justify any, but with respect to
actual faith:

There is an ambiguity in your word, actual faith; for actual faith may be
meant, either faith actually indwelling in the heart; or faith actually
expressing it self in some acts or fruits of profession. If you mean actual
faith in the former sense, it is true what you say, but nothing to the purpose.
For though God does not justify any but with respect to actual faith; yet
many are within the Covenant whom God does not justify; else all the house of
Israel, whose carcasses fell in the wilderness, and with whom God was not
pleased, had been all of them justified, for they were all in the Covenant. If
you mean actual faith in the latter sense, your speech is untrue. For God does
justify many, whose faith does not actually express it self in fruits of
profession. For they who are filled with the holy Ghost from the womb (as John
Baptist, and Jeremy were) they are sanctified: And they who are sanctified, are
also justified: And yet their faith did not at that age express it self
actually in fruits of profession.

Neither is it a commodious or true speech, that as every man's own faith in
Christ enrights him to life; so every man's own faith in Christ enrights him to
the privileges of life.

For faith it self is the life of the soul (the just man lives by his
faith:) and is it a convenient speech, yea, is it not absurd to say, faith
enrights to it self? But what is it that enrights to faith, and and so to life
by faith? Is it not the Covenant of grace, by which God has promised to write
his Law (even the Law of faith, as well as of all holiness) in the hearts of
the chosen children of his Covenant? Jer. 31.33.

As for the priviledg^^ of life, if you mean justification, glorification, and
the saving mercies of the Covenant, your speech is true, every man's own faith
enrights him to them; but that is nothing to the purpose. For many have had
right in the Covenant, who yet have fallen short of the sure mercies of the
Covenant. But if you mean by the privileges of life, the Covenant, and the
seal of it; it is not true, that every man's faith, (and none else) enrights
him to such privileges of life. For the faith of Abraham enrighted Ismael, and
the says of Isaac enrighted Esau to the Covenant, and to the seal thereof
(Circumcision) and not their own faith, which they never had.

Silvester.
The general scope of the Apostles discourse in this 11 Chapter to the Romans,
is concerning the breaking off of the Jews, and the occasion thereof, as also
their calling by the Gospel. Now the Jews were the people of God in a twofold
consideration.

First, as a National people descending from the loins of Abraham by natural
generation after the flesh.

Secondly, some of them God owned in a more special manner, with reference to
his gracious Covenant made with Abraham, and established with Isaac, and his
seed after him for an everlasting Covenant: which cannot be the estate of the
whole Nation; for then all of them had been in a true saving estate of grace;
and so all saved: or else fallen from grace: But in this whole body there was a
Church consisting of an holy Assembly of Worship and Worshippers, a spiritual
state; all the whole body with these held ^^mmunion together, because God took
into one body, that whole Nation for his own people. And all these springing
out of Abraham's loins, did assume to themselves an equal right and privilege
in Gods gracious Covenant made with Abraham and his seed, supposing God had
bound his Covenant generally upon him and his seed, in his natural generation
after the flesh. But God respected in the same only his chosen in Christ with
whom he confirmed his Covenant with Isaac in reference to Christ, Genesis 17.
Gal. 3.

Whom in Gods own time he calls to the faith; and these the Apostle ever
defends against the general rejection of that Nation. For though such were
rejected as were not elected, yet this made not the promise of God of none
effect to those who stood firm in the Covenant by grace in Christ Jesus, as
branches in their root, which grace the ^^st opposed, and were cast off for
their unbelief. And when the fu^nesse of Gods time is come to call them to
belief, they shall be received again into their former estate, as alive from
the dead, as Romans 11.23, 24. Luke 15.24. Therefore the Apostle after he has
proved the rejection of the Jews, he labors to make good the faithfulness of
God in his promise of grace, and the effectual power of the Gospel in the
saving effects thereof, in such as believe through grace, though the Jews in
their National respect were rejected, and few of them gained to the truth. And
he gives a reason of it thus: Though the Jews were all of them under an
outward form of profession of Gods name and truth, yet there was but a remnant
whom he approved of in the Covenant according to his election of grace, unto
whom the promise of life did belong, Romans 11.5, 7. Now to these Gods special
care is to perform his Covenant, and all that he promised to them in their
father Abraham, with reference to Christ, in whom, as the root, God established
his Covenant for these his holy branches, Rom, 11.12. and verse. 26.

Now the lump generally considered comprehends all, both the first fruits and
the latter: For except the first fruits were part of the lump, it could not
give testimony that the lump was holy; which lump is Gods elect in Christ,
with reference to their believing in him, and so the approved subjects of Gods
gracious Covenant, and heirs aprarent to the Kingdom of Christ, as were
Abraham, Isaac, and J^cob, believing, the first fruits of that lump. They
first appearing in the Covenant of grace in a visible way by faith, they were
holy. And so that remnant which God had still among them, was holy, with
reference to the same estate the first fruits were in. The same consideration
is to be had of the lump, with reference to that estate which God in his time
shall call them unto by his Gospel, and so are holy also: for this must respect
a visible holiness suitable to that in the first fruits, otherwise it makes
nothing to the thing in hand.

Now a word or two also of the root and branches; the root here, is that from
which the Jews were cut off, and the Gentiles graffed in. And that is not
only believing Parents, (and so the same with the first fruits) but Christ
mystically considered, with reference to the rules of Order, Ordinances, and
Government laid down in the New Testament, for all such to believe and submit
unto, whom God approves true subjects of the same. In which respect Christ is
called a vine, a root, and the foundation, Joh. 15.1, Romans 15.12. Rev. 5.5, 22,
16. Isa. 28.16. 1 Cor. 3.11. Ephesians. 2.20.

That the root is meant Christ as aforesaid, appears,

First, in that he is the root or olive tree out of which the Jews are cast,
and the Gentiles graffed in, Romans 11.17, 19, 23, 24.

Secondly, in that the Apostle charge the Gentiles, that if they boast
themselves against the Jews, they bear not the root, but the root them, verse.
18. That is, thou appearest not to have the truth of grace, and so not the true
nature of the truth and life of Christ in thy heart, but only an outward form
of the profession of him, as John 15.2.

Thirdly, from the consideration of that which the Jews refused, and the
Gentiles received, which was Christ aforesaid. Therefore it is Christ in his
mystical Order and Government amongst his Saints, that is here the root and
olive tree with his Spirit in his Ordinances issuing forth sap, and fatness of
life and comfort into every believing heart, as a branch of the same.

This will yet more clearly appear, if we consider what was the Jews own
natural root and olive tree, whereof they were natural branches only by
faith, as the Apostle so declares them. Verse. 20, 21, 24. which was union and
communion only with God in all his Divine Ordinances and Worship, which in the
Old Testament was Mosaicall and typical, in which respect the Jews were the
first that ever God took in communion with himself in such an holy way of
Worship, and therefore called the first fruits of his love, and natural
branches, which order and manner of Worship (but not the matter) was changed at
the coming of Christ in the flesh, and a new form and order set up by him,
called the Gospel or New Testament; which order the Jews opposed, and were
rejected: Christ the sure foundation laid in Zion, becoming a stumbling stone,
and rock of offense to the Jews, the Kingdom of God was taken from them; that
is, they were cast out of fellowship and communion with God, in respect of his
Worship, for their unbelief: and the Gentiles that did submit to the Gospel,
were taken in by faith in Christ, to be his worshippers and heirs both of
grace ^^d glory. And when God pleases to call the Jews by the Gospel to
believe in his Son, and to submit to him, as he is the Mediator of the New
Testament, then shall they be received in again into their old fellowship and
communion with God according to the order of Moses. And thus the Apostle proves
their first estate to be holy, as the first fruits of that holy and blessed
relation wherein they stood toward God by faith. From which they for their
unbelief are cut off; and the Gentiles by faith admitted in, of mere grace,
and not to boast. And yet there is a remnant of them to be called as the Lump,
and a second fruit, which are also holy in reference to the same holy root as
aforesaid. And as the root is holy, so shall these branches be when they come
to be graffed in again to their own root and olive tree, as at the first,
which is union and communion with God in his holy way of Worship. And so much
of the root or olive tree, which must be understood of Christ mystically
considered; and not of believing Parents, as aforesaid. Now a word of the
branches, which being holy, are believers only in the Apostles sense.

First, they are branches only, as they subsist and grow in the root or vine,
and so bear the true nature of the same, by which they appear to be holy by
the fruits thereof. Christ being the root or vine as aforesaid, the branches can
no way be said to subsist and grow in him as their root but only by faith, and
he in them by his Spirit, without which there is no holiness in the Apostles
sense, who speaks of such an holiness as is produced in the branch by the
holy root, in which it ingrows, and so partakes of the nature of the root, by
virtue of union and communion which it has with the same. All which is by
faith, as the word reveals.

Secondly, there is no branch that is alive in the vine, but partakes of the
sap and life of the same: by virtue of which the branch, though never so young
and small, is discovered to be alive, and enabled to bring forth (in its
season) such fruit, as whereby the same may be discerned. So it is hereby the
spiritual branches, they cannot properly be called branches in the Apostles
sense, but as they partake of the life and grace of Christ, (their true vine
and olive tree) by which they appear (at the least) to be alive in him by
faith, and enabled by the same to bring forth such fruits as may discover them
to be in Covenant of grace, and so to be admitted ^^to the privileges
thereof; as, John 15.1, 7. Nature it self teaches as much; for no man will
admit of dead plants to be set in his vineyard, or graffed into a stock, but
only such as are capable to comply with the same in the sap, and nourishment
thereof, to the end it may grow and bring forth fruit; and so it is with
Christ, who comes not short of nature. And therefore he admits not of any
dead plants to be set in his spiritual vineyard, nor dead members to be
joined in his mystical body, but only such as are capable by faith to comply
with the head. Neither took he for himself a compound body, consisting both of
living and dead members, which all are that have not a living principle of
grace and faith in him, which unbelievers have not, no nor all the Infants of
believers, nor any at all, until they are born again of the Spirit, Joh. 3.5,
6. The Church of God, which is the mystical body of Christ, is not a mixed
company, but only one substantial and royal substance suitable to her head
and matter, by which she was produced, being the immortal seed of the Word.
And therefore one holy, spiritual, uniforme, compacted body, both for nature
and form, Cant. 6.9. Mal. 2.15. Ephesians. 2.14. to 22. Job. 4.23. All which
considered, proves the body of Christ, or Church of God under the New Testament
not to consist of unbelievers, nor of Infants, neither in whole nor in part:
and so the branches aforesaid, not to be understood of unbelievers, or infants,
but of believers only.

That which you say, Silvanus.
that the Jews were the people of God in a twofold consideration. First, as a
national people descended from the loins of Abraham by natural generation
according to the flesh. Secondly, some of them owned in a more special manner
with reference to his gracious Covenant, made with Abraham and established with
Isaac, etc. This is not rightly spoken according to the tenor of Scripture
language. For none of the Jews (much less the whole Nation) was the people of
God as they descended from the loins of Abraham by Natural generation
according to the flesh, but only with reference to his gracious Covenant made
with Abraham, and with his seed after him. If you set aside the consideration
of the Covenant, the seed of the most holy of Gods Saints are children of
wrath, and not a people of God.

Neither let this seem to you of dangerous consequence, that if God accounted
the whole Nation of the Jews to be his people with reference to his gracious
Covenant, then all the whole Nation must have been in a true and saving estate
of grace, and so all of them either saved, or fallen from a state of grace. For
this consequence will not follow, as has been showed above. But it is true
that you say, that God did in a special manner own Isaac and so all the elect
seed, with whom he established his Covenant, not so with Ismael. And yet it may
not be denied, that God did establish his Covenant to all the seed of Isaac by
Jacob, and that not only to the elect seed, but to the whole Nation, till the
ten Tribes rejected not only the house of David, and the Worship of God in the
Temple, (where God had put his name:) but also the Ministry of the Prophets
whom God sent to reclaim them, as afterward the two Tribes of Judah and
Benjamin (commonly called the Jews) rejected David's Lord, the Lord Jesus and
his righteousness, and the Ministry of the Apostles. But before that rejection
evident it is, that in the wilderness God did by his gracious Covenant even
establish the whole National posterity of Jacob to be a people to himself,
Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. And the Word used in the original for the
establishing of the whole Nation to become Gods people ( ver. 13.) is the very
same which God used when he promised to establish his Covenant with Isaac, Genesis
17.19. And therefore it is not true which you say, That in the natural
children of Abraham, God only respected his chosen in Christ, with whom he
confirmed his Covenant with Isaac in reference to Christ. For the words of the
Text do plainly express; that God by Covenant did confirm or establish the
whole house of Jacob to be a people to himself, according to the Covenant
which he had sworn to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Deuteronomy. 29.13. whence it was
that (as the Apostle says) to the Israelites (one and other) pertained the
adoption, and the glory, and the Covenants, and the law, and the service of
God, and the promises, etc. Romans 9.4. where he speaks of such Israelites, as
for whom he had great heaviness, and continual sorrow in his heart in respect
of their unbelief, verse. 2.

Nevertheless, this I willingly grant you; that God had a special respect to
the elect and faithful seed, as to whom he reserved the effectual
application of the spiritual and sure mercies of the Covenant, though the
external dispensation of the Covenant, and of the seals of the Covenant, and
of all the Ordinances of Gods worship was generally granted to all the seed,
whether elect or non-elect, faithful or hypocrites. But to pass by your
general discourse of the state of the people of the Jews in the Old Testament,
let us attend to that which comes nearer to the argument in hand, to wit, to
the general scope of the Apostles discourse in the 11. Chapter of the Epistle
to the Romans; which you say is, concerning the breaking off of the Jews, and
the occasion thereof, as also their calling by the Gospel; wherein you tell me,
the Apostle ever defends the faithful seed of the Jews against the general
rejection of that Nation.

And it is true, he does so in the former part of the chapter from ver. 1. to
10. but that is not his general scope throughout the whole Chapter. For his
general scope is to declare three things touching the rejection of the Jews.

First, that it is not universal, ver. 1. to 10. Secondly, that it is not
unprofitable, ver. 11. Thirdly, that it is not irrecoverable, which he
prophecyeth, proves, and amplifyeth, v. 12. to the end of the Chapter. For the
1. That their rejection was not universal, he proves, first from his own
example, who was an Israelite, ver. 1. 2. From Gods fore knowledge which is
immutable, ver. 2. 3. From the like reservation, which God made of a remnant,
in the days of Elijah, ver. 3, 4, 5, 6. And this reserving of a remnant he
amplifieth by the cause, the election of grace, ver. 5, 6. And by the contrary,
the rejection of the rest, which he proves by the testimony of Isay 7.8. also
of David, ver. 9, 10. And thus far he defends the faithful seed of the
Jews against the general rejection of that Nation.

2. He proves that their rejection is not unprofitable, by giving an instance,
in an unspeakable blessing, which thereby redounded unto the Gentiles, to wit,
the salvation of the Gentiles, ver. 11.

3. That their rejection is not irrecoverable or final, but on the contrary,
that their restoring and conversion is to be expected,

He proves first, from the great benefit which he prophecyeth shall thereby
redound to the Gentile-churches, which will be our riches and fullness, and as
it were our life from the dead. And that he proves by an argument from the
less, ver. 12, 15.

Secondly, he proves their conversion is to be expected by the end of his
own Ministry, which he professes to be to save the Gentiles, for this end,
that so he may provoke the Jews to the emulation of the Gentiles in receiving
of the Gospel, and by that means save some of them, ver. 13, 14. and thereby
also bring on a greater increase of light and life to the Gentiles, ver. 15.

Thirdly, he proves their rejection is not irrecoverable, but rather that
there is certain ground of their conversion from the holiness of their
Ancestors, which deriveth in like sort holiness to them, as the first fruits
being holy, derive holiness (by Gods institution) to the whole lump; and the
root being holy, deriveth holiness (by Gods Covenant) to the branches, ver. 16.

Whereupon, by the way he inserteth a grave admonition to the Church of Rome,
to beware of boasting, either against the Jews for their Apostasy, or within
themselves for their own stability in the says. For the Holy Ghost did
foresee that the Church of Rome, (above all the Churches of the Gentiles) would
be most forward to boast of their infallibility and stability in the faith, by
reason of the promise pretended to be made to Peter's Chair, above all the
promises made to Jerusalem of old; which boasting, the Apostle represseth, 1.
By calling them to consider their former state, they were branches of the olive
tree wild by nature, verse. 17. 2. By putting them in mind they received the
Gospel from the Jews, not the Jews from them, thou bear not the root, but
the root thee, v. 18.3. By the greater danger or possibility of apostasy and
rejection of the Romans, then of the Jews: for if God spared not the natural
branches (to wit, the Jews) take heed lest he also spare not thee, v. 19. to
22. 4. He both together represseth the Arrogance of the Romans, and withal
proves that the Rejection of the Jews is not irrecoverable, but their
conversion more hopeful, then the conversion of the Romans was, by an Argument
taken both from Gods power, v. 23. and also from the natural estate of the
branches, v. 24. which makes their conversion more easy, If thou Roman were
cut off the Olive Tree, which is wild by nature, and were (by a power above
nature) graffed contrary to nature into a good Olive Tree: how much more shall
these which be natural Branches, be graffed into their own Olive Tree? 5. He
Represseth the same Arrogance of the Romans, and with all proves the
conversion of the Jews, by a word of prophecy both by his own Testimony, v.
25. and by the Testimony of the Prophet Isay, v. 26, 27.

6 He prosecuteth the same conclusion of the conversion of the Jews, and
demonstration, that their rejection is not small, and irrecoverable, by an
argument taken from the immutability of Gods electing love to the children of
such, whose fathers he has given an effectual calling unto, in the fellowship
of his Covenant of grace, v. 28, 29.

7 He proves and amplifieth the same by an argument a Pari, from equals,
thus, As you when you were unbeleivers have now obtained mercy through their
unbeleife: so they now not beleiving shall obtain mercy through your mercy, v.
30, 31, 32. Finally he concludes all with an holy and Affectionate Admiration
of the depth of the riches of the knowledge and wisdom of God in these his
unsearchable Judgments and ways, v. 33. to 36.

I have the more fully opened to you the Analysis of this whole chapter, that
you may the better discern both the true scope of the Apostle, and withal your
own fallacy in perverting the Apostes scope to such a meaning as will not
suite with his words. For you so carry the Apostles scope, as if he wholly
intended throughout all this discourse to defend a remnant of faithful Jews
against the general Apostasy and rejection of that Nation. And lest it might
appear that the Apostle had a principal aim in the latter half of the
chapter, to prove (as he evidently does) the conversion and restoring of the
Nation from the state of Apostasy and infidelity unto the Faith of Christ, and
his Gospel, you would have the Apostle understood to speak of the Jews in a
state of faith and holiness, and the whole lump of them to be holy by faith,
as their first fruits Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And lest it should be thought
that God will convert and restore the Jews (as some of the Apostles Arguments
carry it) out of respect to his Covenant with their holy Ancestors Abraham,
Isaaoc, and Jacob, (out of whom they descended as branches out of a root) you
would have the root not to be meant, their holy Ancestors, but Christ: and
themselves to be holy not by virtue of any Covenant of God with their
Ancestors, (for that you see would fetch in Infants, and others of their
Natural seed within the bounds and benefit of the Covenant) but by virtue of
their actual Union and Communion with Christ through faith in his Name. And
lest it should be humbled at (as justly it might) why the Apostle should spend
so many Arguments to prove the restoring and ingraffing of the Jews into
Christ after ^^^y have come to enjoy Union and Communion with Christ, you would
have Christ to be understood not personally (as a Redeemer and (Savior but
mystically as he is the head of the Church and one body with it, and so their
restoring to be nothing else but receiving into Church Fellowship in the Order,
and Worship and Government thereof. Such hard shifts the wits of men will make
to seek any evasions to avoid the light and power of the truth of the word,
when it will not stand with their own forestalled imaginations. But let us
consider how you go about to make these imaginations of your own, to stand
with the Apostles words. The lump (say you) generally considered comprehends
all both the first fruits and the latter: for except the first fruits were part
of the lump, it could not give Testimony that the whole lump was holy, which
lump so considered is Gods elect in Christ with reference to their beleivin^ on
him, and so the apparent Subjects of Gods gracious Covenant, a remnant
according to Gods election with reference to Faith, appearing in Abraham's,
Isaacks, and Jacobs believing, as the first fruits of the same.

Where 1. It may be marvelled why you should make the holy Ancestors of the
Jews, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the first fruits of the Jews: and yet not
make them in like sort, the root also. For the Apostle puts no difference
between the first fruits and the Root, but speaks of them as two similies to
express one and the same thing: If the first fruits be holy, so is the whole
lump; If the root be holy, so are the branches, v. 16. And as Christ is in
some other places of Scripture called a Root, so is he also called the first
fruits, 1 Cor. 15.20, 23. And sure he has the first pre-eminence in all
relations of holiness and grace unto his people. But let your interpretation
stand so far; let the first fruits of the lump of the Jews be the holy
Ancestors of the Jews, that is indeed the true meaning of the Apostle here;
only consider if you can see any cause why you should not as well take them in
like sort for the root also.

2. Why should you make the first fruits part of the lump, more then the root
part of the branches? As the first fruits be to the lump; so is the root to
the branches. The root is not part of the branches, though they be both part of
the tree: No more are the first fruits part of the lump, though they be both
parts of the fruits of the field: The first fruits are ripe before the rest of
the fruits of the field: and being first reaped and presenced (...) the Lord,
and accepted as holy unto him, they make the whole lump left in the field holy
also.

Obj^ct. But (say you) except the first fruits were part of the lump, they
could not give testimony that the lump was holy.

Answ. Both parts of this reason are unsound; for neither do the first fruits
give testimony that the lump is holy; nor is it necessary, that that which
gives testimony of the holiness of another, should be part of the same. Paul
gave testimony of the holiness of such children, of whom either Parent was
holy, yet he was no part of them himself.

Besides, the first fruits did not give testimony that the lump was holy,
(their hallowing of the lump was not by way of testimony, or as one part of an
Homogeneall body gives testimony of the whole, as one cup of good wine out of
a vessel gives testimony, that all the wine in that vessel is good) but by
way of a moral isntrumental efficient cause: God accepting the first fruits
of the field, given to himself as holy; he therefore allows to the owner an
holy use of the whole lump of the fruits of his field.

3. Take that for granted (which is in it self not much material) that the
first fruits were part of the lump: what will follow thereupon? Why then
(says the Author) as those first fruits of that blessed crop in Gods holy
Covenant were holy by faith, and so appeared: so is the lump out of which
these first fruits appeared by faith, as part of the same, holy also in the
same consideration. For this must respect a visible holiness suitable to that
of the first fruits: otherwise it makes nothing to the thing in hand.

But how can this collection arise out of this comparison of the first fruits?
The first fruits of the field were visibly presented to the Lord in his
Sanctuary, and being visibly accepted, appeared visibly to be holy. But as for
the lump of the fruits of the field, there was no visible appearance, either
of their presentation in the Sanctuary before the Lord, or of the Lords visible
acceptance of them, but only in their first fruits. And so indeed it is here,
the first fruits of Gods holy Covenant, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, being holy
by faith, and accepted of God as holy to himself, they visibly appeared so to
be. And through their holiness, and Gods acceptance of them, and of their seed
in his holy Covenant, the lump of their posterity from their infancy upward,
were holy also, though they did not appear in visible holiness, till in
fullness of time they came to be presented before the Lord in his Temple. And
neither then did they appear visibly holy by their own faith, but by the
faith of their Parents presenting them to the Lord.

But (say you) if there be not a visible holiness in the lump suitable to
that in the first fruits, it makes nothing for the thing in hand.

I willingly grant you that the Apostles intendment here, is to prove the
conversion of the Jews not only to a relative holiness suitable to the
holiness that was in the first fruits their Ancestors of old, which was
visible in their Fathers, and credible in their Infants by virtue of the
Covenant, and visible seal of it. But herein you commit a double prevarication
in your plea: 1. That you will not allow such an holiness to be found in the
Jews after they shall come to be converted, as is suitable unto the holiness
of their Ancestors. For their holiness reached from parents to their infant
seed. But you would wholly exclude their infants in the New Testament. Again,
whereas the Apostle a^gueth the conversion of the Jews unto holiness from the
holy Covenant of their Ancestors, and so would make the holiness of their
Ancestors a means to derive holiness to them, you would utterly make void the
force of that argument. For the Apostles argument proceeds from the virtue of
the first fruits by Gods institution to sanctify the whole lump; but you will
admit no such virtue or efficacy by Gods institution in the holy Covenant of
their Ancestors, as to derive holiness to their posterity, which is to make
the Apostles argument and comparison of none effect.

4. This let me further add, that whereas you in this discourse of the first
fruits and lump speak of the Jews to be converted, as but a remnant: The
Apostle declares himself to the contrary, that then all Israel shall be
saved, Romans 11.26. Yea, not only a body of the Jews, but of the ten Tribes
also, all Israel, according to what Ezekiel had prophesied of old, Ezekiel. 37.16.
to 22. And indeed, when the Apostle calls the conversion of Israel a mystery,
( Romans 11.25.) he gives us to expect a more general conversion of them, then
of a remnant. The Apostle in like sort called the conversion of the Gentiles a
mystery, Ephesians. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And a mystery (and hidden secret) indeed it
was to the Jews of old; and yet it was never a mystery to them the conversion
of a remnant, or of a sprinkling of the Gentiles, but the coming in of such a
great body and multitude of the Gentiles, that was indeed a mystery to them.
And so is the conversion of the Jews a mystery now unto the Gentiles, not the
conversion of a remnant, but of so great a multitude and body of the house of
Israel, as have been scattered like dry dead bones ( Ezekiel. 37.) that indeed
seems to be a mystery like the resurrection from the dead, whereto the
Apostle resembles it.

To proceed to the other comparison of the Apostle which was taken from the
holiness of the root conveying holiness to the branches, to prove the
conversion of the Jews to holiness from the holiness of their Ancestors.

Whereto your Author answers. By root is meant not only believing Parents,
and so the same with first fruits, but Christ mystically considered with
reference to rules of Order, Ordinances, and Government of his Church laid
down in the New Testament. In which respect he is called a vine, a root, and
foundation.

Answ. I know no reason why the root in this Text should be meant not only
their believing parents (their holy Ancestors) but Christ also, as has been
touched before. Only it seems you were afraid, that if believing Parents, or
holy Ancestors were brought in, as any means of the conversion of their
posterity unto faith and holiness, it would establish the virtue and
continuance of the Covenant of grace from Parents to children, now in the days
of the New Testament; the which you carefully shun. And therefore though you
cannot but see, that the first fruits, and the root are used and applied in one
and the same sense, and to the same purpose, and so are forced to confess, that
as by the first fruits, so by the root is meant believing Parents; yet you will
have the root to be meant, not only believing Parents, but Christ: and indeed
you bring such arguments for Christ, as do seem to restrain it wholly to
Christ, and (in a manner) to exclude believing Parents. But all in vain; for
neither will your Arguments evince, Christ to be here expressly intended by the
Apostle, (but only by consequence) neither will we deny that Christ, and
fellowship with Christ is intended in their fellowship with the root, though by
the root be here expressly meant their holy Ancestors.

It is true, Christ is called in Scripture phrase, the vine, the root, the
foundation, and so indeed he is primarily and eminently. But nevertheless, the
Church also is called a vine, Esa. 5.1. Psalm. 80, 8. And Abraham called a root,
Mat. 3.10. and the rock out of which the house of Israel was hewed, Esa. 51.1.
And the Apostles are called foundations, Ephesians. 2.20. Rev. 21.14. yea, every
righteous man is called an everlasting foundation, Prove. 10.25. And therefore
it is not the name of a root, that will cast the root to be here meant of
Christ, and not of Abraham.

"Yes, (say you) for first, Christ is here the root or olive tree, ou^ of which
the Jews are cast, and the Gentiles graffed in, Romans 11.17, 19, 23, 24.

Answ. The Church is called an olive tree (as well as a vine) yea and the
branches of it are said to be broken off, Jer. 11.16. And when the Axe is said
by John Baptist to be laid to the root of the tree^, Mat. 3.10. It is his
meaning to threaten the Jews, that God is about to cut them off from the
Covenant of their father Abraham, of whom they were the offspring and the
branches. And thereby he confirms his admonition to them in the former verse,
( verse. 9.) think not (says he) to say with your selves, we have Abraham to
our Father, for God is able even of these stones (and so of stony hearted
Gentiles) to raise up children unto Abraham. And lest they might object, that
themselves were the children of Abraham, rooted in him not only by natural
generation, but by an everlasting Covenant, he strengthens his admonition
with this threatening, verse 10. Now is the Axe laid to the root of the trees,
(to wit, to cut off barren branches from the Covenant of Abraham:) every tree
therefore that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the
fire. And therefore it is proper enough (according to Scripture phrase) to
interpret the root to be meant of Abraham; and surely as fitly in this place of
Paul, as in that of Matthew; but whether more proper, we shall see anon.

Secondly, say you, it appears, Christ here to be meant the root, in that
the Apostle charge the Gentiles, that if they boast in themselves against the
Jews; Thou bear not the root, but the root thee, v. 18. that is, say you,
thou appearest not to have the truth of grace, and so not to have the true
nature of the root and life of Christ in thy heart, but only an outward form
of the ^^ofession of him, Job. 15.2.

Answ. This interpretation the words of the Text will not bear; for if this
were the meaning of the Apostles words, Thou bear not the root, but the root
thee; that is, thou appearest not to have the truth of grace, and so not the
true nature of the root, and life of Christ in thine heart: Then it will
follow, that if the Gentiles did not boast, but had indeed the truth of grace,
and life of Christ in their hearts, then it might be said to the Gentile, the
root bears not thee, but thou bear the root: which is indeed contrary to
the truth of Religion, yea, to the principles of grace. The absurdity of this
interpretation may give good light to show, that indeed Christ is not properly
meant to be the root here spoken of. For if Christ were here intended to be
the Root, the Apostle would not apply this as a check to the arrogance of the
boasting Gentile, the root bears thee. For it is no check, but a comfort,
yea, the greatest comfort and safety of a true and humble believer, not so much
that he bears Christ, as that Christ bears him. But take the Apostle to
mean Abraham to be the root of the Jews (as the context carries it) and then
his admonition is grave and weighty against the arrogance of the boasting
Gentile. If some of the branches be broken off, and thou being a wild olive
tree, were graffed in among them (that is, among the Jews) boast not thy self
against the branches. But if thou boast, (take this for a check) thou bear
not the root. Thou art not the stock or root into which they were engraffed,
but theirs is the root, into which thou art engraffed. For salvation is of the
Jews ( John 4.22.) thou receivedst it from them, not they from thee: Jerusalem
as a mother bare Rome, not Rome, Jerusalem. Abraham as a father by his faith,
begot thee; as a root by his Covenant, he bears thee, not thou him, nor the
Church of his Covenant.

But thirdly, you argue from the consideration of that which the Jews refused,
and the Gentiles received, that it is Christ in his mystical Order and
Government amongst his Saints, that is here the root and olive tree, who by h^^
Spirit in his Ordinances issues forth sap and fatness of life and comfort
into every very believing heart, as a branch of the same.

Answ. The weakness and fallacy of this Argument will easily appear, if you
cast it into the form of an argument, thus it proceeds.

That which the Jews refused, and the Gentiles received, that is the root here
spoken of, to wit, that root which being holy, the branches also are so too.

But Christ mystically considered, is that which the Jews refused, and the
Gentiles received.

And therefore Christ mystically considered, is the root here spoken of, which
being holy, the branches are also so too.

But here the Major or former Proposition is justly denied. For though Christ
himself be a root which the Jews refused, and the Gentiles received, yet he
is not that root here intended, whose holiness infers and concludes the
conversion of the Jews to holiness. But the Apostle here speaks of such a
root, who being holy, argues that his branches, (though now broken off) will
come on again to holiness; which cannot be argned from the holiness of
Christ. For take Christ for the root, and will the Apostles Argument then
follow; If Christ be holy, then the Jews (though now broken off) are, or shall
be holy also? Is there any soundness in such an inference? If you say, Nay,
but all that you would infer from thence, is this, that if Christ the root be
holy, then the Jews, when they shall come to be graffed into him again, they
will be also holy: That is true indeed, and needs no proof. But that is not the
Apostles scope, to show that they shall be holy, when they are engraffed into
Christ, but to prove that they shall be engraffed into Christ, and become holy
because their root is holy* which will indeed strongly follow, by virtue of the
Covenant with Abraham and his seed, if Abraham be here taken for the root, but
not so, if Christ: What then will you say? is Abraham better then Christ? Not
so neither; but Christ does more delight to communicate his grace, rather in
the way of the Covenant of his grace, then out of it.

Neither will it appear (though you say it will) that Christ is here meant by
the Apostle to be the root of the Jews, if we consider what was the Jews own
natural root and olive tree, whereof they were natural branches only by
faith; as the Apostle so declares them, (...) 20, 21, 24. which was union and
communion with God in all his Divine Ordinances of Worship, the manner and
form whereof was Mosaicall and typical in the Old Testament, which is now
changed in the New, but not the matter, etc. as above.

Answ. It is utterly untrue which you say, that the Jews were the natural
branches of their own natural root, only by faith, and that the Apostle so
declares them, v. 20, 21, 22. For it is evident the Apostle expressly
declares the natural branches not to be spared of God, but to be broken off
for their unbelief, v. 19, 20, 21. And therefore unbelief was found in the
natural branches; and then they were not natural branches only by faith; for
then no natural branches could have been broken off. Neither could the
natural branches be said to be graffed in again, much more readily then the
Romans, v. 24. for the Romans standing by faith, had equally as ready access
unto union and communion with Christ in his Ordinances, which you take to be
the root, as the Jews when they shall be converted to the faith.

It is readily granted, and needed no proof, that the Jews of old enjoyed
union and communion with Christ in the Mosaicall Ordinances of the Old
Testament (whereof some were typical, and some moral.) And it is a confessed
truth also, that God changed the Order and manner of that Worship (but not the
matter) in the New Testament. But that the Jews were broken off for their
opposing and rejecting that new order, is not safely spoken. For they were
broken off for resisting and opposing the righteousness of Faith in Christ
Jesus. Romans 10.3. which was no new order brought in by Christ in the New
Testament, but was the principal matter of all their Typical and Mosaicall
Worship, which your self confess was not changed. Besides it cannot be
denied, That the faithful and their seed was the subject matter of the
Church, and so part of the Order of the Worship in the Old Testament. And this
was neither Mosaicall nor Typical, but before both. And if the matter of the
worship be not changed (though the manner be) then as the faithful and their
(seed whether Jews or proselyte Gentiles) were the subject matter of the
Church, and a Moral part of church order of old, then are they so still, and
neither of them to be excluded.

It was wholly needless and impertinent to prove that the Jews were cast off
from Communion with God in his worship for their unbeleife, and that the
Gentiles who submitted to the Gospel of Jesus Christ are taken in, and do
stand in relation to God by Faith in him: And that the Jews when God shall
please to call them by the Gospel to believe in his Son, they shall be
received in again to fellowship and Communion, with God in his service as
worship, as of old.

But take all this for granted, and yet it reaches not near the Apostles
Words and discourse in this chapter who proves that the Jews shall be called
in again to Faith and Holiness, by reason of their relation as branches to
their root. Which though they be broken off from it by their enmity against the
the Gospel; yet they still belong to it, according to the Election of God, and
according to his love which by his everlasting Covenant he bare and promised to
bear to their Fathers and to their seed after them throughout all Generations.

To proceed then. As your discourse of the root has not hitherto proved
Christ to be the root: So neither will your discourse of the Branches prove
either Christ to be the root, or the Branches, to be such, and can be no other
then such as do subsist and grow in Christ only by Faith. For 1. It has
been (as I conceive) cleared already, that Christ is not the root here meant
by the Apostle: 2. If the branches be such, and can be no other but such, as
do subsist and grow in Christ only by Faith, how then came it to pass, that
the branches were broken off? can such as do subsist in Christ (as in a root)
only by Faith, can they be broken off? What is then become of Christ's prayer
for all that do, or shall believe on him? Joh. 17.20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

But (say you) the Apostle speaks of such branches as are in him by faith and
he in them by his spirit, without which (Faith and Spirit) there is no
holiness in the Apostles sense.

Answer. It is true, the Apostle speaks of such an Holiness in the branches
( v. 16.) as proceeds from the Spirit and Faith: But that is an holiness
which is not found in all Branches (for then no branches should be cut off, but
which shall be found in the Jews at their conversion, as the Apostle proves by
reason of their relation to Abraham as their root, through the grace of his
Covenant. But will not prove, that there is no way for the branches to subsist
in the root, but only by Faith and Spirit. For, these branches who shall be
converted to holiness, were in Abraham before by Natural Generation, and did
pertain to Abraham's Covenant by the grace of Election: by virtue of both which
(both of the Election of grace, and of the Covenant of grace) they shall come
at last to be converted to the fellowship of the Spirit, and of the faith of
Abraham.

But 2. Say you, There is no branch that is alive in Christ, but partaketh of
the sap and life of Christ, and brings forth such fruit, be they never so
young and small, whereby the same may be discerned. So it is here by these
spiritual branches, they cannot properly be called branches in the Apostles
sense but as they partake of the life and Grace of Christ.

Answer. It is true, There is no branch alive in Christ, but partakes of the
Sap and Life of Christ. But it is not true, that every such living branch in
Christ (be it never so young and small) brings forth such fruits whereby the
same may be discerned.

For what discernible fruit of the life of Christ, did Jeremy show forth, when
he was sanctified from his mothers womb? Jer. 1.5. Yea, Christ himself who
was full of the spirit of life from his Mothers womb, what discernible fruits
thereof did he bring forth? Does the Gospel and story of his life express
any? or can your self imagine any?

Neither is it true that you say, that the spiritual branches cannot properly
be called branches in the Apostles sense, but as they partake of the life and
grace of Christ.

For the Apostle does not call them spiritual Branches, nor are they all such,
unless by spiritual, you mean Metaphorical. But he expressly calls them
natural branches, and such as God did not spare, but cut them off, v. 21. And
therefore they did not all of them partake of the grace and life of Christ, but
some of them were indeed dead and fruitless.

But (say you) nature it self teaches, no man will admit of dead plants to be
set in his vineyard, or Graffed into a stock, etc. And so it is with Christ,
who comes not short of Nature: And th refore he admits not of any dead plants
to be set in his Vineyard, nor dead members to joined in his mystical Body.
Neither took he to himself a compounded body, consisting of living and dead
members: And all unbeleivers be dead, and all the infants of believers, till
they be borne again of the Spirit, John. 3.5.6. Neither is the Church of God
(which is the mystical body of Christ) a mixed company, but suitable to her
head, and to the matter of which he was produced, the immortal seed of the
word, one holy spiritual body. Cant. 6.9. Mal. 2.15.22. Ephesians. 2.14. to Ioh.
4.23. All which proves the Church of God under the New Testament, not to
consist of unbeleevers neither in whole, nor in part.

Answer. Nature it self shows that in a Vine many dead branches are found:
and many that have some kind of life, and yet are not fruitful: And therefore
the husbandman in time cutteth them off: and so is it in the spiritual Vine;
and therefore such dead and fruitless branches, the Father (who is the
Husbandman) cutteth them off, Ioh. 15.1, 2. though for a time he may spare
them, as he did the Barren Fig Tree, four years, Luke, 13. 7, 8, 9. And
though no man will admit of dead plants to be se^ in his Vineyard, or graffed
into a stock: yet many plants set and graffed may prove dead; Men indeed would
not willingly admit dead plants to be set, or graffed, because they know not
what to do with them when they are dead. But if dead plants being set or
graffed would grow either to be fruitful, and if not fruitful, yet to be good
firewood, it would be no bad husbndry to set or graff dead plants. And so is
it here, God thinks it no bad husbandry in him, to admit dead plants to be set
and grow in his Vineyard, and if they grow fruitful, well, if not, to tolerate
them there, till they grow up to fulfill their iniquity (as he did the Jews,
Mat. 23.32.) because then he knows how to illustrate the glory of his justice
in casting them into the fire of Hell, John 15.6. Mat. 3.10.

It is true, which you say, Christ comes not short of Nature: but in this, he
exceeds Nature. Nature cannot make a dead plant set in a Vineyard, or graffed
in a stock, to grow: But Christ can make a dead plant set in his Church to grow
living and fruitful. For else how came John Baptists Ministry to turn the
hearts of so many Publicans, soldiers, and other people to bring forth fruits
meet for repentance? Luke 3.10. to 14. But otherwise, if Christ make not dead
plants set in his Church to grow living and fruitful, he can make them grow up
to yield more fuel to the fire of his wrath, and to grow ripe for greater
damnation. Mat. 23 14. It is utterly therefore untrue which you say, that
Christ admits not of any dead plants to be set in his Vineyard: or that he
takes not to himself a compounded body of living and dead members: or that the
Church of God is not a mixed company etc. For who called Judas to the
Apostleship? did not the Lord Jesus himself? Did not he plant him in his
Vineyard? And does he not hyre and send forth many laborers into his
Vineyard, who yet afterward many of them prove murmurers? Mat. 20.1. to 16.
The Church of Christ is often in the Gospel called the Kingdom of Heaven, and
in Mat. 25.1. The Kingdom of heaven is given for the style of such Churches,
as are most pure, such as they will be after the destruction of Antichrist,
and the calling of the Jews prophesied of in chapter 24. wherein all the
members are virgins (none defiled with Antich^istian Whoredom:) All servants,
none enemies: all as clean beasts, whether sheep or goats, the goats
themselves being clean for meat (as chewing the Cud, and dividing the hoof,)
and clean also for sacrifice. And yet are there not to be found amongst these
Virgin-members of the Church, some wise, some foolish? amongst these servants,
some thriving, some unprofitable? amongsts these clean beasts, some sheep, some
goats, who shall stand accursed at the left hand of Christ? It is true, the
Church which is the mystical body of Christ, ought to be suitable unto Christ
her head, and to the immortal seed of the word, of which she is begotten, and
many times so she is: but not always every member: yea very seldom, every
member, if at any time. I cannot tell if at any time, the King that made a
Marriage for his son shall come in, and not find one guest at least, that
has not on a Wedding garment, Mat. 22.11. The pl^c^ which you allege to the
contrary will not prove it, as that in Cant. 6.9. proves indeed that whereas
Christ has manay Queens (Churches married to him by Covenant, and invested
with Royal Authority, and more concubines (that enter not by Covenant, nor are
endued with authority in the house of God) yet one, or some few are chaste and
harmless and undefiled, but so a Church may be when the Doctrine, and
Worship, and Government thereof is received and administered according to the
pattern, although some members have a name to live, but are dead, and have not
(as you speak) a living Principle of grace and faith in them. Christ himself
acknowledges one Churth to be all Fair, and to have no spot in her, Cant.
4.7. and that is interpreted by some Expositors, and (as I take it) most fitly
of the Primitive Apostolic Church at Jerusalem described, Acts 2. and Acts 4.
toward the end of both chapters. And yet even in that Church were found
Ananias and Saphira, who were but dead members, and neither suitable to their
head Christ, nor to the immortal seed of the word, of which that Chuch was
begotten. The place in Mal. 2.15. speaks less to the purpose: for what
though God sought a godly seed: does he always find what he is said to
seek? God sought for one to stand in the gap, but he found none, Ezekiel. 20.30.
Besides the godly seed there spoken of, is in the Original the seed of God:
which is not meant of every Churchmember (for what is the marryage of one man
with one woman) in our first Parents unto that, Seeing it is a pattern that
binds Pagans as well as Christians) but it is meant of Christ Jesus.

The place in Ephesians. 2.14. to 20. shows what the Church of Gods Redeemed be,
and all the spiritual members thereof: but neither proves that all the
members of the Church are such, or that the Infants of believers are not such.
The Church of God in Zion was built upon the foundation of the Prophets: and it
was an habitation to the Lord. Psalm. 102.13. yet infants were members of it.
The place in John 4.23. shows (as I said before) what God seeks: not that
he finds all such in every Church: much less that he excludes Infants out
of the Church, till they can make it appear by open profession of their faith,
that they do worship him in Spirit and truth. It has bin proved above, that
of Infants is the Kingdom of God ( Mar. 10.14.) that is, the Church: and yet
they cannot profess and declare any such worship in their own Persons: though
indeed the Acts of their godly parents in that case are there accepted of
Christ, as the Acts of the Infants. For Christ accepted their Parents bringing
of them to him, as if they had come to him in their own persons. Suffer (says
he) little children to come unto me: and yet they came not, but as they were
brought.

Silvester.
There is a large difference between the Jews and Gentiles in respect of
outward Privileges. The Infants of the Jews had a special reason for their
admittance into the fellowship of the Jewish Church, which does not now
continue in Christian Churches. Of the Jews came Christ, the Savior of man;
and therefore salvation is said to be of the Jews, Romans 9.5. John 4.22. In
respect of which there was a blessed promise passed upon the Jews for the
bringing forth of the Messiah, and the promised seed, in whom all Nations
should be blessed. And therefore all of that Nation were admitted to the
outward Privileges, as figures of him whom that Nation was to bring forth. So
that a fruitful womb was counted a great blessing among the Jews, as not
knowing who might be so honorable, as to bring forth that blessed, and all
blessing seed. And therefore God honored the Natural birth with such outward
blessings and privileges, which belong not to the Gentiles at all.

The Gentiles now are to look for their bringing forth Christ according to the
Spirit, as the Jews did then according to the flesh: and likewise their birth:
and their seed and all things suitable to the same, as Joh. 3.3.5, 6. Ioh.
1.12, 13. And therefore we are said now to know no man after the flesh. 2.
Cor. 5.16. And Circumcision was one Privilege of the flesh, Phil. 3.4, 5.
Therefore though the Jews Infants were admitted to all those outward
Privileges being a National people, and so a National body, with a natural
birth, and the like seed in general: yet the Gentiles Infants cannot be
admitted to their spiritual privileges, they being a personal People called
by the word of Grace, and so a spiritual body with a spiritual birth, and the
like seed.

It is true, there is some difference between the Jews and the Gentiles,
Silvanus.
in respect of outward Privileges, for (not to ^over in generalities wherein
lies deceit) the Jews, or rather the house of Israel, being Gods first borne (
Exodus 4.24.) and so our elder brother, they were the excellency of Dignity, and
the excellency of power; glorious and mighty wonders, the Lord often wrought
for them, they had the pre-eminence: of them was Christ, of them were the
Fathers, (the Patriarchs and the Prophets) and to them were committed the
Oracles of God. And if you will so account it, a double portion to enjoy, both
a Congregationall Church, and a National, they enjoyed both a Congregationall
Church in their Synagogues, and a National Church at Jerusalem in their
solemn feasts.

But two things let me here put you in mind of: first, that when the Elder
brother, for his demerit is disinherited of his Birthright (as Reuben sometime
was) his pre-eminence of honor and double portion is divided amongst his
younger brethren: no part of it is lost. So is it here. The Church of Israel
being disinherited, all the spiritual privileges, all the honor and power
which they enjoyed either in their Synagogue, or in their National Assemblies,
is now set over to our Congregationall Churches; and as for the outward
Privileges, which the house of Israel enjoyed (as a wordly Kingdom and the
power and glory thereof) they were no part of the privileges of their Church
estate, but accessories and additaments thereunto. For in the Covenant of
Abraham God spoke nothing of a worldly kingdom, but of affliction for 400.
years, Genesis 15.13. as therefore worldly power and glory, were cast in as
accessorie to the Church of the Old Testament, so they may be also in the New.
If the Churches of the New Testament shall bind Kings in chains, as is
prophesied Psalm. 140.8. and execute upon them the judgment written, then
surely Christian Churches shall have some Kings to be members of their body,
else what have they to do to judge them that are without? the Apostle says,
Godliness has the promises of this life as well as of that which is to come,
1 Timothy 4.8. What though Church power be not administered with worldly pomp?
and what though all the children of the Church be equal in
Church Priviledges? yet some or other of the children of the Church ate capable
of great pre-eminence even in outward Privileges: They may be Princes in all
Lands, Psalm. 45.16. which though some understand of spiritual power, yet not
so properly: for spiritual power is not princely in the earth. Besides, if
civil Magistracy be lawful amongst men (which you deny not) some of the
children of the Church may be as fitly employed in such a principality, as
Pagans. And surely the time shall come when according to the prophecy of Daniel
(chapt. 7.27.) the Kingdom and the Dominion and the greatness of the Kingdom
under the whole heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most
High.

A second thing which I would put you in mind of (which also has been
mentioned above) is that we do not stand upon National Jewish privileges,
but upon the Covenant of Abraham, which was given with the Seal thereof to him
and his seed before any of the Jews and Israelites were borne, when Abraham
and his seed were confidered rather as a Domestical Church, then a as
national. And then the Covenant was given to him as walking before God in
uprightness of heart, Genesis 17.1.7. which cannot be without faith; and the
sign of the Covenant was given him as a sign and seal of the righteousness
of Faith, Romans 4.11. and both Covenant and seal were given to his infant seed
for his faith sake, Genesis 17.7. And in case his infant seed should grow up to
riper years, and then not take hold of the Covenant of Abraham, but profanely
reject, they were cast out of their Church Estate, as was Ismael, and Esau. And
so the seed of Abraham could never grow up to a National Church, unless when
they grew up to years, they should continue in a visible Profession of the
Faith of Abraham: or unless god should afterward enlarge the wings of his
Covenant to reach over the whole Nation, as he began to do in the Testament
of Jacob, Genesis 49.26. and more fully and solemnly declared the same, Exodus
19.3. to 8. and Deuteronomy. 29.10. to 13. But it is not the Covenant of Jacob to him,
and to all his Posterity, during their lives, that we plead for: But the
Covenant and blessing of Abraham: which the Apostle says is co ue upon us
Gentiles, Gal. 3.14. which only admits the faithful and their infant seed,
not during their lives, in case their lives should grow up to Apostasy, or
open scandal: but during their infancy, and so long after as they shall
continue in a visible profession of the Covenant, and faith, and the religion
of their fathers; Otherwise if the children of the faithful grow up to
Apostasy or to any open scandal, (as Ismael and Esau did) as they were then,
so such like now, are to be cast out of the fellowship of the Covenant, and of
the seals thereof. But you willingly take no notice here of the Covenant of
Abraham to him and to his seed. And because say you, the Jews had a promise for
the bringing forth the Messiah the promised seed in whom all Nations should be
blessed, therefore all of that Nation were admitted to the outward Privileges,
as figures of him whom that Nation was to bring forth: which made a fruitful
womb accounted so great a blessing among the Jews, as not knowing who might
be so far honored as to bring forth that blessed seed.

But Christ came of Abraham, and of Isaae, as well as of Judah (the father of
the Jews:) and yet that did not admit all the Nations which sprang of them to
the outward Privileges, as you call them (though very absurdly (if you mean
(as you seem to do) the Covenant, and the seal thereof. For the Covenant
whereby we and our seed have God for our God is not a mere outward
Privilege, but a spiritual and heavenly Privilege to such as know the worth
of it.

Besides, many Tribes of Israel were admitted (they and their seed) to the
Privilege of the Covenant, and to the seal thereof, of whom yet it was
evident, that Christ was not to spring of any of of them. The Jews who
descended all of them of Judah, they were but one tribe of twelve. And why
should all the other eleven Tribes be circumcised as well as the Jews, in
respect of their bringing forth their promised seed, when yet old Jacob had
limited the bringing forth of the Messi^h to the Tribe of Judah? Genesis 49.10.
Were all the children of the eleven Tribes figures of the Messiah as well as
the children of the Jews? Besides, in David's time, there was a promise given to
him, that the Messiah should come out of his loins, 2 Samuel 7. Why then should
any other families of the Jews enjoy such a Privilege that all their infants
shuold be circumcised with the Seal of the Covenant? Does any word of
Scripture make all the Infants of all the Jews, yea of all Israel, figures of
the Messiah? And if no word of Scripture so do, shall any man forge such an
imagination of his own brain, and be guiltless? what though a fruitful
womb was counted a great blessing among the Jews? So it was also among the
other Tribes, who yet could not expect the Messiah to spring from them. It was
a cause just enough to account a fruitful womb a great blessing, not only
because it was a blessing to the family, but also because it was an enlargement
of the Church. In which respect the Elders and Peoples of Bethlehem blessed
Ruth (Chap. 4.11.) and Boaz with her, The Lord make this young Woman, which
comes into thine house, like Raechel and like Leah, which two did build the
house Israel.

How will you make it appear, That God honored the National birth among the
Jews, with such outward blessings and Privileges that belongs not to the
Gentiles at all?

You should have done well to have told us, what those outward blessings and
Privileges were: and to have cleared it, that they belonged to the Jews and
not to the Gentiles at all. Otherwise it will not be safe for you to take up
doctrines of Religion upon trust of man's word.

The Gentiles (say you) are now to look for our bringing forth of Christ
according to the Spirit, as the Jews did then according to the flesh; and
likewise their birth and seed, and all things suitable to the same, as John
3.3.5.6. John 1.12, 13. And therefore we are said to know no man now, no not
Christ himself after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16. And Circumcision was one
Privilege of the flesh, Phil. 3.4, 5.

Answer. It is not true, that all the Jews did look to bring forth Christ
according to the flesh. For in David's time, they knew, that Privilege was
peculiar to his family, neither is it true, that the Gentiles are now to look
for the bringing forth of Christ according to the Spirit, any more then the
Jews were to look then. The Apostle Peter makes us equal with the Jews, and
them with us in this Privilege: We look (says he) to be saved through the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, even as they, Act. 15.11. It behoved them as
well as us, to attain a spiritual birth and to be borne of an immortal seed
suitable to the same, as well as us; for it was not to a Gentile, but to
Nicodemus a Jew, that Christ spoke unto, Ioh. 3.3.5, 6. Except a man be borne
again of water, and the Holy Ghost, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. That
which is borne of the flesh is flesh: that which is borne of the Spirit is
Spirit; Where it does not appear that Christ spoke to Nicodemus of entering
into the visible Church, for Christ did not seek to gather a visible church
separate from the Church of the Jews till after his ascension. But he spoke to
him of entrance into the Kingdom of Glory, and such a state of salvation in
the Kingdom of Grace, as only regenerate persons did attain unto, whether
Jews or Christians. Christ would never have called Judas to Office in his
Church (which is the place of an emiment member) if none could enter into the
visible Church, but regenerate persons. Your other place in John 1.1^, 13. does
not speak of the estate of the members of the visible Church in the days of
the New Testament, but of the Adoption and Regeneration of the Elect members of
the visible Church of the Old Testament. For all the words of the Evangelist
John, from v. 1. to 14 are a description of Christ. 1. What he was from
eternity, v. 1, 2. 2. What he was in the Creation, v. 3, 4. 3. What he did to
men after the fall, v. 5. etc. 4. What he did to the world of Pagans by his
works of Creaation and Providence. v. 9, 10. 5. How he came to his own
people of Israel in his Ordinances, v. 11. And yet many of them received him
not, to wit, by faith in sincerity and truth. v. 11. But those that did receive
him; that is, believe in him; to them he gave power or privilege, not to be
called, but to become his sons, v. 12. And these were borne, to wit, borne
again, not by power of Nature, but by the grace of God, v. 13. Then it
follows, the Word became flesh, v. 14. So that it may appear plainly by the
Context, that John speaks not of the estate of the people of the New
Testament, before they can enter into the visible Church, but of the spiritual
estate of all the believing Saints of the Old Testament. The other place in 2
Cor. 5.16. we have opened it above. We now know no man after the flesh, no
not Christ himself now. In which words it is no part of the Apostles scope or
meaning to set forth what qualifications are to be attended to in addmitting
members into the visible Church, but to direct Church Members and all
Christians, not to esteem of themselves and others according to common gifts
and carnal excellencies, and outward Privileges (wherein the false Apostles
gloryed, v. 12.) but to live as those who have fellowship with Christ in his
death and resurrection, and therefore not to live unto our selves, or to this
world, but unto Christ, v. 14, 15. And lest it should be objected, Why, time
has been when you (Paul) your self have gloryed in carnal excellencies and
Jewish Privileges, yea and have esteemed meanly of Christ himself for his
poverty sake, and because he was rejected of the high Priests and Elders: Paul
answers, though we have known Christ after the flesh, that is, though we
have esteemed meanly of him, according to his mean outside; yet now henceforth
we neither know or acknowledge him, or any man else according to the flesh.
Where by knowing no man after the flesh, he does not mean that be now knows
no seed of the faithful to have any Privilege or right unto Church Estate by
their natural birth through the the Covenant of their Parents: but that
whatsoever privilege themselves or their Parents, or any others have by their
Church Estate, or Covenant, or seals of the Covenant, or gifts of knowledge
and utterance, or the like, they should not acknowledge them, as things to be
rested till they come to be new creatures in Christ Jesus.

And to the same purpose tends the other place which you quote, Phil. 3.4, 5.
where Paul calls all these outward Privileges, flesh: and professes though
he might as well trust in them, and boast of them as any other man: yet he
counted them all (if they be trusted in without Christ) as loss, and dross,
and dung, in comparrison of Christ. But if by this argument, you would exclude
the Infa^^s of believing Parents from Church Fellowship, and the seal thereof,
you might as well reject Church Fellowship, and Church Covenant, and the seals
of the Covenant and all confessions of Faith, and subjection to the Ordinances,
and fruitfulness in good works: for all these trusted in, are loss, and
dross, and dung in comparison of Christ, nor does our righteousness before
God stand in them. And thus it was also in the Old Testament, as well as now.
So that all this which you have alleged, proves no difference at all between
the Infants of the Jews and the Infants of the Gentiles in respect of
spiritual Privileges; For all these places do as well concern men of
years, as Infants, and Jews as well as Gentiles. And though you call us a
personal people, and the Jews a National people: yet neither were they at
first National, but Domestical, as has been said: And for us, if you mean
that every believer receives the Covenant of grace to his own Person, but not
to his seed; It is utterly untrue, for the contrary has been proved at large
above, and your exceptions answered; that one promise of grace might stand for
many, which Paul gave to the Jailor, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall
be saved and thy house, Act. 16.31. As also that other testimony of his to the
Corinthians, that the children of believing Parents (yea of either Parent
believing) are holy 1 Cor. 7.14.

Silvester.
The holiness which the Apostle speaks of in that place to the Corinthians,
is not the holiness, which proceeds from Gods holy Covenant of grace, but
from Gods holy Ordinance of Marriage. For under the Gospel there is no
holiness, that can inright to any Privilege of grace but, either the
holiness of Christ; in whom God looks upon his children as holy in him, and
through him gives them right to all things both in grace and glory. Ephesians.
1.4, 5, 6. Or that holy frame of Gods workmanship by the holy spirit of
regeneration, appearing in the holy effects and fruits thereof, by which the
persons appear before men to have right to the aforesaid Privileges.

There is great difference in point of Holiness between the holy Covenant of
grace; and the holy Ordinance of Marriage: Silvanus.
The Covenant of grace is holy not only in regard of the efficient cause,
because it was instituted by the holy God: but also because it gives right to
holy Privileges, and denominateth them to be holy (whether persons, families,
or nations) whom God calls into such Covenant with himself. For it
separateth them from other people, and sets them apart to the Lord, and his
holy worship, Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8, 9. But the Ordinance of Marriage is holy, only
in regard of the efficient cause, because it was instituted by the holy God:
but it neither gives right to holy Privileges, nor denominateth them to be
holy, whom God calls unto that estate. God never called persons, or families,
or Nations, an holy people, because they were married: nor their children holy,
because they were bred of married Parents. Turks and Pagans, and all Infidel
people are married as well as Christians: yet neither they nor their children
are counted, or called holy in scripture language.

Yes, in scripture language, Silvester.
as there is an uncleanness of the flesh, so there is opposite to the same an
holiness of the flesh, which is produced by lawful Marriage. Compare these
Scriptures together Ezra, 10.2, 3. 1 Samuel 21.4, 5. 1 Cor. 6.18. and 7.1, 2. 1
These. 4.3, 4.

There is indeed an holiness of the flesh, that is opposite to the
uncleanness of the flesh: but there is no holiness of the flesh, Silvanus.
that proceeds from marriage; For though an unlawful marriage may pollute
both flesh and Spirit, yet a lawful marriage does not make either of them
holy: In that place of Ezra the marriage of the Jews with strangers was an
unclean and an unholy marriage, as polluting the Covenant of their God, Mal.
2.11. Yet that marriage of the Jews with their own Nation did not make them
holy: much less did the marriage of strangers with strangers make them holy,
though their marriage was lawful. Though nothing that is holy is unclean: yet
all things that are not unclean, are not forthwith holy. For not only that
which is unholy is unclean, but also that which is unrighteous, or any way
unlawful, is unclean also. Stolen goods are unclean: but yet goods well
gotten, are not holy. The opposition therefore that is between uncleanness
and holiness, is not that opposition which is between immediate contraries,
that whatsoever is not unclean, the same should be holy: or as if it were
enough to make a thing holy, because it is not unclean; Or as if because the
marriage of the Jews with the strangers was unclean, and their seed unclean
and accursed, therefore their marriage among themselves was holy. It is true,
marriage is honorable amongst all, and in regard of Gods institution, holy: It
is true also, that the seed which the Jews had in a way of lawful marriage were
called an holy seed. Ezra 9.2. But yet that holiness of their seed, did not
proceed from the holiness of their marriage: (for then to this day the
children of married Jews were an holy seed still) but from the holiness of the
Covenant between God, and them.

The next place you refer me to is in 1 Samuel 21.4, 5. where it is said that
David's young men having been kept from women three days, their vessels were
holy. But what would you infer from hence? that there is an holiness of the
flesh oposite to the uncleanness of the flesh? who doubts of that? but
whence did this holiness flow? or wherein did it consist? did it flow from the
lawful marriage of themselves, or their Parents? Or did it consist in their
Legitimation? No verily; it rather sprung from their want of use of lawful
marriage: in that they had not kept company with their wives of three days.
For it is not to be thought that David would keep his men to keep company
with Harlots. The holiness therefore which David here speak^^h of is a
Ceremonial holiness, whereby he and his men being kept from women, and
likewise from effusion of seed (which did Ceremonially pollute) they were
therefore holy in their vessels, and so meet to partake of holy bread; No
holiness therefore here, but such as makes capable of holy things. The next
place which you refer me to in 1 Cor. 6.18. does hold forth, that
fornication is a sin against the body: which is out of question; if your
meaning be^ that that sin brings uncleanness upon the flesh: which if it be
compared with 1 These. 4.3, 4. will argue that there is a contrary holiness of
the flesh, when a man possesses his Vessel in Sanctification and Honor, both
these are truths, but nothing to your purpose. For this holiness of the flesh,
is also an holiness of the spirit. Where by a man out of obedience to the will
of God, v, 3. does mortify the lust of concupisence v. 5. and possess his
vessel in sanctification and honor, v. 4. And this holiness is a part of
that latter holiness; (whereof you spoke before) to wit, that holy frame of Gods
workmanship in the heart by the holy spirit of regeneration, which gives right
to the Privileges. And therefore you will not allow this kind holiness to be
meant in 1 Cor. 7.14. for then by the lawfulness of the Parents marriage,
children should be freed from the lust of Concupiscence, and enabled to
possess their vessels in sanctification and honor.

That other place which you put in (1 Cor. 7.1, 2.) I know not to what end you
allege it, unless it be to prove, that marriage in times of persecution, is
not expedient, (which is the meaning of the first verse:) or that fornication
is to be avoided by lawful marriage, which is the intent of the second verse:
But what is either of these to the point in hand?

To return therefore to the point, from whence your objection diverted me, it
still remains good, that the holiness of children spoken of 1 Cor. 7.14.
does not proceed from the holy Ordinance of marriage, but from the holy
Covenant of grace.

Which may further be confirmed from the very word of the Text. For the
Apostle deriveth that holiness of Infants, not from the holy Ordinance of
marriage, but from the faith of the believing Parent whereby both the
unbeleeving yoak-follow is sanctified to the believer, and the children also of
the believer are holy.

I think both alike, the children are no otherwise holy by the says of the
believing Parent, Silvester.
then the unbeleeving yoake-fellow is sanctified to the believer. That is to
say, the believer has a sanctified use of Cohabitation and Communion with them
both. For to the pure all things are pure, but to the unbeleever nothing is
pure. Tit. 1.15. So that whereas before both the yoake-fellows were unclean by
Idolatry, and their children also: now by the conversion of one of the
yoak-fellows to the faith, though he might scruple the lawfulness of his
cohabitation and Communion, either with his yoak-fellow, or with his children:
Yet the Apostle tells him, he needs not so to do. For by his faith, both
his yoak-fellow and children also are sanctified to him, he has an holy use
to them both. In the same sense are the children said to be holy, and the
unbeleeving yoak-fellow sanctified. For I have learned it from some men skilful
in the tongues, that it is the same word, or at least derived from the same
root and theme, whereby the unbeleever is said to be sanctified, and the
children said to be holy.

Silvanus.
It is true indeed, the one of the words is derived from the other: But yet the
Apostle uses them here in such a different phrase, or manner of speech, as
puts a manifest difference in the sense, and signification of them. For when
he says, the unbeleeving yoak-fellow is sanctified, he does not leave it so
without a limitation or restriction, but says, he or she is sanctified in
the believer, or to the believer, and that limiteth the sense, to the believers
use. But when he speaks of children, he does not speak with such
limitation, they are holy to the believer, but positively, they are holy. Now
the difference is manifest and great between these two, to be sanctified to a
believer and to be holy: for example. It may truly be said, all afflictions
and Persecution it self, are sanctified to a believer: but it cannot therefore
be said, that affliction, yea persecution is holy, yea, we may be bold to
say, that even the falls of Gods children are sanctified unto them, I mean
their falls into sin: yet we may not say, that their falls into sin, are
holy. No scripture language allows any thing to be called holy, but that
which is holy, either by imputation from Christ, or regeneration from the
Spirit, or separation unto God, from uncleanness to his holy worship. Search
the Scripture, you will not find it otherwise, neither is it otherwise in this
place. For else the Apostle might as well have said thus; The children by the
unbeleeving wife, are sanctified in the believing husband: and the children by
the unbeleeving husband, are sanctified in the believing wife, else were your
unbeleeving yoak-fellows unclean: but now they are holy. But do you think the
holy Spirit of God would ever call infidells and Idolaters holy? But suppose,
(as some of your books would have it) that the Apostle did acknowledge
unbeleeving yoak-fellowes to be holy, is there not then a twofold holiness
mentioned in the Text: the one, not in the thing it self, but to another use:
the other of the thing in it self: Is it not then sin to confound these two
for all one which God has distinguished?

I deny not but this is true in a part, Silvester.
that there is twofold holiness here spoken of. For the holiness of the
children is not only such a relative holiness, as to one another use (as the
unbeleever to the believers use and no more:) but the holiness of children
rests in themselves as the subjects thereof by nature, being begotten and
borne in that lawful and honorable way of marriage by Gods appointment, and so
holy and clean in opposition to such as are begotten and brought forth in a
way of uncleanness, as adultery, fornication, and the like.

This kind of holiness which you speak of, Silvanus.
resting in the children by being begotten and borne in that lawful and
honorable way of marriage, has been refuted above. The Scripture
acknowledges no such holiness, as proceeds from lawful and honorable
marriage. If there were such an holnesse, the children of married infidels were
holy as well, as the children of Christians. But the Apostle here speaks of
such an holiness, as would not be found in children, unless one of the
Parents at least were a believer; to speak of holiness since the fall in
children, whereof they are subjects by nature, is strange language in Christian
ears; you might as well speak of prophanenes of grace, as of holiness by
nature. The holy Ghost is the proper subject of holiness: and the proper cause
of all holiness in the creature: so that nothing ought to be called holy, but
what he either makes, or calls holy. But it will never be found, that the
holy Ghost ever imparted either the nature or name of holiness to any, because
they were begotten in lawful marriage, and not in whoredom. Besides if this
were the meaning of the Apostle, to prove that believers might lawfully keep
their unbeleeving yoak-fellowes, because the children which they had by them
were begotten in lawful marriage, the Apostle had not thereby cleared nor
removed the scruple of the Corinthians, but rather aggravated it. For they
might as justly doubt of their lawful cohabitation with their children, as
with their infidel wives. The same grounds which puts them to scruple the one,
did as justly move them to scruple the other: so that to expound the Apostle
this way, does not clear the scruple but rather double is.

It seems to me otherwise to expound the Apostle this way, Silvester.
is the only way for the clearing of the scruple of the Corinthians: which
befell them by reason of an Epistle, which the Apostle wrote to them before in
1 Cor. 5.9. where he so pressed them from having any Communion or fellowship
with any unclean person in the worship of God, that they understood him to
condemn also civil commerce with the world, upon which they questioned the
lawful retaining of their unbeleeving husbands and wives, and to have
communion with them in Society. And so much the more, as having an example of
the like nature in the law, Ezsa. 10.7. About which thing, and that near
relation of husband and wife in their civil commerce they wrote to the Apostle
for information, 1 Cor. 7.1. And questioned not their children. Whereby it
appears, they held it lawful to retain their children. To which the Apostle
answers from a double ground thus.

1. In that all things are said to be sanctified to such as believe, as Tit.
1.15. and so the unbeleeving wife to the believing husband: you may lawfully
therefore live together, in that comfortable estate, and society of marriage,
which God has ordained for man and wife to abide in.

2. If you judge your selves to live in such a way of uncleanness, upon which
you must now part: then your children so begotten are unclean, and to be put
away also. But in that you hold it lawful to retain your children, and not to
put them away, though you believe, and they do not: then much more the
unbeleeving parents (as aforesaid) who bare them. For if the effect be holy,
then must the cause also be holy which produces the same, which is Gods holy
Ordinance of marriage, and not the holy Covenant of grace. Silvanus.


Whether the scruple of the Corinthians about cohabitation with their
unbeleeving yoak-fellowes, did arise from the Apostles former letter, or not,
it is not plainly expressed in the Text: But of the two, it may be gathered
from the Text, rather not, then yes: For if their scruple had risen from the
Apostles former advice, not to keep company with Fornicators (whether bodily
or spiritual) he had fully answered that scruple before in the fifth Chapter.
For there he expounds himself not to speak of the fornicators of the
world, but of the Church v. 10.11. and for the fornicators of the Church, he
does forbid Communion with them, not only in the worship of God (as you would
have him understood) but even in familiar civil converse, With such a one as
is a brother, and a fornicator or the like, I have written to you, no not to
eat with him, v. 11. where, not to eat is not meant not to eat the Lords
Supper: for that is the highest degree of the highest, and holiest communion in
the Church: but not to eat common bread at one another table, for he speaks
of the least degree of familiar society with such a one, saying, With such a
one, no not to eat, but that by the way, to clear your mistake in that point.
But for the point in hand, the Apostle had sufficiently cleared both his own
meaning and the Corinthians scruple touching their civil society with their
unbeleeving yoak-fellowes, in expounding himself, not to forbid them Communion
with the fornicators or Idolaters of this world, but of the Church; whence it
clearly appeard that their unbeleeving yoak-fellowes being not of the Church,
but of the world, it was no part of the Apostles meaning in his former, or
latter letter, to forbid them communion with their unbeleeving yoak-fellowes:
So that if the scruple of the Corinthiane had sprung from the mistake of the
Apostles former letter, the Apostle had there fully cleared his own meaning,
and withal removed their scruple: there needed no more words of it again
here. It seems therefore much more probable, that their scruple arose from
that other place which you mention Ezra 10. where the people of God are charged
to separate themselves from the people of the land, and from their strange
wives: which charge they obeyed also and fulfilled. But if their scruple sprung
from that place, then the Corinthians had as just occasion to scruple the
keeping of their children (which they had by these wives) as the keeping of
their wives. For the people of God in that Chapter of Ezra, made an holy
Covenant with God, to put away not only their strange wives, but their
children also which were borne of them v. 3.

Now then let us come to consider of the Apostles answer to these scruples as
you expound him.

The Apostle (say you) answers from a double ground.

1. In that all things are sanctified to such as believe Tit. 1.15. therefore
believers may have a lawful use of their unbeleeving yoak-fellowes. This
conclusion is true and intended by the Apostle: but this ground of it the
Apostle does not here give, but you fetch it from another Epistle. It is true,
the marriage of the Corinthians with their unbeleeving yoak-fellows, when they
were both infidels, being lawful by Gods institution before, now when one of
them came to be converted to the faith, the faith of the believer did not make
his former marriage which was lawful before, now unlawful, but rather gave
him a pure and sanctified use, both of his marriage, and of his yoak-fellow.
But the Apostle does not here give for a ground thereof, the purity of all
things to a believer, though he might have given it for a just ground
thereof:) but the only ground which in this Text he gives of it, is taken
from the holiness of their children. Else (says he) were your children
unclean: but now they are holy, which argues, that there is now in the days
of the New Testament, such an holiness acknowledged by God to belong to the
children from either parent believing, as is sufficient alone, (though there
were no other ground of it) to ratify to the believing parent a sanctified use
of his unbeleeving yoak-fellow) which holiness can be no other, but the
holiness which springs from the Covenant of grace, wherein God promises to
be a God to the believer and his seed. Whereas on the contrary if this holiness
of the children, did only arise from the lawfulness of the marriage of their
Parents, by the same ground upon which the Corinthians scrupled the lawfulness
of their marriage with their unbeleeving yoak-fellowes, by the same they might
justly scruple the lawfulness of their children, which they had by them, for
in that place of Ezra (whence you conceive their scruple, either sprung or
grew) as the marriage of the Jews with strangers was unclean; and therefore
strange wives to be put away: so their children also were unclean, and to be
put away also according to the counsel of God and the example of the people in
that place. Let us then proceed to examine your second ground, which you say,
the Apostle gives to satisfy the scruple of the Corinthians, about the
retaining of their unbeleeving yoak-fellowes.

2. If you (Corinthians) judge your selves to live in such a way of
uncleanness, upon which you must now part, then your children so begotten are
unclean also, and to be put away. But in that you hold it lawful to retain
your children, and not to put them away, though you believe, and they believe
not, then much more the unbeleeving Parents that bear them. For if the effect
be holy, then must the cause be also holy that produces the same: which is
Gods holy Ordinance of marriage, and not the holy Covenant of grace.

This ground has no ground at all, neither in the Apostles words, nor meaning:
not in his words; for the Apostle does not say, your children are holy in your
judgment, or as you hold: but the Apostle delivers his own Judgment, your
children are holy. Neither will it stand with the Apostles meaning, nor with
the divine wisdom and power of an Apostolic spirit, to prove an holy use of
the parents marriage, from the conceited holiness, which the Parents imagine to
be in their children. For though in Disputation against an adversary, it may
be of use to convince him out of his own conceits: yet in dealing with a
scrupulous conscience, it gives no satisfaction, to give him for grounds of
lawful Practice, his own conceits.

Neither has it any ground at all from the Apostles words, or meaning, to
gather (as you do) from the holiness of children an argument from the less
to the greater, That if the children be holy, and so, lawful to be retained,
then much more the unbeleeving Parents that bare them (because if the effect
be holy, then must the cause also be holy:) for the unbeleeving Parents are
no cause at all of the holiness of their children: neither are they holy
themselves by the holy Ordinance of marriage. For though marriage it self be
holy in respect of the holy institution of it: yet not in respect of the holy
efficacy in it, to make all them holy, that enter into marriage estate; yea as
to believers all things are pure, so to the unbeleever nothing is pure, no not
his marriage, nor his yoak-fellow, nor his children. Though the unbeleeving
yoak-fellow ( Paul says) be sanctified to the believer: yet Paul never said,
that the believer is sanctified to the unbeleeving yoak-fellow. Unbeleevers are
neither holy themselves, nor is any thing else sanctified to them, much less
can they be the cause of producing sanctification and holiness in others. And
therefore Paul does infer the holiness of children, not from the holy
Ordinance of marriage, but from the holy Covenant of grace.

It had bin in vain for the Apostle to have gone about to prove the lawful
retaining of the unbeleeving yoak-fellow from the holiness of their children
being in the Covenant. Silvester.
For nothing was more clear then this, That such children as are begotten in
uncleanness, were not approved of Gods holy Covenant of life: nor any way
holy, either by law, or Gospel; How then could this tend to remove the scruple
of the Corinthians, to tell them, that they might lawfully continue together,
because their children were in the Covenant of grace and life, and so were
holy, when as their scruple lay in matter of uncleanness, upon which they were
to part? Now this must be cleared, whether they were so, or not in respect of
themselves, before ever they could believe the holiness of their children, or
any such to be in Gods gracious Covenant. For the children of adultery and
fornication are debarred the holy Covenant, both in the law, and in the Gospel.

Silvanus.
It were well if you did debar only the children of adultery and fornication
from the holy Covenant now in the Gospel. But you debar all children while
they are infants, whether they be the children of lawful marriage, or of
adultery: whether children of believers or of infidells; all is one. But seeing
God (who keeps Covenant and mercy with thousands) admits believers and
their children to the fellowship of his Covenant: who is man, or what is the
son of man, that he should debar them?

But to come to your argument, many things are unsound in it. 1. When you say,
that nothing is more clear then this, That children begotten in such
uncleanness, are not in Gods holy Covenant, nor any way holy, either by Law or
Gospel.

It is too vast an Hyperbole, there be many clear truths generally received of
all that fear God: as the Trinity of Persons, the unity of the Godhead, Christ
his two Natures and three Offices, and an hundred such like, which are indeed
clear to all that fear God. But this (which you say is most clear to all)
that children begotten in uncleanness are debarred the Covenant, is denied by
Tremelius and Junius, and others more, and doubted by many. There be many that
conceive Pharez and Zerah were in the holy Covenant, though begotten in Incest;
and David's child though begotten in adultery. And what would you say of all the
children, which the Patriarchs had by Concubines? They were not borne in
lawful marriage. If therefore they were begotten in uncleanness, were they
excluded from the Covenant, and no way holy? What say you of Jepthah begotten
of a strange woman, and therefore in uncleanness? Do you think God did not
approve him to be in his Covenant, seeing he called him forth to be a Ruler of
his people? If you say Iepthah was then faithful when God called him forth to
office: What then? yet he was begotten in uncleanness. And then your assertion
was too large, without any limitation to say, That children begotten in
uncleanness are not in Gods holy Covenant, nor any way holy, either by law or
Gospel, and that nothing is more clear then this.

As for the place upon which you ground (as I conceive) your assertion, taken
out of Deuteronomy. 23.2. some understood it of coming in and out before the
Congregation, to wit, in bearing public Office. Others understand it to speak
of a Bastard begotten of a common Harlot; which I note to you, not to show you
my own interpretation of the place, but to wish you to forbear such excessive
prodigal expressions; That nothing is more clear, then that which is dark
and doubtful to many men, men of as clear, and it may be clearer discernings
then your selves.

But for my part, I will not stick with you in this point altogether; let it be
granted that children begotten in uncleanness (that is, as you expound your
self) begotten in adultery and fornication, are not in Gods holy Covenant, nor
any way holy (for ought we can discern, leaving Gods election of them unto
holiness, to himself) either by Law or Gospel; what then? Why then say you,
how could this tend to remove the Corinthians scruple, to tell them they might
lawfully continue together as man and wife, because their children were in the
Covenant of grace and life, and so were holy; when as the scruple lay in matter
of uncleanness upon which they were to part; which scruple must first be
cleared in respect of themselves, before ever they could believe the holiness
of their children in Covenant; seeing the children of adultery and fornication
are debarred the holy Covenant both in the Law and the Gospel?

But this is more unsound then the former, to conceive that the matter of
uncleanness upon which they were to part, was the uncleanness of adultery and
fornication. For if that were the uncleanness in which those Corinthian
yoke-fellows lived before either of them were converted to the faith, surely
the Apostle would never have given them advice, not to depart one from another,
v. r. 12, 13. Such as live in the uncleanness of adultery and fornication
ought not to abide together, but speedily to depart one from another. Yea,
methinkes in case of adultery, the Corinthians would of themselves discern
what was meet, to wit, speedily and utterly to abandon such wickedness, or at
least have lurked in it secretly, and never have consulted with the Apostle
about it in a public Church-letter. It is true, it was matter of uncleanness
upon which they doubted they must part, and thereupon scrupled cohabitation.
But the uncleanness which they suspected, was not adultery or fornication, but
disparity of Religion, in regard of the Infidel yoke fellow, who still lived
in Idolatry. But this uncleanness of Idolatry lying not upon both
yoke-fellows, but upon one only; it could not debar the free passage of the
holy Covenant from the believing parent to the children. For the Covenant
runs not unto you and to your seed, as speaking of both the Parents, but to
thee and to thy seed, as speaking of one of them, of either of them.

If you ask, why then did the Jews put away their strange wives and children,
seeing the Covenant might pass to the children from either party?

I answer two things, 1. The Israelites were expressly forbidden to marry with
those Nations, and their seed was excluded from entering into the congregation
to the tenth generation, Deuteronomy. 23.3. Neh. 13.1. But Christians in the days of
the Gospel, lie not under any such prohibition. There is no such partition wall
now between Nation and Nation; nor any such severe rejection of the children of
any Nation, in case either of the Parents be received into the Church.

2. The case of the Jews who married strange wives in Ezra, was not the like
case with that of the Corinthians, though the Corinthians might conceive the
case to be the same. For the Corinthians had married their Idolatrous
yoke-fellows, when both of them were Pagans. But the Jews married their strange
wives, when themselves were an holy people. Now though the Jews were therefore
bound to put away their strange wives, when they had thus polluted the holy
Covenant, and the holy seed: Yet even in the times of the Law, if a Gentile
Proselyte (especially of a remote Country) were converted to the Jewish
Religion, he was not bound to put away his children which he had by his Pagan
wife (whom he had married in the days of his ignorance) but he was bound to
circumcise them as well as himself, Exodus 12.48. And therefore he was not
bound to put them away, but to account them holy, and within the Covenant, and
so capable of the seal of the Covenant. And since this believing Proselyte was
holy, and his seed also holy, he might therefore have a sanctified use of his
wife, though she still continued unbelieving. And therefore if she consented
to dwell with him, he ought not (no not then) to have put her away, but to
abide with her, which is the very case of the Corinthians here; and the one of
them does fitly and fully illustrate the other.

And therefore further, it is not a sound speech, which you say, touching these
Corinthian yoke-fellows (whereof one was a believer, the other an unbeliever)
that this must first be cleared whether they were unclean or not, in respect
of themselves, before ever they could believe the holiness of their children,
or any such to be in Gods gracious Covenant. For as it was with those
Proselytes of old, so it was with the Corinthians then. The believing
Corinthian had just ground (though he knew not so much) to believe himself to
be in the Covenant of grace, as well as the believing Proselyte: and his seed
to be holy, and in the Covenant, and to have right to the seal of the
Covenant, as well as the seed of the believing Proselyte. And from both to
conclude, to wit, both from his own faith, and from the holiness of his
children, that he therefore has a sanctified use of his yoke fellow, though
yet unclean in her self through her unbelief.

And therefore take notice further, that it is another unsound speech of yours
to say, That it had been in vain for the Apostle, To go about to prove the
lawful retaining of the unbelieving yoke fellow, from the holiness of the
children being in Covenant.

For the Apostle does go about to prove that very point from that very ground,
and from none other, in that 14 ver.

Neither was it vain so to do, unless we charge vanity upon the holy Spirit
of wisdom, and truth and power that guided him. And indeed the Argument is of
eternal force both in the Church of Israel, and in Christian Churches, as has
been shown above.

But this seems a very unsound point to me, Silvester:
(which I see you build much upon in this discourse) which I cannot pass, that
by virtue of a believers estate in grace, all his fruit is holy, and partaketh
in the same estate of grace with him: unless they do by some act of their
own deprive themselves of it, as did Esau and Ishmael. Against which I beiefly
oppose these Arguments.

First, if this be a truth, then one may be saved by another man's faith. For
here by virtue of a believers state in grace all his fruit (that is, his
children) partake of the same with him, and so far as he does, only by
virtue of his grace, or state in grace, which is the same: And so by the
Fathers faith the Children share together with him in that Grace, which his
faith instates him in, which is salvation it self.

Secondly, This Doctrine takes away the being of Original sin; for here
they are all holy, and partakers of Grace, until they commit some actual sin,
which denies any Original sin: for that would make them unholy, though they
never committed actual sin in their own persons.

Thirdly, it lays a ground of falling out of an estate of grace. For by this
Doctrine Esau and Ishmael, and all the Children of Believers are holy, and
partakers of the same grace, before they committed actual sin, as Genesis 25.23.
with Romans 9.11, 12, 13. And so Genesis 17.20, 21. and 21.9, 10.12. But as it tends
to Popery, and Arminianisme, so I shall leave it, as an old Creed, bare Error,
not worth any further meddling with.

Silvanus
Your bare mistake of our Doctrine in this point, makes your Arguments to fight
against an error indeed, and bare enough: but not against any Article of our
Creed, which we confess to be all old, even as old, as the ancient and
everlasting Covenant: and yet never a whit the more old and bare, by Crediting,
but the more new and warm by believing. For to the believer (as to the New
Creature) all things become new, whereas in your despoiling and stripping the
Infant Children of believers out of the bands (the swaddling bands) of the
Covenant, you conspire with old Adam herein in their destruction: For as he
killed them by his fall, so you bury them not in the Land of Promise, but in
the pit of perdition, and land of oblivion and forgetfulness: as forgotten of
God in his Election, forgotten of Christ in his Redemption, forgotten of the
Holy Ghost in his Sanctification: and so quite out of the way of holiness and
Grace; without Covenant, without Hope, without Christ, without God in the world.

But to come to your mistake of our Doctrine, which lies not in this: That by
virtue of a believers estate, we hold all his fruit to be holy. For we
acknowledge, that (rightly understood, as you know we express our selves)
that by virtue of a believers estate, together with the virtue of the Covenant
of grace to him and his seed, all his fruit is holy. But when you add (and
partake in the same estate of grace with him) there you quite mistake us. For
though all the fruit of a believer be holy: yet all of them do not partake
with him in the same estate of all kinds of holiness, which their believing
Father injoyeth: much less so far as he does. For whereas there be three
sorts of holiness (as has been touched above) 1. One by imputation from
Christ. 2. Another by regeneration from the Spirit. 3. A third by separation to
God and to his Worship, and to participation of the Ordinances through the
Covenant: The believing Parent enjoys all these; but not so all his seed. All
of them indeed partake of the last: Of the first, only the elect; but not of
the second, till they be regenerate. And against our Doctrine thus declared,
your arguments fall like Dagon before the Arc of the Covenant.

For to the first, we readily answer; It follows not that if our Doctrine be
a truth, then one may be saved by another faith. For we do not teach that all
within the Covenant, or all that are holy by the Covenant are saved, or are in
a state of salvation: But that by the Covenant they are either in a state of
salvation, or under the means of salvation. Neither do we teach that all
under the Covenant of grace, are in a state of grace, unless a state of grace
be taken in a large sense for such a state, in which they receive the offer and
means of grace, which to the elect seed do become effectual; much less do we
teach, that by virtue of a believers being in a state of grace, all his
children do partake of the same grace with him, and that so far as he does.
These things we neither believe nor profess; neither can they be gathered
from our doctrine by any just consequence.

Secondly, to your second, the answer is as easy. For,

1. We do not say, that the children of believers are holy with that holiness
which accompanyeth regeneration, and mortifieth original corruption, but only
with that holiness whereby they are admitted to the means of grace, with
promise of efficacy to the elect seed, and offers thereof to the rest, so far
as to leave them without excuse.

2. Suppose we did hold (that which is far from us to conceive) that all
infants in the Covenant were regenerate, and so holy as well as their
believing. Parents, and as far as they; Yet that would not take away the
being or remaining of Original sin in them, but only the reigning of it.
For do you think that the being of Original sin is taken away from
regenerate believers? We for our part believe what we have cause to groan
under, that Original sin remains in a believer; and though it be pardoned
and in some measure mortified, yet it is not utterly destroyed till death.

To your third, we deny that our doctrine is any ground of falling away out of
an estate of grace; if you speak of an estate of saving grace. For we do not
say, that all within the Covenant, or under the seal of the Covenant, are in
an estate of saving grace. Though in a large sense all the members of the
Church, whether Infants or Professors of the faith, are in such a state of
grace, as that they do partake of the common gifts of grace, and of the
Ordinances of grace. Nevertheless they may fall away from such grace; which
the Apostle feared in some of the Galatians, Gal. 5.4.

To your fourth and last we answer, it were a false slander, if you should
report that our Doctrine does hold forth, that ever Esau or Ishmael were
subjects of a saving estate of saving grace: For though we say, they were borne
under the Covenant of grace, and were made partakers of the seal of the
Covenant, yet we do not say they were ever subjects of Gods saving grace. It
is a grace to partake in the means of grace, and in the enjoyment of many
gifts of common grace, and in the offers of saving grace; and yet many have
enjoyed all these, who nevertheless were never subjects of saving grace,
neither of election, whereof your two former texts speak, nor of perseverance
in the Covenant, whereof your two latter speak. And to fall from such an
estate of grace, I leave it to you upon second thoughts to judge, whether it
tend to Popery and Arminianisme, or no.

To gather up then the sum of all this discourse about the Covenant of
Abraham to an head: You have seen it now proved and maintained against all
exceptions,

1. That God made a Covenant of grace with Abraham and his seed.

2. That God gave circumcision to be a seal of the same Covenant to Abraham
and to all his infant seed.

3. That by the redemption of Christ, the Covenant and blessing of Abraham is
come upon the believing Gentiles and our seed.

4. These things being already cleared, the fourth thing that remains to be
cleared, is, that circumcision being now abolished, Baptism succeeds in the
room thereof, as a seal of the same Covenant to believers and our seed.
Which, if it may appear, then it will appear also, that the same Covenant of
grace, which gave a Commandment, or word of institution for the Circumcision
of faithful Abraham and his seed, does also hold forth the same commandment,
and word of institution, for the Baptism of faithful Gentiles and our seed.

Now that Baptism does succeed Circumcision it is evident from the testimony
of Paul, Col. 2.11, 12. where the Apostle having proved that we are complete in
Christ, by the fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him, v. 9, ^0. Lest it might
be objected that we want circumcision, and consequently we want the
spiritual benefit signified and sealed by it, which is the cutting off of the
body of the sins of the flesh, the Apostle answers, we are circumcised
with the circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins
of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, v. 11.

And lest it should have been objected again, that we want an outward sign
and seal of this spiritual benefit, the putting off of the body of the sins
of the flesh. The Apostle answers again; no neither do we want the outward
sign and seal thereof, we being buried with him in Baptism, v. 12.

The Argument seems to me somewhat weak; Silvester.
and therefore a weak answer shall serve. What though Baptism succeed
circumcision, must it needs follow, that as infants were circumcised, so they
must of necessity be baptized? The new Testament succeeds the Old; must it
needs therefore follow, that the same Order be observed now, as then?

It is well that you acknowledge the weakness of your answer; Silvanus
for if you had not, the weakness of it bewrays it self; but we acknowledge
no weakness of the Argument, unless it be the weakness of God, which (the
Apostle says) is stronger then men, 1 Cor. 1.25. But you are deceived, if you
think a weak answer will serve a weak argument; a weak adversary despised,
gathers strength by contempt. The Gileadites being despised as fugitives,
proved too heard for the Ephraimites, Judge. 12.4. The Jews being despised for
a feeble company, strengthened themselves in God from the contempt of their
despisers, Nehem. 4.2, 3, 4. yea, there is no sinful weakness of the
Creature, no not any weak thought, but requires weapons mighty through God, to
subdue it, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. And therefore you are much mistaken, when you think
a weak Answer will serve a weak Argument.

But let us consider your answer, such as it is. What though (say you) Baptism
succeeds Circumcision? must it needs follow, that as infants were
circumcised, they must of necessity be baptized?

Yes verily; or else Baptism does not succeed Circumcision, for what is
succession, but the substitution of latter things for former things in the same
subject? If the subject be changed, so far as there is a change of the
subject, there is no succession. If Belshazzar dye, and Cyrus, or Darius reign
in Persia, here is no succession. But if Belshazzar King of the Chaldeans die,
and Darius King of Persia succeed in the Kingdom of the Chaldees, then there
is a true succession; else not, especially in the case in hand, it was
requisite for the clearing of the Apostles doctrine, that Baptism should
succeed upon all those persons on whom Circumcision proceeded: or else the
weakness of your Argument will weaken the strength of the Apostles Argument
For the Apostle is to prove, that we are complete in Christ, not only in the
inward Circumcision of the heart, which takes away the sinful body of the
flesh, but also in the sign and seal of it, even our Baptism, which does
confirm the same things unto us, and gives us as effectual fellowship in
Christ's death and burial, to the putting away of sin, as they had in
circumcision. But take away the Baptism of Infants, and the Apostles argument
will fail. For it might be objected, that the Jews in their circumcision of
themselves and their Infants, had a sign and seal, that God would circumcise
not only their own hearts, but the hearts of their Infant Seed also; but we
in our Baptism, though we have a sign and seal that God will wash and
purify our hearts, yet not so the hearts of our Infants also. And therefore we
are less complete in Christ in our Baptism, then the Jews were in their
circumcision, which if it were admitted, would utterly evacuate the Apostles
argument; who pleads our compleatnesse in Christ, notwithstanding our want of
circumcision, in that we enjoy the like fullness of benefit in our Baptism, as
the Jews did in their circumcision. But admit the Baptism of our Infants, as
well as of our selves, to succeed in the place of circumcision to the Jews and
their infants; and then the Apostles argument proceeds fully, and concludes
invincibly; That we are as complete in Christ in our Baptism, as the Jews were
in their circumcision.

Put us not off therefore with a difference of Order in the New Testament, and
in the Old; The New Testament (say you) succeeds the Old; must it needs
therefore follow, that the same order be observed now, as then? For though the
order may be changed in succession, yet the extent and amplitude of the
subjects is not changed, especially not straightened or diminished, but enlarged
in a growing state. The order of Solomon's house (who succeeded David) was
changed not a little in point of magnificence from the order of David's house:
but yet the subjects were the same, or rather more abundant and numerous, none
of David's subjects being excluded. It is true, in a declining and decaying
state, the extent and amplitude of Rehoboams subjects were not so large, as
those of Solomon's whom he succeeded. But I hope you will not make Rehoboam a
type of Christ, in his folly and decay of his Dominion, but rather look at
Solomon as an intended type of Christ, even in the latitude of his Dominion,
that above David's; from Sea to Sea, from the River unto the ends of the earth.

The Lords Supper succeeds the Passover; Silvester.
but though all the whole household of every family (as well children as other)
were to eat the Passover, Exodus 12.3, 4. yet infants are not approved as fit
communicants of the Lords Supper, because they are not capable subjects.

But how do you make it appear I pray you, Silvanus.
that infants were to eat the Passover? a roasted Lamb with unleavened
bread, and sour herbs, is no meat for infants; neither does it appear by the
Chapter which you allege, Exodus 12.1. that children of more growth were
admitted to partake of the Passover, till they were able to discern the
spiritual nature and use of it. According to what is written, v. 26, 27. of
that chapter.

When your children (says Moses) shall say unto you, What mean you by this
service? ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of the Lords Passover, who passed
over our houses in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians.

It is true (that you say) children are not capable subjects of the Lords
Supper: For receiving whereof, the Apostle requires we should examine and
judge our selves. But Infants are as capable subjects of Baptism now in the
days of the New Testament, as the Infants of the Jews were of Circumcision.
For circumcision and baptism being both of them alike signs and seals of our
new birth (either wrought, or to be wrought;) and in our new birth, we being
merely passive, children are as capable subjects passively to be wrought upon
to a new birth, as men of riper years. But the Lords Supper being a sign and
seal of our spiritual growth in Christ, and dispensed not in milk, but in
strong meat, bread and wine, whereunto holy preparation was requisite, Infants
are not capable subjects of this, though they be of the other.

Silvester.
But why then are Faith and Repentance required unto Baptism, which was not of
old time required unto Circumcision?

Silvanus.
Faith and Repentance and the Profession of both, were of old required in men of
years, not to make them capable subjects of Circumcision, but to receive them
into the fellowship of the Covenant to themselves and their seed. Hence Abraham
was found faithful, before God did receive him into this Covenant, Nehem. 9.8.
And the like is to be thought of all the Gentile Proselites; for the first in
every kind is an example and pattern to all that follow after. And so the Lord
describes the estate of Proselites, Isai. 56.3. to 8.

Silvester.
But why should then John Baptist, and Philip, and the Apostles require the
profession of Faith and Repentance even of the Jews and Proselites who were in
Covenant before, before they would admit them (as capable subjects) unto
Baptism?

Silvanus.
Because the Messiah being then come (who was the chief blessing of the
Covenant, yea, the very substance of the Covenant, and is therefore himself
called the Covenant, Isa. 42.6. and 49.8.) He, I say, being come, it was
necessary, that they who relied upon the Covenant of Abraham, (as all the Jews
and Proselytes did) should hold forth also their reliance on Christ, in whom
the Covenant and the promises thereof, were confirmed to them and their seed.
For then was the Axe laid to the root of the Tree, even to the stock of
Abraham, and to all the branches that grew upon it, and were ingraffed into it.
So that now, if they did not bring for^h this good fruit, to believe in Christ,
who was then come, they and their Children were cut off from the Covenant of
Abraham, and must say no more, We have Abraham to our Father. But if they did
hold forth Repentance and Faith in Christ, then the Covenant and Promise which
was made to them, and to their Children before, did still continue unto them,
and to their Children. And that is the very ground and meaning of Peter's
exhortation to the Jews and Proselites, Act. 2.38, 39. Repent, says he, and
be Baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord Jesus, etc. For the
Promise is to you, and to your Children, etc. as has been opened above.

Silvester.
To keep to the point in hand, we are here speaking of Infants, whom you wake
to be capable subjects of Baptism (as well as the Jewish Infants were of
Circumcision) and yet not capable of the Lords Sapper. But this seems a
double mystery to me, how persons are fit and capable of union in a state,
that are not fit and capable of Communion in the Ordinances of the same state.
And yet more mystical, how one should be a capable subject of Baptism, and
not of the Supper. I can see no rule for such a practice in all the Book of
God. And it is against the rule of Nature, that when a Child is born, it
should be kept from food.

It troubles me to hear you call such plain points both in Religion, and
Nature, Mysteries, Silvanus.
whereby you mean dark Riddles above your capacity. It was a sad speech of our
Savior concerning such as to whom it was not given to know the mysteries of
God, Matthew. 13.11. The Lord give you understanding in his heavenly Mysteries.
When you make it a mystery, how persons can be fit and capable of union in a
state, and yet not be fit and capable of Communion in the Ordinances of the
same state: You know we esteem infants fit and capable Persons of the
Covenant, and of the seal of it, Baptism. If you think otherwise, then you
do expressly make Infants unfit and incapable of Union with Christ, or with his
Church, and so incapable of the Kingdom of Heaven: Which sometime you
disclaim. But if you speak of (all) Ordinances, you speak against common
sense, and experience. Infants are members of the Commonwealth, and so are
they also of the family: and accordingly fit and capable of Union with both
estates. And yet they are neither capable of the Ordinance of Government, nor of
the Ordinance of obedience to the Laws and orders in either state.

And why should it seem more mystical to you, that Infants should be capable
of Baptism, and yet not be capable of the Lords Supper? You have seen even now
a reason of both, both in Religion and Nature. And therefore do not say, you
can see no rule for it in all the Book of God: and it is against a rule in
Nature, to keep a Child born from his food.

For Baptism holding forth the death and burial and Resurrection of Christ,
if there be food in these (as there be food indeed) then children born, that
want not these (as in Baptism they are administered to them) they want not
food. Yea, children in the womb, before they be born to see the light, yet
they want not food, but are fed by the Navell from the blood that is gathered
in the mothers womb, before they come forth to suck the breasts. And so is it
with the Infants in the Church, they are fed by the blood and Spirit of Christ
in Baptism, before they can suck the sincere milk of the Word.

Silvester.
The Church of the New Testament succeeds the Old: but it will not follow,
that the like subjects succeed each other also. For no rejected Ishmaelite and
Esau, are to be admitted either unto Union or Communion in the Church, under
the New Testament, by Christ's appointment, therefore though Baptism succeed
Circumcision, yet the same subjects do not so.

Silvanus.
The Church of the Old Testament consisted of no other subject matter, then such
as professed the Faith of the God of Israel, and their seed: And the Church of
the New Testament consists of the like; Grounds and proofs whereof we have
given above. Ishmael and Esau, when they showed themselves to be rejected of
God, they were not admitted to any further Union or Communion with the Church
in the Old Testament. No more were Simon Magus, Ananias and Sapphira allowed
any longer Union and Communion with the Church of the New Testament, after they
once showed themselves like Esau or Ishmael, to be rejected of God. But before
that time Simon Magus, Ananias and Sapphira, were as well admitted into Union
and Communion with the Church of the New Testament, as young Ishmael and Esau
in the Old.

Silvester.
Yea, but such were not admitted into the Church of the New Testament, by
Christ's appointment.

Silvanus.
What say you then to Judas, a man as bad or worse then any of them, either in
Old or New Testament? Did not Christ himself appoint him to an Office, yea, to
an high Office in the Church? And can you then say, he had no Union or
Communion with the Church of the New Testament?

Silvester.
The two Testaments are as Wills containing certain Legacies, given and
bequeathed only to such, whose names are expressly set down in the same, as
Rev. 21.27. In the Old Testament, as the first will, a male of eight days old,
or a Proselyte, Exodus 12.48, 49. Genesis 17.10.14.23.25. Joh. 8 Phil. 3.4, 5. In
the New Testament, as the last will of Christ, the Legacies therein contained,
as the Privileges and blessings of Abraham, they are given only to such as
believe, and to none else, Gal. 3.14.22.29. Romans 8.17. and 4.11, 12. and 9.7,
8. Gal. 3.6, 7. These are such as are begotten again, by the immortal seed of
the Word, born of the Spirit, and so children of God, the only true heirs of
the Kingdom of God, with the prviledges thereof, as Jam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 2.23.
Joh. 1.12, 13. Joh. 3.5, 6. 1 John 3.9, 10. Romans 8.17. These are the holy seed,
which God so approves of in the Scriptures, as Subjects of Grace, and Heirs of
Life: and being in Covenant, they only have right to the privileges thereof.
And their children and offspring are such as succeed them in the same Faith,
and Truth, and so are called the Generation of the Righteous, succeeding each
other in the way of Righteousness, and not their Infants or personal seed,
proceeding from their loins by carnal generation, as Isa. 43.5. and 44.3. and
54.3. and 59.21. and 66.22. and 61.9. and 65.23. Compare Rev. 12.17. Gal. 4.26.
to 31. Silvanus.


I willingly acknowledge that the two Testaments, are two Wills, containing
such Legacies, as are bequeathed and given only to such, whose names are
either expressly set down, or whose condition is plainly described in them;
Otherwise, if you stand upon express names, are there any such names
expressly set down, as William and Rowland, Richard and Robert, Godfrey and
Geoffrey, or the like? And would you exclude all such whose names are not
expressly set down, from any Legacies in either Testament? But I take your
meaning to be, by names, to understand Natures, or Conditions: and by
expressly set down, to understand plainly described. The place which you
allege out of Revel. 21.27. is a part of the description of the pure Church of
the Jews, after their last Conversion (the New Jerusalem) by the condition of
such Proselytes, as from among the Nations shall enter into fellowship with
them. They shall not be profane persons, defilers and corrupters of others,
nor makers of images which are abominations and lies. And thus far the
description agrees to Infants, as well as to men of riper years. As for the
other part of the description, that none shall enter but such as are written in
the Lambs book of life; this I would say to it:

1. You cannot justly deny, but that Gods Testimony of the Infants of
Believers, that they are holy (1 Cor. 7.14.) and that of such is the Kingdom of
God, Mark. 10.14. is as good an Evidence of their Election, as the Profession
of Faith and Repentance, which men of years are wont to make, is an evidence of
their election before the Church. Again,

2. It is one thing, to speak of such as enter into the Church (for that
agrees to such as were sometime without:) another thing, to speak of the
Infants of believers, who were never out of the Church, and so cannot be said
to enter into it. Besides,

3. It is one thing to enter into the Church as an abiding member; another
thing so to enter, as for some notorious scandal to be cast out of it. Such
shall be the purity of the Government of that new Jerusalem, as that no
profane person shall enter into it, nor any hypocrite: or if any hypocrite
should creep in (as there did in the most pure and discerning times, even in
the Apostles days) yet they will in time be discerned, and then cast out:
Otherwise there would be no use of excommunication in those pure Jewish
Churches; which is not probable. Yea, infants themselves, though borne in the
Church; yet if when they grow up to years they shall degenerate into a
profane or scandalous course, they shall not be tolerated to abide in the
Church: yea, if they shall not take hold of the Covenant of their Fathers, but
content themselves in an ignorant, or civil, or worldly course of life, they
shall not be allowed to enter into holy communion with the sincere members of
the Church at the Lords Table.

4. It is one thing to prophecy of the transcendent glorious happiness of an
exact pure Church in some age of it: another thing to command and foretell the
perpetual continuance of it in the same degree of purity. Sure I am, that when
Christ comes to judgment, he shall find in those pure Churches of the Jews
some foolish Virgins, as well as some wise. And the foolish Virgins shall be
shut out from the presence of Christ ( Mat. 25.10, 11, 12.) And they that are
shut out, were never written in the Lambs book of life.

5. It is one thing to speak of the members of the Church universally; another
thing to speak of them all indefinitely; all of them, (that is, the body of
them, or the greater part of them) may be said to be written in the Lambs book
of life, to be all righteous, ( Isa. 60.21.) to have their sins forgiven,
and not to complain of any sickness, Isa. 33.21. But how can this be
understood universally of all the members of the Church at all times?

6. It is one thing to speak of the condition, in which God approves
Church Members; another thing to speak of the condition, in which God approves
the receiving of Church Members. God never approved the condition of Judas in
his Apostleship, or in his Church Membership; and yet he approved the
receiving of him into both.

But to proceed to the difference which you make of the subjects of the two
Testaments, though that be a point scanned before, and needlessly repeated
here: When you make the Old Testament to bequeath Legacies to a male of eight
days old, or to a Proselyte, and for that end quote Genesis 17.10, 14, 23, 25.
with other Scriptures; and the New Testament to bestow Legacies (as the
Privileges and blessing of Abraham) only to such as believe, and none else.

You speak not herein according to the language of the Scriptures. For the
Scripture never calls the Testament or Covenant which God made with Abraham,
Genesis 17. the Old Testament: your mistake herein has been a principal occasion
of corrupting your judgment, both in this point in hand, and sundry other that
have reference to it. I have showed you above, that the Testament which the
Scripture calls the Old Testament, was that made with the Israelites on Mount
Sinai, not that made with Abraham, (Genesis 17.) in the land of Canaan. It had
been small comfort to us, that Christ by his death should procure us this
privilege, that the blessing of Abraham might come upon believing Gentiles, if
the blessing of Abraham were not better then the Old Testament, or Covenant: of
which the Apostle said long ago (even in his time) it was ready to vanish
away, Heb. 8.13. and was indeed soon after (with the Temple) wholly abolished.

It is true, the Covenant of Abraham bequeathed this Legacy to a male of eight
days old, to be circumcised; but circumcision was only the seal of the
Covenant. The chief Legacy bequeathed in that Covenant, was the promise that
God would be a Father to Abraham and to his seed. And a God he was to them,
whilst they were yet in the womb, or being borne, were not yet come to be
eight days of old. Else all the Infants of Gods people that dyed in their
first week, lived and dyed out of Covenant. And so the Covenant shall depend
upon the seal, not the seal upon the Covenant: and the grace of the Covenant
shall not know, nor acknowledge, nor own infants the first seven days, until
the eight; and so the eternal Jehovah (to whom a thousand years is but as one
day) shall limit the grace of his eternal Covenant, not to shine forth upon
the Infants of believers, til the eighth day shine forth upon them. It
remains therefore that the Infants of Abraham and of his seed were under the
Covenant as soon as they were his seed, to wit, even from their conception,
though none of them were circumcised, but the males only, nor the males
neither, till the eighth day. The males only, partly because the Females had
not such a foreskin of their flesh, as was to be circumcised; partly because
God would have them trained up (both males and females) to expect all the
blessing of their circumcision, from the circumcision of Christ Jesus,
mentioned, Coloss. 2.11. Neither were the males circumcised till the eigthth
day, not because they were not subjects of Abraham's Covenant till the eighth
day, but for some ceremonial respect, or for some other reason peculiar to
that Rite. Circumcision being a cutting of the flesh, it was a work of mercy
not to put infants the first week to the pain, till they were better able to
bear it. Some have anciently thought the circumcision of the eighth day did
prefigure the sanctification of the eighth day for a Sabbath in the days of
the Messiah. Others have thought God would have Circumcision deferred till the
eighth day, that a Sabbath might pass over the Parents, that he might solemnly
renew his Covenant with God, before the seal of the Covenant should be
applied to his Infant. Others have conceived, that as God would not have a Kid
or Lamb sacrificed to him till it had sucked of the Dam seven days; so neither
would he call forth the infant to be solemnly presented and offered to him in
that seal of the Covenant, till the seven days were fulfilled. However it
was, certain it is that the limitation of the eighth day, was not a moral
appendant to the Covenant of grace. And therefore the Infants of believers,
both in those former times, and in these now, partaked in the Legacies of the
Covenant of grace, as well before eight days, as after.

Nay (say you) in the New Testament, as the last Will of Christ, the Legacies
therein contained (as the Privileges and blessing of Abraham) are given only
to such as believe, and to none else.

Two things let me here answer you.

1. It implies a contradiction to say, the blessing of Abraham is given to
believers, and only to believers, and to none else, intending thereby to
exclude the infants of believers. For what is the blessing of Abraham? Is it
not this promise of grace, that God will be a God to him and his seed? If this
blessing then come upon believers, then this promise comes upon them; That
God will be a God to them and their seed. You must therefore either deny the
blessing of Abraham to come upon believers; or else you must grant the promise
of grace to come upon them and upon their seed also. Yea, (say you) upon their
believing seed, such as succeed them in the same faith and truth, not upon
others. If that were the meaning of the promise, it could not be said with any
congruity of speech, that the promise comes upon the seed of believers at
all. For when the children of believers come to be believers, the promise
comes not to them at all as the seed of believers, but as believers
themselves. The children of Pagans when they come to believe, may as well claim
the promise to belong unto them, as may the children of believers, when
themselves do believe.

The second thing that I would answer you, is, that all the places which you
allege to prove, that the privileges of the Kingdom of Christ do belong only
unto believers, they only speak of saving privileges flowing from faith: All
which we readily grant you, (as a point out of controversy) do all of them
belong to believers, and not immediately to the children of believers, till
they come on themselves to believe likewise. But this we further claim in the
behalf of the children of believers (which we have proved before, though you
are willing to take no notice of it) that the children of believers do come on
themselves to believe, by reason of the Covenant of grace which God has made
with believers and their seed, for by that Covenant he has promised to write
the law of faith (as of all other saving graces) in their hearts, that they
also may come in Gods time and way to enjoy all the other saving privileges of
the Covenant, as did their Fathers before them. To take a short survey of the
places, which you quote, that Text in Gal. 3.22. holds forth that the promise
(to wit, the promise of eternal life, of which he spoke in the next verse
before) is given by faith to them that believe. So is also the righteousness
of faith given to them that believe, as the other places you quote, show, Romans
4.11, 12. Gal. 3.6, 7. So likewise the inheritance of glory is given to sons,
even the regenerate sons of God, who have received the spirit of adoption, as
your other place shows, Romans 8.17. But what does all this prove? That no
Legacies of the New Testament, no privileges of the Covenant of grace, no
blessing of Abraham belongs to the children of believers. It proves indeed
that the righteousness of faith and eternal life and glory, do belong to
believers, and to such as are regenerate by the spirit of adoption. But what
think you of faith it self, and the spirit of adoption? Are they not also
Legacies of the New Testament? Are they not the Privileges of the Covenant,
and of the blessing of Abraham? And these when they are first given, they are
not given to believers, who have them already; but to such as have them not:
And therefore the children of believers are capable of these Legacies and
privileges, by the blessing of Abraham in the new Covenant. For this is a
promise of the new Covenant, they shall all know me from the least of them to
the greatest of them, Jer. 31.34. And that knowledge is faith upon which sins
are forgiven, Isa. 53.11. And this is another promise of the same Covenant, I
will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring, Isa.
44.3. If then the Spirit and Faith be given by the New Testament, (or which is
all one, the new Covenant) then all the Legacies, and privileges, and
blessings of the Covenant, are not given only believers, but some also to the
children of believers, that they may receive the spirit and faith also. It is
therefore a slender evasion to allege (as you do) that the children and
offspring of believers are such only, as succeed them in the same faith and
truth, and so are called the generation of the righteous. For they did not
succeed them in the same faith, and truth, and righteousness, till it was
given them; and given them it was by a legacy of the New Testament, when they
were only the children of the faithful, and had neither faith, nor truth, nor
righteousness in them. The other places which you quote, do show, that men of
years, (as well as children) are sometimes called the seed of the Church. And
that the godly ones amongst them are begotten of the immortal seed of the
word, and are regenerate by the spirit of grace, have a seed of God dwelling in
them, are maligned by the carnal seed, are approved of God, and acknowledged
as heirs of the Kingdom of glory. All which are truths out of question. But
none of all the places do exclude the Infants of believers, nor their grown
natural children from being subjects of this grace of the Covenant, to have
the Spirit of grace and faith poured upon them by virtue of the Covenant. One
only place of all the rest, might seem to look that way, which you quote out
of John 3.5, 6, where it is said that the carnal seed, as being flesh, and
destitute of the spirit, cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And indeed if by
the Kingdom of God, were meant the Church (as oftentimes it is) the objection
would be more difficult to resolve. But the truth is, in that place, by the
Kingdom of God, is plainly meant, the Kingdom of Glory, not the Church. For
Nicodemus did not scruple his Church estate, nor enquire how he might enter
into the visible Church, but how he might be saved, and inherit the Kingdom
of Glory. And therefore Christ directs him to Regeneration, and to believe in
his Name, that he might attain unto everlasting life. Joh. 3.5.14, 15, 16. And
though he speak of water, as co-working with the Spirit in Regeneration, (ver.
5.) yet by water may either be understood the Spirit it self (as washing the
soul like water, in Regeneration:) or, if Baptism be understood, yet it is
not there considered, as a necessary ingredient to Church Fellowship, but as a
necessary instrument of the Spirit, unto the sealing up of Regeneration, the
careless neglect and contempt whereof, would exclude from salvation, Luke 7.30.

It would therefore seem a more reasonable matter, Silvester.
to administer Baptism to a person, when the spirit is in hand with his
Regeneration. But to what end shall Baptism be administered to Infants, when
we do not discern that the Spirit is about any such work as the Regenration
of them?

It is no unwonted thing with God, Silvanus.
to give that for a sign of a thing, which shall not be accomplished of many
days or years after. God gave the Rainbow for a sign, that he would no more
destroy the world with water. The performance whereof remains still to be
accomplished to the end of the world. God gave two sticks joined together in
Ezekiels hand, to be a sign of the joining together of Judah and Joseph in
one state, Ezekiel. 37.16. to 22. which is not yet accomplished, nor will be till
their last conversion. God gave Circumcision to the Israelites, as a sign that
he would circumcise their hearts, and the hearts of their seed, Deuteronomy. 29.6.
And yet sometimes their own hearts, sometimes the hearts of their seed were not
circumcised of many years after. It is enough that as in Circumcision, so in
Baptism, God seals up that promise and Covenant, which he has made to
believers to be a God to them and to their seed. For the present, according to
Covenant God preserves and nourishes the seed of the faithful, by his
Fatherly providence; God the Son as he undertook to the Israelites, so he
has already performed it to us, to shed his blood for us and our children; The
holy Ghost (to whom it belongs to work Regeneration) he may take his own
good time, sooner or later to perform that work in our Children, which he
has wrought in our selves. God is as faithful in the New Testament, as in the
Old: and Baptism which succeeds Circumcision in sealing the same Covenant,
will undoubtedly be accomplished in applying all the blessings of the Covenant
to us and our seed, as ever Circumcision found accomplishment to the Israelites
and their seed.

Silvester.
Although Baptism succeeds Circumcision, yet the difference is great, both
in matter and manner, in persons and things. Circumcision seals to things
temporal and carnal, as well as spiritual: and so were the subjects and
things to come, as under types and shadows, and so in a cloud and darkness:
whereas Baptism has for its subjects, children of the light, in the clear
evidence of the Spirit, with the face open, and confirms faith in things come
and already done. For Baptism seals only to faith in Christ, and grace in
the new Birth, which cannot be where there is not first a begetting by the
immortal seed of the Word of Life; for which end God has ordained in the
Gospel, faith and believing to go before Baptizing, as Mat. 28.19. with Mark.
16.15, 16. And that way and order, which has not God for its Author, and
found in the Records of Christ, with his Image and superscription upon it, let
us say, as sometimes he did, Give to Caesar, that which is Caesar's, and to
God, that which is Gods. So say I, give to Antichrist, his baptizing of
Infants: and to Christ, his baptizing of Believers. What advantage will it be
to Infants, to come before they be called? to have a name to live, and yet
dead for ought any one knows? and to come to the Marriage Supper without a
wedding garment? Shall the holy things of God be forced upon such, as neither
believe, know, or once desire them? Will men set a seal to a blanck? Are
Children capable to receive meat before they be born? Except we make Baptism
the womb of Regeneration, as many do, who teach that Infants are regenerated
and born again of the Spirit of Grace in Baptism: Whose Doctrine is of the
same stamp and authority, as he that sent them so to Preach; What can be more
natural then the begetting or bringing forth of the Infant, before feeding of
it at the Mothers breasts? Is it not sacrilege to press such upon the Wife of
Christ, the Church, for her Paps, with whom she never traveled, nor bare of
her body? Christ will deny himself to be food and nourishment to any, where
he has not been first seed to beget? Let men take heed how they impute such
folly to the wisdom of God, as to give the milk of his breasts unto any that
are still-born; or to set dead twigges in his heavenly and divine stock, or
natural branches into his holy and spiritual Vine. Let such beware, how they
fight against the God of Order, lest instead of finding the breasts to feed,
before the womb to bear, they meet with a curse upon the single emptiness of
Christ, with a double barrenness, that will admit of no conception, or
spiritual birth, to succeed the natural. Not that I intend in the least, to
deny salvation unto Infants; no, I am so far from this, that I testify against
all such Doctrine: nor yet affirm all Infants to be saved: neither do I know
among Infants which shall be saved, and which not; Therefore I leave it as a
secret thing to God, until he make the same appear by some visible act of
Faith, which only gives a visible right, unto any Ordinance of the New
Testament. And therefore I cannot see by the Gospel how Infants void of visible
Faith, should have visible right to the Privileges of Grace; neither ought
they to be admitted thereunto.

You have seen by the Gospel, that the blessing of Abraham, Silvanus.
is come upon the believing Gentiles: and that the blessing of Abraham was that
Covenant (or Promise of Grace) that God would be a God to him and to his seed*
and that his seed, was not only spiritual Christians, for they are believers
themselves, but the seed of believers: Now believers are one thing, and the
seed of believers is an other; they are two distinct subjects of the Covenant.
And seeing the Covenant of God has distinguished them, who are you, that you
should confound them? What if Infants be void, as you say, of visible Faith?
yet their right to the Covenant and to the seal of the Covenant, is, or ought
to be visible to all men. For it is visible they are the children of
believers: and it is visible that the Covenant is given to believers, and to
their seed; whether they shall be saved or no, it is not required that it
should be visible: but let it be (as you say it is) a secret thing to God,
yet God has made it visibly (shall I say; or audibly?) to appear that he
accounts them holy (1 Cor. 7.14.) and that of such is his Kingdom ( Mar.
10.14.) whose divine testimony of them is as clear an evidence to us, that God
gives them right unto the fellowship of the Church, and to the seal thereof,
as the testimony of men can give unto themselves or others, by their verbal
profession, or any other visible effects of Faith. Do not say, that you are
far from denying in the least measure, salvation unto Infants.

For if Infants dye in their Infancy, you have apparently declared it above,
that you do not acknowledge them to be subjects capable either of election to
grace and glory, or of Union with Christ, or the Covenant of Grace. And then,
how we should believe you (when you say you do not in the least measure deny
salvation to Infants, and yet deny all such means of salvation, without which
it is impossible, they should be saved) judge you.

But to come to the ground you work upon in denying to them Baptism, whereas
Circumcision was granted to them of old, and in both a promise of salvation
sealed up to them, until they came to reject it.

Though Baptism (you conceive) succeed Circumcision, yet you put a great
difference between them, both in matter and manner, "in persons and things.

And what might that great difference be in so many particulars?

Circumcision (say you) sealed to things temporal and carnal, as well as to
spiritual, and so were the subjects (carnal, as well as spiritual:) Baptism
only seals to Faith in Christ, and to Grace in the New Birth.

I pray you does not Baptism seal to the Covenant of Grace, as well as
Circumcision, in whose room it succeeds? And does not the Covenant of Grace
contain promises of temporal, and carnal (or outward) blessings, as well as
spiritual? Hose. 2.18.21, 22, 23. Has not godliness in the New Testament (as
well as in the Old) the Promises of this life, as well as that which is to
come? 1 Timothy 4.8. Does not Baptism expressly seal up unto us, our
deliverance out of Affliction, as well as out of corruption? yea, to the
raising up of our bodies out of death in the grave, as well as of our souls
out of the death in sin? 1 Cor. 15.29. It is therefore utterly untrue, that
Baptism seals only to Faith in Christ, and to grace in the New Birth; For
it seals to all the blessings of the Covenant, as well those of this life, as
of that which is to come. That which seals to this grand blessing of the
Covenant, that God will be a God to such or such, seals unto all other gifts
of God also. God never gives himself alone, but he gives his Son and his
Spirit also. And he that gives us his own Son (says the Apostle) shall he
not with him give us all things else also? Romans 8.32. Yea, where Christ is
given he gives Repentance unto Israel and conversion (or turning) of the
hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and of the Children to the Fathers, and
both of them to the Lord. Act. 5.31. and Luke 1.16, 17. And Baptism is a seal
of these promises, as of the whole Covenant. And therefore Baptism is not
only (as you say) a seal to Faith, and to the Grace of the New Birth, as if
it only confirmed our own Faith touching our own estates, and our own New
Birth: But it confirms also our Faith, that God will give Faith and
Repentance to our Children, and turn their hearts both to the Lord and to us.
And therefore he powers the water of Baptism upon our Children, that he may
confirm this promise of Grace, the pouring out of clean water, of his Spirit,
and of his blessing, as well upon our seed and offspring, as upon our selves,
Isai. 44.3.

Another difference which you put, is, that Circumcision seals to things to
come, as under Types and shadows, and so to subjects in a cloud, and
darkness: whereas Baptism confirms Faith in things come, and already done:
and has for its subjects Children of the light, in the clear evidence of the
Spirit, with face open: Suppose this difference were true: That Circumcision
sealed to things to come: and Baptism to things come: Circumcision to things
veiled, Baptism to things open: Yet this is but a circumstantiall difference,
in the manner of revealing the blessings promised: but this argues no
material difference at all in the persons, the subjects of the seal. It will
only argue thus much, that whereas the same Christ, and the things of Christ
were sealed up to them, and to their seed more darkly, they are sealed up to us
and our seed, more clearly and plainly.

Besides, it is not altogether true, that Circumcision sealed up to them things
to come. For both Baptism and Circumcision do seal to both things come, and
things to come. Circumcision sealed to Abraham, God to be his God, and the
righteousness of Faith: both which were already come to Abraham before he was
circumcised. It sealed up also sundry things to come, to him, and his seed, as
their deliverance out of Egypt, their inheritance of Canaan, and the coming of
the Messiah. But when the Israelites came to enjoy Canaan, Circumcision did not
then seal to their deliverance out of Egypt, or to their inheritance of Canaan,
as things to come, but as to things come, and already done. Circumcision sealed
to the children of Israel, that God would circumcise their hearts, and the
hearts of their seed, Deuteronomy. 30.6. which was a thing to come, to such of them as
were unregenerate. But after they were Regenerate, the same Circumcision was a
seal of that blessing, which God had already done for them. So is it with
Baptism: Now that Christ is come in the flesh, Baptism seals that to us, as
a thing already done, which to them was a thing to come. And yet the coming of
Christ into our hearts, is a thing partly done in the Regenerate, and yet more
fully to be done, even to us: and to many of our children, it is a thing to
come. To the children of God that walk in darkness, and see no light, (which
is the case of many, and at some time or other, of all) the return of the
Comforter, is a thing to come, and Baptism is a seal thereof: and yet it is a
seal also of the first fruits of the Spirit, which are already come. Baptism
is a seal of the Redemption of Christ, which is already wrought for us. And it
is a seal of our deliverance from all afflictions, and from all temptations
and from all corruptions, and from all enemies, even from death it self, and
many of these are yet to come. So that I can but wonder why such a difference
as this should be alleged to prove a personal difference of the subjects of
Baptism, and the subjects of Circumcision.

If it be said (as you partly express, and partly imply) that we who live
under Baptism are the children of light, but they that lived under
Circumcision, were the children of darkness, and therefore though their
children being in darkness, in such a dark time, might be capable of
Circumcision, yet in the light of the Gospel our children are not capable of
Baptism, till they become children of light; This is a carnal reasoning, not
savouring of the Spirit of God, or speaking the language of the Scripture. For
though the Spirit of God in Scripture do call the children of God the children
of light, in opposition to their former carnal estate, whether in their
Pagancy, or in their unregeneracy (1 Thessalonians. 5.5. Ephesians. 5 8.) yet God never
called the children of God in the Old Testament, nor the children of his
children, children of darkness: Neither does he use such a phrase, as to call
the children of the New Testament, children of the light, in opposition to the
children of the Old Testament, as children of darkness. Neither is it
altogether a true speech, that faith in Christ, and grace in the new birth,
cannot be where there is not first a begetting by the immortal seed of the
word of life. For it has been showed above, that the grace of the new birth,
and so faith, were not wanting in John Baptist, Jeremy, and others, in their
mothers womb, who yet had never heard the Word of life. Though the hearing of
the Word of life be the ordinary instrument, which the Spirit of God is wont
to use in begetting the grace of the new birth in men of understanding: yet the
Spirit himself being a principal part of the immortal seed of the Word, he
can beget the grace of the new birth without the Word, when yet the Word cannot
do it without him. And yet I will not deny that in some sense (though not in
yours) it may be granted, that the Spirit ordinarily never works the grace of
the new birth in the children of the faithful, but by the immortal seed of
the Word of life. For when the Spirit begets the grace of the new birth, it
is by the Ministry of the Word of life to their Parents, one of them at least.
For they hearing the Word of life promising grace and life to themselves, and
to their seed, the Spirit co-working with that Word, begets faith in them to
believe for themselves, and for their seed. And according to their faith, it is
done. The Spirit begets the grace of life, as well in their seed, as in
themselves. The greater is the danger of those infants whose Parents (like you)
do not believe the grace of Christ can reach unto your infants; and so it is
no wonder, if your children be deprived of the grace of the new birth, for your
unbeliefs sake. Be it therefore granted which you take for granted in your next
words; That for this end (to wit, for begetting the grace of the new birth) God
has ordained in the Gospel preaching and believing to go before baptizing,
Mat. 28.9. with Mar. 16.15, 16. yet this only proves that the preaching of the
Gospel, and the begetting of faith by the Gospel is requisite to enstate the
hearer in the grace and blessing, or (which is all one) in the Covenant of the
Gospel. But if the hearer be a Parent of children, and so do believe the
Gospel and Covenant of grace to belong to him and to his seed; both he and
they according to the order of the Gospel, and Covenant of grace, are rightly
baptized into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
All which persons do join together in making this Covenant, and sealing to it,
to be a God to the believer and his seed. And if it were not so, the place
which you quote out of Mark (Chap. 16. v. 15, 16.) would utterly cut off the
children of believers dying in their infancy, from all hope of salvation: which
you said even now, you were far from. For if infants for want of hearing the
Word in their own persons want faith, and for want of faitsh may not be
baptized, then for want of faith they cannot be saved. For so run the words in
Mark, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, he that believes not
shall be damned. If for unbelief they must not be baptized, for unbelief they
must then be damned. But if by the Gospel we understand (as the Scriptures
mean) the glad tidings of the Covenant of grace, and so of redemption and
salvation by Christ preached and proclaimed to believers and their seed, then
al such as do believe these glad tidings, to themselves and to their seed,
they are commanded by the Order of the Gospel to be baptized themselves, and
their children with them; for their children are by the faith of their Parents
wrapped up in the Covenant, and so are become capable subjects both of the
Covenant, and of the seal thereof. For though the infants themselves be not
(it may be) then actually believers, when their Parents are baptized, and
themselves with them; yet God who calls things that are not, as though they
were Rom 4.17. He accepts them into his Covenant by the faith of their
Parents, and so they are no longer Pagans and infidells, but the children of
the faithful and holy, in whom God has covenanted to work faith, and the
grace of the new birth in the elect seed, and to offer it, and the means
thereof unto all the seed, till they utterly reject it: And requires therefore
of the Parents by his Covenant, to neglect no means of grace for the holy
institution of their children. And for this end the seal of the Covenant is
administered to the Infants to confirm the same to their children on both parts.

If therefore we delighted in returning reproaches for reproaches, as you say
to us, give the baptizing of believers to Christ, and the baptizing of infants
unto Antichrist, so might we more truly and justly return it to you: Give the
baptizing of believers and their seed unto Christ; (For the Covenant of Christ
is to believers and their seed, and the seal of the Covenant is due, where the
faith of either Parent is fit to receive it to their holy seed;) but give the
denial of baptism of Infants to Infidels only, and outlaws from the Church,
where neither of their Parents being believers, their children also are
Infidels and outlawes like their Parents, neither believers, nor holy according
to Covenant; You need not "therefore ask what advantage will it be to Infants
to come before they be called? For Christ called for little children to come
unto him, and was displeased with such as did forbid them, Mark 10.14. If
calling for Infants to come, will suffice, they cannot be said to come before
they be called. Suffer (says he) little children to come unto me, and forbid
them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. And they being such, he put his
hands upon them and blessed them. If you ask, why he did not baptize them too,
for who can forbid Baptism to such as are blessed of Christ, and by imposition
of hands set apart to a blessing, and to the Kingdom of God? I would answer,
Jesus himself baptized none, John 4.2. If you ask again, but why did not he
command his Disciples to baptiz: them? I answer, because it may be both they
and their children were baptized before: Or because it does not appear, that
their Parents came to be baptized of him; or had themselves been baptized
before, though out of a godly affection they brought their children to him that
he might bless them. Now it was not meet, that the children should be
baptized, when neither of the Parents of any of them were baptized, nor brought
their children to such an end. Though we baptize children, yet we do not give
them, (as you say) a name to live when they be dead. For they may be truly
said to live in that sense, wherein the dead bodies of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob are said to live to him, Luke 20.37, 38. For though they were then dead
in their graves, yet God being the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob by
Covenant; he will therefore raise up their dead bodies to life again. And so
it is with the Infants of believers, though they were by nature dead in sin,
yet God (the God of their Fathers) being a God to them by virtue of the
Covenant, seeing God is not the God of the dead, but of the living, God will
therefore according to his Covenant, raise them up to newness of life, that
they may live in his sight; If any of them fall short of that life, it is
because they make themselves twice dead, by casting off the Covenant of their
fathers.

I marvel why you should call the baptism of Infants a com-"ming to the
marriage supper without a wedding Garment. If you mean by coming to the
marriage Supper, partaking of the Lords Table; you are not ignorant, there is
great difference in this case, between the Lords Supper and Baptism, such may
be admitted to Baptism, as may not be admitted to the Lords Supper. We do not
force (as you call it) the holy things of God upon such as nei-"there believe,
nor know, nor once desire them. For if Parents do not willingly offer their
children to Baptism, we do not force them. And if they bring them, and
prefent them to Christ, Christ accepts the Parents bringing of them, as much
as the childrens coming in their own person, Mar. 10.13, 14.

Why should you call the Baptism of infants the settting of a "seal unto a
blank?

Is the Covenant of God to believing Parents and their seed become a blanke? Is
the promise of pouring out the Spirit of regeneration upon the seed and
offspring of believers a blank? Isa. 44.3. But it seems by your opinion, if
our children be not full of themselves, all the promises of God are a blanke
and empty to them.

Though children be not capable to receive meat before they be borne; yet
their Parents who are borne again, had need of some sign (the sign appointed
of God) to feed and strengthen their faith in the Covenant, that God will be a
God to them and their seed.

Besides, the Baptism which children receive before their regeneration is a
seal and confirmation of the Covenant, and of all the promises thereof to
them, after their regeneration. The Circumcision which David received in his
infancy, did confirm his faith and confidence of victory against Goliath (the
uncircumcised Philistine) after he was grown up to man's estate, 1 Samuel 17 26.
Signs given of God for future blessings are neither blanks, nor preposterous.

We do not make baptism (as you say) the womb of regeneration, nor teach,
that Infants are regenerated and borne of the Spirit of grace in Baptism.

Nor do I find that it was their judgment, who compyled that book where such
words are used; men may thankfully acknowledge a benefit as received, when they
have only received a promise of it, and see it confirmed with a sign; when
Gedeon received a sign of the accomplishment of Gods promised victory over the
Midianites, though that sign was but a dream, and of a blessing to come, yet
Gedeon thankfully worshipped God for it, and accepted the Victory as already
granted him. For so says the Text, Judge. 7.15. When Gedeon heard the telling
of the dream, and the interpretation of the dream, he worshipped and
returned into the Host of Israel, and said, Arise, for the Lord has delivered
into your hand the Host of Midian.

It is to no purpose to ask us (as you do) what can be more natural, then
begetting and bringing forth of the Infant, before feeding of it at the Mothers
breasts? Is it not sacrilege to press such upon the Pappes of the Wife of
Christ (his Church) with whom she never traveled, or bare of her body?

For we do not look at the Sacraments, neither does the Scripture take them,
as the breasts, or Paps of the Church; The wit of man can make an Image to it
self, and then play before it, as the Israelites did before the golden Calfe.
Twice does the Scripture mention the breasts of the Church, and never means
them for the Sacraments, but for the Ministers of the Church, full of the
sincere milk of the Word, equal in Office (as the breasts hoin bigness) and
such as do themselves feed among Lillyes, Cant. 4.5. and 7.3. and 8.10. You
must strain your wit far, to make the breasts of the Church agree to the
Sacraments, Baptism is rather the Navell of the Church, whereby the Infant
has nourishment derived to it before it be born, Cant. 7.2. And as for the
Lords Supper, if it be the other of the two breasts of the Church, the oldest
and strongest Christians had still need to suck of that breast; and so must
become again babes in Christ. Yea Baptism it self, though it be a seal of
Regeneration whether past, or to come, yet it seals up also such deliverance
from afflictions, and persecutions, (1 Pet. 3 21.) and such sanctification, and
cleansing from all sin, to present us to Christ without spot or wrinckle (
Ephesians. 5.26, 27.) that the strongest Christian will have need to feed upon his
Baptism (as strong meat for strong men) even when he is to lay down his body
in the dust, and to expect from his Baptism the resurrection of his body, 1
Cor. 15.29.

But, say you, Christ will deny himself to be nourishment to any, where he
has not been first seed to beget.

Answer. Though none can take any nourishment, till they be begotten. No
Prince will deny to give a Charter to a Corporation of his Subject; (and a
Charter sealed with the Great Seal) of such and such Lands, and inheritances,
for the maintenance and nourishment of them, and their children, and their
childrens children for ever, before any children be yet born to them.

Your exhortations therefore, for want of a groundwork of Truth, do fall of
themselves to the ground, like an house built upon the Sand.

Let men take heed (say you) how they impute such folly to the wisdom of God,
as to give the milk of his breasts, to any that are still-born.

For neither are all the Infants of the faithful Parents still-born (I mean,
in respect of spiritual life,) and if they were, yet Baptism is not called in
Scripture Gods milk: and if it were resembled to milk, yet it is not milk
only, but it serves for many other uses. It is a seal of that Covenant,
whereby God promises both to be seed, and milk, and strong meat, and
medicine, and all in all, unto believers and their children.

Your next exhortation, to take heed how we set dead twigges in his heavenly
and divine stock, or natural branches in his holy and spiritual Vine, it has
received Answer above; you have heard before, that dead persons if in Covenant,
are alive to God, Luke 20.37, 38. And though a twigge cannot receive life from
the stock unless it bring life with it before it be engraffed: yet Christ can
give life to dead branches that are put to him, as well as the dead corpse of
Elisha could give life to the dead man cast into his grave, 2 King. 13.21.

Your third exhortation has as little ground as either of the former.

Let men beware (say you) how they fight against the God of Order, lest in
stead of finding the breast to feed, before the womb to bear, they meet with a
curse upon the single emptiness of Christ, with a double barrenness, that
will admit of no spiritual birth to succeed the Natural.

If you will needs have Baptism to be the breast of the Church, I will not
contend with you: for there is in it also some milk for babes, as well as there
is much strong meat in it for men of riper years. But when we do bring
Infants to Baptism, we do not first find the breast to feed them, before we
find the womb to bear them. For the Apostle makes the two Covenants the two
Mothers, of which all the children of the Church are born, whether in the Old
or New Testament, Gal. 4.22, 23, 24. If then we have found Infants to be in
the Covenant, we have found a Mother, and in her, a womb to bear them. And if
we bring none to Baptism, but such as are the children of the Covenant, then
we do not find a breast to feed them, before a womb to breed and bear them.
But we proceed Orderly (even according to the wisdom of God, and the ancient
Order, which he has set in his Church) we first find a womb to breed and
bear them, and then a breast to nourish and feed them. The curse therefore which
you threaten, is causeless, and being causeless will not come, Prove. 26.2.

Thus by the help of Christ, our Arguments for the Baptism of Infants, have
been at last cleared from your exceptions, from so many of them at least, as
you have made against them hitherto. Now (if you please) let us inquire into
your Arguments (if you have any) against the Baptism of Infants.

Yes, Silvester.
I have diverse Arguments (eight or nine) against the Baptism of Infants,
besides many evil consequences, which I observe, will follow unavoydably upon
the Baptism of Infants.

CHAP. IV.
What may be your first Argument against the Baptism of Infants? Silvanus.


The first that I have met withal is that (whereto you have already spoken in
part) because there is neither command, Silvester.
nor example in all the New Testament for the baptizing of Infants. And yet the
Order and Government of the New Testament in the administration thereof, is no
way inferior to the Old. But in the Old Testament there was an express Rule,
by Commandment from God, what Communicants were to be admitted to
Circumcision, and other Ordinances of that nature, and what not. But this Order
is no where found in the New Testament for the baptizing of Infants, and
therefore the same is not to be practiced.

To this Argument you have received an Answer already: Silvanus.
when in the beginning of our conference, I gave you three grounds for the
Baptism of Infants: the two former from the Commandment of Christ, and of his
Apostle in the New Testament: the third from the Old and New Testament
together, gathered from the Analogy of Circumcision and Baptism. The
Commandment of Christ was cleared from Matthew. 28.19, 20. The Commandment of
the Apostle was opened from Acts 2.39. The Analogy of Circumcision and
Baptism, was urged from Genesis 17. with Col. 2.11, 12.

Silvester.
I have already acquainted you with the sum of those exceptions, which I have
met withal, against all the Arguments which you have alleged for the
grounding of the Baptism of Infants upon any word of Commandment or
Institution from Christ and his Apostles. Only one exception further comes
to my mind against your third Argument, taken from the Analogy of Circumcision
and Baptism.

Suppose that the Covenant of God with Abraham, wherein he promises to be a
God to him and his seed do continue to believers and our seed now in the days
of the New Testament: Suppose also that Baptism do succeed Circumcision: yet
as it was not the promise of God to Abraham that was a sufficient ground of
Circumcision, but Gods word of Commandment, (or else it would have been sin to
Abraham, to have circumcised his seed:) so neither is it the promise and
Covenant of God to believers, to be a God to us, and our seed, that can be a
sufficient ground to us of baptizing our Infants.

Silvanus.
I did make account, this exception had been prevented above, as well as the
rest. For we do not ground the Baptism of Infants merely upon the promise of
grace, that God is a God to us and our seed: but upon the Commandment of God,
that they to whom God is a God, by Covenant, they should receive the seal of
the Covenant. Which Commandment was (as you know) expressly given to Abraham:
and thereupon he circumcised himself and his seed, Genesis 17.10, 11. If then the
same Covenant be now given to the faithful and our seed, and if Baptism be
given to us in stead of Circumcision, then the same Commandment which required
Abraham to be circumcised and his seed, requires us to be baptized and our
seed. And indeed upon this very ground the Apostle Peter urges every one of
them who repented, to be baptized, they and their seed, because the promise
was given to them and their seed. The strength of which Commandment of his,
lay in the Commandment of God to faithful Abraham, to be circumcised and his
seed, and the substitution of Baptism now in the room of Circumcision. And
verily there is the same moral equity, and reason of the Commandment, both to
faithful Israelites, and faithful Christians. For as the Circumcision of
Abraham and his seed, confirmed the faith of Abraham, that God would be a God
to him and his seed: And also engaged Abraham, both himself to walk in the
obedience of Gods will, and to train up his children to walk accordingly; so
the faithful of the new Testament stand in the like need to have their faith
confirmed, that God will be a God to us and our seed: And we are in like sort
engaged both to walk in Gods ways our selves, and to bring up our children in
the like holy instruction and information of the Lord.

But let it be examined a little, Silvester.
how the authority of the commandment of Circumcision can bear out the
authority of baptizing infants. Circumcision it does not; for all agree that
we are now to baptize, not to circumcise. The Minister circumcising it does
not; then the Master of the family was to circumcise, now one ordained by
Christ in the Church to baptize. The same part of the body it does not; that
circumcised the foreskin, Baptism the whole man. The age it does not; that the
eighth day, this any day. The subject it does not; that a male only, this both
male and female. Now in that it does not enjoyne any of all these: wherein then
can the authority of that commandment consist now in Baptism, so as to
enjoyne Infants to be baptized? And whereas men cry out from that command, that
Infants, Infants, Infants must be baptized, as they were commanded to be
circumcised: Why, this commandment, if it should be so, serves for none but
only males. So that if they will have the females to be baptized, they must
look out another commandment for them, and so there must be two commandments
in one Ordinance.

There is no inconvenience for two commandments to meet in one Ordinance.
Circumcision was more then once commanded, Silvanus.
( Genesis 17. Lev. 12.) So was the Passover, Exodus 12 Numb. 9. Levit. 23.5.
Neither is it another commandment that we allege for the baptizing of
females, but only an example, Acts 8.12. which yet being precedentiall, is of
like force as a commandment; look wherein we vary in the administration of
Baptism from the Rite and manner of Circumcision, we have just warrant for it
in the New Testament. Else we should no more have varyed from it, then did the
Proselytes of the Old Testament. The rite of Circumcising, and of the foreskin,
is expressly abolished, Gal. 5.2. And we are said now to be circumcised in being
baptized, Col. 2.11, 12. The Minister of Circumcision, if it were not removed
in the Old Testament from the family to the Synagogue, from the father of the
family to the Levite; yet surely removed it was by Christ, to the Ministers of
the Gospel, Mat. 28.19. The age had something in it ceremonial, as has been
showed above. The sex (or subject, as you call it) was enlarged by the example
of Philip, Acts 8.12. So that we vary in nothing from the Commandment of
circumcision, but by the like warrant whereby Circumcision was at first
commanded. Show us the like warrant for the rejecting of infants from Baptism,
as we show you for the changing of all the rest, and reason will require we
should hearken to you.

Tell us not, that John Baptist baptized such as professed their faith and
repentance; and Philip baptized the Eunuch upon the profession of his faith.

For we do also now require the like from Proselytes or converts of grown
years, whether Jews or Pagans. But show us any ground from Scripture (either
out of the Old or New Testament) whereby infants are excluded either from the
Covenant, or from the seal of the Covenant, and then we shall plead no longer
for the Baptism of infants from the Analogy of Circumcision.

Silvester.
I will not press again, that which has been alleged before. But there is
something further that sticks with me, which may answer your demand, and give
you a ground for the exclusion of Infants, alleged out of Gal. 4.22, 23, 24,
25. Where the two Mothers, Hagar, and Sarah type out the two Testaments; and
their two sons, Ishm^el, and Isaac, type out the subjects of the same; the
one by the bondwoman, born after the flesh; but he of the freewoman was by
promise, v. 23. Now as Hagar the mother, signified the old state in general;
so Ishmael her son, signified the children of the same state, borne after the
flesh, as he was. For though he was the child of Abraham, yet he was no
child of promise. Now for Sarah she was the lawful wife of Abraham, and so a
freewoman, with whom the Apostle compares the estate of the Church of the New
Testament, the true Spouse and wife of Christ, who is free from all servitude
and bondage, and stands only in subjection to Christ her husband, as Sarah did
to Abraham; and Isaac her son, signifying the true, holy, and blessed seed.
Of this holy stock, according to the Spirit, and so as Isaac was true heir
according to promise. For the Gospel approves of none, as true heirs of the
blessing, and so the right seed, and truly in the Covenant, but only such as
the promise produces and brings forth, as it did Isaac. For Isaac came not by
ordinary course of nature, but by virtue of the promise of God, and faith in
the same, which raised nature above it self, to bring him forth. By this the
wisdom of God holds forth as in a figure, who are Abraham's seed approved of in
the Gospel, and they are such as are brought forth by a power above nature,
which is by the promise of God, and faith in the same, as Isaac was, etc.

Your whole gloss upon this text stands like the Temple of Dag^n, upon two
maine pillars, which being overthrown, Silvanus.
the whole fabric will fall (like Dagon himself) before the Arc of the
Covenant.

1. You conceive that Hagar and Sarah signify the several estate of the
Churches of the Old and New Testament, Hagar the old state of the Church in the
Old Testament: and Sar^^ the state of the Church of the New Testament.

2. You conceive that their two sons type out the different subjects of the
same. But neither of both these will stand with the Apostles words, nor scope.
His scope is to dispute not against infants to exclude them from being subjects
of the Church: but to exclude legal Justiciaries (such as desired to be under
the law) from being children of the Covenant of grace. The words of the Apostle
are these: The two Mothers, are the two Covenants, v. 24. not the old state of
the Church in the Old Testament, and the new state of the Church in the New
Testament; Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, (says he) and answers (or
stands in the same rank, as the word signifies) to Jerusalem that now is,
v. 25. Mark that I pray you, he says, not to Jerusalem in her old estate,
in the days of the godly Kings, and holy Priests, and Prophets, and people
(the Saints of the Lord who looked to be saved by the grace of Christ, as well
as we, Acts 15.11.) but to Jerusalem that now is, under the corrupt and
degenerate Priests and Rulers, Scribes, Pharisees, and Sadduces, who renounced
Christ, and the righteousness of faith in him, and seek to establish their
own righteousness which is by the law. And though some of them received
Christ, (as did the false Teachers in the Churches of Galatia) and did also
acknowledge their freedom from the sacrifices and burnt offerings, and from
many other Leviticall Ceremonies of the Law, yet so long as they looked to be
justified by the works of the moral law, and retained circumcision as still
necessary by the law, they still pertained to Jerusalem that now is (as the
Apostle calls it) and all of them were children of the bondwoman, that is,
of the Covenant of the Law given on Mount Sinai. It is therefore a gross
error, and withal a notorious injury to the godly Saints that lived in the
days of the Old Testament, to account them the children of Hagar, and to make
it a part of their bondage, that their Infants were received into the
fellowship of the Church with themselves. No, no, whilst themselves believed in
the promised seed for righteousness and salvation, and their children were
circumcised into the grace of the Covenant (the righteousness of faith) they
and their seed were accounted the children of the Covenant of grace, (the
freewoman) till any of them rejected that grace, as Ishmael and Esau did.

By this which has been said, may easily be understood, what is meant by
Sarah: not the state of the Church of the New Testament, (as you confine it,
rather then define it) but the Covenant of Grace, by which God (of his Grace)
gave himself to be a God to believers and to their seed, both in the Old and
New Testament, till any of them should afterward grow up to renounce him, and
the Grace of his Covenant, which if they do, then their Circumcision is made
uncircumcision: and they renouncing the Covenant of Grace, fall under the
Covenant of the Law, and come to be accursed by the Law.

But for the children of this Covenant (of whom Isaac was a type) they are not
only such as are Regenerate, above the ordinary course of Nature, by virtue of
the Covenant of Grace, and so do believe in the promise of Grace for
righteousness and salvation; but also the children of such believing Parents,
whom their Parents do beget in the Faith of the Covenant and Promise of Grace
to themselves and their seed. For Isaac himself when he was an Infant born, he
was not as then born anew of the promise and spirit of Grace, but his Father
begot him in the Faith of the Promise. And his Mother Sarah by Faith received
strength to conceive seed, because she judged him faithful who had promised,
Heb. 11.11.

The second main pillar upon which your gloss on this Text, is held up, is,
that the two sons, Ishmael and Isaac, type out the different subjects of these
two states of Churches: Ishmael being a type of the estate in general of the
Church of the old Testament, and Isaac being a type of the state of the
Churches of the New Testament.

But neither will this gloss stand with the Apostles words. For the Apostle
makes these two sons to be the children engendered (or bred) of these two
Mothers. Now children as they are engendered or bred of their Mothers, they are
not properly the subjects of their Mothers (though they be subject to them)
but their effects. The Mothers therefore being not the twofold state of the
Churches of the Old and New Testament, but the two Covenants of the Law and of
Grace, Ishmael the son of Hagar the bondwoman, is the type of all those
Members in the Church, whether of the Old or New Testament, as who look for
righteousness and salvation by the works of the Law, and do therefore lie
under the bondage, and curse of the Law, such were those in Micah 6. who
thought God would be pleased and appeased with thousands of Lambs and ten
thousand Rivers of oil, v. 6, 7. Such also at that time was the whole body
generally of the Priests and Rulers, and People of Jerusalem in the Apostles
days, which he calls the Jerusalem that now is. And such were all the
false Apostles and false Teachers, and their Disciples in the Churches of
Galatia, Phil^ppi, and Colosse, who refused the righteousness of God by faith
in Christ Jesus, and sought to establish their own righteousness by the works
of the law; on the other side, Isaac being the son of Sarah the freewoman,
and Sarah representing the Covenant of Grace, he is the type of all those
members in the Church, whether before Christ in the Old Testament, or since
Christ in the New, as are begotten and bred of the promise and Covenant of
grace, whereby by God gives himself to be a God to the believer and his seed:
who therefore look for all their righteousness and salvation to themselves
and their seed, not from the works of the Law, nor from all their outward
privileges, but from the grace and righteousness of God in Christ Jesus.
Only thus much further I will not stick to grant you, That as the two
Covenants are the two mothers that are represented by Hagar and Sarah; so those
Churches that are begotten and bred of either of these Covenants, (and so are
themselves the children of the one, or of the other of these Covenants) they
may be said to be the mothers of those particular members, which by their
Ministry are engendered and bred; whether of the carnal seed of the Covenant
of the Law, or of the spiritual seed of the Covenant of Grace. For in the
Hebrew language, any whole Society is called a mother, and the particular
members thereof are called children, sons or daughters. And this may somewhat
further help to clear the words and meaning of the Apostle in this place. For
the Apostle here makes the Covenant of the Law to answer to Jerusalem that
now is, v. 25. as if so be the Covenant of the law, and the Church of the
present Jerusalem, which stood for the Covenant of the law, were both (...),
of one rank, and either of them might be called an Hagar, a mother ingendering
their children unto bondage. And indeed the Church engendereth and breeds her
children, by dispensing and administering the seed of that Covenant, of which
themselves are begotten. In like manner the Apostle makes the other mother
Sarah, the Covenant of grace to be all one with the true Church of Christ,
which he calls the Jerusalem which is above, and makes her the mother of us
all, v. 26. Because though she be her self begotten and bred of the Covenant
of grace, yet she dispensing and administering the same spiritual seed,
begets children like her self, partakers of the lib^rty of the sons of God.

And yet to add a word more (which may tend further to clear the words and
meaning of the Apostle) as this seed of the Covenant of Grace, dispensed and
administered by true and pure Churches, is rightly called spiritual seed, in
which the Spirit of grace delights to breath and work; and therefore they
that are begotten of it, are said to be borne after the Spirit: So the seed of
the Covenant of the Law, is rightly called seed, as that which leaves men that
are begotten of it more carnal then they were before. For it either puffs
them up to a carnal confidence of their own strength and righteousness, or
else sinketh them into an horrible pit of diffidence and desperation. And
therefore they that are begotten of it, are rightly and fitly said to be borne
after the flesh. And that is the very true meaning of the Apostles words, Gal
4.29. As it was then, so is it now: He that was borne after the flesh,
persecuted him that was borne after the Spirit. Where by such as are "borne
after the flesh, the Apostle does not mean (as you understand him) such as are
born by an ordinary course of nature, in a way of a natural generation; but
such as are bred and begotten of the carnal seed of the Covenant of the law;
which as it begot in Ishmael a carnal confidence of his own strength (or else
he would never have slighted and mocked the promised seed:) so it begot in
Cain, and Saul, and Judas, an utter despair of grace and salvation.

Thus then you see (I hope) at the length a true and just answer unto your
first argument against the Baptism of Infants, taken from the supposed want of
command or example of the baptizing of Infants in all the New Testament. By
that which you have heard, it appears to the contrary, that the Baptism of
Infants has not wanted a commandment from Christ in the institution of
Baptism, Mat. 28. nor a commandment from the Apostle (joined with an example)
in the first solemn administration of Baptism, Acts 2. nor a commandment and
example from the Lord God in the institution of a proportional seal of the
same Covenant, in the days of Abraham, Genesis 17. which though you seem to
undervalue, because it is fetched out of the Old Testament; yet be not you
deceived by the equivocation of the name. For the Old and New Testament is
sometimes put for the Covenants of the Law, and of grace, (as Gal. 4.24, 25.)
sometimes for the Books of the Old and New Testament, as 2 Cor. 3.14. Now true
it is, that the institution of the Covenant of grace, and of the seal of the
Covenant of grace, Genesis 17. is found indeed in the books of the Old Testament;
but the substance of the New Testament, and the circumstances of that
Ordinance, which are changed in the books of the New Testament, they are not
changed by way of abrogation or diminution, but by way of accomplishment and
enlargement. The Covenant is enlarged from the stock of Abraham to all Nations;
the seal of the Covenant, Circumcision, is translated to another more easy and
acceptable; the time is enlarged in respect of the day; the Minister is
enlarged in respect of his public place; the subject is enlarged in respect of
the sex; and surely not diminished, nor straightened in respect of the age. It is
therefore a needless pretense to plead, That surely the New Testament, and the
Order, Government, and Administration thereof, are no way inferior to the old
Testament, where all things are directed by express rule.

For a great part of the New Testament, or Covenant is expressly delivered in
the books of the Old Testament. Paul professes publicly, he taught nothing
but what Moses and the Prophets did say should come, Acts 26.22. And the
greatest part of the books of the Old Testament hold forth the Doctrine,
Worship, Order and Government of the New Testament, to such who have not a
veil laid over their hearts in the reading of the Old Testament, 2 Cor. 3.14.
Let us therefore proceed to your other arguments, against the baptism of
Infants, and consider if there be any greater weight on strength in them.

CHAP. V.
Silvester.
I Have met with this as a second argument against the Baptism of Infants, That
in the Baptism of infants there is an high contempt and injury offered to
Christ, as he is the husband of the Church, (his holy Spouse) to force upon
him a natural wife, himself being spiritual, and desires the like
associate; whereas such a Church is founded upon the natural bith, namely
Infants; because commonly to one that is born of the spirit, there is twenty
born of the flesh.

Silvanus.
Christ did not take it as such an high contempt or injury offered to him by
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the whole house of Israel, that the infants of
his people, and of the Proselytes that joined to them, were received into
Covenant with him, and admitted to the seal thereof; when as yet himself was
as spiritual then as now he is. You do herein apparently charge Christ
himself with folly, and with indignity offered to himself; that he should so
much forget himself, that he being spiritual, should take so many thousand
Infants into the Covenant with him, who for the most part are natural, and (as
you say) for one that is born of the Spirit, there were twenty born of the
flesh.

But again, let me tell you, that though Christ in taking a company to be a
Church unto himself, does enter into marriage Covenant with them, both in the
Old Testament, Jer. 31.32. and in the New, 2 Cor. 11.2. yet not into a marriage
Covenant with each member at first. Christ entered into a marriage Covenant with
the Congregation of Israel in the wilderness, Ezekiel. 16.8. yet the children of
this Congregation he calls them not his Spouses, but his children, v. 20, 21.

Furthermore, you shall do well to observe, what Spirit breaths in such a
speech, when you say, That such a Church as receives infants of believing
parents into the fellowship of the Covenant, and seal thereof, that such a
Church is founded upon the natural birth. For the Lord himself speaks of
such a Church of Israel, as founded upon his Covenant, Ezekiel. 16.8. And the
Apostle says, We are built upon the same foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, Eph^. 2.19, 20,
21. See what a vast difference there is between the Spirit of your language,
and the language of the Spirit of Christ.

CHAP. VI.
3. I Find this for a third Argument, Silvester.
against the Baptism of Infants:

That this practice overthrows and destroys the body of Christ, the holy
Temple of God. For in time it will come to consist of natural, and so a
Nation, and so a National Generation, and carnal members. Amongst whom, if
any Godly be, they will be brought into bondage, and become subjects of scorn
and contempt: and the power of Government rest in the hands of the wicked.

This Argument ^utteth a fear where no fear is, Silvanus.
or at least a causeless fear. For suppose all the Children of the Church be
baptized, it is an unwonted and unexpected enlargement in th^s^ days for one
Congregation to grow so populous as to become a Nation. We read of no such
increase of any Congregation since Christ's time.

But suppose that all the children in a Nation were baptized, yet that of it
self will not make a National Church, but many Churches in one Nation.

Besides, if one Family should grow a Nation, as the house of Jacob did, and
all the children being received into Covenant, and unto the seal thereof, the
whole National Generation should become members of the Church, as they did in
Israel: Yet that will not bring the godly into bondage, and into scorn and
contempt, nor put the power of Government to rest in the hands of the wicked.

For the faithfulness of God (who keeps Covenant and mercy with his People)
prevented that in the House and Church of Israel. Where, though the whole
Nation was in Covenant with God: yet ordinarily the Government was kept in the
hands of such, as either were Godly, or for the most part favored godliness.
Or, if they failed herein, God was wont to deliver both them and their
Governors, into the hands of their Enemies, that they might learn to rule with
God, and to be faithful with his Saints.

But furthermore, this above all may justly satisfy you: That in the state of
the Churches of the New Testament, God has instituted such an order therein,
that though all the Infants of the Church Members be baptized; yet none of
them are received (by the order of the Gospel) unto Communion at the Lords
Table, nor unto liberty of power in the Government of the Church, until they
do approve themselves both by public Profession before the Church, and also
by their Christian conversation, to take hold of the Covenant of their Fathers,
and of the Church, and to walk in the steps of their Faith, and professed
subjection to the Gospel of Christ. For it is an express Commandment given,
as to all Christians in their place, so especially to the Officers and Brethren
of the Church, Not to cast holy things to dogs, nor Pearls before Swine,
Mat. 7.6. Nor to receive such to the Lords Table, as have not on a Wedding
Garment. But in such a case the Servants and Ministers of Christ, are to ^inde
such hand and foot, (to wit, by the censures of the Church,) and to cast them
out, unto outer darkness, ( Matthew. 22.11, 12, 33.) that is to say, into such
an estate of darkness, and misery, wherein they live that are without. For
without are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whore-mongers, and Murderers, and
Idolaters, and Liars, Rev. 22.15. And there want not holy, and judicious, and
faithful witnesses of the Gospel of Christ, and of the ways of pure
Reformation, who do so expound the principles of the Apostles Catechism, Heb.
6.1.2. That none of the Members of the Church were admitted to the fellowship
of the Lords Table, but such as were enlightened to Repentance, and had tasted
of the Heavenly gift of Faith, and were partakers of the Holy Ghost (in some
kind) and had tasted the good Word of God, and the powers of the world to
come, through the acknowledgement of the Resurrection of the dead, and of the
last judgment.

Of these six Principles of the Apostles Catechism, the Lords Supper is not
mentioned for one amongst them, because these chiefly concerned the baptized
members of the Church, to be trained up unto the knowledge (and taste at
least) of them, before they could be admitted to the Lords Table. And if their
savoury profession of these things were approved before the Church, then they
were received (as confirmed Members) by laying on of hands. Which holy order
was a long time preserved pure in the purer sort of Primitive Churches. But
afterward, it (as all other the Institutions of Christ,) were abused and
adulterated in the Papacy: this profession and confirmation of baptized
Infants, being translated from the Church, whereof they were members, to the
Bishop; and their holy Profession of the principal Doctrines and Duties of
Christianity, transformed into a Catechism touching the Faith, and Promise of
their Godfathers, and Godmothers: And the Imposition of hands upon them by
the Pastor, or Bishop, was finally transformed into a Sacrament. But all these
gross superstitions, were but super-additions to the first primitive holy
institution. And yet, as by the straw and stubble, you may gather what kind of
Grain grew in the field: So by these abuses of this Ordinance, it may easily
be gathered, what was the practice of the Primitive Apostolic Churches in
this case. Let then this primitive practice be restored to its purity (as it
is in some of the first Churches planted in this Country) and then there will
be no more fear of pestering Churches with a carnal Generation of members
baptized in their Infancy, then of admitting a carnal company of Hypocrites,
confessing their Faith and Repentance in the face of the Congregation. Either
the Lord in the faithfulness of his Covenant, will sanctify the hearts of the
baptized Infants to prepare them for his Table: or else he will discover their
hypocrisy and profaneness in the presence of his Church, before Men and
Angels, and so prevent the pollution of the Lords Table, and corruption of the
Discipline of the Church, by their partaking in them.

CHAP. VII.
THe Fourth Argument, Silvester.
that I find against the Baptism of Infants, is,

That it is a ground both of ignorance and error, for it holds people in
blindness, that they cannot come to know the nature of the holy Ordinance, nor
what the same requires in the subjects thereof, and also it causes the simple
to conceive, that Baptism is of necessity to salvation.

Do you think that the Circumcision of Infants in the days of the Old
Testament, was any ground of ignorance or error? Silvanus.
that it held people in blindness, that they could not come to know the
nature of that holy Ordinance, nor what the same requires in the subjects
thereof? Surely, God was of another mind, when he said, he knew Abraham (who
had lately circumcised his children and household) That he would command his
children and household, to keep the way of the Lord, etc. Genesis 18.19. which how
could he possibly do, unless he first taught them to know it? In like sort,
the Baptism of a man's children, does not allow him to keep them in blindness
and error, but rather bind and charge him to train up his children in the
knowledge, and faith, and obedience of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, into
whose name they have been baptized. It is not the baptism of the children of
believers, but of the children of carnal, and ignorant, and profane persons,
that holds or keeps men in the blindness of ignorance and error.

When you say, that Baptism of infants causes the simple to conceive, that
Baptism is of necessity to salvation. I would know whether the Circumcision of
infants did cause the simple to conceive the necessity of Circumcision to
salvation? If not, why should the Baptism of infants, rather cause such an
error, then the circumcision of infants? If yea, whether did the people of God
forbear the circumcision of their infants, for fear they should cause such an
error of the necessity of circumcision in the hearts of simple people? were it
not that we know, when men have once set up an idol in their hearts, every
wind and show of an argument will prevail with a man's mind to bow down to it,
we should not think that men disputed in good earnest, that used such
arguments in such a cause. Have you not met with any other argument of more
weight?

CHAP. VIII.
Silvester.
YEs, this fifth Argument seems to me to have more in it: The Baptism of
infants keeps up the state of Antichrist, by granting him this so chief a
corner stone of the Lords house to lie in his foundation. For that Church where
baptism is the true Ordinance of God, in the administration thereof; it is by
the rules of the Gospel a true Church. So that if Antichrists baptism which
he administreth, be Gods ordinance, then that Church wherein he does so
administer the same, must be al^o the Church of God; and he must be in sin who
refuses communion with it.

Silvanus.
Either the words of this argument are ill chosen to express your meaning; or
else these words will give no ground at all against the baptism of infants.
You say the Baptism of infants keeps up the state of Antichrist, by granting
him this so chief a corner stone of the Lords house to lie in his foundation.

But I pray you understand first, we never made baptism the corner stone of
the Lords house, which is the peculiar prerogative of Christ himself; Christ
only is the corner stone.

Secondly, when we make (I mean acknowledge the Baptism of believers and of
their seed, a true and precious ordinance of Christ, and one of the holy
vessels of his Church, we do not grant unto Antichrist this authority, to lay
this stone in his foundation; unless himself were first invested, with a
lawful calling to baptize; and unless those whom he did baptize were
believers, and the seed of believers. Our baptizing of believers and their
seed, do not grant him leave to baptize idolaters and their seed.

If you say, but we take in such to be members of our Church, who have been
baptized in his Church (or at least their fathers before them) and so take a
stone out of the Temple of Babel, to lay in the foundation of Zion, contrary to
the Word of the Lord, Jer. 51.26.

Answ. This is another matter, but your words express no such thing. Your
words carry it, as if we granted him a chief corner stone of the Lords house
to lie in his foundation; and not that he grants us a stone out of his
Babylonish Temple, to lie in the foundation of the Lord house. But in very
truth, neither do we take a stone from him to lay in Gods house, by continuing
the seal of the Covenant to believers and their seed, from Abraham's time to
the Apostles time, and Baptism from the Apostles time till now. For the
Baptism of believers and their seed is no more a stone that lies in the
foundation of Antichrist, then is the doctrine of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, (three persons and one God) into whose name we and our children are
baptized. Though the people of God would not take a stone of Babel for a
corner, or for a foundation of Zion, (according to Jer. 51.26.) yet they did
not refuse to take those vessels out of Babel, and to restore them again to
the Lords Temple at Jerusalem, Ezra 1.7, 8. with 6.5. Do no^ therefore tell
us, that if Antichrists Baptism which he administreth, be the ordinance of
God, then that Church wherein he does so administer the same must be also the
Church of God, and they in sin that refuse communion with it.

For you might as well say, that if the vessels of the Temple, wherein the
Babylonian Priests ministered to their idols, were indeed the holy vessels of
the Lord God of Israel, then that idols Temple is Babel, (in which they were
used to Ministry) was the holy Temple of the Lord, and the people of Israel
did sin in coming out of Babel and refusing communion with that Idols Temple.

CHAP. IX.
Silvester.
A Sixth argument against the Baptism of Infants I have found to be this,
because it builds faith upon humane testimony in matters fundamental, for
such as are baptized in their infancy, have no other way to satisfy themselves
or others, but the bare word of man, that must stand in the place of the Word
of God, for such to believe their true receiving of so holy an Ordinance of God.

Silvanus.
If Baptism be a matter fundamental, why did your fourth Argument make it an
error in the Baptism of infants, that it caused the "simple to conceive, that
Baptism is of necessity to salvation.

Surely if Baptism be a matter fundamental, it is no offense to make both the
simple and the wise, and all sorts to conceive, that it is of necessity to
salvation. But such indeed is the wise and righteous hand of God, that such as
will contradict the truth of God, shall be ready also to contradict themselves,
and that sometimes within a very few words.

But to speak to your argument, do you think that the Circumcision of
infants was a matter fundamental? If so, do you think those infants growing
up to years, did build their faith in matters fundamental upon humane
testimony? And had they no other way to satisfy themselves or others, for
their true receiving of so holy an Ordinance of God, but only the word of man,
which must stand them in stead of the Word of God?

Yea, let me demand a further Question, What if a man were baptized at as ripe
years as the Treasurer of Candace, Acts 8. who saw himself baptized by
Philip? What has such a man to build the faith of his Baptism upon, and to
satisfy himself and others th^rein, but only the testimony of his own eyes,
and sense of f^eling? but neither a man's eyes, nor his sense of feeling are any
^hitmore the Divine testimony of the Word of God, then the testimony by word of
mouth of many score^ of witnesse^: yea, put the case a little further, (and no
more then possible) what if a man of grown years (suppose a Pagan) were
converted to the faith by the hearing of the Word, and yet had been blind from
his mothers womb? If he shall come to be baptized, he will want the testimony
of his eyes to see himself baptized. And though he may hear the words of him
that baptizeth them, yet he has it only by the words of men, that he that
baptizeth him i^ a Minister. For himself did neither see him elected nor
ordained; which is also the case of any man, though of grown years, that
comes to be baptized of such a Minister who was ordained to his Office before
himself was borne; must such a man's faith think you be built upon the word of
man for the truth of his baptism? But be willing to call to mind, the Lord
Jesus upbraided his eleven Apostles with their unbelief and hardness of heart,
because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen from the
dead, Mar. 6 14. And yet some of them mentioned in the former part of the
Chapter were but women* and others of them were private disciples, neither sort
of them were Apostles. The truth is, if one Proposition in a Syllogism be
found in the Word of God, and the other Proposition be found certain and
evident by sense or reason, the conclusion is a conclusion of faith. As for
example, it is a proposition found in Scripture; That the City which reigned
over the Kings of the earth ^n John's time, is that woman, the great Whore
Babylon, which shall be destroyed, Revel. 17.18. But Rome is that City which
reigned over the Kings of the earth in John's time. This proposition we have by
certain and evident testimony of the histories of those times. Therefore Rome
is that woman, the great whore Babylon, which shall be destroyed. This
Conclusion is a Conclusion of faith, not built upon the word of men, but upon
the word of God. Apply the like man^^r of arguing to the point in hand, thus;

Every disciple of Christ (that is, every believer and his s^ed) that is
baptized by a Minister of the Gospel in the name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, is truly baptized.

This Proposition i^ delivered in the Gospel.

But I the child of a b^liever was baptized by a Minister of the Gospel in the
name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

This Proposition is confirmed by so many eyewitnesses, and such approved
records, that no reasonable man can doubt of it. The conclusion then is a
conclusion of faith.

Therefore I the child of a believer was truly baptized.

CHAP. X.
Silvester.
FOr a seventh Argument against the Baptism of Infants, I have met with this.

To baptize Infants makes the holy Ordinance of God a lying sign: because
none of those things can be expected in an Infant, which the said Ordinance
holds forth, or signifies in the administration thereof; which is the
parties Regeneration, and spiritual new Birth; a dying and burying with
Christ, in respect of sin, and a rising with him in a New life to God, and a
confirmation of Faith in the death and Resurrection of Christ, and a free
remission of sin by the same, as Romans 6.3.4. Col. 2.12. 1 Pet. 3.21. Act. 2.38.
None of all which can be expected in an Infant.

Silvanus.
That which has been found in some Infants (as in John Baptist, and Jeremiah,
and many more) that they have been sanctified by the holy Ghost from their
Mothers womb, there is nothing hinders but the same may be desired, and
expected in any Infants of believing P^rents. The Faith of believing Parents
has prevailed with Christ to cast out an evil spirit out of their children;
And wheresoever the good spirit of grace enters, there wants not
Regeneration, fellowship with Christ in his death, burial, Resurrection: there
wants not Faith nor Remission of sins.

But besides, suppose that none of these things were found in Infants, yet it
is a profane and blasphemous speech, to say, that the Baptism of Infants
makes the holy Ordinance a lying sign, because none of those things are found
in Infants, which the Ordinance holds forth, and signify^th, unless you were
able to make it good, that Baptism holds forth and signifies nothing, but
what is already found in the Infants. But you cannot be ignorant, that
Baptism signifies and seals up not only good things found already in the
baptized, but also good things promised, and as yet to come, as Resurrection
from the dead, 1 Cor. 15.29. Saving out of afflictions and persecutions, which
were then ready to overwhelme all the Churches in the Roman Empire, as Noah's
flood did the whol^ world, which is the meaning of Peter's words in the place
which you quote, 1 Pet. 3.21. To say nothing, that ^aptisme signifies and
seals up the growth of all spiritual gifts, and blessings, as well as the
gift of them. And growth is a blessing future to the baptized, as well as the
gift may be future to some Infants baptized. Yea, it is an holy truth of God,
that Baptism is as well the sign and seal of the promise of God, as the
sign and seal of any gift of God already bestowed. Now Promises are of
blessings to come. Circumcision was a sign and seal of the Land of Promise,
to be given, as well as of the righteousness of Faith to Abraham, which he
had already received. Yea, the same Circumcision which was to Abraham a sign
and a seal of the righteousness of the Faith, which he had already received,
wa^ to Isaac a sign and seal of the righteousness of Faith promised, but not
received. Yea, that gracious Promise of God, that he would circumcise the
hearts of his people Israel, and of their seed, ( Deuteronomy. 30.6.) what was it else
but an exposition and declaration of the meaning of their Circumcision, that as
they had received the outward sign in the flesh, so they should receive (they
and their seed) the thing signified in their heart and spirit? It is no lying
sign that holds forth and seals, that which is done, or which is promised
to be done in due time, as much as i^ meet for him to do that promises.

The Baptism of Ananias and Sapphira, of Simon Magus and Dem^s, was no lying
sign, though they neither were Regenerate when they were Baptized, nor ever
afterward came on to be Regenerate; because the lie lay not in the Lords
Covenant, nor in the sign of it: but in their affected hypocrisy which would
not be healed.

CHAP. XI.
THe eighth Argument against the Baptism of Infant^ is, because the subject of
Baptism is to be Passive, but an Infant is no way passive, as that Ordinance
requir^th. I mean a passive subject threefold.

1 A thing uncapabl^ and thus is a stone*

2 A thing forced, and thus is an Infant who oppos^th his Baptism to the
utmost of his ability, so far is it from being passive in the same.

3 A thing is passive by a subjecting power producing the ^ame in the subject,
by bringing it to a free and voluntary subjection. And thus is the true subject
of Baptism. None can be passive to receive grace, Silvanus.
but by grace, because it consists of self-denial: Obedience to Christ ought
to be free: but Baptism is forced upon an Infant against its will.

I will not examine the terms of your Distinction of a threefold passive
subject (though I would not have you taken with it) which is indeed, neither
Natural, nor Artificial, nor spiritual. For when you make the first sort of
a passive subject, a thing incapable, as is a stone: I might demand whether you
mean incapable lawfully, or unlawfully. If you mean a stone is incapable
lawfully, so you conceive children to be incapable likewise, and all they upon
whom Baptism is forced. And then the first part of your distinction, is all
one with your second part. And a good distinction cannot admit such confusion.
If you mean a stone is incapable of Baptism unlawfully, you know the contrary.
For the Papists do baptize their Fonts and Altars (which are but stones) as
well as their Bells, which are not more lawfully capable of Baptism then
stones be.

Again, when you make your second sort of your passive subject of Baptism, to
be a forced subject, and Infant^ to be such a forced subject, as who do
oppose it to the uttermost ability.

I dare be bold to say, the speech is not generally true. For of those many
hundreths which I have seen Baptized, though some have seemed to oppose it with
crying and struggling, yet I cannot say with truth, that either all of them, or
most of them have so done. And for those that have so done, I demand whether
the Infants in times before Christ, when they were circumcised, did not more
generally, and strongly oppose their Circumcision to the uttermost of their
ability, when they felt much more smarting pain in the cutting off of the
foreskin of their flesh, then our children can do in their Baptism? And why
may such a forced Israelite or Proselyte be a capable subject of Circumcision,
and not a forced Infant of a Christian be in like sort a^ well capable of
Baptism? The Truth is, in administering either of Circumcision to the Infants
of believing Israelites, or of Baptism to the Infants of believing Christian^,
respect is not had to the voluntary subjection of the Infants, but to the fre^
and voluntary subjection of their Parents. It is enough for Infants, that as
they received original corruption without their own personal consent, but in
the will of their first Parents: so now they receive (through the grace of the
Covenant) a remedy against their original corruption without their own
personal consent, but in the will of their parent.

But when you make the Infants opposition of his Baptism to his uttermost
ability, a sign of its far distance of being passive in the same.

The truth is by how much the more the Infant opposes his baptism, by so much
the more he is active against it, and therefore being baptized nevertheless,
he is so much the more passive under it. Your phrase therefore of a passive
subject of Baptism, is ill chosen to express your meaning, you might have
more suitably said in plainer terms, None are capable subjects of Baptism,
but such as gladly receive it. And for that you might have had some color from
the Word, but that the free and voluntary acts of parents in the matters of the
second commandment, are accounted of God for themselves and their children, as
was showed above.

Furthermore, when you exclude Infants from being true passive subjects to
r^ceive Baptism, because they are not brought to a free voluntary subjection
to receive Baptism: Do but consider a while, what kind of passive subjection
is found in m^n in their regeneration, whereof Baptism is the sign. The
subjects of regeneration, are neither active subjects to rec^ive grace, as the
Moon is to receive light from the Sun a (being a lightsome body of it self)
or as a beggar is to receive an Al^^es, that stretches out his hand for it:
nor passively subject, as the air i^ to receive light, which though it be
dark makes no opposition against it: but they are forcibly subject, as being
neither able nor willing to come to Christ, except they be drawn, and drawn by
the same Almighty power, as whereby a dead man is raised to life. Now if men
be forcibly subject to receive conv^rting grace in their regeneration, there
is in it nothing repugnant to the nature of Baptism in it self (which is a
sign of regeneration) to admit Infant^ to it, though they shall be forcibly
subject to i^. This forcible opposition to Baptism is of simple Ignorance, not
knowing what ^he Ordinance is: and their opposition is easily overcome by human
power. Whereas our opposition in receiving regenerating grace is far more
perverse and untractable, not to be overruled but by a divine Almighty power.
It is true, such i^ the nature of Baptism by Gods Ordinance, that it requires
in men of years regeneration and voluntary subjection to it, before they can
be admitted to it, because to them it is a sign and seal of regeneration
wrought, and of the righteousness of faith imputed to them. But in Infants the
Voluntary subjection of Parents in offe^ing them to Christ is a sufficient
recommendation of them to him for his acceptance of them unto Baptism, because
he accepts the offer of their parents, as the gift of their children; and
because baptism is as well a sign and seal of regeneration, and righteousness
promised; as wrought and bestowed. For it is a sign and seal of the Covenant,
and so of all the blessings promised in it, amongst which are regeneration,
faith, and forgiveness of sins, Ier. 31.33, 34. It is true, that you say, no
man can receive grace, but by grace: not only (as you say) because it consists
of self-denial, but because it consists in laying hold on Christ, who above
the reach and power of corrupt nature. But it is a grace and favor of Christ,
that he encourages parents to come to themselves, and to bring their children
in their Arms to him. And this grace is a blessing and favor to the children
also so brought. For the children that were so brought to Christ, they returned
home with a blessing, Mark. 10.16.

It is true also, which you say, that obedience to Christ ought to be free.

But when you say, Baptism is forced upon an Infant against his will. It is
neither altogether true, not at all material. Not true, for it may be Infants
do as often cry, when they are carried home from Baptism, as when they are
brought forth to it. And in proper speech, Infants can neither be said, to
will, or to nill, what they understand not. The will is a faculty of the
reasonable soul: Infant^ till they have the use of Reason, they have not the
exercise of their will. Neither is it material, whether Infants be willing to
their Baptism, or not seeing at that Age God attends not to the will of
Infants, but to the will of their Parents, and to his own gracious Covenant,
in which he is wont to heal the frowardness, and to take away the
uncircumcision of the heart for hi^ Name sake.

CHAP. XII.
A Ninth and last Argument against the Baptism of Infants is, that the
doctrine thereof opposes directly the express word of God, by teaching that
Infants are in the Covenant of grace being borne of believing parents, and so
an holy seed, by virtue of which they have right to Baptism as a Privilege of
Grace, against which the Holy Ghost affirms, that all are conceived in sin,
brought forth in iniquity, and so by nature the children of wrath and under
curse, and except they be borne again from above, they cannot see the
Kingdom of God, Psalm. 51.5. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. Romans 3.9. Gal. 3.10.13, 14. John
3.3.5, 6. Joh 1.12, 13. Here man says, that Infants are clean and holy in and
from the womb, and so are subjects of grace and glory: but God says, that all
Infants, one as well as another, are first in sin and unholy, and so are
subjects of wrath, until the second birth make the difference, Joh. 3.5, 6.
And now which to believe, let the upright to God judge.

This whole Argument has received a full answer above, Silvanus.
we freely acknowledge what the Lord says, and as we believe we profess*
That all of us, we and our children, are conceived in sin, and borne in
iniquity; by nature the children of wrath and under the curse as well as
others, nor can we see the kingdom of God, nor partake in any saving mercies
of the Covenant, except we be borne again from above: which is all that your
alleged Scriptures hold forth touching this point. But this we say withal as
the Holy Ghost also does, That though this be the condition of us all by
nature, yet by the grace of the Covenant God is a God to us, and to our seed:
and therefore by the faith of either believing Parent, the children are holy,
and so have the like right to Baptism, as the children of Abraham had to
Circumcision, Baptism being now appointed to us by God in the room of
Circumcision to them. All which have been cleared above, in opening sundry
Scriptures that speak to this purpose. Gal. 3.13, 14* 15, 16. Act. 2.39. 1
Cor. 7.14. Col. 2.11, 12. which it were needless to expound again, unless I
know what would be further objected against that which has been gathered out
of them.

It is a notorious falsehood to say, That because we hold Infants of believing
Parents to be holy by the Covenant, that therefore we hold them to be so
clean and holy in and from the womb, as to exempt them from Original sin,
and to make them subjects of grace and glory. For though we did hold that all
the Infants of believing Parents, were regenerate from the womb, (which we
do not) yet that would not hinder the truth of the Text, that they were
conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity: nor would it argue, that we hold
them to be so clean and holy from the womb, as to be without sin. No, no,
we do believe, that the most holy regenerate Saints on earth are unclean,
and sinful from the womb, and are still such, defiled with original sin,
and the fruits thereof, even after they be Regenerate; and though we say that
some of the Infants of believing Parents have been regenerate from the womb
(as Jeremy, John Baptists and others) and accordingly that they were subjects
of saving grace and glory: yet we never denied, but do constantly believe,
that they also were conceived in sin and borne in iniquity, and were by
nature the children of wrath, as well as others, else what need should they
have of reconciliation and Atonement by Christ? But as for other children of
believing Parents which are not regenerate by the Holy Ghost (as they were)
from the womb, we do believe and hold, that though they be the subjects of
the common grace of the Covenant, and so have right to the seal and sign
thereof: yet we do not hold them to be subjects of saving grace, much less
of glory, (as you do pretend) but to be still carnal till the Lord be
pleased to apply the saving grace of his Covenant to them in their
regeneration, which he does to all that belong to his election of grace, and
that according to his Covenant in due time. Now therefore when you put it to
the upright in heart to judge, which to believe, whether your selves, or us, as
you state the difference, we desire the Lord not to lay it to your charge at
the day of his righteous judgment, that you put such a false and fraudulent
question to the Judgment of the upright.

But because I do from my heart unfeignedly desire your full satisfaction in
this great point of Christian practice which does so nearly concern the free
passage of the grace of the Covenant, both to you and your children, tell me
yet, if there yet be left any stumbling block in your way which might hinder
the presenting of your Infants to the Lords washing in the laver of Baptism.

CHAP. XIII.
YEs, Silvester.
besides all the former Arguments which I have alleged (as I find them)
against the Baptism of Infants, I have met with sundry evil consequences,
which do unavoidably attend your Doctrine of Infants Baptism.

First, it makes void the stability of Gods Covenant it self, thus, If the
Covenant of Grace be absolute and stable, then all within the same must be
saved. But all within the said Covenant were not saved: Ergo, the Covenant of
Grace is not absolute and stable. The Major is confessed, that a believers seed
is in the Covenant of Grace without exception. The Minor is proved from Ismael,
Esau, and the rejected Jews: all which were the seed of believers, and yet
all not saved.

If all the evil consequences, Silvanu^.
which you say do unavoidably attend our Doctrine, be all of them as easily
avoidable as this, I hope you will see no cause to judge of them, as you do,
so unavoidable. For this evil consequence is easily avoided by such as
maintain the Baptism of Infants two or three ways.

1. There be some that will deny that which you call the Major, though indeed
it be not the Major of that Syllogism, which your self propound; For that
Major was this, If the Covenant of Grace be absolute and stable, then all
within the same must be saved. But I will not stick with you upon terms,
though they be your own. If you call it a Major, let it go for a Major: But
this which you call a Major, there be some who will deny it, and tell you,
that all the seed of believers without exception are not in the Covenant of
Grace, but the Elect seed only. They will grant you, that Ismael and Esau, and
all such Apostates, as do fall off from the Covenant, and grace offered to
them, they were never under the Covenant of grace, but of works only. And yet
as all the children of the faithful, were circumcised then ( Ismael as well as
Isaac, Esau as well as Jacob) so ought they to be baptized now. In this case
they conceive the Apostles words stretch so far, Gal. 4.29. As it was then,
so is it now.

But 2. Others will answer you another way, that though the Covenant of grace
be stable, yet it is not absolute: stable to the faithful seed, but not
absolute, but requiring the Condition of faith, which condition also God will
work in the elect seed. And therefore though Ismael and Esau were not saved,
yet it is no impeachment to the stability of the Covenant, because the Covenant
is only stable to the faithful seed, which these were not.

A third Answer somewhat like to this, and yet different, may be this, That
though the Covenant of Grace be^ absolute, and stable, yet it will not follow,
that all within that Covenant must be saved, for the Covenant though it be
absolute and stable to all the elect seed, yet not to all the seed, because all
of them are not Elect, to whom only the Grace of Christ is absolute and
stable. And yet such as are not elect may be truly said to be under this
Covenant. For we do not read in Scripture of any Covenant which is
everlasting, but only the Covenant of Grace, Jer. 32.40. And yet you read of a
wicked generation, that have broken this everlasting Covenant, Isa* 24.5. which
argues they were under the bond of it, or else how could they be blamed (as
there they be) and cursed, for the breach of it? They therefore who were not
Elected but accursed, were under this Covenant, and yet they making it void
unto themselves, it is evident it was not absolute and stable to them. The
unbeleeving Jews (of whom the Apostle speaks, Romans 11.) who were broken off
from Christ (as branches from the fat Olive tree) they had been in some sense
in Christ, or else how could they be said to be broken off from him? And if
they were in him, and not by faith, then were they in him some other way, and
yet not by Election: therefore only by Adoption, or admission into the
Covenant of their Fathers, which was a Covenant of Grace.

CHAP. XVI.
Silvester.
A Second evil consequence, which I find to be gathered from your doctrine of
the Baptism of Infants, is this, that it is a ground of falling from Grace,
thus. All that God took into his Covenant of Grace, were in an estate of
Grace. But all that God took into his Covenant of Grace, did not therein
continue, Ergo, Such fell from an estate of Grace.

An easy and common distinction will easily avoid this evil conquence. For all
that God took into his Covenant of grace, Silvanus.
may be said to be in a state of Grace, but what Grace? either of common, or
of saving Grace. If your meaning be, all that God took into a Covenant of
Grace are in an estate of saving Grace: we deny that Major proposition, as
utterly untrue. But if you mean it of common Grace in the carnal seed, and of
saving Grace in the Elect seed, then indeed your Major proposition is very
true: but no evil consequence will follow upon it. For the Elect and fai^hfull
seed that are in an estate of saving Grace, can never fall away. And they who
do fall away were only in a state of commom Grace: which is no ill consequence
nor prejudice to the truth, though they do fall away.

CHAP. XV.
3. THe Baptism of Infants is a ground of universal Redemption, Silvester.
for it makes the Grace of Christ equal as well to such as perish, as to such
as be saved. Thus all that are in the Covenant of Grace, Christ died for. But
all that were in the Covenant of Grace were not saved. Ergo, Christ dyed for
such as were not saved. The proof of this is the same with the former: If God
took Abraham and his seed into his Covenant of Grace without exeception.

Though God did take the seed of Abraham and of all other believers into the
Covenant of Grace without exception: Silvanus.
yet not without distinction. The Elect seed he takes them all into his
Covenant of Grace, and into all the sure and saving mercies of the Covenant.
But the carnal and unfaithful seed he takes them also into his Covenant of
Grace, yet gives them not the sure and saving mercies thereof, but the common
graces only, and the outward dispensation of the Covenant, and the seal
thereof, together with such spiritual gifts of the Covenant, as Judas, or
Demas, Saul, or Jehu, might partake of. And even those common gifts the Apostle
does acknowledge, that Apostates are sanctified with them by the blood of the
Covenant, Heb. 10.29. The Covenant ratified by the blood of Christ, was
doubtless the Covenant of Grace. And yet it was by the blood of this Covenant
by which they were sanctified. But to apply my answer more punctually to the
terms of your Syllogism; your Major proposition will be denied, all that are
in the Covenant of grace Christ dyed for them; If you mean he dyed for them
out of Grace to save them, it will utterly be denied you. That Christ should
die for any out of his grace to save them is a sure and saving mercy of the
Covenant: which is not granted to all the seed within the Covenant, but to the
elect and faithful seed only. The very common gifts which such receive from
the blood of his Covenant and so from his death, they flow not from the death
of Christ out of his saving grace to them, but out of his grace to his Church
and chosen people, for whose sake he bestows such gifts upon Hypocrites.

CHAP. XVI.
Silvester.
THe 4. evil consequence which I have found gathered from the doctrine of the
Baptism of Infants, is this, That it makes God the Author of man's believing an
untruth, by enjoining him to believe the salvation of such as he himself
knows and reveals the contrary, as Ismael, Esau, and but a remnant among the
Jews, nay none at all but such as believe, Genesis 17. Genesis 25. Genesis 48. Romans
9.27. Against which opinion and evils aforesaid, I Argue thus: The Covenant is
absolute and saving to all once within the same. But all the personal seed of
believers are not saved, Therefore all the seed of believers are not in the
Covenant of Grace. The proposition is clear from these Scriptures. Jer. 32.40.
Isay 49.21. Jer. 31.3. Ioh. 13.1. Mal. 3.6. Ioh. 10.28, 29. The assumption from
these, Genesis 21.10. with Gal. 4.29, 30. Genesis 25.23. with Romans 9.11, 12, 13, 27.
God requires no man to believe untruth, therefore God requires no such thing.

Silvanus.
I do not delight to take exception at words, when one may guess at your
meaning, though it be contrary to your words. But because you would pick an
argument, from a true doctrine of God, to gather an evil consequence, that so
God should be an Author to make a man believe, that which he himself knows
and reveals the contrary: I conceive it to tend to the glory of God to
observe, that your self in laying down this Argument do express your self
contrary to that which you know to be your meaning: and do affirm God to
know that, which you know is contrary to his knowledge. For you expressly make
it an untruth and contrary to what God himself knows and reveals to
believe the salvation (I do not say of Ismael and Esau, for it is an untruth
indeed to believe their salvation) but to believe the salvation of a remnant
among the Jews, nay of none at all, but such as do believe. Truly if God had
not blinded you for offering to argue God to be an Author of an untruth, upon
the supposition of the Baptism of infants (which is an holy truth of God) you
would never have delivered so palpable an untruth contrary to your own
knowledge, as to say, this is an untruth contrary to what God himself knows
and reveals, to believe the salvation of a remnant among the Jews, nay of none
at all but such as believe. But to leave your inconsiderate boldness in
arguing God of an untruth, which falls upon your self; to your Argument I
answer (as before) by denying your proposition. This I deny, that the Covenant
of Grace is absolute and saving unto all once within the same: you heap up
many Scriptures to prove it, but none of them without violence will be wrested
to bear witness to it; your first Scripture in Ier. 32.40. Do you think it
speaks of all the people, whom God brought out of Babel into Jerusalem
again? or of the Elect only? If of all the people, (as v. 38. might seem to
imply) surely the Covenant of Grace was not absolute and saving to them all.
There was among them Shemajah, and Noadiah false Prophets which sought to
discourage the hands of Nehemiah in his work, N^hem* 6.10. to 14. And there
were also Nobles of Judah, that kept intelligence with Tobiah, and were sworn
to him, v. 17, 18, 19. and can you think that the Covenant of Grace was
absolute and stable unto such as these? But if you mean that the Covenant of
Grace was absolute and stable to the elect seed, you speak truly and safely,
and therein also we agree with you. But then you must not stand to your former
proposition, that the Covenant of Grace is absolute and stable unto all once
within the same. For as it was before the captivity, there were some that brake
the everlasting Covenant, Isa. 24.5. and therefore some were once within the
Covenant, to whom it was not absolute and stable: so was it also after the
captivity, that Covenant promised to give them one heart, that they might fear
the Lord for ever, for the good of them, and of their children afte^ them,
verse 39. And yet some of them did not fear God themselves, and many of their
children did soon degenerate, in so much that in the days of Malachi the
whole Nation fell to the robbery of God and were cursed with a curse in stead of
the sure mercies of the Covenant, Mal. 3.9. The other Scriptures which you do
allege to prove your proposition (that the Covenant of Grace is absolute and
stable unto all once within the same) they none of them speak to your purpose.
The Text in Isay 49.21. speaks that the Church shall wonder at the increase
of her children, after she had lost the other, and shall therefore enquire,
who had begotten these to her. But what makes this to prove that the Covenant
of Grace is absolute and stable to all those who are once within the same? It
rather proves that some of the children of the Church, and so some within the
Covenant of the Church have been lost, and that is contrary to your
proposition.

Your next place in Ierem. 31.3. holds forth that God loved the house of
Israel with an everlasting love; and the text in Ioh. 13.1. declares that whom
Christ loves he loves to the end: And that in Mal. 3.6. teaches us that the
Lord Jehovah is unchangeable, and therefore that the sons of Jacob perish
not. And your last place in Ioh. 10.28, 29. shows us that Christ gives unto
his sheep everlasting life, that they shall never perish. But what is all this
to prove that none are within the Covenant of grace but such as God loves with
an everlasting unchangeable love unto the end, and who shall receive
everlasting life? All these places do prove indeed that God has a people to
whom his love is stable and also absolute, but says nothing to any such
purpose, that all once within the Covenant of Grace do partake in this state
of absolute unchangeable and everlasting love and life of Christ.

CHAP. XVII.
Silvester.
THere be four or five other Arguments against that Baptism of Infants which
were received in England: which though they do not so take with me, as the
former do, yet I desire to hear what you think of them, because I find more
difficulty in them, then I can easily resolve. The 1. is taken from the false
power by which Baptism is administered in England, and that is by power
received from the Bishops.

2. From the false ground upon which it is there administered upon the faith and
profession of the Godfathers and Godmothers.

3. From the fal^e manner, in which it is administered, that is, by springling
and not dipping.

4. From the false end, for which it is administered, which is for the
Regeneration of the Infants.

5. From the false subject of Baptism; which being only Infants, it comes
to pass, that now in England the Baptism of believers (which the Gospel
acknowledges) is worn out of use, and instead thereof the Baptism of
Infants, is come in place: of whom it may be, not one of a thousand at that
age is a believer. But of this subject of Baptism, we have had much speech
already.

Now for the first of these, the power whereby the Ministers of England do
exercise their office, and so baptize, It is derived from the Bishop, and the
Bishop is not ordained by Christ but by Antichrist, at least, by humane power,
and such is all the prower derived from him, Antichristian, or at best, Humane.

Such as hold the Bishops to be of divine Institution (as many English
Ministers have done) they will easily avoid your Argument, Silvan^^.
if they could as easily make good their own Tenent of the divine right of
Episcopasie. But let them pass, and every plantation which our heavenly father
has not planted, let it be rooted out. Take it therefore thus rather the
powers, whereby the Ministers in England do administer the word and Baptism,
it is either spiritual and proper, etc. essential to their calling, or
adventitious, or accidental. The former they have received from Christ by a
double Act of his.

1. He has furnished many of them with Ministerial gifts.

2. He has inclined the hearts of his people, either to choose and call them
(as in many parishes of the City, and in sundry Market Towns and elsewhere:)
or at least to accept them, and to submit to them being commended to them by
the Patron. The latter power, which is adventitious and accidental, is that
which they receive from the Patron who presents them to the Bishop, and from
the Bishop, who ordains and licenseth them to administer unto Christ, and his
people. This power though it has been established by the law of the Land, yet
it is both adventitious, and accidental (for the Ministers power i^ complete
without it) and it is also usurped; For neither had the Law lawful power from
Christ to give such power to the Patron and Bishop: nor had the Bishop and
Patron lawful right from Christ to receive it. But as the Law then stood in
force, neither could the People choose their Minister without leave of the
Patron, nor induct him into their Church without the O^dination and license of
the Bishop. Thus when Pirates have invaded a ship, no man in it (neither
Officer nor Passenger) can come by his own goods, but by leave of the Pirates;
who upon their submission to them, will give them the keys of their own
vessels and chests. This power (to come to their own goods) received from the
Pirates, is not that which gives them true and proper right to enter upon the
possession and use of their own goods (for that right they had by a former
just title,) which Pirates cannot disanull, but it is only adventitious and
accidental. I need not apply it to the case in hand, the Application is
obvious.

Silvester.
But all such submission either of People or Ministers unto such usurpation is
it not a sin?

Silvanus.
That is another Question, and meet to be considered by the persons whom it
concerns: but not much material to the cause. The persons surprised in a
ship by pirates whom they are not able to resist, may submit to this power
which they cannot neither overcome, nor avoid: But Ministers and People, if
they cannot overcome such usurped power in the Church (which now by the help
of Christ they begin to do by the aid of some superior Power,) yet they may
avoid it, by seeking the liberty of their consciences, and of their Churches,
in some foraine Countries or Plantations. Neither can any men so lawfully give
away upon any terms, the liberty of their consciences, and of their Churches,
as they may give away the possession of their goods. But to speak to the cause
in hand, though it be granted that the Patron and Bishop do unlawfully usurp
such Power, and that the Ministers and people do unlawfully also submit to it:
yet such adventitious and accidental corruptions of the Persons do not make
void the spiritual true, and holy calling, which the Ministers receive from
Christ, nor make their administrations dispensed in that calling to be of none
effect. Nay verily their calling and the work of it (for the substance
^hereof) God has borne witness to it from heaven, by setting the seal of his
blessing upon their labors in the Ministry. The Apostle Paul proves himself
to be sent of Christ, to the Corinthians especially, by the conversion of many
of them unto God by his Ministry. Though I be not an Apostle to others (says
he) yet doubtless I am unto you: for the seal of mine Apostleship are ye in
the Lord, 1 Cor. 9.1.2. with Chap. 4.15, 16. By the same Argument Paul gathered
that the Gospel of the Circumcision was committed to Peter, and the Gospel of
the uncircumcision to himself, because of the gracious and effectual power of
Christ, which breathed in his Ministry to the Gentiles, and in Peter's
Ministry to the Jews. Peter, James, and John, they saw (says he) that the
Gospel of the uncircumcision was committed to me, and the Gospel of the
Circumcision unto Peter: For he that wrought effectually in Peter to the
Apostleship of the Circumcision, the same was mighty in me to the Gentiles,
Gal. 2.7, 8, 9. And this Argument taken from the Powerful presence of God with
a Ministry to confirm the lawful authority of it, though it now meet with
exceptions, and cavils from the sons of men: yet God himself judges it to
be of that weight, and convincing power, as to stop the mouths even of
gainsaying Rebels, and quiet to take away al murmurings against it, and
against him in it. The story is well known, when the People of Israel, and some
of the tribe of Levi had often murmured against Aaron and his sons for
executing the Priests Office; the Lord commanded Moses to take twelve Rods from
the fathers of the twelve Tribes of Israel, and to lay them up, and Aarons rod
amongst them, before the Lord in the Tabernacle: to the intent that the Lord
might show by his blessing upon any of the Rods, which of all the Tribes
himself had chosen to minister before him. And in the morning when the Rods
were taken forth, the Rod of Aaron had budded, and brought forth buds and
bloomed blossoms, and yielded Almonds, Number. 17.5. to 10. which was an
effectual demonstration of the divine approbation of Aarons Ministry. And if
this be such an effectual demonstration of a ministers calling to be of god,
that the Lord blesses the Rod of his Ministry with fruitful increase; then
let all the murmurings of Gods people against the truth of the calling of the
Godly Ministers in England cease for ever.

Harlots are sometimes blessed of God with fruitful increase as well as chaste
wives. Silvester.
And therefore though Ministers and Churches may be blessed with Conversion
and Regeneration of souls unto God, yet it is no evident Demonstration of the
truth, either of such Ministers or such Churches.

Then i^ the Argument of God taken from the miraculous budding, Silvanu^:
and blossoming and fruitfulness of Aarons Rod of none effect. For in the
conversion of souls there is a concourse of a the miracles of Christ together,
the blind see, the deaf hear, the lame walk, the dead are raised up, dead
and dry bones live, dry sticks bud, and blossom and bring forth fruit. All
such miracles (which do all meet in the conversion of a sinner) they are all
of them divine Testimonies, and can be wrought by none other but by God
himself: And God never works any such to confirm, either a false calling,
or any false doctrine.

It is true, Harlots are sometimes followed with fruitful increase, but that
is because God has given a general blessing in nature to men, and beasts.
That in the mutual fellowship of both sexes in either kind, they shall
increase and multiply children to himself.

Besides, though Harlots sometimes be fruitful, yet the husbands of such
Harlots will not acknowledge the children of whoredoms for their own
children: No more will the Lord acknowledge so many of the People of England,
to be children unto himself, if they were the children of whoredoms, borne
of a wife of whoredoms, Hos. 2.2.4. The 7000. in Israel, that did not bow
their knees to Baall, they were not begotten to God, by the Ministry of the
Priests, either of Baal or of Jeroboam, but of the Prophets of the Lord, 1
Kings 18.37.

Silvest^r.
But it is certain many are baptized in England by dumb dogs that cannot
preach, and therefore cannot beget souls to God; and such Christ never sent to
baptize, Mat. 28.19.

Silvanus.
If they cannot preach, the greater is their sin to baptize, or to enter into
such a calling whereto the administration of Baptism pertains. But
nevertheless, though God delights not to make use of such instruments for
the conversion of souls: yet their administrations of the seals (which are
given not for conversion, but for confirmation of grace, either formerly
wrought or to be wrought) they are not nullities. Circumcision of the ten
Tribes after the Apostasy of Jeroboam, and after the casting out of the
Priest^ and Levites (2 Chronicles. 11.14, 15.) was generally administered by unclean
hands. For though Circumcision at first might have been administered by the
father of the family (as might also the Passover be killed by them) yet after
the Priests and Levites were set apart for the public service of God and his
people, then look as their Passeovers were to be killed only by the Priests
and Levites: So the Analogy of the seals requires, that Circumcision also
should only be administered by the Priests and Levites. Now when the Priests
and Levites were cast out of office in the ten Tribes, Jeroboams Priests that
came in their room, were as Ignorant and unskilful to expound the Law, as any
(whom you in the Prophets phrase call) dumb dogs, are unskilful to preach the
Gospel, 1 Kings 13.33. 2 Chronicles. 15.3. But if Circumcision were then dispensed
by the Fathers of the families, they were also an Ignorant and rebellious
people, a people Apostate from God, and such as lived either without Law, (2 Chronicles. 15 3.) or in open transgression of the Law (1 Kings 19.10) In which case
the Apostle says in some sense (that is, in respect of the spiritual benefit
of it) their Circumcision is made uncircumcision, Romans 2.25. Notwithstanding
let it be remembered, that in Israel, though none were allowed to partake in
the Passover, but such as are circumcised, (they and their families) Exodus
12.48. yet this people of the ten Tribe^ after they came to humble themselves
before the Lord* they (in such Circumcision as they had) were accepted to the
Passover: which was an Evidence, that the Church at Jerusalem did not look
at the Circumcision of the ten Tribes as a Nullity; or else they would have
kept them from the Passover, which they did not, 2 Chronicles. 30.5, 6.11.18.

But the Church of Israel had sometimes a true constitution: Silvester.
and therefore their administrations were not nullities, though after their
Apostasy all their Ordinary administrations were corrupt and poluted. But the
Church of England never had a true constitution, but an Antichristian, and
therefore such are all their administrations.

Be not unwilling to receive a double Answer, Silvanus.
and both of them just.

1. The Church of the ten Tribes, it never had a true constitution. It was at
first founded in a Public profession of a general rejection of the promised
seed, which was to spring out of the house of David, 1 Kings 12.16. And that
rejection of the promised seed out of David's house, was as much as the
rejection of the promised M^ssiah, to have any part or portion in their Church.
Now can there be a true constitution of the Church, where there wants a true
foundation? Besides, when God says, that for a long season (to wit, ever since
the time of their Apostasy, Israel was without God, without a Priest to teach,
without the Law, (2 Chronicles. 15.3.) could they have the true constitution of a
Church without God, without Priest, without Law?

An. ^. As it is a false and erroneous speech to affirm the Church of the ten
Tribes to have had sometimes a true constitution, so it is no less false and
rash, to deny the Churches of England ever to have had a true constitution.
Rash, for can you say it, or do you know it because you were then born, or
because the number of your days is great? As God questioneth Job in another
case, Job 38.21. Or have you found out such a matter by reading of ancient
records and stories? truly if you dare credit them (and doubtless they are
more worthy of credit that lived nearer those ancient times, and had the view
of ancient records, rather then some of your late books, who speak either out
of Partiality to Rome, as the Jesuits, or out of prejudice against the state
of the Church of England, as some rigid Separatists do:) but those ancient
records will tell you that England received the faith of Christ by Joseph of
Arimathea, by Simon Zelotes, by others of those primitive Apostolic Saints who
doubtless planted Churches not after the pattern of Antichrist, but after the
manner of the Apostles. And though English Jesuits will needs make England be
holding to Rome for their conversion: yet Bar^nius is more ingenuous (though
himself a Cardinal, and wanting no affection to Rome) who ingenuously
confesses, England received the Gospel ten years (though others speak but
of five years) before Rome it self. For he speaks out of Manuscript
records, That the Gospel was brought to England in the year of Christ 35. and
to Rome, in the year 45. Any whom you dare trust may compare his Annalls in
the year 35. number 5 with the year 45 number 1. But because you will not
enquire what is written in Latin books, it may be of some use to help you, to
read of this point what you may find in Mr. Fox his book of Martyrs, in the
beginning of the 2 book of his first ^ome, in the Reign of King Luius: as also
in Cambdens description of Britany during the times of the Romans government,
and in Speedes Chronicle, 9. Chap. of the 5 book. Yea many years, (and some
ages) after when the Bishop of Rome sent Augustine into England, the godly
teachers and people of England refused to receive him, either in way of
subjection to his government, or of conformity to the rites of Rome, as Beda
records in his History of the English Nation. 2. Book 2. Chap. And in the
former part of the History (1. Book 26. Chap.) he acknowledges the Churches
of England compelled none to receive Christian Religion, but received such as
offered themselves. Now though it came to pass, that the Christians in England
(above 200 years after the first planting of the Gospel amongst them) were
much wasted by the persecution of the Emperor Dioclesian, and after that by the
Instigation of Augustine the Monk: yet God is never wont so to forsake his
people, as to leave no remnant amongst them to call upon his Name, who though
in process of time they came to be corrupted and polluted by Antichristian
usurpations and inventions, as all other Christian Nations were, yet that did
not cast them into a worse estate, then the estate of the ten tribes of Israel
under Jeroboam and his successors, especially under Ahab and Jezabel, and the
times succeeding; when as yet their Circumcision was not a nullity, as has
been declared above. Unless therefore you have any more to object against our
Baptism received in England from the power by which it is administered, let us
proceed to your next exception against our Baptism in England.

CHAP. XVIII.
THe second exception against our Baptism received in England, Silvester.
is taken from the false ground upon which it is administered, as the former was
from the false power, by which it is administered. Now that false ground upon
which it is administered, is the faith and profession not of the Parents (whose
Covenant you are wont to stand upon) but of the Godfathers and Godmothers,
whose Covenant does not reach by any Institution of God to their gossips
children, whatsoever it may do to their own.

I do willingly acknowledge, where the Parents of the baptized are still
living, and do intend to educate the children themselves, Silvanus.
there the use of Godfathers and Godmothers (as they call them) in Baptism
(though it be ancient) yet it is a sinful superaddition to the institution.
But when the Parents are dead or absent, and the child is to be brought up in
the house of a Christian friend and brother, the Covenant of such a Christian
brother extends to all that are borne in his house and bought with his money.
And hi^ profession before the Church to bring up the child committed to him, in
the way of the Covenant of Grace, it is as acceptabl^ for the receiving of the
child to Baptism, as the Covenant of Abraham was available to bring not only
his sons, but also all that were borne in his house, or bought with his
money, under the Covenant and seal of Circumcision, Genesis 17.12, 13.2. I may
further answer and testify upon knowledge, that many children have been and
are baptized in England without Godfathers and Godmothers, and without any
Interrogatories propounded to them, only upon the Covenant and profession of
their parents.

3. When children are baptized upon the profession of their Godfathers and
Godmothers, It is not the intendment or doctrine of the Church, to baptize
them, upon the Covenant and profession of their Godfathers: but to bind the
sureties that when the child grows up to years of capacity, they shall
assist the parents in the Christian Education of the child, that he may learn
and practice those good things, which at his baptism they promised and
undertook for him, as appears by the charge given to the sureties.

4. The superfluous superaddition of the sureties or Witnesses to the Sacrament
of Baptism, does not make Baptism a nullity: no more then the superaddition,
of Love Feasts to the Lords Supper, does make that a nullity. Wood, Hay, and
stubble laid upon a good foundation, does not take away the foundation. And
he that so builds does not lose his foundation, but his superstructure, the
superfluous work which he built upon it, 1 Cor. 3.12, 13, 15. If a defect in
the faith of man, does no^ make the faith of God of none effect, Romans 3.3, 4.
much less does a defect in the manner of the profession of the faith (to wit,
by a Deputy rather then by a man's own mouth) make the Covenant or the Seal of
the Covenant of none effect.

CHAP. XIX.
Silvester.
GO on a long, and tell me what you answer to the third exception against our
English Baptism, that is, the false manner, in which it is administered, to wit,
by sprinkling, not by dipping.

Silvanus.
I might answer you truly, that if dipping were the only way to be chosen, in
which children are to be baptized, yet, even so by dipping is Baptism
appointed to be administered in England, by the very Rubric in the
Common Prayer book. The Minister says the Rubricke shall take the child in
his hands, and asking the nam^ shall dip it in the water (so it be discreetely
and warily done:) And i^ the child be weak^, it shall suffice to pour water
upon it. Blame not therefore the Baptism in England for being administered in
such a mann^r, a^ your self desire; and not directing the other way, but in
case of the childs weakness, where God himself would ^ather accept of m^rcy
then sacrifice.

But I see not how sprinkling in any case can be true Baptism. Silvester.


For 1. Baptism never signifies sprinkling, but dipping. So that sprinkling
i^ against the Institution whereby the Apostles ar^ commanded to baptize
Disciples which is to dip them, not to be-sprinkle them.

2. The examples of Baptism in the New Testament show that Baptism was
administered by Dipping, not by sprinkling, John Baptist baptized ^y Dipping
Ioh. 3.23. Mat. 3.16. so did Philip the Evangelist. Acts 8.38, 39.

3. Dipping does lively Represent our fellowship with Christ in his Death,
Burial, resurrection; not so sprinkling.

It is utterly untrue, that Baptism never signifies sprinkling, Silvanus.
but dipping. It signifies generally washing, whether by dipping or
sprinkling: infusion, or affusion. In Acts 22.16. Be baptized and wash away
thy sins, the latter word interprets the former. In 1 Cor. 10.2. the
Israelites are said to have been al baptized in the^ cloud, and in the sea:
Wherein nevertheless they were not dipped, nor drenched, nor doused, but only
sprinkled, for they went over dry-shod, Exodus 14.22. In Heb. 9.10. where it is
said in the Greek the service stood in diverse Baptismes, the translation
reads i^, in diverse washings. In Dan. 4.33. where it is translated he was wet
with the dew of Heaven, the Greek Septuagint expresses it in the same word,
whereof Baptizing is derived.

Touching the second instance, whereby you ple^d for dipping from the ex^mple
of John Baptist and Philip, I willingly acknowledge, that Dipping is a lawful
manner of Baptizing. Bu^ if you contend from these example^^, that dipping is
the only way of Baptizing, and such a dipping as amounts to drenching, or
dousing, that is, to dipping of the whole body over head and ears, those
examples do not pr^^se upon us either of these: For though John Baptist did
bapti^e sometime in Jordan, sometime in Ae^^n, where there might (...) water
enough to drench the baptized* yet where h^d the Apostl^^ water enough in the
streets of Jerusalem to d^^nch the (...) p^rso^^, whom they baptized in one
day? Acts 2.41. It is much more probable, that they either sprinkled them with
water, or poured water upon their face or heads. For it is not said, that the
Apostles carried them away from thence to any poole, or river, where they might
be drenched. In Philips baptizing of Eunuch, it is said, they went down both
together into the water, to wit, both Philip, and the Eunuch, Acts 8.38. But
their going down into the water was not part of the Baptism: For Philip went
down into the water, as well as the Eunuch. And it was no part of Philips
meanning to baptize himself. Besides, the words translated they went down,
expresses no more but that they descended out of the Chariot into the water:
but how deep is not at all mentioned.

Furthermore, It is a consideration of weight with me, that though the person
baptized be said to descend into the water, yet the baptizing lay not in the
descending, or dipping of the body into the water, but in the sprinkling, or
pouring the water upon the body. For in dipping we apply the body to the
water: In sprinkling, or pouring the water, the water is applied to the body:
which does more lively set forth the grace of Christ in the washing away of our
sins; which is done, rather by applying Christ's blood to us, then by applying
our selves to the blood of Christ.

Moreover when you stand so much for dipping, I demand, and I pray you answer
to me, (or to your self ingenuously) Whether would you have the whole body
dipped or part only? If the whole body, whether naked, or clothed? If clothed,
then outward baptism is not a washing of the flesh, but of the clothes rather;
If naked, how will it stand with civility or modesty to Baptize men and women
of grown years, (for children you admit none) in the face of the whole
Congregation? No marvel then, if the Sect of the Adamites grow out of your
Sect. But if you require but part of the body to be baptized, I demand what
part? If the face, that is our usual manner of baptizing in England; but that
you implead, as false. If the hands and feet, and head also, that is it inde^d
which Peter offered in a like case, Joh. 13.9. But Christ answers him the
washing of one part was enough, and would suffice to signify the washing and
purifying of the whole man, every whit, v. 10. And in very truth, the whole
virtue and efficacy of the death of Christ is as well, and as fully applied in
the Act of sprinkling, as of dipping. When Esaias prophesied the Application of
the death of Christ to the Redemption of many Nations, he foretold, that
Christ should sprinkle many Nations, Esaias, 52.15. And when the Apostle
exhorts us to draw near unto God in full assurance of faith (in respect of
the perfect Oblation of Christ for us once for all, Heb. 10.22.) he expresses
our drawing near as having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and
our bodies washed with pure water, The faithful people of God are not wont to
value the virtue of the gifts of Christ, from the bulk of outward signs, but
from the lively virtue and power of the Spirit of life conveyed in them. The
Spirit of a Cordial is as much conveyed in a small dosis, as in a gross
drugge. It is a small morsel of Bread, and a little cup of Wine, which we
partake in at the Lord Supper: and yet therein we partake of whole Christ,
God and Man. If we should eat the whole Natural body of Christ, and drink
all his Blood, it would not profit us so much. It is the Spirit that quickneth
us, Ioh. 6.36. Bodily exercise profits "little. 1 Timothy 4.8.

But say you in your third exception, against sprinkling, sprinkling does not
so lively represent our fellowship with Christ n his Death, Buryall, and
resurrection, as dipping does.

Answ. Why not as lively, seeing as fully? Being sprinkled in our hearts from
an evil conscience, we draw near unto Christ in full assurance of Faith, as
you heard even now out of Heb. 10.22. and Christ in sprinkling many nations
applied to them the whole efficacy of his Death, Isa. 52.15. And the Apostle
sets forth the faithful of the New Testament, to have come to the
rightfruition of the riches, of gracious, and glorious Privileges of the
Heavenly Jerusalem, in that we are come to the blood of sprinkling, Heb.
12.24. And Peter also sets forth the full benefit of our election, in being
chosen (as the Original words run) to the obedience and sprinkling of the
Blood of Jesus, 1 Pet. 1.1. If therefore being sprinkled with the blood of
Christ, we have full fellowship with Christ in his Death, surely the
sprinkling of the person baptized with water in Baptism, does fully and lively
resemble the sprinkling and pouring out of the blood of Christ upon him. And in
his lying under the water poured and sprinkled upon him, thereby is plainly
shown forth his fellowship with Christ in his Buryall. And in his arising from
under the water, is in like sor^ held forth his fellowship with Christ in his
Resurrection.

CHAP. XXII.
Silvester.
What say you then to the fourth Exception, against the Baptism received in
England, taken from the false end, for which it is Administered, to wit, for the
Regeneration of the present Infants? And it plainly seems no otherwise to
me, by the prayers and Collects which are appointed to be read in the book
of the Common Prayer before, and after Baptism. For before Baptism they pray,
that the Infants coming to this holy Baptism, might receive remission of
sins by spiritual Regeneration. And after Baptism, the Minister is
appointed to give thanks upon this ground, that seeing these children are
Regenerate and graffed into the body of Christ's Congregation etc.

Silvanus.
For Answer, take these two things, and either of them will avoid your acception.

First, That the Church of England does not administer Baptism for this end, to
work Regeneration.

Secondly, That though it should aim at such an end, yet that would not make
the Baptism false.

For the fitst, The Church of England does professedly teach the contrary
Doctrine, not only in their Pulpits, but in Books allowed by public
authority, That the Sacraments does not beget Faith, nor Regeneration, ex opere
operato, but they are signs and seals of both. Neither do the public
prayers of the Church hold forth their judgment otherwise. But as in judgment
they do believe, that God by Covenant promises to pour clean water upon us,
and upon our seed, Ezekiel. 36.25. Isa. 44.3. and that he seals the Covenant and
promise by Baptism: So before Baptism they pray him to accomplish this
Promise according to his Covenant, which God is about to confirm by that
seal. And after Baptism they taking Gods Word and Seal as a Pledge and
assurance of the thing already done, which will indeed in due time be done
according to the true intent and meaning of Gods Word and Seal, (that is, to
the elect seed absolutely, to the natural seed sufficiently to leave them
without excuse in the offer of the means) they therefore give him thanks for
it, as done already. When Israel heard their redemption out of Egypt, and saw
the signs which Moses wrought for the confirmation of it, they believed and
bowed their heads and worshipped, as if they had seen the work already
wrought, which they saw only in the promise and in the sign, Exodus 4.30, 31.
When Gedeon had received the promise of deliverance from the Midianites, and
saw the same confirmed by a sign (though it were but by a dream) he
worshipped God with praise and thanksgiving; as if the deliv^rance had been
already wrought, Judges, 7.13, 14, 15. I need not apply it.

For the Second, Though the Church of England had such a corrupt and false end
in their Baptism (which they have not) as to administer the same for the
working of Regeneration: yet that would not make it a false Baptism. The
Nature and virtue of the Sacrament does not depend upon the intention of the
Minister. The Jewish Teachers in the time of Christ, and of his Apostles had a
corrupt and false end in Administering Circumcision, to wit, as necessary to
Justification and Salvation, Act. 15. yet that misbeleife or unbeleife of man
did not evacuate the Faith of God, nor the truth of his Ordinance, Romans 3.3. In
the Dispensing of any Ordinance of God, a corrupt, or false end may vitiate or
evacuate any Ordinance to the Dispenser himself; not so to the receiver; They
that preached Christ of envy, intending to add affliction to Paul's Bonds,
their intent was corrupt and false, and so made their Ministry unprofitable to
themselves. Nevertheless Paul rejoiced in the preaching of Christ even in such
a way, Phil. 1.15, 16, 17, 18. which doubtless he would not have done if the
Preaching had been false, and produced only false effects in the people of
God.

CHAP. XXI.
THE Fifth exception against the Baptism received in England, Silvester.
taken from the false subject (meaning Infants) I am loath to trouble you any
more with that, we have had already speech enough for the present about it.
But because I meet with a further doubt about it, which stumbleth many, I pray
you speak a word further to it. The true subject of Baptism, is believers:
and though you add, their seed also, yet believers are the principal subject.
But now all the people of England being Baptized in their Infancy, it is now
come to pass, that the Baptism of believers is utterly abandoned out of
England. And if all other Churches did the like (as generally they do, except
it be a few^ whom the rest do commonly, but falsely call Anabaptists) then
the Baptism of believers would utterly be abandoned out of the world.

Silvanus.
Our answer is ready in two or three words.

First, If Infants themselves be believers (as some of them be, or else all of
them be damned, Mark. 16.16.) then in baptizing all the Infants of the
faithful, the Baptism of some believers is continued in them.

Secondly, If all the people of England be baptized, and many of them be
believers, then supposing (as has been proved) the Baptism of the seed of
believers to be lawful, there is no believer in England, nor in any such like
Church in the world, that is left unbaptized.

Thirdly, If a believer be not in Gods account baptized himself, till his
seed be baptized also, (as has been showed above) then abandon the Baptism
of the seed of believers (two wit, the Baptism of Infants) out of the world,
and abandon the baptism of believers out of the world, neither is there any
conpetent, reason, that should exclude Infants (the seed of believers) from
being capable and competent subjects of baptism, as well as their believing
Parents.

For first, They are consoederates with God (partakers of his Covenant) as well
as their parents. I will be (says God) a God unto thee, and to thy seed.

Secondly, They are Disciples of Christ, Holy, Freeborne, receivers of the
Kingdom of God, as has been opened above.

Thirdly, There is no Impediment in them to the Grace offered in Baptism, but
what by Grace they are capable of the removal thereof.

For first, Their a version from God is Habitual, not actual: and therefore
the pouring forth of the habit of Grace into them may remove it, which the Holy
Ghost is wont to do in the washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3.5, 6.

Secondly, Their sin was by the fall of their first parents, therefore their
restoring may be by the faith of their next parents. God is wont to observe
such a proportion, in Captivity, and Redemption; Ye sold your selves for
naught, and ye shall be redeemed without money, Isa. 52.^.

Thirdly, Lest the want of ability to make prof^ssion of their faith, should
have be taken up for an Impediment of their Baptism, God himself professes
in their behalf, that they are holy, the Disciples of Christ, Partakers of his
Covenant, Receivers of his Kingdom.

In a word therefore, If by all this conference, (that we have had together)
it may appear, that the Infants of believers are true and capable Subjects of
Baptism; then such as having been baptized in their Infancy, shall afterward
receive another Baptism, they are as well justly as commonly called
Anabaptist^: that is, such as are rebaptized, when they were once truly
baptized before.

CHAP. XXII.
I Will reply no more for the present, Only this let me say, Silvester.
I find my self by Grace able to believe for my self, but not so well able to
believe for my Children.

I deny not, but that is possible, Silvanus.
that a Christian man may believe some promises, when he cannot so readily
believe others.

But first believe it, it is a sin to us, not to believe all the gracious
promises which the Lord makes to us Zacharias could not believe that he
should have a son, no not when a son was promised him; but yet the Lord did
not fail to perform his promise and chastened him for that unbeleife, Luke
1.18, 19, 20.

Secondly The former leaving of your judgment against the Baptism of, your
seed, is such a killing sin to the life of the Covenant (as much as in you
lies) that till you do unfeignedly repent of it, the Lord may justly leave
you to straitness of heart, and unbeleife in the promise for your child.

Thirdly, Notwithstanding the straitness of your heart and Faith toward your
child, yet if you submit your self and child unto the Lord, and to his
Covenant and to the seal thereof, the Lord knows how to perform his
promises with us, and our children, not only above what we can beleev^, but
above all that we can ask or think. Ehes. 3.20.

Fourthly, Remember you had a faithful Father* and gracious Mother, whom God
did enable to believe for themselves, and for their children to many
Generations. God is not wanting to respect children for the Covenant of their
Forefathers, when their next Fathers may be straightened toward them, Romans
11.28.

Fifthly* Remember also, that Sarah, though she believed not the promise of
God for a child at the first, but laughed at it, ( Genesis 18.12, 13, 14.) yet
afterward by meditation upon the promise, and upon the faithfulness and power
of him, that made it, she at length received strength both of faith to believe
the promise, and of body to conceive seed, because she judged him faithful who
had promised, Heb. 11.11. Follow her Godly example, meditate on all the
gracious promises have been alleged, and such other grounds of Faith in this
point, which have been (by the help of Christ) propounded to you: and who
knows, but you may receive of Christ strength of Faith, to believe as for
your self, so for your child, and be ready to offer it up (as your faithful
parents offered you) to the Lord, and to his Covenant, and to the seal
thereof? That so God may bring upon you, and upon yours, all the good that he
has promised to them that love him, and keep his Ordinanc^s: and may prevent
and keep of those fruits of his wrath and jealousy, wherewith he is wont to
visit the sins of the Fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
Generation. For the Lord even our God, is a jealous God, a consuming Fire.

Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding in all things.

FINIS.

