A TREATISE Against RECUSANTS, In defense of the Oath OF ALEGEANCE.

With Executions of Consideration, for repressing the increase of Papists.

By Sir ROBERT COTTON, Knight.

LONDON, Printed by RICHARD HEARN, Anno Dom. 1641.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
IT being my late happiness to light on this no less rational than elegant
Treatise, I should have counted my self very unworthy of its view, had I but
coveted to have hid it from thine; For as he whose power prevents an ill, and
he whose purpose performs a good, may both alike merit reward; so he who
meditates mischief, and he who hides a benefit, as they are both alike debtors
to their Country, so they deserve to be paralels in punishment.

Nor is this ensuing Treatise like the common Bastardy of our age, forced to
usurp an eminent Patron, the better thereby to cloak the baseness of an
illegitimate birth: for though with strictest survey you examine its parts, and
curiously canvass both Matter and Method, yet shall you find it in all things
so acurately excellent, and in every parcel so favoring the Father, as that
you will freely avouch so deserving a child may most justly claim so worthy a
Parent. And though now being brought forth into the world, I believe it cannot
but undergo a double and different censure, as savouring to the one part of
too much mercy, and to the other of overmuch severity; yet for mine own
particular, I find it of so moderate a temper, mitigating severity by
mildness, and mildness by severity, still upholding Justice; that I cannot
but conceive, it may give a sufficient satisfaction to any indifferent and
impartial Reader. However, our modest Author in all things submits to better
Judgments, and with an artificial hand has drawn a Line, to let thee know
the rarely-skilled Apelles has been here.

A TREATISE AGAINST RECVSANTS, IN DEFENSE of the oath of ALLEAGIANCE: ALSO,
EXECVTIONS OF CONSIderation for repressing the increase of Papists.
The question whether Recusants should be executed, or rather imprisoned, well
discussed.
I Am not ignorant that this latter Age has brought forth a swarm of busy
heads, which measure the great mysteries of State by the rule of their
selfe-conceited wisdom. But if they should consider the Commonwealth governed
by grave and wise Counselors, to be like unto a Ship directed by a skillful
Pilot, to whom the necessity of occasions, and ground of reason why he steereth
the helm to this or that point of the Compass, are better known than to those
that stand aloof off; they would be more sparing, if not more wary in their
resolutions. For my own particular, I must confess I am naturally too much
inclined to his opinion who once said, Qui been latuit, been vixit: and freely
calling to mind the saying of Functius, Disce meo exemplo mandato munere fungi
-- Et fuge tu pestem, I could easily forbear to make my handwriting the
record of my opinion, which nevertheless I protest to maintain rather
deliberatively, than by the way of conclusive assention; wherefore, without
wasting precious time any longer, I will briefly set down the question in the
terms following.

Whether it be more expedient to suppress Popish practices against the due
allegiance to his Majesty, by the strict execution of the Laws touching
Jesuits and Seminary Priests: or to restrain them in close Prisons during
life, if no reformation follow.

THe doubt propounded, consisting of two branches to be distinctly handled, and
by comparing either part, the convenience mentioned in the question, may be
cleared with mere facility. In favor of the first division, Mercy forerunning
the repentance of a malefactor, is an ill guardian to a princes person.
there are not a few, who grounding themselves on an ancient proverb, A dead
man bites not; affirm that such are dangerous to be preserved alive, who being
guilty, condemned, and full of fear, are likely, for purchase of life and
liberty, to engage their utmost in desperate adventures, against their King and
Country. No less is to be feared, while the sword of Justice is remiss in
cutting off heinous offenders against the dignity of the Crown; A hard hand
suddenly remitted, is seldom by rude people interpreted in the best sense.
the misled Papal multitude in the interim may enter in a jealous suspense,
whether that forbearance proceed from the fear exasperating their desperate
humors, or that it is now become questionable whether the execution of their
Priests be simply for matter of State, or pretended quarrel of Religion. There
is no hope of reformation, were there no confession of the fault.
And whereas in a remediless inconvenience its lawful to use the extremity of
the laws against some few, that others may by terror of their example be
reformed; what hope can there be that clemency can tame their hearts, who
interpret his Majesty's grace in transporting their Priests out of the Realm,
to be a mere shift to rid the prisons of those whom conscience could not
condemn of any capital crime. While justice sleeps, the time serves to sow
new laws, and raise factions.
Neither are there wanting whisperings, not to be neglected, by which they
seek to confirm the fearful souls on their party, and to inveigle the
ignorant, doubtful, and discontented persons. For if the glorious extolling of
their powerful friends, and the expectance of a golden day be suffered to win
credit with the meaner sort, the relapse cannot be small, or the means easy
to reform the error, without a general combustion of the State. Let
experience speak something in this behalf, Fearful spirits by sufferance
grow insolent and cruel.
which has evidently descryed within the current of a few years, that the
forbearance of severity has multiplied their rout in such a manner, that it
remains as a corrosive to a thousand of his Majesty's well affected Subjects.
To what purpose serves it, to muster the names of the Protestants, or to vaunt
them to be ten for one of the Roman faction, Union in a prepared conspiracy
prevails more then number.
as if bare signs of numeration could prevail against an united party, and
resolved, and advised before hand to turn their faces with assurance, to all
dangers, whilst in the mean time the Protestants nusling in vain security,
suffer the weeds to grow up, that threaten their bane, and merciless ruin.
Sometimes the oath of Alleagiance cloked their presumptuous imagination, It is
hard to persuade those who by reason of their dependence on the pope are scarce
master of their own souls.
and yet could not that infernal smoke be wholly smothered, nor the Locusts
issuing thereout be cleansed from the face of this Land.

Now that the temporal power of the King, contained in the oath of
Alleagiance, is by the Papal Sea, and may by the order thereof impudently be
avoucht unlawful; Shall the broachers of such doctrine be suffered to live,
yea to live, and be releeved of us, for whose destruction they groan daily?

Malis benefacere, tantundem est, ac bonis malefacere.
To be a right Popish Priest in true English sense, is to bear the character of
a disloyal, degenerate of his natural obedience toward his Sovereign, whom
if by connivency he shall let slip, or chastise with a slight hand; in what
immunity may not treacherous delinquents in lesser degrees expect or challenge
after a sort in equity and justice? If there were no receiver, there would be
no thieves: Likewise if there were no harborers of these Jesuits, its to be
presumed they would not trouble this Isle with their presence: Fellowship in
misery eases grief, and by a clamor of a multitude justice is many ti^^^es
condemned.
and rigor must be extended against the receivers, that the Jesuit may be kept
out of doors; were it then indifferent Justice to hang up the accessory, and
let the principal go free? to suffer the Priest to draw his breath at length,
whilst the entertainer of him under his roof submits his body into the
executioners hands? without doubt if it be fit to forbear the chief, it would
be necessary to receive the second offender.

Reputation is one of the principal arteries of the Commonwealth, which
Maxim is so well known of the Secretaries of the Papacy, that by private
forgeries and public impressions of calumniations, they endeavor to wound us
in the vital part. Howsoever therefore that some few of that stamp, being
better tempered than their fellows, in defense of their present government,
have not spared to affirm that Tyranny is unjustly ascribed thereunto,
forasmuch as freedom of conscience, after a sort, may be redeemed by money: It
is not good to set a price upon that which being sold, repentance is to the
seller.
Notwithstanding there want not many Pamphlets of their side, who opprobriously
cast in our teeth, that converting the penalty inflicted upon Recusants, and
refusers of the oath of Alleagiance, is gone from the Kings Exchequer, to a
particular purse. Surely we cannot presume that those Libellors should be
dissuaded from spitting out their venom maliciously against us, when they
shall see their Priests mued up without further process of Law. Wariness is
to be used with those Quines totamservitutem pati possint, nec tota libertatem.
For either they will attribute this his calm dealing to the justice of their
cause, the strength of their parts, or patience, or that no act of time has
discovered our Laws, importing overmuch sharpness in good policy to be
thought fitter for the abnegation of their nonsense, then repealed by a
public decree. Most men write good turns in Sand, and bad in Marble.
Moreover it is thought by some, that if their Seminaries be only restrained,
that they may prove like snakes kept in ones bosom, such as Bonner, Gardner,
and such of the same livery, showed themselves to be after liberty obtained in
Queen Mary's days, and if the lives of their ghostly Fathers agrieve them,
its probable they would take arms sooner, and with more courage to free the
living, then to set up a Trophee for the dead.

Fugitives that crave succor, use to lie much in favor of their cause and power.
Howsoever, the Jesuits band is known in their native soil to be defective in
many respects, which makes them underlings to the Protestants, as in authority,
arms, and the protection of Laws, which is all in all, nevertheless they
insinuate themselves into foreign Princes, favoring their parries, with
promises of strong assistance at home, if they may bewell backed from abroad; to
which purpose they have delivered the inhabitants of this Realm into four
Sects, whereas ranking their troops in the first place, as due to the
pretended Catholics, they assume a full-fourth to their party, and of that
part again they make a subdivision into two portions; namely, of those that
openly renounce the established Church of England, and others, whose certain
number as yet cannot be known, because they frequent our Service and
Sacraments, reserving their hearts to their god the Pope. The second party they
allot to the Protestants, It is a sign When a faction dare number their side,
they conceive an opinion of sufficient strength to attempt some innovation.
who retain yet as they say, some relics of their Church. The third rank,
and largest was left unto the Puritans, whom they hate deadly, in respect they
will not hold an indifferent quarter with Papists. The fourth and last maniple
they assign to the Politicians, Huomini (say they) senza Deo senza anima, Men
without fear of God, or regard of their own souls, who busying themselves in
matters of State, retain no senfe of religion. No doubt if the authors of this
partition have cast their accounts aright, we must confess that the later
brood is properly to be ascribed to them. Discontented minds in beginning of
tumults will agree, though their end be diverse.
For if the undermining of the Parliament house, the scandalizing of the King
in print, who is Gods anointed, and the refusal of natural obedience, be
marks of those that stand neither in awe of God, nor conscience; well may the
Papists boast that they are assured of the first in number, and may presume of
the last in friendship when occasion shall be offered. A multitude is never
united in gross, but in some few heads; which being taken away, converteth
their fury against the first movers of the sedition.
For the preventing of which combination, it is a sure way to cut off the heads
that should tie the knot; Or at least brand them with a mark in the forehead
before they be dismissed: or after the opinion of others, to make them unwelcome
to the feminine sex, which now with great fervency embrace them; like unto
certain Germans in* Italy, who calling themselves Publicans, were marked with
a hot iron in the forehead, and whipped, being thrust out in the midst of winter,
with a prohibition none should receive them, and dyed of hunger and cold.

These are for the most part arguments vented in ordinary discourse, by many
who suppose a Priests breath to be contagious in our English air. Others there
are who maintain the second part of the question, with reasons not unworthy of
observation. Death is the end of temporal joys, but it may no way he
accounted the grave of memory. Therefore howsoever it is in the power of
justice to suppress the person of a man, the opinion for which be suffered,
conceived truly or untruly in the hearts of the multitude, is not subject to
any sword, how sharp or keen soever. I confess, the teeth are seen that bite
only out of the malice of a singular faction, Rooted superstition being
violently handled, does grow more wary, not less obstinate.
but when poison is diffused through the veins of a Commonwealth, with
intermixtures of a blood good and bad, separation is to be made rather by
patient evacuation, then present incision. The greatest biter of State is envy,
joined with the thirst of revenge, which seldom declares it self in plain
colors, until a jealousy conceived of personal danger break out into
desperate resolutions. Hen^^ comes it to pass that when one malecontented
member is grieved, the rest of the body is sensible thereof. If Conspirators
have one sympathy of mind, the conspiracy is never sufficiently suppressed so
long as one of them remains.
Neither can a Jesuit or a Priest be cut off without a general murmuring of
their followers, which being confident in their number, secretly arm for
opposition, or confirmed with their Martyrs blood as they are persuaded,
resolve by patience and sufferance to glorify their cause, and merit heaven:
Do we not daily see it is easier to confront a private enemy, then a society
or corporative? and that the hatred of a State is more mortal then the spleen
of a Monarchy. Therefore except it be demonstrated that the whole Roman City
which consists not of one brood, Opinion settled in a multitude, is like Hidras
head, which must be cured by fearing, not by letting blood.
but of a succession of persons, may be cut off at the first stroke, as one
entire head; I see no cause to think our State secured by sitting on the
skirts of some few Seminaries, leaving in the mean time a multitude of
snarlers abroad, who only show their teeth, but wait for opportunity to bite
fiercely. I will not deny but whom we fear we commonly hate, provided always
that no merit has interceded a reconciliation. For there is a great difference
betwixt hatred conceived against him that will take the life, and him that may
justly do it, and yet in clemency forbeares to put it in effect; for the
latter breeds a reverent awe, Clemency is a divine justice, and works
supernatural effects.
whereas the former subjects to servile fear, always accompanied with desire
of innovation. And though it has been affirmed of the Church of Rome, Quod
pontificum genus semper crudele: Nevertheless, out of charity let us hope that
all devils are not so black as they are painted; Gorticus axiom. polit.
some, or perhaps many of them there are whom conscience, or in default
thereof, pure shame of the world, will constrain to confess that his Majesty
most graciously distinguishes the throne of Popery from the active part
thereof, as being naturally inclined, Parvis peccatis veniam, magnis
securitatem; Tacit. in vita Agricalae.
poena semper, sed poenitentia aliquando contentum esse.

Mistaking of punishment legally inflicted, commonly proceeds from fond pity,
and the interest which we have in the same cause, both which beget blind
partiality.

When traitors in mifchiefes will not choose the least, it argues they are
desperate and breathe nothing but extremity of mischief.
Admit then, that the Papal side affecting merit by compassion, may be nearely
touched with the restraint of their Seminaries; I cannot be denied I hope,
except they had the hearts of Tigers, that in humanity they will prefer their
ease of durance, before the rigor of death. And albeit that Parsons,
Bellarmine, and the Pope himself constrain their spiritual children to
thrust their fingers into the fire by refusing the Oath of Alleagiance;
Notwithstanding we have many Courts, Judicial testimonies, and printed Books,
that the greater part of them are of the. The bane hunters mind, who would
have rather seen his dogs cruel acts, then have felt them to his own cost:
Garnet himself also in one of his secret It was a precept of Machivell to put
on the mask of religion, which is now become a popish aph^risme.
Letters, laments, that after his death he should not be extolled amongst the
Martyrs, because that no matters of Religion were objected against him, yet in
his demeanors it plainly appeared, that he would gladly have had the
possibility of that glory, if any such had remained; neither is it to be
presumed, that being in prison, he would ever have conceived that we durst not
to touch his reverence, or that the Law was remiss that had justly condemned
him, and left his life to the Kings mercy. It is the distance of the place, So
it pleased Parsons to cavil: of whom it may be truly said, Malus malum
peiorem, peiorem esse vult and sus similem.
not Parsons, that interpreted the sending over the Seas of their Priests, to
be a greater argument of their innocence, than of his Majesty's forbearance:
for had Parsons himself been Coram nobis, his song would rather have been of
mercy, than justice. It is truly said, that we are instructed better by
examples, than precepts. Therefore if the Laws printed, and enditements
recorded cannot controlle the calumniations of 2023. of that backbiting
number, I doubt not but that the question may be readily decided:

-- Namque immedicabile vulnus,
Esse recidendum est, ne pars syncera trabatur.
To dally with pragmaticall Papists, especially those that by their examples
and counsels pervert his Majesty's subjects, To bestow benefits on the bad,
makes them worse, and vilifies the reward to the virtuous.
I hold it a point of mere injustice: for what comfort may the good expect,
when the bad are by connivency freed to speak what they list, and emboldened
to put their disloyal thoughts in execution. For example therefore of my
meaning, it is necessary to have regard to the nature of the Kings liege people
that are to be reformed to the example of justice, and other forreiners, who
will they, nill they, must be observers of our actions. It has truly been
observed, that the Nations of Europe which are most remote from Rome, are more
superstitiously inclined to the dregs of that place, then the nearer neighbors
of Italy; whether the humor proceed from the complexion of the Northern
bodies, which is naturally inclined to old custom, more than Southern
regions: Or that the vices of the City seated on seven hills, are by crafty
Ministers of that Sea, concealed from the vulgar sorts; I list not now to
discuss: but most certain it is, that the people of this Isle exceed the
Romans in zeal of their profession; insomuch that in Rome it self, I have
heard the English fugitives tasked by the name of Pischia petti Inglisi,
Knock-breasts, hypocrites. Now as our countrymen took surer hold of Papal
traditions from others, so are they naturally better fortified with a courage
to endure death for the maintenance of the cause. For this Climate is of that
temperature, out of which Vigetius holds it fittest to choose a valiant
soldier, where the heart finding it self provided of plenty of blood to
sustain sudden defects, it is not so soon apprehensive of death or danger,
Valor is overcome, by meekness, but being too much suppressed turns to
unbridled fury.
as where the storehouse of blood being small, every hazard makes pale
cheeks and trembling hands. Angli (say ancient writers) bello in trepidi, nec
mortis sensu deterrentur. And thereupon Botero the Italian bears witness in
his relations, that many strangers coming out of foreign parts, amongst the
rarities of England, desired to see whether report had not been too lavish in
affirming that our condemned persons sold their bodies to death with
cheerfulness, and were it not that by daily experience we can call our selves
to witness this truth, I could produce the reverent Judge Fortescue, The best
laws are made out of those good customs whereunto the people are naturally
inclined.
who in commendation of our English Laws, made suitable (as he well observes)
to the inbred conditions of the inhabitants of this foil, avoucheth that the
English people in trial for criminal causes, are not compelled by tortures to
confess, as in other Nations it is used; forasmuch as the English Nation is
known to be less fearful of deaths torments; Use to see men die with
resolution, takes away the fear of death, for which reason the Romans used
the fights of the gladiators.
for which cause if the torments of the Civil Law were offered to an innocent
person, he would rather yield himself guilty and suffer death, than endure the
hours of lingering pains. Insulam plerumque fures inhabitant, says one, and
so true it is that this Country is stained with that imputation,
notwithstanding that many are put to death, to the end that others by their
facts might learn in time to beware. If then it does not appear that terrors
do not prevail to keep men from offenses, The Heretics and publicans being
whipped, took their punishment gladly, their captain going before, and
singing, blessed are men that hate you.
which are to be condemned by Law and Conscience, what assurance can they have
to scare those which are constantly satisfied in their minds, that their
sufferings are either expressly, or by implication for matter of Religion, and
health of their souls; in such a death to threaten death to English men, is a
matter of small consequence: Purpur at is Gallis, Italis, aut Hispanis is it a
minitare. To a settled resolution it boots not to show the dreadful vizzard
of deaths menaces, to prolong a wearisome life prevails much more in such
cases. Andromachen cogere sivis, vitam monitare. Sen
Rightly did Clement the eighth consider, that by burning two English men in
Rome for supposed heresy, rather impaired his cause, then bettered it,
insomuch that many being present at the death of Master Marsh, who was brought
to dust, In campo de sancta Flora, spared not to proclaim him for a Martyr,
carried away his ashes for a relic, and wished their souls at the same place
with his, which news being brought to the Popes ear, caused him, as it was
bruted about in Rome, solemnly to protest that none of the English nation
should publicly from that time forward be consumed with fire. Worldly desires
may be quenched with godly meditations, but heavenly hopes cannot be abated by
earthly punishments.
On the other side, if we read the Volumnes written in praise of their Priests
constancy, their Martyrology, or Calendars of Martyrs, and path way of
salvation chalkt out to the Papists, by sacrificing their lives to the Pope; we
shall find that by taking away of one, we have confirmed and invited many,
whereof I could give particular instances, if I thought any scruple were made
in that point. As for foreign parts which hold with the Papal supremacy, it
is clear they will be severe and partial judges in this cause. for albeit
here in England it is well known to all true and loyal Subjects, It is a
point of wisdom to maintain the truth with as little disputation as may be,
least a good cause be marred with ill handling.
that for matter of Romish doctrine, no man's life is directly called in
question, but that their disobedience in matters of State is the only motive of
their persecution: Nevertheless where a great Canton of Christendom is rooted
in a contrary opinion, and things of the world are for the most part esteemed
by outward appearance; the Land cannot escape malicious scandals, neither shall
there want Colleges to supply the faction with Seminaries. Therefore again
and again I say, that if the state of the question were so set, that it were
possible by a general execution of Priests, and their adherents to end the
controversy, I could in some sort with better will subscribe thereunto. But
seeing I had little hope in that course, It is hard to make a rule so general,
against which difference of circumstance cannot except.
I hold it safer to be ambitious of the victory which is purchased with less
loss of blood, and to proceed as Tully teaches his Orator, who when he cannot
fully overthrow his adversary, yet ought he to do it in some sort, and withal
to endeavor to confirm his own party in the best manner he can. He that
forbeares to sow his ground in expectance of a good wind, and favorable
moon, commonly has a poor crop, and a lean purse; So shall it fare with the
State, if private whisperings of discontented persons, that never learned to
speak well, never to be nicely regarded, yet are they not to be slightly set
at naught, lest our credit grow light, even in the balance of our dearest
friends. He that is calumniated by many, is in danger, first to be suspected by
his friends, and shortly to be condemned, if the slander continue.
The papisticall Libels inform against us, that we are desirous to grow fat
with sucking of their blood, the very walls of their Seminary counsels at Rome
are bedawbed with their lying fancies, and in every corner the corner-creepers
have some badge of their malicious spleen against us, crying out of our
cruelty and persecutions. But if the penalty of death be changed into a simple
durance of prisons, what moate can they find in our eyes to pull out, or with
what Rhetoric can they defend their obstinate malapertnesse, with repaying us
evil for good, but deserve to have coals of indignation poured upon their
heads. Visne muliebre consilium, to Augustus, let severity sleep a while, and
try what alteration the pardoning of them will bring: The Emperor hearkened
unto the counsel, That counsel takes best effect, which is fitted to the
nature of the times and persons.
and thereby found his enemies mouths stopped, and the fury of their malice
abated; some there are perchance that will term this clemency innovation, and
vouch the president of that City, who permitted none to propound new Laws,
that had not a Collar about their necks ready for vengeance, if it were found
unprofitable. But let such Stoics know that there is a great difference
betwixt the penning a new Law, and advice given for manner of executing it;
Those changes of State are safely made, which reserving most part of the
ancient form, betters it, and reduces effects into order.
neither by their leaves are all innovations to be rejected: for divine Plato
teaches us, that in all Commonwealths, upon just grounds there ought to be
some changes, and that Statesmen therein must behave themselves like skillful
Musicians, Qui artem Musices non mutant, sed Musices modum. That an ill weed
grows fast by the example of the new Catholics increase, is clearly
convinced; but he that will ascribe this generation simply to his Majesty's
heroical virtue of clemency, argues out of the fallacy which is called
Ignoratio Elenchi. Was not the zeal of many cooled toward the end of Queen
Elizabeth's reign? Have not the impertinent heads of some of our own side
bereft us of part of our strength, and the Papacy with tract of time gotten a
hard skin on their consciences? Parvametu primo mox sese, The Church is most
zealous when persecution is most fresh in memory; when those times forgotten,
we fall to loath that which we enjoy freely.
attollit in altum. But if we will have a better insight, behold how this great
quantity of Spawne is multiplied; we must especially ascribe the cause thereof
to their Priests, who by their deaths prepare and assure more to their Sect,
then by their lives they could ever persuade. It were incivility to distrust a
friend, or one that has the show of an honest man, if he will frankly give his
word, or confirm it with a sacred Oath, but when protestation is made at the
last gasp of life, it causes a greater effect, and possesses those that
cannot gainsay it upon their own knowledge. The number of those Priests which
now a days come to make a Tragical conclusion is not great, yet as with one
seal many Patents are sealed, so with the loss of few lives, numbers of:
wavering spirits may be gained. Sanguis Martyrum, In this case the question is
not so much of the truth of it, as who shall judge, and what censure be given.
semen Ecclesiae, and though their Priests having a disadvantagious cause, are
indeed but counterfeit Martyrs to a true understanding, yet will they be
reputed for such by those that lay their souls in pawn upon their doctrine,
with whom, if we list to contend by multitude of voices, we shall be cried
down without peradventure. For the gate of their Church is wide, and many
there be that enter thereinto. By diverse means it is possible to come to one
and the selfsame end, In the first year of Qu: Elizabeth it was easier to
subdue popery then now, for then they feared to irritate the Estates, not
knowing how far sincerity might extend. Now knowing the worst, they are
resolved agere and pati fortia.
seeing that the Sum of our willingness and well wishing is all one; namely,
that Popish priests may have no power to do harm, it is impertinent to try
sundry paths, which way to lead us to the perfection of our desires.
Politicians distinguish Inter Rempublicam constitutam, and Rempublicam
constituendam: according to the several natures thereof, Statists are to
dispose of their counsels and ordinances. Were the Rhemists and Romulists new
hatched out of their shell, the former course of severity might soon bury their
opinions with their persons; but since the disease is inveterated, variety of
medicine is to be applied, but judiciously. The Romans did not punish all
crimes of one and the selfsame nature with extremity of death, for some they
condemned to perpetual banishment in prison, and others they banished into an
Island, and some remote Country. In case of religion they were tender to dip
their finger in blood; for when Cato was Consul, and it seemed good to the
Senate to suppress with violence the disordered Ceremony of the Bacchanals,
brought into the City by a strange Priest, he withstood their sentence, Vulgus
est moresum animal, quod facilius duci potest quam cogi.
alleging there was nothing so apt to deceive many as Religion, which always
pretends a show of Divinity; and therefore it behooves them to be very wary in
chastising thereof, lest any indignation should enter into the peoples mind,
that something was derogated from the Majesty of their god. Others more freely,
have not feared to place religion which is ignorantly zealous, amongst the
kinds of frenzy, which is not to be cured otherwise then by time giving, to
direct or qualify the fury of the conceit. Tantum religio potuit suadere
malorum. Howsoever in valuing the power of a City, as therein strength of
arguments, quality, and worth is to be preferred before number. Nevertheless,
where the uttermost of our fear is not known, Many Partisans encourage the
faint hearted: and where an enemy cannot pre veil against number, his thoughts
are not how to offend, but how to make a safe retreat.
it imports much, to have it conceived that the multitude stands for us. For
doubts and suspicions cast in an enemies way, evermore make things greater, and
more difficult than they are indeed. We have by Gods mercy the sword of Justice
drawn in our behalf, which in short time is able to disunite the secret
underminers of our quiet. We have a King zealous for the house of the Lord, who
needs not to fear less success in shutting up of the Priests, then our
late Queen had in restraining them in Wisbitch Castle, where lest factious
spirits should rust, they converted their canker to fret upon themselves, and
vomiting out their gall in Quodlibets, More Priests may be shut up in a year,
then they can make in many.
showed that their disease was chiefly predominant in the spleen: what
tempests they have raised in their College at Rome, their own books, and
many Travelers can witness, the scorn whereof was such, that Sixtus Quintus
complained seriously of the vexation which he received oftener from the English
Scholars, then from all the vassals of his Triple Crown. And truly is the
Magistrate noted of negligence, Desire of Innovation is rash and contentious,
and therefore can hardly agree of a head.
or overmuch security, that lays not wait to catch the Foxes, the little Foxes
which spoil the Vineyard, as without further punishments, reserving them to
the day wherein God will take account of their stewardships. For if Aristotle's
City deemed to be a society of men, assembled to live well, be the same which
in our Law has reference to the people in peace, so long as we taste of the
sweet of the peaceable government, we cannot say but that we live well, and
that the consisting of men, not of walls, is happily governed and guided. An
oath is of force so long as it is thought lawful; when that opinion is ceased,
it does more hurt than good.
An Oath is but a weak band to hold him, that will for pretended conscience
sake, hold no faith with Heretics, or by absolution of a Priest, thinks
himself at liberty to fly from any promise, or protestation whatsoever,
therefore when I remember that Watson the Priest, notwithstanding his invective
against the Jesuits, gained liberty to forge his treacherous inventions, and had
others of his society in the complot; I judge it safer to make recluses of
them, then to suffer such to dally with us by books, and some other idle
intelligences cast abroad, only as a mist to blind our eyes. But how shall we
find the means to apprehend those disguised Romanists, that borrow the shape
of Captains, Merchants, Gentlemen, Citizens, and all sorts of people, and by
equivocation may deny themselves? In answer to this question, I will first show
the reason why they are not pursued and taken, and after make an overture how
these may be bolted out of their hutches. The nature of man, One man in another
beholds the image of himself, and thereby grows compassionate, and sensible
of that which may fall to himself.
howsoever in hot blood, is to be thirsty of revenge in a chollerick temper, it
has a kind of Nausea, as I may call it, a distaste of taking away the lives,
even of the nocent. Insomuch that in all Assizes and Sessions, and offender can
hardly be condemned, whom the foolish pity of many after a sort, will not
excuse with laying some imputation on the Judges part, on the Jury, and much on
the accuser, and surely by their blind affections, praise the prisoner, who
perhaps was never commended for handsomnesse, yet is esteemed of them for one
of the properest men in the company. For hence it comes to pass that the name
of Sergeant, or Pursevant is odious, and the executioner, though the hand of
justice, is esteemed no better than an enemy to mankind, and one that lost
honesty in the Cradle. Reverend Master Fox was wont to say, that spies and
accusers were necessary members in a Commonweal, What men do unwillingly,
they do not effectually.
and deserved to be cherisht; but for his own part, he would not be one of
that number, nor wish his friends to affect such employments. And albeit the
Law commands every man to apprehend a fellon, do we not commonly see every man
content to stand by, and look on whilst others perform that office? Likewise
it is evident, that if such as are tender of their reputation, be very
scrupulous personally to arrest men for actions of debt, they will be more
unwilling in drawing their bodies to the Rack or Gallows, especially when there
is any color of Religion to be pretended in the case. The diversity of men's
faces is great, but that university of their minds and their cases are more
variable, wherein the meanest have thoughts as well as the highest. Besides,
there are too many of the blind Commonalty altogether Popish, though not
reconciled Papists, who in their foolish ignorance will say, it is pity any
should die for their conscience, though indeed thereby they make but honorable
amends for their treason. Verily I do not know what misgiving of the mind it
is that makes men forecast the possibility of alteration in the matters of
Religion, and for that respect they are exceeding backward in discovery, and
laying hands on Seminaries, yea, and over-timerous in enacting sharp Laws
against them, as they that silently say amongst themselves, Sors hodierna mihi,
cras erit illa tibi.

Some also revive a Text in Queen Mary's time, alleged by the Protestants,
that the tares should not be plucked up before harvest. Nay, Virtue neither
praised or commended, waxes cold.
shall I speak a bugbeare word? there is no small number that stand doubtful
whether it be a grateful work to cross Popery, or that it may be done
without a foul aspersion of Puritanisme, or a shrewd turn for their labor
one time or other. By which unhappy ambiguity it comes to pass that these
animalia, (...), the Priests I mean, that prey on the souls or bodies of
either sex unattached, revell where they list, though they are no more seen
than a man dancing in a net. How much fitter were it for us courageously to
invite them to our party by preaching, or confuting them by writing; and to the
State wherein we stand, wisely to apply the exhortation of the Assyrian King to
his soldiers. You are fools quoth he, if there be any hope in your hearts, to
redress sorrow by flight, make them fly which are the causes of your grief,
assuring your selves, that more perish in flight then in battle, even as many
seeking to meet the Papists but half way, discomfit our own party.

It follows now in order according to the method prescribed, that an overture
be made how to get the Jesuits and their shadows, the Priests, into our
profession. It has been heretofore recited, that the unwelcome name of a
blood-sucker, a busy body, or a Puritan, has been shrewd scare-crowes unto
many honest minds; by abrogating therefore of those or such like imputations,
An ill name given to a good thing, discourageth a man from meddling with it.
many will be stirred up to the apprehending of the adversaries unto the truth,
especially when for their pains and time employed, they shall deserve to have
the titles of dutiful subjects, and zealous Christians. Yet how ready is every
common person to carry every malefactor rather to the stocks, then to the
Jail, Wise men forecast how to do most with least voice.
or execution? And doubtless they will be no less forward to attach a Priest
when they are assured that the worst of his punishment shall be a simple
restraint within the walls of some old Castle. A certain kind of people there
is, with whom money plays a more forcible Orators part, then any persuasion of
their dutiful service which they owe to the Commonwealth; these men will not
be negligent to give intelligence, and also to procure it faithfully, provided
that the reward may help to releeve their thredbare purse, and exempt them from
need to sell liberty to Seminaries; and where assured hope of gain is
propounded for discovery, what Master or Housekeeper will trust his servant
with keeping of his secrets herein, whilst he is thereby engaged to the danger
of a mercenary? I remember that in Italy it was told me the bountiful hand of
Sir Francis Walsingham made his intelligencers so active, that a Seminary could
scarce stir out of the gates of Rome without his privity; which success may
be as easily obtained by the mediation of gold from Sivill, Valledolid, Doway,
Lovaine, Particular offices must be appointed; what is left for all, is
commonly performed by none.
and Paris, and by forewarning of their approach, they may be waited for at the
Port, and from thence be conveyed to safe lodging. But where shall the stream
flow that shall feed this bounty? no doubt it may easily be satisfied, if some
thousands of pounds out of the Recusants penalties be reserved in stock, and be
committed by his Majesty to the disposing of zealous distributers, who will not
be afraid to conclude, Perdat fiscus ut capiat Christus. Neither need we seek
any further succor to repair decayed Castles, and therein to defray the
charge of the Priests, with a sure guard to keep them, then the forenamed
forfeitures, that by the justice of the Law may be collected: which course, if
ever it come happily to be entertained, and that Recusants cease to be an
ignominious prey to the subject, the proceeding for Religion shall be less
blamed, and perhaps altogether unjustly accused by any Gretserus, or Cacodemon
Johannes, their pens being tincted in Gall or Vinegar. For beside occasion of
calumniation given by suites of that nature, Service done for the Kings proper
use, has his warrant and countenance; but when a private man has the gain,
neither reward, nor bearing out can be expected, and by consequence Recusants
are free.
it is evident that many are Recusants that would be indicted for the King, and
for the effecting the project aforesaid shall escape without punishment, and be
borne out against the power of a private person, begging then to no other
purpose then has before been used. And albeit the penalty be raised and rated
at twenty pounds a month, yet was it never the Lawmakers intent, that such as
were not able to pay so great a sum, should go scot-free, but rather
according to the proportion of their ability, they should do the penance of
their parts for their disobedience. A poor man, says one, is to be pitied,
if he offend through necessity, but if he do amiss voluntarily, he is to be
punished severely; because wanting friends and means he shows his fault comes
from presumption. Let us now suppose that the whole regiment of Jesuits and
Seminaries were lodged in safe custody, may we then persuade our selves that
Popery will vanish like a dumb show? I am fully resolved, Medicines that work
in the spirits of men, are of greater force, and cure more surely than
plasters.
that though it receive a great eclipse, notwithstanding without the helps,
the kingdom of Antichrist will only be hidden as a weed that seems withered
in other winter, and is ready to sprout out again with the spring. Temporal
arms are remedies for a time, but the spiritual sword is permanent in
operation, and by an invisible blow works more than mortal man can imagine.
The word of God caries the two-edged weapon in its mouth, which is to be used
by faithful Ministers in the Church, whom pure zeal, without respect to
worldly promotions or persons, ought to encourage. Of Judges the Scripture
says, Estote fortes; and daily we see, that sitting in their judicial seats,
God inspireth them with greater courage then when as private men they are to
give their opinions.

No less is the power of the holy Ghost in his servants, that out of the
Pulpit are to deliver his Embassage. Let them not therefore be dismayed to
speak out plainly, and tell the truth without running the middle course, Such
is the interpreter of the mind therefore who uses in divine matters to speak
reservedly and in a double sense, he will be suspected to have a double heart
and unfit to teach them that trust him not.
betwixt heat and cold, unprofitably descanting upon the Scriptures with an old
postell, or for want of better matter, waste the short time shut up in an hour
glass, with skirmishing against the worthy Pillars of our own profession.
Rumor which is over-ready to take hold of evil, has (...) a secret thought,
(I hope a causlesse suspi^^^^) that there should be some combination
unders^^^d, by changing the States of questions, to put us in our old days to
learn a new Catechism (...) and when they have brought us out of conceit with
the reverent awfulnesse of the word, to use us then, as the Wolves mentioned in
D^mosthenes Apology handled the shepherds when they had delivered up their
dogs. Most sacred was the speech of our late gracious King, concerning
Vorstius, He that will speak of Canaan, let him speak the language of Canaan.
How can we draw others to our Church, if we cannot agree where, or how to lay
our foundation, or how to cleanse the leprous disease of dissension, which the
Papists, most doubtful of their salvation, are not ashamed to ascribe to many
of us. I would not have Ministers undiscreet, like dogs, to bark at all,
whether they know, or know them not: I like better the opinion of Aristotle,
who advised those that stood in guard of a place, to be cursed only to such as
are about to endamage the City. A good pastor is the physician of the soul and
ought to apply his doctrine according to the tenderness of the conscience, for
want of which discretion some men's zeal has done hurt.
If Pursevants and other civil Officers would learn to keep this rule, they
might go about their business with much more credit. The imagined fear of
inviting the Romish factions by force to deliver their ghostly Fathers out of
prison moves not me a whit. For I cannot believe that they esteem them at so
great a price, that they would run the hazard of freeing others out of hold,
to put themselves into their places. Some will say that a man of straw is a
head good enough for a discontented multitude. That the Papists are choleric,
False miracles and lying news are the food of superstition which by credulity
deludeth ignorant people.
appears by their writings, yet it has pleased God to send those cursed Cowes
short horns, that when they could not find a man of mischief to serve their
turns, they were feign to do homage to Garnets straw, forgetful as they
were, that such stubble cannot endure the trial of the fire. But to us that
ought to be doers as well as professors of the Gospel, let this remain as a
memorable Theoreme, That religion is the mother of good order; good order is
the cause of prosperate fortune and happy success in all counsels, and
enterprises. Wherefore in what state soever there wants good order, it is
evident that religion goes backwards. I have ever held it for a kind of
injustice to omit the execution of mean Laws made to pervert the effect of
idleness, and then to apply many extremities of the sword, when the habit of
that vice comes to height. No less is the course uncharitable, with pardon of
presumption be it spoken, when we spare them that have no religion at all, and
censure those that give account of somewhat tending to the purpose: He that is
in misery must be borne withal, if he speak miserably: and when the child
from the mothers breasts have sucked nothing but Popery, a man had need to be
angry with discretion, if he hear him speak with the voice of a Priest; God
calls some by miracles, but the ordinary means is the word; if that means in
any place of this Land be wanting, of what religion will the people likeliest
be? I suppose that few men will deny my assertion, That outward sense will
direct them to Popery, which is fuller of Pageants, than spiritual doctrine.
And what is the cause, that after so many years preaching of the Gospel, the
common people still retain a sense of the Roman perfume? The cause is, that
the formal obedience of coming to Church has been more expected than the
instructions of private families. A man is said to know so much as he
remembers, and no more, and we remember what we learn in our youth:
therefore if we would be wise when we are old, we must be taught young.
Public Catechism is of great use, but the first elements thereof are to be
learned at home, and those which we learn of our Parents stick more surely in
our minds. What was the cause that the Spartans continued their government so
many revolutions of time without mutation? Histories record, that learning
their country customs from their infancy, they could not be induced to alter
them; and in this our native soil we perceive that common Laws which rely on
ancient custom are better observed than late Statutes of what worth soever
they be. So does it fare with the old people, who being seasoned with the old
dregs of Papisme, will hardly be drawn from it, till the learning of the true
faith be grown to a custom. I will prescribe no orders, or officers to effect
this. Such as the Princes house is such is the state of the commons for the
most part, so that a Prince by a survey of his own house may have an ^aime how
the commonweal is affected.
But I suppose the ancient laudable course of the Bishops Confirmation will not
be sufficient to fulfill so great a task. The Ministers ought and must be the
principal and immediate hands to give assistance to so gracious a work, and
in case any be defective in this duty, the reverend Bishops may take notice
thereof in their visitations. Perhaps it might be thought a hard task to
constrain old people to learn the A, B, C. of their Christian belief. By the
laws we are the tithingmen which give account for ten households, some such
office might do good in this case, for I hold the breaking of the saboth to be
the ruin of our religion.
But howsoever it be, I hold it no incivility to prepare people of all ages for
the kingdom of heaven, by the order contained in the book of Common Prayer,
or Sundaies and Holy Days, half an hour before Evensong, the Curate of every
Parish ought to examine Children sent unto him in some points of their
Catechism, and all Fathers, Masters, and Mothers should cause their Children
and Apprentises to resort unto the Church at the time appointed, there
obediently to hear, and be ordered by the Curate, until such time as they
shall learn all that in the said Book is commanded. And when the Bishop shall
appoint the Children to be brought before him for their Confirmation, the
Curate of every parish shall send or bring in writing the names of those
children in his Parish which can answer to the questions of the Catechism. And
there ought none to be admitted to the holy Communion, It were fit also they
learned how to distinguish the common grounds of Popery, whereby the Priests
deceive your people.
nor be confirmed until such time as he can say the Catechism. Many times I
have stood amazed to behold the magnificence of our ancestors buildings, which
their successors at this day are not able to keep up. But when I cast mine eyes
back upon this excellent foundation laid by the grave Fathers of the Church,
and perceive their Children neglect to build upon it, with exceeding marvel I
rest almost besides my self. For never was there better ground-plot laid,
which was seconded with less and worse success. It was not the hanging up of
the Bull of Pius Quintus on the Bishop of Londons doors, He that knows not
the true cause of an evil, cannot help it but by chance, which is a dangerous
guide of a State.
for the forbearing to hang up Priests has wrought the A postacy, but the
idleness and insufficiency of many Teachers, conspiring with the peoples cold
zeal, that have been the contrivers of this unhappy web. Until the eleventh
year of Q. Elizabeth's reign, a Recusants name was scarcely known. The reason
was, because the zeal begotten in the time of the Marian persecution, was yet
fresh in memory. And the late persecutors were so amazed with the sudden
alteration of Religion, that they could not choose but say, Digitus Dei est
hic, in these there was an emulation betwixt the Clergy and the Laity, and the
strife arose who should show themselves most affectionate to the Gospel.
Ministers haunted the houses of worthy men, where Jesuits now build their
Tabernacles. And Country Churches were frequented with the best of the shire,
Where good men are afraid to call vice by the proper name, it is a sign the
vice is common, and great persons whom it is not safe to anger, are infected
with it.
the word of God was precious, and prayer and preaching went hand in hand
together, until Archbishop Grindals disgrace, and Hatfields hard conceit of
prophecies brought the flowing of these good graces to a still water, and the
name of a Papist smelt rank even in their own nostrils, and for pure shame to
be accounted such, they resorted daily to our English Churches, and exercises.
But when they saw their great Coripheus, Sanders, had slily pinned the name of
Puritans upon the sleeves of the Protestants that encountered them with most
courage, and perceiving that the word was pleasing to some of our own side,
that took hearty grace to set little by the service of God, and duty to their
Sovereign: If these men's zeal had been put to employ it self otherwise, and a
task set them to do some good, they might have been reformed or made
harmless by diversion.
Therewith started up amongst us, some that might have been recommended for
their zeal, if it had been tempered with discretion, who for ruining the
authority of the Magistrate, took upon them in sundry places, and publicly to
censure whatsoever agreed not with their conceit, with which cross tumults
vented in Pulpits, and Pamphlets, most men grew to be frozen in zeal, and in
such sort benumbed, that whosoever (as the worthy Lord Keeper Bacon observed)
in those days pretended a little spark of earnestness, he seemed no less
then red fire hot in respect of others. Headstrong passions are not easily
subdued yet must they not be suffered to grow to a faction. Discretio perlegem
distinguere quid sit: we must lay the burden in the right place.
And as some things fare the worse for an ill neighbors sake dwelling besides
them, so did it betide the Protestants, who seeking to curb the Papists, or
reprove an idle, drone, was incontinently branded with the ignominious note of
a Precisian.

And which wind brought plenty to the Popes Well? And there will most men
grind, where they see appearance to be well secured. If without great
inconveniency the children of Papists could be brought up out of their company,
that were a happy turn. Without reformation in this point, Popery will still
increase: but as all virtuous enterprises are difficult, so this most intricate.
But I find it to be full of difficulty: there is provision made to avoid
Popish Schoolmasters, but there is no word against Popish School-mistresses
that infect the silly Infants while they carry them in their arms: which
moves me to suppose that the former proposition to examine how children and
servants are brought up, and truly to certify the life of Communicants and
Recusants, will be the readiest means to let his Majesty know the yearly
increase of the Church in every Diocese; A wise householder will cast up his
reckoning, to see what loss or profit he has made in a year.
and whosoever shall send his children, or any his Majesty's subjects to be
placed in Monasteries and Seminary Colleges, or Popishly to be brought up in
foreign parts, I wish that for punishment, both the one and the other might be
defranchised of the privileges due to natural Subjects, so far forth as any
good by the Laws might descend to them, but not be exempted from the penalties
thereof, or the Regal jurisdiction of the Crown. I know that contradiction is
odious, and makes a man seem ambitious, to be thought more understanding than
others. In which case the Spaniard uses to term him only presumptuous, whom he
would call fool, if civility would bear it. But my defense I hope shall serve
to revive my former protestation, that I discourse by way of proposition rather
than arrogance in defining any thing; The law which took immediate notice of an
offense, gave a quick redress, and corrected the poor as well as the rich.
with pardon therefore may it be permitted, that the penal Law of twelve pence
inflicted on him that would not give a reasonable excuse for his absence from
Church on Sundaies, was one of the best Ordinances that has been hitherto
enacted: but while we sought to make new Statutes savouring of more severity,
we neglected the old, and were loath to execute the new. For it is a certain
rule, that whosoever in policy will give liberty, and yet seem to suppress a
crime, let him procure sharp Laws to be proclaimed, which are necessary only
for the times, and cause occasions to be put in execution, but not to be an
ordinary work for every day in the week; Sharp Laws that stand upon a ^long
process, after a manner seem to dispense with a vice.
daily use teaches us likewise, that it is lesser grievous to punish by an old
Law, than a new. Forasmuch as truth it self without it be praised, seldom
gets credit, and its hard to free the people from suspicion, that new Laws are
not rather invented against the particular persons and purses of men, than
against their manners. By force of which reason I am induced to conceive that
the old use of the Church contained in good nurture and Ecclesiastical censure
much more prevail to nuzzle Popery, than any fresh devices whatsoever. Neither
do I think it blameworthy, to affirm that our cause has taken harm by
relying more on temporal, than spiritual forces, for while we trusted that
Capital punishments should strike the stroke, we have neglected the means
which would for the most part have discharged the need of such security. The
oath of Allegiance is not offered generally to servants and mean people, The
allegiance to God ought to precede the temporal obedience: for if the first
may be obtained, the second will follow of it self.
who if they had taken the oath of Absolution of a priest might recoile from
it, and change their opinion at leisure, without any ready means, to discover
their Lieger demeanes. That oath will not be often pressed, and to them that
shift from place to place, how can it be tendered. The principal Papists now
cover themselves in the crowde of the multitude, but if we can discover the
affection of the multitude, they will easily be unmasked, and being singled
from the rest, they will be ashamed of their nakedness. Which under correction
of better judgments may be effected, if every new commer to inhabit a town,
and servant newly entertained, within a week or fourteen days be caused to
repair unto the Minister, This course will discover more than the oath of
Allegiance, and prevent many from falling off, by reason of the quick
discovery.
there in presence of the Churchwardens and other honest men, to subscribe unto
such brief and substantial articles confirming Faith and Allegiance, as shall
be according to Gods Word, and Justice ordained to distinguish the Sheep from
the Goats. In foreign Countries every Host is bound to bring his guest before
an Officer, there to certify his name, with the occasion of his coming, and
intended time of abode in those parts; and in case he stays longer, he must
again renew his license: so curious and vigilant also they are to keep their
Cities from infection, that without a Certificate witnessing their coming from
wholesome places, they may not escape the Lazzaretto. No less watchful ought
we to be to prevent the contagions of our souls, As long as houses and
lodgings in London are let to Papists, the Priests shall be received, and from
thence the Country infected.
than other Nations are of their bodies; every thing is hard and scarcely
pleasing in the beginning, but with hope some such course may be readily put in
execution: I propound this rather as matter for better heads to work on, then
peremptorily to be insisted upon in the same terms. Yet lest any man charge me
with temerity, that when I desire to know the multitudes inclination by the
means aforesaid, I satisfy my self with the Parrets language, pronouncing it
knows not what: I think it not impertinent to put them in mind, that I have
hitherto required instruction, both precedent, and subsequent, and am ever of
the mind, that though all this cannot be done at once, If we can prevent the
increase of Papists, these that now live, must either be reformed, or in time,
yield to nature, and then shall a new age of Christians succeed and by
education made religions.
yet it is necessary always to be doing our best, knowing, that not to go
forward in Religion, is to go backward. It is not the outward obedience of
coming to Church, that discovers the inward thoughts of the heart, it is the
confession of the tongue must utter these secrets, and where the Curate is
insufficient, or the Parish great, I would they had Chatechists to assist them,
maintained by the Priests of the Recusants, which pension being collected for
good cause, will free us from scandal, though it grieve them to pay the
special army wages against their own Stratagems; surely in giving them way in
petty matters, they are grown Masterfull on their party. Plato affirms, that
the popular state proceeds from the license which people take to make
immoderate applauses in the Theaters; The broachers of a bad cause being
touched in conscience, at first move slowly, but if they prevail, they grow
tyrannous beyond measure.
when as by arrogating that immunity without controlment, in the presence of
their governors, and perceiving the Nobility to join with them in the same
passions, they thought their heads as worthy to govern, as any of those that
were made out of the selfsame mould. In like manner, while we suffer ignorance
to maintain such pretty glimpses of Popery as are thought to be scarce worthy
to be looked at, and in small matters run an indifferent course, which
neither make sure friends, nor feeble foes; unawares they take the bridle from
us, and eat our Religion as it were by an insensible Gangrene, Principiis
obsta, etc. For by sufferance of breaking smaller Laws, people are emboldened
to set the greater at naught. To comprehend all things in a Law that are
necessary, I neither hold it profitable, nor expedient; yet it is discretion to
provide for the most important, smaller matters whereof the Law speaks not,
they are to be commended to the discretion of Parents, Masters, and other
reverend persons, who by example and advise may prepare younglings by education
and custom to obey the Laws, especially such as are in high places, Most men
will affect to be such as the highest do most trust and favor.
ought in this behalf to be like Caesar's wife, Non solum crimine, sed etiam
criminis suspitione vacare: and with circumspection to behave themselves, that
the world may conceive in requiring obedience to God and their Sovereign, that
they hold the multitude rather as companions then slaves. A great man is an
Idol in the eyes of the people, and draws many to imitate his actions.
If great men take another way, they may seduce many by example, though by
words they express not their conceived opinions. Tace and eloquere, says God
to Moses, it is the speech of the heart, which utters more the Letters or
Syllables. And in our Court of Justice, it is holden even dangerous, when a
great person only by his presence countenances a cause. Neither let us secure
our selves with this argument; the Papists are pliable in some matters, and
therefore they will yield in great; And because they took no arms in 88. it
were needless curiosity to suspect them now; for who knows not that smallest
baits are used to take the greatest fish: Vt^cum esca una etiam and humus
devoratur. Wariness is the sinew of Wisdom, and nothing is more dangerous,
than to be secure in matters of State. Therefore concerning Laws already made;
I wish that the most effectual of them, which least concern life, may be
executed: for better it were not to make them, Few Laws well executed, are
better then many.
than by neglect to set them at liberty, seeing that many offenses there be
which many would abstain from, if they were not forbidden; but when a strict
Commandment is avoided without punishment, thereout springs an unbridled
license to be hardly reformed by any rigor.

To conclude, I say freely, he that ends his days by a natural death, he
shall be subject to receive many doomes for every particular offense; but when
for Religions sake a man trampleth over the Sword, that eminent Virtue (it may
be avouched) chaseth out the memory of other errors, and places him that so
dies, in Paradise of common opinion: which glory having many followers and
admirers, makes even dull spirits to affect their footsteps, A crown of glory
once attained, has power to dispense with former faults.
and so sell their lives for the maintenance of the same cause. I need not to
envy the name of a Martyr to a Jesuit; for his cause if it be rightly
weighed, will banish that title: but I desire to have all those lineaments
defaced which may compound that counterfeit Image.

In prosecution of which purpose, if I have failed in mine advise, and by
confused handling, obscured the Question, I humbly request, that wise men's
verdicts may mitigate the heaviness of the doom. It is neither good to praise
bad counsels, because of their good success, He counsels best, that prefers
the cause of God and the commonwealth, before any particular.
nor to condemn good counsel, if the end prove not fortunate: lest many be
animated to advise rashly, and others disheartened to advise gravely.

FINIS.

