The Country-Man's Fare-vvel to LONDON.
OR, A Broadside against Pride.
Let Us stem the Tide, though vanity be grown,
A Torrent that quite over-whelms the Town;
Though horrid Atheism, and Bawdy fits,
Are thought the noblest flights of modera Wits,
Yet thou, free muse! who always did disdain
To bear a part in the illustrious Train
Of thriveing Vice; may with deserved Rhymes
Bleed (whilst the Dog Days last) our Brainsick times:
But stay -- To charm these Adders don't engage,
Satyrs are thrown away on such an Age;
Heaven in loud Judgments has proclaimed it is ire,
Sad Wars, dire Plagues, and all-amazing Fire,
Yet Wars, nor Plagues, nor Fire can us restrain,
But still we grow more giddy, still more vain;
And think thou with soft scratches of a Pen
For to reclaim such brutified Men,
They Are resolutely Deaf, and it appears,
Before they will hear, thunder must bore their Ears.
Pride, that at first made devils, now has hurled
It Is bane on men, and diveliz'd the World,
Humility is banished, and we meet
Whole swarms of Lucifers in every street;
See how the haughty dust and ashes wa^ks
As if he could unhinge the Poles; and talks
Such Hogan Mogan words, as might out-vye
(Were they but true) the Laws of Destiny;
Our shaggy Gallants with prodigious Locks,
(Supplies of thatch blown off by early Pox)
Appear like Hairy Comets, that fore-show
Effiminated Follies Overthrow;
Our Swaggerers with Arms a Kembo Huffe,
And all must give the wall to Mounsiour Puff,
That walking Mercers shop, a thing that owes
His very Essence to New-fashion'd clothes,
And them to some confiding Stitch, who must
As long as Drapers for Nolls mourning trust;
Poor painted Butter-Flyes, whose souls scarce save
Their Carps from stinking, on this side a Grave;
Who can but laugh, to see these pert Buffoons
With empty Pockets, but vast Pantaloons:
Whose dangling points rattle about their Trouzes
Like Hen and Chickens in our Country Houses:
Their Copper Hat-bands counterfeiting gold,
And fresh New Long-Lane Suits some ten years old,
Whole Lord-ships laid on up-start Squires back,
And Sunday-Cloak that makes a whole Shop crack;
Are these, proud Fool! thy ways to gain repute,
T'undo thy self for credit of a Suit?
Reason directs our Clothes to regulate,
Suiting our birth, our breeding, or estate,
For he that Flaunts beyond his pedigree,
Forgets his homespun Parents, and must be
The mark of Envies shot; he that does wear
A braver Garb than his weak Purse can bear,
Undoes his children; and the Gaudy Fopp,
Whose unbecoming Fineries over top,
His course mechanic parts, do what he can,
Is but a gay incongruous gentleman;
Nor may we less of the other Sex complain,
Who think it their just privilege to be vain;
Idols, that half their precious minutes pass
Between the Dressing-box and Looking-glass,
Whilst the short refidue's squandered away
In The wanton bed, vain visits, or a play;
Like speckled Serpents some of them appear,
And even borrow the faces that they wear,
March under vices colors, patch and Paint,
Whitewash and Dawb to make the Devil seem Saint,
D^sguis'd with fruzzled Towers they look like Bulls,
But plant the horns often on their Husbands skulls;
With rolling Eyes they walk, and powdered crests,
Wanton affected Gate, and plumped breasts,
Whose panting and inviting motions show
Too plain how much a stray their fancies go.
Nor is it only the profaner Crew
That these soul-murthering vanities pursue
Those that pretend unto far better things,
We find of late this growing Serpent stings;
They will like Dinah too view Hamors Land,
And with his Daughters in like fashions stand,
Oh! why, dear souls, will you so much decline
Sobriety, which once did make you shine
In The eyes of God, of Saints, and of the world,
Without your tawdry dresses, or Locks curled,
Suits your profession with fond Toys and laces?
Your Wiggs and Fanns, and Hoods like spotted faces?
Your Mag-pye gowns, and fagotted up sleeves,
Wherein your guilty arms are bound like Thieves;
For shame forbear, the wise King tells you all
A proud and haughty mind fore-runs a Fall;
Leave off your gaudy Trifles and strange dress,
Left God refuse to know you in distrefs;
And then stripped of your wanton plumes you must,
Do rueful penance in Sack cloth and dust.
With Allowance.

FINIS.
Printed by A. P. for J. Conniers, at the Sign of the Black-Raven in Duck-lane.


