COUNT HANLAN'S DOWNFALL, OR A True and Exact Account of the KILLING that Arch
Traitor and Tory REDMON o HANLAN: BY ART o HANLAN, One of his own Party, on the
25. day of April, 1681. near the Eight Mile Bridge, in the County of Down.

Being the Copy of a LETTER writ by a Country Gentleman (now in Dublin) to a
Person of Quality (his Friend) in the Country.

DVBLIN, Printed for William Winter, Bookseller at the Wandering Jew in
Castle-street. 1681.

Count Hanlan's Downfall: Or, a True and Exact Account of the Killing that Arch
Traitor and Tory, Redman O Hanlan, etc.
SIR,
THough You know I am not inclined to Scribbling, and therefore can expect no
Packet from me, yet being sensible of your want of fresh Intelligence of News
from Dublin; and I being obliged to show my gratitude for the last Favors you
did me, do readily lay hold on this opportunity of telling you somewhat
Remarkable has happened within the compass of these five days I have been in
Dublin.

On Saturday last, when the Lord Lieutenant, Nobility, and Gentry were returned
from Christ-Church, where they had been Celebrating the King's Coronation:
according to the custom upon State Feastivals, the Great Guns on the
Custom House Key were discharged; the first of which (being either over
charged, or through age, or ill usage, become faulty) burst into several
pieces, which flew diverse ways, and fell at considerable distances;
particularly one piece of near an hundred weight, flew into the House of
Captain Lovet, on the Blind Key, and did much mischief; several persons were
hurt (as it is said) by other pieces: but one piece hit a Gentleman on the side
of his head, who was leaning on a post hard by, with intention to have fired
one of the Guns himslf; which Gentleman (Clerk he was to the Right Honorable
the Lord Blessinton's Troop) was taken up, carried home, dressed by
Surgeons, died yesterday, and was buried this afternoon.

This Account is purely Tragical: But another that I am to give you, may be
said to be Tragi-Comical; for it has Bloodshed and Battery to the highest
degree, in it, yet is the Tidings of it very welcome, I observe, to all here,
and will be no less to you, though at so considerable distance. It Is the
Relation was this day brought, of the Surprise, and Killing of the Famous
Northern Tory, Count Hanlan: The circumstances whereof, as I received them from
the mouth of one of his Consederates, and Executioner, and Mr. William Lucas,
who was Commissioned in that affair. That His Grace, the Lord Lieutenant
finding all ways and endeavors hitherto used, as well by Himself, as other
Chief Governors, for repressing and bringing to condign punishment, outrageous
Rebels and Tories, infesting this Kingdom; resolved to act by his own
sentiments and way: which was to this effect. His Grace sent for a Person of
Honor of this City, (acquainted in those Counties these Tories chiefly
resorted to,) and commanded him to find some person of choice, who might be
capable of His Majesty's Service in that Affair. On which Command of His Grace,
Mr. Williaw Lucas of Drumintyan in the County of Down was sent for; who
received the following Commission, writ every word with His Grace's own hand,
for privacy. None knowing of the design but this Person of Honor, and Mr.
Lucas, whom His Grace acquainted with it. Besides other private directions
given Mr. Lucas by His Grace, which I could not obtain. But the Commission is
as follows.

The Lord Lieutenant's Order, or Commission to Mr. William Lucas.
WHereas William Lucas Gent. has given me good reason to believe that he is
able to do His Majesty good service in the Apprehending, Killing, and
Destroying of proclaimed Rebels and Tories; if he may, upon occasion, have the
help and assistance of such of His Majesty's Army, as he shall desire. These
are therefore to Will and Require all His Majesty's Officers, Civil and
Military, to be aiding and assisting to the said William Lucas in the said
service. And I particularly require all Officers of Horse and Foot, to send as
many of the Soldiers, under their respective Commands, as he shall desire with
him; and to direct such Soldiers to obey his Orders. And I further Authorize
these said William Lucas, in my Name, to give, assurance to any of the Tories,
that in case they shall assist him in the performance of the said service, that
they shall have his Majesty's Gracious Pardon for any Crimes formerly committed
by them, Murder only excepted. And that over and above, they shall be well
rewarded.

Given at His majesty's Castle of Dublin this 4th of March, 1680/1 ORMOND

Pursuant to which Commission, Mr. William Lucas thus acted. Knowing of a
Fosterer of his out in Rebellion with Redmond O Hanlan, by one of his Relations
sent for him; and this Fosterer, one Art O Hanlan came to Mr. Lucas, who gave
him this following Protection.

Mr. William Lucas his Protection and Assurance to Art o Hanlan.
BY Virtue of a Power to me, from His Grace the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland; For
the Apprehending, Killing and Destroying of proclaimed Rebels and Tories,
bearing date the 4. of March last; as also for the giving Assurance and
Protection to such Tories as shall assist me in His Majesty's Service, and have
not had hand in Murder; I do therefore in His Graces name give my Protection
and Assurance to Art o Hanlan, and do desire all His Majesty's Officers, both
Civil an Military to take notice thereof; and that they do not offer to kill,
apprehend, molest or disturb the said Art, during the space of one Month, from
the Date hereof. And I also desire all His Majesty's Officers, and good
Subjects, to be aiding and assisting to him the said Art o Hanlan, in the
furtherance of His Majesty's Service. Given under my Hand this 3. of April,
1681.

To all His Majesty's Officers, both Civil and Military and all other His
Majesty's good Subjects, whom it may concern. WILL. LUCAS.

Art O Hanlan being thus furnished and encouraged, and provided with Arms, by
the said Mr. William Lucas, for so good an Undertaking, waited for a convenient
Opportunity of Executing his Design, which did thus offer itself.

On Monday the 25th. Instant, the said Art O Hanlan and William O She Will, in
company with Redmond O Hanlan, were near the Eight Mile Bridge, in the County
of Down, waiting for prize, on the score of a Fair that was held there, at
which place, while they were watching for their Prey, Redmond took some
occasion to quarrel with Art, as they ere smoking their Pipes, and in the
close bid him provide for himself, for he should not be any longer a Tory in
any of the three Counties, ( viz. Monaghan, Down, or Ardmagh) whereupon Art
rose up and said, I am very glad of it, and will go just now; and then taking
up his Arms (having his Authority and Protection about him) imediately he shot
Redmond in the left Breast, with his Carbine, and forthwith ran to the Eight
Mile Bridge for a Guard, but Art returned with a Guard, and Mr. Lucas, who soon
had notice at the Newry where he was waiting Redmonds motions, for the same
Ends, found Redmonds Body, but the Head was taken off by O She Will, who fled with
it, the Body they removed to the Newry, where it lies under a Guard till Orders
be sent how it should be disposed of; and since that Mr. Lucas has sent out a
Protection and Assurance to O She Will, to bring in the Head of that Arch Traitor
and Tory Redmond O Hanlan.

This Evening Art O Hanlan gave in a Relation of this Adventure, to the Lord
Lieutenant and Council, who ordered him to have a Sum of Money paid forthwith,
for the good Service he has done. And to Mr. Lucas His Grace has promised the
Honor of a Command in the Army. These I mention to show the extraordinary
Care, Vigilance and Honor of our Government. If this Relation of mine may
prove any way diverting to you, 'twill be a sufficient Reward for this trouble
of Letter writing, which is in it self irksom to

Your Obliged Humble Servant.
Dublin April 27. 1681.

