A MODEST AND Clear Answer TO Mr. Ball's Discourse OF Set Forms OF PRAYER.
Written by the Reverend and Learned John Cotton, B. D. and Teacher of the
Church of Christ at Boston in New England. Published for the Benefit of those
who desire satisfaction in that Point.

LONDON; Printed for H. Overton in Pope's Head Alley.

To the Courteous Reader.
WE think it not meet, to fall a commending the Author of this work, who has
been so long precious in the hearts of all the Saints, and for his learning,
pains and piety so famous in the Churches of Christ; that his own Works may
praise him in the Gate, though we be silent. Neither shall we need (as usually
men do in their Epistles) to set glosses upon the work, thy self (if thou
weighest it with a serious and impartial spirit) we believe, will do it, and
save us that labor. This only we say, thou will discern (as some other godly
learned, who have perused it before also have done) such a clear judgment,
dexterous aptness, and pithy plainness in a moderate and brotherly style in
all his Answers, that thou will think thou see the very spirit of the Author
breathing in every page and line. Now, the Father of lights clear all our
minds, that if his blessed will so be, we may think and judge, and speak and
write the same thing; And the God of all Grace warm our hearts with a love of
such truths as we do know, that we may walk in the light and power thereof, to
the praise of his Grace, till we all meet in one, and see him as he is, and so
be filled with all the fullness of God himself for evermore, Amen.

ADVERTISEMENTS UPON The Discourse of set-forms of PRAYER.
YOur Preface touching the Definition, and nature of prayer, I insist not upon;
as not much material to the clearing of the Cause in hand: it is enough in this
Case, to premise what prayer in General is, and what is lawful prayer: Prayer
(in general, comprehending both lawful and unlawful) is the lifting up (or
pouring out) of the Desires of the heart for Divine blessings; Divine I say,
that is, for such as God only can give, either for the nature, or kind of the
thing given, or for the manner of giving.

Lawful prayer, is a lifting up (or pouring out) of the desires of the heart
unto God, for Divine blessings, according to his will in the name of Jesus
Christ, by the help of the Spirit of Grace.

CHAP. I. The State of the Question.
FOr stating of the Question, you give six Rules, of which I will only touch so
many, as do more nearly touch upon the Cause.

In your first Rule you say, it is not a Prayer, as penned, or printed, but as
rehearsed, with understanding, feeling of wants, humility, confidence.

Answ. Nor is it a prayer as rehearsed, though rehearsed with understanding,
feeling of wants, humility, confidence, unless a man therein power out his own
desires unto God; for I may read and rehearse a printed Prayer (say one of
David's prophetical prayers against the enemies of the Church) yea, I may read
it with understanding, with feeling of the wants of such a mercy, and also with
humility, (in conscience of the Churches unworthiness of such a mercy, and
with confidence that God will do for the Church now, as David prayed then, etc.
Yet this will not be my prayer, unless I put up mine own desires in it: but
about this there is no question.

Answ. 2. Though it be not a prayer, as penned or printed, yet is a means, and
help and form of prayer, which either must find a warrant from the Word, or
fall under the breach of the second Commandment.

In the second Rule you say, the controversy is not of this or that prescript
form of Prayer in particular, much less of one for substance of matter, faulty
and erroneous: But of a prescript form of prayer in general, whether it be
lawful to use any set form of prayer at all, though for the matter thereof
never so sound and allowable.

Answ. But so to put the State of the Question, is indeed, to lead your self
and others into temptations: for if it may be once obtained: that some
prescript form is lawful in the General, this in the Theory will straight be
reduced to this practice, to persuade men to join in such a prescript form of
prayer as is justly liable to manifold exceptions, both for matter and manner.

If such as were compelled to worship the Lord before the golden Calves at Dan
and Bethel, should put the state of the Question, not of such particular
Calves, but of Calves, or Cherubims in general (for one form of Cherubims were
like Calves) whether it be not lawful to worship the Lord before any Cherubims
at all? It may be easily conceived, what the issue would be, the Question
admits the lawfulness of some Cherubims in General (which is out of
question.) The practice will conclude the lawfulness of Jeroboams Calves in
particular; which was the sin which made Israel to sin.

2. Your fifth Rule acknowledges that neither Christ nor his Apostles,
prescribed any set form of prayer, and therefore that no prescript form of
prayer of Lyturgie is simply necessary.

Answ. But this argues not only no necessity of prescript forms, but also no
expediency thereof to the edification of the Church, unless it might be
presumed that there is some help or means of Gods worship expedient to the
edification of the Church, which never came into the heart of Christ and of his
Apostles to commend unto the Church.

In your sixth Rule you profess, you never held it lawful, to tie any man's
self, or to be tied always to a set form of Prayer: as knowing that our
requests are to be framed according to the present necessity and occasion.

Answ. But by the same reason, neither will it be lawful to be tied at any
time to an ordinary use of any set form of prayer at all: for there is no
change of time wherein the Church has not some special occasion to change
their Petitions, either by adding some Petitions more than formerly were
needful, or by taking away some Petitions which were formerly needful (it may
be at the last meeting) which are not needful now: And look upon what grounds
it may be lawful to tie others, or to be tied by them, to a set form to day,
upon the same grounds it will be as lawful to tie them, and to be tied by them
to morrow, the next Saboth as well as this, and the third Saboth as well as
both, and all Saboths as well as some.

If tying to set forms be lawful, and thought expedient, for uniformity in
Gods worship one day; the same uniformity is as expedient to be attended to in
every Saboth, as in one: or if tying to set forms be requisite to supply the
defects of the gifts of ignorant Ministers, then thereby a cloak is made for
the covering and sheltering of ignorant Ministers: who had more need to be
shouldred speedily out of the Church, than to be sheltered therein one day to
an end. And besides, if such set forms be prescribed for the succor of
ignorant Ministers, then such Ministers as have received the gift of prayer,
have no need at any time, nor use of prescribed and set forms of prayer at all.

Object. And if it be said that it is not intended, to make it lawful at any
time, to tie or to be tied to a set form of Prayer, so as to offer up no more,
nor fewer Petitions than what are prescribed in the Book, but only to warrant
the lawfullnesse of some set forms of Prayer for some occasions.

Answ. It may be justly demanded, whether the same authority which tyeth to a
set form of prayer, for such or such occasions, may not as well tie to a set
form of prayer for all other occasions, and if authority may tie the Church to
any set form of prayer upon any occasion, whether may not the same Authority by
the same Rule, forbid all other forms of prayers besides upon the same occasion.

Disc. In Brief (say you) the controversy is, whether it be not lawful to
read a Prayer upon a book, or to make our desires known in a set form of words,
when the things we beg, are allowable, fit, and necessary, and when it is done
with understanding, feeling of our wants, faith in Gods promises, and reverence
of his Majesty.

Which Question you spread forth into three branches.

Whether it be lawful in private to use a set form of prayer, or upon any
occasion to read as prayer, a prayer upon a Book.

Whether a set form of prayer sound, and pertinent, for the substance of the
matter, grave and simple for the order and manner, not prejudising, abridging,
or hindering by the length thereof, the preaching of the Word; may in any sort
be tolerated in the Church, or read by the Minister in the public
Congregation.

In case it should be unlawful for the Minister or the Master of the Family to
read a prescript form of prayer, yet whether it should be unlawful to be
present at such assemblies.

Your Assertion is, that a stinted form of prayer is lawful to be used both in
public and private, etc. And though it should be sin in the Minister or in
the Governor of the family, yet may the people in the Congregation, and the
inferior in the family be present at such prayers without sin or scruple of
conscience?

Answ. How far we go along with you in the Question thus stated and where we
stick, may be expressed in these particulars.

First, We grant, a Christian man whether Minister, or of private place, may by
the gift of prayer which he has received, compile to himself a set form of
prayer, and may use the same for his prayer, whether in public or private
according to his place: yet so, as not to limit himself to those words: seeing
he knows not what further occasion may be given him of enlarging his
Petitions, by new occurrences of matters from Gods providence, and by the
enlargement of the help of Gods Spirit: nor so to limit himself as to stick
long in any set form of prayer least it turn into a customary, and empty form,
contrary to the watchfullnesse unto Prayer, which must be Religiously kept of
all growing Christians.

2. A man may give unto another holy directions, and rules for Prayer, and may
also set down some forms of prayer as examples of such rules, but not to
prescribe them as set forms to them, to be used by them for their Prayers.

3. A man that reads a form of Prayer in a Book, may be so affected with it,
as in the desires of his heart to go along with it, and to use it for his
present prayer, as it may thus fall out in reading one of Calvin's prayers,
printed after his Lectures, or such other like.

4. We deny not, but a man that is affected with some Petitions in a Prayer
devised by others, he may lawfully make use of them, and intersert them
ordinarily into his own Prayers; But not to take up an entire form of Prayer
devised by another, and to make it his own ordinary form of Prayer.

5. We grant Magistrates or other Christians may commend some Heads or
Petitions to the Church according to the present state of things (which the
Church as they see fit) may present and commend to God in their Prayers.

Thus far we consent, but farther we cannot go, but do rather conceive it to be
unlawful.

1. To set a part, and take up a set form of Prayer, and to use it as an
ordinary prayer, that which is devised by others, whom God has not called to
be a mouth to me.

2. We conceive it also to be unlawful to bring in ordinarily any other Books,
into the public worship of God, in the Church, besides the Book of God, and
therefore do see no more warrant to read out of a Prayer Book, the public
Prayers of a Church: then out of a book of Homilyes to read the public
Sermons of the Ministers of the Church.

3. We account it alike (if not more unlawful) for Ancestors to prescribe or
enjoin set forms of Prayers to their posterity, or for one Church to prescribe
set forms of Prayer unto another.

4. We hold it in like manner unlawful, for one Church to receive such set
forms of Prayer from another, and to use them for their own Prayers.

5. We take it to be unlawful also, for the people of God to join in such
prayers, which are so divised and prescribed to be read unto them, and to be
offered up in their names, as their prayers.

To apply these things more punctually to the particular branches of the
Question, as they are proposed, and stated by you.

For your first branch, we do not make it a controversy, whether it be lawful
to make known our desires in a set form of words, in such sense as we granted
above in our first point of consent: nor do we hold it unlawful to read a
prayer upon a book and therein to express our desires in such sort as we
granted in our third point of consent.

But nevertheless, we do not discern it to be lawful no not in private to use
ordinarily a set form of prayer devised by others, nor to read such a prayer
out of a book, for the ordinary prayer of a man's self much less of his Family.

For your second Branch, though we neither deny the use of set form in private,
nor in public, so it be compiled by a man's own gists, or by those whom God
calls to be his mouth.

Yet we dare not allow the reading of a set form of public prayer out of a
Book penned for the purpose, and those prayers compiled by the members of one
Congregation and imposed upon others.

3. For your third Branch, we for our parts cannot justify it to be lawful
for to be present, either in the family or in the congregation where, and when
such prescript forms are read for the prayers of the company, as to join with
them, or to seem to join with them in such worship.

But proceed we now to consider the weight of the Reasons which you give for
your judgment and practice.

CHAP. II. Wherein your first Reason is propounded and considered.
THat Form of prayer (say you) is just and lawful wherein all things
essential to prayer, and necessarily required in the Word of God may be
observed:

But all things essential to prayer, and necessarily required in the Word of
God may be observed in read prayer, or in a prescript form; what is required
in holy prayer, more then that the matter be allowable and fit, the manner
holy, reverend, faithful, your hearts laid open, and petitions forced with as
strong, or stronger Reasons than we are able of our selves to press them with
all; and may not a prayer holy and fit for the matter thereof be read with
knowledge, feeling of our wants, earnestness of our desires, holiness of our
affection, and faith in Gods promises.

Answ. There is more required to a faithful holy prayer, then allowable and
fit matter, and holy inward manner, in the good affections of the heart, for an
outward holy manner is required likewise, else a man might pray to God
allowable and fit petitions before an Image; and I deny not, but that God may
sometimes assist a man in such a prayer with holy manner of inward gracious
affections: as for instance, holy Bilney might find his heart warmed in prayer
to Christ, when he looked at him as really present in the Sacrament, or else he
would never have called so zealously on the people to turn all that adoration
of dead Images to the adoration of Christ in the blessed Sacrament;
nevertheless such a prayer was unlawful, through a defect in the outward
manner of it: an outward means being called in for help in prayer, which God
had not sanctified for that end.

Let me give you another instance, when the Corinthians prayed in the Church
publicly, in the Spirit, but withal in a strange tongue, their prayer wanted
not allowable and fit matter, nor holy inward manner (for they prayed in the
spirit) yet the prayer was unlawful through defect of an outward holy manner,
because it being put up in a strange tongue before others, did not tend to the
edification of others: In the case in hand, though prayer upon a Book
prescribed by the authority of man may sometimes be furnished with allowable
and fit matter, and sometimes uttered with inward holy affections; yet still it
will be unlawful through the defect of an outward holy manner. If such a
prescribed book be found (as we conceive it will) an Image or help to prayer,
devised by men, but not ordained by God, and so no better than an Image
forbidden in the second Commandment.

Disc. In reading the Scriptures, the eye does lead the heart, and yet it may
be read with judgment, reverence, meekness, joy, and why may not the like
affections be moved in read prayer?

Answ. Reading of Scriptures is an Ordinance of God, and not an Image or
imagination of man; and therefore God not only may assist and bless the
reading of the Scriptures, with inward good affections, but is usually wonted
so to do in an honest and good heart, as delighting to breath in his own
Ordinances: If it could be proved, that the reading of a prescript form of
prayer upon a Book were an Ordinance of God sanctified for the edification of
the Church (as the reading of the Scriptures is) we might ordinarily expect the
like assistance and blessing in reading of the one as well as of the other; the
comparison would be more suitable, if instead of reading the Scriptures, were
put the reading of Sermons and Homilies in the Church, for which we find as
little warrant as for reading of Prayers; nor can we expect a greater blessing
upon the one then upon the other; we do not deny that read prayer may lead and
affect the heart, as may a Sermon read at home: But then neither is such a read
prayer prescribed by others, nor set a part by me as my prayer; no more than
the reading of such a Sermon is my preaching: which is not because the heart
and the eye are at variance in such a case (as your discourse speaks) but
because God does not ordinarily delight to bless the heart with gracious
affections, when the eyes go a whoring after the imaginations and inventions of
men.

Disc. Asaph and his Brethren could praise God in a form of words, set down by
the Prophet David; and if a set form of words may be allowed in thanksgiving
(which is one part of prayer) it cannot be condemned in petitions.

Answ. We do not deny a set-form either of Petition or of thanksgiving
appointed by God, either to be read or sung, but we deny that God has allowed
either the ordinary officers in his Church (whether Priests or Levites in the
old Testament, or Pastors and Teachers in the new) to appoint such forms of
read prayers for the Church, or the Church to take up such forms of read
prayers from them; God that has forbidden us to make any graven Image to our
selves, has not forbidden or limited himself to devise and prescribe what
forms of worship himself shall see good for our use; the pains which are taken
to parallel petitions and thanksgiving might have been spared; we neither
refuse the forms of the one, nor of the other, such as are commended to us of
God in his Word; the eye does not hinder the affection of the heart in reading
such things as God has appointed to be read; he that gives the Word to be
read, can give the affections to read it withal, and has promised so to do,
which the sons of men that give us prescript forms of prayer to be read cannot
do.

Disc. Whatsoever has the true matter and form of prayer, is truly and
properly prayer; but a prescript form of prayer, sound, and fit for matter;
grave for manner of penning, read as prayer with knowledge, faith, reverence
and fervency of affection, has the true matter and form of prayer.

Answ. The Argument does not conclude the Question in hand; we might grant the
conclusion without prejudice to the cause, for a prescript form of prayer may
have the true matter, and essential form of prayer, and so be (for substance)
truly and properly a prayer, and yet not every way an acceptable and lawful
worship of God, through defect of some circumstances which may pertain to
external form; Baptism may be properly and truly baptism, as wanting
neither true matter nor form, when it is dispensed by a Minister of the Gospel
to a believer or his seed by the dipping or sprinkling of water upon him, In
the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, and yet not every way a
lawful worship of God, if it be administered in an outward form corrupted with
the devises of men: as with Salt, Cream, Spittle, Cross, and the like; so is
the case here; aprescript form of prayer may consist of lawful fit petitions,
and be delivered with a faithful holy humble spirit, and so be truly and
properly prayer, and yet fall short of some rule requisite to be attended to
make it a lawful worship of God, to wit, if it be offered to God in a strange
Tongue or before an Image, or by the help of an Image; such as we conceive a
prescript form of words to be enjoined and imposed, to be read upon a book for
the Prayers of the Church.

Answ. 2. If by Matter and Form be meant not only Internal and Essential
form; but external also. Then we deny that a prescript form of prayer
enjoined to be read upon a Book, is a lawful external form of prayer; no more
than a prescript form of Homilies is a lawful external form of preaching;
These Answers seem to us sufficient and unavoidable, and we rest in them; but
the other Answers which are alleged by you in your Discourse, and much and
often beaten upon you, though it was delivered by one, whose works praise him
in the gates, throughout all the Churches of the Saints: yet we do not insist
upon it, as not willing to turn aside to unnecessary disputes, stinted set
forms we do not look at, as lawful to them that need them; but unlawful to
them that need them not: For though there be a good use of the distinction in
this case (as we shall see anon) yet not in this case, where the necessity
arises not from Gods Commandment, but from the sinful defect of the
Creature, for supply whereof God has ordained sufficient help other ways.

But yet in reply which you make to the Answer, you give a distinction liable
to the same exception which your self take against that Answer: For that Answer
consisting of a distinction of arbitrary and necessary help.

Your Discourse rejects it as a distinction not grounded upon the Word of
God, which in Divinity is (as you say) an unwritten tradition; and is this
distinction of your own any better?

Helps say you and surtherances in Gods Service, are of two sorts, some in
nature and use, the same with the true worship of God, instituted by his
highness, and these are unlawful, because they are devised; and others
concern the Method, Phrase of Speech, outward manner of celebration, only as
mere circumstances, and these are not forbidden.

A distinction ungrounded upon the Word, and so no better that an unwritten
tradition, and withal, both the parts imply a fals-hood; for a prayer which a
Minister devises for his own, and his peoples use, before the Sermon, is in
nature and use the same with the true worship of God instituted by his
highness; yet it is not unlawful because it is devised, for it is devised by
him, who is called of God to devise and indite it, as David did, Psalm. 45. v.
1. and all the rest, and that by help of the Spirit of prayer: again, on the
other part, a prescribed Homily does conserve the method, phrase of speech,
outward manner of celebration, only as a mere circumstance; yet no Word of God
ever allowed it to be read for the public preaching of the Word unto the
people.

It is true which the Discourse speaks of the Method of Sermons, devised or
studied by such as Preach them, there may be some liberty, whether to preach by
doctrine, reason and use, or some other way; the like may be said of forms of
Chatechismes, Blessings, and Baptismes: But the reason of this liberty is
because we find in Scripture several forms of all these, and therefore we
limit or prescribe no set forms to any; Paul's Epistle to the Romans is carried
along by Doctrine, reasons and uses, and so are sundry more of his Epistles.
But Christ's Sermon on the Mount, is carried in another Method: The Apostles
Catechize is of one form, Heb. 6.1, 2. David's of another, Psalm. 34.11, 12, 13,
14. The Priests Blessings, were of one form, Numb. 6.23. to 26. The Apostles
Blessings of another. 2 Cor. 12.13.2 These. 3.17, 18. Heb. 13.20, 21. Jude
24.25. The forms of baptizing did also sometimes vary, some using the words of
our Savior, Math. 28.19. Others another form of words, Acts 19.5. The thing is
this, where God has used variety of forms, he leaves us at liberty to use
that one form or the other; But to gather a liberty to prescribe and limit a
set form of any of these, where God has not limited; is to pervert and abuse
the power of the keys of Christ's Kingdom: to wit, to bind where Christ
loses, but your Objection is (as you say) answered by others, and that more
safely.

Disc. That men's inventions in the service of God are forbidden in the second
Commandment: But Book Prayer is an Invention of men?

To this your Discourse replyeth by retorting upon a former Answer, which we
said before, we did not make use of in this case.

You reply again the Objection it self is of no weight, for by this reason all
set forms of Catechismes, studied Sermons, Interpretations of Scripture,
divisions of it into Sections and Chapters, reading one part this week, and
another the next, conceived prayer it self may be disallowed.

Answ. Touching set forms of Catechism, we do willingly approve diligent
attendance to the Catechizing of youth, and Novices in any form tending to
Edification; but to devise and prescribe a set form of words, wherein all the
Questions and Answers shall run, and no other; we know no warrant for that from
Scripture, if God would have his people limited to a set form of words in
catechizing: he would himself have prescribed some set form of his own
inspiration, which might be defective in no principles, nor incommodious in any
expression.

2. What though there might be some color to put a set form of words of
catechism into the mouths of Children and Novices, the better to help their
memory and capacities; will it therefore argue it to be a reasonable service of
God, to put a set form of words and prayers, into the mouths of Ministers to
help their memories and capacities, in pouring out their own and the Churches
Petitions unto God.

Studied Sermons are of another nature, it is an Ordinance of God that Sermons
should be studied, before preached; Jude made it his whole study, (...) to
write his Epistle, Jude 3. How much more ought we to make it our whole study to
preach: who are not so immediately inspired. Solomon gave good heed and sought
out to find, and set in order fit words and matter for the edification of the
people, Eccles. 12.9, 10. and behold less than Solomon are Ministers here,
though in respect of the clear discerning the Mysteries of Christ, The least in
the Kingdom of God is greater than he. Timonthy is exhorted to give attendance
to reading, Meditation, Doctrine, to meditate thereon, to give himself wholly
to them, that his profiting might appear to all: That he might show himself
approved unto God, A workman that needs not to be ashamed, 1 Timothy 4.13, 14,
15. with 2 Timothy 2.15. But give me leave to speak without offense: You seem to
me in this point to take too much liberty, in a serious cause to play upon
equivocation: It is true, in studying a Sermon the Preacher uses his Invention
and Judgment; and in that sense his Sermon may be called man's Invention: But
you are not ignorant, we speak in this cause of such inventions of men, as God
has given neither Commandment nor direction for in his Word; In which sense a
studied Sermon is no more a man's Invention, than a studied answer, which
Solomon commends as a path of the Righteous, Prove: 15.28. The like may be
said of the next instance, which is, Interpretation of Scriptures, as also, a
conceived Prayer: Interpretation of Scripture is from a spiritual gift, which
God has given, and commanded to be used for the edification of his Church, 1
Cor. 14.26. Nehem. 8.8. So is Prayer conceived from a spirit and gift of
prayer, which is to be used also and attended to, as a principal part of the
Ministerial office, 1 Cor. 14.15. Acts 6.4.

Obj: If it be said, but I may take an Interpretation, or Translation of
Scripture from others, and therefore a form of Prayers from others also?

Answ. 1. There is a broad difference betwixt an Interpretation of Scripture,
as it is put for translation of Scripture, and read Prayer, for reading of
Scripture in the Church is an ordinance of God; so is the reading of it in a
tongue which the people understands, and therefore it is an ordinance of God
that the Word be read in some translation.

But the reading of a prayer, for the prayers of the Church is no ordinance of
God, therefore there is not the like ground from the Word to make use of
Prayer-Books, to read prayers, as to make use of a printed Bible for the
reading of the Word.

2. Every Minister that has understanding of the original languages wherein
the Scripture was written, ought to make use of his own gift in examining the
truth of the translation which he reads unto the Church, which will not be
allowed in prescript Lyturgies: As for the division of Scriptures into Sections
and Chapters, and the reading of one part this Week, and the other next; It is
certain, division of Scripture is ancient, even from the times of the Prophets:
And evident it is, the whole Scripture cannot be read over in one day: And
therefore it is from God, that some divisions of Scriptures be observed,
according to the variety of matter therein contained, and distinctly devideth
it self, and consequently it is from God, that one part of it be read at this
Assembly another at the next, because all cannot be read at once.

And yet we know no warrant that one Church should prescribe another, what
division to make of the Scriptures, or what part of it should be read this day,
and what the next, what God has lest free let no man limit.

Disc. Preaching is commanded of God; so is interpretation of Scripture, but
phrase and method of Interpretation is of men: The matter of the Scripture is
the immediate Word of God, but the Word and phrase, which are Vessels to convey
this truth to us (I speak of Translations not of the Original Text) are humane
and not of God, by immediate inspiration, God commands us to call upon him,
both in public and private, but the words in which we express our desires,
are our own, both in conceived and stinted Prayer.

Answ. It is true preaching of the Word and the Interpretation of the Word are
of God, but the phrase and Method is of men, yet so of men as they have
commandment and warrant from God, to preach and interpret the Word: and not in
what phrase and Method please themselves: nor in such words as man's wisdom
teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, 1 Cor. 2.13. Nor so from men as
that the men of one Church may devise a set form thereof, and bind all men, as
well of other Churches as their own, to this or that manner of phrase, or
Method, the like is to be said of prayer also.

But when your Discourse says, that the words wherein we express our desires
are our own in conceived and stinted prayer, you might as well have said, that
the words wherein we deliver our Sermons are our own; both in conceived
Sermons, and in stinted Homilies.

Disc. These two kinds of Prayer (conceived and stinted) agree in their Author,
Matter, Form, Object, end, and common nature; the one is no more an Invention
of man than the other: so then devised Worship is unlawful but not a worship
in a form of words devised.

Answ. And so might we say of prayer to God before an Image, and prayer without
an Image; they are two kinds of prayer that agree in their Author, matter,
form, object, end, and common nature, yet we cannot say the one is more an
invention of men than the other: As devised Worship is unlawful, so are
devised forms, and means of worship unlawful also: of which sort such set
forms of words be as are devised and composed by the officers of one
Congregation, and imposed upon the brethren of another Congregation, for the
forms of their prayers.

Answ. 2. We cannot say (as you do) that such conceived and stinted forms agree
in their Authors, for I am not the Author of the matter of that prayer which
another man composed, and was the Author of, and is now stinted and prescribed
to me; no more then I can be said to be the Author of that Sermon which another
man indicted. Battyllus was not the Author of Virgil's Verses.

Though he resiteth them as his own, Virgil justly challenges his own out of
his hand, Hos ego versiculas feci, etc. Nor can we say that such conceived or
stinted forms agree in their form, if by form be meant external form, it is
not the same form of walking to walk with Crutches, and to walk upright: It is
not the same form of prayer, to pray with help of men's inventions, and with
such helps only as the Holy Ghost supplyeth: which also hinders that they
cannot be said to agree in their common nature; The one being a lawful form of
prayer, the other unlawful; And therefore when your Discourse says, that
conceived and stinted prayer, the one is no more the invention of man than the
other, we cannot understand the truth of that: for in conceived prayer, the
Spirit of God within us teaches us what to pray. And for that the Ordinance
and Word of God is plain, Romans 8.26. But in stinted prayer the matter is not
suggested or indicted to us by the Spirit of God within us, but prescribed and
imposed upon us, by the will, wisdom and authority of men; whom the Holy Ghost
has not called to such a work: as therefore a devised worship is unlawful; so
it is unlawful to worship God in a form of words devised by the Officers of
one Congregation, and prescribed and imposed upon others.

Disc. Nay (says your Discourse) for the form of words is not worship, but the
Prayer tendered in that form.

Answ. As Prayer is Worship, so the form in which prayer is offered to God, is
Modus, or Medium Cultus, the manner, or means, or help of Worship: which if it
be not warranted, and instituted of God, it is forbidden in the second
Commandment: when God forbad his people to worship him in such a manner, as
the Gentiles served their gods, he ordained them a rule to be perpetually
observed in all service to him, to wit, that we should worship him as himself
has commanded, which the opposition infers, that his meaning is not only
with such duties, but in such a manner as himself has commanded, without
adding ought thereto or taking ought therefrom, Deuteronomy: 12.30, 31, 32. Now he
has commanded us to pray in the spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. which implies not only with
such affections as his Spirit kindles and stirs up, but also with such
matter and words as his spirit helps us unto: For his Spirit is said to help
us what to pray, which else we should not know, Romans 8.26. Now in a stinted
prescript form of prayer, we know what to pray without the Spirit; when we join
in prayer with another who is our mouth to God, though we know what to pray by
his help, yet it is such an help as the Spirit himself has provided, 1 Cor.
14.16.

Disc. It follows in the Discourse, that men's inventions in Gods worship that
be of the same nature and use with true worship, or with means of worship
ordained by God, be unlawful; but method, phrase, order, of speech devised by
man, was never judged an invention of man unlawful.

Answ. 1. This has been alleged, and answered before, but this further let me
add: 1. That the words imply, that men's inventions that be not of the same
nature and use with the worship of God, or with the means thereof are lawful:
whereas it is evident that the making of perfume like unto the incense of the
Tabernacle, though not to the same use in Gods worship, but to smell at, was
rejected of God as utterly unlawful, Exodus 30.38. The making of like things to
the ordinances of God, or to the means of worship, though not to the like end,
but to any religious end, will not be allowed in the second Commandment, as
Gideons Ephod declares.

2. These set forms of prayer prescribed to the Churches, we see not but that
they are of the same nature, and enjoined for the same use, for which any forms
of prayer in Scripture are ordained of God; and therefore by the verdict of
your Discourse they are unlawful: For as those forms of prayer in Scripture
are given of God to supply the Church with fit matter for their petitions, and
praises upon sundry occasions.

And for the use to the edification of the Church: so the forms now in question
are of the like nature, given to the like end, only enjoined with more
strictness and severity, which makes both their use less profitable, and
their burden more heavy, then Gods own institutions.

3. Method, phrase and order of speech devised by men, was judged an unlawful
invention by Paul, when such wisdom of words in preaching become not the
simplicity of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 2. therefore it cannot be said, that method,
phrase and order of speech devised by man, was never judged an unlawful
invention; and surely method, phrase, order of speech devised, and prescribed
by one Congregation to another in prayer, does as little beseem liberty and
purity of the Gospel, as the other in preaching did ill become the simplicity
of the Gospel.

Disc. Set prayer is no strange manner of worship, because in it all things
required to the nature of true prayer may be observed.

Answ. This has been answered before; more goes to the lawfulness of a
prayer then the nature of true prayer; defect in any circumstance, though but
in external form, makes a prayer unlawful.

Disc. In what method and frame of speech to pray, we find nothing prescribed
of God in particular; neither do we judge any thing necessary, more then that
order, decency, and edification be regarded.

Answ. Be it so, but how then shall men have power to prescribe to the Churches
method and form of speech in prayer, when God has prescribed nothing. The
Apostles, who had the largest and highest Commission of any Church governors
in the New Testament, yet they had no power to teach, or to prescribe to the
Churches any other things then what Christ had commanded them, Matthew. 28.19,
20. Say not, though no other things, yet Church governors may command such and
such manner of those things: for then a further Commission must be shown, where
Christ gave to his Apostles, or their successors power to ordain and prescribe
such and such manner of the administration of his holy things, as themselves
should see good.

But we never saw any such commission held forth to this day from any color of
Scripture light; that only place, 1 Cor. 14.40. which is alleged in this case,
is far off from reaching forth any such authority; for though the place do
show that it is the duty of the Church to administer all the holy things of
God, in order and decency, and to edification, and to see that all things be so
carried; yet it does not give to the Church any such power as to make orders,
or to ordain forms of decency, or to devise means of edification, which himself
has not ordained; the Church may indeed appoint such orders, the neglect
whereof would be disorderly and confusion, as they may appoint one Prophet to
speak at once; and when another is called to begin, the first to hold his
peace, because the neglect hereof would breed confusion: The Church may appoint
such decencies, the neglect whereof would be undecent; as for men to pray
bare-headed, and women covered, because the contrary were uncomely by the light
of nature, and civil custom; The Church may appoint, and ought to use such
helps and means to edification, as the Lord has instituted to that end; but if
the Church go beyond the bounds of this power they do at once both exceed the
bounds of Apostolical authority, and cut short the bounds of Christian liberty.

Disc. A set form of prayer is for substance and nature agreeable to the rules
of direction delivered in the word of truth, though for method and word it be
humane, as conceived prayer is.

Answ. A set form of prayer, as it is set by one Congregation for another, can
find no rule of direction, nor any foot-step thereof in the word of truth.

In saying that for method and words, a set form of prayer is humane, as
conceived prayer is; there is the like liberty taken of Sophistry, in an
equivocation, which was observed before: for though a conceived Prayer may be
said to be humane, as it is conceived and indicted in the heart of a man, and by
man offered as worship to God (as all other holy duties be in this sense
humane) yet such a conceived prayer being indicted by the Spirit of God in the
heart of him that prays, and being expressly commanded in the Word: it cannot
be truly called an humane invention, which is only spoken of those things as
have neither commandment, nor pattern from the Word, in which sense we called
a set form humane.

Disc. If our Brethren despair not of the goodness of their Cause; let them in
an orderly Treatise set down what is necessary and essentially required, to the
nature and being of true Prayer, and then show that some one or other of them
cannot be observed in a stinted or Prescript form of Prayer, and we will
readily yield unto them; and some Reason or pregnant place of Scripture, shall
put us to silence.

Answ. We see no cause to despair of the goodness of the cause, which we
conceive is not ours but Gods; we choose rather to bewail the sinfulness of
our former course, then eagerly to dispute for our present proceedings; we all
of us have sinned with our Brethren, and with our Fathers in worshipping God
after the precepts of men, and have as much cause to judge our selves for it,
as you have: To write a Treatise of all the requisites to true prayer, is
nothing to the standing or falling of the Cause.

As has been said, prayer may be true, and have all those things which are
necessary and essentially requisite to true prayer, and yet sinfully def ective
in some extenall circumstances: It were much more pertinen to write a Treatise
of the Second Commandment, whereunto the consideration of the helps and Forms
of Worship does properly belong; and from thence to consider whether any sound
reason at last (which you desire) may not be inferred against prescript Forms
of Prayer.

Let us therefore consider together of the meaning of that Commandment, though
not in the full latitude of it (for that were not so pertinent to the Cause in
hand) but so far as concerns the present business; and yet not seeking
thereby, nor striving to put you to silence, but to awaken both our selves and
you (if it be the Will of God) to repentance.

The Second Commandment, in forbidding Images, forbids not only bodily
Images, (Graven or Molten, or Painted) but all spiritual Images also; which
are the Imaginations and Inventions of men, whether they be ordained for
worship (as Apocrapha Scriptures, and the Laws of men binding the Conscience)
or for helps and means of worship (as significant Ceremonies, to teach and stir
up to spiritual Duties) or finally, for forms, and manner of worship, yet
when we speak of helps and means of worship invented by Men, and forbidden by
God, in this Commandment we do not speak either of natural or artificial
helps to help the natural sense in Gods worship; (such as Scaffolds be to men's
hearing) nor of the helps of Tongues and Arts which the wisdom of God has
given for an help to the mind and understanding in all knowledge: As if God
commanded the people to read in his Word all their days, and to read with
understanding the Translation of Scripture into the Mother Tongue of each
Nation, is a necessary help to this end, and the knowledge of grammar, and
tongues is a necessary help to such a translation.

And so if God command the people to join together, as well in voice as in
heart, to sing Psalms, and to sing them with understanding; seeing Psalms are
a kind of holy Poetry, even as Grammar will be a necessary help to translate
the Psalms into English; So Poetry will be requisite to translate the English
into verse; and such kind of helps, though they be not expressly commanded by
God, yet we look at them as warranted by necessary consequence from the Word;
because God, who commanded thr duties of Reading the Scripture, and singing of
Psalms, (and both to be done with understanding) he does imply a necessary
warrant of such means as do naturally and necessarily lead to those ends, and
without which those ends (without a miracle cannot be otained.

We speak therefore of such means and helps of worship forbidden in this
Commandment, not which do naturally and necessarily help forward the same
(though remotely) but of such Arbitrary helps, as are voluntarily taken up by
the wisdom and will of man for spiritual ends, (as Gideons Ephod and
Pharisaicall washings, and superadded to those means and helps of worship;
which God has sufficiently, yea, and abundantly supplied, his Church and
people withal, by his Word and Spirit, for all spiritual duties.

Nevertheless, this distinction of voluntary and necessary helps, may not be
stretched so far, as to justify devise and set forms of Prayer, to supply
the defects of sinfully ignorant, or carelessly bashful people, as cannot pray
(especially before company) without a book: For, first, God would not have such
persons (so sinfully ignorant and bashful) to be called forth into public
Ministry; the lame and the blind shall not come into Sion, into David's House, 2 Samuel 5.8. nor may such ignorant and lame Christians be admitted to come into
the public place in the Church.

3. God has provided other sufficient helps to supply these defects to private
Christians: for besides the Spirit of God (which helps all our infirmities Romans
8.26.) who supplieth both the ignorant with knowledge of what, and how to pray,
and the bashful with power; he has also ordained instruction to help the
ignorant, and frequent exercise, and diligent Catechizing of a man's own family,
to help his bashfulnesse in praying before them; and if strangers come in, (and
they sit to partake in such an ordinance) God then offers him the help of a
Christian friend to supply his necessity before strangers; and when we speak of
form, and manner of worship devised by men; we speak not of such as light of
nature and civil custom takes up for order and decency: but of such as are
taken up by the voluntary choice of the wisdom and will of man, either for
such ends as God has not appointed (as uniformity in Rites, and conformity to
Idolaters) or for such ends, as for which God has provided otherwise; as the
Love Feasts in the Church to maintain brotherly love, for which God ordained
the Lords Supper, and feasts in private houses: or contrary to such ends and
ways as God has appointed, as the Chemarines to offer incense, (a type of
Prayer) to maintain a Praying Ministry, without sacrificing; as a read Liturgy
to maintain a reading or praying Ministry without preaching.

It was touched upon before that, when God forbad us such a manner of worship,
as Heathens use to their god, and against that one false manner of worship,
establishes his own institutions in his Word ( Deuteronomy. 12.30, 31, 32.) He does
thereby evidently condemn under one false manner of worship all other forms or
manners of worship, which are not instituted in his word. Hence conformity to
Idolaters in cutting their hair and beards is forbidden, Levit. 19.27. Hence
preaching in the wisdom of words, (or in carnal eloquence) is forbidden: as a
painted Image against the second Commandment, 1 Cor. 21. Hence Prayer toward
the East falls under the same reproof: Hence the incense of Uzzia, the
strange fire of Nadab and Abihu; the striking of the rock by Moses in the
Wilderness of Sin; the Love Feasts brought into the Lords Supper.

And many more such like forms and manners of Gods worship are forbidden in the
Word, as diverse from the rule and pattern held forth in the second
Commandment, as it is opened and illustrated by these and such like examples
in the writings of the Prophets, and Apostles: we are not ignorant that there
is also a sinful form and manner of worship which is forbidden in the third
Commandment, as when we worship God unreverently, or droufily, but that is
rather To. modus colendus, then modus cultus.

To apply then to this Rule and Commandment of God these set forms of Prayer
devised by men, and prescribed to be read out of a Book, and so taken up by one
Church from another, as the forms of their worship, and the helps of their
devotion: We find no Commandment nor Pattern for them in the Word; nor any
promise for their acceptance; They are enjoined for helps, and means of Gods
worship; which God has not sanctified, and for forms of worship, which God
has not acknowledged, and therefore we know not how to excuse them from sin,
against the true meaning of the second Commandment.

Object. If it be said that it was granted, before in stating the Question,
that in reading a Prayer penned by another man ( say one of Calvin's Prayers
after his Lectures) a man may be so affected with it, as that his heart going
along therewith, he may convey his own desires, and Petitions to God in reading
thereof, and so make it his own Prayer, though devised by another, and read out
of a Book.

Answ. We grant that a man may make use of another man's penned Prayers read in
private, not only for an example, or instruction how to pray; but also
occasionally for his present Prayer; If he find the Petitions suitable to his
present occasions: Yea, we grant further, that in case one Church should send
letters to another Church, and in the end thereof should conclude with some
Prayer suitable to the state of the Church to whom they write: we doubt not but
that the Church to whom the letters are sent, finding the Petitions suitable to
their condition, may lawfully go along therewith in spirit, and in the end say
Amen thereto, and so make it their own Prayer.

But yet here be two things different from the case in hand.

First, They that penned such Prayers did not prescribe them as forms of Prayer
for the brethren to use, left them freely to their liberty.

2. They that take them up occasionally for their present use, and make them
their Prayers, they do not set them apart to be read for their ordinary
Prayers, either in public or in private, which seems to us a matter of
weighty consideration, and makes a great difference in the cause in hand to
clear it by a familiar instance: A man passing through a burying place may see
a dead man's scalp cast up, and thereby take occasion from the present object to
meditate (for the present) on his mortality, and to prepare for like change:
but if he shall take up, and keep that dead man's scalpe in his Closet, or Bed
chamber, to be an ordinary help to him, to put him in mind daily of his
mortality: Now in so doing he makes an Image of it, to himself, by setting it
a part to be an help to him in Gods worship; which not being sanctified and set
a part by God for that end, it now becomes a sin to him against the second
Commandment in the former case, he took occasion to fall into a present good
meditation of mortality, by the present sight of an object of mortaliy, as it
was set before him occasionally by Gods providence, wherein he did well
according to the second Commandment, not to pass by such a passage of Gods
providence in vain: But in the latter case in setting it a part to be an
ordinary help to him in such meditations, or injoyning the same to others; He
in so doing makes it to him and them an Image, it not being instituted, or
sanctified by God, but devised and set apart by man, for such a spiritual end,
which is forbidden in the second Commandment.

If it be said again, when I read Prayer and sind some Petitions therein that
suit well with my estate, I may not only then use them for my present Prayer,
but may again and again ordinarily make use thereof in my own Prayers.

Answ. We deny not that, but it is one thing to take up a Petition, or two, or
more, and to insert them here and there into mine own Prayers, and another
thing to take up a whole entire prayer, or form of prayer, and use it
ordinarily as mine own; see the like in Preaching, I may make use of a sentence
or two, or more, here and there out of another man's Sermon, and it may be
inculcate the same again and again, in many Sermons together of my own; But I
may not therefore take up a whole Sermon penned by another, and preach it for
mine own, though it were never so fit for my Text, and for mine own
Congregation.

Whence also another reason (and in our apprehension of just weight) may be
alleged against the ordinary use of set forms of Prayers devised by others. If
every Minister be to edify the Church by the dispensation of his own tallents,
and gifts, as well in prayer as in preaching: Then he may not pray another man's
penned prayer, no more then preach another man's penned Sermon, but the former
is true, 1 Cor. 12.7. Acts 6.4. Ephesians. 4.8.11, 12, 13. therefore the latter.

3. Let me add a third reason, If I may worship God in the congregation with a
set form of prayer, read out of a book, then I may bring into the Church
another book besides the book of God, to be read ordinarily for the public
edification of the Church: But we know no warrant for the use of any book in
the Church to be read ordinarily for the public edification of the Church;
besides the book of God; to bring into the Church any other book besides Gods,
is like the bringing in of another Altar into the Temple of the Lord, and set
it up besides the Altar of the Lord: which did in time thrust the Altar of the
Lord to stand behind, and give place, and at length to be laid aside, 2 Kings
16.14, 15. I need not apply it, experience goes far enough in applying of it;
If it be an unsanctified way of preaching to fill a Sermon with Quotations, out
of the Books of ancient Divines (whom more commonly then safely they call
Fathers) though the sentences be godly, and pithy, how much more will it be an
unsanctified kind of prayer, to make up not only many Petitions together, but
also a whole form of Prayer out of a book, less ancient, and much more
offensive.

4. Let me conclude with a fourth reason, and add no more in this place, He
that selecteth a few prayers which in themselves are free from offensive matter
but of a book liable (in the whole bulk) to many just exceptions, and withal
imposed by one Church upon another, he does really therein hold forth and
profess his subjection (not only to the irregular exercise of that authority,
whereby it is enjoined) but also to the whole order of worship enjoined in that
book; as Paul in practicing (though but seldom) a few ceremonies out of the
book of the Law, did therein hold forth and profess his orderly walking
according to the whole Law, and his prosessed subjection to the whole order of
worship prescribed by the authority of the Law, Acts 21.24.25, which had it not
been warranted by God himself fora season, he had doubtless thereby sinned
against the second Commandment, Since then the second Commandment is so many
ways violated by reading of a Prayer Book, devised and prescribed by humane
authority, for the public Prayers of the Church, the Lord pardon all our
provocations of his jealousy by our former ignorance in this point, and keep
us blameless for after times, for his holy names sake, in Jesus Christ. Amen.

You know the sins against this Commandment, do more provoke the jealousy
of the Lord against his people, and that for many generations, then the breach
of any of the rest, which is the reason why the Lord sets before his people
(as a flaming sword) his jealousy, for a sanction and fence of this
Commandment above the rest, Eaeod. 20.5. And shall we then provoke the Lord to
jealousy, are we stronger than he? but let us proceed with our Discourse.

Disc. They tell us (say you) God has not ordained a set prescript worship, he
has not indeed prescribed it as necessary, but his Word does warrant it to us
as lawful.

Answ. First, show us, but one Text of the word that does warrant it as
lawful, any word of precept or promise, or pattern from the Scripture, and we
shall do as you offer to do, sit down in silence.

Secondly, if God has not prescribed a set form as necessary, why is such
necessity put upon all the Churches, for receiving of it, has the Church power
to bind where God loses?

Disc. Touching the external form of words, in which we should profer our
Petitions, we know nothing precisely commanded by the Lord, and therefore judge
it a thing merely indifferent whether our requests be read or uttered; whether
in a stinted or conceived form of words; neither do we bring in any strange
manner of Prayer; for in substance the prayer read and conceived is all one.

Answ. First, touching the external form of words in prayer, we may know (and
must willingly know what the word has taught us) that the Lord has commanded
(whether expressly or by just consequence, all is one):

First, that as in Preaching, so consequently in Prayer, we are to express our
minds in such a frame of words, not which man's wisdom teaches, but which the
Holy Ghost teaches, 1 Cor. 2.13.

Secondly, that we are not to worship God after the precepts, or patterns of
men, but do all things after the pattern in the mount, Esaias 29.13. Deuteronomy. 12.30,
31, 32. Heb. 8.5.

Thirdly, that we should not worship God in an Image, devised by man, and such
are all set forms of Prayer, devised helps of worship, and prescribed to be
read in the Church of Christ.

Answ. 2. But suppose (as the Discourse presumes, that it were a thing merely
indifferent, whether our requests be read, or uttered, whether in a stinted or
conceived form of words, It seems to us a manifest transgression of the
bounds, both of Apostolical authority, and Christian liberty, to bring in or
take up a form of Prayer stinted and limited by men, which is left to us
indifferent by God; nor can we excuse a read prayer prescribed by men, from a
strange form of prayer; seeing no such form is read or heard of, in all the
Scripture; so great a difference is there betwixt a conceived, and prescribed
read prayer, as is betwixt the fire from the Altar and the strange fire; the
one is an ordinance of God, the other is an imagination of men.

CHAP. III. Wherein Answer is returned to Reason the second.
IF it be lawful to use a prescript form of blessing, prayer thanksgiving,
and baptising set down in the Word of God, Then all prescript forms of Prayer
or Liturgy, are not to be condemned; but the former appears from Numb. 6.22,
23. Psalm. 102.1. Hos. 14.2, 3. Joel 2.17. Deuteronomy. 5.10. Psalm. 92.1. Ezra. 3.10.
Rev. 15.3.2 Chron. 29.30. Isa. 12.1. Math. 28.19. What answer do our Brethren
return to this Argument?

Answ. Our answer is ready, and plain, just and short, we deny both the Major
Proposition, and the ground of the Minor; for (to speak first to the former) it
does not follow that prescript form of prayer invented by men is lawful,
because a form prescribed of God is good and allowable; the Reason whereof is
sound and evident; though God forbid men to make themselves any Image, or
likeness in his worship, yet he has not forbidden himself this power to
prescribe any Image or form to us; he appointed his people to make the
Cherubims to worship him before them, both in the Tabernacle and Temple; but
yet when Jeroboam made to himself the like form at Dan and Bethel, and
prescribed them to the people, it was a manifest breach of the second
Commandment; what reply does the Discourser return to this?

Disc. A mere shift (say you) instead of an answer: for the question is not of
this or that form in particular, but of a prescript form in it self
considered; the Lords Prayer was indicted, or prescribed by our Savior himself,
and they yet deny the use thereof as a prayer, and most of the Reasons which
they bring, do conclude against every set form of prayer, as well as against
any one; thus they argue: If a set form of Prayer be lawful, then a man may
carry his prayers in his pocket; buy them at the Book-binders shops, etc. and
does not this Reason disallow all penned and printed forms as well as ours?

Answ. Thus, with one sudden and blunt dash of a Pen, a holy and divine truth
confirmed by plentiful evidence of Scripture, and applied generally and
frequently by our best Divines against Popish Images, is at once blotted out,
and branded as a shift: I say no more but this: This is a speaking evil of the
Law; and condemning of the Law, and that in a higher degree than that which is
reproved by the Apostle James, Chap. 4.11. for the Law it self in condemning
Images, and the imaginations of men's devising, commands and establishes the
Images and imaginations ordained by God.

Therefore for you to call such a distinction of Images, as is established by
the Law of God, a mere shift, is to make your self (pardon my plainness) in
this case, not an observer of the Law, but a Judge; so far will inordinate
zeal to a way of error transport even godly minds.

But to speak to the grounds of such a censure, though it were granted that the
question is not of this or that form of Prayer in particular, yet is of a set
form devised by men, and prescribed to be read out of a book for an ordinary
Prayer; yea, I might add further, that the occasion of the Question in hand,
springs from an offense taken at some brethren (as appears by the letters
sent to us about this matter, by sundry Reverend godly brethren, and subscribed
amongst others, by your own name) for their not joining with others to worship
God in a common stinted Liturgy, known to be devised by men, and prescribed to
be read for the public Prayers of all the Churches in the Country; howsoever
therefore the question be reduced by your Discourses ab Hypothesi, ad Thesin
(and by lawful rules of dispute so may be) yet it is against the rule (...),
so to palliate the matter, as to draw the question above the kind, and occasion
of the question, you may upon occasion of one prescript form of Prayer devised
by men, put the question of any prescript form of Prayer devised by men; but it
is an utter changing and forsaking of the cause to put off the question in hand
to forms of Prayer devised and prescribed by God; what though some that have
spoken or written in this cause, have waved some forms of Prayer devised by God
himself; and have used some arguments, that grasp at more than they can hold?

The state of the question must not be drawn to the arguments, but the
arguments to the state of the question; It is true, some have doubted, and some
have denied the use of the Lords Prayer (as it is called) for a Prayer, but
they would never have denied it or doubted of it, if they had thought it had
been prescribed by Christ for a Prayer: But howsoever (not to spend words and
time in vain) we for our parts (I speak for the most part) do grant it may be
lawful to pray thut very Prayer, in the same words, and yet this will not at
all prejudice the cause in hand, to justify Prayers in a Book composed by men,
and imposed by one Church upon another.

Nevertheless, that Argument against such Prayers which are fetched from the
Topics of the Pocket, or of the Book-binders Shops, we neither use, nor allow,
they which use them may clear their own intentions and drift in them.

Having thus cleared the denial of the Major Proposition, we do as justly deny
the ground of the Minor, for though it do appear from Scripture, that some
forms of Prayer, or blessing, or baptizing, or thanksgiving devised by God,
were sometimes used by godly men (and it was lawful for them so to do) yet we
deny (that which was the ground of the Minor) that God in his Word did set down
any prescript form of any of these: Prescript (I say) In such a sense as in
this Question is intended; to wit, precisely injoyning the use thereof in all
their public holy Assemblies: nor will any of the Scriptures alleged reach
that; in Numb, 6.22, 23. The Priests are directed to a form of blessing: But
that they used that and not other forms, does not appear: It is evident that
the Apostles used diverse other forms, as has been showed above, in Psalm. 22.1.
there is no prescribing of a form of words at all, only Christ used the same
words, with a little variance upon the like occasion, on the Cross, or if you
urge the title of the Psalms, from Junius his notes, as if the Psalm were
appointed to be sung every morning by break of day: Bear with us if we rather
fetch the meaning of these words (...) from the Psalm it self, verse. 19. where
the Prophet alluding to (...) calls the Lord (...) my strength hasten to help
me, the words therefore in the title hold forth no more but the Argument of the
Psalm (...) for speedy help a Psalm of David, In Psalm 102.1. the Title shows
what an afflicted soul in such a case did pray; but does not prescribe all
afflicted souls to power out the same form of words in their afflictions.
Hosea 14.2, 3. The Prophet directs them to take words to themselves, to such
a purpose: But whether the self same words, or some other such like, he does
not limit or prescribe: The like may be said of Joel. 1.17. Deuteronomy. 5.10. has
nothing sounding toward the point in hand. I suppose it is miswritten by the
error of the Scribe. In Psalm. 92.1. the Psalm is penned for the Sabbath, but
whether for a word of instruction for the Sabbath, or for thanksgiving on the
Sabbath it is not mentioned, we willingly grant it was penned for both; But
nevertheless, it was not prescribed every Sabbath day to be sung. In Ezra
3.10. it does appear, as also 2 Chronicles. 29.30. That they praised God with the
words of David and after his Ordinance: But his Ordinance and words were
appointed by God, 2 Chronicles. 29.25. And yet not so prescribed to be used as never
to be omitted; In Rev. 15.3. when it is said, they sung the Song of Moses the
servant of God, and the Song of the Lamb; It is only meant, they praised God
with Psalms to the like effect as that of Moses; not with the same words, much
less upon prescript. Isa. 12.1. It is prophesied the Church shall praise God
to such a purpose as these words hold forth: But whether in these very words,
is uncertain, certain it is, they are not so prescribed to do; but left at
liberty. In Matthew. 29.19. the place is miswritten, as before.

Disc. But it suffices us that these forms of Blessing and Prayer, might
lawfully be used as a blessing, or Prayer, though in conscience they were not
necessarily tied to the use of them: The lawful, not the necessary use of a
prescript form of prayer (or liberty) is now in question: for if the Saints in
former times might pray unto God, or praise him in a stinted form of words,
indicted by others, or invented by themselves (as we find they might and did) we
also at this day do the same.

Answ. We deny not that forms of Prayer and blessings indicted by the Holy Ghost
in Scripture, may be lawfully so used, but we deny that they were prescribed,
or limited to be so used, but still the Church left at liberty to use them, or
some other holy forms in their stead; and therefore when the Discourse says
the lawful, not the necessary use of a prescript form, is now in question, you
make the question to imply a contradiction: for a prescript form is put upon
the Churches, as necessary to be used in all public holy assemblies, else it
is not a form prescribed, but described only.

Disc, But (says the Discourser) if they will hear with patience, the
consequence of that argument, The use of a devised, and prescribed form of
prayer will be justified from their own ground; for they teach that God has
not appointed in his Word any prescript form, which of necessity we are tied to
use at all; that the matter of our prayers are diverse, according to the
several occasions, which happen and fall out; that the Inward frame is the
elevation of the soul to God, in humility, love, fear and confidence; from
which premises it will necessarily follow, if one godly form of prayer may be
used, another also fit for matter, grave for phrase of speech, may be allowed,
for none is absolutely commanded.

Answ. The contrary conclusion does rather follow from the premises; for if
none be absolutely commanded by God, then none ought to be commanded or
prescribed by men; what God has left free in his worship, let no man limit; To
what Church did God ever give power to bind where himself loses? And if it be
unlawful for Church Governors to bind where God loses, it will be unlawful
for the people so deeply to offend the conscience of their Governors, as to
build them up, or to harden them in their sins, by ready subjection to such
injunctions, and serious and zealous pleading for them: How much safer were it
for the people of God, to stand fast in the liberty which Christ has purchased
for them, in accepting no other yoke of ordinances, nor forms of worship, then
himself has put upon them? that so Church Governors might contain themselves
within the power in Church affairs, wherein the Lord has contained himself
throughout the Scriptures; when shall it once be that the servants of God will
learn to be wise, and teach others to be wise, not above that which is written,
but according to it, that so an end might be put at length to the inventions
and innovations of the sons of men, whereby they take upon themselves an
usurpation beyond the bounds of Apostolical Authority, and put upon the people
an unjust restraint of the bounds of their dear bought Christian liberty?

Disc. The use of a prescript form of prayer (or Liturgy) derogateth (as some
say) from the honor, fruit and benefit of Christ's ascension; who ascending up
on high, has given gifts to men for the work of the Ministry, Ephesians. 4.8. Let it
be granted that every particular Minister is able in so full and ample manner
at all times to open his heart before God (which can never be proved) as that
he shall not need the help of a book; Is there no warrant therefore for others
to prescribe, or for themselves to read or use stinted prayer; why not? an able
Minister has discretion to know what portion of Scripture is fit to be read;
Has the Church then no power to appoint what Books and Chapters shall
ordinarily be read; or has a Minister no warrant to observe that appointment?
A learned Linguist is able to translate a Chapter in the old or new Testament,
peradventure as well as it is translated, may not the Church yet ordain one
usually to be read?

Let our brethren judge the strength of their Reason, in one framed after the
same manner; If a Minister be endued with gifts to judge what portion of
Scripture is meet to be read, then is there no warrant for another to
prescribe, nor for them to read stinted portions of Scripture prescribed by
men; prayer is a part of Gods worship, so is reading of Scripture; the
external form of words are humane, so is the prescription of such a Book or
Chapter.

Answ. The Reason is of more weight against prescript forms, then will so
easily be cast off, at least to our best apprehensions; For if the Lord Jesus
by his ascension has given sufficient furniture of gifts to the Ministers of
his Church for prayer, as well as for preaching; For the whole work of the
Ministry, for the edification of the Church, For the perfecting of the Saints
unto the fullness of the slature of the age of Christ; Then it is dishonorable
unto Christ, and superfluous for the Governors of the Church, to prescribe
unto Ministers set forms of Prayer in Liturgies, any more than set forms of
preaching in Homilies; If Christ has not gifted them as sufficient for the one
as for the other, it does indeed derogate from the honor and fruit of his
ascension; if he have, then it is superfluous for Church governors, Actum
Agere, even as much as to tie bladders under the wings of Sea-fowls to keep
them from sinking, or to help them to swim; It is true that every good Minister
is not able at all times to open his heart to God in Prayer, but neither is he
able at all times to open the mind of God in preaching, but if he be not able
to do both without book, neither will he be able to do either upon a book
prescribed to him; I have known a Minister to edify the people more by silence
in the Pulpit through strength of temptation, then ever I knew any do by
reading a Homily upon the Book.

If an able Minister have discretion to know what portion of Scripture is fit
to be read, to what end should the Church appoint him what Books and Chapter to
read ordinarily; It is a commendable work in any state to procure a faithful
translation of the Bible to be extant in the mother tongue of each people under
their dominions, for the common benefit of them all. And we do easily grant a
Minister (though he be a learned Linguist) has liberty not only to make use
of it in his private studies, but also to make use of it in the Congregation;
for seeing reading of Scripture is an ordinance of God; yea, and reading of it
in the mother tongue of each people, it will best agree with the edification of
each people, to read it out of such a book as is frequent and current in all
their hands.

But yet the Church may not so bind him to such a translation, as not to give
him leave to amend it, if need be; and he be able: And besides, this will no
way reach the binding of Ministers to a set form of Prayer upon a book: seeing
reading of Prayers in the Church, as Prayers, is not any ordinance of God; as
all the reading of translated Scriptures be.

CHAP. IV. Answering to the third Reason.
Disc. IF it be lawful to sing Psalms in a form of words devised by men, then
likewise to pray unto God in a stinted form; If the one of these be an
invention of men a strange prayer; a similitude of a prayer: so is the other a
similitude of a Psalm.

Answ. First, the singing of Psalms (whereof you speak) in a form of words
devised by men, may have a double meaning: for either you mean such Psalms as
are compiled by ordinary men, or else Psalms penned by the Prophets; but
translated by ordinary men into English verse, to be sung in the Churches; If
you speak of the former, then this is our first answer:

1. We see as little warrant for singing Apocrypha Psalms in the Church, as for
praying prescript Lyturgies of men in the Church: and for both together, as
little warrant as for reading Apocrypha Scriptures in the Church; but if you
speak of the latter, then our second answer is this.

2. There is an observable difference between singing of Psalms and Prayer; as
also, between the Psalms penned by the Prophets, and by other ordinary men; for
in the peoples joining in prayer, there is no more required but their going
along in silence, with consent of the heart, and in the end of the prayer,
expressing their consent in voice, by saying, Amen, 1 Corinthians. 14.16. But in
singing of Psalms, all the people of God (as spiritual Priests) do sing with
voice together, according to Isa. 52.8. which puts a necessity upon a set
form of Psalms, else one should sing one thing, and another another thing,
which would instead of harmony, breed confusion; but there is no necessity of a
set form of Prayer; for if the words of the Ministers prayers be understood of
the people, they go along and join with him in silent consent, as well in a
form conceived for the present occasion; as in a set form of words, whereunto
they have been accustomed: besides the Psalms penned by the Prophets (as by
David and the rest) being of divine inspiration, and part of the holy word of
God (which we are commanded should dwell in us plenteously, and wherewith we
are to teach and admonish our selves and one another, by the singing of them
unto the Lord) we have therefore a lawful warrant, to sing such Psalms; even
in such a form of words, as they are translated into by men; when yet we have
not the like warrant to pray the forms of Prayer devised by ordinary men, which
are not of divine inspiration, but of humane invention and injunction. Psalms
and Scripture translated are still as truly the Word of God in the translation,
as in the original language.

Disc. But (say you) If a man be disposed to reason against the singing of
Psalms, he may a great deal more plausibly argue that the infancy of the Church
when God saw a set form to be necessary; he inspired holy men to pen such as
might be of use for that time, when such worship was approved; and therefore
seeing at this day, no such forms are given us of God, they are not to be
allowed.

Answ. Such an argument though you think it were plausible, yet indeed it is
less defenceable; for the truth is, set forms of Psalms are as necessary now,
as they were then; for seeing it is necessary that all the people should join
in voice as well as in heart, in the singing of Psalms. It is therefore
necessary they should know beforehand the same set form of words in which they
should all join; and seeing a set form of words in Psalms is necessary, it
pleased the Lord to devise himself to our hands a set form of them by his holy
Prophets; who being carried by the Holy Ghost, far above humane infirmity and
possibility of erring; they have set down such forms as were fit not only for
the infancy of the Church, but for the public use of all Churches in all
ages, and for all occasions, which cannot be said of any compilements de vised
by ordinary men.

Disc. But (say you) a set form of words is as necessary in preaching, and
public prayers, as in singing; this or that form is necessary in neither; a
set form is necessary in both; the people cannot sing with the Minister,
unless what is sung be represented to them in a set form of words; nor can
they join in prayer, or attend to the word preached, unless the matter of
praying or preaching be conveyed to them in a set form of words.

Answ. You confound a form of words understood and a set form: it is true, no
man can join in prayer, or attend unto the Word preached, unless the matter of
prayer or preaching be conveyed in a form of words understood: but yet without
a set form of words they may, the words being delivered in a known tongue; By
set forms we understand standing forms, such as come to be used again and
again, day by day in the same words; common sense makes it evident, men may
join in prayer, and attend to the Word preached, as well in a new form of
words, according to the present occasion, which he never heard before, as in a
set form which he hears every day.

Disc. But you demand, Is a Minister able to express the necessities of the
people, or the doctrine of salvation in a form of words devised and studied by
himself? and is he not able by meditation and study, to dictate, and compose a
Psalm to be sung by the people, as occasion requires? and if so, is not a
stinted form of singing devised by men, an arbitrary help to him, and so
forbidden.

Answ. 2. Many a good Minister that is able to express the necessities of the
people, or the doctrine of salvation, in a form of words devised and studied by
himself: is not able so to dictate and compose a Psalm to be sung by the people
each several occasion, no, though he should meditate and study hard for it:
Poetry is not every good Scholars faculty; nor the penning of holy Psalms the
skill of every good Minister: nor is it required that it should. For seeing the
Holy Ghost has already dictated and composed to our hands diverse forms of
Psalms for all occasions, it would be superfluous for Ministers to take up
their meditations and studies, about the inventing other forms, though they had
gifts fit for it: and therefore if such as have the skill to pen Psalms, do
nevertheless sing the forms of Psalms set and composed by David, and other
Prophets: as they cannot be said, therein to make use of the inventions of men,
but of Gods institutions; so neither can they be said to sin upon the other
respect, which you mention, because they use an help to them not necessary;
whereas others that want their skill, do lawfully use David's Psalms, because
such an help to them, is not arbitrary, but necessary: no, no, we do not
approve of that distinction between arbitrary and necessary, in that sense, to
that purpose; in that sense I say, for I here see you work upon an equivocation
in this word necessary; For there is a double necessity spoken of in this case:
a set form of worship may be said to be necessary, either through sinful
defects in men, who should be able, but are not, to conceive a form of worship
of themselves, or else through the nature and condition of the worship it
self, which cannot be performed, but in a set form, whatsoever the gifts of
men be; in this latter sense, not in the former, is the singing of Psalms in a
set form necessary; for unless a Psalm be expressed in a set form of words,
and so set before the people, all the people cannot join in voice (as well as
heart) singing and praising God together in the same words; we admit of no
necessity of any set forms of prayer (or other worship) in the former sense: as
concerning such men unfit to be Ministers of the Gospel as want gifts to
conceive a prayer according to the present occasion; but a set form of Psalms
we allow as necessary in the latter sense, as necessary (by consequence) from
divine institution; for if singing of Psalms be as it is of divine institution:
and if Psalms be a kind of spiritual Poetry, and therefore to be put into
verse; If it be also of divine institution; that all the people should join as
well in voice, as in heart, in singing of Psalms; and that in a language known,
and understood by themselves; then it will be requisite and necessary by divine
institutions (for he that instituteth the end, instituteth the necessary means
that leads to the end) that in our English Churches the Psalms be translated
into English verse, or meter; and received of the Churches in a set form; that
so all the people may join with one voice and heart to praise the Lord together
in the same words, but there is not the like necessity of a set form of words
in prayer: For in prayer (as has been said) there is no more required of the
people then when they hear the words of the Minister, to go along with him in
heart; and in the end of the prayer to answer with one accord in voice, Amen.
And so whatsoever is required of the people by divine institution for joining
in prayer is fully attained, without a set form of words in prayer, which
cannot be attained in singing without a set form of words in Psalms.

Disc. It is said of prayer, Christ has given gifts to his Ministers for
preaching and praying, has he not for the singing of Psalms also? If it be a
dishonor to Christ (as some affirm) that they should use a form of prayer
devised by others; Is it not a dishonor likewise, if they shall use a form of
singing devised by others?

Answ. It has been answered above, that though God has given gifts to his
Ministers for preaching and praying; yet he has not given to many the gift of
inditing Psalms also; and yet neither is it any dishonor to Christ, nor
sinful defect in his Ministers that he has not so furnished them, seeing he
himself has sufficiently furnished them with all set forms of Psalms by the
Ministry of his Prophets, divinely inspired for the service of the Church: and
it is no dishonor to Christ or his Ministers that they should take up forms of
words devised by him for his own worship.

Disc. If there be any such necessity (of a set form of Psalms) as is
pretended, because some Ministers are not enabled of themselves to furnish the
necessities of the Church: It should rather exempt them from the practice of
singing Psalms, then give liberty to a devised form; for it is a rule in
divinity, that against a general negative precept no particular affirmative can
be lawful, unless that particular be warranted in Scripture, etc. But against
this supposed general negative precept, forbidding all devised helps, and
furtherances in Gods worship, there is no particular warrant alowing it in
singing of Psalms.

Answ. It is not a supposed, but a real negative precept that generally
forbids all devised helps and furtherances in Gods worship, meaning helps
and furtherances devised by men without warrant from the word: For this is
indeed the proper true meaning of the second Commandment, as has been showed
above: but we deny that set forms of Psalms recorded in Scripture as helps and
furtherances devised by men, but given by the Holy Ghost; and though the
translation of the Psalms both in English and in verse, be by men, yet not
without warrant from the Holy Ghost, who has commanded that the Word of God
should dwell in us plenteously, teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms
and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, Coloss. 3.16. who has also commanded that we
should sing with understanding, 1 Cor. 14.15. which the people could not do to
their own understanding, or the understanding of their brethren, if the Psalms
were not translated into their own mother tongue; and when the translation does
fitly express the sense of the original Psalms: we have warrant also to make
use of the translation, though compiled by ordinary men, as we see the Apostles
did many times make use of the translation of the Septuagints, provided the
translation be not imposed upon us, as that was not upon and that liberty be
still left to correct or reform whatsoever shall be found in the translation to
swerve from the true meaning and just weight of the original Scripture;
besides, it has been showed above, (in opening the meaning of the second
Commandment) that though the negative precept forbid all helps and means of
Gods worship devised by men without warrant from the word: yet not the help of
Tongues and Art, which not the wit and will of man, but the wisdom of God has
provided as necessary helps for the furtherance of sundry parts of Gods worship.

The Scriptures cannot be translated into our Mother Tongue, without the help
of Grammar, nor the Psalms into verse and meter without the help of Poetry, nor
sung without the help of Music (natural Music at the least) and therefore
these kinds of helps we make use of, as not being means of worship devised, or
suggested by the wit or will of man, but as they are indeed prepared and
ordained (according to the light of nature) by God: And so not falling under
the general negative precept which forbids all humane Inventions, and
Injunctions in the worship of God.

Disc. Now whether the pretended necessity of a set form, should exempt from
the general negative precept, forbidding devised forms, or from the
affirmative precept of singing Psalms let them judge who put the Exception.

Answ. We doubt not to judge it safe to obey the affirmative precept of singing
Psalms, in a set form of words though translated into English, and into verse
by men, because set Psalms are ordained of God, and their translation into
English verse is necessarily employed and warranted by God himself: And yet
nevertheless we do not pretend any necessity to exempt any such set form from
the general negative precept which falls under the prohibition of it; for
these the negative precept did never intend to prohibit: You need not therefore
to wonder (as you do in the following words) why such a necessity (as has been
opened) of a set devised form of singing should excuse a set form of Psalms,
and yet not excuse a set form of prayer, but rather excuse the people from
joining in it.

Answ. Because there is no necessity at all of a devised set form of prayer
unless it be through the sinful defect of the Ministers gifts in Prayer, which
is such a necessity, as God abhors both it and the Minister for it; But the
necessity of a set form of Psalms is such which God himself has put, for the
Celebration of that service with one accord, both in heart and voice, as has
been showed, and therefore you might well have forborne that confident
expression.

Disc. If Christians shall not exempt themselves from the stinted Prayers used
in the Congregation, until a material difference be showed in these
particulars, and that distinction of Arbitrary, and necessary, devised forms be
approved by solid Reasons, and holy Scriptures, the world shall end (I am
confident) before they shall separate.

For you see a material difference in these particulars, between the necessity
of a set form of Psalms, and the necessity of a set form of Prayer. The
necessity of the one is from Gods Ordinance, and therefore warrantable: The
necessity of the other is from man's Ignorance, and such ignorance as makes him
unfit for the Ministerial Office, and therefore sinful.

As for the distinction of Arbitrary and necessary devised forms in your sense,
we neither use it nor approve it: And therefore have no cause to bring either
holy Scriptures or solid Reasons for the proof of it: But in that sense wherein
we use it, the distinction is so manifest from what we have said already, that
we think your self will require no further proof of it.

CHAP. V. Answering to the fourth Reason.
Disc. YOur fourth Reason may be thus contracted, If the Spirit of God do work
by means, and if he stir up good desires, yet gives not ability to express
our desires, in fit and significant words: Then it is lawful for us to use all
godly means to stir up the graces of God in us: and to premeditate how to utter
our Requests, in such a form and manner, as may best serve for our quickening,
and the edification of others; and if the use of a premeditated form of words
in prayer do not stint the Spirit; a set form of Prayer cannot be injurious to
the Spirit, grant the one, the other will follow.

Answ. If the speech be of public prayer, the same spirit that gives the
Minister ability to deliver a Sermon, in fit and significant terms, does in
like sort give ability to express his desires in Prayer, in fit and
significant terms: no man is called of God to be a Minister of his Church, but
he is as well apt to Pray as apt to Preach; But if the speech be of private
persons, it is true, many good souls have better desires than utterance; In
regard of which defect or without such defect we willingly condescend to you:
It is lawful, yea, and necessary to him, to use all godly means to stir up the
graces of God in him, and to premeditate how to utter his requests in such sort
as best serves for his own quickening, and the edification of others: But this
we deny, that the using of a prescript form of Prayer upon a book, devised and
imposed by one man upon another to be used as their Prayer, is a godly means to
stir up the graces of God in himself, or to edify others; For that which the
Holy Ghost has not sanctified in his Word for the stirring up of the graces of
God in a man's self or others, that is not a godly means for such an end; But
throughout the Scriptures we cannot find any where, that the Holy Ghost has
sanctified such a means to such an end: And then it is but an Image, which will
rather teach a form of godliness, than edify to the power of it.

Disc. Peradventure they would creep out by saying the Spirit of God is our
only helper in the time of Prayer, so that though at other times we might use
helps to stir up the graces of the Spirit, yet not in time of prayer: But this
distinction is not found in Scripture, neither can be deduced by any sound
reason from thence. The Spirit of God is at all times the sole mover, and
enabler of us to pray, and the use of lawful means, and such as suit with the
nature of prayer, are at no time unlawful, as it is fit we meditate and read
before we pray, so it is lawful in prayer to kneel and lift up our hands and
eyes, to use the help of the voice, and the benefit of a Christian friend to
stir up affection. Therefore we may dispute for the lawfullnesse of book
Prayer, thus, if it be lawful to use external helps in time of prayer, the
better to stir up affections, then book prayer is not to be condemned.

Answ. To creep out, being a borrowed speech from worms; It being put upon us
holds us forth as worms, and not as men, yea, worse than worms, (Serpents,
rather than Worms:) That being compassed in with truth, are willing to creep
out by any evasion, rather than to submit to the authority of the truth: But
let our reverend and godly brother, be entreated, not to deal such measures to
his Brethren: Least the God and Father of us both, be displeased and stir up
others to return like measure to you, heaped up, pressed down, shaken
together: our plain and simple Answer (without creeping or shifting) Is this,
that it is lawfll to use any external or internal helps, either before
Prayer, to prepare us for it, or in Prayer to quicken, or enlarge us in it,
provided, they be such means and helps as God has sanctified to such an end,
at such a time.

As we readily grant the help of books and meditation, before Prayer, so we do
grant also the help of holy and reverent gestures in Prayer, as bowing down the
knees, and lifting up of the hands, and eyes, and voice, the presence and
assistance of a Christian friend, for all these God has sanctified, to help
the inward affections of the heart in prayer, do but show that God has
sanctified Book-prayers, imposed upon us for our prayers, and that by the
members of other Congregations, and we will neither creep nor start away: But
willingly bless the Lord for his goodness to you in this case, (as well as in
many others) like as Phineas and the Congregation of Israel blessed God; for
the Rubenites and Gadites that were able to give so good an account of their
actions, beyond the expectation of their brethren, Jos. 22.

Disc. In prayer penned by a godly and well experienced Christian, the case of
a distressed soul may more pithily and amply be deciphered and anatomized then
he of himself is able to do it; and in such a case to deny him this lawful
help, is to take away the Crutch from the lame, and bread from the hungry.

Answ. In case a distressed soul do meet with a prayer penned, by a godly and
well experienced Christian, and do find his own case, pithily and amply
deciphered and anatomized therein, we deny not but his heart and affections may
go along with it, and say Amen to it: And thus far may find it a lawful help
to him; but if you set a part such a prayer to support him as a crutch in his
prayers (as without which he cannot walk straight and upright in that duty) or
if he that penned that prayer, or others that have read it, do enjoin it upon
him, and forbid him to pray (especially with others) unless he use that form,
this instead of a crutch, will prove a cudgel to break the bones of the Spirit
in prayer, and force him to halt in worshipping God after the precepts of men;
as it has been said before, so it may be again remembered here; a man may help
his spirit in meditation of his mortallity, by beholding a dead man's scalp,
cast in his way by Gods providence; but if he should set a part a deaths head,
or take it up as enjoined to him by others, never to meditate or conserre with
others about his mortality, and estate of another life, but in the sight and
use of the deaths head, such a soul shall find but a dead heart, and a dead
devotion from such a means of mortification; if some forms of Prayer,
especially such as gave occasion to this Dispute, do now seem to be as bread to
the hungry, we say no more but this, then hungry souls will never be starved,
that never want store of such like bread as this is.

Disc. The ample and particular laying out of our necessities does ease the
heart, and move affections, and when this may be better done by the help of a
Book in prayer then of our selves, it is senseless to accuse the use hereof,
as a lip-labor, and a quenching of the spirit; he stinteth not the Spirit that
labors to blow the coals of grace, etc.

Answ. It is true, he stinteth not the Spirit, nor quenches him; that uses
any means sanctified by the Spirit to blow the coals of grace; but this we
deny, that a stinted form of prayer upon a book, devised by men, and enjoined
to be used as the prayers of a Christian soul, is a means sanctified by the
Spirit to blow the coals of his grace; or that the repeating of such a set form
of Prayer, though ample and particular in laying out his necessities, will ease
his heart, or move his affections according to God; God does not delight
ordinarily to breath in the Masterly injunctions of brethren upon brethren, or
of one Congregation upon another, especially in such things whereof we have
neither precept nor president in the Word.

Disc. He does not substitute his Christian friend, in the place of the word,
and Spirit, who not able to lift up his soul to God, by reason of straightness
of heart, and grievous pressure, does crave his help and assistance in prayer,
and may not a godly Book supply the want of a Christian companion?

Answ. It is an ordinance of God, to crave the help of the Prayers of our
brethren, and to join with them; show the like warrant for Prayer upon a book,
prescribed to us, and then we will grant a godly book may supply even in this
case the lack of a Christian companion; If a Minister be not able to preach by
reason of the straightness of his heart, and grievous pressure, he may get his
Christian friend to preach for him; but he may not make use of a godly homily
enjoined to him by others, to supply the lack of a Christian friend.

Disc. Why should it be a sin to read or pronounce a godly form of Prayer, is
it for that it is read and pronounced, or because a man cannot lift up his
heart in faith unto God, when he utters his requests in a stinted form of
words; to assign the former, is superstition: To say the latter is to offend
against common experience?

Answ. We do not say it is a sin to read or pronounce a godly form of Prayer;
but to read a form of Prayer devised by others, and to set it a part to read,
being devised by others enjoined to me as my Prayer; This is sin, not because
it is pronounced, for all public Prayer is pronounced; nor always in
private, because it is read; for (as has been said) a man may go along in his
spirit, and be affected with some Prayer, which occasionally he reads, and
may lift up his own heart in it to the Lord; but a sin it is, as it is set
apart by himself for his Prayer; or as it is so enjoined to him by others; and
in public it is of sin, both because it is read, as the Prayer of the Church
(and so another book brought into the Church besides Gods Book) And because it
is devised, not by the gift of Gods Spirit in themselves, but in others, and
also because by other it is prescribed or enjoined to be read, as the service,
and worship of God in another Church: For we do not find that ever God gave
warrant either for the offering up of read Prayers to God, as the ordinary
prayers of the Church; and least of all for Prayers prescribed and enjoined by
one Church unto another.

It is so far off from superstition to affirm this, that we look at it as a
superstition to deny it; for to speak of superstition according to the true
nature of it (and not according to the old Etymology) If superstition be
cultus supra statutum, there is none of all these kinds, whether as read upon a
book in the Congregation, for their ordinary Prayers; or devised by men of
other Congregations for that end; or as imposed upon us by them: but they are
all of them, and each one of them, cultus supra statutum, worships and helps,
and forms of worship which never came into Gods heart to allow for his statute
and worship.

Disc. Will any man object, that read prayer is not Gods Ordinance? It has
been answered already, that prayer is the ordinance of God; but whether our
prayers be only conceived in heart, or uttered by words; whether in our own,
or other words; whether by pronouncing or reading, that is not appointed; when
spoke he one word of prayer within Book or without, in this or that form of
words?

Answ. Reply has been made hereto before; as Prayer is an Ordinance of God, so
are all the lawful helps and means and forms of Prayer; God has plainly
expressed his allowance of Prayer conceived in the heart, and of prayer
uttered, and pronounced by words both in our own words, and in the words of
others, whom God calls to be our mouths in the present assembly: but of set
forms of read prayer devised by men of another Congregation, and prescribed and
imposed upon others; it may justly be demanded, when did God speak one word of
them? And therefore, what have we to do with them? If it be said as God never
spoke word of reading Prayer within book, so never did he speak word of
pronouncing Prayer without Book; the Text does plainly enough express the
contrary; for the Word of God speaks expressly, that Christ lift up his eyes
to Heaven in Prayer, John 17.1. and 11.41. so did David, Psalm 123.1. and God
has ingraffed it in the hearts of all his people, to express the lifting up
of their souls, their faith and hope, and desires to God, by lifting up their
eyes steadfastly to Heaven in Prayer, yea, God has ingraffed it in the hearts
of all men, and even put some kind of instinct into all living creatures, to
lift up their eyes to Heaven for what they want, Psalm. 145.15. Now, if the
lifting up of the eyes to Heaven in Prayer be expressly mentioned in the Word,
then how can it be truly said, that God never spoke word of Prayer without
Book? for they that lift up their eyes steadfastly to Heaven in Prayer, cannot
(without some distractions) cast them down in Prayer upon a book, if lifting up
of the eyes to Heaven in Prayer, be a divine Institution (as the Discourse said
even now) if it be an external means to help the affection of the spirit in
Prayer) then it is against the Institution, and an hinderance to Prayer,
instead of an help, to set a man's self or others, a form of read Prayers,
wherein whilst he is reading he must usually cast down his eyes upon a Book.

CHAP. VI. Tending to give Answer unto the fifth Reason.
Disc. WHere there is no breach of Law, there is no sin: But the use of a
prescript form of Prayer is no breach of Law, or of any Commandment of God.

Answ. It has been showed above that it is a breach of the second Commandment
more ways than one, to devise and use a similitude and form, and means of
worship, which God never appointed, and such is the reading of a ser form of
Prayer, for the Prayers of the Church.

2. It is an usurpation of more than Prophetical, or Apostolical authority,
to prescribe a set form of Lyturgie, to the Churches, and a greater usurpation
for one Congregation to prescribe the same to another, which is a sin both
against the second and fifth Commandments.

3. It is a sinful and disloyal betraying of the souls of Magistrates to
countenance their intruding such prescript forms of Prayer, upon Churches, by
taking up the same forms from them, which they have not authority from God to
injoyne, and stiffly to plead for them, a sin forbidden in the fifth and sixth
Commandments.

4. It is a sinful betraying of Christian Liberty, which Christ has purchased
to every Church of his by his precious blood: For one Church voluntarily to
take up the Injunctions and prescriptions of another, contrary to Col. 2.20,
22. which argument may be applied another way, by a Testimony from the book of
Common Prayer, Gods Service is perfect Freedom, but the reading of a set form
of Prayer devised, and prescribed by others is not perfect freedom (for many
would be right glad to be freed from it) therefore such reading of prayers is
not Gods service.

5. It is a sinful breach of the rule of decency, to offer up prayers to God
in such a form, as cannot well stand with that decent gesture which is most
suitable to Prayer, It is a gesture most suitable to Prayer; to lift it up to God
as with hearts and hands, so with eyes steadfastly lift up to Heaven: But this
gesture cannot fitly, and steadfastly be used, in read Prayer, where the eyes
must be usually cast down upon the Book.

CHAP. VII. Wherein Answer is returned to the sixth Reason.
Disc. IF a set form of prayer be disallowed, then a prescript form of
Catechism and Confession must of necessity be condemned; but how absurd this
is he is very blind, or will full that sees not, the necessity, antiquity and
excellency of catechizing, is known to them that know any thing, touching the
building and governing the House of God.

Answ. Touching set forms of Catechism, we have answered twice before in
clearing some objections against the first Reason: whereto we refer you, it
has been already showed us, that God himself has set before us sundry forms
of Catechism. David's Catechism was of one form, Psalm. 34.11, 12, 13, 14.
Solomon's of another, Prove. 4. The Apostles of another, Heb. 6.2. Yea, the
Apostles name the heads of their Catechism, but neither propound the
questions, nor answers them in use, An evident Argument they never meant to
bind Churches to set forms of Catechism: The excellent and necessary use of
catechizing young men, and novices (as has been said before) we willingly
acknowledge: But little benefit have we seen reaped from set forms of questions
and answers devised by one Church, and imposed by necessity upon another: They
must look at them with colored Spectacles, that can discern them: The like may
be said of forms of Confessions, when a Church is suspected and slandered with
corrupt and unsound Doctrine, they have a call from God, to set forth a
public confession of their faith. But to prescribe the same as the confession
of the faith of that Church to their posterity, or to prescribe the confession
of one Church to be a form, and pattern unto others, sad experience has showed
what a snare it has been to both, nothing in after ages must be held for a
doctrine of the Church (though never so necessary a truth) unless it were
found amongst the Articles of Religion agreed upon by their fathers, in the
confession of their Faith.

CHAP. VIII. Giving Answer to the seventh Reason.
Disc. IT is lawful to ask common blessings of God daily in a set form of
words, Ergo. It is not unlawful to use a set form of Prayer; and if to
pronounce it, to read it also: for reading of it self, is not impure, as
pronouncing cannot make an evil matter good, no more can reading make a good
matter evil, pronouncing and reading being Adjuncts in prayer both indifferent.

Answ. First, the Question with us is not so much about set forms of prayer in
general, as about set forms of Prayer devised by men of other Churches,
precsribed, and enjoined to be read as the Prayers of the Church, or devised by
one Christian, and set apart by another, as his prayers, to which this Argument
reaches not.

Though we do not deny it to be altogether unlawful to seek common blessings
of God daily in a set form of words, yet we would not encourage men to rest and
content themselves in so doing, much less to bind themselves so to do: For
besides that, a daily set form will easily degenerate to a formallity, how can
a Christian be said to watch unto prayer (which we are commanded to do, Ephesians.
6.18.) If we content our selves with the same set form of prayer, this year, as
the last: Besides, the common daily blessings, which the Discourser instanceth
in; as faith, patience, meekness, love, sanctification of Gods name. Coming of
Christ's Kingdom, the state of these things does ever and anon vary, and to
bind a man's self daily to a set form of prayer, for such things as the state
whereof is so daily varied, will bring in a loose and Incongruous kind of
prayers, fit only for those, that do not discern, or are not affected with the
present state of things, either in themselves, or others.

When it is said, if it be lawful to pronounce a set form of prayer, then to
read it; If the meaning be to read it, for a prayer, the consequence is not
firm, for though (as the Discourser says) the reading of prayer is not impure:
Yet the praying of read prayers is the using of such a Crutch to pray (as he
speaks) which God has not appointed, and that makes such reading impure:
And though pronouncing cannot make an evil matter good, nor simply reading
make a good matter evil, yet reading to such an end, reading a set form of
prayer, prescribed to me for my prayer, makes to me a Will Worship of that
which he that conceived the prayer might lawfully have pronounced.

The pronouncing of a good Sermon by him that made it, is a good and acceptable
service to God, and his Church: But to read a Sermon as my preaching, which was
made by another, makes it neither so acceptable to God, nor to his Church, yea
the reading of a man's own Sermon instead of preaching will much detract from
the life and power of it, and make a man of God unserviceable for his place:
Though reading and pronouncing of a thing, be both of them adjuncts, and common
adjuncts too, to that which is pronounced or read, yet according to the ends
and subjects, to which they may be applied, the one may be lawful, the other
not indifferent but sinful, the reading of a Sermon for preaching, is a
sinful manner of preaching; The difference will ever hold between the word
read, and preached: They are two distinct Ordinances.

CHAP. IX. Answering unto the eight Reason.
THe Jews before the coming of Christ used a prescript form of Prayer (as it
is probable, and the learned note) in the celebration of the Passover, and that
which they used (as is very probable) was approved by Christ himself.

Answ. That the Jews before the coming of Christ, did use certain Rites in
keeping the Passover, It does appear by the Testimonies alleged as also by
Causabon, and others: And that some forms of Prayer they used, according as the
several passages of the Passover required: But it does not at all appear that
they used any set forms of Prayer, but only to that and the like effect, and
that not by Prescript or Injunction from one to another, but leaving every
father of a family at his liberty therein, much less will it appear that our
Lord Jesus Christ, took up any set forms of Prayer by their example and least
of all from their Injunction.

CHAP. X. Giving Answer to the ninth Reason
Disc. ALL the reformed Churches at this day, do not only tolerate, but
approve a set form of Liturgy, etc.

Answ. We count it a safe course to bewail our own sins and the sins of our
fathers, whereby we have polluted the holy things of God, more or less, rather
than to justify our own alterations from the rule by their presidents; ^reat
cause we have to bless the Lord for the ^reat light which the instruments whom
God ^^ed in reforming all Protestant Churches brought into the dark world, and
left behind them: and yet it is well known in some thing or other, all of them,
more or less failed: and it is more wonder they should see so much truth out
of the midst of darkness, then that they who saw so much, should fail in any
thing but whereinsoever they failed the generation that have come after them,
have too closely and ungodly stuck to their examples, yea, and have been more
zealous in the defense thereof, than have sought to perfect what they less
defective; yet this we may truly affirm, that we know none of all the reformed
foreign Churches that do prescribe a set form of Prayer with necessity to be
observed; but leave their Minister at liberty to use the same, or some other
form to the like effect at their own direction, which takes off a great part
of sin, and burden of set forms; God knows how to pass by the remnant of
iniquity of the transgression of them that seek him in truth, although all the
high places be not taken away, 2 Chronicles 15.17. The Lord did not so look at their
high places, as to reject his people for Idolaters or Superstitious Persons,
when they sought him in (truth of heart) though in high places; neither yet
would he justify their high places to after Ages, by the example and authority
of their Ancestors: far be it from us to censure the present Churches of
obstinacy, who have persisted in the presidents left by our holy ancestors,
those first reformed; yet neither may we be so unfaithful as to sow Pillowes
under the Elbows, no, not of public Churches, who knows not they have all
been more studious and tenacious of what form the doctrine and worship, and
discipline was left unto them, then inquisitive after farther light, yea,
sometimes more inclinable to look back into Egypt, than to hasten toward
Canaan; it is true, we have cause to suspect our selves of error, rather than
so many glorious lights of former and present times (to wit) if our faith were
built upon our selves, we should prefer their judgments and testimony before
our own; but seeing our faith rests only on the word of the Lord, and his
Spirit breathing therein, and the Word has promised more and more light shall
break forth in these times, till Antichrist be utterly consumed and abolished;
we shall sin against the Grace and Word of truth if we confine our truth,
either to the Divines of present or former ages.

Disc. Be that all the Churches may err in this, yet I hope no moderate man
can censure them of obstinacy, as men not willing to consent to the truth
showed and manifested; how then comes it to pass, that none of them hitherto
have subscribed to this opinion, and to the practice of our brethren of the
Separation? The true Churches of God cannot err fundamentally, nor obstinately
against knowledge; but how can they be freed from one of these, let the
opposites themselves judge.

Answ. Though we do not believe (as you do) that the true Churches of Christ
cannot err fundamentally, but do conceive for a time they may (as the Church
of Israel in the golden Calfe, and afterward more dangerously in the
crucifying of Christ, and many Christian Churches almost all, in that time,
when Hierome complains the whole world was become an Arian) yet we do not
look at the reading of devised prescript forms, as a fundamental error:
howbeit any error or sin persisted in against light, will in time argue an
unsound and corrupt heart in the bottom. And although we dare not excuse true
Churches (as you do) from possibility of obstinacy, at least in some degree
(for we see Moses and the Prophets often taxing the Church of Israel of
rebellion and obstinacy, Deuteronomy. 31.27. Jer. 22.21. Ezekiel. 3.7.) yet we dare not
think that the Churches of Christ do sin of obstinacy (especially of reigning
obstinacy) in this case; For many of them never saw the grounds, as have born
witness against set and prescript read forms of Prayer; and those that have
seen their grounds, have not been convinced of the solidity of them; and
therefore may not be charged with obstinacy, till after they have been convict
of sin herein, and yet persist herein against light of conscience, which God
forbid.

This Reason (from the judgment and practice of other Churches) has been wont
to be of great force in former times; otherwise the Apostle would never have
alleged the practice and consent of the Churches to confirm the faithful, and
to stop the mouths of the contentious, Acts 15.22.28. 1 Cor. 11.16. and 14.34.

Answ. The Argument from the practice and judgment of Churches, was of greater
force in the Apostles time than ever since: the estate of the Churches as then
remained tanquam intemerata virgo, whilst the Apostles and the Apostolic men
lived; men that could not err themselves; and were more watchful and zealous
than to suffer any error to get head in any of the Churches; but let them that
press the like argument now, let them show us the like infallibillity,
vigilance and zeal, of the guides of the Churches in these days; and we shall
readily captivate our own judgments to such divine testimony: otherwise the
judgment of Churches now, being but humane testimony (unless it might appear
grounded in Scripture warrant) we only hearken thus far to an Argument taken
from the Churches, as reverently and meekly to attend to it, and if it dissent
from Scripture, yet still to bear with meekness and patience, and brotherly
love, any failing which is found in them; but not therefore to approve and
justify all their proceedings.

CHAP. XI. Touching the other Question of the peoples joining in prayer with
the reading of a devised prescript Liturgy.
FInally, your Discourse comes along to make good a third assertion, which you
had at first made a part of the state of the Question, to wit,

Disc. That though it were unlawful for the Ministers to use a prescript form
of prayer; yet no reason can be showed, why it should be unwarrantable for the
people to be present at such prayers and assemblies.

Answ. We conceive that good reason may be showed. Why, if it be unlawful for
the Minister to pray upon a book, a devised and prescript form of prayer: it is
unlawful likewise for the people so to be present at it, as to join with it,
or seem to join with it.

Our first reason is taken from the unity of the Church, if the Officers or
Ministers, and all the members of the Church be one body, (as they are said to
be, 1 Cor. 10.17.) the sin of the Minister of the Church openly committed in
the public worship of God, is the sin of them all that do join with him, and
do not bear witness against his sin according to God.

A second Reason may be taken from the compactnesse of Gods worship, and
communion which all the members in the Church have in it; all the worship of
God in the Churches of Christ, is put up to God, as well by the people as by
the Ministers (...) with one accord, Acts 1.14. The Prayer of the Minister is
the Prayer of them; the matter of his prayer is the matter of all their
prayers; the form of his prayer (I speak of the external form, which is that
wherein they can join) is the form of them; if then it be unlawful for the
Minister to pray upon a book, a devised prescript form of prayer: it is alike
unlawful for the people to join with him.

Disc. The people are commanded to examine themselves before they draw nigh
unto the presence of God, but not to examine whether the Ministers pray in one
form or other.

Answ. The members of the Church are not indeed to examine the secret sins of
any but themselves, but the open sins of any of their brethren, they ought to
admonish one another thereof, and to prevent with holy watchfullnesse the
sins of one another, else the sin of one Achan becomes the sin and plague of
all Israel, Joshua 7.11, 12.

Disc. If the Minister pray coldly, (as they say all reading of stinted forms
makes but cold prayer: a drawing nigh to God with the lips; when the heart is
far from him) yet this is the fault of the Minister only, not of all that are
present, for such may be the Ministers fault to pray coldly, even in a
conceived form.

Answ. First, We do not say (for our parts) that all praying upon a book or
instituted forms, is but cold prayer, because God may pardon the ignorance of
his people, and accept the sincerity of their hearts, help them with some
spiritual affections, even in such prayers, howbeit, a form of prayer not
allowed of God will not (of it self) affect the heart with heavenly warmth,
neither do we say that the coldness of the Ministers heart in prayer, if it
spring from the inward corruption of his own spirit, does wrap the people into
the fellowship of the same sin, de secretis non Judicat Ecclesia, nor is it
defiled by the tolleration of secret sins in others.

But if the people be convinced, that the reading of prayer upon a book
prescribed to them by man, is a sin against the second Commandment, and so no
true help or means of Gods worship, is therefore some hinderance and impediment
to it, then the people shall be guilty, not only of the fellowship of those
forms of Prayer, but also of the coldness of the Ministers heart therein, if
they willingly join in that which corrupts and cools his spirit.

Disc. Coldness and lip-labor in prayer is not helped with Separation, but by
joining the inward affections of the heart with the outward Service.

Answ. True, if the coldness spring only from the corruption of the Ministers
heart, and not from the unsanctified means and helpless help of Prayer which
he uses, to wit, a prescript form of book-prayer; but as no man can wash his
hands from sin, that removes not away all outward occasions of such sin, as
much as in him lies, from himself and others, so no man can be freed from the
guilt of such coldness as the Minister and the people do contract by the
customary use of such devised prescript forms of Prayer, if he do not so much
as in him lies remove such occasions of evil from them.

Disc. The Jews used a stinted form of prayer (or Liturgy) in the Synagogues,
at the celebration of the Passover, before the days of our Savior Christ;
yet Christ never persuaded the people to absent themselves, nor did he withdraw
himself, but resorted to their Synagogues, and the Temple; as did also his
Apostles after his ascension.

Answ. Of the Jewish forms of Prayer, we have spoken before, And have justly
denied that they took up any book prayers, devised by others prescribed to
them; and therefore no marvel if neither Christ nor his Apostles withdrew
themselves from them; seeing the outward face of administrations, was only of
Gods Ordinances, not of the inventions of men, at the least so far as not to
draw them into fellowship or communion with them therein; the corruptions sound
amongst them, both in doctrine and worship Christ and his Apostles did freely
bear witness against, both to themselves, and the people.

Disc. It is not lawful to separate from the Churches or assemblies of the
Saints, in whose fellowship we may serve God with an holy worship, and believe
in him with an holy faith; for if a prayer conceived in the heart and uttered
with the voice be a pure service of God, the same read upon a book, becomes
not impure to them that hear it with holy affections.

Answ. We do not separate from the Church and assembly of the Saints, but
willingly join with you in every part of your holy worship; and in every
doctrine of your holy faith only we withdraw our selves from such parts of your
administrations, wherein we cannot join with you, but wrap our selves into the
fellowship of such sin which (in our consciences) we see committed by you: How
the same Prayer conceived by the spirit of a Minister, and pronounced in his
own, and in the peoples name to God, may be a pure service to God, yet the same
written in a book, and prescribed to others to be read by them as their
Prayers, may be an unlawful form of worship has been showed above; it is
wearisome to repeat the same things so often.

Disc. Lastly, The Scribes and the Pharisees sinned grievously in corrupting
the Law with their false glosses, and defiling the worship of God with their
own inventions; nevertheless, the faithful held fellowship and communion with
them in the worship of God; and that by the approbation of the Prophets, and of
Christ himself; but surely the health of the Church is more crazed by such
great infirmities, than by the only toleration and use of a prescript form of
prayer.

Answ. The substance of this objection has been answered even now; the
faithful did, and might lawfully join in worshipping God in his own Ordinances,
notwithstanding the accidental pollution which the Scribes and Pharisees
brought in, both in doctrine and worship; for corruptions in doctrine do not
draw the hearers into fellowship of the same faith: if they beware of the
leaven of such doctrine, and bear witness against it; in time and place
according to God; and as for the pollutions in worship, they chiefly lay in
their private superstitious devotions, of washing their hands, and pots, and
cups, and brazen vessels, and not in their outward administrations of public
Ordinances; especially in such wherein their act and the peoples was offered up
together with one accord; but there is not the like reason of public Prayer,
wherein both Minister and people do all join together, as one man, with one
accord; where any known sin in the outward administration of the Minister is
the sin of all the people that join with him. The Lord give us hearts to deny
our selves, and to sit close to him; that he may delight to lead us on by his
spirit of truth, in all truth and goodness; and still delight to be merciful
to us, in pardoning and healing all our forms and present pollutions, for his
holy Names sake in Jesus Christ, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

