THE BLOODY TENENT, WASHED, And made white in the blood of the Lamb: being
discussed and discharged of bloud-guiltinesse by just Defense. WHEREIN The
great Questions of this present time are handled, viz. How far Liberty of
Conscience ought to be given to those that truly fear God? And how far
restrained to turbulent and pestilent persons, that not only raze the
foundation of Godliness, but disturb the Civil Peace where they live? Also
how far the Magistrate may proceed in the duties of the first Table? And that
all Magistrates ought to study the word and will of God, that they may frame
their Government according to it. DISCUSSED. As they are alleged from diverse
Scriptures, out of the Old and New Testament. Wherein also the practice of
Princes is debated, together with the Judgment of Ancient and late Writers of
most precious esteem. Whereunto is added a Reply to Mr. WILLIAMS Answer, to
Mr. COTTONS Letter.

BY JOHN COTTON Bachelor in Divinity, and Teacher of the Church of Christ at
Boston in New England.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Symmons for Hannah Allen, at the Crown in
Popes-Head-Alley. 1647.

THE BLOODY TENET WASHED AND MADE WHITE IN THE BLOOD OF THE LAMB. OR The
Bloody Tenet discust and discharged of bloud-guiltinesse, by Just defense.
CHAP. I.
THE Bloody Tenet (I mean the book styled by that name, tending to discuss
an holy and wholesome truth of God, slanderously styled the Bloody Tenet) was
put forth against the Royal Law of the love of the Gospel. Mr. Williams sent
me about a dozen years ago (as I remember) a letter, penned (as he wrote) by
a Prisoner in Newgate, touching persecution for Conscience sake: and entreated
my judgment of it for the satisfaction of his friend. I wa not willing to deny
him any office of Christian love, and gave him my poor judgment in a private
letter. This private letter of mine he has published in Print after so many
years, and there with a Resuration of it. If my letter was Orthodoxall and
tending to satisfaction, and edification, why did he refute it? If corrupt, and
erroneous (especially if bloody) why did he publish it?

The letter, and so the error contained in it, (if it was an error) it was
private, and so private, that I know no man that has a copy of it, no not my
self who penned it (for ought I could find) but himself only, if I did
offend him by the writing of such an error to him (though by himself entreated
to express my judgment) let him remember, he pleads for liberty of
conscience: I wrote my conscience and the truth of God according to my
conscience, in the sight of God. Why should he punish me with open penance,
and expose me (as much as in him lies, before the world) to open shame, as a
man of blood, for the liberty of my conscience? How will it stand with his own
principles, to plead for liberty of conscience and yet to punish it? Besides
let him remember, if I did offend him with such an error, it was but a private
offense, and the rule of the Gospel required, he should first have convinced
and admonished me privately of it, and so have proceeded upon my contumacy, at
length to have told the Church, before he had published it to the world. But
such as seek for new Apostles, must seek also for new Gospel, before this
manner of dealing can be justified, by the Gospel of Christ. That book of his
therefore being thus begun against the rule of the Gospel, no marvel if it
swarve from the truth of the Gospel all a long. He that sets forth out of
his way in the first entrance of his journey, no marvel if he wander all the
day after.

CHAP. 2. Of the title he prefixeth to my answer of the prisoners letter.
IN printing my answer to the prisoners Letter, he prefixeth thititle The
answer of Mr. John Cotton of Boston in New-Englands professedly maintaining
Persecution for cause of Conscience.

This Title trespasseth not only against the Creator of Christian love, which
is wont to take even doubtful things in the fairest sense: but even against
the Law of truth. For in the whole purport of my Answer to the Letter, both in
stating the Question, and in answering Objections, I expressly profess, 1. That
no man is to be persecuted at all (much less for Conscience sake:) because all
persecution is oppression for Righteousness sake. 2. I Profess further, That
none is to be punish^d for his Conscience sake, though Erroneous, unless his
Errors be Fundamental, or seditiously, and turbulently promoted, and that
after due conviction of Conscience: That it may appear, he is not punished for
his Conscience, but for sinning against his Conscience.

Thus whilst he pleads for Liberty of Conscience, he takes Liberty to his
Conscience openly to publish, That I do professedly maintain Persecution for
cause of Conscience, When I do in express terms professedly Renounce it.
This Liberty of Conscience sets the Conscience at Liberty Calumniandi
audacter.

Object. But it may be, by consequence, I do maintain Persecution for cause
of Conscience, though in express terms I professedly Renounce it.

Ans. 1. What if such a thing might be inferred by consequence? men's judgments
and professions are not to be taken up from every unwary consequence, against
their own positive and express Declarations, and Professions. It is justly
taxed in Bellarmine as a slanderous Calumny, that he brings in Luther,
Calvine, Martyr Bucer, making God the Author of sin, which all of them in
express terms do avoid; yet he would fasten such a blasphemous Tenet upon
them (forsooth) by consequences. In like sort by the like consequences is the
Bloody Tenet fastened upon me. When the eyes are bloud-shotten, or look
through a red glass, all things about them will appear red and bloody. But if
this Tenet have any appearance of blood in it, It is because it is washed in
the Blood of the Lamb, and sealed with his blood. And then though it may seem
Bloody to men of corrupt minds destitute of the truth, (as Paul seemed to such
to be a Pestilent fellow) yet to faithful and upright souls, such things as
are washed in the Blood of the Lamb, are wont to come forth white, as did the
followers of the Lamb, who washed their Robes white in the Blood of the Lamb,
Rev 7.14.

CHAP. 3. A reply to the third Chapter of the Bloody Tenet discust, what is a
cause of Conscience in general.
IN stateing of the Question I propounded some distinctions for clearing of the
Point. The 1. was this in mine Answer to the Letter of the Prisoner.

By Persecution for cause of Conscience, I conceive you mean, either for
professing some point of Doctrine, which you believe in Conscience to be the
Truth: or for practicing some work, which you believe in Conscience to be a
Religious duty.

Discusser.

This distinction is not full and complete. For besides both these, a man may
be persecuted for cause of Conscience, because he dare not be constrained to
yield obedience to such Doctrines and worships, as are by men Invented, and
Appointed; As the three famous Jews were cast into the fiery Furnace (in a
nonconformity to the whole conforming world) before the Golden Image, Dan.
3.21. etc.

Defender.

Thus a man may find a knot in a Bulrush, yea thus a man that were disposed
might find fault with the Comforts of God for not being full and Complete:
with the Affirmative Comforts, because they do not express the Negative; and
with the Negative, because they do not express the Affirmative. He that
makes it persecution for cause of Conscience, when a man is punished for
professing such Doctrine, which he beleiveth in Conscience to be the truth, he
makes it (a Pari) Persecution for cause of Conscience, when a man is punished
for Renouncing such Doctrines, which he beleiveth in Conscience to be
Erroneous. And he that makes it Persecution for cause of Conscience, when a
man is punished for practicing such a work, which he beleives in conscience to
be a Religious duty, He makes it no less Persecution for cause of Conscience,
when a man is punished for not practicing such a work, which he beleiveth in
Conscience to be a sin.

CHAP. 4. A Reply to his fourth Chapter touching the distinction of Doctrines,
Some fundamental others circumstantiall and less Principal.
IN points of Doctrine (I said in my Answer to the Prisoners Letter) some are
Fundamental, without right belief whereof, a man cannot be saved: others are
circumstantiall, and less Principal, wherein one man may differ from another
in judgment, without prejudice of salvation on either part,

Discusser.

To this distinction (He says) Truth dare not subscribe, for then thousands
ten thousands should everlastingly be condemned, yea the whole Generation of
the Righteous, who since the falling away, have and do err fundamently
concerning the true matter, Constitution, Gathering, Governing of the Church.
And yet far be it from any pious Breast, to Imagine that they are not saved
etc.

Defender.

Fundamental Doctrines are of two sorts: Some hold forth the foundation of
Christian Religion, as the Doctrines of salvation by Christ, and of faith in
his Name, Repentance from dead works, Resurrection from the dead; and the
like. Others concern the Foundation of the Church, as the matter and form of
it, and the proper Adjuncts accompaning the same: The Apostle speaks of both
these sorts of Foundations together, Heb. 6.1.2.

I speak of the former sort of these only, namely the Foundation, or
fundamental points of Christian Religion, which who so subverteth, and
Renounceth, he renounceth also his own salvation. The other sort I look at as
less principal, in comparison of these, though some of them have a
fundamental use in Church order. It was pertinent to the Question propounded
in the Prisoners Letter, to express how far I allowed Toleration even in
such fundamental Errors, as subverted the Foundation of Christian Religion.
And in other Errors less dangerous, such as neither subverted Religion, nor
Salvation, It would easily be conceived, that Toleration, might more easily be
allowed.

How far New English Churches partake with the Old English Parish Churches in
any of the Ordinances of God, and upon what ground, has been declared in the
Reply to the Answer of the other Letter. Where also it has been cleared, how
far off the Churches here have been from persecuting, or oppressing any of
their Brethren for presenting light to them about this point: which may prevent
and still the lamentation of peace, in the beginning of this fith Chapter.

CHAP. 5. A Reply to his fifth Chapter Concerning a distinction of Points of
Practice.
IN Answer to the Prisoners Letter, I said in points of Practice, some concern
the weightier Duties of the Law, as what God we worship, and with what kind of
Worship: whether it be such, as if it be right, Fellowship with God is held: If
false, Fellowship with God is lost.

Discusser.

It is worth the Inquiry, what kind of worship he intends, whether in
general acceptance the Rightnesse or Corruptnesse of the Church, or the
Ministry of the Church, or the Ministrations of the Word, Prayer Seals etc.?

And because it pleases the Spirit of God to make the Ministry one of the
foundations of Christian Religion (Heb. 6.1.2.) and also to make the Ministry
of the Word and Prayer, in the Church, to be two special works (even of the
Apostles themselves. Acts 6.2.) I shall desire, it may well be considered in
the fear of God.

1. Concerning the Ministry of the Word, If their new Ministry, and
ordination be true, then the former was false: And if false, then will it not
follow according to this distinction, that fellowship with God was lost?

2. Concerning Prayer, the New English Ministers have disclaimed and written
against that Worship of God by Common or set forms of Prayer, which yet
themselves practiced in England.

And though they were faithfully admonished for vseing the Common Prayer, yet
at that time they satisfied their hearts with the practice of the Author of the
Council of Trent etc. But now I ask, whether or no, fellowship with God in
such Prayers was lost? etc.

3. Gods People may live and die in such kind of worship notwithstanding light
presented to them able to convince yet not reaching to a conviction, and to
forsakeing of such ways, which is Contrary to his Conclusion, That
Fundamentalls are so clear, that a man cannot but be convinced in Conscience
after once or twice Admonition: And therefore such a person not being
convinced, he is condemned of himself, and may be persecuted for sinning
against his Conscience.

4. I Observe here that Mr. Cotton herein measures to others, that which
himself when he lived in such practices, would not have had measured to
himself. As 1. That it might have been affirmed of him, that in such practices
he did sin against his Conscience, having sufficient light shinning about him.
2. That he should or might have been cut off by death, or Banishment, as an
Heretic sinning against his Conscience, etc.

Defender.

1. It needs no inquiry what worship I means, whether Church, and Minister, or
Ministrations of the Word, Prayer, Seals etc. For I mean none of these, as
they are dispensed in the Churches of England. Though there have been
corruptions in the order and dispensations of these things amongst them,
(especially in the times when we lived there) yet neither their Churches, nor
Ministry, nor Ministrations were such, or so false that fellowship with God
could not be held of them, not only inwardly and secretly, but also outwardly
and visibly: not only in inward conversion and conviction, but also in outward
and visible Reformation according to light received. Take my words as I wrote
them, and as he relates them, and my meaning is plain enough: I speak of
such worship, which if false, fellowship with God is lost: which cannot truly
be avouched of any part of the Worship of God in England.

It is not truly said, that the Spirit of God makes the Ministry one of the
Foundations of Christian Religion, Heb. 6.1.2. for it is only a foundation of
Church Order, not of faith, or Religion, the Apostle puts an express
difference between faith, and Church Order, Colos. 2.5. Nor is it a true and
safe speech, to call the Fellowship or blessing of God vouchsafed to corrupt
Churches, or Ministers, or Ministrations to call it, I say, unpromised, or to
be beyond a word, or promise of God. For it is a large and yet an express
promise of the Covenant of Grace, that God will be merciful to our iniquities,
Ier. 31.34.
That he will be merciful to every one that prepares his heart to seek God,
though he be not cleansed according to the Purification of the Sanctuary, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20. with many more such like. And therefore there wants not
Promises of Grace and blessing to the People of God, notwithstanding some
defects and impurities found in their Administrations. Neither will it follow,
that if our Ministry, and Ordination here be true, that then the former which
we had in England was false, especially so false, as that according to visible
Rule, Fellowship with God was lost.

For the Rite of Ordination we do not look at it as any Essential Part of
our vocation to the Ministry, no more then Coronation is an Essential Part of
the Office of the King. And though we do not justly sundry things found in our
Ministry, yet Jehoshuah the High Priest did not loose his Fellowship with God,
though he was clothed with filthy Garments, Zach. 3.3, 4.

2. Concerning Prayer, though the New English Ministers have witnessed against
the Common set-Forme thereof, which yet our selves in our ignorance have
sometimes used, and have therefore seen just cause to judge our selves since:
yet we did not thereby loose fellowship with God by such sinnnes of Ignorance,
no more then the People of God did in the days of Hezekiah, by sacrificeing to
God in the High places, when yet they did it to the Lord their God only, 2 Chronicles. 33.17.

I know no such faithful Admonishers, as presented to us in England, Arguments
against the Common Prayer, which then seemed weak, but now are acknowledged to
be sound, though such a thing possibly may be true, howsoever forgotten. But
this I am persuaded to be utterly false, that any of us satisfied our hearts
with the Practice of the Author of the Council of Trent, who used to read some
of the choysest select Prayers out of the Mass-Booke. The Spirit of a child of
God, though upon occasion he may receive such a Practice, yet he can never
satisfy himself with the Practice of any godly man for the warrant of his
Imitation without some further light (or at least apprehension of light) from
the word.

3. It is readily granted, (that which is observed in the third place) That
Gods people may live and die in such kinds of Worship, though light from the
Word, whether publicly or privately has been presented to them able to
convince,

Nevertheless, that will not weaken the Conclusion (formerly mentioned, and
afterward further discussed) That Fundamentalls are so clear, that a man
cannot but be convinced in Conscience of the Truth of them after two or three
Admonitions: and that therefore such a Person as still continues obstinate, is
condemned of himself: and if he then be punished, He is not punished for his
Conscience, but for sinning against his own Conscience. For both these may
well stand together, and are far of from crossing or contrarying one another.
A set form of Prayer, though it be unlawful, yet it is not such a
Fundamental Error either in judgment or practice, as cutteth off from
fellowship with God: That is only a resolute Assertion of the Discusser, but a
vouched without all color or pretense from the Scripture. There is some
resemblance and proportion between Praying and Prophesying; Moses used an
unwarranted way and Form of Prophesying, when God Commanding him to speak to
the Rock before the Congregation of Israel, He spoke not to the Rock, but
stroke it with his Rod, (for which he had no Commandment) and spoke to the
People and that in a Passion (and (and both without a Commaundament) Numb.
20.8.11. And yet this did not cut off his Fellowship with God, nor Gods
gracious Presence with him in giving water to the People, no not at that time,
God knows how to be present with his People, in blessing their
Administrations, and forgiving their iniquities, though he do take vengeance
of their Inventions, Psalm. 99.8.

4. Though I do maintain (as the Apostle does) a Clearness of Fundamental
Points of Religion and Worship (such Fundamentalls I say, without which,
Fellowship with God cannot be had) and though I grant, that in subserting such
Fundamental Points, and persisting therein after once or twice Admonition, a
man sins against his own Conscience, and is therefore censurable by the
Church, yea and by the Civil Magistrate also, if after Conviction he continue
to seduce others unto his Damnable Heresy; yet I do not herein measure to
others, that which my self, when I lived in such practices, would not have
measured to my self.

For I thank God, God never left me to live in any such Practices, as to fall
into any Fundamental Error, much less to Persist therein after Conviction and
Admonition, and least of all to seduce others thereinto. If God should leave me
so far, as to fall so fearfully into this threefold degree of Heretical
wickedness, what am I better then other men? better my self cut off by death,
or Banishment, then the Flock of Christ to be seduced and destroyed by my
Heretical wickedness.

CHAP. 6. A Reply to his sixth Chapter Discussing Civil peace, and the
Disturbance of it.
IN this Chapter, the Discusser undertaketh to declare what Civil peace is,
and to show, that the Toleration of different Religions, is no Disturbance of
Civil Peace.

First, for Civil peace, what is it, says he, but Pax Civitatis, whether
English, or Irish, Spanish or Turkish City.

Reply.

Be it so, and if the Civil State, or Commonwealth contain many Cities, or
Towns, and so become a whole Country or Commonwealth, let Civil Peace be
the peace of the Country, or of the Commonwealth. But what is then the peace
of the City, or Country? Is it not Tranquillitas Ordinis the tranquillity of
order in every Society, wherein the Public Weal of the City, or Country is
concerned? And is it not the proper work of the Civil Magistrate to preserve
the Civil Peace, and to prevent or reform the disturbance of the Tranquillity
or Peace of any such Societyes, in whose Peace, the Peace or Weal of the City
or Society is concerned? Suppose a Society of Merchants or Cloathyers, or
Fishmongers, or Drapers, or the like: If the Weal of the City or Country be
concerned in these, (as it is much concerned in them all): It is not for the
safety of the Civil Sat to suffer any of these so to be disturbed, as wholely
to break up, and to be dissolved.

No matter ( says the Discusser) though they do wholly break up into pieces
and dissolve into nothing. For nevertheless the Peace of the City is not
thereby in the least measure impaired or disturbed: because the Essence or
being of the City is Essentially distinct from those particular Societyes etc.
The City was before them, and stands absolute and Entire, when they are
taken down etc.

Reply.

If by Peace be meant (as in Scripture Language it is) all welfare, It would
argue a man that lives in the world, to be too much Ignorant of the state of
the world, to say that in the breaking up and dissolving of such particular
Societyes, the Peace of the City or Country is not in the least measure
impaired, or disturbed.

For 1. Though such Societyes of Merchants and other Trades, be not of the
Essence of the City; yet they be of the integrety of the City. And if the
defect of one Tribe in Israel was a great trouble to all the Commonwealth of
Israel ( Judges, 21.2, 3.) then sure the breaking up and dissolving of so many
particular useful Societyes cannot but much impair and disturb the Peace and
welfare of the City and Country.

2. Though these Societyes of Trades be not of the Essence of the City, yet
they are amongst the conservant causes of the City: as without which the City
cannot long flourish, no nor well subsist. Common sense will acknowledge so
much.

Now then if all these particular Societyes and several Companyes of Trades,
they and their peace and welfare do much concern the welfare and peace of
the City and Country, and therefore it behooveth the Civil Government to
provide for their peace and welfare: I demand, whether the Church also, (which
is a particular Society of Christians) whether, I say, the Peace and welfare
of it, do not concern the Peace and welfare of the City or Country where
they live?

If it be denied it is Easily proved:

First, David says they shall prosper that love the Peace of Jerusalem, and
seek the good of it; Psalm. 122.6. etc. And Solomon says, where the Righteous
rejoice there is great Glory, Pro. 28.12. And what is the Church, but a
Congregation of Righteous men? If the Rejoicing of the Church be the glory of a
Nation, surely the disturbing, and distracting, and dissolving of the Church,
is the shame and Confusion of a Nation.

2. Consider the Excellency and Pre-eminence of the Church above all other
Societyes. She is the fairest amongst women, Cant. 1.8. and 6.1. She is the
City and House of God, Revel. 21.2. Psalm. 48.1.1. Tim. 3.15. The world and all
the Societyes of it, are for the Church, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. The world would not
subsist, but for the Church: nor any Country in the world, but for the service
of the Church. And can the Church then break up, into pieces, and dissolve
into nothing, and yet the Peace and welfare of the City, not in the least
measure impaired or disturbed?

3. It is a matter of just displeasure to God, and sad grief of heart to the
Church, when Civil States look at the estate of the Church, as of little, or
no concernment to themselves. Zach. 1.15. Lament. 1.12.

Object 1. Many glorious and flourishing Cittyes of the world maintain their
Civil Peace: yea the very Americans, and wildest Pagans, keep the Peace of
their Towns, and Cittyes, though neither in the one, nor in the other can any
man prove a true Church of God in these places.

Answ. It is true, where the Church is not, Cittyes and Towns may enjoy some
measure of Civil Peace, yea and flourish in outward prosperity for a time,
through the Patience and Bounty and Long-sufferance of God. The times of
Jgnorance God winketh at Act. 17.30. But when the Church comes to be Planted
amongst them, If then Civil States do neglect them, and suffer the Churches
to corrupt, and annoy themselves by pollutions in Religion, the the staff of
the Peace of the Commonwealth will soon be broken, as the Purity of Religion
is broken in the Churches. The Commonwealth of Rome flourished five hundred
years before the Kingdom of God in his Church came amongst them: and the
decays of the Commonwealth occasioned by the persecutions of the Church, were
Repaired by the Public establishment of the Churches peace in Christian
Emperors. But when the Churches begun to pollute themselves by the Idolatrous
worship of Images, and the Christian Emperors took no care to reform this
abuse in Churches, the Lord sent in (amongst other barberous nations) the
Turks to punish, not only degenerate Churches, but also the Civil State for
this wickedness. And therefore the Holy Ghost upbraideth them for their
continuance in Image worship, though the Turk were let loose from the River
Euphrates, to scourge them for it, Rev. 9.14.20. Go now, and say, the estate
of the Church whether true, or false, (pure or corrupt) does not concern the
Civil Peace of the Sat.

Object. 2. The Peace of the Church (whether true or false) is spiritual, and
so of an higher and far different nature from the peace of the Country, or
People, which is merely and Essentially Civil and humane.

Ans. 1. Though the inward peace of the Church be spiritual and heavenly: yet
there is an outward peace of the Church due to them (even from Princes and
Magistrates) in a way of godliness and honesty, 1. Tim. 2.1.2. But in a way of
ungodliness, and Idolatry, it is an wholesome faithfulness to the Church if
Princes trouble the outward peace of the Church, that so the Church finding
themselves wounded and pricked in the house of their friends, they may repent,
and return to their first Husband, Zach. 13.6. Hosea. 2.6.7.

Ans. 2. Though the peace of the Country or Commonwealth be Civil and
humane, yet it is distracted and cut off, by disturbing the spiritual purity,
and peace of the Church. Jehu cutting short his Reformation, God cut short the
coasts of the Civil State. 2 King. 10.31.32.

Ans. 3. Civil Peace (to speak properly) is not only a peace in civil
things, for the Object; but a peace of all the persons of the City, for the
Subject. The Church is one Society in the City, as well as is the Society, of
Merchants, or Drapers, Fishmongers, and Haberdashers, and if it be a part of
Civil Justice, out of regard to Civil Peace, to protect all other Societyes
in peace according to the wholesome Ordinances of their Company, is it not so,
much more to protect the Church-Society in peace, according to the wholesome
Ordinances of the Word of Christ?

CHAP. 7. A Reply to his seventh Chapter: Discussing what it is to hold forth a
Doctrine or Practice in an Arrogant and impetuous way tending of it self to
the disturbance of the Civil Peace.
HERE 2. Things he complains of, 1. That I have not declared what this
Arrogant and impetuous way is: 2. That he cannot but express his sad and
sorrowful observation, how it pleases God to leave me, to take up the Common
Reproachful Accusation of the Accuser of Gods Children, That they are arrogant
and impetuous.

Defender

I did not think it needful to declare what an Arrogant and Impetuous way
was, seeing his Request was, not that I should compile a discourse of mine
own: but that I should return an Answer to the Letter of his friend. And it
is an Answerers part not to Expatiate into declarations, but distinctly and
closely to remove Objections. Besides himself is not ignorant of this point,
nor needs to be taught, what an Arrogant, and impetuous way is. For he
himself tells us (in his 8th Chapter) That the Civil Peace may be broken by
holding forth a Doctrine or practice, with railing or reviling, daring or
challenging speeches (which is a way of Arrogance:) or with force of Arms,
Swords, Gunns etc.; which is a way of Impetuousnesse.

But if it be desired that I should declare my self herein, thus breily take
it. He holds forth an erroneous Doctrine, or Practice, in an Arrogant and
Impetuous way, not only who carries it in a reviling and daring way (which is
a disturbance to Civil Peace:) But also he who refuses to subject his spirit
to the spirit of the Prophets in a holy Church of Christ (contrary to 1 Cor.
14.32.) which is a disturbance to the peace of the Church. And withal, he that
shall oppose such as dissent from his Errors, either by violent means (as the
Circumcellians did by Clubbs, and Swords, and as Zedekiah did Micajah with
Fists, 1 Kings, 22.24.) or by censorious reproaches, and by rejecting Communion
with them even before conviction, or admonition, all these are ways of
Arrogance, and Imperuousnesse, and tend to the disturbance either of civil, or
of Church Peace, or of both.

But for the 2. His sad and sorrowful Observation, that God has left me to
take up the common reproachful Accusation of the Children of God, as if they
were Arrogant, and Impetuous in their way, upon what ground the Discusser
takes this up, I confess I cannot Imagine, unless, Conscius ipse sibi, de se
put at omnia dici.

There is not the least jot or tittle in my Letter, that applies this
Accusation of Arrogance, or impetuousnesse to any of the Children of God at
all. Nor had I the least thought of himself, when I wrote that Letter, who
(for ought I can remember) did then keep communion with all his Brethren, and
held loving acquaintance with my self.

As for these six Cases he speaks of (or rather, ways) wherein the Children
of God have opposed the stream of the times, and have there upon been taxed as
Arrogant and impetuous Troublers of the State, and yet were none such, I
willingly allow them to stand good, save only they might as well be reduced to
2. or 3. Heads, as branched out into 6. But howsoever, they are nothing
pertinent to the Point in hand: none of them being ways of Arrogance, nor
Impetuousnesse, but of well Ordered, and Christian faithfulness, and
Magnanimity. If any of them did put forth acts of Impetuous violence, (as
Elijah did in putting the Prophets of Baall to death 1 King. 18.40.) It was
done by virtue of an extraordinary calling, or else by the consent of the King
and people then present.

Besides as none of the fix ways wherein the Messengers of God walked against
the stream of the times, were ways of Arrogance, and impetuousnesse, so much
less were these holy men of God Impetuous, in holding forth any Error, or
evil practice, which is the Point in hand.

CHAP. 8. Some what more of holding forth Error in a way of Arrogance, and
Impetuousnesse.
Discusser.

The Distinction now in Discussion concerns not Truth and Error, but the
manner of holding forth, or divulging.

Defender.

The distinction does expressly speak of holding forth things Erroneous and
unlawful, either in a meek and peaceable way, or with such Arrogance and
Impetuousnesse, as tends and reaches (even of it self) to the disturbance
of Civil Peace. And therefore it cannot be said with truth, that the
distinction concerns not Truth and Error; The distinction expressly concerns
both the sinful matter held forth [things erroneous and unlawfull] and the
sinful manner of holding them forth, with such Arrogance and impetuousnesse,
as tends to the disturbance of Civil Peace.

Discusser.

I Acknowledge such may be the way, and manner of holding forth (either with
railing or reviling, daring or challenging, speeches, or with force of Arms,
Swords, Gunns, Prisons etc.) that it may not only tend to break, but may
actually break the Civil Peace.

Defender.

Then the distinction is acknowledged to have a real Truth in it. what lacks
it yet, but that it may stand?

Discusser.

Yet those instances (to wit those 6. mentioned in Chap. 7.) are Cases of great
Opposition and Spiritual Hostility, and Occasions of the breach of the Civil
Peace: yet the matter and manner pure, holy, peaceable and inoffensive.

Defender.

Then these six instances do nothing concern the distinction in hand, which
speaks of holding forth for the matter things Erroneous, and unlawful: and
for the manner in a disturbant way to Civil Peace. But it seems if
something, if any thing, (though nothing to purpose) be said in the Discussion
of a distinction, it may go for a Discussion.

Discusser.

Moreover I answer, That it is possible, and common for Persons of soft and
gentle nature and spirits, to hold out falsehood with more seeming meekness,
and Peaceablenesse, then the Lord Jesus or his servants did or do hold forth
the everlasting Gospel; So that the Answerer would be requested to explain,
what he means by this Arrogant and Impetuous holding forth of any Doctrine,
which very manner of holding tends to break the Civil Peace, and comes
under the Cognizance, and Correction of the Civil Magistrate etc.

Discharge.

Himself has said it, and done it already in this Chapter, and I have done
the same, (somewhat more largely) in the Chapter next foregoing.

CHAP. 9. A Reply to his ninth Chapter, Touching the Causes of Civil
Dissensions, and uprores about Matters of Religion.
Discusser.

Whence then arise Civil Dissensions and uprores in matters of Religion? I
Answer, 1. When a State lives and lies in the guilt of a false God, false
Christ, false Worship: then no wonder, if soar eyes be troubled at the
appearance of light, -- whereas good eyes are not troubled at the Light.
Vigilant and watchful Persons, Loyal and Faithful are not so troubled at the
true, no nor at a false Religion of Jew or Gentile.

Discharge.

This is as little to the purpose, as that which went before. The distinction
spoke of holding forth Erroneous and unlawful things, in a way tending of it
self, to the disturbance of Civil Peace. This Discussion holds forth
another way tending to the disturbance of Civil Peace, not of it self, but by
occasion or by Accident, to wit, when the holding forth of Light and Truth
disturbeth the sore Eyes of a corrupt State. If per se, and per Accidens (of it
self, and by occasion) be all one: If the holding forth of Truth, and Error be
all one, then this Discussion has shaken the distinction of holding forth
Error, not in an humble and meek way, but in a way of Arrogance and
Impetuousnesse. But when he says, vigilant and faithful Persons are not so
troubled, no not at the false Religion of Jew or Gentile: If he mean not so
much troubled at the false Religion, as corrupt Sates be at the true Religion:
there may be truth in the speech, but it only argues, That corrupt nature is
more zealous in the defense of its own will worship, then the faithful be in
the defense of the Truth. But surely the faithful are called to contend
Earnestly for the Faith, ( Jude 3.) and have as much cause to be troubled at
the holding forth of the Worship of Baal, as corrupt States be at the holding
forth of the Worship of Jehovah. If his meaning be, that vigilant and faithful
Persons, are not so troubled at the false Religion of Jew or Gentile, but that
they can Tolerate them to live amongst them in a Civil Body, we say so too:
And therefore the Indians, who have submitted to the Government of this
jurisdiction, are not compelled to the Profession or acknowledgement of our
Religion, either by Force of Arms, or Poenall Laws. But yet if Christians
should seduce Christians to turn Apostates from the Faith, and to embrace
Judaisme, or Paganism: Or if Jews or Pagans living amongst us should openly
blaspheme the God of heaven, and draw away Christians to Atheism, or Judaisme,
I should not account them either vigilant, or faithful Christians, that were
not troubled at such a destroying of the true Religion, and propagating of the
false. Paul blamed the false Teachers to be the Troublers of the Churches of
Galatia, Gal. 5.10, 12. Acts 15.24.

Discusser.

2. Breach of Civil Peace may arise when false and Idolatrous practices are
held forth, and yet no Breach of Civil Peace from the Doctrine, or Practice,
or the manner of holding them forth, but from the wrong and preposterous way of
Suppressing, and preventing and extinguishing such Errors by weapons of wrath
and Blood, Whips, Stocks, Imprisonment, Banishment, Death, by which men are
commonly persuaded to convert Heretics, and to cast out unclean spirits,
which only the finger of God can do, that is, the mighty Power of the Spirit
of the Word. It is light alone that is able to dispell and scatter such mists
and foggs of darkness in the souls and Consciences of men.

Hence the Sons of men disquiet themselves in vain, and unmercifully
disquiet others.

Defender.

Then it seems, that if the Mariners of the Ship wherein Jonah sailed when he
fled from the Presence of God, if they I say did cast Jonah over board into the
Sea, this preposterous way of theirs in suppressing the Error of his way, was
it which raised the storm and Tempest, whereby the Ship was tossed to and fro,
and disturbed, yea and in jeopardy to be sunk and destroyed. But the Text
speaks to the contrary, when they had cast Jonah forth into the Sea, the Sea
ceased from his raging, Jonah 1.15.

But what was the sin of Jonah? was it not some sin against the second
Table, some act of unrighteousness against his Neighbor? It was a direct and
immediate breach of a rule of his Prophetical Office, a sin against the second
Commandment of the First Table. But was not the Sea, in which this tempest
arose against Jonah, and against the whole Ship for his sake, was it not the
Sea of Tiberias, which being within the Confines of the Holy Land, the Sea also
was Holy, and would not suffer such a sin unpunished? No, the Sea of Tiberias
is within the Confines of Galilee, and other parts of the Land of Israel; But
this was the Mediterranean Sea, between Joppa and Tarshish, Jonah 1.3. But were
not these Mariners, Israelites, who might have some special charge from God,
to root out all Idolatry and false Worship from amongst them, which binds
not us Gentiles? No, they were Pagans and Gentiles, as appears in that every
one of them cried out, unto his own God.

But why did not God send out the tempest to punish those Pagan Mariners
rather, for their Idolatry then Jonah for his Erroneous Practice in running
away from the true God?

God in times past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways Acts,
14.16. And so did his Vicegerents the good Kings of Israel do the like: David
did not compel the tributary Nations to worship the God of Israel. No more
does our Colony here compel the tributary Indians to worship our God. But if
an Israelite forsake God, he disturbeth not only the Commonwealth of Israel,
but the Barks of Pagans, and Heathen states as Jonah did this Ship, by his
departure from God. Therefore a Christian by departing from God, may disturb a
Gentile civil State. And it is no preposterous way for the Governors of the
State, according to the quality of the disturbance raised by the starting aside
of such a Christian, to punish both it and him by civil censure.

Nor does the Civil State in such punishments attend so much, how to procure
the conversion of Heretics, or Apostates, or such like scandalous turbulent
offenders: as how to prevent the perversion of their sounder people (Gangraenam
amoveas, ne pars sincera trabatur:) or else to work the subversion of such, as
do subvert both truth and peace.

And yet as legal terrors are ordinary means blessed of God to prepare hard
and stout hearts to conversion: so such legal punishments God is in like sort
pleased to bless to the confusion, and reformation of false Prophets, as was
foretold by Zachary, it should come to pass in the days of the new
Testament, Zach. 13.4, 5, 6.

Object. Yea, but it is light alone that is able to dispell and scatter such
mists and foggs of darkness in the souls and Consciences of men.

Ans. True: But yet the judgments of God are as the Light that goes forth,
Hosea 6.5. And the judgments of men executed according to the Word, are
sanctified of God to prevent the spreading of Idolatry and seducement to it;
All Israel shall hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously, Deuteronomy. 13.11.
Nor is the righteous proceeding in Civil States a disquieting of themselves,
or any unmercifull disquieting of others. For it is no disquieting to a just
man to do Justice: and the disquieting of men in sin, it is no unmercifull
dealing, but a compassionate healing either of themselves or others. The false
Prophet reclaimed by stigmatizing with wounds in his hands, will freely
acknowledge, thus was I wounded in the House of my friends ( Zach. 13.6.)
Friends are not unmercifull disquieters.

Object. The Judgments of God which go forth as the light are not of the
Judgments of his hand, but of his mouth, for so he explaineth himself in that
place of Hosea, I have hewn them by the Prophets, I have slain them by the
words of my mouth: And thy Judgments were as the light that goes forth.

Ans. The Judgments of God, whether of his mouth or of his hand, do both of
them go forth as light. For when the Judgments of God are upon the earth,
(and he speaks of the judgments of his hands,) the Inhabitants of the world
shall learn righteousness, Isai. 26.9. And that whereby we learn
righteousness, is light. Besides when the Lord is said to have hewn, and
slain his Apostate people by his Prophets, and by the words of his mouth; He
does not only mean the spiritual hewing, and slaying of their souls, but
also the temporal judgments, Famine, War, and Pestilence, which the
Prophets threatened, and the Hand of God, and Hazael executed in the hewing and
slaying of them.

CHAP. 10. A Reply to his tenth Chapter, wherein he discusseth the last
Distinction.
PErsecution for Conscience, is either for conscience rightly informed, or a
blind and erroneous conscience.

Discusser.

Both these Consciences are indeed persecuted: but lamentably blind and
erroneous will those consciences shortly appear to be, which out of zeal to
God (as is pretended) have persecuted either, etc.

Defender.

This whole Chapter may stand for us, without Impeachment. We approve no
persecution for conscience, neither conscience rightly informed, (for that we
account the persecuting of Christ:) nor conscience misinformed with error:
unless the error be pernicious, and unless the conscience be convinced of
the error and perniciousnesse thereof, that so it may appear, the erroneous
party suffers, not for his conscience, but for his sinning against his
conscience.

And though it be true, there is a seared conscience in some, to which God has
in his judgment, given them up, that they may never see light, how clear
soever, both in Scripture and nature: and though this seared conscience do not
extenuate, but aggravate sin; and though a man by this seared conscience may
commit some notorious capital crime, (as he that in Ireland burnt his own
son in the fire, in the imitation of Abraham, and called in his Neighbors to
rejoice in beholding the power of his faith:) and though such a man was justly
put to death: yet it may not be said, he was punished for his conscience, but
for that unnatural barbarous cruelty and murder, which he committed, and
which his conscience could never have blinded him to commit, out of any
natural humane ignorance, or infirmity, but out of poenall and judicial
blindness, which God never leaves men unto, but upon habitual and customary
sinning against light of conscience.

CHAP. 11. A Reply to his eleventh Chapter touching Persecution for Conscience
rightly informed.
Discusser.

AFter explication of the Point in these former Distinctions, the Answerer of
the Letter gives his Resolution to the Question in four particulars.

1. It is not lawful to persecute any for Conscience sake rightly informed,
for in persecuting such, Christ himself is persecuted, Acts 9.4.

A man may as soon find darkness in the bright Beams of the Sun, as in
this clear Beam of Truth, that Christ Jesus in his Truth must not be
persecuted.

Yet this I must ask, (for it will be admired by all sober men) what should be
the Cause or Inducement to the answerers mind to lay down such a Position or
Thesis as this is, It is not lawful to persecute the Lord Jesus.

Search all Scriptures, Histories, Records, Monuments, consult with all
experiences; Did ever Pharaoh, Saul, Ahab, Jezebel, Scribes and Pharisees, the
Jews, Herod, the bloody Neroes, Gardiners, Bonner, Pope or Devil himself
profess to persecute the Son of God, Jesus as Jesus, Christ as Christ,
without Mask or Covering?

Defender.

It may seem though the Truth be as clear as the Beams of the Sun, yet the
Discusser can epsy a moate of admirable weakness in the delivering of such a
Position, though never so true or clear. But let him cease his Admiration,
unless it be to admire his own Fancy.

For I do not lay it down as a Position, that it is not lawful to persecute
the Lord Jesus: or that Christ in his Truth must not be persecuted. But my
Position was, It is not lawful to persecute any for Conscience sake, rightly
informed: And for a reason hereof, I give this Principle, for in persecuting
such, Christ is persecuted: Is it now become an admirable strange thing to give
a Principle of Religion, not for a Position, (and yet if it were so, what
strange thing were it?) but for the proof of a Position? Let me give you a
like instance, Gamaliel lays it down for a Position, that the Doctrine of
the Apostles, if it be of God, the Priests and Elders cannot overthrow it: and
he gives this principle for a reason of it, lest in so doing, ye be found
(says he) to fight against God, Acts 5.38, 39. Now is this such a matter as
will be admired of all sober men, that so wise a man as Gamaliel should lay
down this as a Position, That men should not be found fighters against God?
May not a man rather admire and adore the strange hand of God, that shall leave
a man soberly to admire at such a thing, and to think all sober men will in
like sort wonder at the same? But the truth is, Neither Gamaliel, nor my self,
laid down that Principle for a Conclusion, nor for a Position: nor if we had,
had we done any thing for sober men to admire at.

2. Though it were true, (which the Discusser makes the Ground of his
Admiration,) That no Pharaoh, or Herod, or Nero, did ever profess to persecute
the Son of God, Christ as Christ, etc. yet it will not make it an admirable
Point, that Christ as Christ is not to be persecuted. For though they do not
profess to persecute Christ as Christ: yet they do it. And it is no admirable
matter for all sober men to admire at, to tell men that perfecute the Lord
Jesus, That it is not lawful for them so to do: Did not Christ himself (the
wisdom of the Father) tell Saul as much? Acts 9.5.

3. It is as clear, (to use his phrase) as the Sun beams, both in Scripture
and other histories, and frequent experience, That Tyrants and Apostates have
often persecuted Jesus as Jesus, Christ as Christ. The Scribes and Pharisees
they knew that Christ was the Son of God, the Lord, and Heir of the Church:
And therefore they said among themselves, This is the Heir, come let us kill
him, Matthew. 21.38. Nor could they be said, in persecuting Christ, to have
sinned against the Holy Ghost: if they had not been enlightened to know him
who he was, and yet leavened with such malice, as to persecute him, as they
did. Histories tell us, that Julian the Apostate persecuted Jesus as Jesus, and
Christ as Christ, yea and professed so to do. And experience tells, That if
a Christian shall in Turkey seek to gain Turks from the service of Mahomet,
to the Faith of Jesus: they will persecute such a Christian to death, and in
him Jesus, as Jesus.

4. Let Tyrants and Persecutours profess what they will, that they do not
persecute Jesus as Jesus, but under some other pretense: yet that varieth not
the Truth, nor impeacheth the wisdom of this Position, That it is not lawful
to persecute any for Conscience rightly informed, or to persecute any for
professing the Truth of Christ.

Discusser.

One thing I see apparently in the Lords overruling of the pen of this
Answerer, viz. a secret whispering from Heaven to him, That yet he has never
left the Tents of such who think they do God good service in killing the Lord
Jesus in his servants, and yet say if we had been in the days of our Fathers
in Queen Maryes days, we would never have consented to such Persecution etc.

Defender.

Verily this is a strange sight indeed, (and which all sober minds may well
wonder at) to see apparently, That he who lays down this for a Position,
That it is not lawful to persecute any for Conscience rightly informed, has
had a secret whispering from Heaven, that himself never yet left the Tents of
Persecutors.

Surely it must needs be a strange and strong sight, even the fight of such as
make themselves equal with God; that can see a man has not left the Tents of
Persecutors, (that is, the Communion with Persecutors) when he openly
professes it, to be utterly unlawful to Persecute any for the Truths sake. It
is true, God may see that in a man's heart which is contrary to the Profession
of his mouth and Pen. And so may this Discusser see as much, if he be equal
with God. But yet herein I dare be bold to say, he exalts himself, not only
equal with God, but above God, to see one contradictory in another, which God
himself cannot see. It is contradictory to Persecution, to believe it
unlawful to persecute any for the Truths sake. He then that can see, yea and
see apparently, and that out of the Faith and Profession of this truth, that it
is unlawful to persecute any for the Truth, he that can see (I say) fellowship
with persecution in the faith, or Profession of the unlawfulnes of Persecution,
verily he can see darkness in light, evil in good, Falsehood in Truth, which
God himself (Such is the perfection of his Truth) cannot do.

Discusser.

Let me also add a second, So far as the Answerer (by Preaching for
Persecution) has been a guide to others in persecuting any of the Servants of
Christ witnessing to his Truth, so far his own mouth and hands shall judge (I
hope not his person, but) his actions, that the Lord Jesus has suffered by him.

Defender.

If any Doctrine Preached by me have Guided any to persecute any of the
Servants of Christ for witnessing to any Truth of Christ, then I confess I
must lay my hand upon my mouth, and acknowledge that the Lord Jesus has
suffered by me. But if the Disousser can never be able to produce any such
Doctrine broached by me that has guided any to persecute any of Gods Servants
for witnessing to any Truth of his, (as I trust in the grace of Christ, he
shall never be able) then the Discusser may know (and the Lord help his spirit
to know it) that his own mouth and hands, shall one day judge (if not his
person, yet) his actions, that the Lord Jesus has suffered in his poor
Servants, even bitter persecutions by his unjust slanders.

CHAP. 12. A Reply to his twelueth Chapter Entering upon the Discussion of the
unlawfulnes to Persecute an Erroneous and blind Conscience.
Discusser.

The second Conclusion laid down by the Answerer, is: It is not lawful to
persecute an Erroneous and blind Conscience, Even in Fundamental, and weighty
Points, till after Admonition once, or twice Tit. 3.10, 11. And then such
Consciences may be persecuted; because the Word of God is so clear, in
Fundamental and weighty Points, that such a person cannot but sin against
his Conscience, and so being condemned of himself, that is of his Conscience,
he may be persecuted for sinning against his own Conscience.

Defender.

They are the words of the Discusser, not mine, That such as err in
Fundamental and weighty Points, after once or twice Admonition, such
Consciences are then to be persecuted.

No, my words will clear themselves if they be truly related, even as himself
has printed them. Thus they stand.

Secondly, For an erroneous and blind Conscience, even in Fundamental and
weighty Points, It is not lawful to persecute any, till after Admonition once
or twice. And so the Apostle directs Tit. 3.10. and gives the reason, That
in Fundamental and principal Points of Doctrine and worship, The Word of God
in such things is so clear, that he cannot but be convinced in conscience of
the dangerous Error of his way, after once or twice Admonition, wisely and
faithfully dispensed. And then if any one persist, It is not out of Conscience,
but against his Conscience, as the Apostle says, ver. 11. He is subverted and
sins being condemned of himself, that is, of his own Conscience, so that
if such a man after such Admonition, shall still persist in the Error of his
way, and be therefore punished, He is not persecuted for cause of Conscience,
but for sinning against his Conscience.

Where though I say, That it is not lawful to persecute any, though erring in
Fundamental and weighty Points, till after once or twice admonition: I do not
therefore say, (as the Discusser reports me) that after once or twice
admonition, then such Consciences may be persecuted: But that if such a man
after such Admonition shall still persist in the Error of his way, and be
therefore punished, He is not persecuted for cause of Conscience, but for
sinning against his own Conscience.

Object. But he that says, It is not lawful to persecute any Heretic till
after once or twice admonition, He does as much as say, that after once or
twice admonition, It is then lawful to persecute any Heretic.

Ans. Not so neither, neither every Heretic, nor in every Court. Not in every
Court or Judicature. But the same Church that followed an Heretic, with once
or twice admonition, was further to pursue him, if he remain obstinate, with
excommunication; my words do express two things:

1. That an Heretic till after once or twice admonition, may not be pursued,
no not with the Church-censure of Excommunication: but after once or twice
admonition, It was then lawful for the Church to proceed to his
Excommunication.

2. My words hold forth this also, That if such an Heretic so convinced and
admonished, be afterward punished by any Censure, whether of Church or Court,
It cannot be said, he is punished for his Conscience, but for sinning against
his Conscience.

But it was no part of my words or meaning, to say, that every Heretic, though
erring in some Fundamental and weighty Points; and for the same
excommunicated, shall forth with be punished by the Civil Magistrate: unless
it do afterward appear, that he break forth further, either into Blasphemy,
or Idolatry, or seducement of others to his Heretical pernicious ways.

Discusser.

This third of Titus, which through fearful Prophanations has so many
hundred years bin the pretended Bulwark of all the bloody wolves, Dens of
Lions, Mountains of Leopards hunting and devouring the witnesses of Jesus. He
that can but see men as Trees, may easily discern, It shall now be the Refuge
and Defense (as I hope) of the Lamb's and little ones of Jesus.

Defender.

It is out of doubt, That this Text is, (as all the Texts in Scripture be) the
just Refuge and safe defense of the Lambs, and little ones of Jesus. But all
the wit and skill of the Discusser, can never so far wrest it, or darken it,
as to make it a Refuge and defense for Heretics, which is the Point in hand.

CHAP. 13. A Reply to his thirteenth Chapter, what is meant by this Heretic in
Titus.
Discusser.

What is this Heretic? I find him commonly defined to be, such an one as is
obstinate in Fundamentalls. And so the Answerer seems to Resent him, saying,
the Apostle rendereth this reason, why after once or twice Admonition, he ought
to be Persecuted, because, in Fundament ill and Principal Points of Doctrine
and Worship, the Word of God is so clear, that the Heretic cannot but be
convinced in his own Conscience. But of this Reason I find not one Tittle
mentioned in this Scripture: for so he says, such an one is condemned of
himself, yet he says not, nor will it follow, that Fundamentalls are so
clear, that after first and second Admonition, a Person that submits not to
them, Is condemned of himself, more then in lesser Points.

This word then an Heretic is no more, then an obstinate and wilful person
in the Church of Creet striving and contending about unprofitable Questions and
Genealogies. What is to be done with such an one? Let him be once and twice
Admonished. What if once and twice Admonition prevail not? The Apostle seems
to Answer, (...), that is, the man that is wilfully obstinate, after once or
twice Admonition, Reject him.

Defender.

The Discusser is so far from weakening what I said from this Text in Titus,
that he rather confirms it, yea and grants a larger allowance to proceed
against erroneous Persons, then I did. For,

1. Whereas I had said, The Apostle directs the Church to proceed against an
Heretic, that is against one obstinately erroneous in Fundamentalls, The
Discusser says, yea and against such as err though not in Fundamentalls, but
in lesser points, and continue obstinate in striving about unprofitable
Questions, and Genealogies.

2. He that grants (as the Discusser does) that the Word of God is so clear
even in lesser Points, that he that persisteth in his error after once or twice
Admonition, is wilfully obstinate: he surely will not stick to acknowledge,
that the word of God is much more clear in Fundamental and Principal Points,
that he that shall persist in Errors against the Foundation, after once or
twice Admonition, he cannot but be much more justly accounted wilfully
obstinate, and to sin against the light of his own Conscience.

3. Though he says he finds no one Tittle in the Text, that in Fundamental
and Principal Points of Doctrine and Worship, the Word of God is so clear,
that after once or twice Admonition, the Heretic cannot but be convinced in
his own Conscience: Yet he might easily find it, and cannot but find it, if he
were pleased to ponder the words of the Text: yea and he does find it, though
he be pleased to deny it. For the Heretic (whom the Text speaks of) himself
expounds to be a man wilfully obstinate: An Evidence, that he erreth not
through want of light, or weakness of knowledge, but through strength of will.
Whence also he is said to be condemned of himself, of his own Conscience: An
Evidence that the Points about which he erreth, are so clearly delivered in
Scripture, that after once or twice Admonition, the Heretic cannot but be
convinced in his own Conscience. And if this hold in sundry lesser Points, how
much more does it hold in Fundamentalls and Principalls? Unless he think the
Holy Ghost be more dark, and obscure in delivering Principles and milk to
Babes, then in delivering lesser Points to men of riper growth. If the word be
so clear as to make Fundamentals clear, (though not any more clear, as he
says, then lesser Points) yet then it follows, It makes them both so
clear, that he that submiteth not to them after once, or twice Admonition is
condemned of himself.

4. When the Apostle says, an Heretic is subverted, (...), it is as much as
if he had said, he is as an house subverted, o^ turned upside down, or inside
outward, as an house turned off from the Foundation: It is too dilute, and
loose an Interpretation of the word (...), (which the Discusser makes, Chap.
14.) (...), he is turned Crooked, a word opposite to straightness, or
rightnesse. For he is not ignorant, that is not the meaning of (...), but of
(...), which he joyneth with the other, mean, turned-crooked: for that is not
subverted, but perverted. And if Paul say, that the Heretic is subverted, or
turned off from the Foundation, and gives that as a reason, why he should be
censured, how then can the Discusser say, he finds not one tittle of this
reason in this Scripture?

5. Take the Discussers own Interpretation of an Heretic, for an obstinate and
wilful striver or contender about unprofitable Questions and Genealogies:

Those Questions and Genealogies, are expressly described by the Apostle, not
only to be unprofitable and vain, but also to tend to the subversion of whole
houses, Tit. 1.10, 11. which may seem evidently to argue, that their
disputings about the Genealogies of Christ, tended to cut off the Line of
Christ, or at least to make it doubtful, whether he were the lineall Heir of
David, according to the flesh, and so whether he were the true Messiah or no.
And thus, if the Discussers own meaning of an Heretic may stand, still an
Heretic is he, who is wilfully obstinate in holding forth such Errors as
subvert the Foundation of Christian Religion.

CHAP. 14. A Reply to his foureteenth Chapter, Explaining what it is to be
subverted and self condemned.
Discusser.

Subverted is not here intended to be spoken of Heretics in Fundamentalls
only, but of men obstinate in the lesser Questions.

1. Subverted, (...), Crooked, a word opposite to rightnesse or straightness.

2. He sins wandering from the ways of Truth:

3. He is (...), and condemned of himself, that is, by the secret checks and
whisperings of his own Conscience, which will take Gods part against a man's
self, in accusing, smiting etc.

Defender.

All this so far as Error is found in it, is spoken to, and discharged in the
former Chapter.

Only 2. Things more remain in this Chapter which may not pass without some
touch.

1. That he says Gods People in all their awakenings acknowledge how slightly
they have listened to the checks of their own Conscience. This the Answerer
pleases to call sinning against Conscience: for which he may lawfully be
persecuted, to wit, for sinning against his own Conscience.

Wherein there is found a double falsehood: 1. That he says, I call the slight
listnings of Gods People to the checks of their Conscience, their sinning
against Conscience. For I speak not of the sinning of Gods People against
Conscience, but of an Heretic subverted turned off from the Foundation: much
less do I call their slight listnings to Conscience, to be Heretical
sinning against Conscience.

2. Least of all do I say, that for such slight listnings to the checks of
Conscience, he may lawfully be persecuted, to wit, as for sinning against
Conscience. Thus men that have time and leisure at will, will set up Images of
clouts, and then shoot at them.

The 2. Thing in this Chapter (which I said might not pass without some touch)
is, that having fastened upon me a conclusion, (which is none of mine, but an
invention of his own) He adds, howsoever it be painted over with vermillion
etc. yet he hops to manifest it to be the overturning and rooting up of the
root of all true Christianity, and absolutely denying the Lord Jesus to be
come in the flesh.

Whereto I Reply no more but this: If he do manifest that which Magnanimously
he undertaketh, It may happyly be also manifested (by the help of Christ) that
it will overturne no conclusion of mine. But howsoever, let him remember it was
a proverb in Israel, Let not him that girdeth on his Armor, boast himself, as
he that puts it off 2 Kings 20.11.

CHAP. 15. A Reply to his fifteenth Chapter touching the admonition and
rejection of an Heretic.
THe first and second Admonitions in the place of Titus were not Civil or
corporal punishments on men's persons, or purses: But they were the
reprehensions, convictions, exhortations, and persuasions of the word of the
Eternal God, charged home to the Conscience, in the Name and Presence of the
Lord Jesus in the midst of his Church. Which being despised, and not hearkened
unto, in the last place follows rejection, which is not a cutting off by
heading, hanging, burning, nor an expelling out of the Country, and coasts:
but the dreadful cutting off from the visible head and body, Christ Jesus, and
his Church -- Spiritual cutting off by Excommunication.

Defender.

All this, and the proofs of this, in this Chapter, I willingly consent and
subscribe unto: nor does this touch any conclusion of mine at all, much less
Discuss, or shake it. For though I said indeed, that for an erroneous and
blind Conscience (even in Fundamental and weighty Points) It is not lawful
to persecute any, till after Admonition once or twice, according to Tit.
3.10.11.

Yet in alleging that place, to prove that Conclusion, I intended no other
persecution, but the Churches prosecution against such an Heretic by
excommunication: no syllable in my conclusion looks at more.

If it be said, but Excommunication or any other Church-prosecution, cannot
fitly be called persecution: Yes verily, excommunication is a persecution, and
a lawful persecution, if the cause be just offense, (as the Angel of the Lord
is said to persecute the wicked Psalm. 35.6.) But the Excommunication is a
cruel and bitter persecution, If it be without just cause and due order: yea
and the more grievous persecution, by how much the more grievous it is to a
Christian man, to be excluded from the Communion of the Saints, then to be
banished from a civil Society, sure it is, the Lord Jesus accounts it a
persecution to his Disciples, to be delivered up unto the Synagogues, and to be
cast forth out of the Synagogues Luke 21.12. with Joh. 16.2.

CHAP. 16. A Reply to his sixteenth Chapter touching To leration in Points of
less moment.
Discusser.

For a third Position, or Conclusion, the Answerer gave this, that in things of
less moment (whether Points of Doctrine or Worship) If a man hold them forth
in a spirit of Christian meekness and love, (though with zeal and constancy)
he is not to be persecuted, but tolerated, till God may be pleased to manifest
his truth to him.

This conclusion I acknowledge to be the Truth of God; yet 3. things are very
observeable in the manner of laying it down.

1. That such a Person may be tolerated, till God may be pleased to reveal his
truth to him: upon the same ground the Apostle calls for meekness and
Gentleness toward all men, and toward such as oppose themselves; 2. Tim. 2.
because it may be, God may give them repentance. Hence a soul that is lively
and sensible of Gods mercy, cannot but be patient, and gentle toward the Jews
-- toward the Turks -- yea to all the several sorts of Anti-Christians, yea
to the Pagans, and to the wildest sort of the Sons of men, who have not heard
of the Father and of the Son, etc. Yea not only be patient to such, but also
to pray for such, yea and to endeavor their participation of the same grace
and mercy.

Defender.

This nothing shakes, no nor so much as touches our cause, or defense; we
think it unlawful for the Church, to censure such, as are out of the Church.
And for the Civil State, we know no ground they have to persecute Jews, or
Turks, or other Pagans for cause of Religion, though they all err in
Fundamentalls. No nor would I exempt Anti-Christians neither, from Toleration,
notwithstanding their Fundamental Errors, unless after conviction they still
continue to seduce simple souls into their damnable, and pernicious Heresies:
as into the Worship of false Gods, into confidence of their own merits for
Justification, into seditious conspiracyes against the lives and States of such
Princes, as will not submit their Consciences to the Bishop of Rome. Which if
the Discusser shall in the sequel pluck off as the silken covering of an Image
(as he calls it) we shall further attend him.

Discusser.

2. I observe from the Scriptures he quoteth for this Toleration ( Phil. 3.
Romans 14.) how closely (yet I hope unadvisedly) he makes the Churches of Christ
at Philippi, and Rome, all one with the Cities of Philippi, and Rome etc.

Defender.

No such matter: I never thought these Scriptures to belong at all to the
Cities of Philippi or Rome, Paul writes to both the Churches not only to
tolerate, but to receive their weak brethren, who dissent from them in matters
of less moment: but to the Cities, I never read any Epistle of his. Who would
ever imagine, the Discusser should be so far transported beyond all bounds,
either of reason, or truth, or candor, as to surmise the Answerer should
conceive, That what those Churches must not tolerate in their holy communion,
that the Cities of Philippi and Rome must not tolerate within the compass of
the City, State, and Jurisdiction.

Discusser.

3. From this Toleration of persons holding but lesser errors, I observe the
unmercifulness of such Doctrines and Hearts, that he, that is slightly and
but a little hurt shall be suffered, and means vouchsafed for his cure: but
the deep-wounded sinner, the Leprous, and Vlcerous etc. must not be suffered,
until peradventure God may give them Repentance etc.

Defender.

And why does he not as well observe the unmercifulness of such States and
Laws, as suffer petty theives, and liars to live in their Towns and Cities:
but will not suffer willful murderers, and violent robbers to live amongst
them? such as are tainted with lesser Errors, and it may be, whet them upon
others, they are but as petty theives, and liars: but such as after conviction
do go on to subvert the Foundation of Christian Religion and to subvert and
destroy the souls of Gods People, and stoutly robb them both of the means of
Grace here, and of the inheritance of glory hereafter, they are worse then
wilful murderers, or violent robbers. The Holy Ghost speaks of false
Teachers, as bringing in damnable Heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1. as overthrowing the
faith of some 2 Timothy 2.18. as subverting their souls, Acts 15.24. making
merchandise of Gods People 2 Pet. 2.3. which being so, me thinks, such as do
more mischief, are less tolerable, then they that do less. It is true, they
that are more deeply wounded-sinners, are more to be pitied, suppose the depth
of their wounds reach none but themselves; but if they be infectious, and
Leprous, and have Plague sores running upon them, and think it their glory to
infect others; It is no want of mercy, and charity, to set such at a distance:
It is a merciless mercy, to pity such as are incureably contagious, and
mischeivous, and not to pity many scores or hundreds of the souls of such, as
will be infected and destroyed by the toleration of the other.

CHAP. 17. A Reply to his seventeenth Chapter: touching the holding forth of
Error with a boisterous and arrogant Spirit.
Discusser.

It is said by the Answerer, He that holds forth Error with a boisterous and
arrogant spirit to the disturbance of the Civil Peace, he ought to be
punished.

To this I have spoken too, confessing that if any man commit ought of those
things, which Paul was accused of Acts 25.11. He ought not to be spared: yea he
ought not in such cases to refuse to die.

Defender.

I would not say, That every man that holds forth Error in a a boisterous and
arrogant spirit to the disturbance of Civil Peace, ought to be punished with
death. This is too Bloody a Tenet, unless the boisterous Arrogance were such
as did disturb the Civil Peace to the destruction of the lives and souls of
men.

Discusser.

But if the matter be of a Spiritual and Divine nature, I have written before,
in many cases, and might in many more, that the worship which a State
professes, may be contradicted and preached against, and yet no breach of
Civil Peace, etc.

Defender.

There is no Error, that can be a matter of divine nature, though it may be
spiritual; no such Points as are of a divine nature, fall within the compass
of this dispute of persecution. The many cases, which the Discusser before
wrote of are all of them allowed, but none of them concern holding forth of
Errors, which is the Point in hand.

Yet true it is, that if a man hold forth Truth in some boisterous and arrogant
way, not with the Armor of the Spirit, but with the Arm of flesh, He may in
so doing disturb the Civil Peace, and for such disturbance be justly
punished, according to the quality of the disturbance raised by him.

It is easily granted what the Discusser further avoucheth, that they do
break the Cities or Kingdoms Peace, who cry out for Prisons, and Swords,
against such who cross their Judgments, or Practice in Religion: to wit
unless their Religion be of God, and the crossing of it be such as destroys
and subverteth the Religion of God.

But when he says, such only break the Cities or Kingdoms Peace, as call
for Prisons and Swords against Heretics. It is too vast an Hyperbole; as if
Murderers Seditious Persons, Rebels, Traitors were none of them such, as did
break the Cities or Kingdoms Peace at all: but they only who are too sharp
against corruptions in Religion.

It is also further easiely granted, which he alleges, that many complain
most, who are most in fault themselves, as Joseph's Mistress of him. The Lord
help the Discusser to reflect upon his own way.

CHAP. 18. A Reply to his Eighteenth Chapter, Examining the first Argument for
Toleration from Mat. 13.30, 38.
Discusser.

First, Mat. 13.30, 38. Christ Commands to let alone the Tares, to grow up
together with the wheat, until the Harvest.

Unto which he Answers,

That Tares are not Briars and Thorns, but partly Hypocrites like unto the
Godly, but indeed carnal (as the Tares are like to the wheat, but are not
wheat) or partly such corrupt Doctrines and Practices, as are indeed unsound,
but yet such as come very near the Truth (as Tares do to the wheat) and so
near that good men may be taken with them, and so the Persons in whom they
grow, cannot be rooted out, but good wheat will be rooted out with them. In
such a case, Christ calls for Peaceable Toleration, not for poenall
Prosecution according to the third Conclusion.

But alas here is no evidence or demonstration of the Spirit, nor argument from
the place it self, or from the Scriptures of Truth, to prove such an
Interpretation.

Defender.

Ans. The Letter (to which the Answer was given) gave no reason of his
exposition: and who ever required more reason of an Answerer, then of a Replyer?

2. The Exposition I gave was consistent with that which the Letter gave.
[Tares and wheat, says he, some understand to be those that walk in the
Truth, and those that walk in lyes] now when I say, the tares are Hypocrites,
and some kind of corrupt Doctrines and Practices, and such as walk in them,
are not these coincident with such as walk in lies? what need had I to give a
reason of the exposition, which he himself (to whom the Answer was written)
acknowledges?

Discusser.

But those three Persons, Doctrines and Practices, are as a threefold cord, and
so a threefold strong snare to catch the feet of some or other.

Defender.

What hurt do they get by being caught? Hypocrites, and corrupt Doctrines, and
Practices, if they be found like unto good Christians, or sound truths, what
hurt do they catch, when I say such are to be tolerated to the end of the
world? But to prevent his fear of a threefold cord, I shall easily acknowledge
that which I meant, that by Tares are meant such kind of evil persons, as are
like unto the good, whether they be Hipocrites, men of unsound hearts, or men
of unsound Doctrines, and Practices yet such as come near the Truth.

CHAP. 19. A Reply to his nineteenth Chapter.
Discusser.

That the Lord intends not Doctrines, or Practices in this Parable, It is
clear: For,

1. The Lord Jesus expressly interprets the good seed to be Persons, and those
the children of the Kingdom: The Tares also to signify men, and those the
children of the wicked one ver. 38.

Defender.

If the Discusser had cast his eye a little lower, he might have found, that
Christ interprets the Tares, not only to be Persons, but things (...) all
things that offend, as well as those that do iniquity ver. 41. But I shall not
stick upon that at all, let the Tares be Persons, whether Hypocrites, like unto
true Christians, or holders forth of scandalous, and corrupt, Doctrines and
Practices like unto sound.

Discusser.

2. Such corrupt Doctrines and Practices are not to be tolerated now (as those
Jewish observations were for a while, Romans 14.) nor so long till the end of the
world. For can we think, that though the Lord tendered the tender conscience of
the Jews, in the observation of the difference of meats and drinks (which were
sometimes his own Ordinances) that therefore Persons must be now tolerated in
the Church (for I speak not of the Civil State) in superstitious forbearing
and forbidding of flesh in Popish Lents and superstitious Fridayes? etc.

Defender.

Who can tell what this Discusser would have? The Tares he would have to be
Persons; not corrupt Doctrines, and Practices. And yet when he comes to
prove, that corrupt Doctrines and Practices are not to be tolerated, he proves
it from the unlawfulness of tolerating corrupt persons: for can we think
(says he) that persons must be now tolerated in the Church, in the
superstitious forbearing or forbidding of flesh in Popish Lents and Fridayes?
Such is the inconstancy of the spirits of men, whose hearts are not stayed, and
steered by the Spirit of Truth, that sometimes Tares must not be corrupt
Doctrines and Practices, but persons, because Tares, and so persons must be
tolerated till the Harvest, not so corrupt Doctrines and Practices: And yet all
the reason given, why corrupt Doctrines and Practices must not be tolerated, is
this, because Persons that hold them forth must not be tolerated.

CHAP. 20. A Reply to his twentieth Chapter what is meant by Tares?
Discusser.

The Original word (...), signifying all those weeds which spring up with the
Corn, as cockle darnell, Tares etc. seems to imply such a kind of people,
as are commonly and generally known to be manifestly differing from, and
opposite to, the true Worshipers of God etc.

Defender.

1. It is not true, that (...), signifies all those weeds that grow up with
the Corn. For they be a special weed, growing up cheifely amongst the wheat:
but when it comes to the earing, it grows more like to Barley, yet having a
narrower leaf, fatter, and rougher, and a leaner seed in a prickly bark,
bearing a purple flower: as Dioscorides testifyeth. Now this is far from a
description of all sorts of weeds, that grow up with Corn.

2. Neither is it true, that Tares are commonly and generally known as soon as
they appear. For Hierom, who for a time lived in Jury, testifyeth, that Inter
triticum et zizania, quod nos appellamus lolium, quamdiu herba est, et nondum
culmus venit ad spicam, grandis similitudo est, et in discernendo aut nulla aut
perdifficilis distantia. Comment. Mat. Cap. 13.

Yea the Text it self (though the Discusser deny it) holds forth as much.
For the servants of the Husbandman (in whose Field the Tares were sown by the
enemy) did not discern the tares from the wheat, till the blade was sprung up,
and brought forth fruit: for then it was, and not till then, that the Tares
appeared to be Tares, Mat. 13.26. what though the Text holds forth no such
time, wherein the servants doubted, or suspected what they were? It is like
enough, they did not suspect them at all by reason of (the grandis similitudo)
the great likeness that was between them, whilst they were both in the blade.
Which still makes good the Exposition, that Tares are not briars and thorns,
but so like to the wheat, that till they come to earing, the one cannot be
discerned from the other

Discusser.

The one appeared as soon as the other, and when the wheat put forth its
blade, and fruit, the Tares were as early, they put forth themselves, and
appeared also.

2. There is such a dissimilitude and unlikenesse between them, that as soon
as Tares and wheat sprung up to blade and fruit, every husbandman could tell,
which is wheat, and which is Tares.

Defender.

Its true, the Tares put forth their blade, as soon as did the wheat, and
appeared above ground, one as early as the other: but they were so like one to
an other, that the husbandmen could not tell, which was wheat, and which Tares,
till the blade was grown up, and they both brought forth their fruit. And
though when they both brought forth their fruit, there was no apparent
dimissilitude: yet still it is evident, that at first the dimssilitude did not
appear. The Tares may therefore still stand for Hypocrites, who are so like at
first unto good Christians, that they cannot easily be discerned one from
another, till in process of time, the difference of the fruit discover them.

Discusser.

But when was it that the House-holder gave charge to let them alone? was it
not after they appeared, and were known to be Tares? which should imply by
this interpretation of the Answerer, that when men are discovered and known to
be Hypocrites, yet still such a generation of Hypocrites in the Church must be
let alone, and tolerated until the Harvest, or end of the world: which is
contrary to all Piety, order and safety in the Church of the Lord Jesus, as
doubtless, the Answerer will grant.

Defender.

If the Answerer know his own mind as well as the Discusser doubtless the
Answerer will not grant, that it is contrary to all piety, and order, and
safety, that hypocrites (known hypocrites) be tolerated in the Church till the
end of the world. For though it be against the safety of the Church, when the
Officers, or body of the Church prove hypocrites, (for that threatens a
dis-churching, Rev. 2.5.) yet till the fruits of hypocrisy grow notoriously
scandalous, and ripe for Church-Censure, it is not contrary to all piety, and
order, and safety, to suffer them: but rather more safety to suffer them, least
some of Gods own Saints, (true wheat) who for a time may degenerate and bring
forth like fruit with the Tares, be plucked up with them. If foolish Virgins be
cast out of the Church, the wise Virgins may be sometime found sleeping, as
well as they, Mat. 25.5.

CHAP. 21. A Reply to his Chap. 21. What is meant by the world; and more of
the Tares.
Discusser.

2. The Tares cannot signify hypocrites in the Church; for the field wherein
they both grow is interpreted by Christ himself to be the world, which lies
in wickedness, and is a wilderness of wild Beasts, Fornicators, Covetous,
Idolators, etc. In this world as soon as the Lord Jesus has sown the good
seed, (the Children of the Kingdom, true Christianity, or the true Church)
the enemy Satan presently in the night of Security, Ignorance, and Error,
sows the Tares, which are Antichristians, or false Christians. Those the
Ministers and Prophets of God would straight run to Heaven for fiery
Judgments, from thence to consume them. But the Son of man commands a
Permission of them, till the end of the world, when Goats and Sheep, Tares and
Wheat, shall be eternally separated, etc.

Defender.

Answ. 1. It is true, Christ expounds the Field to be the world, ver. 38. But
he meant not the wide world, but (by an usual Trope) the Church scattered
throughout the world: as Christ is said to have loved the world, Joh. 3.16. and
to be the Propitiation of the sins of the world, 1 John 2.2.

Reas. 1. Else there had been no place for the servants wonder at the appearing
of the Tares. Sir, did not thou sow good seed in thy field? from whence then
has it Tares? ver. 27. Did ever any of the servants of Christ wonder, or saw
any cause to wonder, that the world should be full of Fornicators, Idolaters,
Murderers, Robbers, etc? Was it ever otherwise since the world was replenished
with Inhabitants?

Reas. 2. What calling had the Ministers, or Prophets of Christ, to offer to
pluck up all such notorious vicious persons out of the world? Did ever any
Ministers of Christ demand such a Question of Christ; Will thou have us go,
and gather up all notorious vicious Persons out of the world? As they do
indeed demand the like concerning these Tares in Christ's field, ver. 28.

Reas. 3. The Discusser himself reckons up Goats and Sheep, as parallel
with Wheat, and Tares, as generally Interpreters do. Now evident it is, that
Goats were clean Beasts, as well as Sheep; clean for food, yea and clean
also for sacrifice; and yet they were tolerated not only to live in the same
world, but in the same Church. For after the destruction of Antichrist, when
purest times of the Church shall come, the Members of the Church shall all of
them be Virgins, (none Idolaters) though some wise, and some foolish; all of
them servants, though some thristie, some unprofitable: all of them clean,
though some Goats, some Sheep. And therefore the Kingdom of Heaven (that is,
the Church) is at that time resembled to such a mixed state (after the ruin of
Antichrist, and conversion of the Jews) until the coming of Christ to
Judgment, Mat. 25.1. etc.

Answ. 2. If the Field should be the world, and the Tares Antichristians and
false Christians; it is true, Satan sowed them in Gods Field, but he sowed them
in the Church. The mystery of their Iniquity did secretly work in the very
bosom of the Church, till in process of time, it grew so rank and gross, as
transformed the Churches that drunk it up, into spiritual Babylon. But if
Antichrist be an Apostate, and Antichristianitie Apostasy, then it was first
sown in the field of the Church, and not of the wide world.

Answ. 3. It is not the will of Christ, that Antichrist and Antichristians, and
Antichristianitie should be tolerated in the world, until the end of the
world. For God will put it into the hearts of faithful Princes, (as they have
given their Kingdoms to the Beast, so) in fullness of time to hate the whore,
to leave her desolate and naked, and to burn her flesh with fire, Rev. 17.16,
17. And after this we read of a visible state of a new Jerusalem, which shall
flourish many years upon Earth, before the end of the world, Revel. Chap. 20.
Chap. 21. Chap. 22.

Nevertheless, I willingly grant that the first fruits of Antichristians, and
false Christians may be reckoned up amongst the Tares, which Satan sowed in the
field of the Church, which afterward grew to be Briars and Thorns, and so
destructive to the wheat, that the wheat could not be suffered (if discerned)
to live amongst them.

Discusser.

But Christ (the wisdom of the Father) would never in opening this Parable, so
far obscure it, or to call the Church, the world: Nor does it agree with the
nature of the Church, or Garden of Christ, to be styled the world.

Defender.

It is no impeachment to the wisdom of Christ to call his Elect Churches and
Saints throughout the world, by the Name of the world; Else Paul spoke not by
the wisdom of Christ, when he said, God was in Christ, reconciling the world
unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19.

And though the Church within it self be a Garden, and severed from the world;
yet all the Churches being scattered and dispersed throughout the world, it is
no more an improper speech, to call the Church the world, then to speak of
Christ as dying for the world, when he dyed for his Church.

CHAP. 22. A Reply to his 22. Chapter: more of Tares.
Discusser.

In the former Parable, the Lord Jesus compared the kingdom of Heaven to the
sowing of seed. The true Messengers of Christ are sowers, who cast the seed of
the word of the Kingdom upon 4. sorts of ground; which 4. sorts of grounds, or
hearts of men, cannot be supposed to be of the Church; nor will it ever be
proved, that the Church consists of any more sorts or natures of ground
properly, but one, to wit, the honest and good ground. And the proper work of
the Church concerns the prosperity and flourishing of this sort of ground,
and not of the other three sorts.

In the field of the world then are all those sorts of grounds, High-wayside,
stony, thorney Hearers, as well as the honest and good ground. And I suppose it
will not be said by the Answerer, that these three sorts of bad grounds were
Hypocrites or Tares in the Church.

Defender.

Answ. 1. But what if the Answerer will say so? It may be contrary to his
supposall, but not to the Truth. For I demand, did not Christ himself (who was
the chief Sower) did not he Preach, and sow the seed of the word to all those
four sorts of Hearers? And yet he was the Minister of Circumcision, ( Romans
15.8.) and Preached seldom to any, but to Church Members, Members of the
Church of Israel.

Answ. 2. It Is an error to say, The Church consists of no more sorts of
Hearers, but one, the honest and good ground: for if the children of
Church Members be in the Church, and of the Church, till they give occasion of
rejection, then they growing up to years, become some of them like the
High-way-side, others like the stony, others like the Thorney, as well as
others like the honest and good ground.

Answ. 3. Though it be not the proper work of the Church to attend the
prosperity and flourishing of the three sorts of bad ground, to wit, whilst
they remain bad: yet it is their work to seek the changing of the bad into
good ground, that so they may come to prosper and flourish. For is it not the
proper work of the Church, to bring on their children to become the sincere
People of God, as well as to keep themselves in that estate? Is it not a maine
Branch of their Covenant with God, that as God gives himself to be a God to
them, and to their seed, so they should give up themselves and their seed to be
his People? Besides, has not God given Pastors and Teachers, as well for the
gathering together of the Saints, as for the edification of the body of Christ?
And has he not given the Church, and the Gospel Preached in the Church, to lie
like Leaven in three Pecks of Meal till all be Leavened? Mat. 13.33.

Answ. 4. There is not such resemblance between High-way-side ground, and good
ground, as is between Tares and Whea; nor would the servants of the Husbandman
ever wonder that weeds should grow in the high-way-side ground, as they do at
the growing of Tares in the Field. Nor would they ever ask the Question,
whether they should pluck up weeds out of the High-way-side, or stones out of
the stony ground, or pluck up Thorns out of the Thorney.

CHAP. 23. A Reply to his Chapt. 23. Still touching the Tares.
Discusser.

These Tares I shall evidently prove to be Idolaters, and in particular,
properly Antichristians. For first, these Tares are such sinners, as are
opposite, and contrary to the Children of the Kingdom, visibly so declared and
manifest, ver. 38.

Defender.

Answ. 1. These Tares are not such sinners as are contrary to the children of
the Kingdom; for then none should be opposite to them but they. For contraries
are such, quorum unum uni opponitur. But evident it is, there be more wicked
ones opposite to the children of the Kingdom, then Idolaters, and
Antichristians, to wit, those notoriously scandalous wicked ones, whom the
Discusser names in the next Chapter, Drunkards, Thieves, unclean Persons.

Answ. 2. It is a (...), a begging of the Question, to say that these Tares are
such sinners, as are opposite and contrary to the children of the Kingdom,
visibly so declared and manifested; For the Tares were not discerned at first,
(as has been showed above) till the blade was sprung up, and brought forth
fruit.

Discusser.

These Tares are the Children of the wicked one; which wicked one I take to be,
not the Devil; for the Lord Jesus seems to make them distinct. The Tares
(says he) are the Children of the wicked one, or wickedness: the Enemy that
sowed them is the Devil.

Defender.

Answ. 1. The Devil and the wicked one, may well mean one and the same
Person. For if the Devil sowed these Tares, then these Tares were the seed
(and so the children) of the Devil. Why should they be called the seed of one,
and the children of another?

Answ. 2. Suppose, (...), be translated (the children) of the wicked one, or
wickedness; that style will agree to hypocrites, as well as to other Persons.
Sure it is, the Lord Jesus often calls the Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites,
( Mat. 23.) and he calls them also a wicked and adulterous Generation, Mat.
16. And therefore still these Tares will not appear to be others then
Hypocrites.

CHAP. 24. A Reply to his 24. Chapter, Still touching the Tares.
Discusser.

Though all Drunkards, Thieves, unclean Persons, etc. be opposite to Gods
Children, yet the opposition of the Tares here against the Children of the
Kingdom, is such an opposition as fights against the religious state and
Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. It is manifest, the Lord Jesus intends no other sort of sinners in this
Parable, (then Antichristians) unto whom here he says, let them alone, in
Church or State. For then he should contradict other holy and blessed
Ordinances, for the punishment of Offenders, both in Christian and Civil State.

For 1. In the Civil State, God has armed Parents, Masters, Magistrates, to
punish evil doers, Murderers, Quarrellers, unclean Persons, stealers,
extortioners: such ought not to be let alone, neither in lesser nor greater
Families, Towns, Cities, Kingdoms, Romans 13. but seasonably suppressed, etc.

2. In the Kingdom of Christ, (whose Officers, Laws, punishments, weapons,
are all Spiritual and of a Soule-nature) he will not have Antichristian
Idolaters, Extortioners, Covetous, etc. to be let alone, but the unclean
Lepers to be thrust forth, etc.

Therefore if neither the Offenders against the Civil Laws, State, and Peace,
ought to be let alone, nor the Spiritual State, the Church ought to bear with
them that are evil, Romans 2.

I Conclude, that these Tares are sinners of another nature, Idolaters, false
Worshippers, Antichristians, who without discouragement to true Christians,
must be let alone, and permitted in the world to grow up until the great
Harvest.

Defender.

Answ. 1. As all wicked Persons be opposite to Gods children, (for the children
of the Kingdom of Light, and the children of the Kingdom of darkness, cannot
but be opposite;) so the opposition that is in all the wicked against the
children of God, does fight against the religious state and Kingdom of the
Lord Jesus. For such as stand for the Kingdom of Satan, (as all wicked men
do) they stand in opposition to the Kingdom of Christ. No man can serve two
Masters; If he cleave to the one, he stands in enmity to the other, Mat.
6.24.

Answ. 2. It follows not, that because Christ bids his Ministers, Let the
wicked alone in Church or State, That therefore he intends no other then
Antichristian Idolaters: Neither should Christ contradict any Ordinance of his
own for the punishment of Offenders, both in Christian and Civil State, though
he should command other offenders to be let alone besides Antichristians. For
no Ordinance or Law of God, nor just Law of man, commands the rooting out of
hypocrites, either by Civil, or Church-censure, though the Church be bound to
endeavor as much (as in them lies) to heal their hypocrisy.

Answ. 3. Neither is it true, that Antichristians are to be let alone by the
Ordinance of Christ, till the end of the world. For what if the members of a
Christian Church shall some of them Apostate to Antichristian Superstition and
Idolatry, (as often falls out by the seduction of the Emissaries of Babel)
does the Ordinance of Christ bind the hands of the Church (of which they are
Members) to let them alone? In chapter 19. The Discusser himself would not have
the superstitious observation of Lent-Fasts to be let alone; And surely, Christ
ordained by his blessed Apostle Paul, that if any Brother proved an Idolater,
(whether Pagan, or Antichristian) such an one should be cast out by
excommunication, 1 Cor. 5.11.

Besides, What if any Antichristian Persons out of zeal to the Catholic
Cause, and out of conscience to the command of their Superiors, should seek
to destroy the King and Parliament, (as has more then once or twice been
attempted;) should such an one by any ordinance of Christ be let alone in the
Civil State? Moreover, if Popish Priests and Jesuits be rightly expounded to
be the Rivers and Fountains of water which drive the dead Sea of Antichristian
pollution up and down all Nations in Europe: and if they by the Ordinance of
Christ, be (in some cases) to drink blood, (for they are worthy) then they are
not to be let alone, but duly suppressed, and cut off from conveying up and
down their Idolatrous, Heretical, and Seditious wickedness, Rev. 16.4. to 7.

CHAP. 25. A Reply to his 25. Chapter; Still discussing the meaning of the
Tares.
THirdly, The Tares cannot be hypocrites, is as clear as the Light, because
they, when they are discovered, and seen to be Tares, are not to be let alone
to the Angels in the end of the world, but are to be purged out by the
Governors of the Church, with the whole Church.

Defender.

This objection has been answered above, and let it be again denied (till the
Discusser prove the contrary, which will never be) That hypocrites when they
appear to be hypocrites, (and yet no worse then Tares) are to be purged out by
the Government of the Church. It is true, if Hypocrites having a form of
Godliness, and yet denying the power thereof, do break forth into such
notorious scandalous Fruits of Hypocrisy, as tend to the leavening of the
whole lump, they may then justly be proceeded against by the Government of the
Church. But otherwise, if the Church proceed against an Hypocrite, as such,
merely for his hypocrisy, for want of life and power of Godliness in his
duties, they may soon root out, sometime or other, the best wheat in Gods
Field, and the sweetest Flowers in his Garden, who sometimes loose their
fatness and sweetness for a season.

Discusser.

Every Brother that walks disorderly is to be with-drawen; and separated
from.

Defender.

True: But who is a Brother that walks disorderly? Not every Hypocrite, but
only such, who either walk inordinately without a calling ((...),) or idely
and negligently in his calling. For so the context carries it, in the words
alluded to 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. But that is not the case of every Hipocrite: of whom
their are many that follow their callings, and are so far from being
burdensome to others by their idleness, that they are even choked with the
cares and businesses of this world, and yet are not behind in liberal
contributions to pious uses.

CHAP. 26. A Reply to his Chap. 26. Touching the danger of letting alone Anti
Christians.
Discusser.

If any imagine, that the Antichristians being let alone may do a world of
mischief before the worlds end, by the infection of others.

I Answer, 1. The Civil State keeps it self with a Civil sword: let Civil
offenses be punished: and yet let their worship and Consciences be tolerated.

2. The Church has a thousand bucklers and weapons, able to break down the
strongest hold (2 Cor. 10.) and so to defend it self against the gates of
earth or hell.

3. The Lord knows who are his: his chosen cannot finally be deceived

Lastly the Lord Jesus himself in this Parable gives 2. Reasons able to
content and satisfy our hearts.

First, least the good wheat be plucked up out of the field of the world. Gods
People, the good wheat are generally plucked, and persecuted, as well as the
vilest Idolaters, whether Jews or Antichristians, which the Lord Jesus seems
here to foretell.

Second reason is, when the world is ripe in sin, in the sins of
Antichristianisme, those mighty Angels of God will come with their sharp
sickles, and down with them, and buildle them up for everlasting burnings,
then shall the man of sin be consumed by the breath of the mouth of the Lord
Jesus etc.

Defender.

Reply, 1. To his first Answer: It is true, the Civil State keeps it self
with a Civil sword, if Civil offenses be punished. But when he would have
their worship and Consciences tolerated, what if their worship and Consciences
incite them to Civil offenses? How shall then the Civil State keep it self
safe with a Civil Sword.

As suppose a man that worshippeth the Beast, and makes Conscience of obeying
his commandments, shall think himself bound to subvert the Civil Prince, or
State, who is excommunicated by the Beast? If such a man must be tolerated in
his worship, and Conscience, what sword can provide for the safety of such a
Prince or State?

Reply.

2. To his second Answer, It is true, the Church wants no Armories to defend
it self, and amongst others, excommunication. But if their members be leavened
with Antichristian Idolatry and superstition, and yet must be tolerated in
their Idolatrous and superstious worship, will not a little leaven (so
tolerated) leaven the whole lump? And how then is the safety of the Church
guarded?

Reply.

3. To his 3. Answ. It is true the Lord knows who are his: and none of his
Elect shall perish. But nevertheless, Is it not a tempting of God, to presume
upon Gods Election for our salvation, and to neglect the means of our
preservation? In like case, Paul knew by revelation, that all his fellow
passengers in the ship should be saved: but yet he professed that if the
Mariners went out of the ship, they could not be saved Acts, 27.24, with 31.
So is it here, The Elect of God shall be saved: but yet if Idolaters, and
Seducers be tolerated (as Jezabell was in Thyatira) to seduce the servants of
Christ to pollution and Apostasy, the Church will stand guilty before God of
the seduction and corruption of the people of God.

Reply.

4. To his 4 Answer (the 2. Reasons alleged by him out of the Text:) To the
first: There is no fear of plucking up the wheat, by rooting out Idolaters,
and Seducers. If any of Gods People should fall into Idolatry, and Apostasy,
yea and should prove an instrument to seduce others also into the like
wickedness: yet the censures inflicted on them, would be blessed of God to
their recovery, and healing: yea and if they were cut off by the Civil sword,
yet the example and terror of their punishment, would be blessed of God to
preserve their brethren: who would all of them hear and fear, and do no more
such wickedness. Neither is the just punishment of such, any just pretense to
punish the innocent lambs of Christ.

Reply.

To the Second Reason out of the Parable, It may justly be Replied, that the
charge given to the Angels to execute vengeance at the last day upon such
Idolaters, if that were sufficient to plead for the toleration of Idolaters, It
would as well plead for the toleration of Murderers, Robbers, Adulterers,
Extortioners etc. for all these will the holy and mighty Angels of God gather
into bundles at the last day, and cast them into everlasting burnings.

The place in 2 Thessalonians. 2. does not say, that the man of sin shall then be
consumed with the breath of the mouth of the Lord Jesus: for he shall begin to
be consumed long before, by all the seven vials of the wrath of God, Revel. 16.
which have bin, and will be in pouring out, many ages, before the great
Harvest, of the end of the world. Yea I believe also, He shall be destroyed
many ages before then: as the Apostle John foretells in Chap. 20.21.22. of
the Revelation. And though it be translated, (in 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.) The Lord shall
destroy him with the brightness of his coming: yet the word is, (...); and
(...) does as well, and more firstly signify Presence, then coming. The Lord
will destroy Antichrist with the brightness of his Presence in his sacred and
Civil Ordinances, sundry ages before the brightness of his coming to
Judgment. Otherwise we should set John and Paul at variance, who spoke by one
and the same Spirit of Truth.

CHAP. 27. A Reply to his 27. Chap. Discussing a doubt, how Ministers may be
bidden to let Antichristians alone in the Civil State.
Discusser.

If it be objected, These servants, whom the Householder commands to let the
Tares alone, seem to be Ministers or Messengers of the Gospel: How shall it
belong to them to pluck up the Tares, or to let them alone, if by the Field be
meant the world?

Ans. The Apostles, and in them all that succeed them, received from the Lord a
threefold charge.

1. To let them alone, and not to pluck them up by Prayer to God for their
present temporal destruction.

2. Not to prophecy or denounce a present destruction, or extirpation of all
false Professors of the Name of Christ. It Is true many soar and fearful
plagues are powered out upon the Roman Emperors, and Roman Popes, yet not to
their utter extirpation until the Harvest.

3. Not to pluck them up, by stirring up Civil Magistrates and powers, to
punish and persecute all such persons out of their dominions, as worship not
the true God according to his revealed will in Christ Jesus.

It Is true, Elijah thus stirred up Ahab to kill all the Priests and Prophets of
Baal: but that was in the figurative state of the Land of Canaan, not to be
matched or paraled by any other State, (but the Spiritual State, or Church of
Christ) in all the world, putting the false Prophets Spiritually to death, by
the two-edged sword, and power of the Lord Jesus, as that Church of Israel did
corporally.

Defender.

These 3. Interpretations of, Let them alone, are all of them so many evasions,
(slippery evasions) sought out by the subtle wit of man, to wind out from
under the Authority of the Truth, and word of Christ,

For 1. Why should not the Ministers of Christ Pray, either to pluck them up
out of their Antichristian Idolatryes, or else to pluck them up, as the
Plantations which our Heavenly Father has not planted? He that may Pray daily
for the coming of Christ's Kingdom, He may, and does, and ought to pray for
the coming down of all opposite Kingdoms. The Saints under the Altar that
prayed against the delay of vengeance on the Roman Emperors, ( Revel. 6.10.)
may more justly pray against the delay of vengeance on the Roman Antichrists.

What though the State of the Roman Antichristians was to continue for sundry
ages before their final extirpation? Yet they were to expect vialls of Gods
indignation to root them out by a graduall extirpation in sundry of their
chief branches, and pillars, long before the extirpation of their whole
Kingdom.

And what though the Saints in old Babell were to pray for the Peace of the
City, as wherein themselves -- might find Peace? Yet the Saints that live not
in such An^ichristian Territoryes; they may safely pray for the hastening of the
redemption of their brethren out of the Antichristian bondage, and there
withal pray for the hastening of the ruin, and desolation of the Antichristian
Kingdom

Besides, Certain it is from the Word of Truth, that the Antichristian
Kingdom shall be destroyed, and rooted up by Christian Princes and States long
before the great Harvest of the end of the world, as has been shown a bove.
And either such Princes must perform this great work without Prayer (and then
it were not sanctified to God 1 Timothy 4.4, 5.) Or if it be a sacrifice
sanctified to God, they must pray for their desolation before they inflict it.
And all the seven Angels, who power out their vialls on the Antichristian
State, tending to the rooting of it out by degrees, They either pray for the
success of the vengeance of their vialls, or else they do not power them out
in faith: which were contrary to the spirit of such holy Saints, who come out
of the Temple opened in Heaven, and are clothed with pure and white linen,
and have their breasts girded with golden girdles, Rev. 15.6.

2. If John the Apostle have Prophesied and denounced the destruction and
extirpation of Antichristian Idolaters, and their whole State, why may not a
Minister and Messenger of Christ (according to the measure of light received)
open those Prophecyes, and apply them with severe threatenings, against thme and
their State?

Yea, but they may not apply, or denounce them to their present destruction or
extirpation.

Yes to the present destruction of some or other Antichristian Idolaters in
every age, though the State may continue (wasting) till the time appointed. It
might as truly be said, the Ministers of Christ are forbidden to denounce
present or speedy destruction to any murderers, whoremongers, Tyrants,
extortioners, because though some of them, may fall under many sore and
fearful plagues: yet there will never want a company of such wicked doers,
till the Great Harvest, the end of the world.

Besides what if a messenger of Christ should not denounce present destruction,
yet he cannot be said to let them alone, who is hewing at them to bring them to
destruction many years before. It is not every stroke with an Axe that
felleth an Oak: it may be not an hundred, not a thousand strokes; yet no
stroke is lost that makes way for the felling of it at the last. Neither can
he be said to let the Tree alone, that strikes and heweth at it every day. So
he that heweth at the Antichristian State every day by Prayer, and Preaching.
He does not let it alone, though it may stand many a year after. It will fall
the sooner, and with more -- facility for every stroke.

3. Nor can it be the meaning of Christ, in commanding his Ministers to let the
Tares alone, to forbid them to stir up Princes and States, to the rooting out
of Antichristian Idolaters, and all such false worshippers, as destroy the
Truth and Religion of the Lord Jesus. For amongst all the Angels, that powered
out their vials upon the Antichristian State, it is not credible, that none of
them should be Messengers of the Gospel. And when the ten Kings shall burn
the City of Rome, and leave it desolate and naked, It is not credible that they
will do it without some excitement from the Angels, no more then the Angels
powered out their vialls, till they were stirred up by a great voice out of the
Temple, Revelations, 16.1.

It is an evasion as groundless as the former, that Elijahs stirring up of
Ahab to kill all the Priests and Prophets of Baal, was figurative.

For all Figures in the old Testament have their Accomplishment ^n the New. Now
evident it is, Ahab (an Apostate Idolater) was no Type of Christ: nor was
Israel (after their Apostasy) a Type of the true Church of Christ: A Tabernacle
it was, but not a Tabernacle of Christ: Aholah but not Aholibah. To make this
act in Israel a Type of Christ's act in Christian State, or Church, is to make
darkness a type of light. Ceremonial Laws were generally Typical: not so
Moses his Judicialls, especially those which had in them moral equity.

It is Moral equity, That Blasphemers, and Apostate Idolaters, seducing others
to Idolatry, should be put to death, Levit. 24.16. Deuteronomy. 13.5. Ahab forfited
his own life because he did not put Benhadad to death for his blasphemy. 1
Kings, 20.23, 28. and ver. 42. yet Benhadad was no Israelite, nor was his
blasphemy bleched out in the Land of Israel: but the external equity of that
Judicial Law of Moses was of moral force, and binds all Princes to express
that zeal, and indignation, both against blasphemy, in such as fall under
their just power, which Ahab neglected; and against seduction to Idolatry,
which Ahab executed, or else Elijah, or some others, by his consent.

But before I leave this dispute, touching the meaning of those words, Let them
alone, let me add another Interpretation, which I see does rather more satisfy
others, and it may well stand. Let them alone, is not a word of precept by way
of Ordinance: But a word of permission by way of Providence. God in his
Providence will permit some or other Tares ever to be found in his Church to
the last Judgment. Which yet he would not have his servants offended at: For
them he will pluck up by his Angels at the last Harvest.

CHAP. 28. A Reply to his 28th Chapter: Which is a Recaptulation of what
Points the Discusser supposes, He has proved in opening this Parable.
Defender.

The Discusser in this Chapter, is only a Rehearser of what he conceives
himself to have evidently demonstrated to the Conscience, from Chap.
eighteen, to this Chapter twentieight: Five Points Negatively: and Five Points
Affirmatively. But because what he rehearses has been reversed in the Reply
to those several Chapters, I will not Actum Agere, nor Dictum dicere.

CHAP. 29. A Reply to his twentininth Chapter, Discussing the Text in Matthew.
15.14.
Letter.

The second Scripture brought against such Persecution for Cause of Conscience,
is Matthew 15.14. where the Disciples being troubled at the Pharisees carriage
toward the Lord Jesus, and his Doctrine, and relating how they were offended
at him, The Lord Jesus commands his Disciples to Let them alone, and gives
this Reason, that the blind lead the blind, and both should fall into the
ditch.

Answ. of the Letter.

Christ speaks not there to public Officers, whether in Church or
Commonwealth, but to his private Disciples concerning the Pharisees, over whom
they had no power.

And the command he gives to Let them alone is spoken in regard of troubling
themselves, or regarding the offense which they took at the wholesome Doctrine
of the Gospel. As who should say, Though they be offended at this wholesome
saying of mine, yet do not you fear their fear, nor be troubled at their
offense, which they take at my Doctrine, not out of sound Judgment, but out of
blindness. But this makes nothing to the cause in hand.

Discusser.

To pass by this Assertion of the privacy of the Apostles, in that the Lord
Jesus, commanded to Let them alone, that is, not only to be offended
themselves, but not to meddle with them, It appears it was no Ordinance of
God, nor of Christ, for his Disciples to have gone further, and have complained
to, and excited, the Civil Magistrate to his duty. Which if it had been an
Ordinance of God, and Christ, either for the vindicating of Christ's Doctrine,
or the recovering of the Pharisees, or the preserving of others from infection,
the Lord Jesus would never have commanded them to omit that, which should have
tended to these holy ends.

Defender.

Reply 1. To pass by the Assertion of the Privacy of the Apostles, It is not
an Act of courtesy, and loathnesse to strive, but out of defect of just
pretense to make any colorable exception against it. For though the Apostles
were called to a public Ministry, Math. 10. yet it seems, not as then to a
constant office, but to a transient Administration pro illa vice, for that
time. Their constant calling required to attend continually upon Christ's
Ministry, to prepare and ripen them for the public constant office which they
were to be called to, after Christ's Resurrection, Acts 1.21, 22.

Besides in that transient Administration they were not sent to the Scribes and
Pharisees, (who were no bitter then Wolves and Foxes,) but to the lost sheep of
the House of Israel, Matthew. 10.6. And therefore the Apostles not being sent to
the Scribes and Pharisees, they had no power over them, but stood as private men
to them.

Reply 2. And as they had no calling, nor power to correct or censure them
themselves: so neither had they a calling to excite the civil Magistrate
against them. For first it was no just cause for the civil Magistrate to
punish the Pharisees, for that they took unjust offense against Christ's
wholesome doctrine.

For neither was the doctrine it self a fundamental truth: nor was their
offense against it, a fundamental error, though it was dangerous. Besides the
civil Magistrates had no Law established about doctrines, or offenses of that
nature. And therefore they could take no judicial cognizance of any complaint
presented to them about the same.

Moreover our Savior who sent forth his Apostles to preach to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel, gave them a charge of caution to beware how they meddled
with Scribes and Pharisees, Behold, (says he) I send you forth as sheep among
wolves: Be ye therefore wise as serpents, and innocent as doves, Beware of men,
etc. Mat. 10.16, 17.

The Apostles therefore having received this caution could not meddle with the
Scribes and Pharisees, but trespass against this rule of serpentine prudence:
as much as for a flock of lambs to complain to a kennell of wolves, of the
wolves outrage. Yea, Christ himself was sparing to reprove them himself
(though called to a public Ministry,) till the last year of his Ministry,
when his hour was coming of departure out of the world; as knowing, they
would not be able to bear it, and their exasperation might have been some
hinderance to the free passage of his Ministry, before his hour was come.

CHAP. 30. A Reply to his Chap. 30.
Discusser.

IF it be said, neither the Roman Caesar, nor Herod, nor Pilate, knew ought of
the true God, or of Christ: and it had been in vain to have made complaint to
them, who were not fit, and competent, but ignorant, and opposite Judges.

Answ. 1. This removes the stumbling block of Paul's appeal to Caesar: which
since he could not do in common sense, as to a competent Judge in such cases,
etc. It must needs follow, his appeal was merely in respect of his civil
wrongs, etc.

Answ. 2. If it had been an Ordinance of God: that all civil Magistrates were
bound to judge in causes spiritual, and Christian, (as to suppress Heresies,
to defend the Faith of Jesus:) although that Caesar, Herod, and Pontius Pilate,
were ignorant, wicked and opposite Judges: yet Christ and his Disciples should
have gone as far as lay in their power for redressing of evil, and left it
in the Magistrates hands.

Answ. 3. If it had been the holy will of God to have established the Doctrine
and Kingdom of his Son this way, he would have furnished Kingdoms and
Commonwealths with many good and gracious Magistrates, to have fitted them for
it.

Defender.

Reply 1. to Ans. 1. Paul's appeal to Caesar, was about the wrongs done unto
the Jews, Acts 25.10. The wrongs to them were not only civil, but
Church-offences, which Paul denied: Neither against the Law of the Jews (says
he) nor against the Temple, nor against Caesar, have I offended any thing at
all, ver. 8. Festus demanded if he would go up to Jerusalem, there to be
judged of these things? ver. 9. These things were matters of Religion, as well
as civil offenses. To offend against the Law of the Jews, and against the
Temple, were offenses against Religion: to offend against Caesar was a civil
offense. To be judged of these things, Paul declineth the Court at Jerusalem,
(as being unjustly prejudiced against him:) But professing his own innocence,
and subjection to just judgment, He appealeth to Caesar's judgment seat, ver.
10, 11. wherein three or four things do evidently appear.

1. That a man may be such an offender in matters of Religion (against the Law
of God, against the Church, as well as in civil matters against Caesar) as to
be worthy of death.

This Paul presupposes, ver. 8, 9, 10.

2. That Paul, or any other such like servant of Christ, If he should commit
any such offense, he would not refuse judgment unto death, ver. 11.

3. That for the Judgment of his person in these causes, (whether
ecclesiastical or civil,) It is lawful in some cases to appeal, to a
civil, though a Pagan Magistrate. In some cases I say, as where both these
concur, to wit. 1. That Church Officers, are maliciously prejudiced against a
man, and inferior civil Courts incline to them. 2. That a man be called in
question amongst them in capital causes, which concern his life.

But a fourth thing which appears from Paul's appeal is this, That the civil
Magistrate, whether Christian, or Pagan, may and ought to be so well
acquainted, not only with civil causes, but also with causes of Religion,
especially such as concern life, as to be able to judge, though not of all
questions, yet of capital offenses, against Religion, as well as against the
civil State.

Reply 2. to Ans. 2. The Marginall Note, seems to imply a contradiction to it
self, for thus it speaks, Civil Magistrates were never appointed by God,
Defenders of the Faith of Jesus. And again, Every one is bound to put forth
himself to his utmost power in Gods Business: Surely, if every one be bound
to put forth himself to his utmost power in Gods Business, then civil
Magistrates are bound to put forth their civil power, in defending the Faith
of Jesus.

Neither will it henceforth follow, That either Christ, or his Disciples were
bound to complain to Caesar, or to Herod, or to Pontius Pilate, against the
Heresies of the Pharisees. For though all Magistrates, even Pagans ought to
inform themselves in the matters of Faith and of Christian Religion, (that
they may observe and preserve it) and it will be a destructive sin to them
and their States, if they do neglect it, ( Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12.) Yet it may be
safer for a Christian man being oppressed in inferior Courts of heretical
malignant Judges to appeal from them unto Pagan Princes in his own just
defense, then to make complaint to malignant heretical Judges, or to Pagan
Princes, against heresies, or heretical false Teacliers. Christ sent out his
Disciples, as sheep amongst wolves: and therefore instructed them, to be wise
as serpents, and innocent as doves, Matthew. 10.16. Now it is no part of wisdom
for a sheep of Christ to complain to a kennell of wolves, That amongst the
wolves, there be some of their company do make havocke of the sheep, leading
them aside into damnable heresies. If a poor sheep should attempt such a
thing, would not the whole kennell of wolves arise up against him, as a
troubler of their State, that when he enjoys peace himself, (they trouble
not him,) yet he will needs be so busy as to trouble them?

And therefore we deny, that it had tended to the defense of the Faith of
Jesus, or to the suppressing Herisies, for Christ and his Disciples to have
complained to Herod, Pilate, Caesar, of the heresies of the Pharisees. It had
rather tended to the disturbance and suppression of the Faith of Jesus, by
provoking the malice of the Pharisees, and by disquieting civil Thrones with
fears and jealousies of a new Kingdom springing up amongst them. Besid^^, it
had been altogether preposterous, to make use of the civil power, for the
first publishing of the Gospel of peace. It was necessary the Gospel should
first be known, and received, and believed, and professed, before any could be
complained of, for Apostasy from it into Heresy, or seducement of others into
such wickedness.

Reply 3. to Ans. 3. We do not say, It is the holy Will and Purpose of God, to
establish the Doctrine and Kingdom of his Son (our Lord Jesus) only this
way, to wit, by the help of civil Authority. For it is his Will also, to
magnify his Power, in establishing the same, by a contrary way, even by the
sufferings (patient sufferings) of his Saints, and by the bloody swords of
persecuting Magistrates, Revel. 12.11. So that Christ need not to send good and
gracious Magistrates, as if for want of them, the Christian Faith and Religion
would fall to the ground: for it has spread and flourished under fiery and
cruel persecution. But yet this hinders not, but that it is the duty of
Magistrates to know the Son, and to kiss him, to acknowledge his Kingdom,
and submit their Thrones and Crowns to it, to love his truth, and to be
nursing Fathers to his Church, Isai. 49.23. which how they can do, and yet not
be Defenders of the Faith of Jesus, I do not understand.

CHAP. 31. A Reply to his thirteenth Chapter, discussing by the way, the Text
in Isai. 49.23.
Discusser.

1. THat place of Isaiah 49.23. will appear to be far from proving such
Kings and Queens Judges of Ecclesiastical causes. And if not Judges, they may
not punish.

2. In spiritual things, themselves are subject to the Church, shall lick the
dust of the Churches feet, as is there expressed. How then shall those Kings and
Queens be Supreme Governors of the Church?

3. Gods Israel of old being earnest for a King, an Arm of flesh, God gave
them Saul in his anger, and took him away in his wrath. So God will take away
such Princes in his wrath; that so as David succeeded Saul, so Christ Jesus in
his spiritual Power may for ever be advanced.

Defender.

Reply 1. We do not allege that place in Isaiah, to prove Kings and Queens
to be Judges of Ecclesiastical causes: but to be providers for the Churches
well-being, and protectours of it. For so much the very phrase of nursing
Fathers, and Mothers, does necessarily import. But if they be Protectours of
the Church, and providers of the well-being of it, then are they also Defenders
of the faith of it: so far as their defense (in a way of God) is dispensable.
So Magistrates are also called Shepherds of the people (as well as Ministers)
Ezec. 34. Now it is a part of a Shepherds protection of his sheep, to drive
away wolves from sheepe-folds. And it is the like part of good Magistrates to
drive away false Prophets from the Churches, whom our Savior calls ravening
wolves, Matthew. 7.15.

But (says he) Magistrates are not Judges of Ecclesiastical causes: and if
not Judges, they may not punish.

Answ. There is a threefold Judgment. 1. A Judgment of private spiritual
Discretion: and so a spiritual man judges all things, 1 Cor. 2.15. and so may
a Magistrate judge also, if he be a spiritual man.

2. There is Judicium Propheticum, A prophetical Judgment, whereby the
Prophets having received a greater gift of spiritual discerning of the things
of God, and an office to declare the same, do judge of Doctrins with
Authority. Let the Prophets judge, 2 Cor. 14.29.32. And this the Ministerial
Judgment of the Church: but here the Magistrates Judgment does not interpose,
as a Magistrate, but as a Brother.

3. There is Judicium Politicum, the Judgment of civil power, whereby a
Magistrate being called of God to provide, that his people may lead a peaceable
life in godliness and honesty, he therefore is called to discern, not only
what is honesty or righteousness before men, but what is godliness also before
the Lord, and accordingly judges of godly and ungodly doctrines and practices,
so far as tends to the upholding of public Peace. For it is evident in the
Scriptures of the New Testament, that when Magistrates were so blindly devout,
and superstitious, as to give their Kingdoms unto the Beast, (as Rev. 17.12,
13.) and so to tolerate the public worship of Images, and other Idols, they
thereby overthrew the civil Peace of their Commonwealth. For to punish their
ungodliness, it was, that God opened a way for the Turks to break out and
destroy the 3d part of Christendom, Rev. 9.14. to 21.

Reply 2. Both these may well stand together, that Magistrates may be subject
to the Church, and lick the dust of her feet, and yet be supreme Governors
of the Church also. In spiritual matters, and in the right administration of
them, the Magistrates are subject to the Church. But in civil matters, and in
corrupt administration of Church-Affaires, (so far corrupt, as tends to the
disturbance of civil Peace, there the Magistrates are supreme Governors even
over Churches also, in their own Dominions.

Reply 3. It was no sin in Israel of old to ask a King, but to ask him
before the time appointed, and to ask him in a tumultuous manner, (with
rejection of Samuel, and to ask him for carnal and profane ends, that they
might be like to all other Nations, whom God did not approve they should affect
to be like unto. Otherwise had they tarried Gods time, God had appointed to
give them a King out of the Tribe of Judah, Genesis 49.10. It is true, God took
away Saul in his wrath, but not for exercising civil Power against spiritual
wickedness; for he did justly exercise it against Witches: but for other
well-knowne notorious wickedness. And as for David, we do not read, that he
did exercise any spiritual Power, as a King, but as a Prophet.

CHAP. 32. A Reply to his Chap. 32.
Discusser.

THough for the present, the punishment of corrupt Teachers (as the Scribes and
Pharisees were) be deferred: yet their waits for them an higher pitch of
punishment, then any Corporal can reach unto. As 1. Stark Blindness, etc. 2.
Incurable Blindness, etc. 3. Their end is the Ditch, etc. 4. The Leaders of
others into the ditch shall find their own ruin horrible, and the ruin of
their followers eternally galling and tormenting.


Defender.

The Discusser himself knows, and accordingly expresses himself in his
next words, That it is the like case of all sinners, and of all malefactors:
their punishment in hell will be more horrible and full of torment, then can be
inflicted in this world. And yet the State is often bound to punish them, and
in many cases by death it self.

Discusser.

Be it so: But what is this to a blind Pharisee, resisting the Doctrine of
Christ? who hapily may be as good a Subject, and as peaceable, and profitable
to the civil State as any, etc.

Defender.

But what is this to the question in hand? we do not hold it lawful for a
Christian Magistrate, to compel by civil sword either Pharisee, or any Jew,
or Pagan, to profess the Religion, or Doctrine of the Lord Jesus, much less
do we think it meet, for a private Christian to provoke either Jewish or
Pagan Magistrates to compel Pharisees to submit to the Doctrine or Religion of
Christ Jesus. And therefore all these Chapters from 29. to 35. (seven Chapters
in all) tending to prove that Christ's Disciples were to let the Pharisees alone
in this way, are but so many empty flourishes, beating the air, and playing
with a shadow. And yet the rest of the Chapters which remain must not pass
without some Advertisement of such passages in them, as do corrupt the truth
of Christ. How the Pharisees can be as good subjects, and as peaceable, and
profitable to the civil State as any, who yet destroyed the civil State, by
destroying Christ; let any but a blind conscience judge.

CHAP. 33.
Discusser.

IT is truth, The mischief of a blind Pharisees blind guidance, is greater then
if he acted treasons, murders, etc. And the loss of one soul by his
seduction, is a greater mischief, then if he blew up Parliaments, or cut the
throats of Kings and Emperors, etc.

And therefore a firm justice, that requires an eye for an eye, a tooth for a
tooth, life for life, calls also soul for soul. But that no civil sword
can inflict, but the Lord Jesus only.

Defender.

Reply 1. But he that corrupts a soul with a corrupt religion, or worship,
lays a spreading leaven, which corrupts the State. The Idolatry began in
the House of Micah, corrupted Laish, Judges chap. 17. and chap. 18. And that
was the beginning of sin to the Daughter of Zion, Micah 1.13. And that
Apostasy was the captivity of the Land. As in the New Testament, the worship of
Images was the advancement of the Turks, and the ruin of Christian States,
Rev. 9.14. to 21. When therefore the corruption, or destruction of souls, is a
destruction also of lives, liberties, estates of men, lex talionis calls for,
not only soul for soul, but life for life.

Reply 2. False Prophets in the Old Testament did but corrupt the souls of
some, and it may be did not corrupt them neither, but attempted it only. And
yet amongst Gods people, where lex talionis was much attended, the Law was,
Thine eye shall not spare him, Deuteronomy. 13. The reason of which execution is not
fetched from any typical holiness of the Land: but from the dangerous
wickedness of the attempt, to thrust away a soul from God, which is a greater
injury, then to deprive a man of bodily life.

Discusser.

But dead men cannot die, nor be infected. Natural men, the civil State, the
world, are dead in sin, etc.

Defender.

Reply 1. Dead men may be made worse, by corrupt Teachers, twofold more the
children of hell then before, Matthew. 23.15. And therefore such as so corrupt
them, are worthy in a way of due proceeding of a twofold death.

Reply 2. Such as profess the truth of the Doctrine and Worship of Christ,
they live a kind of spiritual life, though not such as accompanies salvation.
Else how are false Teachers, and such as are led by them, said to be twice
dead, plucked up by the roots? Jude ver. 12. And therefore it is not true, that
such as being in a natural state, are dead in sin, annot be infected, nor
die again.

Discusser.

As in the common infection of the plague, so in the infection of heresy, none
can be struck deadly, but whom God has thereunto ordained, etc.

Defender.

Reply 1. No more can any man be murdered, but whom God has ordained
thereunto. But it is a profane sacrilege to excuse, or alleviate the
punishment of sin by Gods eternal predestination. Was the sin of Herod, or
the Jews, or of Pontius Pilate any whit the less, because they did nothing
against Christ, but what the hand of God and his Counsel had fore-determined
to be done? Acts 4.29. Sure it is, Christ aggravateth the sin of Judas, and
of the Highpriests, and Elders of the Jews by this Argument, that Pilate
could do nothing against him, but as it was given him from above. Therefore
(says he) he that delivered me to thee, has the greater sin, John 19.11.

Reply 2. The Discusser himself acknowledges, That though in a common plague
or infection, none are smitten, or die, but such as are ordained thereunto: yet
it is not only every man's duty, but the common duty of the Magistrates to
prevent infection, and to preserve the common health of the place, by removing
infectious persons into solitary tabernacles.

Discusser.

True: but the means, God has appointed for preservation from spiritual
infection and perdition, are spiritual, such as God directs to Rev. 2. Tit.
3.10, 11. Romans 16.17. But the Lord Jesus never appointed the civil sword for
either Antidote, or Remedy, as an addition to those Spirituals. The Remedy
which God preseribed to the Angel of the Church of Pergamus, It were a
Babylonish confusion to interpret it, as sent to the Governor of the City of
Pergamus.

Defender.

Subordinata, and so Coordinata non pugnant. It is true, Christ has appointed
spiritual means for the avoiding and preventing the infection of heresies; so
has he also for the preventing and avoiding all offenses in Church Members.
But that hinders not the lawful and necessary use of a civil sword for the
punishment of some such offenses, as are subject to Church-censure. If indeed
the Ordinances of Christ in the Church do prevail to the avoiding and healing
of heresies, there is no need of the civil sword for that end. But it often
falls out otherwise: as

1. That when the Church has cast out an Heretic, yet he still remains
obstinate, and proceeds to seduce, and destroy the faith of some, (it may be
of many:) as did Hymeneus and Philetus, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. If the Magistrates
sword do here rust in the scabberd, such leaven may leaven the whole Mass of
a City, or Country; As by this means Arrianisme leavened the world by the
indulgence of Constantius; Ingemuit Orbis Christianus, and miratus est factum
se esse Arrianum.

2. It may be the Heretic was never any member of the Church, and then though
the Church may lay in some Antidotes, and Purges, to preserve, or recover their
Members: yet how shall they succor such as are not subject to their censures?
Or how shall they prevent the spreading of this noisome leprofie in private
Conventicles?

But the Lord Jesus never appointed the civil sword for an Antidote, or Remedy
in such a case.

Answ. It is evident the civil sword was appointed for a remedy in this case,
Deuteronomy. 13. And appointed it was, by that Angel of Gods presence, whom God
promised to send with his people, as being unwilling to go along with them
himself, Exodus 33.2, 3. And that Angel was Christ, whom they tempted in the
wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.9. And therefore it cannot truly be said, that the Lord
Jesus never appointed the civil sword for a remedy in such a case. For he did
expressly appoint it in the Old Testament: nor did he ever abrogate it in the
New. The reason of the Law, (which is the life of the Law) is of eternal force
and equity in all Ages. Thou shult surely kill him, because be has sought to
thrust thee away from the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 13.9, 10. This reason is of
moral, that is, of universal and perpetual equity to put to death any
Apostate seducing Idolater, or Heretic, who seeks to thrust away the souls
of Gods people, from the Lord their God. If Magistrates be the Ministers of God
in the New Testament, (as Paul calls them, Romans 13.4.) And Ministers of God
to execute vengeance on him that does evil, surely either this is no evil,
(to seek to thrust away Gods people from him) or the Magistrate bears not
the sword in vain, to execute vengeance on such an evil doer. Yea but such an
evil, is evil only to the inner man, not to the civil State

Answ. But if a man imagine evil against the Lord, it is a destructive evil
to a whole City, yea to a Pagan City: and God will visit such an evil with
such an affliction, as shall be no less then utter destruction to such a City:
It shall not rise up the second time, Nahum 1.9.11.

Discusser.

But the eivill Magistrate has his charge of the bodies and goods of the
Subject; as the Spirituall-Officers of Christ's City or Kingdom, have the
charge of their souls, and soule-safety.

Defender.

Reply 1. If it were true, That the Magistrate has charge only of the bodies
and goods of the Subject: yet that might justly excite to watchfulness against
such pollutions of Religion as tend to Apostasy. For if the Church and People
of God, fall away from God, God will visit the City and Country with public
calamity, if not captivity for the Churches sake. The Idolatry and
Image Worship of Christians, brought in the Turkish captivity upon the Cities
and Countries of Asia, and upon some of Europe also, as has been showed above.

Reply 2. It is a carnal and worldly, and indeed, an ungodly imagination, to
confine the Magistrates charge, to the bodies, and goods of the Subject, and to
exclude them from the care of their souls. Did ever God commit the charge of
the body to any Governors, to whom, he did not commit (in his way) the care of
souls also? Has God committed to Parents the charge of their childrens
bodies, and not the care of their souls? To Masters the charge of their
servants bodies, and not of their souls? to Captains the charge of their
soldiers bodies, and not of their souls? shall the Captains suffer false
worship, yea idolatry, publicly professed and practiced in the camp, and yet
look to prosper in the Battle? The Magistrates to whom God has committed the
charge of bodies, and outward man of the Subject, are they not also to take
care to procure faithful Teachers to be sent amongst them? Jehosaphat took
faithful care for the souls of his people in this kind, 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8, 9.
Neither did he this as a Type of Christ, but as a Servant of Christ. Those
things are said to be done as Types of Christ, which being ceremonial duties,
were afterward done by Christ in his own Person, and so were in him
accomplished, and abolished: And it would be sacrilege to perform the same
after him. But let the conscience of any sincere Christian judge, whether it
would be sacrilege in a godly Magistrate, to procure the sending forth of
godly Preachers into all the blind corners of his country? The truth is,
Church-Governous, and civill-governours do herein stand parallel one to
another. The Chuch-Governours though to them be chiefly committed the charge
of souls, as their adaequate objects: yet in order to the good of the souls
of their people, to dehort from idleness, negligence, from intemperancy in
meats and drinks, from oppression, and deceit, and therein provide both for
the health of their bodies, and the safety of their estates. So
civill-governours though to them be chiefly committed the bodies and goods of
the people (as their adaequate object:) yet in order to this, they may and
ought to procure spiritual helps to their souls, and to prevent such
spiritual evils, as that the prosperity of Religion amongst them might
advance the prosperity of the civil State.

Reply 3. I cannot but with grief observe the sinful guile of the Discusser:
who whilst he takes off all charges of souls from the civil Magistrates,
and lays it upon Church Governors, he takes it off from Church Governors
too, that so the whole charge of precious souls (for whom Christ dyed) might
utterly fall to the ground. For how shall Church Governors take the charge of
souls upon them, if there be no Church Governors? And how shall there be
Church Governors, where there be no Churches? If Churches be all dissipated
and rooted out from the face of the Earth by the Apostasy of Antichrist, and
none to be gathered again, till new Apostles or Evangelists be sent abroad for
such a work, then there be now neither Churches, nor Church Governors, nor
Church Censures, either to censure Heretics, or to fetch in those stray souls
whom they have scattered. And then rejoice ye Heretics, and all ye
Idolaters, and Seducers, and go on, and make havoc of the sheep of Christ
like ravenous Wolves: you may now do it (impune) without fear or danger; It
is neither for Civil Governors, nor Church Governors to meddle with you; Not
for Civil Governors, for they are not to judge nor punish in matters of
Religion: Nor for Church Governors, for there are neither Churches, nor
Church Governors extant now upon the face of the Earth. But woe be to you
poor sheep and Lambs of Christ Jesus: you are now indeed truly become the
sheep of the slaughter, your Possessours may slay you, and plead themselves not
guilty, ( Zach. 11.4, 5.) not guilty before the Civil Bar: for their crime
is exempted from civil cognizance: not guilty before the Churches Tribunal:
for there be no Churches to call them to account.

CHAP. 35. A Reply to his 35. Chap.
Discusser.

IF it were the Magistrates duty or office, to punish Heretics, then is he
both a Temporal and Ecclesiastical Officer.

Defender.

It follows not: unless the Magistrate were to punish them with
Ecclesiastical censures, which he neither does, nor may do. The punishments
which he inflicteth on them, are merely Civil, whether imprisonment,
banishment, or death.

Discusser.

That Doctrine and distinction, that a Magistrate may punish an Heretic
civilly, will not here avayle. For what is Babell, if this be not? confusedly
to punish Corporal, or Civil offenses, with spiritual, or Church Censures
(the offender not being a member of it:) or to punish soul or spiritual
offenses, with Corporal or Temporal weapons proper to Delinquents against the
Civil State.

Defender.

It is no Babell, or Babilonish confusion to punish corporal, or civil
offenses, with Spiritual or Church Censures. What if a Brother be a striker,
an oppressor, a murderer, a fornicator, or Adulterer? all these are corporal,
and civil offenses. But shall not therefore the Church punish these with
spiritual, and Church Censures? Then the Apostle was mistaken, who directs
so to do, 1 Cor 5.11. why the Discusser puts in that parenthesis (the
offender not being a member of it:) I cannot tell: sure I am, it is nothing to
the purpose. For as the Church cannot punish any offender, unless he be a
member of the Church, so neither may the Civil Magistrate punish an Heretic
or other spiritual offender, unless he be a member of his Commonwealth.

And if it be no confusion to punish civil offenses with Church Censures, it
is no confusion to punish spiritual offenses with civil censures. And the
reason of both these is the same, there be sundry civil offenses, which are
also transgressions of the Rule of the word, and so offenses to the Consciences
of the Church, and so justly subject to Church-censure. There be also offenses
to the Order and peace of the Church, which tend likewise to provoke wrath
against a Civil State. As the King of Persia said, Whatsoever is commanded by
the God of Heaven for the House of God, let it bediligently done: for why
should there bewrath against the King and his Sons? Ezra 7.3. If offenses to
the Church do provoke wrath against the Civil State, it is no confusion in
the Civil State to punish such.

Discusser.

Woe were it with the Civil Magistrate, if together with the common care and
charge of the Commonwealth, the blood of every soul that perishes, should
cry against him, unless he should say with Paul, Acts 20. I am clear from the
blood of all men, etc.

Defender.

It is not the blood of every soul that perishes, that can cry against a
Magistrate, unless the soul perish by some such neglect of duty in the
Magistrate, which God requires of him for the good of the souls of his
people. Of which Duties there be two sorts.

1. To seek out and procure means of Grace for them so far as they are
capable in Gods way.

2. To remove means of their corruption and pollution, such as Idols openly
erected, and Idolatrous false Teachers perverting the people. If in both these,
the Magistrate be faithful, though thousands of souls may perish under his
Government, yet he is innocent from the blood of them all, and may so profess
with Paul.

Discusser.

I acknowledge the Magistrate ought to cherish (as a Foster Father) the Lord
Jesus in his Truth, in his Saints, to cleave unto them himself, to countenance
them unto the Death, yea also to break the Teeth of the Lions, who offer
civil violence and injury unto them. But to see all his Subjects, Christians,
to keep such a Church, or Christians in the purity of worship, and see them do
their duty, this belongs to the head of the body the Lord Jesus, and such
spiritual Officers, as he has to this purpose deputed.

Reply. 1. What is said of Spiritual Officers deputed by Christ to see the
Church to do her Duty, is but a pretense, when he acknowledges no Church, nor
spiritual Officers in the Church deputed by Christ, extant upon the face of
the Earth.

Reply. 2. What Reason can the Discusser give why the Magistrate should break
the teeth of the Lions, who offer civil violence to the Church and Saints, and
not break the teeth of the ravenous wolves (false Prophets) who offer violence
to their souls? Doubtless those ravenous wolves, that make havoc of their
souls, are far more mischievous then the Lions be, that offer violence to
their bodies. The Roman pagan Emperors (who like Lions persecuted the Church,
2 Timothy 4.17.) they by persecution increased it, though against their wills. But
the Roman Popish Bishops, that like ravenous wolves devoured their souls,
left the Church of Christ scarce visible, (though visible) and them, a very
small remnant, though a remnant. It may be matter of just wonderment, why
Antichrist should find more favors in the Discussers eyes, then an ignorant
Pagan, when the one hates Christ more bitterly, and makes far more waste of
the Church, and Saints of Christ, then does the other. Is it because his own
Spirit does more symbolize with Antichrist then with Caesar? Rather in secret
supplanting, then in open persecuting the Churches and Ordinances of Christ?

Beply. 3. We do not say that it is a part of the Magistrates duty, to see all
his Subjects to become Christians, if they were Pagans before: though we say,
it is his Duty to neglect no good means to help them onward to the knowledge
and faith of Christ Jesus. But why does the Discusser shake this duty out of
the Magistrates, to see that the Church, and the Christians under his
Government, should walk in purity of worship, at least not so far to
degenerate and apostate as to provoke Christ to depart from them? Can he hope
that such Christians will be faithful and loyal to their Prince, whom he
sees to grow false and disloyal to their God? Surely the Land of Ismael
though it had some peculiar and and typical Holiness belonging to it, yet no
other then what did prefigure the Holiness of the Church, which is as holy to
Christ, and ought to be as holy to us, as the Land of Israel was to them. If
therefore it was the duty of Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, and Isaiah, to reduce the
people of Israel from their backslidings, because they were an holy people, (2 Chronicles. 19.4.) Surely the like Duty lies upon all Godly Christian Princes, to
reduce their backsliding Churches to their Primitive Purity.

Let no man say, that as the Holy Land of Israel, was a Type of Holy Church: So
these Princes were Types of the Lord Jesus, to whom alone it belongs to see
Churches and Christians to do their duty in Purity of worship.

For though David and Solomon were Types of Christ, (and so the Scripture
holds them forth:) yet the Scripture gives no hint, that the other Kings
either of Israel, or Judah were Types. Not of Israel, for they were all
Apostates: nor of Judah, for if the Kings of Judah (as Kings of Judah, to wit,
in respect of their Regal Estate over the Church) if they were all of them
Types of Christ, then Apostates from Christ, were Types of Christ. For many of
the Kings of Judah were Apostates from Christ as well as the Kings of Israel.

Yea, if they were all Types of Christ, then Christ is the Antitype, and by
accomplishing such types, has abolished them all: so that now it were
sacrilegious and Antichristian usurpation for any Kings to be set over
Christians, or the people of God. For the Body being come, Types and shadows
vanish.

But what if they were all types of Christ in respect of their Kingly office
over the Church alone? were they therefore types of Christ in all the Kingly
Offices which they performed? Then it was typical in Solomon to put Joab a
Murderer to death, and Adonijab a Traitor. And then it will be unlawful for
Christian Princes to put Murderers or Traitors to death.

Or if you say these were civil crimes: But Idolatry and Heresy, which Asa,
Joash, and Josiah punished with death, were spiritual crimes, and therefore
the Kings of Judah in punishing these latter, were types of Christ, not so in
the former: this is spoken gratis. For whatsoever the Kings of Judah did, as
types of Christ, Christ, being the Antitype, might more full, and lively
perform it in his own person. But certain it is, he put no man to death in
his own person, all the days of his flesh. Why therefore may it not rather be
said, that whatsoever the Kings of Judah lawfully did, whether against the
Transgressors of the first or second Table, they did it not as types of
Christ, but as servants of Christ, betrusted with the care of the welfare both
of Church and Commonwealth, and therefore as patterns and examples to
Christian Magistrates?

And indeed many of the Kings of Israel, as they were Kings over a
Commonwealth, which was also a Church, so they were Kings also over sundry
Pagan Nations round about them, as were David and Solomon, Asa and Jehosaphat,
Joash and Josiah. And though none of them compelled the Pagan Nations, to
become Proselites to the Church of Israel (no more then Christian Kings may
compel Pagans to become Christians, or men without to become Church Members)
yet Ahab, though King over an Apostate Church, having gotten Pagan Benhadad by
conquest under his Dominion, because he put him not to death for his blasphemy,
forfeited his own life for his, 1 Kings 20.23. with 42.

CHAP. 36 A Reply to his Chapter 36. Discussing the Text in Luke 9.54, 55.
Discusser.

THe next Scripture brought by the Letter against such Persecution, is Luke,
9.54, 55. where the Lord Jesus reproved his Disciples, who would have fire come
down from Heaven, to have devoured those Samaritans, that would not receive
him, in these words, You know not of what spirit you are, the Son of man is
not come to destroy men's lives but to save them.

With this Scripture Mr. Cotton joyneth the next, and answers both in one,
which is this, 2 Timothy 2.24. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but must
be gentle toward all men, proving if at any time, God will give them
Repentance, etc. unto both these Scriptures, he gives this Answer.

Both these are directions to Ministers of the Gospel, how to deal, (not with
obstinate offenders in the Church, but) either with men without, as the
Samaritans were, and many unconverted Christians in Creete, whom Titus (as an
Evangelist) was to seek to convert.

Or at best, with some Jews or Gentiles in the Church, who though carnal, yet
were not convinced of the Errors of their way. And it is true, it became not
the Spirit of the Gospel, to convert Aliens to the Faith, (Such as the
Samaritans were) by Fire and Brimstone, nor to deal harshly in public
Ministry, or private conference, with all such severall-minded men, as either
had not yet entered into Church Fellowship, or if they had, did hitherto sin
of Ignorance, not against Conscience. But neither of both these Texts, do
hinder a Minister of the Gospel to proceed in a Church way against
Church Members, when they become scandalous, either in life, or Doctrine: much
less do they speak at all to the Civil Magistrate.

Defender.

The matter of this Answer, it is likely enough was given by me: for it suiteth
with mine own apprehensions, both then and now. But some expressions in laying
it down, I do not own, nor can I find any Copy under my own handwriting,
that might testify, how I did express my self, especially in a word or two,
wherein the Discusser observes (in chap. 38.) some haste, and light, and
sleepy attention. But if the Discusser can show the same under mine own hand,
(as it is not impossible) I shall be willing (by Gods help) both to acknowledge
it, and my haste in it.

CHAP. 37. A Reply to his Chap. 37.
Discusser.

THis perplexed and ravelled Answer, wherein so many things, and so doubtful
are wrapped up and entangled together, I shall take in pieces.

1. That the Lord Jesus in rebuking his Disciples rash and bloody zeal against
the Samaritans, did not hereby hinder the Ministers of the Gospel, to proceed
in a Church Way against scandalous offenders, is not here questioned.

Defender.

Well then, this Point is none of those many doubtful things here wrapped:
much less is it perplexed, or ravelled, but a plain, and confessed Truth. But
whether the Author of that Letter sent to me, did take it for a certain and
unquestioned Truth, I did not know: nor do I yet know, unless the Discusser
speak his mind herein, as well as his own. Sure I am, Prosecution in a
Churchway, (if the cause be not just) is as odious and dreadful a Persecution,
as Prosecution in a Court of civil Justice, as has been proved above.

Discusser.

Secondly, when the Answerer says, much less does this Text speak at all to
the civil Magistrate: here I observe, that he implies, that beside the
censure of the Lord Jesus in the hands of his spiritual Governors, for any
spiritual evil, in Life or Doctrine, the civil Magistrate is also to inflict
corporal punishment.

Defender.

This observation I may truly say is ravelled out of my Answer, and that so
perplexedly, that it cannot be wound up out of my Answer without breaking the
thread, both of my words, and meaning. It is a plain and certain Truth, that
as the Disciples were not civil Magistrates, so neither does Christ speak to
them in this Reproof as to such. But it is far from me to say, that it is
lawful for civil Magistrates to inflict corporal punishment upon men
contrary minded, standing in the same state the Samaritans did. No such thought
arose in my heart, nor fell from my pen, either in my Answer to the Letter, or
in any writing of mine, that it is lawful for a Civil Magistrate (though he
had dominion over Pagans, much less if he have none) to inflict corporal
punishments upon such as are contrary minded in matters of Religion. No, these
are ravellings of a loose and ungirt disputer, not the Inferences of a serious
and solid Discusser. And therefore the Reasons which he brings in the Sequel
of this chapter, that the Magistrates should not lay violent hands upon any
(such as the Samaritanes) for not receiving of the Lord Jesus, might well have
been spared: for they fight not against me, but against a shadow of his own
fancy.

But when he makes the Fire that fell down from Heaven, Rev. 13.13. to be the
fiery Judgments and persecutions, which the second Beast persuaded the civil
Powers, to destroy the Saints withal, as if they were Gods just Judgments
from Heaven upon Heretics.

This is such an Interpretation, as ravelleth the Text, and will not stand with
the Context. For the Text speaks of it, as a great wonder, that the Beast
should make Fire to come down from Heaven upon Earth in the sight of men, ver.
13. But this was no wonder to cause civil Powers to inflict fiery Judgments
of Imprisonment, Banishment, Death upon Heretics; for Constantine had done as
much before.

And the Arrian Bishops had caused Constantius to do as much against the
Orthodox Saints. Besides in the Context, ver. 15. It is expressly there
declared as a distinct matter from the former, that he had Power to cause that
as many as would not worship the Image of the Beast, should he killed. This is
a different effect (and recorded as different) from the former of causing fire
to come down from Heaven, and that, not upon the Saints, but upon Earth.

CHAP. 38. A Reply to his Chap. 38. Discussing the place in Timothy. 2 Timothy
2.25, 26.
Discusser.

I Acknowledge, this Instruction, to be meek and patient to all men, etc. is
properly an Instruction to the Ministers of the Gospel.

Defender.

Then hitherto the Answer is not perplexed and ravelled.

Discusser.

Yet diverse Arguments will from hence be truly and fairly collected, to
manifest and evince, how far the civil Magistrate ought to be, from dealing
with the civil Sword in spiritual cases.

But first by the way, I desire to ask, what the Answerer means by his
unconverted Christian in Creete? An unconverted Christian, is as much as an
unconverted Convert, untamed tamed, unholy holy, Christians Antichristians.

How sad an evidence is this, that the soul of the Answerer, has never yet
heard the call of the Lord Jesus to come out from those unconverted Churches,
from that unconverted Antichristian-Christian world? etc.

Defender.

Reply. 1. When we come to those Arguments truly, and fairly collected out of
this place of Timothy (which is not till the next chapter) we shall, (God
willing) consider what Truth and fairness they hold forth: which if it be
found, we shall consider, whether they be of force against the Truth witnessed
by me.

In the mean time, for Answer to his demand, what I should mean, by the
unconverted Christian in Creete?

Answ. I must take it upon his credit, that I spoke at all of any unconverted
Christian in Creete. Mine own copy is not extant with me. And the Transcript,
which with much seeking, I found, has it, instead of unconverted Christians in
Creete, unconverted persons in Ephesus. As indeed Timothy was left at Ephesus
when Paul wrote to him his first Epistle, as is evident, 1 Timothy 1.3. and Titus
it was, who was left at Creete, Tit. 1.5. But whether Timothy was then at
Ephesus, when Paul wrote his second Epistle to him, is not so certain. But
wheresoever he was (as being an Evangelist, he was not limited to a certain
place) doubtless there wanted not unconverted persons, amongst whom the
Members of the Church lived.

Yea, but they were not unconverted Christians, for it is as much, as
unconverted Converts, etc.

Answ. It must lie upon the Discussers credit, whether I used at all such a
phrase or no: sure I am, I cannot hitherto (after much seeking) find mine own
hand-written copy, which might clear the mistake, both of Creet for Ephesus,
and unconverted Christians for unconverted Persons.

But let it not seem strange to him, to hear tell of unconverted Christians,
or unconverted Converts. There is no contradiction at all in the words. When
the Lord says, that Judah turned unto him, not with all her heart, but
fainedly, (Jer. 3.10.) Was she not then an unconverted Convert? converted in
show and profession, but unconverted in heart and Truth? Let him then consider
his own phrase here misapplyed, whether this be the Language of Canaan, or the
Language of Ashdod. Jeremies Language is the Language of Anathoth, not of
Ashdod.

Reply. 2. If the Discusser look at it as a true, but sad experience of my
unconverted estate, from unconverted Churches, and that the Lord Jesus never
yet called me to come out of them, because I speak (if I do so speak) of
unconverted Christians living amongst them.

I must be contented still to lie under that imputation from him. I never knew
that Church yet, nor ever read of it, in which there was not, (or at least
might not) be found, some unconverted Christians, unconverted Converts. Judas
was found in Christ's Family: Ananias and Sapphira, in the Apostolic Primitive
Church: Balaam and the Nicholaitans were found in Pergamus, and Jesabel in
Thyatira.

Besides I have not yet learned, (nor do I think, I ever shall) that the
children of beleiving Parents borne in the Church, are all of them Pagans, and
no Members of the Church: or that being Members of the Church, (and so holy)
that they are all of them truly converted. And if they be not always truly
converted, then let him not wonder, nor stumble at the phrase of unconverted
Christians.

But if the Discusser do sadly observe it, that my soul has not yet heard
the call of the Lord Jesus to come out of unconverted Churches: truly I have
just cause (not without sadness and mourning) to consider, and to pray, that
he might consider, what call of the Lord Jesus his soul has heard to come
out, not only out of unconverted Churches, but converted too, yea out of all
Churches?

Discusser.

Again, I observe the haste and light attention of the Answerer, to these
Scriptures (as commonly the Spirits of Gods children in matters of Gods
Kingdom, are very sleepy:) for these persons here spoken of were not
unconverted Christians in Creete, whom Titus as an Evnngelist was to convert,
but they were such Opposites, as Timothy ( to whom Paul writes this Letter at
Ephesus) should not meet withal.

Defender.

Whether such words be found in the copy of my Answer to the Letter, I leave it
to the Discussers credit. As I said even now, mine own copy I cannot (after
much diligent search) find: the Transcript which I have found has it
otherwise, the unconverted Persons in Ephesus, whom Timothy as an Evangelist
was to seek, to convert. But if my copy do speak as he reports:

Then, 1. I do not deny, but have just cause to acknowledge mine own haste,
and light attention, and sleepiness in the matters of Christ's Kingdom, not
only in this passage: but frequently else in the race of my Christian course
of life. The Disciples themselves Christ found sleepy, Matthew. 26.40. how much
more may he find me sleepy?

2. The Discusser might have imputed it as well, to my have to gratify his
earnest desire to Answer his friends Letter, and to my confidence in his love,
that for have to satisfy him, mistook one place and person for another, and
was not so attentive to peruse and examine the copy sent by me to him, as I
would have been, had I sent it to an Adversary.

3. The case is all one in the matters of Christ's Kingdom, whether I had named
Timothy, or Titus, Ephesus, or Creete: For the persons were both of them
Evangelists, and the places of them both such, as had unconverted persons in
them, and (like enough) unconverted Christians too: Ephesus had evil persons
amongst them, whom they could not bear, ( Rev. 2.2.) as well as Creet had
amongst them such as were always liars, evil Beasts, slow bellies, Tit. 1.12.

4. The Discusser, that observes haste, and light attention, and sleepiness
in another, one would think, would be more vigilant, and attentive himself.
He that says (as the Discusser does in his parenthesis) that Paul wrote this
Letter, (to wit, his second Epipistle) to Timothy at Ephesus, takes it for
granted, that which without some hasty lightness, even the same, which he
blames in my self, he cannot believe, that Paul wrote his second to Timothy
at Ephesus. There is no word in the Epistle, that speaks of Timothies being
at Ephesus, when Paul wrote that second Epistle. His calling of an Evangelist
did not permit him to tarry long in a place: and the first Epistle to Timothy,
is thought by the Learned to have been written one of the first of all Paul's
Epistles, next after those of the Thessalonians. But the second Epistle to
Timothy was written last of all the Epistles, when Paul's time of departure was
at hand, 2 Timothy 4.6. And when Paul writes 2 Timothy 4.12. that he had sent
Tychicus to Ephesus, It is not likely, he would have written so to Timothy, if
Timothy then had been at Ephesus. For Timothy would have known, that Tychycus
had been at Ephesus: or if Tychicus had been then but on his way to Ephesus
(which is a narrow point of time) it is more then propable, if Timothy had been
then at Ephesus, he would have said, Tychicus have I sent to thee to Ephesus.

CHAP. 39. A Reply to his 39. Chap.
Discusser.

But from this place in Timothy (2 Timothy 2.25.) in particular, I argue thus

1. If the Civil Magistrates be Christians or Members of the Church, able to
prophecy to the Church of Christ; then they are bound by this command of
Christ, to suffer opposition to their Doctrine, with meekness and gentleness,
waiting if God peradventure will give them Repentance.

So also it pleases the Answerer to acknowledge in these words: It becomes
not the spirit of the Gospel to convert Aliens to the Faith (such as the
Samaritans and unconverted persons, whether in Ephesus, or Creete) with Fire
and Sword.

Defender.

The Answerer is still of the same mind, though he might strike in upon the
advantage, that if the Magistrate be also a Prophet, he may do some things as
a Magistrate, which he may not do as a Prophet: yet he willingly
acknowledges, that if a Magistrate be also a Prophet (yea, whether he be a
Prophet, or no) he ought not to seek to subdue, and convert Aliens to the
Faith, by Fire and Sword.

Discusser.

Secondly, if the Oppositions be within, and the Church Members become
scandalous in Doctrine (I speak not of scandalls in the Civil State, which
the civil Magistrate ought to punish.) It is the Lord only ( as the Scripture
in Timothy implies) who is able to give them Repentance, and to recover them
out of Satan's snare, etc. It is true, the civil Sword may make a whole Nation
of Hypocrites, as the Lord complains, Isay 10. and as befell our Native
Country in a few scores of years, in the several Reigns of Henry 7. Henry 8.
King Edward, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth; under whom our Nation was as ready
to change the fashion of their Religions, as of their Suits of Apparel, which
has been their sinful shame.

Defender.

If Opposition rise from within, from the Members of the Church, I do not
believe it to be lawful for the Magistrate to seek to subdue, and convert
them to be of his mind by the civil Sword: But rather to use all spiritual
means for their conviction, and conversion. But if the Opposition still
continue in Doctrine and Worship, and that against the vitals, and
Fundamentalls of Religion (whether by Heresy of Doctrine, or Idolatry in
Worship) and shall proceed to seek the Seduction of others, I do believe the
Magistrate is not to tolerate such opposion against the Truth in
Church Members, or in any Professors of the Truth after due conviction from
the word of Truth. Nor is it an Objection of any weight, that neither the
Magistrate, nor his Sword can give Repentance unto such.

For neither can he give Repentance unto such persons as are scandalous to the
civil State, whom yet notwithstanding the Discusser himself acknowledges the
civil Magistrate ought to punish. Though the civil Sword should not make the
opposers Hypocrites, yet better tolerate Hypocrites and Tares, then Briars and
Thorns. In such cases the civil Sword does not so much attend the conversion
of wicked Seducers, as the prevention of the seduction of honest minds by their
means.

What the Kings and Queens of England have done in former, or later times,
either by violent Persecution of the Truth, or in preposterous maintenance of
the Truth, we have cause rather to bewail it: (and so has the Discusser too,
if he be an English man) then to justify it: as also bewail the like vanity
justly complained of in sundry of our English Nation, to be as ready to change
the fashion of their Religion, as of their Raiment. And yet he cannot be
ignorant, that the Lord has chosen to himself sundry faithful witnesses out
of that Nation, who have continued steadfast unto the death in the Profession of
the Truth, and have not been carried away, either with the fear of civil
Sword, or with the deceitful insinuations of unstable but seducing Teachers,
to depart from the simplicity and Truth of the Gospel. But howsoever woeful,
and wonderful changes have been made of Religion in England, in the Reign of
four or five Princes, yet it is no more then befell the Church of Judah, in
the days of Ahaz and Hezekiah, Manasseh, and Josiah; yet the Prophets never
upbraided them with the civil Magistrater Power in causes of Religion, as the
cause of it. Better some vicissitudes in Religion, then a constant continuance
in Idolatry, and Popery, by Princes referring all causes of Religion to
Churchmen. The Prophecy of Englands Revolt again to Popery, wants
Scripture Light.

CHAP. 40. A Reply to his Chap. 40.
Discusser.

But it has been thought and said, shall Oppositions against the Truth escape
unpunished? will they not prove mischievous? I answer as before, concerning the
blind Guides, their case being incurable is rather to be lamented, since none
but the right hand of the Lord, in the meek and gentle Dispensing of the word
of Truth; can release them, etc.

Defender.

So it is with all scandalous offenders against the civil State: none can give
them healing Repentance, but the right hand of the Lord Jesus, in the
dispensing of the word of Truth: yet that does not restrain Magistrates from
executing just Judgment upon them. So neither does it restrain them from
executing the like just Judgment against these, though not to procure the
Repentance of incurable obstinate Heretics, and Idolaters: yet to prevent the
seduction and subversion of others. What though a dead soul, though changed
from one Worship to another, (like a dead man shifted into several suites of
Apparel) cannot please God? Heb. 11.6. And what though Faith be that gift,
which proceeds alone from that Father of Lights? Phil. 1.29.

Yet better a dead soul be dead in body, as well as in Spirit, then to live,
and be lively in the flesh, to murder many precious souls by the Magistrates
Indulgence. And better he die without Faith, then to live to seduce many honest
minds to depart from the Faith.

Discusser.

I add, a civil Sword hardneth the followers of false Teachers, by the
sufferings of their false and Antichristian Seducers.

And secondly, it begets in them an Impression of the falsehood of that
Religion, which cannot uphold it self, but with such Instruments of violence,
and wants the soft, and gentle commiseration of the blindness of others.

Defender.

A civil Magistrate ought not to draw out his civil Sword against any
Seducers (Whether Heretics, or Idolaters) till he have used all good means
for their conviction, and thereby clearly manifested the bowels of tender
commiseration and compassion toward them.

But if after their continuance in obstinate Rebellion against the Light, he
shall still walk toward them in soft and gentle commiseration, his softness
and gentleness is excessive large to Foxes, and wolves: But his bowels are
miserably straightened and hardened against the poor sheep and Lambs of Christ.
If any be hardened by the just and faithful severity of Magistrates in this
case, it is merely accidental, from the extreme perverseness of the
deceitful and corrupt heart of man, not from any corruption found in such
dealings of Magistrates. Yea, Experience speaks the contrary, not only in
the instance of the Donatists, who were many of them reclaimed, by the just
severity of the civil Magistrate in Augustines time: But also in our own
memory. Let the Discusser speak his conscience, whether Popery or Papists did
more swarm and abound in Queen Elizabeth's days, then in the days of King
James?

Discusser.

Antonius Pius, the Emperor of Rome, upon this occasion, wrote to all the
Governors of his Provinces, to forbear the Persecution of Christians, because
such dealing was so far from converting Christians from their way, that it
rather begat in their minds an opinion of their Cruelty.

Defender.

No marvel: for first the Pagan Religion was not of God, but palpable and
gross Idolatry: But the Religion of Christians came down from Heaven, in the
Gospel of Truth. It is cruelty in a Magistrate and it will beget in the minds
of indifferent men, an opinion of his cruelty, to murder Innocents (and that
indicta cau^a:) when it will never be found guilty, nor beget in equal minds
an opinion of the cruelty of such, as shall put to Death Murderers, and
obstinate destroyers of the life of Souls.

Secondly, It is evident, the persecuting Emperors, and their Governors of
Provinces under them, attended not at all, to the conviction of Christians, nor
did they endeavor to make it appear, that the Christians sinned against the
Light of their own consciences: And therefore we marvel, if it bred in the
people, a just opinion of the cruelty of Persecutors, and of the Innocence of
Christians.

3. It is an untrue Intimation of the Discusser, that Antonius forebad the
persecution of Christians upon any such grounds, as if he affected rather their
conversion (which harsh dealing might alienate them from: or as if by reason of
hard dealing with them, it bred in the Christians an opinion of the cruelty of
their Persecutors: which he was desirous to avoid. Read both the Rescripts of
Antonius Pius, both to the men of Asia, and to the Senate of Rome: and he
gives other just Reasons of forbidding the persecution of them: as in respect
of their confidence on God in times of danger, above Pagans: and in respect of
his Fathers favorable grant to them: and chiefly in that by their Prayers they
had saved his Army in great distress in Germany, and destroyed their Enemies.
But he was so far from seeking their conversion to his Paganism by lenity
toward them, that he straightly charge his Officers, (...), not to draw any
such to Repentance, and bondage. Both his Rescripts are extant in the end of
Justin Martyrs second Apology for Christians.

CHAP. 41. A Reply to his Chap. 41. Discussing the Texts, Isay 2.4. with Mica.
4.3.
Discusser.

THe next Scripture against Persecution, is that of the Prophet Isaiah 2.4.
together with Micah 4.3. They shall break their Swords into Plowshares, and
their Spears into pruning hooks: And Isa. 11.9. There shall none hurt or
destroy, in all the Mountain of my Holiness.

Unto which Mr. Cotton answers, 1. That these Predictions do only show with
what weapons Christ will subdue the Nations to the Faith of the Gospel.

2. They show also what the meek and peaceable temper will be of all true
Converts to Christianity: not Lions, nor Leopards, nor cruel Oppressors, nor
Malignant opposers, and biters one of another: but does not forbid them to
drive ravenous wolves from the sheepfold, nor to restrain them from devouring
the sheep of Christ.

This first Answer is truly Christian: but me thinks the Answerer might hear
a voice from Heaven, out of thine own mouth will I judge thee: for that which
he adds is as evil and bitter, as the former words were good and sweet; But
this does not forbid them to drive ravenous wolves from the sheepfold, and to
restrain them from devouring the sheep of Christ.

But this fights against the former Truth; to wit, that Christ by spiritual
weapons will subdue the Nations of the Earth to the obedience of the Gospel.
For by driving away these Wolves, he intends not only the Resistance or
violence, which the Shepherds of Christ ought spiritually to make: but the
civil Resistance of the material Swords, staves, Guns, etc. whence I argue,
that same power forces the evil (the Wolves) out, forces the good (the
sheep) in: for of the same things, is the like and same Reason, etc.

Defender.

He should say, for of contrary things, is a contrary Reason: for sheep and
wolves are not the same things: nor are force in, and force out the same
things. But howsoever, his Argument is of the like force, as if he should
reason, a man may witha staff or a Sword drive away dogs, that might by the
way bite, or worrey his children in going to School: therefore a man may with
astaffe, or a Sword drive his children to go to school: for there is the same
Reason of both. But does he speak in good earnest, that there is the same
Reason of both? Are Wolves to be driven away, and sheep brought into the fold
by the same Instruments? Yes, says he, the same arm that with a staff
beats off the Wolf, with a rod and hook brings in the sheep: the same
Dog that assaulteth and teareth a Wolf, frighteth and forces in the
straggling sheep. But the Dog that is taught to assault and tear the Wolf, if
he assault and tear the sheep also, will find a halter for his labor. And
though the same Arm may with a staff beat a Wolf, yet it will not with the
same staff beat a sheep. The same Shepherds staff, that knocks down a
Wolf on the head, hooketh in the sheep gently by the leg. The same voice from
Heaven, that calls the sheep by Name into the sheepfold, and leads them by
still waters, the same voice has said, that Antichristian Wolves and Seducers
shall drink of blood, for they are worthy, Revel. 16.6.

CHAP. 42. A Reply to his Chap. 42.
Defender.

IN this Chapter the Discusser makes himself work to discourse upon the
Wolves, which Paul foretold to the Elders of Ephesus) should come in amongst
them, not sparing the flock, Acts 20.29. A place which I quoted not, nor did
apply to the cause in hand. (But he as a full vessel) abounding and running
over in wit, and words, (and it seems in leisure) he propounds, and
discusseth three Questions about these Wolves in this Chapter: and two more in
the next.

Discusser.

As 1. What Wolves were those Paul warns of? not literally meant: nor
Persecutors of the Flock, such as the Roman Emperors: But such as brought in
other Religions and Worships, such as amongst themselves should speak perverse
things, as many Antichrists did. And I ask whether or no such as may hold
forth other Worships, or Religions, (Jews, Turks, Antichristians) may not be
peaceable and quiet Subjects, loving and helpful neighbors, fair and just
dealers? etc. It is clear, they may, in all experience, and yet in spiritual
and Mystical Account, they are ravenous, and greedy Wolves.

Defender.

It has been declared above, that we do not hold it lawful, to constrain by
Civil Sword, Jews, or Turks, or Antichristians to be of our Religion,
whether they be good Subjects, loving Neighbors, fair dealers, yea or no. Nor
does the Apostle in that Text, (which the Discusser has in hand) speak of men
out of the Church, Jews, Turks, or Antichristians, but of such as enter into
the Church, and are of themselves.

Now if Church Members should Apostate from Christ, and of Christians become
Jews, and Turks, and Antichristians, and draw away Disciples after them, I
would demand of any man (whose Conscience is not past feeling of the danger of
damnable Heresies) whether such Members may go for peaceable and quiet
Subjects, for loving and helpful Neighbors, for fair and just dealers, for
true and Loyal to the civil Government? If those be peaceable, and quiet
Subjects, that withdraw Subjects from Subjection to Christ: if they be loving
and helpful Neighbors, that help men on to perdition: If they be fair and
just dealers, that wound the souls of the best, and kill and destroy the
souls of many, if such be true and loyal to Civil Government, that subject
it to the Tyranny of a foreign Prelate, then it will be no advantage to civil
States, when the Kingdoms of the Earth shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord:
and they may do as good service to the civil State, who bring the wrath of
God upon them by their Apostacy, as they that bring down blessings from
Heaven by the Profession and Practice of the true Religion in Purity.

Discusser.

I querie secondly, to whom Paul gave this charge, to watch against them? ver.
31.

They were not the Magistrates of the City of Ephesus, but the Elders of the
Church of Ephesus.

Defender.

Who doubts of it?

Discusser.

Many of these charges and Exhortations given by Christ to the Shepherds and
Ministers of the Churches, be commonly attributed and directed (by the Answerer
in this Discourse) to the Civil Magistrate.

Defender.

Cujus contrarium verumest. For look the Answer through, and you shall find,
not one of these charges or Exhortations, given to Ministers, were ever
directed by the Answerer, to civil Magistrates: the falsehood of the Discusser
in this charge upon the Answerer, is palpable and notorious. And this
exhortation in this place, the Answerer does not so much as mention at all
either as directed to Magistrates, or to Elders.

Discusser.

I desire it may be inquired into, whether in all the will, or Testament of
Christ, there be any such word of Christ by way of Command, Promise, or
Example, countenancing the Governors of the Givill State to meddle with these
wolves, if in civil things peaceable and obedient.

Defender.

This Condition if (in civil things peaceable and obedient) implies a
contradiction to the nature and practice of wolves. How can Wolves be
peaceable, and obedient, unless they be restrained? and how can they be
restrained, and not meddled with? What Peace (said Jehu) so long as the
whoredoms of Jezabel, and her witchcrafts are so many, 2 Kings 9.22.

Yes: may not spiritual whoredoms and witch-crafts stand with Civil Peace?

No verily: the whoredoms and witch-crafts of the Jezabel of Rome, took away
civil peace from the earth, and brought in the Turks to oppress the peace
both of Christian Churces and Commonwealths, as has been showed above, Revel.
9.15.21. That dreadful example of Gods vengeance upon Civil States for
tolerating and practicing Image Worship, is a serious and loud warning to all
Christian States to beware of such seducing spirits, as bear them in hand,
they shall have peace, though they tolerate Idolatrous and false worships in
their Territoryes.

Besides for another example, and that approved, you find in the Lords
Testament, Revel. 16.4, 5, 6, 7. of which before. And for a word of command
from Christ, to meddle with wolves, that grand charter, whereby Magistrates are
established in the new Testament, may abundantly suffice, The Magistrate is the
Minister of God, an avenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil Romans 14.4.

If the wolf be an evil doer, let him look at the Magistrate as appointed of
God to be an avenger, and executor of wrath upon him. Say not, yea, if the
wolf be an evil doer against the second Table, but not so, if against the
first Table: or if an evil doer against the bodies and estates of men, not so,
if against their souls.

For who gave any man commission so to limit the word of God, or the power of
the Magistrate? Besides it has been often said, that he that goes about to
subvert Religion, and to destroy souls, is an evil doer against the peace of
the Civil State.

Discusser.

If God had given charge to Magistrates to punish evil doers in matters of
Religion, he would have given to Magistrates in the world, ability to discern,
and determine, who are sheep, and who are wolvish oppressors, whom he is bound
to punish and suppress. Yea they must be able to discern this, not with
others men's eyes, but with their own etc.

Defender.

It has been declared above, that Magistrates ought to be so well accquainted
with matters of Religion, as to discern the Fundamental Principels thereof,
and the evil of chose heresies and Blasphemies, as do subvert the same. Their
ignorance thereof, is no discharge of their duty before the Lord. Such wolvish
oppressors, and Doctrines, and practices as they cannot discern with their own
eyes, It will be their sin either to suppress them, because they cannot do it
of faith: or to tolerate them, because they are destructive to the souls of
the people, and enemies to the common salvation. Gallio is justly censured as a
profane man, not because he refused to be a Judge in matters concerning the
Jewish worship, and Religion: (for he had noe Law of Caesar, whose Deputy he
was, to judge of it:) but because he rejects the cognizance of such causes of
Religion, as a Question of words and Names. Which made him so ^ame regardlesse
of causes of Religion, that though the Civil peace was broken by the Jews (in
pursuit of Paul) the Jews laying violent hands upon Sasthenes, and that
before the judgment Seat, yet Gallio cared for none of those things, Acts 18,
15.16.17.

Discusser.

In the third place I Quere, Whether the Father who gave the sheep, and the
Son who keeps them, be not greater then all? And who can pluck the Elect
out of his hand? which Answers the common objection of the danger of
devouring souls.

Defender.

It does not Answer that Objection. For the Father, and Son were greater then
all in the old Testament, as well as in the New: And none could then pluck his
Elect out of their hands, no more then now: yet the attempt to pluck them out
of Gods hand was a Capital crime then Deuteronomy. 13.5.10. For speaking to turn
away a soul from God. ver. 5. and seeking to thrust away a soul from God, are
but attempts. Besides God puts no difference of Elect and Reprobate in
matter of murder either of foul, or Body. But the respect, which God has in
this case, is to his Covenant, which God made with the visible members of his
Church.

Now. if a man shall so far violate his Covenant as to Apostate from God, and
to draw others away to Apostate from him, the Lord avengeth this quarrel of
his Covenant upon the lives of such And therefore the heinousness of this
crime is expressed, in that he spoke, or sought to turn away any of the people
of God from the Lord their God, Deuteronomy. 13.5.10.

CHAP. 43. A Reply to his Chap. 43.
Discusser.

FOurthly, I ask; were not these Elders and Ministers of the Church of Ephesus
sufficiently furnished from the Lord Jesus, to drive away these spiritual, and
mystical wolves?

Defender.

They were furnished with sufficient power to cast them out of the Church, but
being cast out, they had not sufficient power to drive them away from
conferring with, and corrupting the members of the Church, or other Godly ones
out of the Church. It is no dishonor to Christ, nor impeachment to th
sufficiency of the Ordinances left by Christ, that in such a case, his
Ministers of Justice in the Civil State, should assist his Ministers of the
Gospel in the Church State

Discusser.

Fifthly, lastly I Ask, whether (as men deal with wolves) these wolves at
Ephesus were intended by Paul to be killed, their brains dashed out with
stones, staves, Halberts, Gunns etc. in the hands of the Elders of Ephesus?

Defender.

No: nor was it alleged by me for any such end, nor indeed alleged by me at
all: but only the Discusser is pleased to set up a mark, to shoot at for his
own recreation. Elders must keep within the bounds of their calling: But
killing, and dashing out of Brains (which is all one with stoning) was
expressly commanded, in such a case, to the People of God (by order from the
Judges:) Deuteronomy. 13.10.

Discusser.

But comparing spiritual things with spiritual things, spiritual and
mystical wolves, should be spiritually and mystically slain.

Defender.

So they should be by the spiritual Officers, and members of the Church. But
in destroying Religion they are also disturbers of the Civil State, and
accordingly are to be dealt withal by Civil Justice. Achan disturbed the
Commonwealth, as well as the Church of Israel, by bringing a Babylonish
garment into the Tents of Israel: and was therefore troubledhimselfe, for
troubling the People of the Lord, Josh. 7.25.

Discusser.

It is a most bloody Doctrine, The wolves (Heretics) are to be drivenaway,
their brains knocked out, and killed, the poor sheep to be persecuted for whom
Christ died.

Defender.

Belike it is a milkey, and peaceable, and Gospel like Doctrine, The wolves
(Heretics) are to be tolerated, not an hair to be struck off from their
heads, but for the poor sheep, for whom Christ died, let them perish, unless
Christ mean to preserve them himself alone, with his own immediate hand: no
care of preserving them belongs to the Civil Magistrate.

Discusser

Is not this to take Christ, and to make him a temporal King by force? Joh.
6.15. Is not this to make his Kingdom of this world? to set up a Civil and
Temporal Israel? to bound out new earthly holy lands of Canaan? yea and to set
up a Spanish Inquisition in all parts of the world, to the speedy destruction
of millions of souls, and to the frustrating of the sweet end of the coming
of the Lord Jesus, which was to save men's souls (and to that end, not to
destroy their bodies) by his own blood?

Defender.

Now of all these: when the Kingdoms of the earth become the Kingdoms of the
Lord ( Rev. 11.15.) It is not, by making Christ a temporal King, but by making
temporal Kingdoms nursing Fathers to his Church. In the days of Christ's
Flesh it was Incompatible to his Ministry to make him a King (as they went
about to do Joh. 6.15.) Christ has enjoyed (even as Mediator) an everlasting
Kingdom, not only in the Church, but in the Government of all the Kingdoms
of the earth, by his glorious power, and righteousness. But the Kingdoms of
the earth are then said to be the Kingdoms of our Lord, when they submit their
laws to the laws of his word. But that neither makes him a temporal King,
nor his Kingdom in the Church to be a Kingdom of this world. The Church and
Commonwealth are still distinct Kingdoms, the one of this world, the other of
Heaven: and yet both of them from Christ; unto whom the Father has committed
all Judgment, Job. 5.22.

Neither will this set up a Civil and temporal Israel, an holy Canaan,
unless all the members of the Commonwealth were called to be members of the
Church, and subject to all the ceremonial, and all the judicial Laws of
Moses (not only those of Moral, and perpetual equity,) but peculiar to that
State, as the Brother to marry his deceased Brothers wife.

Nor is it a Spanish Inquisition, to preserve the sheep of Christ from the
raven of wolves: but this rather, (such is the practice of the Discusser) to
promote the principal end of the spanish Inquisition, to advance the Romish
tyranny, Idolatry, and Apostasy, by proclaiming impunity to all their whorish
and wolvish Emissaries.

Nor is it a frustrating of the sweet end of Christ's coming, which was to save
souls, but rather a direct advancing of it, to destroy (if need be) the bodies
of those wolves, who seek to destroy the souls of those, for whom Christ
died, and whom he bought with his own blood.

CHAP. 44. A Reply to his Chap. 44. Discussing 2 Cor. 10.4.
Discusser.

The next Scripture produced against such persecution was 2 Cor. 10.4. The
weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God etc.

To which it is Answered, Paul speaks of the weapons of Apostles, and
Church Officers, which are not carnal, but spiritual: and mighty through God.
But this denies not, Civil weapous of Justice to Civil Magistrates. But I
here observe, that the Scripture holds forth a twofold State, a Civil
State, and a Spiritual: Civil Officers, and spiritual: Civil weapons, and
spiritual: Civil vengeance, and spiritual: though the Spirit speaks not
here expressly of Civil Magistrates, and their Civil weapons: yet these States
being of different natures and considerations (as far differing as flesh and
spirit) therefore Civil weapons are most improper and unfitting in matters of
the spiritual Kingdom and State, though in the Civil State most proper and
suitable.

Defender.

The Discusser, as often throughout his Discourse, so here he loses himself,
and the truth, in ambiguityes. Civil weapons are indeed improper, and
unfitting in spiritual matters, to wit, in the dispencing, and pressing of
spiritual matters for the immediate producing of spiritual ends, as for a
Magistrate to draw his sword to compel all his Subjects to the obedience of
the faith if Christ, and to the profession of it. But this is not unfitting nor
improper, That a Magistrate should draw his sword, though not in matters
spiritual, yet about matters spiritual to protect them in peace, and to stave
off the disturbers, and destroyers of them. It were improper and unfitting, for
carpenters to bring their Axes and Hammers to build up the spiritual Kingdom
and Church of Christ: But yet their tools are fitting to build up scaffolds,
that the people may draw near to hear the Word, and by hearing, be brought on
to faith and salvation.

CHAP. 45. A Reply to his 45. Chap.
Discusser.

TO Batter and take a strong Hold, or Fort, men bring not a first and second
Admonition, and after obstinacy, Excommunication: But they bring Canons,
Culverings, Sakers, Bullets, Powder, Muskets, Swords, Pikes, weapons suitable
and proportionable. On the other side, to batter down Idolatry, false worship,
Heresy out of the soul and spirit, It is vain, Improper, unsuitable to bring
the usual weapons of persecutors, Stocks, Whips, Prisons, Swords, Gibbtts,
Stakes: But against these spiritual sirong holds in the souls of men,
spiritual Artillery, and weapons are proper, and mighty through God to subdue
every thought to obedience.

Defender.

Let this stand (as it shall for me:) It nothing touches the Question in hand.
It is far from me to allow the Civil Magistrate to make use of his Civil
weapons to batter down Idolatry, and Heresy in the souls of men: but for this
end, he is to use spiritual weapons, and all Lenity and wisdom in the
improvement thereof: But if the Idolater or Heretic grow obstinate and as the
Apostle says, wax worse and worse deceiving himself and others, to the
destroying or corrupting and disturbing of others, now the Magistrate makes
use, not of Stocks, and Whipps (for these do not remove, but exasperate the
malady:) but of Death, or Banishment, that may cut him off from opportunity of
spreading the leaven, and Gangerne of his pernicious ways, whether in
Doctrine, or practice. It is one thing to speak o^ Heresy and Idolatry in the
Abstract: another in the Concrete. Heresy, Idolatry and all spiritual
wickedness, cannot be rooted out of the hearts of the sons of men, but by
spiritual weapons. But Heretics, and Idolaters may be restrained from the
open practice, and profession of their wickedness by the Sword of Justice, and
such weapons of Righteousness.

Discusser.

But though these weapons were proper: yet they are unnecessary. For if
spiritual weapons in the hand of Church Officers, be able, and mighty, and
sufficient, and ready for the Lords work, either to save, or to kill the soul
etc. How does the Magistrate come in to help, but as if the Lord had no power?

Defender.

This is a mere pretense in the mouth and pen of the Discusser: For he having
cut off all the Churches of Christ, and all Church Ordinances, and
Church-weapons from off the face of the earth for these many ages past, and I
know not for how many years yet to come: If Civil weapons be debarred from
defending Religion, upon pretense, that Church-weapons are sufficient, and and
then no Churches nor Church weapons to be found upon the face of the earth,
then let all Seducers to Apostasy, Idolaters, and Heretics, let them all
rejoice in an open doote of liberty, and safety, which the Discusser has set
wide open before them. If Civil States must not, and Churches cannot, come in
to help the Lord, shall the curse of Meroz be so avoided, because the Lord
wants not power to help himself? But I might reply further, that though
spiritual weapons are mighty through God, and sufficient to those ends, for
which the Lord appointed them: which are to purge out leaven from their holy
communion, and to mortify the flesh of offenders: yet that is not supersedeas
to Civil Magistrates, to neglect to punish those sins, which the Church has
censured, if the persons censured do proceed to subvert the truth of the
Gospel, or the peace of the Church, or the salvation of the people. The rest of
the Discussers discourse in this chapter are (as Jude speaks) clouds without
water, words without matter.

CHAP. 46. A Reply to his Chap. 46. Discussing Romans 13.
Discusser.

This Scripture Romans 13. which it pleases the Answerer to quote, how has both
himself, and many excellent servants of God, wrested (not as Peter writes of
the wicked to their eternal, yet) to their own and others tempor all
destruction by civil wars, and combustions in the world?

Defender.

This charge is a grievous crime, if it be truly proved: a grievous slander,
if it be not proved.

The rest of the Chapter proves it not, but that only which I willingly
grant, that this 13th Chapter to the Romans exhorts unto subjection to
Magistrates, and unto love to all men: which are duties partaining to the
second Table. Howbeit though subjection to Magistrates, and love to all men be
duties which concern the second Table (a point which needed no proof:) yet
this inference will not here follow, That therefore Magistrates have nothing to
do to punish any violation, no not of the weightiest duties of the first
Table. It is a clear case, amongst the duties of the second Table, people may
be exhorted to honor their Ministers, and children may be exhorted to honor
their Parents. But will it thence follow, that therefore Ministers have nothing
to do with matters of Religion in the Church, or parents in the Family?

CHAP. 47. A Reply to his Chap. 47.
Discusser.

THere be excellent and precious servants of God in their time, who have
absolutely denied the 13. of the Romans to concern any matter of the first Table.

Defender.

I will not stand upon the last use in that Chapter, put you on the Lord Jesus
Christ: which I hope the Discusser himself will not deny, much less say, that
any Excellent and precious servants of God, do absolutely deny, that such a
Duty concerns the first Table. But what is it that the servants of God say?

Discusser.

Calvin says, this whole Discourse concerns Civil Magistrates: and
therefore in vain do they who exereise Power over Consciences, go about from
this place to establish their sacrilegious Tyranny.

Defender.

Calvin's Judgment herein (as generally in other points) is sound and agreeable
to the Text: but not at all favoring the Discussers Imagination. This whole
Disputation (says he) is of Civil Governments: whereupon this inference is
(according to his own true meaning and scope) therefore it does nor concern
Church Government. Therefore such Church Governors as upon pretense of this
Text do make Laws, without the word, and besides the word, to bind
Conscience, and to usurp power over Consciences, they in vain go about to
establish their sacrilegious Tyranny from this place. But what is this to the
point in hand? Church Governors do in vain go about from this place to
establish their Sacrilegious Tyranny by giving Laws without the word, and
beside the word to bind Conscience: Therefore Civil Magistrates, (of whom this
whole Discourse is) shall exercise a sacrilegious Tyranny over the Conscience,
and in vain go about to establish it from this place, when from the word of
God, they establish true Religion, and go about to punish the Fundamental
subverters of the same. But how far off Calvin's Judgment was to restrain
Civil Magistrates from meddling in matters of Religion, let him interpret
himself in his own words (in his opuscula) in his Answer to Servetus, who was
put to Death for his Heresies at Geneva by his procurement. Hoe uno (says he)
contentus sum, Christi adventu; nec mutatum esse Ordinem Politicum, nec de
Magistratuum officio quicquam Detractum.

A gedum quod Paulus docet, Romans 13.4. Non frustra ah ipsis Gladium gestari, an
ad speciem unam restringi debet? Fatentur isti, quibuscum nunc Discepto ad alia
crimina plectenda Judices divini^us esse amatos, mo^^ a Religione abstineani,
ut libera, ipsis tacentibus, Impietas lasciviat: verirm reclamat innumeris
locis Spiritus Sanctus, etc. This one thing (says he) suffices me, that by
the coming of Christ, neither was the State of Civil Government changed: nor
any thing taken away from the Magistrates Office. Go to then, that which Paul
teaches (Romans 13.4.) that he bears not the Sword in vain, ought it to be
restrained unto one kind only? they themselves confess with whom I have to
deal, the Magistrates are armed of God to punish other crimes, so that they
abstain from matter of Religion, that so ungodlynesse may run riot by their
connivance. But the Holy Ghost cries out against this in many places, etc.

Discusser.

Again, Calvin speaking of sulfilling the Law by Love, writes thus on the
same place, Paul has not respect unto the whole Law, he speaks only of
those duties, which the Law commands us toward our neighbors. And after
Paul only mentions the second Table, etc. And that he repeateth, Love is the
fulfilling of the Law, understand it as before, of that part of the Law which
concerns humane Society: for the former Table of the Law, which is of the
worship of God, is not here touched.

So Beza upon the word (...), (if there be any other Commandment, it is summed
up in this, thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self) the whole Law, (says
he) commands nothing, but the love of God, and our Neighbor: but since the
Apostle in this place discourses of the mutual Duties of men one to another,
I think this Term, Law, ought to be restrained to the second Table.

Defender.

And so think I too, yet without the least prejudice to the cause in hand. For
if the Question be of the duties which Subjects owe to Magistrates, they
pertain to the second Table: or if the Question be of the virtue eof love one
to another, That it is the fulfilling of the whole Law, It is meant cheifely of
the second Table: though withal it be true, the second Table cannot be
fulfilled without fulfilling of the first Table also. These things are out of
controversy. But what is all this to the point in hand? The Apostle in calling
love the fulfilling of the Law, speaks of the Law of the second Table. Ergo,
the Magistrate (who is spoken of in the same chapter) has no power to punish
the crimes against the first Table? or thus further, in the 13. of the Romans,
the Apostle speaks of the Duties of Subjects to Magistrates (which is a Duty
of the second Table:) therefore Magistrates have no power to punish their
Subjects for crimes against the first Table?

The Discusser might as well argue, that the duties of Subjects to Magistrates,
are duties of the second Table: therefore it is not the Duty of Subjects to
pray for their Magistrates, which is a Duty of the first Table? The Truth is,
though Prayer be a Duty of the first Table; yet to pray for Magistrates, is a
Duty of the second Table. In like sort, though Idolatry, and Blasphemy, and
Heresy be sins against the first Table: yet to punish these with civil
penalties is a Duty of the second Table. For let it be considered in the fear
of God, are not all Duties of Righteousness to man commanded in the second
Table, as well as all Duties of Holiness to God, commanded in the first Table?
If so, I demand again, whether it be not a Duty of Righteousness belonging to
the people of God, to enjoy the free passage of Religion, Truth of Doctrine,
Holiness of worship, Purity of Church Government? I demand yet further, if it
be not an injurious dealing to the people of God, to disturb the Truth of
Doctrine with Heresy? the holiness of worship with Idolatry? the Purity of
Government with Tyranny? If all these be granted, then it unavoydably
follows, that all these ways of unrighteousness are justly punishable by
the second Table. Let not therefore the Discusser please himself in deluding
himself, and the world, that Beza, and Calvine did absolutely deny the 13. of
the Romans to concern any matter of the first Table. For though the Duties of
Loyalty to Magistrates, and of love to all, concern the second Table, yet it
was neither the word nor Judgment of Calvine, or Beza, so to interpret Romans
13. As to exempt Magistrates from Power of punishing Heresy, and Idolatry.
Calvines Interpretation of Romans 13.4. and his Argument from thence against
Servetus, is declared above in this chapter. Hear now how Beza interprets
the same Text in his Book entitled De Haereticis, a Magistratu puniendis.
Testatur Paulus Magistratum esse Dei Ministrum qui Gladium gerat ad eas
ulciscendas, qui male agunt, Romans 13.4. Quamobrem alterutrum necesse est, si in
Haereticos Magistratus jus nullum habet, vel ipsos male non agere (quod
Refutatione indigere non puto) vel, quod in genere Paulus ait, ad certum
maleficiorum genus revocandum, eorum videlicet, quae corporalia peccata vocant,
de quo malificiorum discrimine, copiosius, ut spero, postea, suo loco Disseram.
That is, Paul witnesses says he, that the Magistrate is. Gods Minister, who
bears the Sword to take vengeance on them that do evil, Romans 13.4.
wherefore one of these two must needs be, If Magistrates should have no just
power over Heretics, either that Heretics are not evil doers (which is so
gross, that I think, it needs no Refutation) or else that Paul's speech is to
be restrained to a certain sort of evil deeds, to wit, such as they call
corporal sins: of which distinction of evil deeds, I shall dispute more
largely, I hope in his due place hereafter. So Beza.

CHAP. 48. A Reply to his Chap. 48.
Discusser.

THe higher powers in this Romans 13. were (amongst others) the Roman Emperors,
and subordinate Magistrates under them. But they all were strangers from the
life of God, yea most averse and opposite, yea cruel, and bloody Persecutors
of the Name and followers of Jesus: and yet unto these is subjection commanded.

Now then I argue, If Paul had commanded this subjection to Roman Magistrates
in spiritual causes to defend the Truth, to punish Heretics, (neither of
which they could discern nor judge of, but by Trust from others, as Pilate
condemned Jesus) he must in the Judgment of all men, have put out the eye of
Faith, and Reason, and sense at once.

Defender.

Not in the Judgment of all men, for besides Calvin and Beza (whose Judgment
you have heard) all those Interpreters, who expound this place in the Romans,
of the Magistrates power in punishing spiritual evil doers, as well as
corporal, they, none of them do so judge, that Paul in commanding the
Churches to yield subjection unto civil Magistrates in matters of Religion,
did put out the Eye of Faith, and Reason, and sense at once.

For first, it is one thing to yield subjection to the unrighteous Decrees of
Ignorant, and Pagan Magistrates: another thing to obey their Ordinances in
matters of Faith, and worship, and Government of the Church. The former of
these, Christians did yield unto the Roman Magistrates, even subjection unto
the Death: the other, they neither did, nor ought to yield: as knowing God was
to be obeyed rather then men.

Secondly, though it be true, whilst the Roman Emperors and Magistrates were
Pagans and Persecutors, they were incompetent Judges, to discern and give
Sentence in the spiritual matters of Christian Religion: yet the word of
Christ, who commands a Duty, commands all the necessary means, which tend
to that Duty. And therefore in giving them a Power and charge to execute
vengeance on evil doers, (and that in matters of spiritual unrighteousness
against the Church, as in matters of Civil unrighteousness against the
Commonwealth) It behoved them to enquire and listen after true Religion, to
hear and try all, and upon serious, deliberate, and just scruting to hold
fast that which is good, and so prevent the disturbance thereof by the
contrary. It was no vain charge of the Holy Ghost, Psalm. 2, 10, 11, 12. If
Christ have an Iron Scepter in his hand (to crush all States, and Kingdoms,
Emperors, and Princes, as well as private persons) Be wise now therefore o ye
Kings: be instructed ye that are Judges of the Earth, serve the Lord with
fear, rejoice unto him with trembling. Kiss the Son least he be angry, and
ye perish in the way.

Thirdly, the cases of Religion, wherein we allow Civil Magistrates to be
Judges, are so fundamental, and palpable, that no Magistrate studious of
Religion in the fear of God, but, if he have any spiritual discerning (as all
truly Christian Magistrates have, and even Pagans have discerned between
innocent Christians, and turbulent Seducers) he cannot but judge of such gross
corruptions as are unsufferable in Religion, as has been opened above. Though
we reserve to the Prophets and Churches Judicium Propheticum, as has been said
above: yet we allow Judicium Politicum, to Civil Magistrates studious of Truth
(as all ought to be) and the Judgment of Discretion unto all Christians. But
as for such Magigistrates as are merely natural and Pagan, though Christians
be bound to subject themselves unto them with patience: yet such Magistrates
ought to forbear the exercise of their Power, either in protecting, or
punishing matters of Religion, till they have learned so much knowledge of the
Truth, as may enable them to discern of things that differ.

But this forbearance of theirs is not for want of Authority in their callings,
nor for want of Duty in their Consciences, but for want of evidence to them in
the cause. In which Case, Magistrates are wont to forbear their exercise of
their Power, and to respit Judgment even in Civil causes, not for want of
Authority, or Duty, to do Justice: But for want of ripe and full cognizance of
the Cause.

CHAP. 49. A Reply to his Chap. 49.
Discusser.

Why then did Paul himself appeal to Caesar (Acts 25.) unless that Caesar
(though he was not yet, yet he) ought to have been a fit Judge in such matters?

Answ. Paul appealed to Caesar, not to judge the cause of his Religion: but to
defend him from civil violence, and slanderous accusations about sedition,
mutiny, civil Disobedience, etc. From which Caesar (as a supreme civil
Magistrate) ought to defend him.

Defender.

This appeal of Paul to Caesar does evidently hold forth three things.

1. That there is a lawful and needful use of civil Magistracy unto
Christians.

2. That Church Officers (even of highest rank) the Apostles themselves, and
other Ministers are subject to civil Authority, as well as private Christians.

3. That Paul did submit to Caesar's Judgement-seate: the trial of his
innocence, as well in matters of Religion, as in civil conversation. For he
pleads his innocence, that he was guilty in none of those things whereof they
did accuse him, and for trial hereof he appealeth to Caesar, ver. 11. Now the
things whereof they did accuse him, were offenses against the Law of the Jews,
and against the Temple, as well as against Caesar, ver. 8. And offenses against
the Law of the Jews, and against the Temple, were matters of Religion. And yet
even in these Paul appealeth to Caesar's Judgment Seat for trial of his
innocence.

Discusser.

But if Paul in this Appeal to Caesar, had submitted his Religion (which was
the cause of Christ) his Ministry, and Ministration, to the Roman Emperors
Tribunal, he had sinned. First, against the light of Reason. Secondly, against
the cause of Religion. Thirdly, against the holy Calling of a Christian.
Fourthly, against his own calling of Apostleship. Fifthly, against the holy
name of God, etc.

Defender.

All these sins might with some color have been charged upon Paul, if he had
appealed to Caesar, to Judge, whether his Religion, or Ministry, or
Ministration were of God, or no. But that was no point of his Appeal: But
whether his Religion, or Ministry, or Ministration were guilty of any capital
crime against the Law of the Jews, or against the Temple, or against Caesar.
Now in this case Paul might safely appeal to Caesar, and that to the Honor of
God, of his Apostolic and Christian Calling, and to the glory of his Religion.
The Reasons against Paul's Appeal in this case are but bul-rushes.

CHAP. 50. A Reply to his Chap. 50.
Discusser.

HAving dispatched two Arguments (against the founding of the civil
Magistrates power in spiritual causes, in Romans 13. First, from the Testimony
of Calvin and Beza: the second from Caesar's incompetency and insufficiency to
Judge of spiritual matters.)

I come now to the third Argument, taken from the nature of the Magistrates
weapons: he has a Sword, and that Sword is a civil Sword, a Sword of civil
Justice which being of a material and civil nature, serves for the defense
of Persons, Estates, Families, Liberties of a City, or civil State, and for
the suppressing of uncivil and injurious Persons, or Actions by civil
punishment. And therefore this Sword cannot extend now (as it did in Israel of
old) to spiritual and soul causes, to spiritual and soul punishments.

Defender.

I easily hold with the Discusser, that the civil Sword does not extend to
spiritual and soul punishments. But if the civil Sword ought to extend to
the defense of civil men in civil Liberties, then why not also to the like
defense of Churches, and spiritual persons in their spiritual Liberties? It
is the Office of the civil Magistrate to govern his people in righteousness.
And if spiritual Liberties be in righteousness due to spiritual persons, as
well as civil Liberties to civil persons, doubtless the Magistrate is
defective in Rules of righteousness, if he only attend the defense of the
civil people, in their civil Rights, and neglect to defend his spiritual
people in their spiritual Rights.

What though the Sword be of a material and civil nature? so it was in the
Old Testament, as well as in the new. It can therefore reach no further, either
then or now, then unto the punishment of men, in bodily life, or civil
Liberties: But it can reach to punish in these things not only the offenders
in bodily Life, and civil Liberties, but also the offenders against spiritual
Life and soul Liberties.

What though it be called a civil Sword in common speech? It is not a
Scripture Phrase, so to call it: It may as fitly be called the Sword of God, as
well as the Sword of war is so called (Judges 7.20.) which the Discusser
(guilefully, or else unskilfully) distinguishes in this chapter from the
civil Sword. Now if the Sword of the Judge, or Magistrate, be the Sword of the
Lord, why may it not be drawn forth, as well to defend his Subjects in true
Religion, as in civil Peace?

And as Magistrates are called (in common speech) civil Magistrates: so are
they called also in the Language of the Sanctuary) Gods, Psalm. 82.1.6* If
civil Magistrates are to attend to civil matters: are not Gods to attend to
Gods matters? It was wont to go for a good Argument a conjugatis, homo sum,
humani nihil a me alienum puto. But now (by the Discussers Doctrine) the
Magistrate may say, Ego (dignatione Divina) Deus sum (Psalm. 82.) quatenus autem
Deus sum; Divina omnia a me aliena puto. Now far be all such reasonlesse, and
Paganish, yea worse then Paganish, Atheology from us. Worse then Paganish I
say, for Pagan Princes accounted their Religion their chief care, prima cura
sacrorum. And can a Christian forbid the care of Religion to Magistrates, I say
not, without blushing, but without trembling?

Object. But Magistrates were called Gods in the Old Testament, not so in the
New. Now under Christ all Nations are merely Civil, without any such Typical
holy respect upon them as was upon Israel a National Church.

Ans. It is written in the New Testament, the Kingdoms of the world are become
the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of Christ, Rev. 17.15. And if the Kingdoms be
Gods Kingdoms, and the Kingdoms of Christ, then the Kings of those Kingdoms,
are Gods Kings, and Christian Kings and what Title is there in all the New
Testament that either derogateth from the Titles, or Office of Kings?

Though the Nations now have not that Typical holiness, which the Nation of
Israel had: yet all the Churches of the Saints, have as much Truth and reality
of holiness, as Israel had. And therefore what holy care of Religion lay upon
the Kings of Israel in the Old Testament, the same lies now upon Christian
Kings in the New Testament, to protect the same in their Churches.

CHAP. 51. A Reply to his Chap. 51.
Discusser.

A Fourth Argument from this Scripture (Romans 13.) I take (in ver. 6.) which is
a merely civil reward for the Magistrates work. Now as the wages be, such is
the work, but the wages are merely Civil, Custom, Tribute, not the
contributions of the Saints or Churches of Christ, etc.

Defender.

The Contributions of the Saints and Churches, are truly called by the Apostle
carnal things, Romans 15.27. and again, 2 Cor. 9.11. But shall a man
therefore thus reason, as the wages be, such is the work: But the wages are
carnal things: therefore such is the work of the Ministers of the Gospel, to
whom such wages are paid? It is true the contributions of the Saints, may be
called Holy, because they are given to God, and (by his appointment) to the
maintenance of such as minister in his house about his holy things: But these
are mental relations, no real differances in the thigns given to Magistrates,
and Ministers: The wages given to them both, are carnal things. And consider
them both in their proper ends: as the rewards given to Ministers, are given
for their service about holy things: so the rewards given to Magistrates are
given for their service about righteous things. Now if the Purity of Doctrine,
worship, and Government be righteous privileges of all the Churches in the
Commonwealth, surely Magistrates do not well deserve all their wages, that
suffer the Churches to be bereaved, and dispoyled of their spiritual
privileges, which is the greatest and best part of their Birthright.

Besides, the Apostle commands the Churches, and Saints not only to pay to
Magistrates, Tribute, and Custom, (which are civil things:) but also to pour
out all manner of Prayers, and Supplications, Intercessions, and given of
thanks for them, 1 Timothy 1.1, 2. And surely these are spiritual dues, and not
Earthly. And therefore Magistrates owe to the Churches, and Saints some
Spiritual recompenses, which the Apostle also there names, that we may live a
quiet and peaceable Life in all godliness and honesty, ver. 2. If therefore
the Churches and Saints be not suffered to live a quiet and peaceable Life in.
Godliness and honesty: or if they be suffered to live a quiet and peaceable
life in ungodliness and dishonesty, the Magistrates fall short of returning
spiritual recompense for the spiritual Duties and services performed for them.

Discusser.

Lastly, that the Spirit of God never intended to direct or warrant the
Magistrate, to use his power in spiritual affairs and Religions, I argue from
the Term, or Title given by God, to such civil Officers, to wit, Gods
Ministers, ver. 6.

Defender.

One would think the Argument would rather evince the contrary. For what is a
Minister, but a Servant? and what is a servant, but he that is at his Masters
command (for his efficient cause:) and for his Masters ends, as his final
cause? How shall then a Magistrate carry himself, as a Minister of God, and
yet fall short (and intended so to do) both of Gods Commandments in his
Laws? and of Gods worship, and glory in the execution of them?

Discusser.

But at the very first blush, any man will acknowledge a double Ministry: the
one appointed by Christ in his Church, to order the affairs thereof, Ephesians. 4.
1 Cor. 12. The other a Civil Ministry or office, merely humane and Civil,
which men agree to constitute, (therefore called an humane Creation, 1 Pet.)
and is as true and lawful in those Countries, that never heard of the true
God, and his holy Son Jesus, as in any part of the world, where the Name of
Christ is not taken up.

Defender.

If Magistrates be the Ministers of God (as Paul calls them) then their
Ministry or office is not merely humane, but as the Apostle says, it is of
God, and ordained of God, Romans 13.1. And if it be of God, it must also be for
God: or else he is a Minister and servant not of God, but of the world. It is
true, men agree to constitute it, to wit, this or that form of it (in respect
of which influence of men, it is called an humane Creation:) but the Truth is,
Government it self is of God, and ordained by God, and every lawful form of
Government (whether Monarchy, Aristarchy, or Democracy, or some mixed of these,
according to the State of the People) they are all of God, and so acknowledged,
and authorized by God in his word, and though they be as true and lawful in
those Nations that never heard of the true God, or of his holy Son Jesus: yet
it was from the guidance and appointment of God in the very light of Nature,
that such Nations did erect such and such Governments, and Governments for the
good of humane society, and that not only in worldly matters, But in matters
also of Religion.

Whence it is, that in all civil Nations, whose Acts are recorded, either in
sacred or profane Authors, their Magistrates have had not only a due care of
Justice and honesty, but a reverend care of Religion also: Joseph in Egypt
provided for the preservation of the Lands of the Priests without Impeachment,
and that not out of respect to their superstition (which he could not but
dislike:) but out of regard to the Egyptian Laws, and Customs, to preserve
their Religion, and the maintenance thereof, inviolate, Genesis 47.22. In Babell,
Nebuchadnezzar being convinced of the sovereign Divinity of the God of Israel,
made a capital Law against the blasphemers of his Name, Dan. 3.29. Darius of
the Medes and Persians enacted a Royal Law to like purpose, Dan. 6.26. The
like did Artaxerxes, Ezra. 7.26. and Darius before him, Ezra. 6.11. In Athens
they had a Law against (...), Irreligion, upon which suffered three famous
Philosophers, Socrates, Theodorus, and Protagoras. Socrates, as Laertius
reports in his Life, was accused by Melitus (...), who commenced his Action
against him in these words (...).

Theodorus was firnamed (...), and as Socrates was condemned to death by
poison, so was this man also, as Laertius reports out of Amphicrates in the
life of Aristippus. Protagoras, (as Tully reports of him, de Natura Deorum
Lib. 1.) having thus expressed himself in the beginning of his Book,
concerning the Gods (I have not to say, whether they be, or whether they be
not) his Books were publicly burnt, and himself banished out of City and
Country. How the Ephesians stood affected to the destroyers of their Religion,
appears by the excuse which the Towne-Clarke made for Paul and his
Companions, you have brought these men hither says he, which are neither
robbers of Churches, nor yet blasphemers of your Goddess, Acts 19.37. The
Romans how zealous they were in defense of their Religion, the slaughter of
many thousand Christians will be a perpetual Monument to all Ages. All which
things I recite not to justify the misapplying of their zeal to the
maintenance of false Gods, but to make it appear, that as the Pagan Nations
who never heard of the true God, and of his Son Jesus, did erect by instinct
of Nature, Governments, and Magistrates: so by the same instinct, their Laws
and Magistrates took care of the maintenance of that Religion, which they
took to be of God. What a shame were it, that Pagan Magistrates should be more
careful and zealous of the honor of their Idols, then Christians of the
Honor of the known true God, the Lord our Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier?

CHAP. 52. A Reply to his Chap. 52.
Discusser.

MAny object out of ver. 4. of Romans 13. that the Magistrate is to avenge evil:
and therefore Heresies, false Christ's, etc. But I answer, First, that the word
is generally opposed to civil goodness, or virtue in a Commonwealth, and not
to spiritual good.

Secondly, I have proved, here as not intended evil against the spiritual or
Christian State ( handled in chapter 12.) But evil against the Civil State,
handled in this 13. chapter.

Defender.

What is meant by (...), evil, no man (that I meet with) Interprets more
fully then Pareus. There is, says he, a fourfold evil, of which the
Magistrate is the Avenger: contrary to the fourfold good, whereof the
Magistrate is the Preserver. A natural good, a Moral good, a Civil good, a
spiritual good. A natural good, as Life, and safety of our bodies: A moral
good, as Temperance, Chastity: a Civil good, as our goods and Lands, and
civil Liberties: A spiritual good, as the free passage of the Ordinances of
God, and pure Religion. In opposition to these there is a fourfold Evil:
Natural, as the killing, and wounding, and beating of our bodies: moral as
Drunkenness, and whoredom: Civil, as stealth, and robbery, and oppression:
Spiritual, as Heresy, Idolatry, and disturbance of the free passage of Gods
Ordinances. As the Magistrate is bound by his office to preserve the good of
the Subject in all these kinds: so is he to avenge the evil done against the
Subject in any of these.

What the Discusser has proved to the contrary (as he says) has been
Answered already in his place.

Discusser.

The Elders of New England grant, the Magistrate may not punish some evil, as
the secret sins of the Soul: nor sins handled in the Church in a private
way: nor such sins as are private in Families. As the complaints of Children
against Parents, Servants against Masters, Wives against Husbands: nor such
sins as are between the Members, and Churches themselves. From whence I
observe,

1. That the Magistrate is not to punish all evil.

2. I observe, how they take away from the Magistrates that which is proper to
his cognizance, as the complaints of Children, servants, Wives, against their
Parents, Masters, Husbands, etc.

Defender.

When we say, the Magistrate is an Avenger of evil: we mean of all sorts, or
kinds of evil: not every particular of each kind: secret evils, in thought,
or affection, yea in action too: but neither confessed, nor proved by due
witnesses: the Magistrate cannot punish.

Discusser.

The distinction of secret, or private, and public evil, will not here
avail: because such as urge the Term evil (viz. that the Magistrate is to
punish evil) they urge it strictly, eo nomine, because Heresy, Blasphemy,
etc. is evil, etc.

Defender.

But not simply because it is evil, unless it be also notorious, and evident,
and convicted by sufficient witnesses, and held forth with public offense, and
disturbance. Neither do the Elders take away from the Magistrates, the
cognizance of the complaints of Children, Servants, wives, against Parents,
Masters, Husbands.

Unless they be merely private, and easily healed in a private way, by
Domestical Government, what need household Government, if every Family-offence
should be brought to the cognizance of the public Magistrate? one Ordinance of
God does not swallow up another.

CHAP. 53. A Reply to his Chap. 53, 54, and 55.
Discusser.

THe Author of the Letter proceeded to a last Reason from Scripture, to prove
that the Disciples of Christ should be so far from persecuting, that they
ought to bless them that curse them, and pray for them that persecute them:
and that because of the freeness of Gods grace, and deepnesse of his Counsels,
calling home them that be Enemies, persecutors, no people, yea some at the last
hour.

Unto this Reason the Answerer is pleased thus to Reply.

First, in general, we must not do evil that good may come thereof.

Secondly, in particular, he affirms that it is evil to tolerate seditious
evil doers, seducing Teachers, scandalous livers; and for proof of this,
quoteth Christ's Reproof of the Angels of Pergamus, and Thyatira, for
tolerating Balaam, and Jezabel, to teach, and seduce, Revel. 2.14.20.

Defender.

The Discusser forgets himself, through Incogitancy, (if not through guile)
when he makes this to have been my first Reply, that we must not do evil
that good may come thereof. For he is not ignorant, that I gave two Answers,
(or Replies as he calls them) before, in the same place.

First, when Christ commands his Disciples to bless them that curse them,
and persecute them, he gives not therein a Rule to public Officers, whether
in Church, or Commonwealth, to suffer notorious sinners, either in Life or
Doctrine, to pass away with a Blessing: but to private Christians, to suffer
persecution patiently, yea and to pray for their Persecutors.

Again, it is true, Christ would have his Disciples to be far from
persecuting, (for persecution is a wicked oppression of men for Righteousness
sake:) but that hinders not, but that he would have them execute upon all
Disobedience, the Judgment and vengeance required in the Word, 2 Cor. 10.6.
Romans 13.4.

Both these Answers the Discusser passes over in silence. For look, as
Children where they cannot read, think it best to skip over: so men of riper
years, when they are loath to stoop to the Authority of the Truth, they think
it best to pass it over in silence. But what is it, the Discusser is pleased
to answer to?

Discusser.

In this Proposition, [that it is evil to tolerate notorious evil doers,
seducing Teachers, scandalous livers:] I observe two evils.

First, that this Proposition is too large and general, because the Rule
admits of exception, and that according to the will of God.

Defender.

And to prove that this general Proposition admits some exception, the
Discusser spends the rest of this 53. chapter: as also the 54th. chapter, and
55th.

But because I would not spend time, nor weary the Reader with following the
Discusser in impertinent, and copious digressions, I return briefly this Reply.

First, it is wholly impertinent, whatsoever the Discusser is pleased to
discourse of Gods permission, or toleration of any evil.

For first, God is his own Rule, and what he does is good, because he does it.
Not his Act, but his word, is a Rule to us. He may tolerate Cain, a Murderer
to live; but that is no precedent to a Civil Magistrate.

Secondly, I willingly grant, it may be lawful for a Civil Magistrate, to
tolerate notorious evil doers in two cases, under which, all the Examples will
fall, which the Discusser alleges in any word of Truth.

As first, in regard of the efficient cause of punishing; when the Magistrates
hand is too weak and feeble, and the offenders Adherents so great and strong,
that Justice cannot be done upon him, without manifest peril to the whole
State, there the Magistrate may tolerate a notorious evil, even murder it
self, as David upon this ground did tolerate in Joab and Abishai, the murder
of Abner. 2 Samuel 3.39.

And secondly, in regard of the final cause, an evil may be tolerated to
prevent other greater evils: As Moses tolerated divorce of unpleasing Wives,
to prevent the murder, or other hard and cruel usage of them.

In either of these cases, I would not deny but a murderer may be tolerated: if
either the Magistrate want sufficient Power, with safety of the State, to cut
him off: or if a foreign State be so affected and addicted to the Murderer,
that in case the Magistrate here cut off him, they will cut off sundry of our
innocent and necessary members, whom they have gotten into their custody in
revenge of him.

And if either of these be the case, I easily grant that it is not evil to
tolerate a notorious seducing false Teacher, or other scandalous liver: But
such an extraordinary does not hinder the due largeness, and generality of the
Proposition, that it is evil to tolerate seditious evil doers, seducing
Teachers, scandalous Livers. As in a parallel case, this Proposition is not too
large, nor too general, it is evil to tolerate a bloody murderer:
notwithstanding in some cases (such as have been named, but those are
extraordinary) it may be lawful to tolerate him.

Now that in ordinary cases, it is not lawful to tolerate a seducing false
Teacher, the Commandment of God is clear, and strong, Deuteronomy. 13.8, 9. Thine
eye shall not pity him, neither shall thou spare him, neither shall thou
conceal him, but thou shall surely kill him.

If the Discusser shall except, that strict Commandment was in force in
Israel, because their Land was typically holy, or their Magistrates were Types
of Christ.

The Reply is plain and just, God himself alleges no such reason of his
Law: But another quite different, but common with them to all Nations,
professing the worship of the true God, Thou shall put him to death, because he
sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God, ver. 10.

Neither can any instance be given of any Capital Law of Moses, but is of
Moral, (that is of general, and perpetual) Equity, in all Nations, in all
Ages, Capitalia Mosis Politica sunt aeterna.

CHAP. 54. A Reply to his Chap. 56.
Discusser.

I Come now to the second Evil, which I observe in the Answerers former
Position, that it would be evil to tolerate seducing Teachers, scandalous
Livers.

In two things, I shall discover the great evil of this joining and coupling
seducing Teachers, and scandalous Livers, as the proper and adaequate object of
the Magistrates care and work to suppress and punish.

Defender.

I no where make it the proper and adaequate object of the Magistrates care and
work, to suppress, and punish seducing Teachers, and scandalous livers. For I
have expressly said it, and proved it before, that it is, and ought to be the
care and work of the Church also to suppress and punish seducing Teachers,
and scandalous livers, in a Church Way, as well as the Magistrate, in a civil
way.

Discusser.

First, this joining of things of such different kinds, is not an homogeneall,
but heterogeneall commixture of things most different in kinds.

Defender.

But these different kinds, they agree in one common kind: they are both of
them evils, and evils destructive in their several ways to the common good
of Gods people, which ought to be preserved both in Church and Commonwealth.
The Terms of Homogeneall and Heterogeneall, are in this case only words of
noise, and of an empty sound, fit to take with simple people, that know not the
meaning, nor use of them.

Discusser.

Who knows not, that many seducing Teachers of the Paganish, Jewish, Turkish,
or Antichristian Religion, may be clear and free from scandalous offenses in
their lives, and from disobedience to the civil Laws of the State?

Defender.

Now you may see the Discusser was willing to make use of founding words, which
himself (it seems) knew not well the use of. For what if there were many
seducing Teachers of all Religions, that may be clear from scandalous
offenses? the distinguishing therefore of evils into these two sorts, into
seditious Teachers, and scandalous offenders, is so much the more allowable,
and accurate. If a man shall say the work of the Creation on the sixth day, was
either of man, or of Beast: shall a man go about here to observe a great
evil, that here is not an homogeneall, but an heterogeneall commixture of
things most different in kind? For who knows not that there are many Beasts,
Lions, Leopards, Wolves, Bears, that never were men, but are clear and free
from all humane nature?

Such a like reasoning is that of the Discusser here. What if many seducing
Teachers, whether Jewish, Paganish, Turkish, Antichristian, were never
scandalous livers, but obedient to the civil State? yet are they not all of
them evil? and accordingly to be restrained by lawful Authority? And is the
joining of them together the great evil of an heterogeneall commixture?

Again, let the Discusser be pleased to observe (that which has been often
touched before) that we look at it, as more tolerable, for seducing Teachers to
seduce those who are already in the same gall of bitterness with themselves,
as Pagans to seduce Pagans, Jews to seduce Jews, Turks to seduce Turks, and
Antichristians to seduce Antichristians. Though this also ought to be prevented
by wise and wholesome means, by a Christian Magistrate in all those that are
under his dominion, so far as there is power in his hand, without the hazard of
the public State.

Lastly, let me add this Reply to the rest, that it will be hard for the
Discusser to find Antichristian seducers clear and free from Disobedience to
the civil Laws of a State, in case that Antichrist (to whom they are sworn)
shall excommunicate the civil Magistrate, and prescribe the civil State to
the invasion of Forrayners.

Discusser.

Again, who knows, not that a seducing Teacher properly sins against the
Church, and against the Spiritual State and Laws of it? and therefore ought
most properly and only to be dealt withal in such a way.

Defender.

These twise-sod Coleworts, the Discusser has often set them before us
heretofore: but with as little savor now, as before. For what if a seducing
Teacher having sinned against the Church, be cast out by the Church, and still
continue seducing? yea what a weak and guilfull evasion, would this prove for
the Discusser, to refer a seducing Teacher to a Church Way, when himself
does not acknowledge any Church of Christ extant upon the face of the Earth?

Discusser.

A second evil, which I observe in coupling seducing Teachers with scandalous
livers, is a silent and implicit Justification of all unrighte us and cruel
proceedings of Jews, and Gentiles against all the Prophets of God, the Lord
Jesus himself, and all his messingers and witnesses, whom their Accusers, have
ever so coupled and mixed with notorious evil doers, and scandalous livers,
etc.

Defender.

Is this a silent and implicit Justification of all the injurious and cruel
handlings by wicked men of the Lord Jesus, and his witnesses, to say, that
seducing Teachers, and scandalous livers are to be punished by Authority,
because the Lord Jesus himself, and his witnesses have suffered under those
names? What if the wicked Jews, and Gentiles did injuriously and blasphemously
put those names upon the Lord Jesus, and his faithful witnesses, and upon
pretense of such evils put them to death? does it therefore justify such
proceedings, to say, that seducing Teachers, and scandalous livers are to be
punished by Authority? If those who are indeed seducing Teachers, and
scandalous livers ought to be punished, will it therefore justify the like
proceedings against them who are no such persons, but falsely so called? if a
man should say, a murderer is to be punished with death, will it therefore
justify the Islanders of Melita, to put Paul to death, because amongst them he
was so reputed, doubtless a murderer? Acts 28.4. yea let the Discusser
seriously confider, whether this kind of reasoning of his, do not more then
silently and implicitly testify, that the Lord Jesus and his witnesses, were
seducing Teachers and scandalous livers.

CHAP. 55. A Reply to his Chap. 57.
Discusser.

THe Scripture alleged by the Answerer, to prove that it would be an evil, to
tolerate notorious evil doers, whether seducing Teachers, or scandalous
livers, is written, Rev. 2.14.20. Where Christ has something against the
Church of Pergamus, for tolerating them that hold the Doctrine of Balaam: and
against the Church of Thyatira, for tolerating Jezebel, to teach and seduce.

Unto which I may answer with some admiration and astonishment, how it pleased
the Father of Lights, and most Jealous God, to darken and veil the eyes of
such a man, as not to seek out, and propose some Scriptures (in the proof of
so weighty an assertion) as at least might have some color for the influence
of the civil Magistrate in such cases. For these Texts concern neither the
City, nor the civil Magistrates of Pergamus, and Thyatyra, but the Churches,
and Elders, etc.

Defender.

It was no part of my meaning, to allege those Scriptures, to prove it
unlawful for Magistrates to tolerate seducing Teachers, but unlawful for
Churches.

If the Discusser say there needed no proof of that, that was out of Question.

I may truly tell him, that was more then I knew. For the Letter which he
entreated me to Answer) so stated the Question, as in general to argue against
persecution for cause of Conscience. And if the Question be put in such
general Terms, I knew the Church might as well be complained of for
persecution for cause of Conscience, as the civil Magistrate. For if
persecution be taken properly for affliction or oppression for righteousness
sake I knew it was out of Question, all persecution was unlawful, whether by
the Church, or the Magistrate: an unjust excommunication is as true
persecution, as an unjust Banishment. But if persecution be taken more largely,
and loosely, (as it is by the Author of the Letter, and by the Discusser, for
any affliction, or persecution for cause of Conscience (whether good
Conscience, or evil, whether rightly informed, or erroneous) If that be the
intent of the Letter (as it seemed to me) to bear witness against that, then
any testimony of Scripture, that justifies a lawful censure of false and
erroneous Teachers, does evince the scope of the Letter to be erroneous, which
is against all persecution for cause of Conscience. Let therefore the Discusser
admire at his own admiration, and be astonished at his own astonishment, that
wondereth to see an universal negative argued against by a particular
affirmative.

The Letter denies the lawfulness of all persecution in cause of Conscience,
that is, in matter of Religion: I seek to evince the falsehood of it, by an
instance of lawful Church-prosecution in case of false Teachers.

Discusser.

But if the Churches and Angels thereof had sufficient power to suppress
Balaam, and Jezabel, then all power of Magistrates and Governors in Pergamus
and Thyatira (though they had been Christian) must needs fall to the ground, as
none of Christ's appointment.

Defender.

The power of the Churches and Angels, of Pergamus, and Thyatyra, were
sufficient for those ends, for which Christ ordained Church Power: to wit, for
the healing of the souls of such seducers, (if they belonged to Christ) as
also for keeping those Churches pure from the fellowship of the guilt of their
Act (in teaching false Doctrines) whom they had duly censured. But the power of
those Churches and Angels was not sufficient to prevent the further spreading
of the Leaven of their false Doctrines, both in such as were out of the Church,
and in private, amongst the members of the Church, who might adhere to them.
Much less was the putting forth of the Church Power against them sufficient to
clear the Magistrates of a Christian State from the guilt of Apostasy, in
suffering such Apostates amongst them, who would be ready to solicit many
simple souls, either to withold and withdraw themselves from the Fellowship
of the Churches, or in the Churches to withdraw from the Lord Jesus.

Discusser.

Lastly, from this perverse wresting of what is writ to the Church, and the
Officers thereof, as if it were writ to the Civil Officers, and State thereof,
all may see how since the Apostacy of Antichrist the Christian world (so
called) has swallowed up Christianity, how the Church, and Civil State, that
is, the Church and the world are now become one flock of Jesus Christ, etc.

Defender.

Here is no wresting, much less perverse wresting of any Scripture at all,
from the Church, to the Civil State. I intended to apply the Scripture written
to the Churches, and to the Officers thereof, no further then to other
Churches, and their Officers. The Scriptures upon which we call in the
Magistrate to the punishment of Seducers, are such as are directed to civil
States, and Magstrates, of which diverse have been mentioned, and applied before.

CHAP. 56. A Reply to his Chap. 58, and 59. Discussing the Testimony of some
Princes.
Discusser.

I Proceed to the second Head of Reasons (against persecution for cause of
Conscience) taken from the profession of famous Princes, King James, Stephen of
Poland, King of Bonemia.

Unto whom the Answerer returns a treble Answer.

1. We willingly acknowledge, (says he) that none is to be persecuted at all;
no more then any may be oppressed for righteousness sake.

Again, we acknowledge, that none is to be punished for his Conscience, though
misinformed, unless his error be fundamental, or seditiously and turbulently
promoted, and that after due conviction of his Conscience, that it may appear,
he is not punished for his Conscience, but for sinning against his Conscience.

Furthermore, we acknowledge, none is to be constrained, to believe or profess
the true Religion, till he be convinced in Judgment of the truth of it: but
yet restrained he may be from blaspheming the Truth, and from seducing any into
pernicious errors.

This first Answer, I believe, I have sufficiently cleared the weakness of the
Foundations thereof in the former discourse.

Defender.

And I doubt not, but by the help of Christ, I have formerly declared and
convinced the feebleness of the opposition made against them, and what firm
foundations those Answers are built upon, from the Scriptures of Truth.

Discusser.

His second Answer is this, what Princes profess and practice is not a Rule of
Conscience. They many times tolerate that in State Policy, which cannot justly
be tolerated in point of true Christianity.

Again, Princes many times tolerate Offenders out of very necessity, when the
Offenders are too many, or too mighty for them to punish. In which respect
David tolerated Joab and his murder, but against his will.

It may be here observed, how the Answerer deals with Princes, one while,
they are nursing Fathers to the Church, not only to feed, but also to correct;
and therefore consequently, bound to judge, what is true feeding and
correcting: and consequently all men are bound to submit to their feeding and
correcting.

Defender.

The Discusser does partly falsely, and partly fraudulently fasten upon me this
dealing with Princes. That I make them nursing Fathers of the Church, I therein
follow the footsteps of the Holy Ghost before me, teaching what Princes should
be, and foretelling what they shall be in the latter days, Isaiah 49.23. In
which place, It was not the intent of the Holy Ghost, (nor mine) to threaten
the Church with a red of Correction: But to comfort the Church with a double
blessing: First of the Fatherly provision and protection of Princes for the
Church: Secondly, of their subjection to the Church, in respect of their
spiritual Estate. What Princes may do, in case the Church should Apostate,
and become no Church: or in case they should break forth into Sedition, and
Rebellion against the Civil State, It is another Question which I have not
meddled with, in all this Discourse. Neither have I spoken of Princes, as bound
to Judge, what is true feeding, or correcting: least of all have I said, that
all men are bound (especially in Conscience) to their feeding, and correcting.
These are calumnies devised by the Discusser.

All I have said (to my remembrance) this way, is, that Princes are bound to be
wise, and Learned with holy knowledge that they may kiss the Son, and be
subject to him, Psalm. 2.10.11. And therefore able to discern of such corrupt
feeding, as destroys the Foundation of Religion, and the souls of Gods
people, that they may be able to restrain such, and to preserve the Church
from such ravenous Wolves: and I deny not that their Subjects are to submit to
them herein; when they judge according to the Word; or howsoever patiently to
suffer for well-doing, without resistance, in a way of Hostility,
notwithstanding any Church Power. If ought be unsound in this dealing with
Princes, I am willing to hear of it.

Discusser.

Another while, when Princes cross Mr. Cottons Judgment, and Practice, then
it matters not, what the Profession and Practice of Princes is: for, (says he)
their Profession and Practice is no Rule to Conscience.

Defender.

If Princes swerve from the rule of the word, either in profession, or
practice, their own profession, or practice is no rule either to themselves,
or others. Princes ought not to rule the word, but are to be ruled by it. But
see the notorious calumny, of the Discusser, so representing Mr Cottons dealing
with Princes, as if he made his own judgment and practice the rule of the
proceeding of Princes. Men whose tongues are their own, may speak any thing:
But yet such as fear the Lord, would tremble at such speeches, as neither
express Truth, nor Love.

Discusser

I ask then, unto what Princes or Magistrates, will themselves, or any so
persuaded, submit to, as unto keepers of both Tables, and nursing Fathers, and
Mothers, to the Church?

First will it not evidently follow by these Tenants, That they ought not to
submit to any Magistrates in the world, in these cases, but to Magistrates just
of their own Conscience?

Defender.

We subject our selves to all sorts of Magistrates of the Countries where we
live, or whether we come, whether Christian, or Pagan, Orthodox, or erroneous,
just of our Consciences, or unjust against them. Subject our selves, I say,
either in active submission, and obedience, when they command according to God:
or in passive submission, of our bodies, and goods, lives, and liberties, when
they command against God. Since the Discusser concludes, it will evidently
follow, that we will submit to no Magistrates, but just of our own
Consciences let him make that evident, which he says, is evident, or else, let
him say, he is evidently mistaken, ne quid dicam gravius.

Discusser.

Secondly, will it not also follow, that all other Consciences in the world,
(except their own) must be persecuted by such their Maistrates?

Defender.

This will no ways follow, unless all men's Consciences in the world did err
Fundamentally, and obstinately after just conviction, against the very
Principles of Christian Religion, or at least, unless they maintained, and
held forth other errors (though not Fundamentally subverting Religion, yet
Fundamentally subverting Church Order, and civil order) and that in a
turbulent, and Factious manner. For in these cases only we follow Magistrates
to punish in matters of Religion.

Discusser.

And Lastly, Is not this to make Magistrates, but stepps, and stirrops for
themselves, to ascend and mount into their rich, and honorable Seats, and
Saddels? I mean, great and settled maintenances, which neither the Lord Jesus,
nor any of his first Messengers, the true Patterns did ever know.

Defender.

How this power ascribed to Magistrates, not by me, but by the body almost, of
all Faithful Ministers, yea by the Prophets and Apostles themselves, should
make Magistrates stairs, and stirrops, for our selves to mount up so high, let
him that can discern it, make it appear. To allow them power over our selves
in case of Heretical Delinquency, is not to make them stairs, or stirrops of
our advancement, but Swords, and staves (if need be) for our punishment.

Besides, I wonder what fancy came into the Discussers mind, to dream of rich
and honorable Seats, and Saddels of our Magistrates? When as he need not
beignorant, how far short they themselves, fall, of rich and honorable Seats
and Saddels, which himself, interprets, great and settled maintenances.

Lastly, I suppose, he is not ignorant, that my self against whom he is
pleased by Name to write this invective, lives not upon great and settled
maintenance, but according to that which he calls, the true pattern of the
first Messengers of the Lord Jesus.

CHAP. 57. A Reply to his Chap. 60.
Discusser.

IN the second place, the Answerer says, that Princes out of State Policy, do
sometime Tolerate, what suiteth not with Christianity: and out of
State-necessity Tolerate ( as David did Joab) against their wills.

But then the Answerer must acknowledge with me, That there is a necessity
sometime of State-Toleration, as in the case of Joab. And so his former
affirmation, generally laid down, [viz, That it is evil to Tolerate seducing
Teachers, and Scandalous Lives.] Was not duly weighed in the balance of the
Sanctuary, and is too light.

Defender.

I easily acknowledge sometime a necessity of State Toleration. As I have
formerly expressed (in Chap. 53.) especially in two cases, whereof that of Joab
is one.

But that will nothing impeach the Truth of my former affirmation delivered in
general terms, especially, if it be weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary.
For the holy writings of the Sanctuary do expressly deliver the like position,
in like general terms. As Moses says, who so sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed. This Law is delivered in general terms: and yet
though Joab was a murderer, he was tolerated to live all the Reign of David:
yet I hope the Discusser will not say, that general Law of Moses was not duly
weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and is too light.

Discusser.

I affirm Secondly, That that State Policy, and State-necessity which
permits Consciences of men, will be found to agree most punctually with the
Rules of the best Politition, that ever the world saw, the Lord Jesus himself,
who commanded the permitting of the Tares, to wit, Antichristians, or false
Christians with true Christians, as I have discoursed above.

Defender.

That discourse has bin examined above, and found too light, so far as it
crosses the Truth returned in Answer to the Letter. To permit some
Antichristians, or false Christians, The Answer to the Letter did allow:
unless they maintained Fundamental Heresies against the Foundation of
Religion, and that obstinately, after conviction, and did withal seduce
others, into the same Apostasy.

But as for such Heretics, and seducing Teachers, I hope, it has been
cleared, they are none of those Tares, of which Christ says, Let them alone.

Besides, it is an Interpretation of Christ's words formerly given, and not to
be reversed, That if by Tares were meant, such gross offenders, then the
speech of Christ. Let them alone, is not a word of command in way of an
Ordinance, but a word of Permission, and prediction, what will be, in way of
Providence. Like that in Luke 22.36. He that has no sword, let him sell his
Garment and buy a sword, It is not a word of command, or direction, what the
Disciples should do; But a word of prediction, what times of trial they
should meet withal.

CHAP. 58. A Reply to his Chap. 61.
Discusser.

His Third Answer is this.

FOr those three Princes named by you, who Tolerated false Religion, we can
name more and greater, who have not Tolerated Heretics and Schismatics,
notwithstanding their pretense of Conscience, and Arrogating the crown of
Martyrdom to their sufferings.

Constantine the great at the Request of the general Council of Nice, Banished
Arius, with some of his fellows, Ecclesiast. Histor. l 1. Cap. 19.20.

The same Constantine made a severe Law, against the Donatists: and the like
proceedings against them were used by Valentinian, Gratian, and Theodosius, as
Augustine reports in Epist. 166. only Julian the Apostate granted liberty
to Heretics as well as to Pagans, that he might by Tolerating all weeds to
grow, choke the vitalls of Christianity: Which was also the practice and sin
of Ualens the Arian.

Queen Elizabeth, as famous for her government, as most of the former, It is
well known what Laws she made, and executed against Papists: Yea and King
James (one of your own Witnesses) though he was slow in proceeding against
Papists (as you say) for Conscience sake; yet you are not ignorant, how sharply
and severely he punished those, whom the Malignant world calls Puritans, men
of more Conscience and better Faith, then the Papists, whom he Tolerated.

Discusser.

First, for mine own part, I would not use an Argument from the number of
Princes, witnessing in profession, or practice, against persecution for cause
of Conscience, etc. Truth, and Faith, must not be received with respect of
persons: precious pearls are found in muddy shells. The most High chooses the
poor of this world, to be witnesses to his Truth: and Buchanan dying was going
thither, whether few Kings were coming.

Defender.

This Chapter then might have been spared: for it neither maintains his
cause, nor refuteth my answer to his friends Argument: but yields up the
invalidity of the Argument from such a Topic place, As from the number and
votes of Princes. But by his leave, the answer which I gave to his argument is
not taken from the like number of Princes, but from the greater piety, and
presence of God with those Princes, who have professed and practiced against
Toleration. It is truly said, Suffragia non sunt numeranda, sed ponderanda.
Heroical wisdom, magnanimity and zeal, is not the less to be esteemed,
because it is found in the spirit, and counsel, and practice of Princes.

CHAP. 59. A Reply to his Chap. 62.
Discusser.

Secondly, I observe, how inconsiderately (I hope not willingly) the Answerer
passes by the reasons and grounds, urged by these three Princes.

In King James his speech, he passes by that golden Maxim, that God never
loved to plant his Church by blood.

Defender.

The Discusser is mistaken, when he says I passed over their reasons and
grounds inconsiderately, though he hops, not willingly: for indeed I passed
them over willingly, but not inconsiderately. For I well considered, either the
reasons wanted weight, or else did not impugn the cause in hand. For instance,
this speech of King James (That God never loved to plant his Church by blood)
though it be a Truth of weight: yet it does not touch this cause. It is far
from us, to defend the planting of Churches by blood: that is, to compel men
to yield themselves to the fellowship of the Church by bloody Laws, or
poenalties: the Church of Christ admits no members, but a willing people,
Psalm. 110.3. Nevertheless that hinders not, but as the Church was purchased
and planted by the blood of Christ: so he that shall go about to supplant, and
destroy the Church of Christ, his blood may justly fall upon his own head.

Discusser.

Secondly, That civil obedience may be performed by Papists: this was another
reason of King James passed over by the Answerer.

Defender.

No marvel, that I passed it over: for I did not find it in the Letter. For
though the King say (as the Letter reports him, I only declared, to be
secured for civil obedience: which for Conscience cause, they were bound to
perform:) yet the King does not say, That civil obedience may be performed,
by Papists, standing steadfast to the rules of their own Religion. For if the
Bishop of Rome, upon pretense of heretical pravity, shall excommunicate a
Protestant Prince, dissolve the Subjects Oath of Allegiance to him, depose him,
dispose of his Kingdom: In this case (which often falls out) how can civil
obedience be performed by the Papists?

Discusser.

Thirdly, The Kings third ground is his observation in Revel. 20. That
persecution is a true and certain note of a false Church: The wicked are
Beseigers, the faithful Beseiged.

Defender.

I subscribe to the King that persecution (properly so called, that is, the
oppression of any for righteousness sake) is a note of a false Church: but nor
a certain note. For again, I say, that persecution properly so called, may be
sometime found, in the true Church. For which of all the Prophets did not the
Church of the old Testament persecute? Acts 7.52.

And yet that persecution was not the true and certain note of a false Church:
For then God had left no true Church upon the face of the earth. But this I
grant, That such persecution, where ever it is found, It is a degree of
falsehood and A postacy in that Church. But what a vast distance is there
between the just censure of Apostasticall, and Heretical seducers, and
disturbers of the Churches peace and truth, and between persecution?

As for the other speech [The wicked are beseigers, the faithful are beseiged]
It may well be said of the seige spoken of in that 20. of the Revelation: But
if it should be put for a universal Maxim, Royal Authority cannot make it
good Divinity. When the ten Christian Kings shall hate the Whore of Rome, and
eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. ( Rev. 17.16.) I suppose the Discusser
will not say, the wicked are Beseigers, the faithful are beseiged.

Discusser.

In King Stephens speech of Poland, he passes by the true difference, between
a civil, and a spiritual Government. I am ( said Stephen) a civil Magistrate
over the bodies of men, not a spiritual over their souls.

Defender.

King Stephens speech may well stand, and the cause still untouched. The
Magistrate is a Ruler over the Bodies of men, not over their souls: He cannot
command their souls, nor bind their Consciences, nor punish their spirits. It
is the Lord alone can reach them. That which the King or Magistrate can do, or
does in this case, is to punish the bodies of men for destroying, or
disturbing Religion.

Discusser.

To confound these, is Babel: and Jewish to seek for Moses and bring him from
his Grave, etc.

Defender.

It is Babel indeed, for civil Magistrates, to make Laws to bind Conscience,
and to excommunicate transgressors of those Laws: But to punish false
Prophets, and Seducers of Gods people to Idolatry, was never the practice of
Babel: but it was, and is their practice, not only to Tolerate them, but to
advance, and encourage them.

If it were a Jewish seeking of Moses, and a bringing him from his Grave, to
punish Seducers for Idolatry, then after Moses was buried, that Law ( Deuteronomy.
13.) was abrogated. But his buryall, and Gods hiding of the place thereof, was
rather a confirmation, and establishment of it, then any Abrogation, or
Impeachment of it. For may it not justly be conceived. That the Lord therefore
hid the place of his burial, least the Children of Israel knowing it, might
go a whoring after his Sepulcher, and it may be offer sweet incense upon it:
and so such false worship against the law of Moses might come to be Tolerated,
for honor to the body of Moses?

But Christ has abolished a National State, or Church, which Moses set up in
Canaan

Though Christ abolished a National Church State, and instead thereof set up a
Congregationall Church: yet Christ never abolished, a National Civil State,
nor the Judicial Laws of Moses, which were of Moral equity, but established
them rather, in their place and order. He that shed his own blood to plant his
Church, did never abolish that Law, which enacted, that his blood should be
upon him, who should supplant his Church. If Christ's blood go to plant it, let
the false Christ's blood go for supplanting it.

Discusser.

In the King of Bohemias speech, the Answerer passes by that Foundation in
grace and Nature, that Conscienee ought not to be violated, and forced, it is a
spiritual Rape.

Defender.

This was not passed by, but prevented in stating the Question, where it was
said, it is not lawful to censure any, no not for error in Fundamental points
of Doctrine or Worship, till the Conscience of the offender, be first convinced
(out of the word of God) of the dangerous error of his way, and then if he
still persist, It is not out of Conscience, but against his Conscience (as the
Apostle says Tit. 3.11.) and so he is not persecuted for cause of Conscience,
but punished for sinning against his Conscience.

Discusser.

The King observes that most lamentably true experience of all ages, That
persecution for cause of Conscience, has ever proved pernicious, etc.

Defender.

No experience in any age did ever prove it pernicious, to punish seducing
Apostates, after due conviction of the error of their way. Wherein did the
burning of Servetus prove pernicious to Geneva? or the just execution of many
popish Priests to Queen Elizabeth, or to the english State?

But the Kings speech may pass, if it be meant of persecution properly so
called, to wit, Oppression of the faithful, for the Truths sake: yea if it be
the punishment of any for error, If not Fundamentally pernicious either to
Religion, or Church Order, and that after conviction of Conscience, persisted
in with obstinacy.

Discusser.

Lastly, the Kings observation of his own time, that Persecution for cause of
Conscience, was practiced most in England, and such places, where Popery
reigned: Implying (as I conceive) such practices commonly proceed from the
great Whore, whose Daughters are like their Mother, all of a bloody nature, as
commonly all wolves be.

Defender.

It is no marvel, if I passed by this observation in the Kings speech: For
there is no such observation there to be found. If the Discusser had well
observed it himself, he would have found, it was not the speech of the King,
but of the Prisoner.

And the persecution, he speaks of, was not of Antichristians, or Heretics,
or Idolaters, but only of such as the world nicknamed Puritans, or the like,
and of them too, without conviction of the error of their way.

But in that the Discusser makes England a Daughter of the great Whore, and of
a bloody nature, like her Mother: he speaks as some other of the rigid
Separation have done before him. But I could never yet see awarrant (from the
rule either of Truth, or Love) for such a speech. Did ever the holy Scripture,
call any Church an whore, that worshipped the true God, only in the Name of
Jesus, and depended on him alone for righteousness and salvation? Is it not
the part of a base child, or at least, a base pare of a child, to call his
Mother whore, who bred him, and bred him to know no other Father but her
lawful Husband, the Lord Jesus Christ?

CHAP. 60. A Reply to his 63. Chap.
Discusser.

NOw Thirdly, In that the Answerer observes, that amongst the Roman Emperors,
they that did not persecute were Julian the Apostate, and Valens the Arian:
Whereas the good Emperors, Constantine, Gratian, Valentian, and Theodosius,
they did persecute the Arians, and Donatists.

Let it be for an Answer, It is no new thing for godly, and eminently godly men
to perform ungodly actions: nor for ungodly persons, for wicked ends, to act
what in it self is good and righteous, etc.

Defender.

This may go for a truth, but not for an Answer. The Letter would Justify
Toleration of Religion from the judgment and speeches of three Kings. I
Answered that was no Argument, for I could bring him Kings more in number, and
greater in the sight of God and man, who judged it meet not to tolerate
Heretics, nor turbulent Schismatics,

To this the Discusser Answers, sometimes the Godly do that which is evil,
and the wicked, that which is good. This I say is a Truth, but does not take
away my Answer, but by a Petitio Principij, a begging of the Question, That
Kings alleged by him did that which was good, but the Kings alleged by me,
though better persons, did that which was evil.

CHAP. 61. A Reply to his Chap. 64.
Discusser.

THe unknowing zeal of Constantine and other Emperors did more hurt to Christ
Jesus, his Church and Kingdom, then the raging fury of the most bloody Neroes.
In the persecution of those wicked Emperors, Christians were sweet and
fragrant, like spice pounded in Morters: But those good Emperors persecuting
some erroneous persons, and advancing the Professors of some truths, and
maintaining their Religion by the material Sword, by this means Christianity
was eclipsed, The Professors of it fell asleep (Cant. 5.) Babel was ushered
in, and by degrees the Churches of the Saints were turned into the Wilderness
of whole Nations, (Rev. 12.13.) until the whole world, became Christian, or
Christendom. Those good Emperors intending to exalt Christ, but not attending
to the command of Christ Jesus, to permit the Tares to grow in the Field of the
world, they made the Garden of the Church, and Field of the world, all one etc.

Defender.

If the unknowing zeal of Constantine, and other Christian Emperors did more
hur^ to the Church, then the raging fury of bloody Neroes: It was not because
the raging fury of those Persecutors was more accepted of God, then this
unknowing zeal of the good Emperors. For though the unknowing zeal of the one
was finfull, yet it was the friut of humane frialty, Error Amoris: But the rage
of the others was divelish fury, Amor Erroris. Besides the unknowing zeal of
the good Emperors, lay not in punishing notorious Heretical Seducers; nor will
the Discusser be ever able to show, that the Church of Christ suffered any hurt
at all by that means. The contrary is evident, Constantius, and Valens by
Tolerating and favoring the Arians, the whole world became Arian; Ingemuit
orbis Christianus, et miratus est factum se esse Arianum. Now whether be the
greater mischeife the whole world to become Arian, or to become Christian, Let
Christians judge. The Discusser indeed speaks of it, as a soliscisme in
Religion, that the whole world should become Christian, and quoteth for it,
Rev. 12. and 13. But Rev. 12. speaks nothing to the purpose: and Revel. 13.
speaks of it, as a marveilous evil, that the whole world should wonder after
the Beast, ver. 3. But their wondering after the Beast, not a becoming
Christian (for they were that before) nor did it spring only from the
unknowing zeal of Christian Emperors in persecuting Apostate Heretics: But
rather from their sinful Indulgence in the Toleration of Heretics in Doctrine,
and Idolaters in Worship. For had they been zealous, and watchful against
such, how is it possible, that ever Antichrist should have been hatched up, to
carry the world after him into such a notorious Apostasy? It was not
persecution, that made the world, Christian: but Toleration, that made the
world, Antichristian. Furthermore, the hurt of the unknowing zeal of good
Emperors did to the Church, came in also another way, by advancing
Church Officers to Mountains of high preferments, and settled indowments, Rev.
8.8, 9. The Church never took hurt by the punishment of Heretics. Moreover,
when God advanced Constantine and other good Emperors to sit on the Throne, It
is true, the Church soon became a wilderness: but that came not to pass
because those Emperors forced Pagans into Church Fellowship by the material
Sword (as the Discusser intimates, but untruly) But because the common sort
are willing to follow the example of great ones, Regis ad exemplum totus
componitur Orbis: as also because of the sleepiness of the watchmen (the
Elders of the Churches) who should not have suffered such store of Tares to
come into the communion of the Church. Had the world renounced their Paganism,
and professed Christ to be the Son of God, but yet had been kept out of the
Fellowship of the Church, till they had approved their profession by a sincere
Christian conversation. It had been no soliscisme at all (howsoever the
Discusser judge of it) though the whole world had been come -- Christian, and
styled Christendom. But it is too gross and palpable a mistake, to make this
the cause why the Garden of the Church, and the Field of the world became all
one, because the zeal of Christian Emperors intending to exalt Christ, did not
attend to the command of Christ, to permit the Tares to grow in the Field of
the world.

For they did permit them to live in the Field of the world, they seldom or
never put any to death for Heretical pravity (though it had bin better they
had so done with some of them:) But only exiled them from such Cities and
Countries as were most Populous, where if they had continued, they might have
had too great an opportunity of spreading their leaven, which (as the Apostle
speaks fretteth like a Gangrene, 1 Timothy 2.17.

CHAP. 62. A Reply to his Chap. 65.
Discusser.

I Desire you to glance your eye on this not unworthy observation, how fully
this Answer has learned the Language of Lion like Persecution etc. for thus
he writes, more and greater Princes then these you mention, have not Tolerated
Heretics, and Schismatiks, notwithstanding their pretense of Conscience, and
their Arrogating the Crown of Martyrdom to their sufferings.

It Is true, these terms Heretics (or wilfully obstinate) and Schismatics, are
used in holy writ: it is true also, that such pretend Conscience, and Arrogate
the Crown of Martyrdom to their sufferings. But this is the common clamor of
Persecutors against the witnesses of Jesus in all ages, you are Heretics,
Schismatics, factious, Seditious, rebellious.

Defender.

If it be true, that these be Scripture terms, and by his own acknowledgement
truly applyable to Heretics and Schismatics, then, it seems, the Discusser
has learned this Language of Ashdod, that the Scripture it self, and Truth it
self speaks the roaring Language of Lyon-like Persecution. For he
acknowledges, the Scripture uses the same terms, and Truth verefieth the
same things. In Sum, It is as much to say, as Paul had learned the roaring
and railing Language of Lyon-like Pharaoh: Pharaoh told the Children of Israel,
ye are idle, ye are idle, Exodus 5.17. And Paul had learned to say as much to
the Cretians by his Letter to Titus, The Cretians are always liars, evil
beasts, and flow bellyes Tit. 1.12. But is it so indeed? may not the same
reproof unjustly cast upon Gods servants, be justly applied to Gods enemies,
when (by the Discussers own confessi^n) it may be applied truly? If
Persecutors misapply Scripture Terms, and rebukes to Christ's Witnesses
falsely, may not a servant of God apply the same truly, as the Scripture
applies them, but he shall be thought to learn to speak not the Language of
Scripture, but the Language of persecutors?

Discusser.

Ob it is hard for Gods Children to fall to Opinion and practice of
Persecution, without ready learning the Language thereof. And doubtless that
soul, that can so readily learn Babels Language, has cause to fear that he
has not yet in Point of Worship left the gates or suburbs of it.

Defender.

If this Language used by me be the Terms of Scripture, and by the
acknowledgement of Truth rightly applied, then it is the Language of Canaan,
and not of Babel. What Language they have learned, who in point of Worship,
have left Zion, but not the gates and Suburbs of Babel, (for they set up
Bulwa^ks of Impunity, to secure them) Let themselves (in the fear of God)
confider.

But what Language is it to speak of me, as having learned the opinion and
practice of persecution, I desire the God of Truth to teach him to know, It is
the Language of him that stood not in the Truth, and of such also, as call
evil good, and good evil.

Discusser

Again in blaming Julian the Apostate, and Valens the Arian for Tolerating all
weeds to grow, he notes their sinful end, that thereby they might choke the
vitalls of Christianity: and seems herein to consent (on a speech of Jerome)
That the weeds of false Religions tolerated, have a Power to kill true
Christianity in the Church.

But when Christianity began to be choked, It was not when Christians lodged
in cold Prisons, but Downe-Beds of ease, and Persecuted others.

Defender.

I noted indeed the sinful end of Julian the Apostate in tolerating all
Religions and Heresies, to aim at the choking of the vitalls of Christianity.
Of Valens I noted the like finfull practice of Tolerating all Religions: but
did not express his end. But what I spoke of the end, concerned Julian: and I
sp^ke of it not of mine own imagination, (though he that shall read the
stories of his Apostasy, and malignity against the Name of Christ, and
Christians, might easily believe and speak it without rashness:) but I speak
it out of a grave and judicious Author, who lived near those times, I mean
Aligustine, who in his 166, Epistle, thus exp^esseth Julians both practice, and
end. Julianus deserter Christi, et Inimicus, Haereticis libertatem perditionis
permisit, et tum Basilicas Haereticis reddidit, quando Templa Daemonijs; Eo
modo putans, Christianum Nomen posse perire, de Terris, sivanitati Ecclesiae,
de qua lapsus fuerat, invideret, et sacrilegas Dissensiones liberas esse
permitteret, that is, Julian, the forsaker, and enemy of Christ, Permitted to
Heretics liberty of perdition: and at the same time restored Palaces (or
royal meeting houses) to Heretics, when the Temples to Devils; thinking by
this means, the Christian Name might perish from the earth, if he should envy
that unity to the Church, from which himself fell, and permit Sacrilegious
Dissensions to enjoy their liberty.

What the Discusser subjoyned, as weakening this end, that Christiaaity began to
be choked, not when Christians lay in cold Prisons, but Beds of ease, and
persecuted others: This does not at all weaken the right apprehension of
Julians end, For 1. Julian might aim at that end, though he might not have
attained it.

Secondly, evident it is, that Toleration of briars and thorns, (and such are
Heresies and Blasphemies) do choke the life of Christianity. For beside
experience, the Text in Rev. 8.10.11. Declares, that by the fall of a Star,
(called wromewood) into the waters, the third part of the watters were
embittered by it, and many men dyed that drunk of those warters. And what was
that Star, but Arius and Constantius?

Thirdly, Though Beds of ease have been one means of choking Christianity,
yet that hinders not, but the Toleration of all weeds to grow with the good
seed, is another.

Fourthly, when he says, Their persecuting of others was a means of choking
Christianity: It is a plain contradiction of his former speech, that
Constantine did more hunt to Christ's Church and Kingdom, then the raging fury
of the most bloody Neroes.

CHAP. 63. A Reply to his Chap. 66.
Discusser.

HE ends this passage with approbation of Queen Elizabeth for Persecutiag the
Papists, and a reproof to King James for Persecuting the Puritans.

Defender.

I neither did in terms approve the persecution of the one, nor reprove the
persecution of the other. The words I spoke of them are recited above. Chap.
58. which contain an Historical Narration of the Res gestas in this case of
both the Princes, but neither approvement, nor reprovement of them. It was
enough to answer the Prisoners Argument, that as great Princes as the three
named by him for Toleration, might be named against Toleration: As Queen
Elizabeth for one, and King James for another, who persecuted Puritans though
he Tolerated Papists.

Discusser.

But if Queen Elizabeth did well to persecute the Papists according to her
Conscience: King James did not ill in persecuting others according to his.

Defender.

It follows not. For Queen Elizabeth might do well in punishing seditious,
or seducing Papists according to Conscience rightly informed, and King James
do ill according to Conscience misinformed. Besides, It may be the worse, when
a man persecuteth those, whom he knows to be innocent, against his own
Conscience. Or suppose Conscience by often sinning against the light and cheks
of it, be (by the just Judgment of God) blinded and seared, In such a case to
do a wicked act according to Conscience, does not extenuate, but aggravate a
sin: in that such a man sins not only in doing a corrupt act, but (which is
worse) with a corrupt Conscience. But with what Conscience King James did
persecute Puritans, I judge not: the judgment of such things is with the Lord.

Discusser.

But then Mr. Cotton must grant, that if King James did ill in persecuting
Puritans according to his Conscience, then either King James was not fit to be
King, and had not the essential qualifications of a King (in not being able
rightly to judge, who are to be pers^cuted, who not:) or else, He must
confess, that King James, and all Magistrates must persecute such, whom in
their Conscience they judge worthy to be pe^secut^d,

Defender.

None of these things will follow. For though King James did evil to persecute
godly Ministers, and other good Christians, studious of Reformation: yet he was
fit to have been a King, and wanted not the essential Qualifications of a
King. For he was by lawful Succession the next heir of the Crown, and was
besides endued with many royal gifts of wisdom, and Knowledge, both of
Scripture and Policy, which if he did not always attend to, in his
Administrations, the defect was not for want of Essential Qualifications, but
for want of employing his Qualifications according to the right Rule of the
word of God. For by the Rule of the word, those (whom they called) Puritans
ought not to have been persecuted, no though they had been erroneous in their
way, which they were not. For though they consented not to the State-Government
of the Church; yet neither did they tumultuously and seditiously resist it. But
suppose Princes and Magistrates do want some Qualifications meet for their
calling (as this for one, Knowledge and Judgment rightly to discern, who may
be punished for matters of Religion, who not:) yet such Qualifications are not
of the Essence of the calling of a King, or Magistrate, but belong only to the
Integrity of it. Yea such Kings or Magistrates as want such clear discerning
of this point, they have a just Call to forbear all execution of civil
Censures in matters of Religion, till they be better informed. Or else (as the
Discusser says truly) they may persecute the Son of God in stead of the
son of Perdition.

CHAP. 64. A Reply to his Chap. 67.
Discusser.

IN the second place, I ask, what glory to God, what good to the souls and
bodies of their Subjects, did these Princes bring, in persecuting?

Defender.

Persecution of Innocents never brought good to Princes, or Subjects, but
accidentally: as the Discusser said above, that Nero in persecuting, made the
hearts of Christians, more sweet, and fragrant like pounded Spices. But such
evil ought not to have been done, that such good in such a way might come of
it.

But the good that is brought to Princes and Subjects by the due punishment of
Apostate Seducers, and Idolaters, and Blasphemers, is manifold.

First, it puts away evil from the people, and cutteth off a Gangreene,
which would spread to further ungodliness, Deuteronomy. 13.5. 2 Timothy 2, 16, 17, 18.

Secondly, it drives away Wolves from worrying, and scattering the Sheep of
Christ. For false Teachers be Wolves, ( Matthew. 6.15. Acts 20.29.) And the very
name of Wolves holds forth what benefit will redound to the sheep, by either
killing them, or driving them away.

Thirdly, such Executions upon such evil doers causes all the Country to
hear and fear, and do no more such wickedness, Deuteronomy. 13.11.

Yea, as these punishments are preventions of like wickedness in some: so are
they wholesome Medicines, to heal such as are curable of these evils, Zach.
13.4, 5, 6.

Fourthly, the punishments executed upon false Prophets, and seducing Teachers,
do bring down showers of Gods blessings, upon the civil State, 1 Kings
18.40, 41.

Fifthly, it is an honor to Gods Justice, that such Judgments are executed,
Rev. 16.5, 6, 7.

Discusser.

But such Executions in Queen Elizabeth's days had raised almost all Europe in
combustion; the wars of 88. the Spanish Invasion had special respect to
this. And had not the Lord borne witness to his own Law, and to his people
herein, (by defeating the Intendments of their Enemies) it might have been the
ruin, both of England and the Netherlands, which are the words of Mr. Cotton
himself on the third Vial.

Defender.

The words Answer for themselves. The Devil and his Instruments raged against
such Laws, and such Executions, but God bare witness to both, by mightily
defeating the Invasions and Conspiracies of Enemies.

Discusser.

It is no Argument that God bare witness to his people in such Deliverancies
and Victories: For,

1. Events and Successes come alike to all, and are no Arguments of Love, or
Hatred.

Defender.

Events and successes are indeed no Arguments of a man's spiritual Estate, of
the Love or hatred of God, to a man's person, in which sense Solomon speaks,
Eccles. 9.1, 2. But otherwise they are ordinary witnesses, good Events of a
good cause if it be well handled: ill events of an ill cause, or at least of
the ill handling of a good cause, Psalm. 1.3, 4. Jer. 22.15, 16, 17.

Discusser.

Secondly, Papists in their wars have ever yet had both in Peace and war,
victory and Dominion. And therefore (if success be the measure) God has borne
witness to them: as in the Wars between Charles the fifth: and some Germane
Princes, where the success was various, between Philip of Spain, and the
Low Countries; the King of France, and his Protestant Subjects, sometimes
winning, sometimes loosing.

But most memorable is the History of the Waldenses, who fought many Battles
against three succeeding Popes, with various success: But the final success
and Victory fell to the Popedom, and Romish Church, in the utter extirpation
of those Waldensian witnesses.

Defender.

Reply. 1. I will not inquire of the meaning of the words, how the Papists in
their wars have had both in Peace and War Victory and Dominion. But this I
cannot excuse from contradiction, that the Papists in their Wars ever had the
Victory: and yet have often fought with various success, sometime winning,
sometime loosing.

Nor can I tell, how it stands with Truth, that Papists in their Wars ever
had the Victory: since Queen Elizabeth ever had the Victory over them.

Reply. 2. Though Papists have fought with various Success, it is Gods manner
to nurture his people with some crosses, that they might at length learn to
fight not in their own strength, but in the Lords.

Reply. 3. The story is evident, that the Waldenses never lost Battle, but
when they complied with the Papists, and trusted more in their false pretenses,
then in the Lord. Neither is it true, that the final success of the Victory
fell to the Romish Church to the utter extirpation of those Waldensian
witnesses.

For it never came to an utter Extirpation of them, but only to a dispersion
into sundry Countries of Europe, as Bishop Usher shows in the last words of
his Book De successione Christianarum Ecclesiarum. But dispersion is one
thing; utter exterpation is anoother. Seed is dispersed, and the more
multiplied: but exterpation tends to withering, and destruction. Certain it
is, the Waldenses long after those wars, and that dispersion, wrote Letters
to Luther, and Calvin, which are extant to this day.

Discusser.

It is most true, what Daniel in his 8.11, and 12. Chapters, and John Rev. 11,
12, and 13. Chapters, write of the great success of Antichrist against Christ
Jesus for a time appointed.

Defender.

Not against Christ Jesus: for who ever warred against him, and prevailed? Job.
9.4. But true it is, against his servants Antichrist prevailed for a time
appointed: but it was when either the Saints suffered for the Truth: (and then
the Saints were the true Conquerours:) or else when they complied with the
corruptions of the times, and then though their cause was good, yet they
handled it ill.

Discusser.

Gods servants are all Conquerours, when they war with Gods weapons in Gods
cause and worship: as in Rev. 2. and 3. Chapters, and in Rev. 12. they overcome
the Dragon in the Roman Emperors by three weapons, the blood of the Lamb, the
word of their Testimony, and not loving their lives unto the death.

Defender.

It is true, those are the weapons of the Ministers of the Gospel, and those
are also the weapons of private Christians: but if the Magistrate be the
Minister of God in bearing his sword, then the Sword also is a weapon of God,
which when it is drawn out in Gods cause and worship, according to God, with
confidence, not in the arm of flesh, but in the Lord of Hosts, it goes forth
Conquering to conquer, Rev. 17.14. with Rev. 19.14.19, 20. Gideons Sword was
the Sword of the Lord, Judge. 7.20.

CHAP. 65. A Reply to his Chap. 68. Discussing the Testimonies alleged from
Ancient and later writers: and first, that of Hilary.
Discusser.

THe last Head of Arguments produced by the Author against persecution, was
from the Judgment of Ancient and later Writers: to some of which, the Answerer
pleases to answer.

Defender.

Some of which? as if any of them were omitted? or as if all of them were not
answered? compare the Prisoners Letter, and my Answer together, and see if I
have balked any one of them.

Discusser.

If it be a mark of the Christian Church to be persecuted, and of the
Antichristian or false Church, to persecute, then the Churches cannot be truly
Christian (according to the first Institution) which either actually
themselves, or by the civil Power of Kings and Princes given to them (or
procured by them to fight for them) do persecute such as descent from them, or
be opposite against them.

Defender.

I say again, if persecution be properly taken for the punishment of the
Innocent for Truth, or Righteousness sake, it ought not to be found in a
Christian Church, but is usually found in a false and Antichristian Church, but
I cannot (as the Discusser does) make it a mark of the Christian Church, to be
persecuted, and a mark of a false Church to persecute. For a Mark is such a
sign as belongs, omni, soli, and semper, as a mark of the Church must agree
to every Church, and at all times to the Church, and only to the Church. But
to be persecuted, is not found in every true Church, at least not at all times:
For after the conversion of Paul unto the Faith of Christ, the Churches had
rest throughout all Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, Acts 9.31. shall we say
they were then no true Christian Churches, because they wanted this mark of
the Church, to be persecuted? Again, we read, that after the destruction of
Antichrist, the Churches of the Saints shall have rest and rule a thousand
years, Revel. 20.4. Shall their freedom from persecution, be a dissolution of
the Church Estate? The like may be said of the New Jerusalem (the Churches of
the Jews, after the destruction of Gog, and Magog) when God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes, and take away Death (violent Death) sorrow, crying,
and pain, ( Rev. 21.4.) shall they then cease to be Churches, when persecution
cease?

Beside, to persecute is not always a mark of a false Church: for then it
would be a mark of a false Member of a Church, or a mark of a Member of a
false Church: but the contrary appears in the example of Asa, who persecuted
the Prophet of God for his holy Message sake, 2 Chronicles. 16.10. And it has been
showed above, that Stephen complains of the persecution of all the Prophets,
Acts 7.51. And if they were persecuted, it was by the Church of the Old
Testament: and if therefore the Church of the Old Testament was false, God had
then no Church extant upon the face of the Earth.

It is therefore a begging of the Question, to affirm, that those

Churches cannot be truly Christian, who by themselves, or by the Civil power
of Kings, do punish such as dissent from them or are opposite against them.

And indeed a double begging of the Question, it is: For,

1. It beggeth that for the Question, which is not the Question: for it is no
Question, but out of Question, that it is not lawful for a Christian Church,
to punish men for dissenting from them, or being opposite to them. But the
Question is, whether Christian Magistrates may not punish Apostate Heretics
and Seducers, not for dissenting from the Church, but for seducing from Christ,
and blaspheming against his Name. And (if you will) whether the Church may not
stir up the Christian Magistrate, (after all milder helps used without a
veil) to do his Duty in such a case.

2. It is another begging of the Question, to take that for granted (which is
not yet proved) that it is a mark of no true Christian Church to procure the
civil punishment of incurable obstinate Heretics and Seducers.

Discusser.

When the Answerer says, that to Excommunicate an Heretic is not to
persecute.

I answer, If the Answerer were thoroughly awaked from the Spouses spiritual
slumber (Cant. 5.) and had recovered from the Drunkenness of the great Whore
(who intoxicateth the Nations, Rev. 17.) It is impossible, that he should so
answer.

For who questioneth, whether to excommunicate an Heretic be to persecute?
Excommunication being of a spiritual nature, a sentence denounced by the word
of Christ Jesus (the spiritual King of the Chureh:) and a spiritual killing
by the two edged Sword of the Spirit, in delivering up the person Excommunicate
unto Satan. Therefore who sees not this Answer comes not near the Question?

Defender.

I must still profess my self to be one of them that see it not. For first
the Author of the Letter did no where express himself to put any difference,
neither between Church and Court, in point of censure for cause of Conscience:
nor between causes of Religion, whether true, or false. If it be unlawful to
banish any from the Commonwealth for cause of Conscience, it is unlawful to
banish any from the Church for cause of Conscience. The Church ought to be more
tender of the Liberty of Conscience, then the Court, as being more acquainted
with the tenderness of Conscience.

Secondly, if the censure of a man for cause of Conscience by the civil Sword,
be persecution, it is a far greater persecution to censure a man for cause of
Conscience, by the Spiritual Sword, by how much the more sharp and keen the
spiritual Sword is above the civil. Sure I am, Christ Jesus reckons
Excommunication for persecution, Luke 21.12. They shall lay their hands on you,
and persecute you, delivering you up to the Synagogues, and into Prisons. To
deliver up into Synagogues is as much persecution, as to deliver into Prisons.
And will the Discusser then say, that if Christ had been awakened from his
spiritual slumber, and from the Drunkenness of the great Whore, it had been
impossible, he should have accounted Excommunication a persecution?

Me thinks, if a soul were awakened unto spiritual sobriety, he should judge
it a sorer and a deeper affliction, to be bound with spiritual chains, both
in Earth and Heaven, then to be bound in material chains on Earth only.

Discusser.

But Hilary his complaynt, speaks not to Excommunications, but to civil
censures.

Defender.

Therefore my Answer was to him partly by proportion, partly by concession.
Hilary said, the Christian Church did not persecute, but is persecuted. Whereto
I Answered,

1. That Excommunication of an Heretic is no persecution: and therefore by
proportion neither is the civil punishment of an Heretic persecution; And the
Reason in my words following reaches both: for to persecute is to punish an
Innocent: But an Heretic is not an Innocent, but a culpable and damnable
person.

2. I answered by concession of Hilaryes words in Hilaries meaning, it is true,
what Hilary says, neither did the Apostles, nor may we propogate Christian
Religion by the Sword, etc.

Discusser.

But a Christian Church does no more persecute, then a Lilly does scratch
thorns, or a Lamb pursue and tear the Wolves, or a Turtle Dove does hunt the
Hawks, or Eagles, or a chaste modest virgin fight, and scratch like Whores and
Harlots.

Defender.

If by persecution, the Discusser means (as it seems he does) the
infliction of the civil punishments, his speech is true, and the proportion
holds, civil punishments are as improper for Christian Churches to inflict,
as for Lillies to scratch Thorns, or Lambs to tear Wolves, etc.

But if the Lambs he speaks of in his comparison, were as reasonable, as the
Lambs of Christ be, though they would not themselves pursue and tear the
Wolves, yet they would run to their Shepherds (and civil Magistrates are
the shepherds of all their people) to send out their dogs after the Wolves, to
pursue and tear them. I see no reason, why the chaste and modest eye of a
Christian Church should any more spare, and pity a spiritual Adulterer, that
seeks to withdraw her from her spouse to a false Christ, then the eye of an
Holy Israelite was to spare and pity the like Tempters in days of old, Deuteronomy.
13.8.

CHAP. 66. A Reply to his Chap. 69.
Discusser.

THe Answer by concession to Hilaryes words may surther be discussed. It is
true (says the Answerer) as Hylary speaks, that neither the Apostles, nor
we, may propagate Christian Religion by the Sword: But if Pagans cannot be
won by the word, they are not to be compelled by the Sword. Nevertheless
this hinders not, but if they, or any other should blaspheme the true God, and
his true Religion, they ought to be severely punished: and no less do they
deserve who seduce from the Truth to damnable Heresy and Idolatry.

In which Answer, I observe, First, his Agreement with Hilary, that Christian
Religion may not be propagated by the civil Sword.

Unto which I Reply, what means then this passage in his first Answer to the
former speeches of the Kings, viz. We acknowledge, that none is to be
constrained to believe or profess the true Religion, till he be convinced in
Judgment of the Truth of it.

Defender.

If it be observed, my Agreement with Hilary, then let it be observed, that the
Discusser in whetting the words of the Authors of the Letter against us, lays
a false charge upon us, as if we maintained such persecution for cause of
Conscience, as is condemned by the Ancient Writers. Of whom Hilary is named for
one, and for the first: and yet in the Discussion it is found that we agree
with him.

In that Answer to the speeches of the Kings, when I acknowledged, that none
was to be constrained to believe, or profess the true Religion, till he be
convinced of the Truth of it.

I did not mean, that after he was convinced, he might then be constrained
with civil censfures: for neither beleiving nor professing to believe, is to
be constrained with civil censures.

But yet thus far he may be constrained, by withholding such countenance and
favor from him, such encouragement, and employment from him, as a wise and
discerning Prince, would otherwise grant, to such as believe the Truth, and
profess it, so far as they are convinced of it in Judgment and Conscience.
For such as will not walk according to their Light, are neither trusty
servants to God, nor man.

Discusser.

That Answer to the speech of the Kings implies two things.

1. That the civil Magistrate, who is to constrain, must judge of all the
Consciences of their Subjects, whether they be convinced or no.

2. That when the civil Magistrate discerns that his Subjects Consciences
are convinced, then he may constrain them vi and armis, hostilely. And
accordingly, who knows not what constraint lies upon all Consciences in Old
and New England, to come to Church, and to pay Church-Duties? which is upon the
point (though with a Sword of a finer gilt and trim in New England) nothing
else, but that which he confesses, Hilary says, should not be done, to wit, a
Propagation of Religion by the Sword.

Defender.

Neither of both these things are employed in that Answer. Not the first, (that
the civil Magistrate must then Judge of all of the Consciences of their
Subjects, whether they be convinced, or no:) For it implies no more then that
he is not to constrain them, till he see they be convinced. If he never see
them convinced, he is to see, they be never constrained. But how far the
Magistrate may discern, and judge in matters of Religion, has been spoken
above. Nor the second: For the constraint I spoke of, was not by positive
means, vi, and Armis, but negative, withholding such trust and employment from
such, as he sees are not faithful and trusty to their God, of whose Truth
they are convinced, and yet withhold it in unrighteousness. I know no
constraint at all, that lies upon the consciences of any in New England, to
come to Church: neither do I know that any scruple lies upon any Conscience
in New England, that withholdeth any from hearing the word amongst us. But
least of all do I know, that any are constrained to pay Church-duties in
New-Engla^d. Sure I am, none in our own Town, neither Church Members, nor
other, are constrained to pay any Church-duties at all. What they pay, they
give voluntarily, each one with his own hand, without any constraint at all,
but their own will, as the Lord directs them.

Discusser.

Again, although he confesses, that Propagation of Religion ought not to be
by the Sword; yet he maintains the use of the Sword, when persons (in the
Judgment of the Civil State, for that is employed) shall blaspheme the true
God, and the true Religion, and also seduce others to damnable Heresy and
Idolatry.

Defender.

True: but this is not the Propagation of Religion but the preservation of it;
or if it do conduce to Propagation, it is only removendo probibens.

CHAP. 67. A Reply to his Chap. 70. Discussing the Testimony of Tertullian.
Discusser

TO Tertullian, the Answerer gives the like Answer. Tertullians Intent (says
he) is only to restrain Scapula, the Roman Governor of Africa) from
persecuting the Christians, for not offering Sacrifice to their Heathen Gods:
and for that end fetches an Argument from the Law of Natural Equity, not to
compel any to any Religion, but to permit them to believe, or not to believe
at all.

Which we acknowledge: we judge, the English may permit the Indians to continue
in their unbelief. Nevertheless, it will not therefore be lawful to tolerate
the public worship of Devils, or Idols, in a Christian State, or the seduction
of any from the Truth.

In this passage, he agrees with Tertullian: but it is well known, that in
New England, they not only permit the Indians to continue in their unbeleife,
(which they cannot help) but they also permit or tolerate them in their
Paganish worship, which cannot be denied to be a worshipping of Devils.

And therefore consequently according to the same practice, did they walk by
Rule, and impartially, not on^^ the Indians, but their Countrymen, French,
Dutch, Spanish, Per^, Turks, Jews, should also be permitted in their
Worships, if correspondent in civil obedience.

Defender.

It is not true, that the New-English do tolerate the Indians (who have
submitted to the English protection, and Government) in their worship of Devils
openly. What the Indians do, that are not under the English Government, the
English have no warrant from God, or Law of Nations to restrain them; nor is
it in the power of the English to restrain the private Worship, which some of
the Indians under the English Government may possibly adhere unto the this day.
What courses have been used to bring them on to Civility, and to the knowledge
of our Religion, by fair means, are not pertinent to the present controversy
to relate. It has been an Article of the Covenant between such Indians as have
submitted to our Government, that they shall submit to the ten Commandments,
which they thought reasonable. Some of their Sachims young children are brought
up with us, and trained up to knowledge. Such of them as come to our Houses are
fed with courtesy, and care taken often to instruct them, as far, yea further
then they are greatly willing to hear. Some of them of late, frequent our
markets, to get money, by selling Fish, Baskets, whortleberries, Cramberries,
which takes them off from some idleness; Some English are studious of the
Indian Language, to deal with them in their own Tongue. Of late some of our
Ministers have preached to a Congregation of them, whilst others at first
interpreted what was preached: but since one of our Ministers preaches to them
in their own Language. The other day, whilst I was at the College with other
Elders, an Indian from Plimmouth side, (an hopeful youth) was received into
some employment in the College, that he might be trained up to knowledge for
the help of his Countrymen. But no violent course taken with them at all, to
constrain them to the Faith, or Profession of Christianity. The time is
hastening (we hope) when all the vials of Gods wrath will be poured out on the
Antichristian State: and then we look for the fullness of the Gentiles to come
in, and with the Jews, multitudes of Pagans. But till the seven plagues of the
seven Angels be fulfilled, we cannot easily hope for the entrance of (...).
New multitudes of men into the Church according to the word of the Lord, Rev.
15.8. No man (that is, no man out of the Temple, no Pagan) was able to enter
into the Temple, till the seven plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled.

But to return to our Discusser, he speaks at random, when he intimates,
that we walk not by Rule but partially, as if we permitted not the like
liberty of worship to our Countrymen, nor to the French, Dutch, Spanish,
Persians, Turks, Jews, which we do to the Indians.

For we Neither constrain them to worship God with us, nor restrain them from
worshipping God in their own way. Persians, Turks and Jews, come not amongst
us: those of other Nations of Europe, when they do come amongst us, their
manner of Worship is not taken notice of amongst us. Our Countrymen worship
God with us for the most part, if some of them come not to our Assemblies by
reason of the distance of their dwellings from us, they have Liberty of public
prayer and preaching of the word a-amongst themselves, by such as themselves
choose, without disturbance.

Discusser.

The Answerer adds a further Answer to Tertullian, for whereas Tertullian had
said, that one man's Religion does neither hurt, nor profit another: the
Answerer says, it must be understood of private Worship, or of Religion
professed in private. Otherwise a false Religion professed in public, by the
Members of the Church, or by such as have given their Names to Christ, will be
the ruin and Desolation of the Churches, Rev. 2.

Whereto I Answer, 1. Those that are Members of the Church, and those that have
given their names to Christ, are all one: the distinction therefore is unsound.

Defender.

The Discusser must excuse me, though I do not take them for all one. For men
of years must give up their names to Christ, before they can be received
Members into the Church, as is evident, Isaiah 56.6, 7. Therefore they are not
all one: the one precedeth the other.

Discusser.

I answer secondly, that Tertullian does not there speak of private, but of
public worship, and Religion,

Defender.

Tertullians speech may possibly be meant of either public or private But as I
said, to make the speech true, it must either be understood of private, or if
of public profession of Religion, it must be understood not of Christian, but
of Pagan: and of Pagan during the time of Gods Patience, and their ignorance.
But after God revealed the Truth of the Gospel-Religion to them, it was not
safe to continue a public Profession of Pagan-Religion: for after the
White-Horse has revealed the Gospel, a Red, and Black, and pale-horse follow,
to avenge the rejection of it upon the Romane-Pagan-Empire, Revel. 6.2. to 8.

Discusser.

I answer thirdly; although it be true in a Church of Christ, that a false
Religion, or Worship permitted will do hurt according to those Threats of
Christ, Rev. 2. yet in two cases, I believe a false Religion will not hurt
(which is most like to have been Tertullians meaning.)

1. A false Religion out of the Church will not hurt the Church: no more then
weeds in the Wilderness will hurt the enclosed Gardens: nor poison hurt the
body, when it is not touched, or taken, yea and Antidotes are received against
it.

2. A false Religion and worship will not hurt a Civil State, in case the
worshippers break no civil Law. And the Answerer elsewhere acknowledges,
that the civil Peace is not broken, where the civil Laws are not broken. And
this only is the point in Question.

Defender.

If this only be the point in Question, where then lies the controversy? for
if I say (as the Discusser says I do) that the Civil Peace is not broken,
when the Civil Law is not broken; and if a false Religion or worship do not
hurt the civil State, unless the Worshippers break some civil Law, then
where lies the pinch of the controversy?

But I would not have the Discusser mistake himself; I do not remember, that
I have any where said, that the civil Peace is not broken, where the civil
Law is not broken. He says, I say so elsewhere: If he mean, that I say so in
the Model drawn up by my Brethren (the Elders of those Churches) he wrongeth
and polluteth himself much (Crimine falsi) when he says that Mr. Cotton with
the rest of the Ministers of New England composed that Model of Church and
civil power. It is no new thing with him, to say I did that, which I did not:
that Model was drawn up by some other fellow-Brethren, but not by me. There
is a Truth in the speech which they speak, rightly understood, but not as the
Discusser here takes it.

For first, what if no civil Law be made for the establishment of Religion,
nor against the violation of the Fundamentalls of it? this very defect of so
needful a Law, may bring the wrath of God upon the civil State: as did the
defect of a King in Israel, Judge. 21.25.

Again secondly, there may be a Law made for the establishing of true
Religion: and it though it be violated, yet the Discusser will say, no civil
Law is violated, because no Law concerning the second Table is violated. But
that is his mistake, to think the civil Laws concern only the outward
Estate of the People, and not their Religion.

That is a civil Law whatsoever concerns the good of the City, and the
propulsing of the contrary. Now Religion is the best good of the City: and
therefore Laws about Religion are truly called civil Laws, enacted by civil
Authority, about the best good of the City, for the promoting, and preserving
of that good of the City. But having thus spoken to his second case first
(wherein he says, a false Religion will not hurt a civil State.)

I come now to his first: which was, that a false Religion will not hurt, if it
be out of the Church, no more then weeds in the wilderness will hurt the
enclosed Garden.

But what if the Garden be enclosed in the midst of a wilderness? what if the
weeds grow so near the enclosure (or hedge) round about the Garden, that they
easily creep into the Garden? what if every blast of wind blow the seeds of the
weeds into the Garden, which are ready to overspread the Garden, and to choke
the good herbs? The Discusser will say, they that keep and dress the Garden
should weed them out.

True, so they ought, to their best endeavor. But were it not also needful,
that the Lord of the soil, who has his Officers both to dress his Garden and
to keep his wilderness, should provide, that the keepers of his wilderness
should suffer no venomous weeds to grow near his garden, hedge, or pale, least
the seeds thereof should annoy his Garden, and poison those within the Garden
that feed on them?

It is true, which the Discusser says, poison will not hurt the body, unless
it be taken, or touched, yea and Antidotes taken against it.

But who shall prevent the Members of the Church from touching or taking
poison? or who shall provide, that all the Members shall take the Antidotes
which are prepared for them? Here will be needful the faithful vigilance of
the Christian Magistrate, to assist the Officers of the Church in the Lords
work: the one to lay in Antidotes to prevent infection: the other to weed out
infectious noisome weeds, which the sheep of Christ will be touching and
taking, when they will sometime neglect their Antidotes. It is a very unlikely
thing which the Discusser says (is most likely) that Tertullian meant one of
these two cases.

For doubtless his meaning was, to plead for the Innocence and impunity of his
own Religion, which was indeed the Truth of God. And he might safely plead,
that if the Pagan Religion did not hurt their civil Government, (as the Roman
Governors doubted not of that) he bids them to be secure of the Christian
Religion, it will never hurt them at all. When therefore he speaks of Religion
indefinitely, that one man's Religion will not hurt another, it is Argumentum ad
hominem, let not Scapula suspect hurt from Christian Religion to the Roman
State. If the Roman Religion be the preservation of the Roman Empire (as
Scapula thought) Christian Religion (though tolerated, yea though received, and
advanced) will never be their destruction, nor disturbance.

CHAP. 68. A Reply to his Chap. 71. Discussing the Testimony of Jerome.
Discusser.

I Erome (says the Answerer) confesses not the Truth, nor advantageth your
cause: for we grant, what he says, That Heresy must be cut off by the Sword
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. But this hinders not, but that being
so cut down, if the Heretic do still persist in his Heresy to the
seduction of others, he may be cut off also by the civil Sword, to prevent the
perdition of others.

And that to be Jeromes meaning, appears by his Note upon that of the Apostle
(Gal. 5.) A little Leaven leaveneth the whole lump. Therefore says he, a
spark, as soon as it appears, is to be extinguished, and the Leaven to be
removed from the rest of the dough: Rotten pieces of flesh are to be cut off,
and a scabbed Beast is to be driven from the sheepfold: least the whole house,
body, mass of dough, and Flock, be set on fire with the sp^rke, be putrified
with the rotten flesh, sowred with the Leaven, perish with the scabbed Beast.

But to this I Answer, 1. He grants to Tertullian, that Heresy must be cut
off with the Sword of the Spirit: yet with all he maintains a cutting off by
the second Sword, the Sword of the Magistrate, and conceives that Tertullian,
so means, because he quoteth that of the Apostle, a little Leaven leaveneth
the whole lump.

Ans. 2. It is no Argument to prove that Tertullian meant a civil Sword, by
alleging, 1 Cor. 5. or Gal. 5. which properly and only approve a cutting off
by the Sword of the Spirit, and purging out of leaven in the Church.

And if Tertullian should so mean, as the Answerer does: yet 1. The cutting
off of Heresy by the Sword of the Spirit implies an absolute sufficiency in
the Sword of the Spirit to cut it down, according to 2 Cor. 10.4.

2. It is clear to be the meaning of the holy Spirit and of the Apostle in the
words alleged by him, a little Leaven etc.

Defender.

Reply 1. This Testimony of Jerome, which the Author of the Letter alleges
against persecution for Conscience, I might justly refuse to spend time about
it, till either the Author or the Discusser do make it appear to be the words
of Jerome. For though I at first gave Answer to it, as presuming the Letter had
not forged it: yet now looking into the place of Jerome, whence it is quoted, I
find no such matter. The Letter quoteth it out of Hieroms Proaeme upon the
fourth Book of his Commentaryes upon Jeremy. But perusing the place, I find
no such words, neither in that Proaeme on his fourth Book on Jeremy, nor in
any other Proaeme of any other of his Books on Jeremy which are six in all,

Reply. 2. I might here observe, (if I should deal with him, as he does with
me, in his Chap. 38) the like failings in the Discusser, in putting Tertullian
fouretimes in this passage instead of Jerome, whom he has in hand. When I had
once named Titus for Timothy, he observes the have, and light attention, and
sleepiness of the Answerer. But I will not make such an observation upon his
misnaming of an Author, which might easily slip from his pen, or from his
Scribe, or from the error of the Printer.

Reply 3. In this he does me wrong, to pu^ upon me that for a Reason, which
has no reason in it, to wit, that I should conceive, that Te tullian (lerome,
he would say) means a civil Sword because he quoteth that of the Apostle, a
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.

For I gather it, not from his quotation of those words of the Apostle (which I
easily grant, do clearly speak of Church censure, not of civil censure:)
But I gather it partly from his exposition of the parralell words in the same
Chapter: and partly from the words he uses in opening that very Text. The
parralell place in the same Chap. is ver. 12. I would (says the Apostle) they
were cut off that trouble you. This cutting off, (or (...)) He expounds the
cutting off of their virility which no manwill say is a Church-Censure. I spoke
not here of the true meaning of the Text (which doubtless, speaks of a
Church-Censure) but of the true meaning of Ieromes words.

Again, when Jerome would have the spark, as soon as it appears, to be
extinguished, and the leaven to be removed from the rest of the Dough etc.
though it be true (which the Discusser speaks) that the Apostle intends a
Church-Censure: yet doubtless Jerome aimed at more in those comparisons, even
to a civil censure also. For to these comparisons, he immediately subjoyneth
these words, Arius in Alexandria una scintilla fuit: sed quia non statim
oppressa est, totum orbem, eius flamma de populata est. Arius (says he) was
but one sparkle: yet because he was not speedily executed (or suppressed) his
flame depopulated all the world. Where by the extinguishing of that spark, he
does not mean, by excommunication: for he was not ignorant, that Arius had
been speedily excommunicate, once and again out of the Church of Alexandria;
once whist he was Deacon, as Sozomene reports in Lib. 1. Ecclesiast Historia,
Chap. 14. And though afterward, he got into the Church again, yet he was
again excommunicated, when he was Presbyter, and cast out of his Presbytery,
as Socrates reports in his lib. 1. Ecclesiast Hastoria, Cap. 6. of the Greek
Edition; Chap. 3. of the latin. So that Hierome complaining, of the great
hurt, which the spark of Arius did, because he was not timely put out, he did
not mean, of putting out of the Church (which was done timely enough, and
twice for failing) but because he was not put out either out of the world, or
at least, out of the Confines of Neighbor Churches.

Say not: yet Paul doubtless spoke of putting out of the Church. For though
that be true: yet now the Question is not of Paul's judgment in this place, but
of Hieromes judgment, which the Author of the Letter alleges as a witness
for himself, and the Discusser would maintain it: though Ieromes words will
not bear it. It argues, men are more led by will, then judgment to uphold a
cause, when the witnesses which themselves produce, bear witness against
them. Neither let any man say, That this grant of his, That Heresy must be
cut off with the Sword of the spirit, does imply an absolute sufficiency in the
Sword of the Spirit to cut it down, according to 2 Cor 10.4, 5.

For though Spiritual weapons be absolutely sufficient to the end for which
God has appointed them (as has been opened above) to wit, for the conviction,
and (if he belong to God) for the conversion of the offender, for the
mortifying of his flesh, and for the saying of his soul, and for the cleansing
of the Church from the fellowship of that guilt: yet if an Heretic still
continue obstinate, and persist in seducing, creep into Houses, lead captive
silly souls, and destroy the faith of some, (it may be, of many) such
Gangrenes would be cut off by another Sword, which in the hand of the
Magistrate is not borne in vain.

Discusser.

But the eye of this Answerer could never be so obscured, as to run to a Smiths
shop, for a Sword of Iron, and steel, to help the Sword of the Spirit, if the
Sun of righteousness had once been pleased to show him; That a National
Church (which elsewhere he professes against) a State-Church, (whether
explicit, as in Old England, or implicit, as in New) is not the Institution
of the Lord Jesus Christ. The National Typicall-State-Church of the Jews,
necessarily called for such weapons: But the particular Churches of Christ in
all parts of the world, consisting of Jews and Gentiles, is powerfully able to
defend it self, and offend men, and Devils, although the State and Kingdom
(wherein the Churches be) had neither carnal Sword, nor Spear, as once it was
in the National Church in the Land of Canaan; 1 Samuel 13.

Defender.

I should think mine eye were very obscure indeed, if I should run to a Smiths
shop to fetch the Authority of the civil Magistrate from thence: or if I
should think his Authority could not be put forth against all evil doers (and
amongst others, against Heretics) without a Sword of Iron or Steel. If their
be stones in the streets, the Magistrate need not fetch a Sword from the Smiths
shop, nor an Halter from the Ropers, to punish an Heretic. A pleasant wit can
play with a feather of every flying Fancy, and yet (which is to be lamented)
bring in such light conceits into grave Discourses, and Disputes about the holy
things of God.

But two things let the Discusser understand, 1. That the Lord (through his
grace) has opened mine eye many a year ago, to discern, that a National
Church is not the Institution of the Lord Jesus. And himself confesses, that
elsewhere I have professed against such a Church State: nor will he ever be able
to make it good, that the Church in New England is implicitly any National,
or State-Church.

2. Let him understand further, that I should think mine eye not only
obscured, but the sight of it utterly put out; if I should conceive, as he
does, That the National Church State of the Jews did necessarily call for
such weapons to punish Heretics, more then the Congregationall State of
particular Churches does call for the same, now in the days of the
New Testament. For was not the National Church of the Jews as compleately
furnished with spiritual Armor to defend it self, and to offend men: and
Devils, as the particular Churches of the New Testament be? Had they not power
to convince false Prophets, as Elijah did the Prophets of Baal? Had they not
power to separate all evil doers from the fellowship of the Congregation? what
power have our particular Churches now, which their National Church wanted? or
what efficacy is their found in the exercise of our power which was wanting to
them?

If it be said, Their Nation was an holy Nation, and an unclean person might
not live amongst them:

Ans. It is true, he might not enter into the Congregation with the rest of the
Israelites, to worship the Lord: but he was permitted to live in the
Commonwealth of Israel, men uncercumcised both in heart, and flesh.

It is therefore a Sophystical imagination of man's Brain, to make a man's
self, or the world believe, that the National. Church State of the Jews,
required a civil Sword, whereas the particular Church State of the Gospel
needs no such help.

Why not I pray you? Because particular Churches are powerfully able, by the
Sword of the Spirit, to defend themselves, and to offend men, or Devils?

And was not the National Church of Israel as powerfully able, by the same
Spirit to do the same? Surely it was both spoken and meant of the National
Church of the Jews, Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the
Lord of Hosts? Zach. 4.6. And does not the Discusser himself observe, that
time was in the National Church of the Land of Canaan, when there was neither
carnal Spear, nor Sword to be found? 1 Samuel 13. And was not then the
National Church powerfully able (by the Spirit of God) to defend it self, and
to offend men, and Devils, as well as particular Churches now?

CHAP. 69. A Reply to his Chap. 72. discussing the Testimony of Brentius.
Discusser.

BRentius upon 1 Cor. 3. says, no man has power to make or give Laws to
Christians, whereby to bind their Consciences. For willingly, freely, and
uncompelled, with a ready desire, and cheerful mind, must those that come,
run unto Christ.

To this the Answerer returns, Brentius (says he) speaks not to your
cause. We willingly grant you, that man has no power to bind Conscience:
but this hinders not, that men may see the Laws of God observed, which do
bind Conscience.

But the granting this, That men have no power to make Laws to bind
Conscience, overthrows such his Tenent, and practice as restrain men from
their worship, according to their Conscience, and belief, and constrain them
to such worships, which their own souls tell them, they have no satifaction,
nor faith in.

1. It is an untruth, that either we restrain men from worship according to
Conscience, or constrain them to worship against Conscience: or that such is
my Tenent and practice.

2. Though it were true that we did both: yet this did not make Laws to bind
Conscience, but the outward man only: nor would we think it meet, to bind
the ontward man against Conscience.

Discusser.

Again, where as the Answerer affirms, That men may make Laws to see the
Laws of God observed.

I Answer, As God needs not the help of a material Sword of Steel to assist
the Sword of the Spirit in the affairs of Conscience: so those men, those
Magistrates, yea the Commonwealth which makes such Magistrates must needs have
power and Authority from Christ Jesus to sit Judge, and to determine in all the
great Controversies concerning Doctrine, Worship, Government etc.

Defender.

God needs not the help of a material Sword of Steel, to assist the Sword
of his Spirit of righteousness in the duties of the second Table, no more then
to assist the Sword of the Spirit of holiness in the duties of the first
Table. The Law of Righteousness is as fully and plainly written by the Spirit
of God in the hearts and Consciences of men, as is the Law of holiness: yea
and more too. And yet the Discusser does not (for ought I know) make it a
needless matter for God to accept the help of the material Sword to assist
the Spirit of Righteousness in the affairs of Conscience, which pertain to
the second Table. The truth is, God needs not the Arm of flesh to help him,
that is, he needs not any help, which the wisdom or strength of the creature
can invent, or bring forth, which himself appointed not. But yet God thinks
it no dishonor to himself, to make use of his own Ordinances, in their own
bounds, to his own ends; Nor does he then need them, when he uses them, but
we need such helps for the performance of our duty both to God, and man. Which
made it a cursed sin in Meroz, not to come out to help the Lord, Judge. 5 23.

Nor will it hence follow, that such Magistrates as are chosen to help forward
the work of God in matters of Religion, that either themselves, or the
Commonwealth that chooses them, must needs have power, and Authority from
Christ, to sit Judge, and to determine in all great controversies of Religion,
in Doctrine, Discipline and Government:

It is enough that they are called of God to be wise and learned in the service
of Christ, and in the ways of his Kingdom. Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. which if they
have learned, they ought to rule with him, and for him: or else how shall it be
fulfilled, which is written of them, The Kingdoms of the world, are become the
Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever? Rev.
7.15. Yea in this case, it is learning enough, if they know the Principles and
Foundations of Religion, and can discern the Arrogance of a tumultuous spirit
after conviction For such want not judgment; to censure Apostasy, to Heresy
in doctrine, to Idolatry in worship, to Tyranny in Government.

Discusser

But then I ask, whether upon this ground, it must not evidently follow, that
then either there is no Commonwealth, nor Civil State of men in the world,
that is not qualified with this discerning: (and then the Commonwealth has
more light concerning the Church, then the Church it self:) Or that the
Commonwealth and Magistrates thereof must judge and punish as they are
persuaded in their own belief and Conscience (be their Conscience, Paganish,
Turkish, or Antichristian:) And what is this, but to confound Heaven and Earth
together? and to take away not only the being of Christianity out of the
world, but all civility, yea the world out of the world, and to lay all upon
heaps of confusion?

Defender.

See what strange effects, a strong fancy can produce? would you not think, it
must be some strange, and strong paradox, that if it be granted shall produce
such strange and strong effects, as to take away the being of Christianity out
of the world, yea and all civility, yea and the world out of the world?

But when men have slept a while, and strong fancyes are evaporated, the world
will stand where it is, and civility stand in the world, and Christianity in
civility.

I say therefore (that which no sober mind can contradict) that though
Magistrates be bound to become wise and learned, to know Christ, and to
establish the Religion of Christ yet it will not (as the Discusser says)
evidently follow, no nor follow at all, That then there is no law full
Commonwealth nor Civil State of men in the world, which is not qualified with
this spiritual discerning.

For though it be the duty of Civil States, thus to be qualified: yet their
want of such qualifications, does not make them unlawful States. Many due
qualifications are required in Husbands, Wives, Children, Servants,
Magistrates, Churches, the want of which makes them defective, and sinful,
but does not make them unlawful. This will need no proof to any sober mind.

Muchlesse will it follow upon the former Premises, that the very Commonwealth
has then more light concerning the Church of Christ, then the Church it self.

For it is a weak Church, that knows no more light, then Principles: And what
light the Commonwealth has, it may have received from the Church. Howsoever,
the Magistrates power to establish the Religion of Christ does no way infer.
That he that establishes that Religion, which is professed in the Church, has
more light concerning that Religion, or any part of it, then the Church it
self. Albeit, it is not impossible, nor is it absurd that sometime the
Magistrate may have more light in matters of Religion, then the Church it
self. David (for ought we read) was the first that discerned the disorder in
Carting the Ark of God, 1 Chronicles. 15.2. And Hezekiah was the first, that
prevented the Priests and Levits, and the whole Church, in the work of
Reformation, from the Apostasy of Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 29.4, to 11.

But there is no color of consequence, that because Magistrates are bound to
discern, and know the will of Christ, and to serve him with their power, That
therefore such as have no discerning of Christ, nor of his holy will, That they
should punish and destroy Christ, and Christians, and seek only to advance
their own Religion, which is but Idolatry and Superstition.

CHAP. 70. A Reply to his Chap. 73. Discussing the Testimony of Luther.
Discusser.

LUthers Testimony, says the Answerer, reaches to two things, neither of
which we deny.

First, that the Government of the civil Magistrate reaches no further, then
to the bodies and goods of their Subjects, not over their souls: and therefore
they may not undertake to give Laws to the souls and Consciences of men.

Secondly, that the Church of Christ does not use the Arm of secular power, to
compel men to the true profession of the Truth. For this is to be done with
spiritual weapons, whereby Christians are to be exhorted, and compelled.

But this (says he) hinders not,

That Christians sinning against the Light of Faith, and Conscience, may justly
be censured of the Church, by Excommunication, and of the civil Magistrate
also, in case they shall corrupt others to the perdition of their souls.

This Joynt-confession of the Answerer with Luther (to wit, that the Government
of the civil Magistrate extends no further then over the bodies and goods of
their Subjects, not over their souls) who sees not, that hereby is given a
clear Testimony, that either the spiritual and Church Estate, the preaching
of the word, Baptism, Ministry, Government thereof, belongs to the civil
body of the Commonwealth, (that is, to the bodies and goods of men, which
seems monstrous to Imagine:) or else, that the civil Magistrate cannot
(without exceeding the bounds of his Office) meddle with those spiritual
Affairs.

Defender.

A man that is willing to open his eyes, may easily see, that though the
Government of the civil Magistrate do extend no further then over the bodies
and goods of his Subjects, yet he may and ought to improve that power over
their bodies and goods, to the good of their souls: yea and by promoting the
good of their souls, he may much advance the good of their outward man also.
The bodies, and goods, and outward Estates of men may expect a blessing, when
their souls prosper. Though God may keep his Saints low in outward Estate,
that grow fastest in Godliness: yet sure Godliness has the Promises of this
life, and of a better, 1 Timothy 4.8. And such as first seek the Kingdom of God,
may expect all these outward things to be cast in upon them. If it seem a
monstrous thing in the eyes of the Discusser, to imagine, that the good Estate
of the Church, and the well-ordering of the Ordinances of God therein, should
concern the civil good of the Commonwealth, it may well seem monstrous to
him, to imagine that the flourishing of Religion is the flourishing of the
civil State, and the decay of Religion is the decay and ruin of the civil
State. But such Virgin souls, as follow the Lamb, wheresoever he goes ( Rev.
14.4.) would be loath to go to live in such a Commonwealth, to whom it should
seem monstrous, that the things of God should belong to them.

And therefore the Magistrate need not to fear, that he should exceed the
bounds of his Office, if he should meddle with the spiritual affairs of the
Church in Gods way. It is true, if he shall meddle with the execution of a
Ministers Office, as Vzziah did or if he shall set up humane Inventions in
Doctrine, Worship, Government, in stead of Christ's Institutions, as David
brought the Ark of God upon Oxen, instead of the shoulders of the Levites: Or
if he shall thrust in Jeroboams Priests upon the Church, and cast out faithful
Ministers: or if he shall make Laws to bind Conscience, in all these, or any
such Like, he exceeds the bounds of his Office. But if he shall diligently
seek after the Lord, and read in the word of the Lord all the days of his
life ( Deuteronomy. 17.19.) that he may both live as a Christian, and rule as a
Christian, if he shall seek to establish and advance the Kingdom of Christ
more then his own: If he shall encourage the good in a Christian course, and
discourage such as have evil will to Sion: and punish none for matter of
Religion, but such as subvert the Principles of saving Truth (which no good
Christian, much less good Magistrate can be ignorant of) or at least such as
disturb the Order of the Gospel in a turbulent way, verily the Lord will build
up and establish the House and Kingdom of such Princes, as do thus build up
his.

Discusser.

Again necessarily it must follow that these two are contradictory to
themselves (which yet both of them are Mr. Cottons Positions) the Magistrates
Power extends no further then to the bodies and goods of the Subject: and yet.

The Magistrate must punish Christians for sinning against the Light of Faith
and Conscience, and for corrupting the souls of men.

Defender.

If the Christian Faith, and a good Conscience be a part, and a great part, a
chief part of the good of Christians, then these two are so far from
contradicting one another, that they establish one another. For if a
Magistrates power extend to the preserving of the Goods of the Subject, and to
the punishment of the Impeachers or purloyners thereof: then he falls short
of his duty, if he suffer their Faith and good Conscience to be corrupted or
dispoyled without revenge. Again, this I say further (which also will easily
avoyde appearance of Contradiction) suppose by Goods were meant only outward
Goods, and that the Magistrates power extended no further then the bodies and
goods of the Subjects: yet though he have no power over Faith and Conscience,
he has nevertheless lawful power to punish such evil doers in their Bodies
and goods, as do seduce his people to make shipwreck of Faith, and a good
Conscience. For in seeking Gods Kingdom and Righteousness, men prosper in
their outward Estates, Matthew. 6.33. otherwise they decay. Besides, I do not
remember, that this Proposition is any of mine (which yet the Discusser
fastneth upon me) that the Magistrates power extends no further then the
bodies and Goods of his Subjects.

I do not deny the Truth of it, rightly understood, but it seems to me
somewhat too loose, and confused, for me to own it as mine own. For the
Magistrates power may be said to extend no further then the bodies and Goods of
his Subjects, either as the Subject of his power, or as the end of his power.
If Goods be meant outward Goods, and the Magistrates power be said to extend no
further then to the body and Goods of his Subjects, as to the Object of his
power, the Position is true. But if it be meant of the end of his power, as if
a Magistrates power reached no further then to the preservation of their
bodies, and outward Goods, it is false For the Adequate end of the Magistrates
power, is (...), been administrare Rempublicam, well to govern the
Commonwealth. Now can it be well with a Commonwealth, that lives in bodily
health, and worldly wealth, but yet without Church, without Christ, without God
in the world? But though God for a time may preserve a civil State in health
and wealth, through his Patience, and bounty, especially till means of Grace
be offered to them: yet after means of Grace be offered, they cannot long
expect bodily health, or wealth to be continued to them, if they neglect, or
despise, or depart from so great salvation. Witness the Roman Empire, which
though it abounded in worldly blessings, till the Lord Jesus came riding forth
amongst them upon a White Horse of the Gospel of his Grace: yet after they
neglected so great Salvation, then followed a Red Horse of War, and a black
Horse of Famine, and a Pale Horse of Pestilence and other Judgments, which
much impeached both the health, and wealth of that State, and would have ruined
it, had it not cast away her Idols, and advanced the Scepter of the Lord Jesus.

Now the God of all Grace be pleased at length to shake the heart of this
Discusser, that he may not thus delight to seduce himself and others against
the Light of Grace, and Conscience, against Reason and Experience.

Discusser.

Again, in the Answerers Joynt-confession with Luther, that the Church does
not use the secular power to compel men to the Faith, and Profession of the
Truth, he condemns (as before I have observed.)

1. His former implication, that they may be compelled, when they are convinced
of the Truth of it.

Defender.

This implication where it was formerly observed, it has been formerly cleared
from implication of Contradiction. I have never said, that after men be
convinced of the Truth, they may be compelled to the Profession of it, by any
penalties, but only by withdrawing such favors as are not comely or safe for
faithless persons.

Discusser.

2. He condemns their own Practice, who suffer no man of any different
Conscience and worship to live in their Jurisdiction, unless he depart from
the Exercise of his own Religion, and worship, differing from that allowed of
in their civil Estate, yea and also actually submit to come to their Church.

Defender.

This charge of the Discusser, let him consider, if it be not contradictory to
his own Relation, chap. 60. where he says, we permit and tolerate the
Indians in their Paganish worship, which we might restrain. Yet here he
says, we suffer no man of any different Conscience, or worship to live in our
Jurisdiction.

Neither is it true, that we suffer no man of any different Conscience or
worship to live in our Jurisdiction. For not to speak of Presbyterians, who
do not only live amongst us, but exercise their public Ministry without
disturbance, there be Anabaptists, and Antinomians tolerated to live not only
in our Jurisdictions, but even in some of our Churches. Yea says the
Discusser, but they must actually submit to come to our Church.

I cannot say, nor do I believe, that any man is compelled to come to our
Church, against his Conscience. Nay we are so far from that, (and that the
Discusser is not ignorant of) that our Churches do not expostulate with our
Members who hear in England, no not then, when there was more difference from
us in manner of worship, then (through the mercy of God) now there is. The
which the Discusser himself has declared to have been no little Offense unto
himself. Which makes me the more to marvel, that he should now charge it
upon us, that we compel all to come to hear in our Churches, against their
Consciences: when he is wont to be offended, that we suffer them to hear in
any true Church (though polluted) according to their Consciences.

Discusser.

Howsoever they cover the matter with this varnish, that none are compelled
further unto their Churches, then unto the hearing of the word, unto which all
men are bound: yet it will appear, that Teaching, and being taught in a Church
Estate is a Church-worship, as true-and proper a Church-worship, as is the
Supper of the Lord, Acts 2.46.

I cannot call to mind, that either upon that color, or any other, any man in
this Country was ever compelled to hear the word of God, in any of our
Churches, in this Country. But there is indeed some color for the varnish he
speaks of: but not that which he pretends (our compulsion of any man for to
hear:) but a controversy with himself upon another occasion, as I remember.

The Discusser sometimes endeavored to draw away the Church of Salem (whereof
he was sometime Teacher) from holding Communion with all the Churches in the
Bay, because we tolerated our Members to hear the word in the Parishes of
England. We to satisfy him in that, held forth (that which here he calls a
varnish) that hearing was a common Duty lying upon all men, where the word of
God was truly taught. He replied, as he does now, that Teaching and hearing in
a Church Estate is Church worship, Acts 2.46. To which we gave Answer (as now
again) That though Teaching and being taught in a Church Estate be
Church-worship (according to Acts 2.46.) yet it is not a Church-worship, but to
such as are in a Church Estate. To all it is an holy Ordinance of Gods worship,
and a Christian Duty. And though Teaching and hearing does imply a Relation,
yet not a Church-relation. There is a relation between a Teacher, and a
Learner, in any Art, or Knowledge: and there may be a nearer relation between a
Preacher and an Hearer, in case the Hearer be begotten to God by such a Sermon
(even the same relation as is between a spiritual Father, and Son:) but this
does not amount to Church-relation, and Communion, till there pass some
mutual profession of Covenant (explicit or implicit) between them. A Pagan
Infidel may come into a Christian Church-Assembly to hear the word, and may
be convinced and converted by it, (as suppose he in Corinth, 1 Corinthians
14.24, 25.) yet is he not therefore joined in Church Estate, and Fellowship
with them, without profession of acknowledgement, and acceptance.

Discusser.

Secondly, all persons (Papist, and Protestant) that are Conscientious have
always suffered upon this ground especially, that they have refused to come to
each others Church, or meeting.

Defender.

It is too large an Hyperbole, to affirm, that all persons that are
Conscientious (whether Papist, or Protestant,) have always suffered upon this
ground. Are no men conscientious but such as have suffered upon this ground?
are there not many that were never put upon this Trial? and are not many
conscientious, that never scrupled this point? and are there not many
conscientious, that have suffered upon other points, that never suffered upon
this point?

Besides though many conscientious Protestants and Papists do refuse to hear
in each others Assembly, or Church, it is not because such hearing does implant
them into their Church State: but out of fear to be leavened with their
corrupt Doctrine, or polluted with some other part of false worship.

CHAP. 71. A Reply to his Chap. 74. Touching the Testimony of the Papists
against Persecution.
Discusser.

AS for the Testimony of the Popish Book (says the Answerer) we veigh it
not: as knowing what ever they speak for toleration of Religion, where
themselves are under Hatches: yet when themselves come to sit at Stern, they
Judge and practice quite contrary: as both their writings, and judicial
proceedings have testified to the world these many years.

But (for Answer to him) though both their writings and practices have been
such: yet the Scriptures, and expressions of Truth alleged by them, do speak
loudly and fully for them, that where they are under the Hatches they should
not be smothered, but suffered to breath and walk upon the Decks in the air of
civil Liberty.

Defender.

Reply. 1. When the Author of the Letter calls that Popish Book (out of
which he quoteth that Testimony) a wicked Book, why may not that Testimony be a
wicked Testimony, (as by his own Judgment) the Book, a wicked Book?

Reply. 2 It is true, which they say, the means which Almighty God appointed
for the conversion of Kingdoms, was Humility, Patience and Charity: neither
do we allow any means of rigor for Conversion of souls, but only the
power of Spiritual Armor.

It is true also which they allege out of Matthew. 10.16. That Christ sent his
Apostles as sheep into the midst of Wolves: He did not send Wolves amongst
sheep, to kill, imprison, spoil, etc. But this only shows, what the
condition and Commission, and work of Ministers is, when they are sent among
Pagans, and Persecutors. But this is no prohibition to Ministers, when they
live in a Church of Christ, to drive away Wolves from the Sheepfolds of Christ,
as knowing they come to kill and to destroy. And drive them away they may, not
only by Church Censures, if they be of the Church ( Tit. 3.10, 11.) but also
if they be out of the Church, by miraculous vengeance, (in case they have such
a gift, as Paul had, and used it against Elymas, Acts 13.9, 10, 11.) or by
their Prayers, (though the Discusser deny it, chap. 27. as Paul did against
Alexander, 2 Timothy 4.14. or by stirring up the civil power against them, as
Elijah did Ahab and the people, against the Prophets of Baal, 1 Kings 18.40.

Reply. 3. That which they allege out of Matthew. 10.7. (they mean 17.) is as
far wide from the purpose, as the former. It is true, the Apostles ought not
to deliver the People (whom they are sent to convert) unto Councels, or
Prisons, or to make their Religion Felony, or Treason.

But what is this to such as being converted to the Profession of the Faith,
do Apostate from the Faith, and seek to subvert the Faith, which they have
professed? Or what is this to such, as do seek also to subvert the civil
State, to kill Kings, or dethrone them, and to dispose of their Kingdoms? may
not such (Religion shall I say, or Rebellion:) be made Felony or Treason? But
see here the partiality both of the Letter, and of the Discusser: if a
Christian King set not up the Popish Religion, but make Laws for the
establishment of the Truth, this shall be condemned in him as Heretical
pravity, himself prescribed, dethroned, killed, and his Kingdom alienated to
a stranger. And this shall pass with Toleration. But if a Prince shall make
Laws for the security of himself and his Kingdom, and condemn such
seditious, and rebellious Attempts for Felony and Treason, this shall be taxed
as unchristian Persecution, and contrary to the way of Christ, and his Apostles.

Reply. 4. It is true likewise, what they quote out of verse 32. When ye enter
into an House Christ had them salute it, saying, Peace be to the House; he does
not say, send Pursevants, to ransack and spoil it.

For Christ sent not his Apostles with civil power: nor does he allow Princes,
to send Pursevants to ransack Houses, that so they might convert the
Householders, or sojourners therein. But if Seducers to Idolatry be found there,
and Rebels, and Conspirators against the civil State be found there, though
that Commission to the Apostles speak not to such case: yet it is enough, the
Magistrates Commission from God, Romans 13.4. Armeth him to take vengeance on
evil doers.

Reply. 5. To John, 10. verse 10, 11. The Answer is as easy as to the former.
The Pastor gives his Life for the sheep: he comes not to kill, or to destroy
the sheep. But what if he see the Wolf coming? or what if he see the Thief
coming? both of them, to steal, and kill, and to destroy? Shall the Pastor now
sit still, and not hazard his life in their defense, contrary to verse 11, 12,
13? Or shall he betake himself only to spiritual censures, when it may be
they are not capable of such strokes? Or shall it be an heinous and
unchristian carriage in him, to seek aid against such Thieves and Wolves from
them who should see that the sheep of Christ may lead a quiet, and peaceable
Life in all Godliness and Honesty? 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. The Apostles themselves, and
the Churches planted by them, they do not so much as desire it of God from
their Magistrates, that they may live a quiet and peaceable life in a way of
ungodliness, no more then a way of dishonesty. So Paul himself professes,
Acts 25.8.11. But in a way of Godliness and Honesty, they desire of God, they
may find by the protection of their Magistrates, a quiet and peaceable life, in
that Text of Timothy.

Thus to satisfy the Discussers mind, and to prevent any pretense of
exception, I have runn^ over the Scriptures, and expressions of Truth alleged
in the Popish Book, which he says, speak loudly, and fully for their
Toleration: but how truly, let the servants of God judge.

Discusser.

But Protestants herein show themselves partial, and practice that themselves
which they tax in Papists. For though they cry out of Persecution when
themselves are under Hatches, yet when they come to sit at Helm, they run
the same course both in Doctrine and Practice.

When Mr. Cotton and others have formerly been under Hatches, what sad and true
complaints have they poured out against Persecution? But coming to the Helm,
how do they themselves both by Preaching, Writing, Printing, practice
unnaturally, and partially express toward other, the cruel Nature of such
Lions, and Leopards, as some of them have opened out of Cant. 4.8.

Defender.

What we have opened out of Cant. 4.8. against Persecution, when (as he says)
we were under the Hatches, amounted to this, That it was lawful for the sheep
of Christ, to follow Christ, and and to come along with him, and fly away from
persecution. Did any of us then teach, that it was unlawful for Magistrates to
pursue with just revenge Apostate Seducers unto Idolatry, Heresy, or
blasphemy? or turbulent subverters of civil or Church Order? And since we are
come hither, where he is pleased to honor us with sitting at Helm (which is
far from us) what have we taught or practiced more, then our selves allowed
in times of our own restraint? But men that can allow themselves a Liberty of
calumny, it may well become them to plead for a Liberty of impunity for all
Religions.

We keep not a weight and a weight (as he calumniateth) a measure and a
measure: what we measure out to others, we should never think it hard measure
to have the same returned to our selves in the like case, Only this measure we
desire of all hands to be kept (that which Abraham the Father of the faithful,
and God the Judge of all the Earth, thought equal, Genesis 18.25.) that the
Righteous should not be as the wicked: nor that Truth, and Fidelity, should
suffer as Heresy and Apostasy.

Discusser.

Yea, but it is not confidence of being in the Truth (which they judge the
Papists and others are not in) no nor the Truth it self that can privilege
them to persecute others, and to exempt themselves from persecution, for three
Considerations.

First, because it is against the nature of true sheep, to persecute, or hunt
the Beasts of the Forest, no not the Wolves, who have persecuted themselves.

Defender.

It is a feeble kind of reasoning, from a similitude in some things, to press
a resemblance in every thing: Sheep do fitly resemble Christians in many
proprieties: but he that shall therefore press them to be like in all, shall
not suffer a Magistrate (if he be a sheep of Christ) to punish Robbers,
Adulterers, Murderers: why? for it is against the Nature of true sheep, to
persecute any Beasts of the Forest.

Besides, I demand, whether Paul was a sheep, or a Wolf, when he smote Elymas
with blindness? If he were a Wolf, how is he then said, to be filled with the
Holy Ghost; Acts 13.9. If he were a sheep, why did he strike such a Beast of
the Forest? ver. 10, 11.

Furthermore, when the Wolf runs ravenously upon the sheep, is it against
the nature of the true sheep, to run to their Shepherd? And is it then against
the Nature of the true Shepherd to send forth his Dogs to worry such a Wolf,
without incurring the reproach of a persecutor?

Discusser.

Secondly, if it be a Duty and charge upon all Magistrates in all parts of the
world to judge and persecute, in, and for spiritual Causes, then either they
are no Magistrates, who are not able to judge in such cases: or else they must
judge according to their Consciences, whether Pagan, Turkish, or Antichristian.

Defender.

This has been again, and again Answered above, though it be the Duty of all
Magistrates in the world, to judge and punish Blasphemers, Idolaters, and
Seducers: yet not in sensu composite, whilst they are ignorant of the Truth,
and cannot judge of such causes: but in sensu diviso, they are bound to be
wise, and instructed in the knowledge, and worship of Christ, ( Psalm. 2.10.11,
12.) and then to judge accordingly.

But in the mean time, it does not follow, that they are no Magistrates, who
are not able to do all the Duties of a Magistrate. Neither will it follow,
that they must judge according to their Consciences, when their Consciences are
blind, and erroneous, Pagan, Turkish, Antichristian. Let them first cast Beams
out of their own eyes, and then they will better discern between Beam, and
motes in other men.

Discusser.

Thirdly, the Experience of our Fathers errors, and of our own mistakes and
ignorance, the sense of our own weaknesses, and blindness in the depths of
the Prophecies and mysteries of the Kingdom of Christ, and the great professed
Expectation of the Light to come, which we are not now able to comprehend, may
abate the edge and sheath up the Sword of Persecution against any, especially
such as differ not from them in Doctrines of Repentance, or Faith, or Holiness
of heart, and life, but only in the way, and manner of the Administration of
Jesus Christ.

Defender.

I say, as Augustine sometime said in another case, Nunquid negandum quod
certum est, quia comprehendi non potest, quod occultum est? There are depths of
sundry Prophecies, which we yet comprehend not: but shall we therefore be
always babes, and ignorant of the Fundamental Principles of Christian
Religion? yea and suffer them to be shaken, and ruined, because there are some
Prophesies, and Mysteries, which we yet understand not? shall the expectation
of greater Light so dazzle our eyes before we see it, that we cannot be able to
see, what we do see? It is not Light, but darkness, that cloudeth the Light
already revealed. Nor is it darkness only, but blackness of darkness, that
puts Light for darkness, and darkness for Light, and would have both
tolerated to live together in the same Hemispheare, because some blind
Christians cannot yet tell, which is whether?

It is true, the Experience of former Errors, and sense of present weaknesses,
may justly abate the edge, and sheath up the Sword of persecution against any,
that differ only in errors of weakness, and differ not in Doctrines of
Faith, Repentance, and Holiness of heart, and life. Yea we willingly grant
more, then the Discusser requires in such a case. For though there should be
some Difference in Doctrines of faith, or Repentance, or Holiness; Yet we
should not approve the unsheathing of the Sword against such, unless the
Doctrine were fundamentally subversive to faith, or Repentance, or Holiness,
and that obstinately maintained against light, and conviction: and broached,
and dispersed to the Infection, and Seduction of others.

If the Difference be only in the way and manner of Administration of Christ
Jesus, and that Difference held forth in a Christian and Peaceable way. God
forbid a staff should be shaken against such, much less a Sword unsheathed.

CHAP. 72. A Reply to his Chap. 75th. Discussing a Testimony of Augustine.
Discusser.

TO begin with Augustine, They murder (says He) Souls, and themselves are
afflicted in Body. They put men to everlasting Death, and yet they complain
when themselves are put to a temporal Death.

This Rhetorical persuasion of humane wisdom seems very reasonable in the
Eye of flesh, and blood: but one Scripture more prevails with faithful and
obedient souls, then thousands of plausible, and Eloquent speeches.

Defender.

Neither this Testimony, nor the rest of those Ancients that follow, were
alleged to prevail with the Faith of any, further then Light of Scripture
might shine forth in them: but only to counterpoyse the Testimonies of the
Ancients alleged in the Letter against the Truth. And the Discusser in his
entrance into this chapter, is forced to acknowledge, that the cause we
maintain has more number of Votes (and I may add, weight of Voters) then the
contrary Tenent: only he puts it off with this evasion: that Antichrist is
too hard for Christ at Votes, and Numbers.

Which yet is the more to be marvelled at, that when the cause is about the
Toleration of Heretics, and Antichristians, that Antichrist should procure
more Votes against Antichristians, and Christ to procure any Votes, though
fewer for them. And it is but another evasion, whereby he here puts off
Augustines speech, as if it were but a Rhetorical evasion. Whereas indeed the
weight of the speech lies not in the Rhetoric, which is little, or none: but
in the Logic, in an Argument taken from the Excellency of the soul above the
body, and thence inferring the equity of killing the bodies of such, as kill
the souls of Gods people, and the iniquity of such, as think this unequal.

But to weaken the force of this Argument, the Discusser bestirreth himself to
draw up six Answers.

1. From the large extent of soule-killing, which may reach to many sins,
that are not capital, 1 Cor. 8.11.

2. From the dissimilitude of bodily, and spiritual Death. A body being killed
can dye but once: but a soul killed may recover.

3. From the different punishment, which Christ has provided for
soule-killers: to wit the two edged Sword, which comes out of his mouth, which
is able to cut down Heresy, and to kill the souls of Heretics everlastingly.

4. From the toleration, which Christ himself gives to such soule-killers, or
soule-wounders, in the Parable of Tares, Matthew. 13.

5. From the impossibility of killing any soul by any Heretic: not the souls
of natural men: for they are dead already: nor can false Teachers so much
prevent the means of spiritual Life, as does the force of a material Sword,
either imprisoning the souls of men in a Nationall-State-Religion: or cutting
them off immediately without any longer means of Repentance. Nor can there be
a killing of the souls of men alive in Christ, partly by reason of the
sufficiency and power of Spiritual Ordinances to preserve that Life in them
against all Enemies.

Partly, from the Immortality of the spiritual Life in Christ, which can no
more dye then Christ himself who is alive for ever.

6. From the possbility of a false Teachers, and a Wolves recovery from the
Estate of a soule-killer, to become a soule-saver, as it was in the case of
Paul.

For a just Reply to all these, let me first premise four things: and then
speak to the Arguments in Order.

1. It is not every murder of the body, that is a capital crime, but murder
executed in some gross Attempt. For he that hates his brother is a
manslayer, or murderer (1 John 3.15.) and yet not for that to be put to death.

2. Murder unadvisedly committed, when the Act done was not intended, is not a
capital crime: there were Cities of Refuge provided in such a case, Ezod.
21.13.

3. The very Attempt of murder, in the abuse of an Ordinance of God, is a
capital crime. As in a case, a man shall rise up before a Court of Justice to
bear false witness against his Neighbor, of some capital offense, this very
attempt of killing his Neighbor by the abuse of public Justice, is a capital
crime, Deuteronomy. 19.18. to 21.

4. The murder of the soul is not the only Formalis Ratio (as they call it)
the only proper cause of an Heretics capital Crime, but chiefly his bitter
root of Apostacy from God, not only falling off himself from God, but
seducing others to fall away from him.

These four things being premised, come we now to consider of the several
Answers given by the Discusser to Augustines Argument.

His first Answer reaches not the point: for as every killing of the body is
not a capital crime, so neither is every killing of the soul, but such as is
more voluntary, and presumptuous, and joined with some gross and murderous
attempt.

His second Answer falls short in this respect, that though a soul wounded
and killed may recover again, yet the very murderous Attempt of killing a
soul, in abusing an Ordinance of God, in corrupting Religion, is a capital
crime, whether the soul dye of that wound or no: or if it dye whether it be
recovered, or no. Thine eye shall not spare him, because he has sought to
thrust thee away from the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy 13.10. Though he did not thrust
thee away, yet because he sought to do it he shall dye.

His third Answer has been removed above. Church Censures are sufficient to
heal the Heretic, if he belong to God, and to remove the guilt of his
wickedness from the Church: but not sufficient, to prevent his further
spreading of the Leaven of his corruption: nor sufficient to cleanse the
Commonwealth from the guilt of such Rebellion, as has been taught by him
against the Lord.

His fourth Answer taken from Christ's toleration of the Tares has be en
largely, and (as I conceive) fully refelled above.

His fifth Answer has also been cleared already. If the Answer were good, it
would evacuate not only Augustines Argument, but Paul's also, 1 Cor 8.11. Paul
disswadeth from eating things sacrificed to Idols in Idols Temples. The
Argument to dissuade it, is from the offense thereby given to the Conscience of
the weak: and that backed and strengthened from the haynousnesse of the sin
of offense to Conscience: It is the murder, or perishing of a weak Brothers
soul. Now if this Answer of the Discusser might stand, it would make the
Argument of the Apostle of none effect. For either this weak Brother is a
natural man, dead in sin already, and then no man can kill him: or else he
is in Christ, and then his Life is immortal, and Christ has provided
Ordinances powerfully sufficient to prevent or heal such deadly Dangers,

It is an high presumptuous tempting of God, and wanton treading under foot
the precious souls of men for whom Christ dyed, to wound and (as much as in us
lies) to kill the souls of men, upon pretense, the Lord can save them, and
raise them again by his all-sufficient Grace. It is a putting of fear, where
none is, that the punishment of obstinate seducing Heretics with the material
Sword, is the imprisoning of the souls of men to a National Religion: for if
the Religion of the Nation be good, it is no Imprisonment: if naught, there
should be no punishment. And it is a like causlesse Fear, that, the cutting
off of Heretics, will cut off men immediately without any longer means of
Repentance: for if they belong to God, God will give them Repentance before
they go hence: but whether they belong to God, or no, the revealed will of God
is fulfilled in their just Execution.

The last Answer falls as short of strength, as any of the former. For if men
be such Wolves, and Blasphemers as Paul was, before his Conversion, neither the
Law of God or man would put such an one to Death, who sinned of ignorance, and
walked (as himself professes) with all good Conscience, even in his former
evil times, Acts 23.1. But as for such as Apostate from the known Truth of
Religion, and seek to subvert the Foundation of it, and to draw away others
from it, to plead for their Toleration in hope of their Conversion, is as much
as to proclaim a general pardon for all malefactors, (save such only as
sin against the Holy Ghost:) for he that is a wilful murderer, and Adulterer
now, may come to be converted and dye a martyr hereafter.

CHAP. 73. A Reply to his Chap. 76. discussing the Testimony of Optatus.
Discusser.

THe Answerer alleges from Optatus his third Book, that he justified
Macarius, who had put some Heretics to death, for that he had done no more
herein, then what Moses, Phincas, and Elias had done before him.

But these are shafts usually drawn from the Quiver of the Ceremonial and
Typical State of the National Church of the Jews, which vanished at the
appearing of the Body, and substance of the Sun of Righteousness, who set up
another Kingdom, or Church (Heb. 12.) Ministry, and Worship: In which we
find no such Ordinance, Precept, or Precedent of killing men for Religion sake.

Defender.

Whether these shafts be taken from the Quiver of the Ceremonial and Typical
State of the National Church of the Jews, or no: Sure this Answer is taken
from no Law of God, nor any Scripture ground: but from the Topics of humane
invention.

Did ever any Apostle or Evangilist, make the judicial Laws of Moses
concerning life and death, Ceremonial, or Typical? Time was, when humane
inventions in Gods Worship, were accounted Superstition: but now humane
inventions in Doctrine, may pass for current Evangelicall Divinity.

It is true the Sun of Righteousness has set up another Church, Ministry,
and Worship: But did he ever set up another civil Righteousness? or a M
gistracy to walk by another rule of Righteousness, then that which God gave
by Moses? If it be true, that Christ gave no express Ordinance, Precept, or
Precedent of killing men by material Swords for Religion sake: It is as true
that neither did he for any breach of civil Justice, no not for murder, nor
adultry. Which makes it therefore evident, that seeing he has expressly
authorized civil Magistracy in the New Testament, and has given no express
Laws or Rules of Righteousness for them to walk by in Administration of
civil Justice, therefore either he leaves them to act and rule without a Rule
(which derogateth from the perfection of Scripture:) or else they must fetch
their rules of Righteousness from the Law of Moses, and from the Prophets, who
have expounded him in the Old Testament.

Discusser.

More particularly, concerning Moses, I Querie what Commandment, or practice
of Moses, either Optatus, or the Answerer here intend^th. Probably that of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 13. If so I shall particularly Reply to that, in Answer to the
reasons here under mentioned.

Defender.

When Optatus speaks, that Macarius in putting Heretics to death had done no
more, then Moses had done before him: It appears he meant not that passage of
Deuteronomy. 13. but of Exodus 32. where he put to death Idolaters: and that of Levit.
24. where he put the Blasphemer to death. For Optatus speaks of what Moses
had done, not what Moses had commanded to be done. But I shall (God willing)
consider his Answer, if it come in my way.

Discusser.

Concerning Phinehas his zealous Act.

1. His flaying the Jsraelitish man and woman of Midian, was not for
spiritual, but corporal filthynesse.

Defender.

Was it for bodily or corporal filthiness? Surely for spiritual. For the
Israelites that committed whoredom with the daughters of the Land, they were
invited to the Sacrifices of their God: And being invited they did eat and
bowed down to their Gods, and so joined themselves to Baal Peor: this is
plain in the text Numb. 25.1, 2, 3.

Now I do not know, that corporal filthynesse between a young man and single
woman was any Capital Crime, by the Law of Moses. But the Discusser contenteth
himself, if any thing be said, it may go for an Answer.

Discusser.

2. No man will produce this fact as Precedentiall to any Minister of the
Gospel, so to act in any Civil State etc.

Defender.

It is true, it is no Precedent for Ministers: but the fact so clearly
acknowledged, and approved, and rewarded of God, is doubtless an act of
righteousness to have been done by some in their ordinary calling (to wit, by
Moses and the Princes of Israel:) which Phinehas did by an extraordinary
motion. God is not wont to approve any act of holiness, or righteousness
(though never so extraordinary) which does not fall under the ordinary Rule of
holiness, and righteousness, in the ordinary calling of some or other
Function, which himself has ordained. Therefore though Phinehas his fact be
no Precedent for Ministers of the Gospel: yet it is Precedentiall to such as
bear not the Sword in vain, but for the punishment of evil doers.

Discusser.

Concerning Elijah, There were two famous acts of Elijah of a killing nature.

1. That of slaying 850. of Baals Prophets, 1 Kings. 18.

2. Of the two Captains, and their fiftyes by Fire.

For the first, It cannot figure or Type out any material slaughter of the
many thousands of false Prophets in the world by any material Sword of Iron,
or steel: for as that passage was miraculous: so we find not any such
Commission given by the Lord Jesus to the Ministers of the Gospel.

Defender.

It will do the Discusser no hurt to take notice, that he that is forward to
take hold of any slip of Pen, or memory, is subject to the like slips himself.
The number of the false Prophets, which he says, were slain by Elijah
exceeds the Truth by half in half: the Text numbreth them 450. and he
numbreth them 850. Again, it is a vain thing to inquire what this fact of
Elijah should figure or Type out. Acts of Moral Justice, though they may
sometimes be extraordinary: yet they are never accounted Typical, or
Figurative: but by such as would transform all the Scripture into an Allegory.

Besides, why should he call the fact Miraculous? Is it a miracle for Elijah
with the aid of so many thousand people of Israel ^o put to death 450. men,
whose spirits were discouraged being convinced of their forgery and Idolatry?

Moreover, Though Christ gave no such Commission to Ministers of the Gospel to
put false Prophets to death, as Elijah did: yet the same Answer holds here
which was given to the fact of Phinehas: though the hand which executed Justice
was extraordinary: yet the act of Justice, was an ordinary duty of Moral
Righteousness, belonging to such as bear the Sword.

Discusser.

Lastly, such a slaughter must not only extend to all the false Prophets in
the world, but (according to the Answerers grounds) to the many thousands of
thousands of Idolaters, and false worshippers in the Kingdoms and Nations of
the world:

Defender.

Such a slaughter being only made of the false Prophets in Israel (a people in
Covenant with the true and living God) the example of it will only extend to
the like execution of all the false Prophets in the Church of God, who have
turned the hearts of the People of God from Jehovah to an Idol. What has any
Officer in the Church, or Magistrate in the Commonwealth to do, to censure or
punish all the false Prophets in the world, when many hundreds of them (if not
thousands) are exempt from their jurisdiction? muchlesse will this example
extend to the floughter of many thousands of thousands of Idolaters, and false
worshippers in the Kingdoms and Nations of the world.

For 1. many thousand thousands of them are exempt from the civil Magistracy
of Christians.

2. They were never in Covenant with God to whom only the Law of Moses
(concerning the punishment of Idolaters) extends.

3. Though the Israelites were Idolaters, yet Elijah spared them, as having bin
lead aside from the days of their Fathers, in their simplicity, and Ignorance,
by these false Teachers. And for sins of Ignorance God has appointed other
expiatory Sacrifices, then the slaughter of the off^nders. Nor has the
Answerer any grounds, or thoughts to the contrary.

As for the other fact of Elijah in slaying the Captains of their fiftyes, as
it is not pertinent to the punishment of false Prophets, nor of Idolaters (as
such:) so I do not find it alleged by any in this cause, but only by the
Discusser, to make himself work.

But when the Discusser is pleased to glory in his Answers to Augustine,
before, and to Optatus here, That if Augustine were now living, he would be of
his mind, and Optatus, and the Answerer himself might rest satisfied.

Let the Discusser revise again what he has written, and see if he can
satisfy himself (muchlesse the Answerer, and least of all Augustine, and
Optatus) in such Cobweb Evasions.

CHAP. 74. A Reply to his Chap. 77.
Discusser.

AS for. Calvine, Beza, and Aretius, mine Answer is, since matter of fact and
opinion are barely related by the Answerer without their grounds, (whose
grounds notwithstanding, in this Book are Answered) If Paul himself were
joined with them, yea or an Angel from Heaven, bringing any other Rule, then
what the Lord Jesus has once delivered, we have Paul's Conclusion, and
Resolution, peremptory, and dreadful, Gal. 1.8.

Defender.

That I only quoted the Names of those blessed men of God, It was partly
because it was enough to counterpoise the Names of Authors alleged by the
Letter against the Truth, by the Names of greater and more holy men of God, for
the Truth: partly also, because if I had quoted their grounds, I must have
transcribed their whole Books of the Argument. Calvines discourse about it,
against Servetus, is bound up in his Opuscula. Beza his. Book de Haceticis a
Magistratu puniendis, is bound up also in his Opuscula: but both of them too
large by me to be coppyed, and to strong and accurate, by them of the adverse
part to be refuted. Aretius, a like solid writer, may sooner be shifted off,
then sifted to Branne. But it seems, if Paul himself had joined with them in
the like fullness of expressions, himself should rather have been accursed by
the Discasser, then his Doctrine accepted. Which seems to me a strange both
prejudice, and prefidence met together. For since God laid his charge upon
Magistrates in the Old Testament, to punish Seducers, and the Lord Jesus never
took this charge off in the New Testament, who is this Discusser, that he
should account Paul himself, or an Angel from Heaven accursed, that should
leave this charge still upon Magistrates, which God laid on, and Christ never
took off? That Argument from the Parable Let both grow together to the Harvest
is not at all expounded in the Interpretation, Let Seducers be suffered to live
in the world till the last Judgment. And how weak a Foundation that is, to
cast a curse upon a chosen Apostle, or upon an holy Angel, I hope has been
cleared in discussing that Text.

Discusser.

Let me finish the whole, by proposing one Conclusion of the Author of the
arguments in the Letter, viz. It is no prejudice to the Commonwealth, if
Liberty of Conscience were suffered to such, as fear God indeed.

Abraham abode a long time amongst the Canaanites: though contrary to them in
Religion etc. So did Isaac: so did Jacob twenty years with his Uncle Laban.

So the People of Israel were about four and thirty years in Egypt: and
afterward seventie in Babylon, differing from Religion in both States.

Come to the time of Christ, Israel lived under the Romans, and diverse Sects in
Israel, besides Christ, and his Apostles etc. All these lived under Caesar's
Government, being nothing hurtful to the Commonwealth, giving to Caesar, that
which was his. And for their Religion, he left them to themselves, as having no
Dominion over their souls and Consciences. And when the enemies of the Truth
raised up any tumults, the wisdom of the Magistrates most wisely appeased
them, Acts. 18.14. and 19.35. Unto this, the Answerer returns thus much:

It is true, That without prejudice to the Commonwealth, Liberty of Conscience
may be suffered to such as fear God indeed: as knowing they will not persist
in Heresy, or turbulent Schism, when they are convinced in Conscience of the
sinfulness thereof

But the Question is whether an Heretic after once or twice Admonition (and so
after conviction) or any other scandalous and heinous Offender, may be
Tolerated either in the Church, without Excommunication: or in the
Commonwealth without such punishment, as may preserve others from dangerous
and damnable infection

CHAP. 75. A Reply to his Chap. 78.
Discusser.

But here I observe the Answerers partiality, That none but such as truly fear
God should enjoy Liberty of Conscience etc.

Defender.

But here I Observe the Discussers both partiality and fashood. Partiality, for
I did but repeat the very words of the Author of the Letter, and grant them
to be good. The Letter had said (as himself repeateth it, It is no prejudice to
a Commonwealth if Liberty of Conscience were suffered to such as fear God
indeed: whereto I subjoyne my Attestation, It is true, that without prejudice
to the Commonwealth, Liberty of Conscience may be suffered to men that fear
God indeed.

Here the Discusser in me observes Partiality: but in the Letter the very same
speech passes for Current, and approveable. But the Lord help him to remember
Diverse weights, and diverse measures are abomination to the Lord, Prove. 20.10.
But I truly observe in his speech, not only partiality, but falsehood also. For
it is a very falsehood, that I should say, None but such as truly fear God
should enjoy Liberty of Conscience. I say no more then the Letter says: It
says, That it is no prejudice to the Commonwealth, if Liberty of Conscience
were suffered to such as fear God indeed. I say, It is true, without prejudice
to the Commonwealth, Liberty of Conscience may be suffered to such as fear
God indeed. Now if a man should gather the same Observation out of the Letter,
That none but such as truly fear God should enjoy Liberty of Conscience, I
believe the Discusser would observe notorious falsehood in such dealing. And
justly he might: for it is one thing to say, liberty of Conscience may be
suffered to men that truly fear God, without prejudice to the Commonwealth:
another thing to say, it may be suffered to none else.

I easily grant, nor did I ever deny it, that the Inhabitants of the world,
though they never come into the estate of men fearing God, yet they may and
ought to be suffered to live in the world, unless they disturb the Countries
of the world where they live, with some Capital Crimes. And if they do
disturb the Countries where they live, they stand and fall to the Laws, and
Governments of the Countries where they inhabit.

And therefore all the dangerous consequences, which the Discusser gathers
from my speech (but indeed not my speech, but his own) as if I should drive
the world out of the world, or turn the world upside down, or leave it to men
that have not Gods fear, to judge who fear God, and who not, and the rest
that follow, they are all of them consequences without an Anticedent, or an
Anticedent without exsistence in any speech of mine, but only in his own
imagination.

Neither has it any better ground, that passionate exclamation of his, with
which he ends this Chapter.

Hear (says he) O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, yea let the Heavens be
astonished, and the Earth tremble at such an Answer.

What Answer, think you, might this be, that might provoke not the Discusser
only, but the Heavens and earth to such attention, admiration, trembling,
astonishment?

The Answer (forsooth) is that which he calls a wonderful Answer, which the
Ministers of New England gave to the third Question sent to them by some
Ministers of Old-England, to wit, that although they confessed them to be such
persons whom they approved of, far above themselves, yea who were in their
hearts to live and die together: yet if they or other godly people with them,
coming over to them, should differ in Church-Constitution, they then could not
approve their civil Cohabitation with them and consequently could not advise
their Magistrates, to suffer them to enjoy a civil being within their
jurisdiction.

Now sure, if there were any such Answer to be found in that Book sounding to
such a purpose, I my self should join with him in the like exclamation, and
wonderment. But when I came to search for that speech, and neither find it in
the Answer which he quoteth to the third Question, nor in that, which I rather
think he meant, the 31. I cannot but admire and adore the righteous Judgment
of God, who having left the Discusser (in this Book, and some other) to write
against the Truth in point of Doctrine, has herein left him to break forth in
his own handwriting, into notorious impudent falsehood in matter of fact:
which any man that reads that Book cannot but discern in this Allegation.
The Answer is too large for me to transcribe, but who so will may read it, and
when he compares the Answer in that Book, with the Answer in this, he may
well wonder with what heart and forhead, the Discusser could so express it.

CHAP. 76. A Reply to his 79. Chap.
Discusser.

Yea, but say they, they doubt not if those Ministers of Old-England should
come over to them, and were here with them, they should agree. For, say they,
either you will come to us, or show us light to come to you: for we are but
weak men, and dream not of perfection in this life.

Alas who knows not what lamentable differences have been between the same
Ministers of the Church of England? etc.

Let none now think, that the passage to New England by Sea, or the nature of
the Country can do, what only the Key of David can do, to wit, open and
shut the Consciences of men.

Defender.

I did not think that any man in Old-England, or New, had been so ignorant, or
uncharitable, as to think, the Penman of the Answer to these Questions had
conceived, that either the voyage by Sea, or the change of the air from Old
England to New, could change the judgments or Consciences of men. Nature could
tell, Coelum, non animum mutant, qui trans mare Currunt. But yet no Christian
man is ignorant that mutual conference between Godly, ingenuous, and
selfe-denying Christians is a notable means sanctified of God for the
instruction and edification one of another, till we all come to be of one
mind in the Lord. Else how shall therebe mutual convictions without mutual
conferences? It is the Key of David only, that can open and shut the
Consciences of men: but that Key ordinarily does it in the dispensation of
Ordinances, whereof Conference is one.

Discusser.

Besides, how can this be a faithful and upright acknowledgement of their
weakness, and imperfection, when they Preach, Print, and practice such
violence to the souls and bodies of others? And by their Rules and grounds
ought to proceed to the killing of those, whom they judge so dear unto them,
and in respect of godliness far above themselves?

Defender.

This violence to the souls and bodies of men is often charged upon us by the
Discusser: But he has not yet given us an instance of any one soul or body,
which has undergone this violence from us. Si Accusasse fufficiat, quis
innocens exit? It is no new practice to be an Accuser of the Brethren: neither
is their any slander so false or scurrilous, but finds ready, yea and greedy
intertainment even of many professors, especially such, whose best Religion
lies in the observing and censuring the ways of others. How welcome to such,
are evil reports of them, that dare not allow themselves in any known evil?

This acknowledgement of our weakness and imperfection would then truly
appear to be neither faithful nor upright, if we Preached or practiced
violence against such, in comparison of whom we acknowledge our own weakness
and imperfection. Mean while we may well stand and wonder, what rules and
Grounds of ours those be, by which we ought to proceed even to the killing of
those, whom we judge so dear unto us, and in respect of Godliness far above
us?

Are any of them whom we so respect, such as subvert the Foundation of the
Christian Faith, and persist therein obstinately after conviction? are any of
them presumptuous Blasphemers of the great Name of God? Or Idolaters
themselves, and Seducers of others to Idolatry?

CHAP. 77. A Reply to his Chap. 80.
Discusser.

What though, they say, the Godly will not persist in Heresy, or turbulent
Schism, when they are convinced thereof in Conscience? If the civil Court and
Magistrates must judge, and those civil Courts, are as lawful, consisting of
natural men, as of Godly persons, then what consequences will follow, I have
before mentioned.

Defender.

Mentioned, indeed, but not proved: I hope (by the help of Christ) the
inconsequence of them has been cleared.

Discusser.

And I add, according to this Conclusion it must follow, that if the most
godly persons yield not to once or twice Admonition (as is mainteyned by the
Answerer) they must necessarily be esteemed obstinate persons: for if they were
godly, they would yield.

Defender.

Here again the Discusser misreporteth my words: For I did not say, that if
persons be godly, they would yield to once or twice Admonition: and if they did
not yield to once or twice Admonition, they must necessarily be esteemed
obstinate persons. But my words were, The godly will not persist in Heresy or
turbulent Schism, when they are convinced in Conscience of the sinfulness
thereof.

Here is then a threefold wresting of my words, and accordingly so much false
dealing. For 1. Admonition is one thing: Conviction in their own Conscience,
is another. For though Admonition ought not to be dispensed till after
conviction: yet it may fall out, that the Church (through mistake) proceeds
to Admonition, before the Offender be convinced in his own Conscience of the
sinfulness of his way.

2. He carries my words, as if they who yield not to once or twice Admonition
must needs be esteemed obstinate persons: whereas I only say, they will not
persist in Heresy, (that is, in obstinacy of Fundamental Error) nor in
turbulent Schism, when they are convinced in Conscience of the sinfulness
thereof.

3. He propounds my words generally, as if I had said that godly persons (in
whatsovever Error they hold) if they yield not to once or twice Admonition,
they must needs be esteemed obstinate. whereas I spoke not of every Error, but
of persisting in Heresy and turbulent Schism.

But you may see how far the love of an Error, and desire of contention, will
transport the mind and spirit!

The two stories that he tells, upon this occasion (in his next words)
because he names neither time, nor persons, nor occasions of the speeches
(which he represents as odious) a short Answer will serve to them. 1. I have
too much experience of the Discussers mistakes of permanent Printed words, and
therefore am afraid to credit every report of transient words spoken, without
further Testimony. 2. The words might be spoken by some persons, concerning
others, upon such occasions, as I will by no means excuse, or justify: but
they might be spoken upon such weights, as might justly hold weight in the
Balance of the Sanctuary.

The latter part of my Answer which he says, comes not near the Question, I
now understand so much by the Discusser: but it did not so appear to me by the
Author of the Letter.

Discusser.

Mr. Cotton concludes with a consident persuasion, of having removed the
grounds of that great Error, viz. that persons are not to be persecuted for
cause of Conscience.

Defender.

How hard a thing is it, to write against the Truth, and yet to speak with a
lip of Truth? Compare the words of my conclusion with the Discussers relation
or representation thereof. The words of my conclusion were these

Thus much I thought needful to be spoken for the avoiding of the grounds of
your Error.

1. Then, let him speak, what words of mine do express the confidence of my
persuasion? It is true, I bel^ive, and therefore speak what I have written:
but wherein did I blow up my belief to a confident persuasion? I thank God: I
doubt not of the truth of what I have written: but it is one thing, what I
conceive in my mind: another thing what I think meet to express.

2. I do not say in this conclusion, that I have removed the grounds of his
Error: but that I have spoken so much for that end: but whether I have done it
or no (according to the help of Christ received) I leave others to judge.

3. The name of a great Error is foisted in by himself, ad exaggerandam
gloriationis invidiam et indignitatem: but though the Error be indeed great:
yet I did not so style it, when I spoke of mine own endeavor to remove the
grounds of it.

4. It is an evident falsehood that I should conclude, This to be that great
Error, That persons are not to be persecuted for cause of Conscience.

For it is that which in stating the Question, I did in express terms deny,
that any was to be persecuted for cause of Conscience: no not an Heretic, no
not in a Church Way, much less in a civil way till being convinced in his
own Conscience of his wickedness, he do stand out therein, not only against
the Truth, but against the light of his own Conscience, that so it may
appear, he is not persecuted for cause of Conscience, but punished for sinning
against his Conscience.

Only this, I now further add, which I know not, whether I had not occasion
to speak to in this Discourse hitherto (unless in a touch) that sometime it
may be an aggravation of sin both in judgment and practice, that a man
holds it, or commits it in Conscience. But that is only in case, when a
man has been wonted to sin so often against his light, and against the clear
Principles of Truth, and godliness, that it may appear, the just curse of God
has given him up to a reprobate-blinded-minde, and seared Conscience. But of
that we have not had occasion to dispute in this Discourse.

Discusser.

But I believe it shall appear, That the charge of Error Reboundeth backc,
even such an Error as may be called the Bloudy-Tenent.

Defender.

I hope, It has by this time appeared, in the former dispute, (through the
blessing of Christ) That, that which he calls the Bloudy-Tenent is washed
white in the blood of the Lamb: and tends both to the ends, for which the
Prince of peace dyed, viz. To the saving of his sheep from devouring to the
dissolving of the cursed works of Satan, to the maintenance of his Truth, and
to the preservation of sacred and civil peace, both in Churches, and
Commonwealth.

CHAP. 78. A Reply to his Chap. 81.
Defender.

TO the last Chapter of the Discusser, I think it not worth the while to
speak any thing: it consisting chiefly of the Discussers selfe-applauses and
vainglorious Triumphs; As that he knows, That the God, the Spirit, and
Prince, the Angels of peace, and that all the true awaked sons of peace will
call the Truth (be means this Doctrine of Toleration held forth by himself)
blessed:

That the contemplations thereof are sweet and precious: but Ob how sweet the
actions, and Fruitions!

That these lips of Truth (to wit, distilling in his Pen) drop as the honey
Comb: Honey and milk are under her Tongue: and oh that these drops, these
streams might flow without interruption?

Only one passage of his glorious boasting, I may not let pass, without some
Animad version because the Name of Christ is interested in it, and dishonored
by it.

Discusser.

Were I (says he) believed in this, That Christ is not delighted with the
blood of men, (but shed his own blood for his bloudyest enemies:) That by the
word of Christ, No man for gainsaying Christ, or joining with his enemy
Antichrist, should be molested with the Civil sword: were this foundation
laid, and the Magna Charta of highest Liberties, and good security given on all
hands for the preservation of it, How soon would every Brow and House be stuck
with Olive Branches?

Whether this be not to Conclude with confident persuasion (the same, and far
greater then that which he noted in me, even now) I matter not. Let him reserve
conclusions with confident persuasions to himself alone. Had he ground (from
the eternal word of Truth) for such confidence, It would never trouble me, nor
hurt him,

But this is not, pleasing to Christ, nor to the Spirit of his wisdom and
Truth, that the Disousser should publish the delights of Christ in a confussed
way, without distinguishing things that differ, and so not dividing the Word
aright. It is true, that Christ delights not in the blood of men, but shed
his own for his bloudiest enemies, and gainsayers: to wit, whilst they
gainsaying him, and bloudily persecute him, or his out of ignorance. In this
case indeed, he prays for them, and dies for them, Father forgive them, they
know not what they do, Luke 23.34. whilst we were enemies Christ died for
us, Romans 5.8, 10.

But to say that Christ delights not in the blood of men, who after the
acknowledgement of his Truth do tread the blood of his Covenant under foot,
and wittingly and willingly reject him from reigning over them: To hold it
forth, that Christ delights not in the blood of such men, or that he would
not have such molested by the civil Sword, who gainsay Christ known and
professed, and join with his enemy Antichrist, in blaspheming and persecuting
Christ and his Saints, This the Discusser can never make good to be the word of
Christ. It is indeed, to publish the glad Tidings of the Gospel, not to the
humble and meek Lambs of Christ, but to the seed of the Serpent, to sow
pillowes under all elbowes: to make the hearts of the righteous sad, whom God
would not make sad: and to strengthen the hands of the wicked in their Apostasy
from the truth, and malignity against it. Christ has pronounced it upon earth,
and ratifyed it in Heaven, Those mine enemies, that would not that I should
reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before my face, Luke 19.27.
Are these the words of him, that delights not in the blood of his bloudyest
enemies, and gainsayers? when the Lord Jesus sends forth his servants to
power out bloody vengeance upon Antichristian emissaries, and opens the
hearts and mouths of his Saints to praise him for thus judging ( Rev. 16.4, --
7) Is this to proclaim a Magna-Charta of highest libertyes, even to his
gainsayers, and to such as join with his enemy Antichrist?

Time was, when Jehu justly demanded, What peace (what have thou to do with
peace) so long as the whor domes of thy Mother Jezebel, and her witcherafts are
so many? 2 Kings, 9.22. And are the times now so far changed, that the Sword
of Jebu shall proclaim peace to Jezebel, and peace to all that call her
mother, and peace to her whoredoms, and peace to her witchcrafts: and then to
bless our selves with a glorious expectation, That soon shall every Brow and
house be stuck with O live branches?

The Lord keep us from being bewitched with the Whores cup, lest whilst we
seem to detest and reject her with open face of profession we do not bring
her in by a back door of Toleration, and so come at last, to drink deeply of
the cup of the Lords wrath, and be filled with the cup of her plagues.

Amen.

CHAP. 79. Touching the Model of Church and civil Power, composed by Mr.
Cotton and the Ministers of New England, and sent to the Church of Salem etc.
Examined (by the Discusser) and Answered.
THis Title or Inscription (which the Examiner sets up of this Model)
holds forth to the world a double falsehood.

1. That the Model was composed by Mr. Cotton, and other Ministers of
New England.

This is one falsehood. What other Ministers of New England did in it,
themselves know: But for Mr. Cotton, I know, that he was none of them that
composed it.

2. That this Model was sent to the Church of Salem, if he mean, sent by
those Ministers (as the following words imply, for the confirmation of their
Doctrine) that is another falsehood. The Ministers themselves, that composed the
Model, do deny it; Howsoever the Model came to Salem, the Ministers say, it
was not sent by them. But see, when men are left of God, openly, and boldly to
write against the truth in matter of Doctrine, how readily and freely, they can
write and speak falsehood in matter of fact?

It is therefore less marvel, that in Answer to the preface of the Model, he
breaks forth into such vast hyperboles, That the Model awakeneth Meses from
his unknown Grave: and denies Jesus yet to have seen the earth. A speech as
devoid of reason, as of truth. The observation of Moses Laws does not awaken
Moses out of his grave, nor is there any reason it should. The validity of
Laws does not (in reason) depend upon the life or resurrection of the
Lawgiver: the Examiner himself (I suppose) would not doubt, but the Laws of
Moses were of force to the Israelites in the Land of Canaan, when yet Moses was
dead and buried before their entrance into the Land. Neither did their
observation of them awaken Moses out of his grave, but argued his Laws to be
in force as well after his death, as whilst he was yet living. If it be said,
That Christ at his coming in the flesh when he was buried himself, buried also
the Laws of Moses with him in his grave.

Then the Examiner should not have said, that the Model raised up Moses out of
his grave, but that it raised up Christ out of his grave.

If it be said again, the Examiner says, It denied Christ to have seen the
earth, which was of as ill consequence. Be it so: but yet still, this makes
nothing to the rasing up of Moses out of his grave.

I Answer further, Neither does it at all deny, Christ to have seen the earth.
For Christ came not to destroy the Law of Moses, Mat. 5.17. Neither the Moral
Law: for in the sequel of that Chapter, he does at large expound it, and
establish it:

No, nor did he come to destroy the judicial Laws, such of them as are of
Moral equity. Or else, the Conscience of the civil Magistrate could never do
any act of civil justice out of faith, because he should have no word of God
to be the ground of his action, if the Laws of judgment in the Old Testament
were abrogated, and none extant in the New. As for the exception, which the
Examiner takes against the Preface. It is as easily avoided, as Objected.

If (says he) the civil Magistrate (even the highest) being a Member of the
Church, be subject to Church-Censure, how can this stand with their common
Tenent, that he must keep the first Table, Reform the Church, be Judge and
Governor in all causes, as well ecclesiastical as Civil?

Secondly, how can a Magistrate both sit on the Bench, and stand at the Bar of
Christ Jesus? Is it not as impossible, as to reconcile east and west together?
Yea, is not the Text in Isa. 49, 23. Lamentably wrested to prove both these?

Reply.

One Answer may easily remove both Exceptions: And that one Text does expressly
hold forth both these Points, which the Examiner conceives to be so
irreconcilable.

For if Princes be nursing Fathers to the Church (as that Text speaks) then
they are to provide, that the children of the Church be not nursed with poison
in stead of milk. And in so doing, they keep the first Table. Reform the
Church, and judge in causes Ecclesiastical,

Again, If the the same Princes shall bow down to the Church with their faces
toward the earth, and lick the dust of her feet (as the same Text expresses)
then they being members of the Church, shall be subject also to Church-Censure.
In one word, Princes sit on the Bench over the Church in the offensive
Government of the Church: and yet may themselves (being members of the Church)
be subject to Church-Censure in the offensive Government of themselves against
the Rules of the Gospel.

The Examiner himself contesseth, that in several respects, He that is a
governor may be also a Subject.

Behold here are several respects, to wit, several objects of Judicature; In
the Mal-Administration of the Church, the Magistrate sits as Judge, and
Governor: in the Mal-Administration of a Church-Member-Magistrate contrary to
the express rules of the Gospel, he is subject to the power of Christ in the
Church. If it be said, nay rather, The Church is subject to the Magistrate in
civil causes: and the Magistrate is subject to the Church in spiritual causes:

I Answer, That eases not the difficulty, no more then the other. For suppose
the Magistrate (a Church member) live in Incest, break forth into murder, and
notorious oppression: these are all civil causes, belonging to the second
Table. If the Magistrate sit as Judge and supreme Governor in this case, then
must the Church tolerate him herein, to the dishonor of the great Name of
Christ, to the leavening of the Church, and to the perdition of his soul. If
it be granted, that in such a case though civil, the Church is bound to deal
faithfully with the Magistrate, and not to suffer sin upon him: let the like
power be granted to the Magistrate to deal faithfully with the Church in the
notorious transgressions of the first Table, as is granted to the Church to
deal with the Magistrate in the notorious transgressions of the second Table,
and the controversy is ended.

If any further matter be claimed in making the Supreme Magistrate, the Supreme
Judge and Governor in all causes, as well Ecclesiastical, as civil, I do not
understand, that the Ministers or Churches of Christ are called to acknowledge
such a meaning. Sure I am, the Interpretation of that high style, which godly
learned Reynolds made of it in the 10. Chap. of his Conference with Heart, It
was accepted of the State in the days of Queen Elizabeth. And the same
Interpretation (if no more be intended by that style) does well stand with our
defense.

But wherefore do I put my Sicle into the Harvest of my Brethren? my Brethren,
who penned that Model, are richly furnished by Christ with ability to defend
it. I therefore leave it to them, whom it chiefly concerns, to maintain the
Truth, which themselves have witnessed in that Model.

And the Lord Jesus Christ himself (the God of Truth) who came into the world,
that he might bear witness to the Truth, be pleased to bear witness from
Heaven to his own Truth and bl^ that peace (a fraudulent and false peace)
which the Examiner proclaims to all the ways of falsehood in Religion, to
Heresy in Doctrine, to Idolatry in worship, to blasphemy of the great Name of
God, to Pollution, and profanation of all his holy Ordiannces.

Amen, Even So, Come Lord Jesus.

A REPLY TO Mr. WILLIAMS his EXAMINATION; And Answer of the Letters sent to
him by JOHN COTTON.
SUch a Letter to such a purpose, I do remember I wrote unto Mr. Williams
about half a score years ago. But whether this printed Letter be a true
Copy thereof, or no, I do not know; for the Letter being sent so long since,
and no Copy of it (that I can find) reserved by me; I can own it no further
then I find the matter and style, expressing the judgment which I then had of
his cause of Separation, and the affection I bare unto his person. And for
ought I see, the Letter does not unfitly express both.

But how it came to be put in print, I cannot imagine. Sure I am it was without
my privitie: and when I heard of it, it was to me unwelcome News, as knowing
the truth, and weight of Plinies speech, Aliud est scribere uni, aliud omnibus.
There be who think it was published by Mr. Williams himself, or by some of
his friends, who had the Copy from him. Which latter might be the more
probable, because himself denies the publishing of it: and it sticks in my
mind that I received many years ago, a refutation of it (in a brotherly and
ingenuous way) from a stranger to me, but one (as I hear) well affected to
him, Mr. Sabine Staresmore. To whom I had long ago returned an Answer, but
that he did not direct me where my Letter might find him. But I do not suspect
Mr. Staresmore, nor Mr. Williams himself to have published it; but rather some
other (unadvised) Christian, who (having gotten a copy of the Letter, took
more liberty, then God allows, to draw forth a private Admonition to public
notice in a disorderly way.

But howsoever it was, upon the publishing of this Letter, Mr. Williams has
taken occasion (as is observed by some who are acquainted with the Spirit of
the man) first to rise up against me (the meanest of many) in the examining and
resuting of that Letter: And then (as if one Mordecai were too small a morsel)
to stand forth against all the Churches, and Elders in New England, in his
Bloody Tenent: And then (as if New England were but an handful) from thence to
rise up against the choicest Ornaments of two populous Nations, England and
Scotland, the reverend Assembly of Divines, together with the reverend Brethren
of the Apology: and above them all to address himself (according to his high
thoughts) to propound Quaeries of high concernment (as he calls them) to the
High and Honorable Court of Parliament. So a Bird of prey, affecting to soar
aloft, gets first upon the top of a molehill, and from thence takes his
rise from Pale to Tree, till he have surmounted the highest Mountains.

In this apprehension of him they are the more confirmed, as having discerned
the like frame of Spirit in his former walking amongst us. Time was, when of
all Christian Churches, the Churches of New England were accounted, and
professed by him, to be the most pure: and of all the Churches in New England,
Salem (where himself was Teacher) to be the most pure. But when the Churches
of New England took just offense at sundry of his proceedings, he first
renounced communion with them all: and because the Church of Salem refused to
join with him in such a groundless Censure, he then renounced communion with
Salem also. And then fell off from his Ministry, and then from all
Church Fellowship, and then from his Baptism, (and was himself baptized
again) and then from the Lords Supper, and from all Ordinances of Christ
dispensed in any Church Way, till God shall stir up himself, or some other
new Apostles to recover, and restore all the Ordinances, and Churches of Christ
out of the ruins of Antichristian Apostasy.

But for mine own part, whatsoever thoughts, others (who seem to know him
well) have conceived of his Spirit, and course in these things: yet I choose
rather to leave all Judgment of him, to Him, who sees, and searches the
heart, and reins, and will one day bring every secret thing, yea the very
thoughts, and intents of the sons of men, unto righteous Judgment.

Nevertheless, seeing the Tree is known by his fruits, I do rather
apprehend, that he knowing the Spirit breaths where he pleases, and
conceiving himself to have received a clearer illumination and apprehension of
the estate of Christ's Kingdom, and of the purity of holy Communion, then all
Christendom (yea even Christendom it self is an unsavory word to him) he
therefore takes it to be his duty, to give public advertisement, and
admonition to all men, whether of meaner note, (such as my self) or of more
public note, and place, of the corruptions of Religion, which himself
observes in their judgment, and practice. Neither would I deny, but that (to
use his own words) God sometimes stirs up one Elijah against eight hundred
of Baals Priests, one Micajah against four hundred of Ahabs Prophets; one
Athanasius against many hundreths of Arrian Bishops; one John Hus against the
whole Council of Constance; Luther and the two witnesses against many
thousands, etc. And therefore I durst not neglect, much less despise any
advertisement from him alone against so many; provided that the word of the
Lord be found in his mouth, or pen. I come therefore to consider, and weigh
what he says to my self, without prejudice against him, and (I hope) without
partiality to my self.

In his Epistle to the Reader, before his Answer to my Letter, he utterly
misconstrueth the ground and scope, whether of this Letter, or of any other
Letters of mine to him, As if I wrote upon occasion of the grief, which some
friends conceived, That such an one as himself (publicly acknowledged to be
godly, and dearly beloved) should be exposed to the mercy of an howling
Wilderness, in frost and snow, etc. And that my intent in writing was, to take
off the edge of Censure from my self, by professing in speech, and writing,
That I was no procurer of his sorrows, etc. In which few lines, four things
present themselves, which if they be cleared, may clear both his mistake of
himself, and his cause, and together therewith the innocence of others.

1. When he speaks of himself as one publicly acknowledged, to be godly and
dearly beloved, I did never perceive just ground for such public
acknowledgement. For before my coming into New England, the godly-wise, and
vigilant Ruling-Elder of Plymouth (aged Mr. Bruister) had warned the whole
Church of the danger of his spirit, which moved the better part of the Church,
to be glad of his removal from them into the Bay. And in the Bay not long
before my coming, he began to oppose the Kings Patent with much vehemence, (as
he had done at Plymouth before;) which made the Magistrates to fear, they
should have more to do with him, then with a man publicly acknowledged to be
godly, and dearly beloved.

Soon after, when upon hearing of some Episcopal, and malignant practices
against the Country, the Magistrates, and whole general Court thought meet to
take a trial of the fidelity of the people (not by imposing upon them, but) by
offering to them an Oath of Fidelity, That in case any should refuse, they
might not betrust them with place of public Command; He vehemently withstood
it, partly because it was Christ's Prerogative to have his Office established by
Oath; partly, because an Oath was a part of Gods worship, and many of the
people being carnal (as he conceived) it was not meet to put upon them an
Oath, which was an act of Gods worship. Upon such, and the like disturbances to
the Civil Peace (for upon this sundry refused the Oath, and upon their
refusal the Magistrates could not discern how the people stood affected to
the public Safety) therefore, both the Magistrates, and sundry Elders (though
I do not remember my self to be one) advised the Church of Salem, not to
proceed to choose him (as they were then about to do) unto office in the
Church. Yea and in Salem (though many of the Members were taken with him) some
judicious amongst them told me, they could not choose him to office, because
they found him to be (contrary to the Apostles rule) (...), selfe-pleasing,
selfe-full, or (as it is translated) selfe-willed, Tit. 1.7. Nevertheless, the
major part of the Church made choice of him. Soon after the Church of Salem
made suit to the Court, for a parcel of Land, which lay commodious for them:
But the Court delayed to grant their request, because the Church had refused to
hearken to their motion, in forbearing the choice of Mr. Williams. Which so
much incensed Mr. Williams, that he caused the Church to join with him, in
writing Letters of Admonition to all the Churches, whereof any of the
Magistrates were members, to admonish their Magistrates of their breach of the
rule of Justice, in not granting their Petition. Which following upon all the
former disturbances raised by Mr. Williams, it still aggravated the former
jealousies, which generally, the judicious sort of Christians had conceived of
his selfe-conceited, and unquiet, and unlambelike frame of his Spirit: So that
from first to last of my knowledge of him here, I cannot see, nor say, what
ground he had of such a Testimony, as he gives of himself, as of one
publicly acknowledged to be godly, and dearly beloved.

2. When he makes it an occasion of my excuse of my self, (from having an
hand in his sufferings) that some friends were much grieved that such an one
should be exposed to such sufferings.

I do believe indeed, that not some friends only, but many were grieved at the
unmovable stiffnesse, and headiness of his Spirit, that exposed him to such
sufferings.

But he does not well to say, that some friends were grieved, that one so
publicly acknowledged, should be exposed to such sufferings; thereby to
intimate as if his sufferings were greater then his deservings. For neither
might such friends be truly called his friends; nor was their judgment of any
weight in his cause. For they cleaved to him, and his cause, not out of
judicious charity, but out of an itching levity, taken with every wind of new
Doctrine: which soon after appeared. For within a short time, when his new
Notions grew stale to them, they separated from him, (as he from them) and
began to listen after a more prodigious Minter of exorbitant novelties, (the
very dregs of Familisme) held forth by one Mr. Gorton. Gorton at first arrived
in our Bay, and continued a while in our Town, till a reverend Minister in
London, (Mr. Walker) sent over Directions to some friends, to demand an 100.li.
debt of him, which he having borrowed of a Citizen, the Citizen bequeathed it
to some good use, whereof Mr. Walker was called to some Trust. But then Mr.
Gorton departed out of this Jurisdiction to Plymouth: and there beginning to
spread some of his Opinions, to the disturbance of the Church, and fearing
disturbance to himself, he came to Roade-Island; and there raising some
seditious disturbance against the Magistrates, he met with public correction.
From thence therefore he went to Providence, the place where Mr. Williams, (and
those some friends he spoke of) sat down. But those friends of Mr. Williams
were soon taken with that greater Light, which they conceived was held forth
by Mr. Gorton.

What kind of light that was came to our view upon this occasion: One or two of
the Indian-Sagamores, who lived near Providence, came over into the Bay, to
offer the subjection of themselves, and their people, to the Government of the
English, hoping by this means to avoyde the oppression of the Narhagansets
(their potent Neighbors) as also of Mr. Gortons company, who took their lands
from them. Afterward those Indians complaining to our Magistrates of some
further injury done to them by Mr. Gortons company; our Court sent over to Mr.
Gortons company, requiring some of them to come over, and show what right they
had to those lands, which they had taken from the Indians, their Subjects. He
and his company in stead of coming, or sending any to clear their Right, sent
two Books written by some of themselves, full of sundry heresies, and malignant
blasphemies, against Christ, against his Churches, Ministers, Sacraments,
Censures, and Magistrates: yet withal offered that if this Court would send
their Agents over unto them, they would clear their Right to the Land, which
they took from the Indians. The Court therefore sent over some, with Commission
to Treat with them; and because Gortons company had threatened the former
Messengers with the offer of some violence, they therefore sent as many armed
men with these, as might secure their Agents from injury: And in case they
refused to show the right, and equity of their cause, then to bring some of
the principal of them, by strong hand, to clear it here. When hither they
were come, (not to digress to another Story) Gorton, desiring liberty to
speak his mind freely, held it forth (as the mind of himself, and his
company,) (whereof those of Mr. Williams his friends were no small part;) That
Christ was Incarnate when Adam was made after Gods Image: For God had but one
Image, and that Image was Christ. And this making of Adam in that Image, was
the exinanition of Christ. But when it was objected, that that exinanition of
Christ was unto life in Adam, but Christ was to suffer exinanition unto death:
He answered; That Christ dyed when the Image of God dyed: and the Image of God
dyed in Adams fall.

But when it was further objected, That Christ's death was the Price and
Purchase of our Redemption; but the fall of Adam was not the Price of our
Redemption, but the cause of our condemnation. He stopped, and would neither
proceed to clear his mind further, nor by any means be persuaded to revoke
that hellish blasphemy. These, and many such like Tenants were vented by him,
and his company: and this company was made up of those friends of Mr. Williams,
who (as he says) were grieved at his exposall to the mercy of the Wilderness.
Which I thought meet to declare, lest any should think that his sufferings
(considering the causes of them) were grievous or offensive to godly minds.

Where by the way, a sincere hearted humble Christian may easily discern the
vast difference between the spirit of Mr. Williams, and of John the Apostle, in
relating their sufferings by way of Banishment: John was a beloved Disciple,
yea (by way of eminency) the Disciple whom Jesus loved: and He, for the
testimony of Jesus, was banished by the bloody Emperor Domitian, into the Isle
of Patmos, a desolate Wilderness, destitute (for the most part) of
Inhabitants: yet he makes no express mention of his Banishment, nor of the
howling Wilderness, nor of frost, and snow, and such winter miseries: But
(says he) I was in the Isle of Patmos for the Testimony of Jesus. But Mr.
Williams being called by a weak man beloved in Christ, he aggravateth the
banishment of such an one as himself, by all the sad exaggerations, which wit
and words could well paint it out withal; to wit, That he was, only for the
holy Truth of Christ Jesus, denied the common air to breath in, and a civil
cohabitation upon the same common earth, yea and without mercy, and humane
compassion exposed to winter miseries in an howling Wilderness, in frost, and
snow, and that amongst Barbarians. So deeply affected the sons of men can be
in describing their own sufferings for themselves, and their own ways, above
what the children of God be in their far greater sufferings for the Testimony
of Jesus.

3. What causes moved the Magistrates so to proceed against him at that time,
is fully declared by another faithful and diligent hand, in another Treatise
of that matter.

But whereas he says, He was exposed to the mercies of an howling Wilderness
in frost and snow, etc.

The truth is, the Sentence of his Banishment out of the Patent was pronounced
against him in the Court before winter; and respite was given him to tarry
certain weeks (six or more) to prepare for his journey.

In the mean time, some of his friends went to the place appointed by himself
before hand, to make provision of housing, and other necessaries for him
against his coming; otherwise he might have chosen to have gone either
Southward to his acquaintance at Plymouth, or Eastward to Pascatoque, or
Aganimticus. And then the wilderness had been as no wilderness, (at least, no
howling wilderness) where men sit down under warm and dry Roofes, sheltred
from the annoyance of frost, and snow, and other winter hardships.

4. When he says, That my self professed in speech and writing, that I was no
procurer of his sorrows. I do not believe that I made any such profession at
all, either in speech, or writing. For it was my serious intendment, (if it had
been the will of God to breath in such weak means for such an end) to have
procured his unfeigned godly sorrow for his Errors in Judgment, and for his
offensive disturbances of Churches, and Commonwealth. But this is that which I
have professed, That I had no hand in procuring, or soliciting the Sentence of
his Banishment. And that not for the cause, which he notes in his margent, as
if I had some reluctance in my self, concerning the way of Persecution.

For 1. I did never doubt, that the way of persecution, (truly so called) that
is, the affliction of others for righteousness sake, was utterly unlawful.

2. I did never believe, that the sentence passed against him was an act of
Persecution.

3. Nor did I ever see cause to doubt, but that in some cases, (such as this of
his was,) Banishment is a lawful, and just punishment: if it be in proper
speech a punishment at all in such a Country as this is, where the
Jurisdiction (whence a man is banished) is but small, and the Country round
about it, large, and fruitful: where a man may make his choice of variety of
more pleasant, and profitable seats, then he leaves behind him. In which
respect, Banishment in this Country, is not counted so much a confinement, as
an enlargement, where a man does not so much loose civil comforts, as change
them. And as for spiritual liberties, (liberty of Church Ordinances) they were
a burden and bondage to his spirit here: And therefore he cast them off, before
they left him; neither does he to this day, look at it as a way of God, for any
Christian man to look after the Ordinances of God in a Church Estate at all; As
conceiving that the Apostasy of Antichrist has so far corrupted all, that
there can be no recovery out of that Apostasy, till Christ shall send forth
new Apostles to plant Churches anew.

But as for the true cause why I meddled not in his civil Censure, it was,
chiefly because Civil Censures belong unto another Kingdom, then that which
we are called to administer: (Civil Censures are not the weapons of our
warfare:) and partly also because I was carried (as still I am) with a
compassion of his Person, and likewise of his wife, (a woman as then, of a meek
and modest spirit) who a long time suffered in spirit, (as I was informed) for
his offensive course: which occasioned him for a season to withdraw communion
in spiritual duties, even from her also, till at length he drew her to partake
with him in the error of his way.

But Mr. Williams affirms, That in Letters past between him, and me, he
proved, and expressed, that if he had perished in that sorrowful winters flight,
only the blood of Christ could have washed me from the guilt of his.

Answ. That he did express such a thing in some Letters to me, as I do not
remember it, so neither will I deny it: but that he proved it, I may as safely
deny it, as he boldly affirm it. Could he then have given any such proofs,
doubtless he would not have concealed them now, when he undertaketh to clear
to the world the pretended innocence of himself, and the supposed iniquity of
his supposed Persecutors. How precious the blood of Christ is to me, and how
needful (I bless the Lord) my soul knows: but that I needed it to wash
away the guilt of any injurious proceedings against the blood of Mr. Williams,
(I speak it in holy confidence) I never discerned it to this day. The proofs
which he alleges in the sequel for my hand in his Banishment, I shall (God
willing) clear them anon in due place. Mean while, what answers I made to him
concerning the same in other Letters, he wisely concealeth: but contenteth
himself to tell us, that my final Answer was; That had he perished in his
flight, his blood had been upon his own head: It was his sin to procure it,
and his sorrow to suffer it.

If this was my final Answer, it seems I gave him other former Answers: what
they were I have now forgotten; but I suppose, had they been insufficient, or
impertinent, I should have heard of them.

But what is amiss in this final Answer? The margent notes it, " as an
unmercifull speech, of a merciful man.

But when it shall please the Father of mercies of soften the heart of Mr.
Williams, and to give him an heart, and ear to hearken unto the wholesome
Counsel of his true friends, he will at length see the speech was truly
merciful, as well as the man that spoke it. When a Fountain is opened to
Jerusalem for sin, and for uncleanness, the Prophets who have deceived the
people shall at length see, and acknowledge their error, and being demanded
the cause of the wounds in their hands, They shall answer (each of them for
himself) thus was I wounded in the house of my Friends, Zach. 13.1. with
verses 4, 5, 6. An heart softened with the Blood of Christ, will judge the
wounds of his friends faithful, Prove. 27.6. I mean, such reproves for sin,
which though they may seem to wound, yet wound to heal. David thought such
smiting to be a kindness, yea an excellent Oil, which does not break the
head, but heal the heart, Psalm. 141.5.

There is one thing more in his Epistle to the Reader, which calls for Answer:

It cannot now (says he) be justly offensive, that finding this Letter
public, (by whose procurement I know not) I now present to public view my
formerly intended Answer.

Answ. It had not been offensive to me, that he did present his Answer to
public view, if he found my Letter public, without his own, or his friends
procurement: especially if his Answer had been returned in words of truth, and
faithfulness. Which how far they fall short of, I hope (by the help of
Christ) will appear in the sequel.

Mean while, I fear it is justly offensive to the Spirit of Grace, and Love,
That whereas he judged me to allow my self, and others, to rest securely in
the Doctrine, and Practice of bloody Persecution, that all this while (even for
the space of nine or ten years) he suffered me to sleep so long so quietly
under the guilt of such a crying sin. Nay, it may seem by his own words, if
he had not found my Letter public, it may be doubted whether ever I should
have heard any further word from him hereabouts, at all. If I had been esteemed
as a Brother, sin should not have been suffered to lie so long upon a
Brother, Levit. 19.17. If an enemy, yet the very Ox or Ass of an enemy, is
not to be suffered to lie so long grovelling under his burden, Deuteronomy. 22.4.

But when he adds in the next sentence; That he rejoices in the goodness,
and wisdom of him, who is the Father of lights, and mercies, in ordering the
season of his own present opportunity of Answer.

I confess we on the contrary have cause to admire, and adore the wisdom, and
dreadful Justice of God herein, That seeing Mr. Williams has been now as a
branch cut off from the Church of Salem these many years, he should bring
forth no spiritual good fruits in due season: and that which he brings forth
now at the last is bitter, and wild fruit: and that in such a season, when the
Spirit of Error is let loose to deceive so many thousand souls of our English
Nation: So that now their hearts are become as Tinder, ready to catch and
kindle at every spark of false light. Even so, O Father, because thy good
pleasure is such, to let loose this Spirit of Error in the mouth of this
Backslider, in the very hour and power of darkness: for these are the days
of vengeance; when the Antinomians deny the whole Law; the Anti-Sabbatarians
deny the Morality of the fourth Commandment; the Papists deny the Negative
part of the second Commandment. It is a woeful opportunity that God has left
Mr. Williams to, now to step in, and deny the Affirmative part of it also, (as
the Papists do the Negative) and so He and the Papists to combine together to
evacuate the whole second Commandment altogether. For, take away (as Mr.
Williams does) all Instituted worship of God, as Churches, Pastors, Teachers,
Elders, Deacons, Members, public Ministry of the Word, Covenant, Seals of
the Covenant, (Baptism, and the Lords Supper) the Censures of the Church, and
the like, what is then left of all the Institutions, and Ordinances of God,
which the Lord established in the second Commandment, against the
Institutions, Images, and Inventions of men in his worship? But it is an holy
wisdom, and righteousness of the Lord, that he that refuses the Communion
with the Churches of the Saints, should join in communion with the enemies of
the Saints, even Antichristians; and that in such a work, as to blot out and
extinguish that holy second Commandment of the Law: The violating whereof
kindles the jealousy of the most High: and the observation thereof would have
opened a door of mercy to a thousand Generations! It is no vain word of our
Savior, He that shall break one of the least Commandments, and shall Teach
men so to do, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of Heaven.

This advice would I shut up this Point withal, (if I had any hope of an open
ear in him to hear it) he that separateth from all Churches, and all
Ordinances, let him at last separate also from himself: and so he shall then
be better able to discern the way to return again unto holy Communion with
the Lord, and his people.

Let me conclude this Preface with this Advertisement to the Reader, who may
perhaps marvel, that I now (so much against my usual custom) should lay open
the nakedness of another to public view. I bless the Lord, I am not
ignorant, That love covers a multitude of offenses: and that the Disciples of
Christ, when they are reviled are taught to Bless. And therefore were the case
merely mine own, and all the reproaches and slanders cast upon my self, had
terminated in my self, I should have been as a deaf man, and as a dumb man
that opens not his lips. But when through my sides, not only so many Elders,
and Churches in this Country, who had as much (or more) influence into his
sufferings, as my self, (and yet none of us any further influence, then by
private, and public conviction of himself, and of the demerit of his way;)
yea when Courts of Justice suffer for Justice sake: yea further, when the Truth
and Righteousness of God also suffer for inflicting just recompense of reward
upon the disturbers of Civil and sacred Truth, and Peace: and under pretense
of maintaining Liberty of Conscience, Purity of Conscience is violated, and
destroyed: In such a case as this, just it is, and equal, rather that the name
of an evill-worker should justly suffer, then that the name of God called upon
Judgment seats, upon the Churches of Christ, and upon the Ministers of the
Gospel, should unjustly suffer for his sake.

To his CHAP. I.
MY Letter to Mr. Williams, (which he undertaketh to Examine, and Answer) began
(it seems) with this Compellation of him, Beloved in Christ. For I
considered, he had been not only a member, but an Officer of the Church at
Salem: and though from thence he was then Excommunicate; yet I took the
Apostles Commandment for a Rule, Account him not as an enemy, but Admonish him
as a Brother, 2 These. 3.14. If a Brother of the Church, (though cast out of the
Church, yet not cast out of Christ) then in Christ, at least in judgment of
charity. And if in Christ (though but in judgment of charity, yet) in charity
to be Beloved.

But (says Mr. Williams) how can it be well-pleasing to Christ, that one
beloved in Christ, should be so afflicted, and persecuted by himself, and
others, (for such causes) as to be denied the common air to breath in, and a
civil cohabitation upon the same common earth, yea and also without mercy, and
humane compassion, be exposed to winter miseries in an howling Wilderness?

Answ. If Mr. Williams may be Judge in his own cause, himself has been
persecuted without mercy, and without humane compassion: And which the more
concerns my self to enquire into, he has been so persecuted by me, and some
others; but chiefly (it should seem) by me; for I only am charged herewith by
name: and those others, who ever they were, are not so much as described, much
less expressly named. But such Priests, and Persons, as be thus partial in the
Law, the Holy Ghost threatens to make them base, and contemptible in the eyes
of all the People, Mal. 2.9. Which the Lord give him to foresee, and fear,
that he may timely prevent such a Judgment.

But to weigh his words particularly: Persecution is the affliction of another
for Righteousness sake. Now two things it will be requisite for Mr. Williams
to prove, to make good his charge. 1. That the cause for which he suffered, was
a cause of Righteousness. 2. That he suffered this Persecution, which he
complains of, by me. And to make this latter charge good in such manner as he
lays it upon me, it were further requisite that he should prove two things
more. 1. That my self was the principal mover and actor in this his
Persecution, (for I only am singled out by name;) 2. That this has been
evidenced to him by two, or three witnesses at least, if he account me for an
Elder of a Church, 1 Timothy 5.19. But whether he account me for an Elder, or no
Elder, (I claim no privilege of Office;) yet I require attendance to an
eternal Law of moral Righteousness; One witness shall not rise up against a
man for any Iniquity, or for any sin: at the mouth of two witnesses, or at
the mouth of three witnesses, shall every word be established, Deuteronomy. 15.15. But
on the contrary, if it do appear, that the cause for which he suffered was
not for Righteousness sake: and that the affliction which he did suffer was
not put upon him by me at all much less in any eminent, and singular manner,
then it will behoove Mr. Williams in Conscience to understand, that himself is
the Persecutor, as of other servants of God, so of my self especially. For it
is a case judged by the Holy Ghost, that he who mocketh, or reproacheth any of
the least of Christ's little ones, for walking in his way, he is a Persecutor,
Gal. 4.29. It has been the lot of the faithful of old to be tried by cruel
mockings, Heb. 11.36. If a man be publicly accused to the world as a
Persecutor, in case the accusation be proved true, Persecution is a cruel, and
crying sin: but if it be not proved, nor true, the false accusation is a
grievous Persecution, even a cruel mocking. But I shall refer the trial of
his accusation to the place himself appointed, where he gives Instance of the
cause of his sufferings.

Mean while, let him suspend his Marginall note, That it is a monstrous
Paradox, that Gods children should Persecute Gods children, and they that hope
to live eternally with Christ Jesus in Heaven, should not suffer each other to
live in this common air together.

For though Gods children may not persecute Gods children, nor wicked men
neither, for well-doing: yet if the children of God be found to walk in the
way of the wicked, their sin is the greater, because they sin against
greater light, and grace: and their Brethren (in Place) may justly afflict them
for it: to deprive them, in some cases, not only of the common air of the
Country by banishment, but even of the common air of the world by death: and
yet hope to live eternally with them in the Heavens with Christ Jesus. Yea what
if a child of God were infected with a plague sore, or some other contagious
disease, may not their Brethren exclude them the common air, both of their
religious, and Civil Assemblies, and yet hope to live eternally with them in
the Heavens? Truly there be some unsound, and corrupt opinions, and practices,
(and that of him too) which are more infectious, and contagious, then any
plague sore.

That other Marginall note of his, (What Christ Persecute Christ in
New England?) calls for another Answer.

Christ does not persecute Christ in New England: For Christ does not persecute
any at all, (to speak in the proper sense of Persecution;) much less does
Christ persecute Christ. For though Christ may and does afflict his own
members; yet he does not afflict (much less persecute) Christ in them, but
that which is left of old Adam in them, or that which is found of the seed of
the Serpent in them. For even Satan may fill the heart of Church Members, Acts
5.3. Yea breathe and act in an Elect Apostle, Mat. 16.22, 23. And then the Lord
Jesus may afflict in his members, that which he sees in them nor of his own.

But he proceeds, and asks further, ( Since Mr. Cotton expects far greater
light then yet shines) whether upon the same grounds, and practice, if Christ
Jesus in any of his servants shall be pleased to hold forth a farther light,
shall he himself find the mercy, and humanity of a Civil, and temporal
life, and being with them?

Answ. The greatest light that I expect is not above the Word, much less
against it: nor is it destructive to the Church, and Ordinances of Christ,
established according to the Word, but instructive of them in the way of the
word. If therefore Christ Jesus shall come in any of his servants, holding
forth a further light to us, we trust, that he that offers us light, will
give us (as hitherto he has done) eyes to see it, and hearts to follow it.
Light is discernable (through the Grace of the Father of Lights) by the
children of light: The Spirit of the Prophets is discerned, and judged by the
Prophets: Wisdom is just fied of her Children: When Judgment returns to
Righteousness, all the upright in heart shall follow it: The Sheep of Christ
that see his face, will see his Light, and hear his voice: his Spirit of Truth
will lead them into all truth. And yet because we all know in part, and
Prophecy in part, we are taught of God in meekness of wisdom to instruct one
another, (till light of Instruction be obstinately rejected;) and to suffer one
another in differences of weakness, till weakness prove wilfulness, and will
not suffer Truth to live in Peace.

But what is all this to Mr. Williams? Has he therefore not found the mercy,
and humanity of Civil, and temporal life, and being amongst us, because
Christ Jesus held forth by him a further light unto us?

So it should seem, or else his Quaere is nothing to the purpose; surely if it
be a further light which is held forth by him, it is such a transcendent light,
as puts out all other lights in the world besides: as (they say) Majus lumen
extinguit minus. The Churches of Christ have been wont to be counted lights,
the Ministry, lights, the Sacraments, and Censures, lights. But this new light
held forth by Mr. Williams, has put out all these lights, yea and all
possibility of their shining forth again, till the Restitution of new
Apostles. And yet if he had held forth any light from the word of light to
manifest this great new light to us, truly I hope the Lord would give us
hearts, not to shut our eyes against the light, but to follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes, and to follow the light of his word whithersoever it
leads us. Christian Magistrates, they also have been wonted to be counted the
light of Israel: and Oaths likewise have been thought to give light to discern
the end of all Controversies: But by this new light, we may not accept from the
Patents of Princes any light or direction where to sit down, with their
warrant, and leave, in foreign Plantations: Neither may we make use of the
light of Oaths between Magistrates, and people, to discern of the fidelity and
constancy of the one to the other in times of danger. Where then shall his
Marginall Note appear?

Mr. Cotton (says he) expecting more light, must (according to his way of
Persecution) Persecute Christ Jesus, if he bring it.

Does Mr. Williams hold me so far forsaken of common sense, as to frustrate,
and destroy mine own expectations? If I expect more light, must I (according to
mine own way) needs Persecute him that brings it, yea persecute Christ
himself, if he bring it? But thus when a man's head runs round, he thinks
all the House runs round about him.

But what is my way of Persecution, according to which, I expecting more light,
must needs persecute him that brings it? It is but a few days ago, since
there came to my hand a book, published (as is said) by Mr. Williams, and
entitled, The Bloody Tenent. In which Mr. Williams (without my privity)
published a private Letter of mine, and therewith a Confutation of it, touching
Persecution for cause of Conscience. In my stating of that Question, (which he
relates in the 7th Page of that Book) he declares my Judgment to be so far
from persecuting any for cause of Conscience, that he lays it down for my
first Conclusion; That it is not lawful to persecute any for Conscience sake
rightly informed [that is to say, bringing more, and true light.]

2. For an erroneous and blind Conscience, (even in fundamental, and weighty
Points) it is not lawful to persecute any, till after Admonition once or
twice, according to the Apostles direction, Tit. 3.10, 11. That so such a man
being convinced of the dangerous error of his way; if he still persist (being
condemned of himself, ver. 11.) it may appear, he is not persecuted for Cause
of Conscience, but for sinning against his own Conscience.

3. In things of less moment, whether Points of Doctrine or worship, if a man
hold them forth in a spirit of Christian meekness and love, (though with zeal
and constancy) he is not to be persecuted, but tolerated, till God may be
pleased to manifest his Truth to him, Phil. 3.17. Romans 14.11, 12, 13, 14.

4. But if a man hold forth or profess any error, or false way, with a
boisterous, and arrogant spirit, to the disturbance of Civil Peace, he may
justly be punished according to the measure of the disturbance caused by him.

This is that way of Persecution which Mr. Williams expresses to be mine. In
all which I durst appeal to Mr. Williams his own Conscience, (were it not
Leavened with over-deepe prejudice) whether in all this way there be any
crevise opening a door for the Persecution of Christ himself bringing further
light?

Let no man take it amiss, that (in the Parenthesis) I intimate, the
Conscience of Mr. Williams in this case to be leavened with overmuch prejudice.
For if extreme prejudice were not predominant in him in this case, I should
stand amazed how a man of understanding could out of such Conclusions make up
this Inference, which he gives in the Title of the Chapt. page 7. That I do
professedly maintain Persecution for Cause of Conscience. I that do expressly,
professedly deny Persecution of any, even of Heretics, unless it be when they
come to persist in heresy, after conviction, against conscience: how can I be
said to maintain Persecution for Cause of Conscience? But oh the woeful
perverseness and blindness of a Conscience, when it is left of God, to be so
far transported with prejudice, as to judge a Cause of Conscience, and a
cause against Conscience to be all one.

For the shutting up of his Chapter, he is pleased to Comment upon a phrase in
my Letter, wherein I styled my self a man of uncircumcised lips. And he does
acknowledge it to be an holy Character of an heavenly Spirit, to make an
ingenuous, and true acknowledgement of an uncircumcised lip. Yet (says he)
that discerning Spirit, which God graciously vouchsafes to them that tremble
at his Word, shall find, that not only the will-worships of men may be
painted, and varnished over with the glittering show of Humility, Colos. 2.
but even Gods dearest servants (eminent for humility, and meekness) may yet be
troubled with a swelling of spiritual pride, out of the very sense of their
humility, etc. Humility is never in season to set up superstition, or
persecute Gods children.

Answ. I could entreat some or other of Mr. Williams his acquaintance (whose
words may find better acceptance with him, then mine do) to persuade him, not
to attribute too much to his own Spirit of discerning; which though he truly
says, God does vouchsafe to them that tremble at his word: yet I never read,
nor heard, that God did vouchsafe a Spirit of discerning to any that are so
far from trembling at the word, that they do not vouchsafe to hear the word
from the mouth of so many thousand faithful Ministers of the Gospel. As for
me, I desire not to neglect any word from the mouth of Mr. Williams, (upon what
pretense soever spoken) that puts me in mind of spiritual pride, arising
out of the very sense of humility. Such smiting shall not break my head.

But when he concludes with this Aphorism; Humility is never in season to
set up superstition, or to persecute Gods children.

I desire it may be considered, what is Superstition? what is Persecution? and
whether my Letter unto him tended to set up the one, or to set forward the
other?

Superstition is properly cultus supra statutum, which I speak not from the
Etymology of the word, (for I know Latinists do otherwise derive it) but from
the nature of the thing. And what is Persecution? It has been answered above,
the affliction of any for their Righteousness sake. If it appear in the
sequel, that my Letter tended either to set up any worship of God, which he
has not appointed, or to afflict any for their Righteousness sake, then I
will confess it tended to set up Superstition, and Persecution: And the
humility which he acknowledges to be expressed in my Letter, I shall
acknowledge to be out of season: Mean while, Affirmanti incumbit Probatio.

To CHAP. II.
His second Chapter is spent in answering to a double charge, which he says,
he observes, I laid against him. Though in very Truth, I laid neither of them
down as charges against him, but as discharges to my self from expecting that
He should vouchsafe to hearken to my voice, who had refused to hearken both to
the voice of the body of the whole Church of Salem (whereof he was a member)
and to the voices of so many Elders, and brethren of other Churches.

But suppose I did charge him with a double sin in refusing to hearken to
this double voice, (though I did not say it was a sin:) how does he discharge
himself? For neglect of the former, he excuses himself by the charge of his
Office, which lay upon him, on a Fast Day to discover to them eleven public
sins, as causes of the present, and public calamities. Which most of the
Church seemed at first to assent unto, until afterward, the greater part of
the Church (whether for fear of Persecution, or otherwise) was swayed, and
bowed to practice such things, which with sighs and groans many of them
mourned under.

But will this indeed discharge an Elder of the Church before the Lord, from
coming into the presence of the Church, when they send for him, because the
greater part of them, are bowed, and swayed for fear of Persecution, to slip,
and slide, and to say and practice that, which with sighs and groans they
mourned under? Why then, if the Wolf come, and scatter the sheep, and they
slip out of the way, let the Shepherd fly, and leave them; that the word of
the Lord Jesus might be fulfilled; He that is an Hireling, and not the
Shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, he sees the Wolf coming, and leaves
the sheep, and flees, and the Wolf catches them, and scatters the sheep,
Joh. 10.12.

Or will it go for current Doctrine before the Lord, that if the greater part
of a Church fall (through fear, or otherwise) into sin, and such a sin,
which they mourn under with sighs, and groans, and which in it self is not
heinous, that then they do ipso facto, cease to be a Church, and utterly to be
cast out? Why then let the Covenant between the Lord and his Church be no more
reputed any branch of the Covenant of Grace, but let it stand and fall as a
Covenant of works.

But surely if the greater part of the Church were gone astray, I should think
it would well become the faithfulness of a Church-Elder, to hasten to them,
(specially when he is lovingly and respectively sent for) and to convince them
of the error of their way before the Lord, and to seek to bring them back
again to the Bishop and Shepherd of their souls. Sure I am, that in a case
of greater defection of the Churches of Galatia, then Mr. Williams imagined was
found in the Church of Salem. Paul did not reject them, but professed; I desire
(says he) to be present with you now, and to change my voice, for I stand in
doubt of you, Gal. 4.20.

Mr. Williams acknowledges in the next Paragraph, That the Church of Colosse
might say to Archippus; Take heed to thy Ministry, and that Archippus might
negligently, and proudly refuse to hearken to them: but for his case, his
faithfulness, and uprightness to God, and the souls of the people will
witness for him, when his soul shall come to Hezekiahs case on his deathbed,
and in the great day approaching.

I do not know but that Archippus might as justly refuse to hearken to the
Church of Colosse, as Mr. Williams to the Church of Salem. What though Colosse
was more eminent in gifts then Salem, yet the mutual power, and subjection of
Pastor and people, depends not upon eminency of gifts, but upon the
Institution of Christ, and their mutual Covenant, and Relation. If it had been
a negligent and proud part in Archippus (as Mr. Williams confesses) to refuse
to hearken to the lawful voice of the Church of Colosse, admonishing him of
his slacknesse in his Ministry: I know not but it might be such a like part in
Mr. Williams to refuse to hearken to the voice of the Church of Salem,
admonishing him to take heed of deserting his Ministry. Whether is a greater
sin in a Minister, not to fulfill his Ministry, or to desert his Ministry?
Neither do I know but that Archippus might have pretended the like evasions
with Mr. Williams, if not fairer. For he might plead there were amongst them,
such as spoiled them through Philosophy, and vain deceit, after the Traditions
of men, and Rudiments of the world, and not after Christ, ( Col. 2.8.) that
beguiled them also in a voluntary humility, and worship of Angels, not holding
the Head, ( ver. 18, 19.) Yea so far that themselves come to be dogmatized
with the Traditions of men, ver. 20, 21, 22. And why might not then Archippus
as justly refuse to hear the Church of Colosse, as Mr. Williams refuse to
hear the Church of Salem?

Let not Mr. Williams please himself in suiting his faithfulness, and
uprightness to Hezekiahs case. Hezekiah faithfully, and uprightly endeavored,
and (through grace) procured the reformation of the Apostate Church of
Jerusalem in the days of his Father Ahaz: But Mr. Williams in stead of
reforming one Church, renounceth all.

For his neglect of hearkening to the second voice, the voice and testimony of
so many Elders, and Brethren of other Churches; He says (because he truly
esteems the Persons) he will not answer the Argument of numbers, and
multitudes against one, as our men are wont to answer the Popish universalitie,
that God stirs up sometimes one Elijah against eight hundred of Baals
Priests, etc. But this he says that David himself, and the Princes of Israel,
and 30000. of Israel carrying up the Arc, were not to be hearkened unto in
their holy intentions of rejoycings, and triumphs, when the due order of the
Lord was wanting to them. In which case one Scripture in the mouth of a
Mechanic, is to be preferred before a whole Council.

Answ. I will not here observe (as Mr. Williams does in a like case, in Chap.
38. of his Bloody Tenent) his have and light attention to the Scriptures which
himself alleges. The Text speaks but of 450. of Baals Priests, 1 Kings
18.19. Now for him to multiply them to 800, is to fetch in also the Prophets of
the Groves, (the Prophets of Jeroboams Calves) whom the Text expressly
distinguishes from the Prophets of Baal.

But to let that pass, as not material to the Argument, (no more then the
misquotation, which he observes of Titus for Timothy) we will not reply as the
Papists do against single witnesses, let him call for fire from Heaven as
Eliah did, and we will submit the testimonies of many to one single witness:
No we call not for Miracles at his hand: but let him produce one testimony of
holy Scripture (rightly understood, and applied) against the advice, and voice
of those Elders, and Brethren, and then though he be but one (yea though that
one were but a Mechanic too) we shall gratify his demand, and (by the Grace
of Christ) be ready rather to hearken to him, then require that he should
hearken to us.

Mean while, we answer him as the Apostle did to the Corinthians, (1 Cor.
14.36.) What, came the word of God out from you? or came it unto you only?

It is true, David and the Princes, and the 30000. of Israel, were not to be
hearkened unto, nor followed in their disorderly carrying of the Arc; because
the word of the Lord had given express order to the contrary, requiring that
the Kohathites should bear the Arc upon their shoulders, and not touch it,
least they dye, Number. 4.15. Let him show us the like order violated by us, and
we shall freely excuse him (yea and justify him) in not hearkening to us, nor
following of us.

But suppose some one Prophet, or Brother of Israel, had discerned the disorder
of David, and of the whole Congregation of the 30000. of Israel, and had
therefore not only refused to follow them, but had proceeded further (as many
of Christ's Disciples did with him, Joh. 6.66.) to go back from them with an
utter Apostasy, and to walk no more with them, no not though they were
willing to reform their disorder, if any were made known to them? Would Perez
Vzzah have justified that? Or did that disorder of David, and of that
Congregation of Israel, dischurch them all from fellowship with God, or
discharge their Brethren from having any fellowship with them, as with the
Church of God?

TO CHAP. III.
HIs third Chapter is taken up in answering to a Phrase in my Letter, in which
I had said, I endeavored to show him the sandinesse of those grounds, upon
which he had banished himself from the fellowship of all the Churches in this
Country.

The sum of his Answer is, That his grounds were the firm rock of the Truth
of Jesus, and that my endeavors to prove them sandy, are but the weak, and
uncertain sand of man's Invention, which shall therefore perish, and burn like
hay, or stubble; And the Rocky strength of his grounds shall appear in the
Lords season, and that my self also may yet confess so much, as I have (
since I came to New England) confessed the sandinesse of the grounds of many of
my Practices in Old England: and the rockinesse of their grounds that witnessed
against me, and them: for Instance, that himself had discovered to me, and
other servants of God, his grounds against the use of the Common Prayer Book:
which though they then seemed sandy to me, yet since I have acknowledged to be
rocky, and have seen cause so to publish to the world in my Discourse to Mr.
Ball, against set forms of Prayer.

For a reply, let me begin where he leaves; How ready he is to build upon
sandy grounds, may appear by this very Passage, where he maintains his
rockinesse. For here he avoucheth, I have seen cause to publish to the world,
the rockinesse of his grounds in a Discourse to Mr. Ball against set Forms of
Prayer.

What rocky ground do you think this Assertion of his stands upon? I know
no other but this; He finds such a Discourse published to the world: and he
thence concludes (for other Grounds he has none) that I published that
Discourse, and that I saw cause to publish it: both which hang upon that ground
like ropes of sand. The truth is, I did not publish that Discourse to the
world, much less did I see cause to publish it upon the Grounds he speaks
of. A brief Discourse in defense of set forms of Prayer was penned by Mr.
Ball, much briefer then that which since is put forth in Print. That brief
Discourse a religious Knight sent over, (whether to my self, or to a Gentleman
of note then dwelling in my house, I remember not) but with desire to hear our
judgment of it. At his request I drew up a short Answer, and sent one Copy of
it to the Knight, and another to Mr. Ball, diverse years ago. How it came (in
process of time) to be published to the world, or by whom, I do not know. And
yet Mr. Williams doubts not to affirm it, that I published that Discourse to
the world, and saw cause to do it. Rocky spirits can express all their
conceits, in rocky firmness, though upon sandy conjectures.

Besides, when he says, That himself discovered to me, and to other servants
of God, his grounds against our using of the Common Prayer; which then seemed
sandy to us, but now in New England, I have acknowledged to be rocky in my
Discourse to Mr. Ball. I could have wished he had expressed, what grounds those
were, which he discovered to us; For my self I can call to mind no such
matter, that ever I heard, or received from him, either by word, or writing,
any solid grounds against that Practice. But this I am sure of, that the
grounds of altering my judgment touching that practice, did chiefly stand upon
the exposition of the second Commandment; which if I should say, I received
from him, I should greatly fear my forehead were more rocky then his grounds
were. I think it no disgrace to change either my judgment or practice upon
better grounds then I formerly discerned. Nor would I think it a disgrace to
learn any grounds of truth, and to profess that I had learned them from
himself, if so I had done. But sure I am, it has not been wont to be the
manner of the servants of God to upbraid their Brethren, with their
Retractations of their former Aberrations.

I have read of the Churches of Judea, that when they heard Paul now preached
the Faith, which once he destroyed, they glorified God for him, ( Gal. 1.23,
24.) but I never read, that any of the Churches of Christ, or any sincere
member of the Churches, did ever upbraid Paul for his former Persecution, or
for his present change.

The other part of the Chapter, he spends in relating the grounds of the
sentence of his Banishment, and in the avouchment of his confidence of the
firmness of them.

The grounds of the sentence of his Banishment, some whereof He says I am
pleased to discuss in the Letter, and others not to mention; He says were
rightly summed up by one of the Magistrates after his public Trial, and
Answers.

Mr. Williams (said that public Person) holds forth these four particulars.

1. That we have not our Land by Patent from the King, but that the Natives are
the true owners of it; and that we ought to repent of such a receiving it by
Patent.

2. That it is not lawful to call a wicked Person to swear, to pray, as being
actions of Gods worship.

3. That it is not lawful to hear any of the Ministers of the
Parish-Assemblies in England.

4. That the Civil Magistrates Power extends only to the bodies, and goods,
and outward state of men, etc.

These particulars he hops, that as he maintained the rockie strength of them
to his own, and other Consciences satisfaction: So (through the Lords
assistance,) he shall be ready not only to be bound, and banished, but to dye
also in New England, as for most holy Truths of God in Christ Jesus.

It was not my intent in that Letter which he examineth, to discuss the
Grounds of his Civil Banishment at all, neither did I discuss one or other of
them. And it is a preposterous shifting of the State of the Question, to put it
upon me to give account of the causes of his Banishment, who neither did banish
him, nor provoked the Court to banish him out of the Country. The Magistrates
and Deputies of the Commonwealth (who were then the Members of that Court) are
all of them of age, and able themselves to give account of their own actions.
To them or some of them he should in reason have addressed himself for
satisfaction in this case (if any were due) and not to me, who am as seldom
present at any Civil Court, (if not more seldom) then any man of our calling
in Town or Country, where the Courts are kept. It were more then Egyptian
bondage to me, and more then Pharaonicall tyranny in him, to exact of me, an
account of all the capital, or notable sentences of Judgment, which pass in
all the Civil Courts of Justice in the Country, unless I had a calling to
sit amongst them.

But why did I then endeavor in my Letter to show him the sandinesse of those
grounds, upon which he had banished himself, etc. If I did not mean to
declare, and discuss the causes of his Banishment?

He does very well, and wisely to express the Grounds upon which I said he
banished himself with an, etc. For he knows that if he had related my whole
sentence in my own words, he had cut off himself from all opportunity of
pleading with me the causes of his Civil Banishment.

My words are plain, -- I endeavor to show you the sandinesse of those
grounds, upon which you have banished your self from the fellowship of all the
Churches in these Countries.

It is one thing to banish ones self (or to be banished) out of the fellowship
of all the Churches in the Country; another thing to banish ones self (or to
be banished) out of the Country. There be at this day that banish (and
separate) themselves from all the Churches in the Country, and yet are not
banished out of the Country: and there be that are banished out of the
Country, and yet are not banished out of the fellowship of all the Churches in
the Country. Himself has separated (and so banished himself) from the
fellowship of all the Churches in the world: and yet he has not banished
himself out of the world.

But though it be impertinent to my Letter to discuss the grounds of his
Civil Banishment: yet since he is pleased (by hook or crook) to draw it in, I
refer the Reader for Answer to a full Treatise of that Argument, penned by a
reverend faithful Brother, (the Teacher of the Church at Rocksbury;) and
withal as I have touched somewhat of it above in Answer to his Preface, so I
shall speak a word or two more unto it here.

Whom that eminent Magistrate was, that so summed up the grounds of Mr.
Williams his Banishment in those four Particulars above mentioned, Mr.
Williams does wisely conceal his name, lest if he were named, he should be
occasioned to bear witness against such fraudulent expression of the
Particulars: whereof some were no causes of his Banishment at all, and such as
were causes, were not delivered in such general Terms. For in universalibus
latet Dolus. It is evident the two latter causes which he gives of his
Banishment, were no causes at all, as he expresses them. There are many known
to hold both these Opinions, That it is not lawful to hear any of the
Ministers of the Parish-Assemblies in England, and that the Civil Magistrates
power extends only to the bodies, and goods, and outward estates of men: and
yet they are tolerated not only to live in the Commonwealth, but also in the
fellowship of the Churches.

The two former, though they be not so much noysed, yet there be many, if not
most, that hold, That we have not our Land, merely by right of Patent from the
King, but that the Natives are true owners of all that they possess, or
improve. Neither do I know any amongst us, that either then were, or now are
of another mind.

And as for the other Point; That it is not lawful to call a wicked Person to
swear, or pray.

Though that be not commonly held, yet it is known to be held of some, who yet
are tolerated to enjoy both Civil, and Church-liberties amongst us.

To come therefore to Particulars: Two things there were, which (to my best
observation, and remembrance) caused the Sentence of his Banishment: and two
other fell in, that hastened it.

1. His violent and tumultuous carriage against the Patent.

By the Patent it is, that we received allowance from the King to depart his
Kingdom, and to carry our goods with us, without offense to his Officers, and
without paying custom to himself.

By the Patent, certain select men (as Magistrates, and Freemen) have power to
make Laws, and the Magistrates to execute Justice, and Judgment amongst the
People, according to such Laws.

By the Patent we have Power to erect such a Government of the Church, as is
most agreeable to the Word, to the estate of the People, and to the gaining of
Natives (in Gods time) first to Civility, and then to Christianity.

To this Authority established by this Patent, Englishmen do readily submit
themselves: and foraine Plantations (the French, the Dutch, and Swedish) do
willingly transact their Negotiations with us, as with a Colony established by
the Royal Authority of the State of England.

This Patent, Mr. Williams publicly, and vehemently preached against, as
containing matter of falsehood, and injustice: Falsehood in making the King the
first Christian Prince who had discovered these parts: and injustice, in giving
the Country to his English Subjects, which belonged to the Native Indians.
This therefore he pressed upon the Magistrates and People, to be humbled for
from time to time in days of solemn Humiliation, and to return the Patent
back again to the King. It was answered to him, first, That it was neither the
Kings intendment, nor the English Planters to take possession of the Country
by murder of the Natives, or by robbery: but either to take possession of the
void places of the Country by the Law of Nature, (for Vacuum Domicilium cedit
occupanti:) or if we took any Lands from the Natives, it was by way of
purchase, and free consent.

A little before our coming, God had by pestilence, and other contagious
diseases, swept away many thousands of the Natives, who had inhabited the Bay
of Massachusetts, for which the Patent was granted. Such few of them as survived
were glad of the coming of the English, who might preserve them from the
oppression of the Nahargansets. For it is the manner of the Natives, the
stronger Nations to oppress the weaker.

This answer did not satisfy Mr. Williams, who pleaded, the Natives, though
they did not, nor could subdue the Country, (but left it vacuum Domicilium)
yet they hunted all the Country over, and for the expedition of their hunting
voyages, they burnt up all the underwoods in the Country, once or twice a
year, and therefore as Noble men in England possessed great Parkes, and the
King, great Forests in England only for their game, and no man might lawfully
invade their Propriety: So might the Natives challenge the like Propriety of
the Country here.

It was replied unto him. 1. That the King, and Noble men in England, as they
possessed greater Territories then other men, so they did greater service to
Church, and Commonwealth.

2. That they employed their Parkes, and Forests, not for hunting only, but
for Timber, and for the nourishment of tame beasts, as well as wild, and also
for habitation to sundry Tenants.

3. That our Towns here did not disturb the huntings of the Natives, but did
rather keep their Game fitter for their taking; for they take their Dear by
Traps, and not by Hounds.

4. That if they complained of any straites we put upon them, we gave
satisfaction in some payments, or other, to their content.

5. We did not conceive that it is a just Title to so vast a Continent, to make
no other improvement of millions of Acres in it, but only to burn it up for
pastime.

But these Answers not satisfying him, this was still pressed by him as a
National sin, to hold to the Patent, yea, and a National duty to renounce
the Patent: which to have done, had subverted the fundamental State, and
Government of the Country.

2. The second offense, which procured his Banishment, was occasioned as I
touched before. The Magistrates, and other members of the General Court upon
Intelligence of some Episcopal, and malignant practices against the Country,
they made an order of Court to take trial of the fidelity of the People, (not
by imposing upon them, but) by offering to them an Oath of Fidelity: that in
case any should refuse to take it, they might not betrust them with place of
public charge, and Command. This Oath when it came abroad, he vehemently
withstood it, and dissuaded sundry from it, partly because it was, as he said,
Christ's Prerogative, to have his Office established by Oath: partly because an
oath was a part of Gods worship, and Gods worship was not to be put upon
carnal persons, as he conceived many of the People to be. So by his Tenent
neither might Church Members, nor other godly men, take the Oath, because it
was the establishment not of Christ, but of mortal men in their office; nor
might men out of the Church take it, because in his eye they were but carnal.
So the Court was forced to desist from that proceeding: which practice of his
was held to be the more dangerous, because it tended to unsettle all the
Kingdoms, and Commonwealths in Europe.

These were (as I took it) the causes of his Banishment: two other things fell
in upon these that hastened the Sentence. The former fell out thus: The
Magistrates discerning by the former passages, the heady and turbulent spirit
of Mr. Williams, both they, and others advised the Church of Salem not to call
him to office in their Church; nevertheless, the major part of the Church made
choice of him. Soon after, when the Church made suit to the Court for a
parcel of Land adjoining to them, the Court delayed to grant their Request (as
has been mentioned before) because the Church had refused to hearken to the
Magistrates, and others in forbearing the choice of Mr. Williams. Whereupon Mr.
Williams took occasion to stir up the Church to join with him in writing
Letters of Admonition unto all the Churches, whereof those Magistrates were
members, to admonish them of their open transgression of the Rule of Justice.
Which Letters coming to the several Churches, provoked the Magistrates to take
the more speedy course with so heady, and violent a Spirit.

But to prevent his sufferings, (if it might be) it was moved by some of the
Elders, that themselves might have liberty (according to the Rule of Christ) to
deal with him, and with the Church also in a Church Way. It might be, the
Church might hear us, and he the Church; which being consented to, some of our
Churches wrote to the Church of Salem, to present before them the offensive
Spirit, and way of their Officer, (Mr. Williams) both in Judgment, and
Practice. The Church finally began to hearken to us, and accordingly began to
address themselves to the healing of his Spirit. Which he discerning,
renounced communion with the Church of Salem, pretending they held communion
with the Churches in the Bay, and the Churches in the Bay held communion with
the Parish-Churches in England, because they suffered their members to hear
the word amongst them in England, as they came over into their native Country.
He then refusing to resort to the Public Assembly of the Church. Soon after
sundry began to resort to his Family, where he preached to them on the Lords
day. But this carriage of his in renouncing the Church upon such an occasion,
and with them all the Churches in the Country, and the spreading of his Leaven
to sundry that resorted to him; this gave the Magistrates the more cause to
observe the heady unruelinesse of his spirit, and the incorrigiblenesse thereof
by any Church Way, all the Churches in the Country being then renounced by
him. And this was the other occasion which hastened the Sentence of his
Banishment, upon the former Grounds.

If upon these Grounds Mr. Williams be ready, (as he professes) not only to
be bound, and banished, but also to dye in New England; let him remember, (what
he knows) Non poena, sed causa facit Martyrem; No Martyr of Christ did ever
suffer for such a cause.

When he fears not to profess, that he did in open Court maintain the rocky
strength of his grounds, to the satisfaction of his own, and (as he says) of
other men's Consciences.

I can but wonder at the rocky flintinesse of his selfe-confidence: To give a
taste of the rocky strength of his maintenance of these things; He made
complaint in open Court, that he was wronged by a slanderous report up and
down the Country, as if he did hold it to be unlawful for a Father to call
upon his child to eat his meat. Our reverend Brother Mr. Hooker, (the Pastor
of the Church, where the Court was then kept) being moved to speak a word to
it, Why, says he, you will say as much again, (if you stand to your own
Principles) or be forced to say nothing. When Mr. Williams was confident he
should never say it: Mr. Hooker replied, If it be unlawful to call an
unregenerate person to take an Oath, or to Pray, as being actions of Gods
worship, then it is unlawful for your unregenerate child, to pray for a
blessing upon his own meat. If it be unlawful for him to pray for a blessing
upon his meat, it is unlawful for him to eat it, (for it is sanctified by
prayer, and without prayer unsanctified, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5.) If it be unlawful for
him to eat it, it is unlawful for you to call upon him to eat it, for it is
unlawful for you to call upon him to sin.

Here Mr. Williams thought better to hold his peace, then to give an Answer.

But thus have I opened the grounds, and occasions of his Civil Banishment;
which whether they be sandy, or rocky, let the servants of Christ judge.
Howsoever, my Letter gave him no occasion at all to put me upon this Discourse;
for in my Letter I intended only to show him the sandinesse of those grounds
upon which he banished himself from the society (not of the Commonwealth,
but) of all the Churches in these Countries.

But whether I intended the one, or the other, he gives an Answer for both; If
Mr Cotton mean (says he) my own voluntary withdrawing from all these Churches
resolved to continue in those evils, and in persecuting the witnesses of the
Lord, presenting light unto them. I confess it was mine own voluntary act: yea
I hope the act of the Lord Jesus sounding forth in me (a poor despised
Rams-horne) the blast which shall in his own holy season cast down the
strength, and confidence of the Inventions of men in the worship of God: and
lastly his act in inabling me to be faithful in any measure to suffer such
great, and mighty Trials for his Names sake.

Reply, That I meant only his own act in withdrawing himself from these
Churches, does plainly enough appear both from my express words, and fro mthe
Reasons which I expressly assign of that act of his, which I called the sandy
grounds, upon which he built his Separation. My express words are, He had
banished himself from the society of all the Churches in this Country. The
society of the Church is one thing, the society of the Commonwealth, is
another. And the Grounds upon which he built his Separation, were not the
causes of his banishment, but of his withdrawing from the society of the
Churches.

But if I so meant, He confesses it was his own voluntary act; and professes
also, it was a double act of the Lord Jesus in him.

The ground which he gives of his own voluntary act, was because these
Churches were resolved to continue in those evils, and persecuting the
witnesses of the Lord Jesus, presenting light to them.

Reply; Those evils? What were those evils, which we were resolved to
continue in? He expresses none: but sure meet it had been, that as his
voluntary withdrawing from these Churches was publicly known; so the evils in
which we resolved to continue, and for which he withdrew himself, should in
like manner have been publicly known also. It is an unrighteous thing to
pass public known acts, upon private unknown evils. But whatsoever those
unknown evils were, I suppose he conceives them to be such ways, either of
Judgment, or Practice, wherein we walk according to the light of our
Consciences. And then by his Rule he should have allowed us the like liberty of
conscience, which himself requires. And surely by the Royal Rule of the Lord
Jesus, no Brother may be so much as admonished, (much less separated from)
till he be convinced, ((...)) Mat. 18.15.

And as for persecuting the witnesses of the Lord, presenting light to us;
himself (for ought I know) was the first in this Country, that ever pretended
suffering for bearing witness in any matter of Religion true or false: And for
him to withdraw himself from the society of all the Churches for their
persecution of him, before he had suffered from them any thing but conference,
and conviction, is to make them sufferers for well-doing, and to choose
suffering, that he might have cause to complain of sufferings. Let him, if he
be able, name any one in this Country of the witnesses of the Lord, (for he
speaks of witnesses) that ever did so much as pretend before himself to
suffer Persecution, for presenting light to us.

Thus he makes that the ground of his withdrawing, which was not then in Rerum
natura, (no not in pretense) till after his withdrawing. As a furious
Schoolmaster will beat a child for nothing till he cry, and then beat him
for crying.

But he further presumes to affirm; That his withdrawing was the act of the
Lord Jesus in him, sounding forth that Blast, which shall one day cast down
the strength, and confidence of the Inventions of men in the worship of God.

Reply. If a particular visible Church, consisting of visible Saints, and
united by holy Covenant into one Congregation, to worship the Lord, and to
edify one another in all his holy Ordinances; If such a Church be an Invention
of man; If Elders called, and ordained by them for Administration of these
Ordinances, be an invention of man; If the Covenant of Grace between the Lord,
and his Church, and the Seals thereof, and the Censures dispensed against the
violation thereof; If all these be the Inventions of man, then indeed the Lord
has sounded a blast in Mr. Williams his horn, to cast down the Inventions of
men in the worship of God. But if all these be the holy Institutions of the
Lord Jesus, then let Mr. Williams know, that this speech of his is a blast of
blasphemy against the Lord Jesus, to put upon him that which is the proper
work of Satan, to blast all the Churches, and Ordinances of Christ. And
whereas it was wont to be the work of Antichrist to defile all the Ordinances
of Christ, it is now the work of this examiner to deface, and abolish them all
from the face of the earth. Whether of these works are the more Antichristian?
It may be he will be ready to say, (as the Prophet said in another case of
Senacherib, Isai. 10.7.) he means not so, nor does his heart think so: and
as Hazael said to the Prophet, Is thy servant a dog, that he should do this
great thing? (2 King. 8.13.) Sed quid verba audiam, cum facta videam? Why does
he separate from all Churches under Heaven, and refuse to gather into any
Church where himself lives, if he did not in these times look at all
Church Estate, and Fellowship, and Ordinances, as not to be found in the Land
of the Living?

Lastly, He looks at it, as an act of Christ enabling him to be faithful in
any measure, to suffer such great and mighty Trials for his Names sake.

But if the Spirit of the Apostle John had in some measure rested upon him, he
would no more have mentioned (much less have magnified) his great, and mighty
Trials, till he had seen John go before him in such a like predication of
his sufferings, who doubtless had less deserved it, and yet suffered more
great, and mighty Trials, Revel. 1.9. But full vessels make least sound.

Again, He recoyleth to his civil Banishment, and observes, That if by
banishing himself I meant his Civil Banishment, then 1. He discerns the
language of the Dragon in a Lambs lip; to put the sufferings of the Saints
upon themselves, and the Devil.

2. That I silently confess, that the frame and constitution of our Churches
is implicitly National. Else if the Commonwealth, and Church were not one,
how could he that is banished from the one, be necessarily banished from the
other also?

Reply. It was far from my meaning, and words, when I spoke of his banishing
of himself from the Fellowship of all the Churches in the Country, to intend
his civil banishment. I knew his civil banishment was not merely his own Act.
I knew also that he might have been banished from the Commonwealth, and yet
have retained (as some others have done) Fellowship with some Churches, if not
with all the Churches in the Country. And therefore both his observations are
but empty flourishes, and vanish like Bubbles. It is the wiliness of the
Spirit of the Serpent, to hide his head under fig-leaved evasions.

But suppose I had meant by his banishment of himself, his civil banishment,
and had meant, that by exposing himself deservedly to that censure, he had
deprived himself of enjoying all the spiritual liberties of the Churches in
the Country: might I not so have said, and yet not have spoken the language of
the Dragon? What if the Dragon use such language to the Saints suffering
innocently? may not the Spirit of God use the same words to a guilty person
suffering deservedly? The language of the Dragon lies not always in the words
or meaning, but in the application, and intent of them. The Dragon said to
Christ, I know who thou art, the holy One of God, Mar. 1.24. Peter might say
the same, or the like words, Mat. 16.16. And yet in his mouth, it was not the
language of the Dragon, but of the Holy Ghost.

Neither will it imply, That the Church, and Commonwealth, are all one,
because he that deservedly is banished from the Commonwealth, banisheth
himself also from the communion of the Churches; For the same sins which may
be offensive civilly to the Commonwealth, may be also spiritually offensive to
the Church, and both proceed to censure the same person in their own way,
severally.

TO CHAP. IV.
IN his fourth Chapter the Examiner answers to a speech of mine, wherein to
prevent his prejudice against my person, (which might weaken the fruit of my
counsel to him) I told him, I had not hasted forward the sentence of his
Civil Banishment: and that what was done by the Magistrates in that kind, was
neither done by my Counsel, nor consent.

Whereto he answers, first, That he observes, I cannot but confess, that it
is hard for any man to do good, or to speak effectually to the soul, or
Conscience of any, whose body he afflicts, and persecuteth, and that only
for their soul and Conscience sake.

Reply. All that can truly be observed from my words is, That it is hard for
any to take good from those, against whom they have conceived a prejudice,
whether justly, or unjustly. But when he subjoyneth a Serpentine, that is, a
subtle, and venomous insinuation, as if I had afflicted, and persecuted his
body, and that only for his soul, and Conscience sake.

Answ. I have been so far from afflicting, or persecuting his body,
(especially for his soul, or conscience sake) that in very truth, whilst I
had any hope of prevailing for him, I may say, as David said for himself,
against a like slander, Psalm. 7.3, 4. I have sought to deliver him who without
cause reproacheth me.

Let not Mr. Williams please himself (as he does in this Paragraph) in
comparing the dealing of the Elders with him here, to the Persecutions of the
Bishops against the godly Preachers in England. If the Bishops had dealt no
worse with the godly Preachers there, and upon no more unjust causes, then the
Elders dealt with him here, they might with good conscience, and good
countenance have looked with comfort, and confidence, both God, and man in the
face, even now when God has laid their carnal pomp, and worldly honor in
the dust.

Neither let him please himself (as he does in the next Paragraph) in his
undoubted Assertion; That what Mr. Cotton, and others did in procuring his
sorrows, was not without some regret, and reluctance of Conscience, and
affection, (as David in procuring Uriah's death, or Asa in imprisoning the
Prophet.)

For neither was he so innocent, as was Vriah, and that Prophet: nor had my
self the like hand in his sufferings, as David and Asa had in the other: nor
did I ever see cause of regret, and reluctance of conscience, for any act of
mine own about his sufferings. Only I confess I had (as he says) some
regret, and reluctance of affection, and of compassion, to see one who had
received from God, stirring and useful gifts, to bestirre himself so busily,
and eagerly to abuse them, to the disturbance of himself, his family, the
Churches, and the Commonwealth.

That I consented not to his Banishment, he in part admits; For what need
was there (says he) of that, being not one of the Civil Court?

As if I might not have consented to it, though I needed not to have done it. I
might have drawn up Articles against him, I might have come in as a witness
against him, I might have solicited, and stirred up the body of the Magistrates
against him, to rid the country of him: and then I had consented beforehand
to what was done by the Magistrates in that kind, though my self had been
none of the Court; but none of all these acts, nor any such like were done by
me.

But be it that I consented not, yet I counseled it, (and so consented) and to
prove that he says, He will produce a double, and unanswerable Testimony for
it.

First, That I publicly taught, (and still do Teach, except lately Christ
has taught me better) that body-killing, soule-killing, and State-killing
Doctrine of Persecuting all other Consciences, and ways of worship but mine
own, in the Civil State, and consequently in the whole world, if the Power, or
Empire thereof were in mine hand.

Reply. Were it not that I have learned from the word of truth, that when men
are cast out of the Church of Christ, they are delivered up unto Satan, and so
neither their wits, nor their tongues are their own. I could not easily have
believed that Mr. Williams could so confidently and openly have avouched such a
notorious slander. Since the Lord taught me to know any thing, what conscience,
or the worship of God meant, it has been my constant judgment, and doctrine,
and practice to the contrary. Besides, To teach the killing of the bodies of
all such Consciences, and ways of worship, as are not mine own, is to make
mine own conscience, and way of worship, the infallible Rule, and sovereign
Standard, by which all consciences, and ways of worship throughout the world,
were to be regulated: yea, and as if this were a light measure of arrogance,
and usurpation, I make it a capital crime, (a body-killing offense) for any
man to swerve from my conscience, and way of worship, even in such Points
wherein the Holy Ghost has given express charge, that we should not judge,
nor condemn one another, Romans 14.3. But I durst appeal even unto the
conscience of Mr. Williams himself, (if it were now in the gracious keeping of
Christ, or of himself, as in former times) that himself knows, I do not
think it lawful to Excommunicate an Heretic, much less to persecute him
with the civil Sword, till it may appear, even by just and full conviction,
that he sins not out of conscience, but against the very light of his own
conscience. Sure I am, such a Point he reports is received from me, to the
very same purpose, (and he reports it truly) in his Bloody Tenent, page 8.
This Answer may suffice to his first (as he calls it) unanswerable Testimony.

His second unanswerable Testimony is, That some Gentlemen that did consent to
his Sentence, have solemnly testified, and with tears since confessed to
himself, that they could not in their souls have been brought to have
consented to the Sentence of his Banishment, had not Mr. Cotton in private
given them advice, and counsel, proving it just, and warrantable to their
Consciences.

Reply. I might here justly plead the equity of the Roman Custom, to excuse
my self from this accusation, until the accusers come before me face to face:
And truly, if Apocryphal witnesses may go for unanswerable Testimonies, it
is an easy matter to oppress any innocence: I might also plead the
incompetency of such a witness, as (happily lying under some censure from our
Church, and removing himself from our fellowship) might take more liberty to
speak against me in a pang of passion, what he would be loath to justify in
cold blood.) I might likewise allege that one or two Magistrates makes not a
Court, nor was his Sentence cast by the vote of one, or two: So that if I had
counseled one or two to it, it would not argue that the act of the
Magistrates, and of the Deputies, (which is the body of the Court) had been
done by my counsel or consent. And indeed it was the very true meaning of my
speech, that for the hastening of the Sentence of the Court against Mr.
Williams, that act of the Court (which was the act of the body of the
Magistrates, and of the Deputies) it was neither done by my counsel, nor
consent. For the body of them neither required my counsel, nor received my
consent. What one of them did (for I remember but one that consulted with me
about it) was not the act done by the Magistrates, whereof I spoke. And let the
occasion, and scope, and matter of that speech be remembered, and it will be
found to tend to that purpose, and no other. About a year before the Sentence
in Court passed against Mr. Williams, the Governor, and other Magistrates
having understood of the disturbances put upon the Civil State by Mr.
Williams, (which have been declared above) they sent for the Elders of the
Churches in these parts, to acquaint us therewith, and to declare thereupon,
the just grounds which they had to proceed against him: yet willing to confer
thereof with us, because he was an Elder of a Church. I do not love to
predicate mine own good offices to any: but his importunity forces me to
utter it; when I heard the motion, I presented (with the consent of my fellow
Elders and Brethren) a serious Request to the Magistrates, that they would be
pleased to forbear all civil prosecution against him, till our selves (with
our Churches) had dealt with him in a Church way, to convince him of sin:
alleging, that my self, and brethren hoped, his violent course did rather
spring from scruple of conscience, (though carried with an inordinate zeal)
then from a seditious Principle. To which the Governor replied, That we were
deceived in him, if we thought he would condescend to learn of any of us: And
what will you do (says he) when you have run your course, and found all your
labor lost? I answered for the rest, we hoped better things: if it fell out
contrary to our hopes, we could not help it, but must sit down, and quiet our
conscience in the Lords acceptance of our will, and endeavor for the deed.

This interceding of my self, and other Elders in his behalf, gave me just
occasion of that profession abovementioned, That I had sought to deliver him,
who without cause reproached me.

The issue was when the Church of New-Towne, with our own, and others had
endeavored to convince both Mr. Williams of these offenses, and the Church of
Salem of their indulgent toleration of him therein; it pleased the Lord to open
the hearts of the Church to assist us in dealing with him: but he in stead of
hearkening, either to them, or us, renounced us all, as no Churches of Christ:
and therefore not at all to be hearkened unto.

Whereupon the Magistrates being to assemble to the next General Court at
New-Towne, intending (as appeared by the event) to proceed against him: And one
of the Magistrates of our Town being to go thither, acquainted me that it was
likely Mr. Williams his cause would then be issued, and asked me what I thought
of it. Truly (said I,) I pity the man, and have already interceded for him,
whilst there was any hope of doing good. But now he having refused to hear
both his own Church, and us, and having rejected us all, as no Churches of
Christ before any conviction, we have now no more to say in his behalf, nor
hope to prevail for him. We have told the Governor, and Magistrates before,
that if our labor was in vain, we could not help it, but must fit down.
And you know they are generally so much incensed against his course, that it is
not your voice, nor the voices of two, or three more, that can suspend the
Sentence. Some further speech I had with him of mine own marvel at the
weakness, and slenderness of the grounds of his opinions, motions, and
courses, and yet carried on with such vehemence, and impetuousnesse, and
prefidence of Spirit.

To this purpose was my speech to him, nor can I call to mind that I spoke so
much as this to any man else; nor can I remember at all, that further then so,
I gave him any grounds to prove the sentencing of him to Banishment, to be just
and warrantable to his Conscience. Nor would it infringe the truth of my speech
if I had so done, seeing it is not one man's vote (nor two, if there had been
two) that denominateth the sentence of the Court, or the act to be done by the
Magistrates, much less done by the Magistrates with my counsel, and consent:
but though I looked at the Sentence of the Court, as neither hastened nor done
by my counsel, and consent, yet I did never intend to say, that I did not
consent to the justice of the Sentence when it was past. Not that I withdrew my
self out of the Court (as he is pleased to construe it) out of some
reluctation; or that I meant it, I neither counseled nor consented in the very
time of the sentence passing: but that I did not beforehand either give
counsel, or consent to the body of the Magistrates, or Deputies, to pass that
Sentence against him.

TO CHAP. V.
I see I have been so large in answering the former four Chapters of this
Examination of my Letter, that if I should proceed in the like sort in a
particular search of the other twenty-foure Chapters which remain, I should
take up more time then were meet about the personal concernments of him, or my
self. Who are we, that we should publicly invite the servants of Christ (who
are employed in more weighty affairs of their Lord and ours) to attend unto
personal Transactions between him, and me? Where any thing shall occur
tending to more public edification, I shall insist with more attention
thereupon, and pass over other lighter Discourses, with a lighter touch. Yet
who so can spare so much time, and leisure, as to compare each Chapter of his,
with each Chapter of this Discourse, he shall find (if I be not mistaken) no
passage of weight passed over without returning due Answer to each particular.
That Text in Prove. 11.26. (He that withholdeth the Corn, (which is the staff
of life) from the people, the multitude shall curse him:) I alleged to prove
that the people had much more cause to separate such from amongst them,
(whether by Civil, or Church-Censure, as do withhold, or separate them from
the Ordinances, or the Ordinances from them, which are (in Christ) the bread of
life. Let not the Reader be so far misled by the Examiner his
misinformation, as to think, that this Scripture was produced against him, to
justify either a false Ministry, or an unfit people to choose and enjoy a
true Ministry. The Ministry, and people, are the Ministry and people of this
Country: of which, the people he acknowledges to be Saints: and the Ministers
of the Churches (chosen by them) not to be destitute of such qualifications, as
Christ requires, save only that we do not forbid the people when they go
over into England, to hear the word of God preached by godly Ministers in the
Parish Churches. Now for this cause, because we do not separate these English
hearers from us, he separated himself, and withdre others from hearing the
word in our Churches with us: which I accounted as great, and as unsufferable
an injury to the souls of Gods people, as it would be to their bodies to
withhold the Corn from them, or them from the Corn: and for that end I
produced this Scripture.

That I produced this Scripture alone to justify the Sentence of the Court, it
was not for want of others, (if that had been the Question;) but because the
scope of my Letter was, not to confirm the equity of his Banishment, but to
convince the iniquity of his Separation. The mention of the cause of his
civil Banishment fell in only upon the by, to remove an objection out of the
way, that because I denied the act of the Court to be done by my counsel, or
consent, therefore it might seem I disallowed the sentence. To prevent that
mistake I acknowledged the righteousness of the Sentence, and for that end
produced that Scripture, as that which might give both some just reason before
God of his Civil Banishment: and also make way for the discovery of his sin
of groundless Separation. Let no man be so far mistaken, as to think, that
his Separation from the Churches, was either the chief difference between the
Court and him, (though it was the chief between him and me in my Letter;) or
that it was the chiefest offense for which he suffered, though he so pretended.

What though neither corporal nor spiritual food may lawfully be sold or
bought, but with the good will, and consent, and authority of the owner? etc.

Let him make it appear, that Christ has not committed the Ministry of the
Gospel to us; and we shall give place to others whom Christ shall send: Mean
while, if the budding, and blossoming, and fruit-bearing of Aarons rod was a
witness from Heaven, that the Lord approved his Ministry against all the
murmurings of the Children of Israel, Number. 17.5. to 8. We must leave him, and
others to their murmurings against us, and quiet our conscices in an humble
blessing of the Lord for his gracious blessing upon our weak labors in that
holy Ministry we have received from him.

What though the Apostles were to turn away, and to shake off the dust of
their feet, against scorners, contradictors, despisers, persecutors?

It was not till they had sinned against the Holy Ghost, and scorned, and
persecuted the convincing light of the Gospel, Acts 13.45. to 51.

Otherwise the Jews were scorners, and persecutors of Christ himself, and of
all that confessed his Name, Joh. 9.22. yet still the Apostles ceased not to
Preach to them, and pray with them, Acts 3.1. etc. to wit, whilst their
Persecutors sinned of ignorance, ver. 17.

What though the Apostles were forbidden to Preach to some places?

He wisely quoteth no Text for it, lest the quoting might be the confuting of
himself. He knows, it was but for a time that others (according to the good
pleasure of Christ's will) might be served before them.

What if Mr. Cotton saw just cause to refuse to sell spiritual Corn in a
mis-hallowed Surplice? Is it safe therefore for Mr. Williams to shut up his
sacks mouth, and to refuse to sell corn in his ordinary apparel?

What if Mr. Cotton forbear to administer the Lords Supper to all believers,
or Baptism unto their children, until the believers profess their Faith, and
Repentance before the Church? Is it safe therefore for Mr. Williams to refuse
to Break the Bread of Life unto the Church of Salem, whereunto their Election,
and Ordination of him, and his own voluntary acceptance thereof, had engaged
him unto stuwardly office?

What though in all Civil Transactions, and in all the present disturbances of
England, principal respect is had unto a right Commission, and right Order?
Let him show wherein our Commission, or Order is defective, and reason would we
should hearken to him.

But see the wariness, and slinesse of the Examiner: I judge it not (says he)
seasonable here, to entertain the Dispute of the true Power, and call of
Christ's Ministry. An handsome evasion. Now when the grounds of his Separation
are questioned, now when he stands upon his open justification, now in Print
before the eyes of all men, now he thinks it not seasonable, to entertain
any dispute of such things at all. Thus Foelix would hear Paul when he had a
more convenient time: and yet that was the very time and hour of his
visitation, Acts 24.25.

His evasion of this Text in Prove. 11.26. (by comparing it with Deuteronomy. 17.12.)
does but add a delusion to an evasion. [ Deuteronomy. 17. I suppose he means,
though his printed copy say Deuteronomy. 15.] For it is a delusion to make the
capital punishment prescribed against the presumptuous rejection of the
Sentence of the chiefest Court in Israel, a figure of Excommunication in the
Church of Christ.

For first, no Scripture of old or new Testament gives any intimation of any
such figure in this Law. And to make a judicial Law a figure without some
light from some Scripture, is to make a man's self, wise above that which is
written.

2. That law is of moral equity, that is of universal and perpetual
equity, in all Nations, in all Ages: He that shall presumptuously appeal
from, or rise up against the sentence of the chiefest and highest Court in a
free State, is guilty Laesae majestatis publicae, and therefore as a capital
offender to be censured in any free Commonwealth.

3. This Law in Deuteronomy. 17. provided an effectual punishment against such
presumptuous offenders, and an effectual remedy against all such like
presumption in others, that all Israel might hear, and fear, and do no more
presumptuously, ver. 13. But so does not Excommunication. For what if an
Excommunicate person presume against the sentence of Christ in his Church, (as
Mr. Williams does against the Sentence of the Church of Salem?) does the power
of the Church provide, that all the Israel of God may hear, and fear, and do
no more presumptuously? Is the figure become more powerful, and effectual,
then the substance? the shadow, then the body? the type, then the Antitype?

From this mistaken Figure, the Examiner would infer, The withholding of the
Corn presumptuously to be death in Israel: but not so in every State of the
world: much less the pleading against a false Ministry to be a capital
crime: for as for Banishment never such a course was heard of in Israel.

Answ. That law in Deuteronomy. has nothing to do with the withholding of Corn
presumptuously, unless there had first passed some sentence of the Sovereign
Court against the withholding of Corn. But otherwise ordinary sins of
presumption, do fall under the Judicature of another Law, Number. 15.30, 31.

Neither has this Text in Solomon's Proverbs any thing to do with that Law in
Deuteronomy. 17. nor with capital punishment. Solomon does not say, that every man
that withholdeth his corn, shall be put to death in Israel: nor do I say that
he is to be put to death in any State of the world: least of all do I say that
Pleading against a false Ministry is a capital crime: These are all but
excursions, and evaporations of the superfluity of wit. But this I say, (and
not I but Solomon) He that withholdeth the Corn, the people shall curse him,
Prove. 11.26. And cursing implies Separation. He therefore that shall withdraw,
or separate, the Corn from the people, or the people from the Corn; the
people have just cause to separate either him from themselves, or themselves
from him. And this proportion will hold as well in spiritual Corn as bodily:
the Argument still stands unshaken.

What though we never read of Banishment in Israel? we read of something
proportionable: what else means that Decree? Let Judgment be executed to
death, or to Banishment, Ezra. 7.27. And Ezra. 10.8? Let all his substance be
forfeited, and himself separated from the Congregation of those that had been
carried away. And in Moses, frequent mention is made of, Cutting off from the
people; which though in Israel, it may sometime signify, cutting off by Gods
hand, sometime by the sword of the Magistrate, and sometime cutting off from
the fellowship of Gods House: yet in Abraham's Family, The cutting off (in Genesis
17.14.) may very well reach, cutting off from their civil Cohabitation: as for
a like offense Ishmael, and his mother were cut off from cohabitation in the
Tents of Abraham's people, Genesis 21.9. to 14.

Also he that had unawares slain a man, was banished, though not out of all
Israel, yet from his own House, and Town, and Tribe, till the death of the
High Priest, and that was as much as Banishment out of any Society of Christ's
people now, whether in Church, or Civil Fellowship. For though out of Israel,
there was no full Banishment legally enjoined, because there was then no other
Church extant in the world, (and so to banish a man out of Israel, was as much
as to say, Go, and serve other Gods, 1 Samuel 26.19) yet now when
Church Fellowship in the true Religion may be had in so many places, to banish
a man out of his Country, is no more then it was then to banish an Israelite
into a City of Refuge. But though banishment be now a lawful punishment in
some case, yet I go not about to prove that every wilful withholding of
corn, in every State is banishment, much less death. But he that shall
withhold his own corn, and go about to persuade all others that have corn
lying by them, to shut up their sacks mouths, and not to bring forth their
corn for the nourishment of the people, (which is, if we speak of spiritual
corn, the very case of the Examiner) I do not see but such an one may be
justly accounted as Hostis Reipublicae, a public enemy of the Country, and,
as such an one, in due order, to be cast out of it.

In due order I say; for if such an one be detained from bringing forth his
corn by some scruple of Conscience, (as suppose a man able to Preach Christ,
and so able to dispense spiritual corn, yet doubting of the true way of the
Ministry since the Apostasy of Antichrist, dare not practice the Ministry.)
Such an one should not be suddenly cast out of the Country, till he be first
convinced, that the Apostasy of Antichrist, did never so far prevail
against the Church of Christ, as to root it out from off the face of the
earth. The woman (which is the Church of Christ) was still nourished in a
Wilderness, even during all the Reign of Antichrist, Rev. 12.14, 15, 16. The
Temple of God, (which is his Church) together with the Altar, and them that
worship therein, were still measured, and that by John (by Apostolic measure)
all the time, when Antichrist trod down the outward Court of the holy City,
Rev. 11.1, 2. The Golden vessels of the Temple still continued in the midst
of the Babylonish Captivity. And if spiritual Babylon have now so far
prevailed against the Church of Christ, as that they have rooted it up from the
face of the earth, then what is become of the promise of Christ; The gates of
Hell shall never prevail against it? Mat. 16.18. Surely the Promise is given
to a particular Congregationall Church, that it shall never fail, but shall
always be extant in some Country, or other; for he speaks of such a Church,
to whom the keys of the Kingdom are committed, ver. 19. It will be vain to
look for new Apostles to replant Churches out of the ruins of the
Antichristian Apostasy. For the new Testament acknowledges Paul and Barnabas
to be the last Apostles, 1 Cor. 4.9. If any Apostles rise up after them, then
Paul and Barnabas will not be the last. And when the New Jerusalem comes down
from Heaven, yet she shall not be builded by any new Apostles, but built upon
that foundation which the Lambs twelve Apostles have already laid, Rev. 21.14.

As for those many excellent, and worthy Gentlemen, Lawyers, Physicians, and
others, whom the Examiner commends to be as well gifted in the knowledge of
the Scripture, and furnished with gifts, of tongues, and utterance, as most
that profess the Ministry, and yet are not persuaded to sell spiritual
Corn, as questioning their true calling, and Commission.

In such a case I would first seek (by the help of Christ) to remove the
scruples upon which they question their calling, and Commission.

Secondly, I would think it meet, to put a difference between such as never
received a lawful calling and commission to the Ministry, and them that have
received it. But if any of them have received a lawful calling into the
Ministry, and yet will neither Preach themselves, nor suffer them that would,
I suppose that both Church, and Commonwealth, may justly account them unworthy
of any Christian society; and as such unprofitable servants refuse to minister
themselves, or to suffer others to minister spiritual things; so others should
refuse to minister to them carnal things.

But (says he) the selling, or withholding of spiritual Corn, are both of a
spiritual nature: and therefore must necessarily in a true Parallel bear
Relation to a spiritual Curse.

Answ. If they that minister spiritual good things may duly reap carnal
good things, (1 Cor. 9.11.) then they that hinder the ministering of spiritual
good things, may justly reap the hinderance of enjoyment of carnal good
things. What if spiritual, and carnal good things be not parallel? Are there
no Arguments but a Pari? Is it not lawful reasoning a majori ad minus? If men
hinder the enjoyment of spiritual good things, may they not be hindered from
the enjoyment of that which is less, carnal good things? It would weary a
sober mind to pursue such windy fancies: though I hope the Lord will help me
not to count it wearisome, either to satisfy a tender Conscience, or to
convince a Gainsayer.

TO CHAP. VI.
THough my Letter expresses, That it may be the Court passed that sentence
against Mr. Williams, not upon that ground, (from Prove. 11.26.) but for ought I
know, for his other corrupt Doctrines (suitable to his Practices) tending to
the disturbance of Civil, and holy Peace: Yet I do not therefore question (as
he says I seem to do) the sandinesse of such a ground (as that place of
Seripture) to warrant such proceedings; nor do I therein confsesse that my
self had no distinct knowledge of the causes of his Banishment.

For I did not allege that place of Scripture, as a ground upon which the
Court proceeded to his Banishment: and therefore I said in my Letter, it may be
they passed Sentence not upon that ground. But I alleged it as a reason, which
provoked the Lord to moove the Court to proceed against Mr. Williams, for such
other offensive, and disturbant Doctrines, and Practices against the Patent,
and against the oath of fidelity, and against the Magistrates delay of the
Petition of Salem, which he himself knows, I had distinct knowledge of
before, which makes me the more to marvel at his wonder, Where was my waking
care in his behalf; Whereas he knows I spent a great part of the Summer in
seeking by word and writing to satisfy his scruples in the former particulars:
until he rejected both our callings, and our Churches. And even then I ceased
not to follow him still, with such means of conviction, and satisfaction in
that Point also, as God brought to my hand: whereof this very Letter, (which he
examineth, and answers) is a pregnant, and evident demonstration.

What though in this Letter I did not name his other corrupt Doctrines and
Practices, nor any Scriptures to prove them corrupt? His heart knows full
well both the Points, and the Scriptures, that were charged upon him all that
Summer. And to have rehearsed them again in this Letter, it had been but actum
agere, neither was it the work in hand. For having done it before, we looked
for some satisfactory answer: but in stead thereof we received only a
rejection of our callings, and Churches: so that there was nothing now left,
but to endeavor to satisfy his Conscience in the sandinesse of those grounds,
upon which he rejected communion with us.

TO CHAP. VII.
IN the 7th Chapter Mr. Williams examineth those words of my Letter, wherein I
say, that were my soul in his souls stead, I should accept it as a mercy of
God, to banish me from the Civil Society of such a Commonwealth, where I
could not enjoy holy Fellowship with any Church of God amongst them without
sin. For what should the daughter of Zion do in Babel? Why should she not
hasten to flee from thence?

To this the Examiner answers, that though his love bids him to hope, that
Mr. Cotton herein intended him a Cordial, yet if the Ingredients be examined,
there will appear no less then dishonor to the Name of God, danger to every
Civil State, a miserable comfort to him, and a contradiction within it self.

Reply. It is true, what I wrote was in love to his soul: but I intended not a
cordial of consolation to him, (for I did not conceive his Spirit at the
present prepared for it;) but I intended only a conviction, to abate the
rigor of his indignation against the dispensation of divine Justice: And
therefore presented before him the mercy of God in that Administration.

But he begins with the last, first, to show me the evil of these
Ingredients.

And first for the contradiction to my self, in that I speak of the daughter
of Zion in Babel: If he call (says he) the Land Babel, how can it be Babel,
and the Church of Christ also?

As if Zion cannot be in Babel, but it must be Babel? or as if the Church
cannot be in the world, but it must be the world? Or as if when I call the Land
Babel, I speak of it as it is in it self, and not rather as it is in his
apprehension? the Churches (in his imagination) still holding communion with
Antichristian Babylon.

Secondly, He makes it a dangerous Doctrine to affirm it, a misery to live in
that State where a Christian cannot enjoy the fellowship of the public
Churches of God without sin.

Reply. 1. Though I do affirm it to be a mercy to be delivered out of such a
State, yet I do not affirm it to be a misery to live in it. It is a mercy to
be translated, not only from misery to happiness, but from a less good to a
greater. It is a mercy to a faithful soul to be translated from a Saint to a
Minister; and yet Saintship is no misery.

2. It is some degree of misery, and no small one to a spiritual mind, for a
Christian to live where he cannot enjoy the fellowship of Churches: or else
David complained without cause; Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell in
Meshek, Psalm. 120 5. and 42.4.

What if there be many famous States, wherein no Church of Jesus Christ is
known? Is it not a mercy to be dismissed from such a State to a Land of more
liberty, and piety?

What if God commanded his people to Pray for the Peace of material Babel,
whilst they were forced to abide in it?

Was it not therefore a mercy from God, for Cyrus to deliver them out of Babel?

What if Sodom, Egypt, Babel, be spiritually understood, Rev. 11.8. and 14.8.

Is it not therefore a mercy when God calls his People out of such Dungeons,
and sinkes of abomination?

What if there were a true Church in material Babel? 1 Pet. 5.13.

Let him remember what he spoke a little before; That if I speak not of Babel
mystically, I speak not to the Point: Let him apply it to himself.

Wherefore does he tell us again of his being driven into the miseries of an
howling Wilderness?

1. It was no howling Wilderness when he came to it, as has been said above.

2. He might have gone to other English Plantations Eastward, Pascatoque, and
Agaminticus.

3. Solomon tells us, It is better to live in a Wilderness, then with a
contentious, and angry woman, Prove. 21.19. And such he accounts all our
Churches, and Courts to be.

Thirdly, says he, Mr. Cotton himself would have counted it a mercy, if he
might have Practiced in Old-England, what he does in New England, with the
enjoyment of Civil Peace, etc.

Reply. True; but what is that to the purpose? The Question is if I could not
enjoy the Fellowship of public Churches without sin, (as in those days I
could not) whether then I would account it a mercy to be removed? Verily, I do
so account it, and bless the Lord from my soul for his abundant mercy in
forcing me out thence, in so fit a season.

But further, (says he) what if Mr. Cotton should dissent from the new
English-Churches, and join in worship with some other, (as some few years
since, he was upon the Point to do, in a separation from the Churches there,
as Legal) would he count it a mercy to be plucked up by the roots, him, and
his, and to endure the losses, distractions, miseries, that do attend such a
condition?

Reply. The Examiner is falsely, and foully misinformed, when he says, I was
about to separate some few years since from the new English Churches as
Legal. For I never counted them as Legal Churches; nor was I ever about to
separate from them as Legal, or otherwise so unclean, that a good conscience
might not hold communion with them without sin.

The truth is, There was a Generation of Familists in our own, and other
Towns, who under pretense of holding forth, what I had taught, touching union
with Christ, and evidencing of that union, did secretly vent sundry corrupt,
and dangerous errors, and heresies, denying all inherent righteousness, and
all evidencing of a good estate thereby in any sort, and some of them denying
also the Immortality of the soul, and Resurrection of the body. When they
were questioned by some Brethren about those things, they carried it as if they
held forth nothing but what they had received from me. Whereof when I was
advertised, to clear my self, I publicly Preached against these errors. Then
said the Brethren to the erring party, See, your Teacher declares himself
clearly to differ from you. No matter (say the other) what he says in
public, we understand him otherwise, and we know what he says to us in
private. Yea and I my self could not easily believe that those erring
Brethren, and Sisters were so corrupt in their Judgments, as they were
reported, they seeming to me forward Christians, and utterly denying unto me
any such Tenants, or any thing else but what they received from my self. All
which bred in sundry of the Country a jealousy that I was in secret a
Fomenter of the Spirit of Familisme, if not leavened my self that way. Which I
discerning, it wrought in me thoughts, (as it did in many other sincerely godly
Brethren of our Church) not of a Separation from the Churches, as Legal, (whom
we truly embraced, and honored in the Lord) but of a Remoovall to New Haven,
as being better known to the Pastor, and some others there, then to such as
were at that time jealous of me here. The true Ground whereof was, an inward
loathnesse to be troublesome to godly minds, and a fear of the
unprofitablenesse of my Ministry there, where my way was suspected to be
doubtful, and dangerous. I chose therefore rather to meditate a silent
departure in Peace, then by tarrying here to make way for the breaking forth of
Temptations. But when at the Synod I had discovered the corruption of the
Judgment of the erring Brethren, and saw their fraudulent pretense of holding
forth no other, but what they received from me, (when as indeed they pleaded
for gross errors, contrary to my judgment;) and thereupon bare witness
against them; and when in a private conference with some chief Magistrates,
and Elders, I perceived that my purpose of removal upon such differences was
unwelcome to them, and that such Points needed not to occasion any distance
(neither in place, nor in heart) amongst Brethren, I then rested satisfied in
my abode amongst them, and so have continued by the Grace of Christ unto this
day.

But now to return to Mr. Williams his Question; In the time of this
Difference, would I count it (says he) a mercy to be plucked up by the rovtes,
me, and mine, and to endure the losses, distractions, and miseries, that do
attend such a condition?

Answ. Yea truly, if those jealousies, and differences had still held, I
should have accounted it, and then did account it a mercy to see a door open
for remoovall. And therefore in my heart chose it, and purposed it, as a way of
wisdom, and mercy.

But whereas he talks of plucking up by the roots, the Metaphor is too
Catachresticall. An old Tree plucked up by the roots is not like to grow
again: but neither he, nor I, was exposed to such an Eradication: we might
have remooved (with our selves) whatsoever mooveables we had; and what we could
not remoove, we might put it off (sooner, or later) unto others for a valuable
consideration. So that though we had been plucked up by the roots, our roots
had not been dried up, but would have sprung forth again to our comfortable
supportance.

It is a question altogether impertinent, which the Examiner puts in the
next place, Whether if the Inhabitants in New England were permitted to enjoy
in Old-England their Congregationall way, whether then Mr. Cotton himself (if
be were seated in Old England again) would count it a mercy to be banished
from the Civil State?

For that is not at all the Question in hand, but this: whether if there were
no Congregationall Churches in Old-England, unto which we might join without
sin, whether then it were a mercy to be thrust out? And verily for my self
(and I doubt not for many a thousand more) I should account is a mercy, to be
hastened out, yea, (if I lingered) to be thrust out in such a case. If many
thousand godly persons in this Country did not make the same account, how came
we to dwell here, as we do this day?

Neither yet do I make God the Author of such cruel mercy, in them that were
the causes of our casting out, as he calumniateth.

For the Instruments of any unjust dealing with the servants of God may be
cruel: when yet the hand of God in ordering such a work may be most
merciful. The hand of God was most merciful to Joseph in casting him out of
his Fathers house into Egypt, when yet the hand of his brethren was defiled
with bloud-guiltie cruelty.

When the Examiner concludes, that if I had been exposed to the miseries,
poverties, necessities, wants, debts, hardships of Sea and Land, in a banished
Condition, he presumes I would reach forth a more merciful Cordial to the
afflicted; and therefore looks at himself afflicted, as a Lamp despised in
the eyes of him that is at ease, Job 12.5.

I desire the Lord might be pleased to open his eyes by such afflictions,
wisely to consider whether he be not out of his way, when he meets with such
miseries, poverties, debts, hardships? Surely when God hedgeth in the way of
his people with thorns, he calls them to return to their first husband, for
then it was better with them, then now, Hos. 2.6. His banishment was doubtless
no cause of such afflictions: Diverse others have been cast out of the Country,
as well as he, and yet God has generally rescued them from affliction, and
prospered their estates before his eyes. But when he chooses rather to betake
himself to merchandise by Land and Sea, (unto which he was never brought up)
then to serve the Lord, and his People in dispensing spiritual food to them in
a Churchway, no marvel if the Lord do not shine upon his way, but expose him
to debts, necessities, poverties, miseries, hardships by Sea and Land. It is
far off from me to despise his afflicted condition: but the truest merciful
cordial to his afflicted estate, would be to persuade him that he is out of
his way, and still blesses himself (though God both cross his estate, and
blast his spirit) in such a way.

As for my being at ease, (as he calls it) had he been a little longer
acquainted with the faithful discharge of a Ministers office, he would not
judge it such a state of ease. If I durst allow my self to seek, and take
mine ease, I should sooner choose a private solitary condition in his
Wilderness, then all the throng of employment in this numerous society.

TO CHAP. VIII.
IN his 8th Chapter Mr. Williams rehearses, and examineth those words of my
Letter, wherein to help him to a serious sight of his sin, I said that it
pleased the Lord Jesus to fight against his corrupt ways with the sword of his
mouth, in the mouths and testimonies of the Churches, and Brethren. Against
whom, when Mr. Williams overheated himself in reasoning, and disputing
against the light of his Truth, it pleased the Lord to stop his mouth, by a
sudden disease, and to threaten to take his breath from him. But he in stead
of recoyling (as even Balaam offered to do in the like case) chose rather to
persist in his way, and to protest against all the Churches, and Brethren that
stood in his way, etc.

In these lines, the Examiner tells us, an humble, and discerning Spirit may
epsy, first, a glorious justification, and boasting of my self, and others
concurring with me: secondly, an unrighteous, and uncharitable Censure of the
afflicted.

Reply. Whether is it a more glorious boasting, to challenge to a man's self,
an humble, and discerning Spirit, (as the Examiner does here, and elsewhere in
this Treatise) or to ascribe the glory to Christ in fighting with the sword of
his mouth, in the testimonies and labors of the Churches, and Brethren against
his corrupt ways?

Surely when our glorying is not in our selves, but in the Lord Jesus, we are
allowed so to do by the Holy Ghost, Isa. 45.25. In the Lord shall all the seed
of Israel be justified, and shall glory.

Object. But is it not a glorious boasting of our selves, when as we make the
sword in our mouths, and testimonies, to be the sword of the mouth of Christ;
when as the holy Scripture puts the sword of Christ in the mouths of such
witnesses, as himself, and some others, who in meekness, and patience,
testify the truth of Jesus against Antichrist, and against all false Callings
of Ministers? And whether is Mr. Cotton, swimming with the stream of outward
credit, and profit, and smiting with the fist, and sword of Persecution: or
himself, and such other the witnesses of Christ, most like unto Balaam?

Reply. 1. The quickness of the Examiners wit over-runneth his judgment; for
I did not compare him to Balaam as like, much less as most like; but as
unlike. For that which Balaam would have done, I said, he would not do.

2. Let the light of the holy word of God discover, and judge, whether the
sword of the mouth of the Lord Jesus be found in his mouth, and his fellows,
or in the mouths of the Churches, and Brethren here: and let the trial be upon
this very Point, whether witnesses for Christ, or for Antichrist?

1. We witness that Christ was never so far overthrown, and overcome by
Antichrist, but that still the Lord Jesus has preserved a Congregationall
Church, one or more, especially since the Reformation of Religion, by the
Ministry of Luther, and Calvin, and other Ministers of Christ in the days of
our Fathers.

The Examiner witnesses, that since the Apostasy of Antichrist, Antichrist
has so far prevailed against Christ, and his Kingdom, that he has no
Church, nor Church Officers left upon the face of the earth to this day.

2. We witness the godly persons, visible Saints, confessing their known
sins, and professing their faith, are fit materials for Church Fellowship.

The Examiner witnesses, that the Churches (which consist of such visible
Saints) are nullities, unless they discern every spot, and pollution of
Antichrist, and forsake it: (for Instance) unless they see the Antichristian
pollution of the Ministry in England, and do refuse to hear the word from it.

3. We witness, that Persons qualified with a convenient measure of spiritual
gifts, fit to lead Gods people; and chosen, and elected by a Congregation of
visible Saints, and ordained, and set apart unto the work of the Ministry,
have received a lawful calling from Christ to that office.

The Examiner witnesses against this as a false Calling, upon what pretense
himself better knows then I.

4. We witness, that it is lawful for the King of England, to give a Patent
to a certain number of his Subjects, to transplant themselves out of England
into America, and to possess such Lands as the Providence of God lays open
before them, between such, and such Degrees of the Horizon. Provided that his
Subjects adventure not upon such acts as the Patent never intended, as to
murder the Natives, or to dispossess them by violence or fraud of their
lawful Possessions: but either to plant themselves in a vacuum Domicilium, or
if they sit down upon the Possession of the Natives, to receive the same from
them by a reasonable Purchase, or free Assignement.

The Examiner witnesses against all such Patents, and Preaches it to be
unlawful for Magistrates to execute Justice upon the English by them, and that
it is necessary to repent of receiving such Patents, and to return them back
again into the hands of those Princes, or of their Successors, from whom they
received them.

5. We witness, that it is lawful for Magistrates (especially in time of
danger) to offer to the Subjects under them an Oath of Fidelity, whether they
be regenerate, or unregenerate.

Mr. Williams witnesses it to be utterly unlawful so to do: an Oath for
confirmation of Office being peculiar to Christ: and an Oath being a worship of
God not meet for unregenerate Persons to take into their mouths.

6. We witness, that if a Church refuse to hearken to the voice of
Magistrates in delaying the Election, or ordination of such an one to Office,
whom they find to be troublesome to the State, then it may be lawful for
Magistrates to delay the granting of the Petition of such a Church for Lands
that lie convenient for them.

Mr. Williams witnesses, that in such a case the Church, whose Petition is so
delayed, may write Letters of Admonition to all the Churches, whereof such
Magistrates are members, to require them to grant without delay such Petitions,
or else to Proceed against them in a Church Way.

Now let the Churches of Jesus Christ, and all the Saints on earth judge, in
whether sort of these witnesses, the word, and Spirit of Christ, or Antichrist
breaths. As for the deciphering which the Examiner makes of Mr Cotton, as
swimming with the stream of outward credit, and profit, and smiting with the
fist, and sword of Persecution of such as do not join in worship with him. I
cannot say that I have sworn, but I thank God I have waded through credit, and
discredit, through evil report, and good report, as a deceiver, and yet true.
And for profit, I have neither abounded in superfluities, nor (through mercy)
have been long destitute of necessaries: but whether this be a badge of
Antichrist, and not compatible to the witnesses of Christ, I have not yet
learned.

And for smiting with the fist, and sword of Persecution, if Persecution be
affliction for Righteousness sake, I would willingly learn of the Examiner,
whom of all the Righteous I have smitten with the fist, or wounded with the
sword? I speak according to his own meaning, meaning (as I suppose himself
does) neither bodily fist, nor material sword; but let him then Instance in
some one, or other, that has felt the heaviness of my fist, or the keenness
of my sword, or else let him remember what the Spirit of God has said ( Psalm.
31.18.) concerning such, as speak bitter things proudly, and contemptuously,
(and I also add) injuriously, and falsely against those whom himself in the
next line styleth holy, and beloved.

To the second, the Censure which he calls unrighteous, and uncharitable; He
confesses, it pleased God to bring him near unto death: But his Answer he
returns in two things. 1. By deriving the cause of his sickness, not from
his excessive heat in disputing against the testimonies, and writings of the
Churches, and Elders, but from his excessive Labors on the Lords days, and
thrice a week at Salem, by labors day and night in the field with his own
hands, by travels day and night also to go, and return from the Court.

Reply. The Court being held within twelve or fourteen miles distance from
Salem, travel to, and fro, was no likely cause of such distemper. And
whatsoever his Labors were in Town or Field, on the Lords Days, or week
days, (I detract not from them;) but this is all I would say, That that
sudden distemper fell not upon him, neither in the field at his labor, nor on
the week days, or Lords days in his Preaching: but in his vehement public
arguing against the writings, and testimonies of the Churches, and Brethren
sent to him, and to the Church of Salem, against his corrupt ways. Wherein
though I know, All things fall alike to all: yet if Moses himself (as well as
Balaam) meet with a check in his journey from the hand of God, I believe it is
a just call to consider; Is there not a lie in my right hand? Or is there not
an Idol in my heart? or do I go about the work of God, in a way of God?
Howsoever, it was far from me to upbraide your sickness, (as your marginall
note taxes;) but rather to call you to consider of your unprofitable, and
perverse use of it.

The second part of his Answer is a Recrimination of the Officer of Justice, by
whom in this time he was unmercifully driven from his Chamber to a winters
flight.

Reply. When he says, in this time; if he mean (as the words foregoing
express) the time wherein he was near unto death, it is a manifest untruth.
James Bonne
For the Officer of Justice (who then was) is a man fearing God, and of a
tender Conscience, and who dare not allow that liberty to his tongue, which the
Examiner often uses in this Discourse: He testifies, he then spoke with Mr.
Williams, and that he discerned no sign of sickness upon him, much less of
neernesse unto death* He testifies further, that upon the mourning complaint
of some of Mr. Williams his neighbors, who did adhere to him, he left only
the Warrant with him, but left him in his house to take the time for his
departure limited in his warrant, which was not that night, though he do not
well remember how many days were set him. But this I have been given to
understand, that the increase of concourse of people to him on the Lords days
in private, to the neglect or deserting of public Ordinances, and to the
spreading of the Leaven of his corrupt imaginations, provoked the Magistrates
rather then to breed a winters spiritual plague in the Country, to put upon
him a winters journey out of the Country. Gangraenam amoveas, no pars sincera
trahatur.

TO CHAP. IX.
TO his 9th Chapter, I shall not need to return any large Reply. Let him read
over my words again, which he examineth, and answers in this Chapter, and
they may serve for a just Reply unto his Answer, so far as it is needful.

Only let me touch a Passage, or two. When he says, That after the first
manifestation of the countenance of God, reconciled in the blood of Christ unto
his soul, it has been with him, as with one whom he says, I told him off,
his Questions, and Troubles have not been concerning his Reconciliation, and
Peace with God, but concerning Sanctification, etc.

I would it might please the Lord to persuade his heart, that, that one of whom
I spoke to him, was but one to whom the Lord dispensed himself in that manner;
and he a man, though he suffered much, and wrote much, yet no where magnified
his sufferings, nor vilified the Authors of his sufferings: A man that cleaved
to the Ordinances, and Saints of God, and not willing to manifest his dissent
from his Brethren, no not there where he did dissent, as willing to attribute
more to the judgments of other servants of God, then to arrogate to himself.

But surely the ordinary manner of Gods dispensation of himself to his
servants, is otherwise; even to those that have been most precious in his
sight. Job has sometimes complained, that God took him for his enemy, Job
13.24.26. David sometimes complains, that he was cut off from before Gods
eyes, Psalm. 31.22. And that God sometimes hid his face from him, Psalm. 30.7.
That his soul was also sore vexed with the sense of Gods anger, and hot
displeasure, Psalm. 6.1. 3 Asaph also complains of the same, in Psalm. 77. and
Heman the Ezrahite in Psalm. 88. and Hezekiah in Isai. 38. If the Lord have
dealt more indulgently with Mr. Williams, he has the more cause to walk
humbly, and circumspectly, and fruitfully before the Lord, which is the worst
that I wish him. And let him also consider, that whilst he lives under the
Sun, himself is not exempted from the dangerous Inmate of a deceitful
heart. As for Master Smith he stands, and falls to his own Master: whilst
he was Preacher to the City of Lincoln, he wrought with God then: what
temptations befell him after, by the evil workings of evil men, and some good
men too, I choose rather to tremble at, then discourse of. If I had made use of
his Principles, and Arguments, (as this Examiner says I have) it is more then
my self know: for I have not been acquainted with sundry of his writings, as
being discouraged with that one, wherein he makes Original sin an idle
name. Albeit, I refuse not to learn from any man, as being conscious to my
self of mine own emptiness.

But (says the Examiner) whatsoever Mr. Smiths Temptations, and Falls have
been: yet that opinion of Mr. Cotton, or any, is most grievous to God, and man,
and not comparable to any that ever Mr. Smith could be charged withal: nor is
any sin comparably so grievous in Gods David's, as a treacherous slaughter of
the faithful, whom we are forced to call, Beloved in Christ.

Reply. This is one of the Instances amongst many others, upon which I was
moved to speak even now, that the Examiner allows more liberty to his
tongue, then the Messenger of Justice, a man of a tender Conscience, (of whom I
spoke) durst use. But when a man is delivered up to Satan, and neither his
mind, nor conscience, nor tongue, nor pen, are his own, no marvel if he cast
forth firebrarnds, and arrows, and mortal things, which I suppose a Publican,
or Pagan would hardly utter, without some more colorable pretense then the
Examiner has to say, That Mr. Cotton is of opinion, that it is lawful to
commit a treacherous slaughter of the Saints, whom we are forced to call,
Beloved in Christ.

To the accusation I shall (God helping) make further Answer in his Place:
Mean while, let the Examiner know, that I was not forced to call him, Beloved
in Christ. That I did so style him, it was out of indulgence of charity, not
out of any necessity of duty.

TO CHAP. X.
THe residue of my Letter to Mr. Williams was taken up in remooving two
stumbling blocks out of his way, which turned him off from fellowship with us.
The former was, the want of fit matter of our Churches. The latter, our
disrespect to the separate Churches in England. Our want of fit matter he
acknowledged stood, not in this, that we wanted godly persons to be the visible
members of our Churches, (for with joy, he acknowledges that:) but in this,
that all godly persons are not matter fit to constitute a Church, no more then
Trees, or Quarries are fit matter proportioned to a Building.

This exception of his seemed to me to imply a contradiction: for if the matter
of our Churches were (such as himself acknowledged) godly persons, they were
not then as Trees unfeld, nor as stones in the Quarry unhewen: for godliness
cutteth men down from their former root, and heweth them out of the Pit of
corrupt Nature, and fitteth them for fellowship with Christ, and with his
People.

The sum of his Answer is (though delivered in other words obscurely and
confusedly, yet in sense) thus much; That he accounts our members, as Trees
or Quarries, not for that they are not yet cut our of the pit or root of
natural corruption, but for that they are not yet removed and cleansed from
actual and Antichristian pollution. In which case, Noah, Abraham, Lot,
Sampson, Job, David, Peter, in their drunkenness, lying, whoredoms, cursings,
murders, Perjuries, though they were godly persons: yet not fit members for
Church estate. And so our Church Members, howsoever godly otherwise, yet
through ignorance, and negligence, lying under Antichristian pollutions, ever
since the Apostasy, are not fit members for Church Estate.

Reply. 1. I do willingly allow him to be the Interpreter of his own meaning:
and do easily grant him, that with that distinction, he salveth his
contradiction. But yet let him remember, his words were very unproper, to
account godly Persons fallen into any actual Pollution, to be matter fitted
for a Church, no more then Trees or Quarries are fit matter proportioned to a
Building.

We are not wont, neither in common speech, nor in proper speech, to account
such persons, as have been already cut off from the root and pit of natural
corruption, to be no more then Trees and Quarries, though they have since
fallen into actual pollution; but we rather account them like Timber and
Stones, cut out, and hewn, yet fallen into some mire by the breach of the
Axeltree of their Carriage, and therefore fit to be washed before they be laid
in the Building. But leave that, as it please him.

Reply. 2. He may do well to consider, that the most of those Saints he
names, were not as rude Trees and Quarries unproportioned to the Building, but
as Trees of Righteousness, and living Stones, laid by God himself in the
Building of his Church. But I easily grant him, that according to the
Discipline of the Churches of Christ in the days of the Gospel, it were meet
that godly persons falling into any gross, and scandalous, and notorious
pollution, they should first give satisfaction to the Church by profession of
their Repentance, before they be received into holy fellowship with the Lord,
and his People, in Church Communion. In which respect, if Christ be considered
as head of the visible Church, he who is a member of the Church, (and so a
member of Christ) may fall so foully into gross sin, and be so enthralled to
it, as to be separate from the Church, yea and from Christ too, considered as
the visible head of it. And therefore the Examiner mistook himself, and me
too, when he writes, that I affirmed, that godly persons cannot be so
enthralled to Antichrist, as to separate them from Christ. For I never denied,
that godly persons may fall, as into other gross and notorious sins; so also
into gross and notorious Antichristian Pollutions, so as to separate them from
Church Communion, yea and from Christ himself, as he is the Head of the
visible Church.

Reply. 3. But to clear the point more fully and plainly; Put the case, that
the Saints whom the Examiner sets forth in their pollutions, (as Noah,
Abraham, Lot, Sampson, Job, David, Peter,) suppose, I say, they had openly
professed their Repentance for their open scandalls, of drunkenness, lying,
incest, murder, etc. and all their other known scandalls, but had neither
discerned nor bewailed the sin of Polygamy: yea, suppose the Church with
which they might join, did neither discern the necessity, nor duty of
acknowledging that sin, whether such Saints were to be refused from
Church Communion, (as rude Trees and Quarries?) or if they were received as
members into the Church, whether was such a Church to be separated from? If
yea, we must look for new Rules for it out of a new Gospel. If no, then will
the Examiner want a Rule for his separation from all the Churches in
New England.

For this is the very state of the Question, as the Examiner himself
rehearses it, in this Chapter. For he having objected, that a necessity lies
upon godly men, before they can be fit matter for Church Fellowship, to see,
bewail, repent, and come out of the false Churches, worship, Ministry,
Government, ( according to Scriptures, Isai. 62.11. 2 Cor. 6.17.) And this to
be done, not by a local remoovall, but by a deliverance of the soul,
understanding, will, judgment and affection, etc.

He subjoyneth my Answer out of my Letter in these words;

1. We grant, that it is not local remoovall from former pollution, nor
contrary practice, that fitteth us for fellowship with Christ, and his Church:
but that it is necessary also, that we do repent of such former Pollutions,
wherewith we have been defiled and enthralled.

2. We grant further, that it is necessary to Church Fellowship, that we should
see and discern all such pollutions, as do so far enthrall us to
Antichrist, as to separate us from Christ. But this we profess unto you, that
wherein we have reformed our practice, therein we have endeavored unfainedly
to humble our souls for our former contrary walking. If any through hypocrisy
are wanting herein, the hidden hypocrisy of some will not prejudice the
sincerity, and faithfulness of others, nor the Churchestate of all.

This though the Examiner do rehearse it here in this Chapter: yet here he
answers nothing to it, though it be the very hinge of the Controversy. If we
meet with any Answer to it in the sequel, we shall (God willing) consider of
it in its place.

Only let me add this third thing to clear the state of the controversy
more fully, That to this day we do not see nor discern, that it is any
Antichristian pollution at all, for a member of any of our Churches, going over
into England, to hear the word Preached by a well-gifted Minister in the
Parish Assemblies.

TO CHAP. XI.
IN this Chapter, the Examiner propounds a second, third, fourth, and fifth
Reason, to prove that, (which I deny not) to wit, That a necessity lies upon
godly men, before they can be fit matter for Church Fellowship, truly to see
and humbly to bewail their spiritual bondage under Antichristian pollution,
and withal to obtain some power and strength from Jesus Christ to bring them
out of it.

This I say, I deny not, nor ever did. But this necessity I conceive to be
Necessitas praecepti, (as they call it, or officii) as that which is the
commandment of God, and the duty of godly men to do: But not Necessitas medij
ad finem, such a necessity, as without which a godly person cannot be a member
of the Church, unless the spiritual bondage under Antichristian pollution,
do so far enthrall him to Antichrist, as to separate him from Christ as he
is the Head of the visible Church. Which what it is, we shall have fitter
occasion to speak of in the sequel.

To his second Argument I would therefore Answer, that as an holy Altar and
Temple to God, could not have been built to God in the midst of Babylon, but
the Builders must come locally out of Babel to build it in Jerusalem: So a
Church of Christ cannot be built to God, but by such Builders as spiritually
come out of Antichristian pollutions and inventions, at least out of such
pollutions as keep them still in Babel, and detain them under Antichrist, and
separate them from Christ.

To his third Argument, I would grant all that he says in it to be true: But
how he applies it to infer his conclusion, he neither expresses, nor is it
easy for me to gather. If his meaning be, that Luther, and other godly
persons, might not be received into Church Fellowship in those days, because
they saw not the bottomless gulf of all those Antichristian corruptions,
which the Lord has since discovered; It is a conclusion that I durst not
infer, nor will he be ever able to make good. It is not always full Moon in
respect of spiritual light with every Church of God in all ages alike.

To his fourth Argument, taken from my own Practice; In that I do not receive
all Persons, eminent for Grace and godliness, forthwith to the fellowship of
the Lords Supper, till upon their entrance into Covenant, with a Confession of
faith, etc.

I would answer, it is not because I think such persons are not fit matter for
Church estate; but because they yet want a fit Form, requisite to
Church Estate.

His last Argument, is taken from a famous Passage (as he calls it) of a
solemn Question put to me, and to the other New-English Elders, unto which I
with the rest did answer Negatively, That if godly persons coming over hither
did refuse to submit to our way of worship and Government, that then they could
not only not enjoy Church Fellowship together, but not be permitted to breath
and live in the same common air and Commonwealth together.

To which I answer; 1. That it is suitable to his wonted boldness, to affirm
that of me which is more then he knows, and indeed more then is truth. For
though he say, that Mr. Cotton, and the New English Elders returned that
Answer: yet the answer to that Question, and to all the other thirty-two
Questions, were drawn up by Mr. Mader, and neither drawn up nor sent by me,
nor (for ought I know) by the other Elders here, though published by one of our
Elders there. Howsoever, the substance of that Answer (not which Mr. Williams
rehearses, but which Mr. Mader returned) does generally suite with all our
minds, as I conceive.

2. In particular; The Answer which our reverend and beloved brother Mr. Mader
did return unto that Question, I have read it, and did readily approve it (as
I do the substance of all his Answers) to be judicious, and solid. But this I
must needs profess, that his Answer to this Question is notoriously slandered,
and abused by the Examiner.

For 1. There is no word at all in that Answer, that denies permission to such
godly persons to live and breath in the same air of the Commonwealth. Let the
Answer be perused; It is too long for me to transcribe; the Book is publicly
extant, and obvious: and see if there be a syllable sounding that way.

2. In that Answer he distinguishes (out of Mr. Cartwright, and Mr. Parker)
touching matters of Church Discipline, and makes some to be the substantial
and immutable, others of a more accidental and circumstantiall nature.

In the former, he doubts not but that we and all the godly Ministers in
England should accord (if they were here;) as believing, that either we should
satisfy them in our way, or they us in theirs; so as there would never be
Question, whether we should embrace one another as Sister-Churches.

In the latter, to wit, in matters circumstantiall, we are all taught of God,
Placide far aliud sentientes.

3. When the Examiner makes it his own case, not to be permitted to live and
breath in the same air and Commonwealth, though Mr. Cotton, and others, most
incensed, gave him a testimony of godliness, etc.

Let him be pleased to look back, to what has been formerly laid open, and he
will find this Instance of himself wholly impertinent. For the casting of him
out of the Commonwealth, sprung not from his difference in matters of Church
Discipline. It was well known that whilst he lived at Salem, he neither
admitted, nor permitted any Church Members, but such as rejected all Communion
with the Parish Assemblies, so much as in hearing of the Word amongst them. And
this liberty he did use and might have used to this day, without any
disturbance to his Civil or Church-Peace, (save only in a way of brotherly
disquisition;) but it was his Doctrines and Practices which tended to the
Civil disturbance of the Commonwealth, together with his heady and busy
pursuit of the same, even to the rejection of all Churches here. These they
were that made him unfit for enjoying Communion either in the one state, or in
the other. When he reckons me, and me only by name, (as one of the most
incensed against him) I reckon it as one of his usual exorbitant Hyperboles:
unless by Incensed, he mean one that with some others, were most kindled, and
stirred up to endeavor his satisfaction. And then his term Incensed, though
it be not an Hyperbole, yet it is an Acurology.

Neither do I remember, that he has any cause to say, that I gave him a
Testimony of godliness.

For his godliness, I leave it to him who is the searcher of hearts: I neither
attested it, nor denied it.

Every brother in the Church, though he may be called a brother in Christ, as
Christ is the Head of the visible Church: and being cast out of the Church,
though he may be admonished as a Brother, and so have some reference still to
Christ, yet godliness requiteth a Participation of the Divine Nature, (I
speak in Peter's sense, 2 Pet. 1.4.) by the power of the Spirit of Grace,
conforming us to fellowship with Christ, and his Churches: the which things
have not so evidently appeared to me, (I speak it with grief) either in his
spirit, or in his way these many years. And yet I deny not, others may
discern more Power of Godliness in him, then I do, and may speak of him
accordingly. But it was no uncharitable speech of Paul, to tell the Galatians,
and that before all the Churches, that he stood in fear of them, Gal. 4.10.
The life of faith (from whence springs both the truth, and the Power of
Godliness) is very repugnant to Self-fulnesse, (...); Faith emptieth a man of
self-confidence, and makes him apt to acknowledge with Agur, Truly I am more
foolish then any man, Prove. 30.2. But the Lord help us to tremble before him:
If he leave us (though but a while) to our selves, we can soon learn to
reign as Kings, (like the Corinthians) without Church Officers, or the
Ordinances of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.8.

TO CHAP. XII.
HIs 12th Chapter is taken up in Examining and Answering a speech of mine, That
godly persons are not so enthralled to Antichrist, as to separate from Christ:
Else they could not be godly persons.

His Answer is, That this comes not near the Question, which is not
concernign personal godliness, or Grace in Christ, but the godliness or
Christianity of worship.

Whereupon he distinguishes of Christ, as considered two ways: 1. Personally,
as God-man, etc. 2. As Head of his Church. In the former sense (he
acknowledges) they cannot be so enthralled to Antichrist, as to be separate
from Christ: in the latter they may.

Reply. This distinction of Christ is inconveniently expressed, as was the like
once before. For the membra dividentia, the parts of the division are
coincident. Christ as God-man is the Head of the visible Church. But his
meaning I apprehend, and accept. Christ God-man is Head both of the invisible
Church, and of the visible; As he is Head of the invisible Church, so he is
received by faith: As he is head of the visible, so he is received by
profession of the true faith, both of the grace of faith, and of the Doctrine
of faith. The proper fruit whereof is holy worship, and professed subjection to
the Rule of the Gospel.

Now for his application of his Distinction, in the general I do approve it,
and do willingly acknowledge, that a godly person may be (through ignorance,
or negligence) so far enthralled to Antichrist, as to be separate from
Christ, taking Christ as Head of the visible Church. For he may fall into such
fundamental Antichristian corruption, in Doctrine, or Worship, or Government,
as either may justly prevent his admission into the Church, or being in the
Church, and yet (through pang of Temptation) continuing obstinate in his
corruption after conviction, he may justly be excommunicate out of the Church.
But lest I may seem to hover (and so to vanish) in Generalities, whilst I
only speak of Antichristian corruptions in general: I shall willingly
Instance in some Particulars, which may give light to others of like nature. It
is an Antichristian corruption in Doctrine, to accept any Propitiatory
Sacrifices for our reconciliation, but the death of Christ only.

It is a like corruption, to look for Justification from sin in the sight of
God by our own works.

It is an Antichristian corruption in worship, to worship Angels, or Saints, or
Images.

It is an Antichristian corruption in Government, to take the Pope to be the
Head of the Church: and such an Head as has Power to make Laws to bind the
Conscience, to authorize Scripture to be Canonical, to add other Books to
Scripture with like Authority, to be himself the only Authentical
Interpreter of Scripture, and Judge of Controversies.

These and the like corruptions are such as make Antichrist a Son of
Perdition, and them that are led by him to fall into like Perdition with him.
Of one of these Points Paul says, They that hold it, hold not the Head, Col.
2.18, 19. Of another of these Paul says, They that hold it are abolished from
Christ, Gal. 5.4. The like we may say of all the rest. Yet in times of former
darkness, some of the faithful members of Christ, might and were for a time
entangled with a yoke of Bondage, in some, or most, or all of these
Particulars: out of which the Lord at length rescued them by variety of
Temptations, and by some breaking forth of light in the mouths of some of his
witnesses in every age.

But whilst any of them walked in these, or like corruptions, they might
justly be debarred from admission into Church Fellowship: or standing fast in
them after conviction, they might justly be cast forth out of Church Fellowship.

But there be other corruptions, and Antichristian corruptions too, which
because they do not subvert the Foundation, neither of faith, nor of
Church Order, I would not say that they separate from Christ, no not as he is
the Head of the visible Church. For then if some whole Church were leavened
with them, they might soon cease to be a Church. But we see the contrary in
Scripture, the High Places were tolerated in Judah, and yet Judah ceased not to
be a Church: And by like proportion some more high and eminent Power may be
given by some Churches to their Officers, (according to an Antichristian
Pattern in some measure) and yet they not cease to be a Church. David and all
the Congregation of Israel might bring up the Ark of God in a Cart, (after the
manner of the Philistims) and yet not disanull their Church Estate: And by like
proportion, so may a Church of Christ take up some orders, (as the carting of
some part of their worship upon a Book) after the manner of Antichrist, and yet
not forthwith evacuate their Church Estate.

But this let me further add, that a godly person may have some kind of
communion, so far as hearing the word from a Minister well gifted by Christ,
to whose calling some corruption may cleave, both in his Church Estate, and in
his Ordination: And yet nevertheless, no Antichristian Pollution at all may
cleave or redound to the hearer by his hearing of him. And this being the
Principal Exception which the Examiner takes against some of the members of our
churches, and against all the churches for their sakes, we shall further (God
willing) clear when the Examiner puts it upon us in the sequel. Mean
while, we profess as we do believe, that such an action is not any
Church-co^munion with Antichrist, nor does so enthrall the People of God unto
Antichrist, as to separate them from Christ, no not as he is Head of the
visible Church.

The Answer which (upon occasio of this Point) the Examiner gives to the
Papists Question, (Where was your Church before Luther?) though it seem to him
well and good: yet it gratifieth the Papists, and straitneth the holy Counsel
of God in Scripture. The Question, says he, is thus well answered, to wit,
That since the Apostasy of Antichrist, Truth, and the holy City, (according
to the Prophecy, Rev. 11. and 13.) have been trodden under-foot, and the whole
Earth has wandered after the Beast; yet God has stirred up witnesses to
Prophecy in sackcloth against the Beast, during his 42 months Reign.
Nevertheless, these witnesses have in their times more or less submitted to
Antichrist, and his Church, Worship, Ministry, etc. And so consequently have
been ignorant of the true Church, that is, Christ taken for the Church in the
true Profession of that holy way of worship, which he himself at first
appointed. This Answer gives away the cause to the Papists. They demand, Where
was your Church before Luther? This Answer gives it for granted, that since
the Apostasy there was no particular church extant in the world. This fully
satisfies their desire, and expectation: for if there were no Church of Christ
in the world, for so many Centuries of years till Luther, then they readily
conclude, That their Church of Rome was (before Luther) the only Church in the
world. For they urge it, (and I know not how we can fairly deny it) that the
Church of Christ, even that Church to which the keys of the kingdom are
committed, (which is the visible Church) is that against which the Gates of
Hell shall not be able to prevail, and so not all the Power of Antichrist. If
then the visible Church of Christ shall never cease, and yet during all that
time of the Apostasy of Antichrist, no Church was extant in the world, but the
Church of Rome, then during all that time (which is not yet expired) the Church
of Rome is, and has been the only Church of Christ these many ages. Besides,
as this Answerer gratifieth the Papist, and makes the promise of Christ ( Mat.
16.18, 19,) of none effect: so it straitneth the Counsel of God in the very
Texts of Scripture alleged by himself. For in that Text ( Rev. 11.) where the
outward Court is given to the Gentiles, (that is, Ecclesiastical Courts, given
to Antichrist and his Clergy) v. 2. There also a rod or reed is given by the
Angel unto John, to measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that
worship therein, v. 1. Which evidently holds forth that even then there was
somewhere extant the Temple, that is, the visible Church of Christ, which had
communion with Christ as Head of the Church, there called The Altar, and the
Temple, was furnished with true worshippers, and all measured according to the
Pattern of Apostolical Rule. What if Ecclesiastical Stories be deficient in
telling us the times and places of their Church Assemblies? Is therefore the
Word of God deficient, or the Church deficient, because humane Stories are
deficient? Great has been the industry and vigilance of Satan and Antichrist,
to blot out (as much as in them lay) all Monuments and Records of such holy
Assemblies: but yet sometimes their own Inquisitors confess, that the Churches
of the Waldenses, or men of that way, have been extant a tempore Apostolorum.

Furthermore, evident it is, that when the Dragon persecuted the woman, (that
is, the Church) the Church fled into the Wilderness, and was there nourished for
a time, and times, and half a time, (Rev. 12.14.) which is all the time,
wherein the Beast reigned, Rev. 13.5. And wherein the Gentiles, having obtained
Rule in the Court, trod down the holy City under-foote, Rev. 11.2.

Moreover, evident also it is, that all the Angels (or Ministers) of Gods wrath
that poured out their Vialls upon the Antichristian State, did all of them
issue forth out of the Temple, and out of the Temple as then opened, Rev. 15.5,
6* Which argues that the Temple or Church was not only then visible, but
openly visible: not visible only to the secret Assembly of the true
worshippers, but openly conspicuous to them that had not seen it before. Now
how all those seven Angels should come out of the Temple, and it openly
visible, and all of them pour out their Vialls upon the Antichristian State by
seven Degrees, to the utter desolation of it: and yet no Church extant, either
before Luther, or since Luther, till the utter extirpation of Antichrist,
passes all my comprehension.

TO CHAP. XIII.
HIs 13th Chapter is taken up in Examining and Answering a second Answer, which
I gave to his Objection propounded above in Chap. 10. The Answer was this, as
he sets it down.

Secondly, we deny that it is necessary to Church Fellowship, (that is so
necessary, that without it a Church cannot be) That the members admitted
thereunto, should all of them see, and expressly bewail all the pollutions
which they have been defiled with in their former Church Fellowship, Ministry
worship, Government, etc. If they see and bewail so much of their former
pollutions, as did enthrall them to Antichrist, so, as to separate them from
Christ: and withal be ready in preparation of heart, as they shall see more
light, so to hate more and more every false way. This we conceive to be as
much, as is necessarily required to separate them from Antichrist unto
fellowship with Christ, and his Churches, etc.

For Answer hereunto, the Examiner desires three things to be observed:

1. Mr. Cottons own Confession of that twofold Church Estate, worship, etc.
The former false: or else why to be so bewailed and forsaken? The second true,
to be embraced and submitted to.

Reply. This observation is more then is intended, or can justly be gathered
from my words: For even a true Estate of a Church, Worship, Ministry, etc. may
be bewailed, though not in regard of the falsehood of the estate, yet in regard
of the pollutions that cleaved to it, which were as so many false ways in the
Administration of it.

2. The second thing, which he would have to be observed, is my own confession
of that which a little before I would make so odious in him to hold, to wit,
That Gods People may be so far enthralled to Antichrist, as to separate them
from Christ. For these were my words; If they see and bewail so much of their
former pollutions, as did enthrall them to Antichrist, so as to separate them
from Christ.

Reply. 1. His expressions of himself in that Point were so incommodious, as
that a plain Reader, (such as my self, unwonted to hear such language, in
his sense) could not easily conceive, that he speaking of godly persons, no
less unfit for Church Fellowship, then Trees and Quarries unfit for a Building.

I say, I could not easily conceive, that by Trees and Quarries should be meant
any other persons then unregenerate: and it seemed to me, to imply a
contradiction, to call them ungodly, who were unregenerate.

Reply. 2. The Examiner wrongeth himself and me, to say, That I would have
made it odious in him, to say that godly persons cannot be so enthralled to
Antichrist, as to-separate them from Christ. The odiousness he speaks of is
a contradiction: And it was himself, not I, that forged that contradiction, as
has been showed above.

Reply. 3. My words out of which he gathers this observation, are
misreported: and the contradiction arises from his misreport, not from my
words. For Gods People, and godly persons are not all one. Any Church Members
may be called Gods People, as being in external Covenant with him, ( Psalm.
81.11.) and yet they are not always godly persons. Gods People may be so
enthralled to Antichrist, as to separate them utterly from Christ, both as Head
of the visible, and invisible Church also. But godly persons cannot be so
enthralled to Antichrist, as to separate them from Christ, as the Head of the
invisible Church: though, as I said before, they may be separated from him, as
the Head of the visible Church.

3. The third thing which the Examinen would have to be observed in my words,
is, How easily a soul may wander in his generals: for thus I write, though
they see not all the pollutions, wherewith they have been defiled in their
former Church Fellowship: Again, if they did see so much as did enthrall them
to Antichrist, and separate them from Christ. And yet (says he) he expresses
nothing of that, all the pollutions, nor what so much is, as will separate them
from Christ.

Reply. 1. Though these words might seem general to a stranger, who knew
nothing of the occasion of them: yet to the Examiner himself, (to whom in
private I writ them) it was easy and obvious to point with the finger, at the
particular I intended in these. He knows the Question was; Whether the
hearing of the Ministers of the Parishes in England, was such an Antichristian
pollution, as either to cut off such persons from Church Fellowship, or the
Churches themselves from Christ. Our Answer was; 1. That it was no
Antichristian pollution at all: 2. If it were, it was more then either our
members, or our Churches yet saw, or were convinced of: and then general
confessions, and general repentance would serve for unknown known sins. To
the same purpose, is this general Answer framed here: which himself well
knows upon what particular occasion it grew, and to what particular case it
had reference.

Reply. 2. Besides, why should we count the Answer as wandering in Generalities,
when it was fitted to his general Objection? His Objection was Chapt. 10. That
a necessity lay upon, godly men, before they can be fit matter for Church
fellowship, to see, bewail, repent, come out of the false Churches, Worship,
Ministry, Government.

Now here are only general words: no particular mention of the falsehoods that
lie in the Churches, Worship, Ministry, Government. Why should he blame
wandering in Generality in the Answer, when his own Objection wandereth in the
like Generalities.

Reply. 3. If he please to look back to the Reply given in his 12. Chapter, he
may find me plain and punctual in Instancing in particulars. But thus having
passed over his Observations upon my former Answer, he now comes to return
Answer to me, by demanding a Question or two, to wit, 1. Whether if a godly
person remain a member of a salsely constituted Church, and so consequently
(in that respect) of a false Christ, whether in visible worship he be not
separate from the true Christ?

Answ. That I may not delude neither him, nor my self, by answering to obscure
and ambiguous terms, I would know (by some that understand his speech) what he
means by a falsely constituted Church: or else give me leave to explain the
terms my self. There be but two things intrinsecally necessary to the
constitution of any thing, and so of a Church, to wit, a fit matter, and a fit
form. The matter of a Church are visible Saints, Pro^essors of the faith of
Christ. The form, is an holy Covenant, or Agreement, (either explicit or
implicit) to join together in one Congregation, to worship the Lord, and to
edify one another in the Administration of his holy Ordinances. Now if in
stead of visible Saints professing the Name of Christ, there be a company of
profane persons, Idolaters, Heretics, that shall covenant, or agree together
to join in a Congregation to worship Idols, and to build up one another in
Heresy, and Apostasy; This is Ecclesia Malignantium, a false constituted
Church: And consequently, the Head of this Church is a false Christ, and every
member of this Church, who joyneth with them in this way, is in visible
worship, separate from the true Christ.

In this sense, I would answer to the Examiners first Question, Affirmatively.

His second Question then is, Whether it be not absolutely necessary to a godly
persons uniting with the true Church, (that is, with Christ in true Christian
worship) that he see and bewail, and absolutely come out from that former
false Church, or Christ, and his Ministry, Worship, etc. before he can be
united to the true Israel?

Answ. I would readily answer this Question, Affirmatively also, unless there
be a fallacy in the latter absolutely. For his Question is, Whether it be not
absolutely necessary unto uniting with a true Church, to see, and bewail, and
come out absolutely from the false Church, or Christ, or Ministry, or Worship,
etc. This latter absolutely, if it imply no more then coming out altogether
from all that separateth from true Christ, I grant it absolutely: but if he
mean coming out from every thing of theirs, say from every good gift, yea from
every error amongst them, which does not separate from Christ, and then I deny
that it is absolutely necessary, either to see or bewail all, or in that sense
absolutely to come out of all.

His similitudes brought to the contrary, may persuade a selfe-pleasing fancy,
but will not convince nor satissie any solid Judgment. Might not the
Israelites that came out of Egypt, borrow Jewels of silver and gold from the
Egyptians, yea and carry up also a mixed multitude of People, and yet build a
Tabernacle to the Lord in the Wilderness? Exodus 12.35. to 38. Might not the
Jews come out of Babel, and accept from all the People, where they had
sojourned, vessels of silver, and gold, with goods and beasts, and other
precious things, and yet build a Temple at Jerusalem? Ezra 1.4, 5, 6. May not
a soul be married to Christ, and yet his former husband (his corrupt nature)
not be so absolutely dead, as the husband of a wife must be, before she can be
lawfully married to another?

The Graft cut off from one tree, may be engrafted to another: and yet carry
forth his old leaves with him. The kingdom of Christ that is cut off from the
Roman Monarchy, may yet for a time have some intercourse with the Roman
Monarchy.

The Corinthians, though united with Christ, and washed from their former
Idolatry, as well as from other sins: yet still were defiled with communion
in Idols Temples, and with Fornication.

The Thessalonians turned from their former Idols, to serve the living and
true God: yet they had some amongst them, that walked inordinately after their
entrance into Church Estate, as well as before, 2 These. 3.6. Besides, for a
further answer to his similitudes, the Examiner may remember, that though
Israel came out of Egypt locally, before they could sacrifice to God in the
Wilderness, yet in their hearts and souls they were still for Egypt, Exodus
14.11, 12. Yea and for Egyptian Idols, Act. 7.39. Ezekiel. 20.7, 8. which is
more then we do allow to our selves.

TO CHAP. XIV.
HIs 14th Chapter is spent in Examining and answering a Reason that I gave of
my second Answer to his Objection, which was propounded and cleared in the
former Chapter. The Reason was this. The Church of Christ received many
thousand Jews, who believed on the Name of Christ, although they were still
zealous of the Law, and saw not the beggarly emptiness of Moses his
Ceremonies, Act. 21.20. And the Apostle Paul directs the Romans to receive
such unto them, as were weak in the faith, and saw not their liberty from the
servile difference of Meats and Days, but still lay under the bondage of the
Law. Yea he wished them to receive such upon this ground, because Christ had
received them, Romans 14.1. to 6. And lest it should be objected, there was not
the like danger of lying under bondage to Moses, as to Antichrist; It was said,
that even the bondage under Moses was such, as that if it were continued in,
after instruction and conviction, it would separate them from Christ, (Gal.
5.2.) and bondage under Antichrist could do no more.

For Answer hereto, the Examiner would have two things to be carefully minded:

1. That the Ordinances of Moses were sometimes the Ordinances of God: and when
they were to vanish, they were to be taken away with solemnity. The Ordinances
of Antichrist were the Inventions of Satan, and from first to last never to be
received, nor submitted to, no not for a moment.

2. He would have the difference of times to be observed, (which says he, Mr.
Cotton himself confesses) after instruction and conviction, Moses Law was
deadly, and would separate from Christ. Therefore there was a time, when they
were not deadly, and did not separate from Christ, to wit, until Moses was
honorably fallen asleep, etc. To apply then, Paul observed a vow, and the
Ceremonies of it, Circumcised Timothy, etc. May therefore a Messenger of Christ
now (as Paul) go to Mass, Pray to Saints, perform Penance, keep
Christmasse, and other Popish Feasts, and Fasts? etc.

Reply. 1. I never heard or read till now, that Paul ever went to Mass, Prayed
to Saints, kept Christmasse, or the like: nor did I ever imagine, that any
ingenuous mind would think that ever it came into my heart to plead for such
things now, or for the retaining of any Popish Rite at all. But the wit and lip
of man being let loose, and left to it self, may infer quodlibet ex quolibet.

If it be said, his Parenthesis (as Paul) had reference only to a Messenger of
Christ, (as Paul) not to any such like act of Paul, then his Argument is no
more conclusive then a Baculo ad Angulum. What color were there that any man
now should plead Paul's example, to do that now, which Paul never did, nor any
thing like it?

Reply. 2. The Examiner requires two things here to be carefully minded: In
answer whereto, I desire but one thing to be carefully minded: to wit, to what
end, I alleged the ignorance of the Jews in the Primitive times, and the
indulgence of the Christian Churches, for receiving them into
Church Fellowship, notwithstanding such ignorance: And then see, if it do not
infer that which I brought it for.

If in the Primitive times, the ignorance of the Jews in many weighty Points
of Religion, and some of them fundamental, did not hinder their receiving into
Christian Church Fellowship, nor disanull their Church Estate (who so received
them) then it is not so necessary to Church Fellowship, as that without it a
Church cannot be, that the Members admitted thereunto, should all of them see
and expressly bewail, all the pollutions, wherewith they have been defiled in
their former Church Fellowship, Ministry, Worship, Government, etc. But the
former is true, as has been opened from Acts 21.20. Romans 14.1. to 6. Gal. 5.2.
To which may be added, Acts 15.5. with 24. Where it appears some of the
members of the Church and of the Synod, held forth such Doctrine and Worship,
touching the necessity of Circumcision, and observation of the Law, as tended
to the subversion of souls: and yet neither their membership, nor the Estate
of the Church was thereby disanulled.

The Conclusion is evident from these Premises.

It is a vain thing now to allege, that the Ordinances of Moses were
sometimes the Ordinances of God, but so the inventions of Antichrist never
were: and there is not the like honorable respect and tenderness to be showed
to the inventions of Antichrist, as to the vanishing Ordinances of God; For
though this were of weight, in case I had pleaded for the practice of any
Antichristian inventions, (which indeed was far off, both from my meaning and
words:) yet in this case it is wholly impertinent. For that which I pleaded
for, was, the capablenesse of godly Persons of Church Estate, notwithstanding
their ignorance of some weighty and necessary truths: and the soundness of
their Church Estate, notwithstanding their admission and toleration of such
ignorant members: unto which the difference of the several objects of their
ignorance makes nothing at all. For the ignorance of weighty Truths (of one
sort as well as another) necessary to salvation, is a sin of like destructive
nature, of what kind soever the Truths be.

Besides, there is no need, either for the clearing of our members, or of our
Church Estate, to plead for the capablenesse of godly persons of Church Estate,
notwithstanding their ignorance of the Truths of God, whether more or less
necessary: For we do not look at it as any point of ignorance at all, for our
members to believe, they may partake in the gifts of the godly Ministers in
England, in hearing the word of God from them. I know the Examiner is vehement
and peremptory in pleading for an absolute necessity, that godly persons
before they do join to a true Church, and Ministry, should see and bewail
so much as may amount to cut off the soul from a false Church, (whether
National, Parishionall, or any other falsely constituted Church) Ministry,
Worship, and Government of it.

But the voice of God is not always in every vehement and mighty wind, that
rendeth mountains, and breaks rocks, 1 Kings 19.11. The Examiner is not
ignorant, that we have seen, and bewailed National, and Parishionall
Church Estate, and have cut off our selves (by the Grace of Christ) from any
invented worship or government of it: yea and from such entrance into the
Ministry or Administration of it, as was corrupt either by National or
Parishionall Relation. But this is that which he requires further, (He I say,
but not the Lord) that we should cut off our selves from hearing the Ministry
of the Parishes in England, as being the Ministry of a National, or
Parishionall Church, whereof both the Church Estate is falsely constituted, and
all the Ministry, Worship, and Government thereof false also.

But two things here may suffice to answer this clamor.

1. Suppose all this were true, that he clamoureth, but prooveth not: yet this
would I feign learn, wherein lies the sin of our members in hearing the
godly Ministers in the Parishes? Why, says he, in that they do not cut off
themselves from a false Ministry.

Now by the Ministry may be meant, either the office of the Ministry, or the
exercise of the office, and gifts of the Ministry. From the office, and from
the exercise of the office, our members have cut off themselves, partly by
submitting themselves to a Ministry of their own Election in these Churches,
and partly by submitting themselves to no act of their Ministerial office in
England, but what an Indian, or any Pagan might partake in, who yet is cut off
far enough from fellowship in their office.

Cutting off, is an act of disunion, and somewhat more violent, and keen, then
(it may be) the Examiner requires. The sin he charge upon our members in
hearing such Ministers, is union, or communion with them. And what shall we
say, is there no Communion between our members, and the Ministers in England,
whom they do hear?

Yes doubtless: For 1. There is a natural communion between the speaker and
the hearer: the one gives counsel, or instruction, or reproof, or comfort;
and the other receives it.

2. There is a moral Communion between a Teacher and a learner: and
doubtless, our hearers may learn many precious Truths from them.

3. What shall I say further; Is there not also a spiritual Communion between
the Preacher and the Hearer, when the Preacher communicates many spiritual
and heavenly Points, and the Hearer receives them?

Answ. 1. Some would say; It is not necessary, that this should breed a
spiritual Communion between the Preacher and the Hearer: No more then it
makes a Mathematical Communion between a reader of the Mathematics, and the
learner of some Principles, or Conclusions from him.

But 2. I would rather answer otherwise. For suppose a member of our Churches,
though a visible Saint here, yet indeed an hypocrite, should occasionally hear
a Minister in England, and by the Power of the Spirit of Grace breathing in his
Ministry, be effectually brought home to Christ, and by lively faith united to
him: Here is a spiritual Relation and Communion wrought between them: the one
is a spiritual Father; the other a natural Son in the Faith.

Nevertheless, this I would say, that this spiritual Communion is not between
this Hearer and this Minister, in respect of his Office, but in respect of his
Gifts, and of the Power of the Spirit of Grace breathing in the dispensation of
his Gifts. In which respect this Communion does not amount to Church Communion:
Any stranger might enjoy as much. Any Pagan Corinthian might come in, and hear
in the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. and reap a blessing thereby, who
yet had not Ecclesiastical Communion with their Office. Also the Prophet
Jeremy heard the false Prophet Hanani, yea (and in some sense) said Amen to his
Prophecy: yet had he no communion with his false Office, Jer. 28.1. to 6. If he
still urge, that we have not yet cut off our selves from communion, no not with
the false office of the Ministry of England, and with their false
Church Estate, in as much as we still retain their Baptism, wherein we
subjected our selves to their Office, and to their Church Estate, (which are
both false:) as well as their Worship, and their Government.

Answ. This is a further Objection, then he held forth whilst he continued
with us: and therefore no marvel, if my Letter spoke nothing to it. But
therefore let me now propound another Point, which may suffice both for an
Answer to this Objection, as also for a second Answer unto the former clamor,
and exception against hearing of the godly Ministers in England. The Point is
this; That I do not see, how the Examiner can justify his grievous charge,
that their Church is falsely constituted, (whether National or Parishionall)
and accordingly, that their Ministry, Worship, and Government are all of them
false. Four things he charge to be false. 1. Their Church constitution,
Parishionall and National. 2. Their Ministers. 3. Their Worship. 4. Their
Government.

For the first, touching the constitution of their Parishionall Churches, let
it be considered what I said before, that where there be visible Saints, there
is the true matter of the Church; and where there is a Covenant or Agreement
(whether explicit or implicit) to assemble together in one Congregation, to
worship the Lord, and to edify one another in the Ordinances of Christ, there
is (for substance) the true form of a Church. And where there is the true
matter, and true form of a Church, it cannot be truly said, that such a
Church is falsely constituted. For there being but two causes of which a thing
is constituted, matter and form: whatsoever has true matter, and true form,
is truly constituted.

Against this, what he will accept I do not know: and therefore know not how
to prevent him with a fit and just defense. But by others, two things are wont
to be objected.

Object. 1. From the matter of the Church. Object. 2. From the efficient cause
of the Church.

From the matter of the Church, it is objected, that there be not only visible
Saints in the English Parishes, but with them are mingled many ignorant, and
scandalous persons, drunkards, whoremongers, despisers and persecutors of them
that are good, Profane swearers, that have not so much as a form of
godliness, but do utterly deny and deride the power of it.

Answ. This is indeed just matter of mourning and lamentation to all the Saints
of Christ, and may be also (in due order) just warrant of some degree of
separation from them, as from a corrupt Church. It cannot but offend and deeply
grieve the spirit of a Christian, to sit down at the Lords Table, and drink
the blood of the Lord with such, who may be ready the next day to spill the
blood of sincere Communicants as Puritan Roundheads.

But whilst the Saints of Christ continue amongst them, the mixed fellowship of
ignorant and profane persons does not evacuate or disanull their Church
estate. The store of malignant and noisome humors in the body, yea the
deadness and rottenness of many members in the body, though they may make the
body an unsound and corrupt body, yet they do not make the body no body. When
the Prophet Isaiah complained, that in the Church of Judah, from the soale of
the foot to the crown of the head, there was no soundness in it, but wounds,
and bruises, and putrefying sores; yet whilst there was a Remnant amongst them
of faithful Saints, they were not yet no Church, they were not yet Sodom and
Gomorrha, though but for that Remnant, they had been as Sodom, and like unto
Gomorrha, Isa. 1.6. with 9. Say not though Jerusalem and Judah were at that
time degenerate, yet they had been at first an holy Nation, a faithful City,
( Isa. 1.21.) and so had a true constitution: which the Churches of England
never had.

For 1. I might answer, That though in regard of some prime members, Jerusalem
was counted a faithful City, and the Nation Holy, by Privilege of their
Covenant: yet for the body of the people, Jerusalem was always a City of the
provocation of Gods wrath from the day they built it, Jer. 32.31, 32. And for
the body of the Nation, Moses charged them; Ye have always been rebellious
against the Lord, since the day that I knew you, Deuteronomy. 9.7.24. And Stephen
protests against them; They had always wont to resist the Holy Ghost, they
and their fathers, Act. 7.51.

2. I do not understand, but that (according to Scripture) those corruptions
which do not destroy a Church constituted, the same do not destroy the
constitution of a Church. The Church is constituted, and continued by the same
Grace.

3. The estate of the Churches of England was not corrupt in their first
constitution. Baronius himself confesses, that England received the Gospel
ten years before Rome; and that from the Ministry of the Apostles, and
Apostolic men: who doubtless constituted the English Churches:) not after the
manner of Rome, (which was then Pagan;) but after the Apostolic Rules and
Patterns.

This may suffice touching the matter of the English Churches. Now touching the
second thing objected, which was from the efficient cause of their
constitution; It is said, they were gathered not by the preaching of the
Gospel, (by which Churches should be planted and constituted) but by the
Proclamation of Princes.

Answ. 1. The efficient cause of a Church is a thing without the Church, and so
no essential cause of the Constitution of a Church. The Proclamation of King
Hezekiah, and of the Princes, drew on multitudes of Apostate Israelites to the
Communion of the Church at Jerusalem, and many of them in much pollution: yet
neither their own pollution, nor the Proclamation of the King and Princes did
evacuate their Church Estate, but encourage them rather in their Church-worke,
2 Chronicles. 30.5. to 9. and verses 11, 12.17, 18, 19, 20. It was no pollution to
the second Temple at Jerusalem, that it was built by the encouragement of the
Proclamation of Cyrus, Ezra 1.

Answ. 2. Wheresoever there be visible Saints gathered into a Church, they were
first gathered by the Ministry of the Gospel. For Proclamations cannot make
Saints, but the word of the Gospel only. If any hypocrites, or time-servers,
do for fear join themselves with the Saints in such a work; though their
fellowship may weaken and blemish the work, yet it does not destroy it.

Thus much touching the constitution of their Parishionall Churches: Now
touching their National Constitution, it stands partly in their National
Officers, Archbishops, Bishops, and their Servitors; partly, in their National
Synods and convocations; and partly also in their National Ecclesiastical
Courts.

The Examiner is not ignorant, that (by the Grace of Christ) we have withdrawn
our selves, and our Churches also from this National Constitution, and from
all Communion with them.

If it be said; But we still keep Communion with the Parish-Churches, (in
hearing the Word there) who do subject themselves to these National Officers,
Convocations, and Courts.

Answ. 1. Though the Parish-Churches were lately subject to them, it was a
burden (which as they did discern the iniquity thereof) they groaned under,
and now by the mighty Power of the gracious Redemption of the Lord Jesus, they
have shaken off through the help of the Honorable, and Religious Prudence and
Piety of the Parliament.

2. Though those National Courts in their Officers, did for many years tread
down the Parish-Churches, yet they did not extinguish their Church Estate. The
Text is plain, The Gentiles (that is, men of Gentile-like profaneness, and
malignitie, and iniquity, who had the keeping of the Church-Courts) they did
tread down the Holy City, Rev. 11.2. Tread down (I say) but not destroy the
Holy City. Yea though the Translation read it, They did tread it down, or,
Tread it under-foote: yet the Original word may be rendered somewhat more
mildly: (...), may express their walking upon it, or else the Peripateticks
were a more violent sect then either their Principles, or their Practice did
declare them.

I come now to speak of the second Falsehood, which the Examiner charge upon
the English Churches, which was the falsenesse of their Ministry: which
wherein it lies, he should have done well to have told us: for himself
disliketh it in me, to wander in Generalities.

But for our selves, we are far from that supercilious, and Pharisaicall
arrogance, as to condemn such for false Ministers, in whom we find Truth of
Godliness, Truth of Ministerial Gifts, Truth of Election and acceptance unto
Office by true Churches of Christ, Truth of sound, and wholesome, and
soule-saving Doctrine, and Truth of holy and exemplary Conversation. And such
are all the Ministers whom either the members of our Churches affect to Hear,
or our Churches do allow them ordinarily for to Hear. And when I say Truth, I
speak it not in opposition to Eminency, (for sundry of them excel in Eminency
of sundry of these things:) but in opposition to the falsehood which the
Examiner objecteth.

I know not what exception lies against their Ministry, to argue it of
falsehood, (save what has been excepted and answered already touching the
constitution of their Parishionall Churches) but only the falsenesse of the
Power from whence their Ministry is derived, to wit, from Episcopal
Ordination.

But the Examiner is much mistaken, if he take us to conceive, or if he
himself conceive, that the Power of the Ministerial calling is derived from
Ordination, whether Episcopal or Presbyteriall, or Congregationall. The Power
of the Ministerial Calling is derived chiefly from Christ, furnishing his
servants with Gifts fit for the Calling; and nextly, from the Church, (or
Congregation) who observing such whom the Lord has gifted, do elect and call
them forth to come and help them. For from that ground, Paul and Silas (to use
the words of the Text) assuredly gathered that the Lord had called them to
preach the Gospel to the Macedonians, Acts 16.9, 10. to wit, because a man of
Macedonia (in the name of the rest) had called unto them to come into Macedonia
and help them. Pastor and flock are Relatives: and Relatives do consist ex
mutua alterius affectione, Their mutual acceptance of one another is the
essential cause of their Relation. Ordination is but adjunctum consummans (as
Dr. Ames rightly observes) of the Ministers Calling: the Relation between him
and the people was truly wrought before. As the Coronation of the Prince is not
that which gives the Essency of his Princely Calling, but Election by the
People, (where the Government is Elective:) so neither is Ordination that which
gives Essence to the Ministers Calling, but the peoples choice. Ordination by
Imposition of Episcopal hands, does pollute an Adjunct of the Ministers
calling, (to wit, the solemnity of it:) but does not destroy the essence, or
nature of it, much less derive a false power to it, to evacuate the true.

The third Falsehood, which the Examiner charge upon the
English-Parish-Churches, is the False worship. And truly whatsoever has been
corrupt in their worship, whether Prescript, Liturgies, or undue Honor put
upon Saints or Angels, in denominating Days or Temples after them, and such
times and places dedicated to God, which he never required, and what ever other
Devices of like nature, I had rather bewail before the Lord, then excuse or
justify before men. And I should think it had been a better service to God,
and his Churches, and a greater comfort to the soul of the Examiner, to have
expressed particularly what the false worship had been which he bears
witness against, and to have cleared wherein their falsehood lies, rather then
to have rested in condemning all false worships in overly Generalities: and
especially at such a time when (through mercy) the State is set upon
Reformation, and calls for light. He that shall cry out against all false
ways in Travels by Land, and exclaim against all Rocks and Quicksands by
Sea, and give no particular notice where they lie, what help does he afford to
the careful Passenger or Mariner, either by Land or Sea? When Trumpets give
such an uncertain and obscure sound, who shall prepare themselves to avoid the
danger on the one hand, or on the other?

But for the present, two things would I say, touching the point in hand.

1. It is not every corruption in worship, that denominateth the worship to be
false worship. It was doubtless a corrupt worship to Sacrifice in the High
Places: yet God does not call it a false worship, but rather seems to accept
it, as done to himself, 2 Kings 33.17. False worship (to speak properly) is
as good as no worship: nor is the God of Truth wont to accept that which is
false. But there may be many aberrations in the manner of worship, when yet
both the object of the worship is the true God, and the substance of the
worship is true worship: and God may accept that which is Truth, from an honest
and true heart, and pass by many aberrations, (as infirmities) and not reject
all as falsities.

The second thing I would say, is, That whatsoever we have discerned to be
corrupt, or irregular in the worship of God, we have believed it to be our
duty, both to judge our selves for it before the Lord, and to reform it in our
practice. If any shall discover any further failings in our worship, or in the
worship of those Churches whom we communicate with, I hope the Lord will not
shut our eyes against the light.

The fourth Falsehood, which the Examiner charge upon the English-Churches, is
false Government, which if he mean the Government of the Parishes, by the
godly Ministers, (with whom our people communicate in hearing;) that Government
is chiefly administered by the public Preaching of the Gospel, and by private
admonition. Which he that shall challenge it to be a false Government, (though
it may be defective in some Directions;) verily the spirit of Truth and Grace
in those who are governed and led by it, from darkness to light, from the
Power of Satan unto God, from a state of Grace to assured hopes of eternal
Glory in Christ Jesus, will convince all such slanderous tongues of notorious
falsehood.

But if he speak of the Nationall-Church-Government, we must confess the
Truth, there indeed Truth is fallen, and falsehood has prevailed much. For
whether we speak of the Hands, by which that Government has been administered,
or of the Ecclesiastical Courts, in which it is administered, or of the Rule,
according to which it is administered, or of the End for which it is
administered; All of them are forsaken of Truth, and can challenge no warrant of
Truth but falsely.

The Hands by which that Government has been administered, are the Prelacy, and
their Servitors: who though they have of late challenged Institution by Divine
Right: yet the claim is utterly false. The Divine Authority has none to
attend upon Rule and Government in the Church, but such as are inferior to
Pastors and Teachers in Congregations, who labor in Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy
5.17. Diocesan Bishops in the days of the Gospel, are like Kings in Israel in
the days of the Judges, both of them wanting Divine Institution. What a pity
is it, that some men eminent for Piety and Preaching, and others for learning
and moderation, should come to be (as Jothams Parable speaks) advanced over
their Brethren, and so leave their fatness, and sweetness, and fruitfulness,
wherewith they had been wont to serve both God and man?

The Ecclesiastical Courts in which that Government is administered, are like
the Courts of the High Priests, and Pharisees, which Solomon (by a spirit of
Prophecy) styleth, Dens of Lions, Mountains of Leopards, (Cant. 4.8.) And
those who have had to do with them, have found them Markets of the sins of
the People, the Cages of uncleanness, the forgers of Extortion, the
Tabernacles of Bribery.

The Rule according to which the Government is administered, is not the word of
God, (which alone is able to make a Church-Governour perfect to every good
work, 2 Timothy 1.17.) but in stead thereof the Canon Law, the Decretalls of
Antichrist, and most unworthily and falsely applied to the Government of the
Spouse of Christ.

The End also for which this Government now for many years has been
administered, has not only been contrary to the ends of Church Government,
(which is to order the people in holiness, and love) but even contrary to the
end of Civil Government, which is the punishment of evil doers, and the
praise of them that do well, Romans 9.4. But here the very edge of Government,
has been bent and sharpened chiefly against holiness and purity. No
malefactors so heinous, (drunkards, whoremongers, profane persons) but might
expect the approach of Courts with less terror, and pass from under their
hands, with more favorable Censure then the sheep of Christ, and the
faithful Shepherds of them.

This Government therefore being administered with false Hands, on false
Thrones, by false Rules, for fall Ends, I blame not the Examiner, though he
style it, (as justly he may) a false Government.

But to conclude therefore this 14th Chapter, the Examiner tells us, He
believes it is absolutely necessary to see and bewail so much as may amount
to cut off the soul from a false Church, (whether National, or Parishionall,
or any other falsely constituted Church) together with the Ministry, Worship,
and Government of it.

Now in that which has been spoken, we have given account, how far we have
seen any of these things to be false in the Churches, which his charge has
respect unto. And so far as we have seen, the Lord knows how far we have
bewailed, and cut off our selves from the Fellowship thereof. Yea not only
from the fellowship of that which we discern to be false, but also from what
we have discerned to be unsound and corrupt. If we do not discern all those
things to be false, which he accounts to be false; we have given the grounds
thereof from the Scriptures of Truth. If we do not follow him in all his
imaginations, it is no marvel: The sheep of Christ know the voice of their
Shepherd: a stranger they will not follow. His charges of Falsehood upon
Churches have been vehement, and peremptory, and in a manner sorbonicall,
without any touch of Scripture-grounds, as if he had learned not only from
them, but from the Conclave of Antichrist, to obtrude upon the Churches of
Christ, his unwritten imaginations and censorious Decrees, as the very Oracles
of God.

Proceed we now therefore to his next Chapter, wherein there is some mention of
some Texts of Scripture, and let us see, whether they will speak more to his
purpose in that which remains.

To CHAP. XV.
THe Texts of Scripture which Mr. Williams alleged, not to prove the Churches
of England to be false in their Constitution, Ministry, Worship, Government,
(for to that end he alleges no Scriptures at all) but to urge upon us a
separation from them, (even from hearing in their Assemblies) were three, Isai.
52.11. 2 Cor. 6.17. Rev. 18.4. Whereof I certified him in my Letter, That two
of them (to wit, the first and last) made nothing to his purpose. For that of
Isaiah, and the other of the Revelation speak of local separation, which he
knew we had made: and which neither he, nor indeed our selves apprehended to be
sufficient, though sufficient to answer, in part, the literal sense of those
Places.

To which he answers, That he could not well have believed that Mr. Cotton,
or any other, would have made that coming forth of Babel in the Antitype, Rev.
18.4. to be local and material also. For what Civil State, or Nation, or
Country in the world, in the Antitype could now be called Babel? If any, then
surely Babel it self properly so called: but there we find a true Church of
Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 5. Secondly, If Babel be local now, whence Gods People
are called, then must there be a local Judea, a Land of Canaan also, into
which they are called, etc.

Reply. If the Examiner had been pleased to have read Mr. Brightman on Rev.
18.4. He might find, I was not the first that Interpreted, either that place
in Isaiah, or this in Revelation, of a local separation. For as there was in
old Babel, sundry of Gods Israel, Inhabitants then when the Medes and Persians
were about to take it, and destroy it: so will there be in new Babel sundry of
Gods chosen people still inhabiting amongst them, even then when the ten Kings
will be ready to take the City, and to burn it with fire. Unto whom as the
Lord sent his Angels to hasten Lot out of Sodom, when he was about to destroy
it: so he has sent and will send the voice of his Messengers to hasten his
people, as well out of new Babel, (as he did out of old) before that sudden
destruction fall upon the City, and upon them in it.

He need not make it so strange, What Civil State, or Nation, or Country in
the world shall be called Babel now? As if the very exp^esse letter of the Text
had not clearly enough deciphered the City of Rome, the great City, which in
John's time reigned over the Kings of the Earth, to be the Babylon, (the
Antitype of Babel in Chaldea,) whom the Lord would destroy, and out of whom he
calls his people to depart? Why does he tell us of Babel in Peter, (Babel in
Chaldea,) as if the Type and the Antitype were literally the same place? Or as
if he were altogether a stranger in the Book of the Revelation, and never
understood Rome to be called Babylon?

But secondly, says he, If Babel be local now, then there must be a local
Judea, a Land of Canaan also, into which the Saints are called.

Reply. 1. It follows not; for the Angel that calls them out of Babel, does
not call them into Judea, or Canaan. There is no mention of such places in that
call at all.

2. There be, and will be, when Rome is destroyed, and before it be destroyed,
visible Churches of Christ, (as was Judea and Canaan of old;) into which these
Saints who are called to depart out of Rome, have a just calling to come and to
join themselves. For it is out of the Temple, and out of the Temple open in
Heaven, out of which those Angels come, who power out the vialls of Gods wrath,
both upon the Antichristian State, and upon the City of Babylon it self, Rev.
15.5, 6. with Chap. 16.19.

The Examiner need not here ask, Whether Mr. Cotton can satisfy his own
soul, or the souls of other men, in making a local departure from old
England to New, as if therein we had obeyed that voice of the Angel, Come out
of Babylon my People, partake not of her sins, etc.

For 1. I do not count England, literally to be Babel, nor mystically neither.
I believe a man may live and dye in England, and yet obey that Commandment of
the Angel in all the parts of it. Some other godly men might find more favor
and exemption from Babylonish corruptions in the midst of England, then I was
suffered to do, without local departure.

2. Though I think, that in those words, Come out of Babel my People, local
separation be intended, yet when he adds, Lest ye be partakers (...) her
sins, I believe, spiritual separation is much more required: and local
separation as a means the better to attain that end of spiritual separation
from partaking in her sins.

Which may also clear the meaning of the Text, and the fraud of the Examiner.
For the words are not (as he alleges them) Come out of Babel, my people,
Partake not of her sins: For so the latter part might be an (...), or
explanation of the former: Coming out of Babel, might be all one with, Partake
not of her sins. But the words of the Text be, Come out of her, my People,
that ye be not partaker of her sins. Which plainly argues, that coming out
of Babel locally, is a means to prevent partaking in her sins spiritually.

It is true which he says, The Lord Jesus has broken down all difference of
Places, (Joh. 4.) and all difference of Persons, Acts 10. To wit, in regard of
ceremonial pollution, or ceremonial holiness. But if he think, there is no
difference between one City, or Country more then another in moral
pollutions of Idolatry, and superstition, unrighteousness and uncleanness, he
makes himself a greater stranger both to the Word and to the world, then I
did think he had been.

The two causes of Gods Indignation against England, which he suggesteth, are
worthy due consideration and attention. I would rather say Amen to them, then
weaken the weight of them. Only I should so assent to the latter, as not to
moove for a Toleration of all Dissenters, Dissenters in Fundamentalls, and that
out of obstinacy against conscience, and Seducers, to the perdition of souls,
and to the disturbance of Civil and Church-Peace: but only of such
Dissenters, as vary either in matters of less weight, or of fundamental, yet
not out of wilful obstinacy, but out of tenderness of Conscience.

As for the Controversy, which the Examiner says, He has with me, Whether
false worship be not only local, but a spiritual Guilt, and not only a
Guilt, but also an Habit, etc.

I do acknowledge no such controversy between us: I wholly consent with him
in the Point. Only I do not believe, all that to be either a Guilt, or an
Habit of false worship, which he does imagine: but in his terms I accord.

TO CHAP. XVI.
HIs 16th Chapter is taken up in Examining and Answering the Exposition which
my Letter gave of that Text formerly alleged, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. Of which I
said,

1. That the Text only requires Coming out from Idolaters in the fellowship
of their Idolatry: No Marriages were they to make with them: No Feasts were
they to hold with them in the Idols Temples: No intimate Familiarity were
they to maintain with them: Nor any Fellowship were they to keep with them in
the unfruitful works of Darkness.

And this is all which the place requires. But what makes all this to prove,
that we may not receive such Persons to Church Fellowship as our selves
confess to be godly, and who do professedly bewail and renounce all known
sin, and would renounce more, if they knew more? Although, it may be, they
do not see the utmost skirts of all that pollution they have sometimes been
defiled with: as the Patriarchs saw not the pollution of their Polygamy?

In Answer to this, the Examiner tells us;

1. That if the regenerate and prepenting English did come thus far forth, it
would avail much to the sanctifying of the Name of the Lord Jesus, to the
pacifying of his jealousy, etc.

Reply. But this is no Answer at all, unless he did assume that our repenting
English did not come thus far forth. Therefore he gives for another Answer,
(that which is indeed but a part of this) That according to the former
Distinction of Godly Persons, who possibly may live in ungodly practices
(especially of false worship:) And then according to Mr. Cottons
Interpretation, they come not forth.

Reply. That former Distinction has been considered above and weighed; but
has been found impertinent to the case in hand. The Examiner neither does, nor
ever will make it good, That the Godly persons amongst us do live in any
ungodly practices of false worship. Nor do they take his Affirmation (without
any mention of Scripture-ground) for a sufficient conviction.

But (says he) if there be any voice of Christ in the mouths of his witnesses
against these sins, they are not then of ignorance, but negligence, and
spiritual hardness against the ways of Gods sear, Isai. 63. etc.

Reply. If there be (says he) any voice of Christ in the mouths of his
witnesses against these sins, etc. If there be: he does not say, there be.
And if there were, how does it appear, that their voice is the voice of
Christ, or that they be the witnesses of Christ, in whose mouths this voice is?
How easy had it been for the Examiner, if he himself knew any such voice of
Christ in the mouths of any of his witnesses against these sins of false
worship which our godly Brethren do live in, to have alleged the same, and
the word of Christ, which might have been witness to the voice of those
witnesses? But these Ifs and Overtures will neither convince nor edify others,
nor justify himself.

Besides, what if there be some witnesses have testified against the false
worship in England, and against the hearing of those Ministers, by reason of
that false worship? What if the Godly Persons (of whom he speaks) here, are
not so ignorant, but they know what those witnesses have said, nor so
negligent, but they have duly considered and pondered the same, and weighing it
in the Balance of the Scriptures, have found it too light? Is it spiritual
hardness, to choose, rather to fear God, and his Word, then to fear the
false Interpretations and Applications of it by the spirit of Error? The word
of the Lord we reverence and acknowledge, Come not ye to Gilgall, neither go
ye up to Bethaven: But do we come to Gilgall, or go up to Bethaven, when we
hear the word of the Lord from the godly Preachers in the Parishes in England?
If such alledgements of Scripture may go for the voice of Christ in the mouths
of his witnesses, we shall soon forget the Counsel of Solomon; Cease my Son
to hear the Instruction, which causes to err from the words of knowledge,
Pro. 19.27. The Apostle John has long since directed us, Hereby know we the
spirit of Truth, and the spirit of Error: He that knows God, hears us,
(that is, the Apostles, and those that preach their Doctrine;) He that is not
of God, hears us not, 1 John 4.6.

But for another Answer, the Examiner proceeds; Moreover, (says he) the
Question is not of the utmost skirts of pollution, but the substance of a true
and false Bed of worship, Cant. 1.16. In respect of coming out of the false,
before the entrance into the true.

Reply. I said indeed, that Godly Persons repenting of all known sins, may
be received to Church Fellowship, although they do not see the utmost skirts
of all the pollution they have sometimes been defiled with.

But, says he, the Question is not of utmost skirts, but of the substance of a
true and false Bed of worship.

What he means by the Bed of worship, I know not If he mean the Church, to
be the Bed of worship; and the Churches of England to be false Churches, that
Point has been cleared above: that no voice of Christ has declared the
Churches of England to be false Churches.

But yet further, the Examiner answers, That if there were but filthiness in
the skirts of an Harlot, he believes Mr. Cotton would not receive an Harlot,
infamous for corporal whoredom, without sound repentance, not only for her
actual whoredoms, but also for her whorish speeches, gestures, appearances,
provocations. And why should there be a greater strictness for the skirts of
common whoredom, then for spiritual and soule-whoredome, against the
chastity of Gods worship?

Reply. 1. There may be the greater strictness about the skirts of bodily
whoredom, not because it is a greater sin, but because it is more easily
discernable, and convinceable by ordinary light.

2. Where any speeches, gestures, appearances, provocations of spiritual
whoredom shall discover themselves, we believe there ought to be as great
strictness about them, as about the like whorish appearances of bodily
whoredom. But when will the Examiner discover to us, what those spiritual
whorish gestures or speeches be, wherein we show less strictness, then the
chastity of Gods holy worship requires?

Touching the Polygamy of the Fathers, the Examiner answers, three ways.

1. By observing what great sins Godly Persons may be subject to,
notwithstanding Godliness in the Root.

We consent to that, especially in case of ignorance.

2. He demands, If any godly Persons should now believe, and maintain, that
he ought to have many wives, and accordingly did so Practice, whether Mr.
Cotton would receive such a godly Person to Church Fellowship?

Yea whether the Church of the Jews (if they had seen the evil of it) would
ever have received such a Proselyte into fellowship with them?

The same Answers may serve to both the Demands.

1. Neither would I receive them, nor do I think the Church of the Jews
would, in case the sin had appeared so plain and palpable, as by the light
of the Gospel it has been discovered.

2. This is not the case in hand, what my self or a Church ought to do, about
receiving a member living in known sin: but when he that lives in no known
sin, (none known either to himself, or the Church) whether the Church if
they receive him, does thereby evacuate their Church Estate? Or whether the
Church, and every member thereof, be so far bound to a distinct knowledge of
all appearances of spiritual whoredom, that if they be ignorant of any one or
two of them, they are utterly incapable of Church Estate?

For a third Answer to the case of Polygamy, the Examiner demands what was
this personal sin of Polygamy in the godly Patriarchs? Was it any matter of
Gods worship, any joining with a false Church, Ministry, Worship, Government,
from whence they were to come, before they could constitute his true Church,
and enjoy his Worship, Ministry, Government, etc.

Reply. 1. Polygamy if it had been known to be as great a sin amongst the
Israelites, as it is now known to be by the Doctrine of the Lord Jesus, it is
of so heinous a nature now, that every godly person guilty of it, must come out
of it, before he could lawfully be received into a pure Church of Christ.

2. If a Church were now ignorant of such a known case, and should in their
ignorance admit sundry members living in that sin, into fellowship with them,
though it would much defile them: yet I do not conceive it would evacuate
their Church Estate.

3. The Examiner will never prove, that the estate of the Churches in England
is false, their Ministry false, nor their worship false. And as for their
Episcopal Government, he is not ignorant we have come out of it both in place
and heart. Neither will he ever be able to prove, that any of our Churches
partake in the communion of any such known sin, either in Church Estate,
Worship, Ministry, Government, as Polygamy is.

But touching that place in 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. urged by the Examiner, that I
might give a further Answer then before, I add further in my Letter; That the
place was wrested besides the Apostles scope, when Mr. Williams argued from it,
That such Persons are not fit matter for Church Fellowship, as are defiled with
any remnants of Antichristian Pollution: nor such Churches any more to be
counted Churches, as do receive such amongst them: For were there not at that
time in the Church of Corinth, such as partaked with Idolaters in their Idols
Temples? And was not this the touching of an unclean thing? And did this sin
reject members from Church Fellowship before Conviction? Or did it evacuate
their Church Estate for not casting out such members?

To this Argument the Examiner gives (as he calls it) an Answer in four
Paragraphs: whereof the three former hold not forth so much as the face, or
shape, or color of an Answer.

For in the first Paragraph, says he, This was indeed an unclean thing, from
which God calls his People: and Mr. Cotton confesses, that after conviction
any member obstinate in these unclean Touches ought to be rejected.

But what is this to the Argument?

Again, In the next Paragraph, Upon the same ground, (says he) that one
obstinate Person ought to be rejected out of Church Estate, upon the same
ground, if a greater company or a Church were obstinate in such unclean
touches, ought every sound Christian Church to reject them, and every sound
member to withdraw from them.

But is this any more to the Argument?

In the third Paragraph, Further (says he) it is clear, that if such unclean
Touches obstinately maintained, (as Mr. Cotton professes and practices) be a
ground of a rejection of a Person in a Church, questionless, it is a ground of
rejection when such Persons are to join unto the Church. And if obstinacy in
the whole Church after Conviction be a ground for such a Churches rejection,
questionless, such a Church or number of persons obstinate in such evils,
cannot congregate, nor become a true constituted Church of Christ.

But still the Argument is where it was, not only unshaken, but untoucht.
Neither is the Text in 2 Cor. 16. any whit at all cleared by these discourses,
to argue them to be no true constituted Churches who live in such unclean
touches, without conviction, without obstinacy. For the Text speaks nothing
of obstinacy, nor conviction: but only implies, that such unclean Touches
were found in the Church of Corinth, and yet that did not evacuate their
Church Estate.

His last Paragraph holds forth some more shape of an Answer, but as little
substance.

The greatest Question here (says he) would be whether the Corinthians in
their first Constitution were separate or no from such Idols Temples? And this
Mr. Cotton neither does nor can deny; A Church estate being a state of marriage
unto Christ Jesus; and so Paul professedly says, He had espoused them as a
chaste Virgin unto Christ, 2 Cor. 11.

Reply. 1. To put any substance into this Answer, or any force pertinent to the
cause in hand, it must be no great Question, but clear out of Question, that
these Corinthians in their first constitution were clean, and absolutely
separate from such Idols Temples: and that not only locally, but in their
soul and judgment, mind and heart, utterly cut off from such unclean
Touches, so that they both undoubtedly saw the evil thereof, and from their
hearts abhorred it, and forsook it. For all these Acts of coming off in a way
of separation from the Churches of England, he requires from us, as absolutely
necessary to enter into a true Churchestate. Now if he think that Mr. Cotton
(to use his words) neither does nor can deny, that in their first constitution
they were thus separate from Idols Temples.

I must profess, though not to him, yet to all that love and seek the Truth
without prejudice, that I both can and do deny it, that in their first
constitution, they were locally separate from Idols Temples, it is likely
enough; or else I suppose the Apostlewould have admonished them thereof in
their first Plantation. But that in their mind and judgment, they saw the
evil thereof, and did in heart and soul bewail it, and confess it before
the Apostle and their Brethren, and so enter into solemn Covenant, expressly
against it; this is altogether incredible to me: For would not the Apostle then
(out of his faithfulness) have reproved them as well for their Apostasy, as
for their Fellowship in Idolatry? Would he not as well have rebuked the
prevarication of their Covenant, as their pollution of their communion with
Pagans?

What though a Church Estate be a state of Marriage unto Jesus Christ? May not
a married Spouse of Christ be ignorant of some part of her marriage-dutie
toward him? And what though Paul profess, He had espoused them as a chaste
Virgin to Jesus Christ? May not he call them a chaste Virgin, who had seen and
bewailed their former worship of Idols, though they neither bewailed nor saw
the evil of feasting with their neighbors in Idols Temples?

Reply. 2. Though the Examiner make it a great Question whether a Church can be
truly constituted, that in her first constitution is not separate from all
unclean Touches, so as both to see them, and come out of them, howsoever they
may fall into such sins afterward: yet I look at it as an ungrounded
distinction, to require more purity to the being of a Church in her first
constitution, then is necessary to the being of it, after it is constituted. I
should think the longer a Church has enjoyed communion with the Lord Jesus
Christ, the more she ought to grow both in knowledge and purity. Where more
has been given, the more will be required of the Lord. Yea I conceive it more
agreeable to the word of Truth, that God will sooner separate from a Church
constituted, for their whorish pollutions, then deny them Churchestate for the
like pollutions in their first constitution. The people of Israel were not
constituted a National Church till the Lord gave them National Ordinances,
and National Officers, and entered them together into a National Covenant,
Exodus 19.5, 6. Their Church Estate before, was rather domestical, dispersed
into several Families. When they were thus constituted a National Church, and
afterward fell into an Idolatrous crime, the Lord directed Moses to break the
Tables of his Covenant between them, and did also separate his Tabernacle from
them, till upon their repentance he renewed communion with them, Exodus 32.19.
with Exodus 33.3. to 7. But yet the like Idolatry (if not worse) being found in
the same People, when they dwelt in Egypt, it did not hinder the Lord from
accepting them unto a National Constitution of a Church Estate.

To CHAP. XVII. XVIII. XIX.
HIs 17, 18, 19. Chapters are taken up, in Examining and Answering my Answers
to his second Objection, which he made to prove, a Necessity lying upon Godly
men, before they can be fit matter for Church fellowship, to see, bewail,
repent, and come out of false Churches, Ministry, Worship, and Government. To
prove which, his first Objection, or Argument was taken from Isaiah 52.11. 2
Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. Whereto we have returned a Reply in the former Chapters. His
second Objection was taken from the Confession made by John's Disciples, and the
Proselyte Gentiles before admission into Churchfellowship, Mat. 3.6. Act 19.18.
Whence he gathered, That Christian Churcher are constituted of such members, as
make open and plain confession of their sins: and if any s^^^es be to be
confessed and lamented (Jewish or Paganish) then Antichristian drunkenness and
whoredom much more, etc. Yea every sipping of the Wh^res Cup.

To which Objection of his, (to pass by all verbal velitations, for I love
not to take up time about words) the substance of my Answer was twofold.

1. That it was not necessary to the Admission of members, that they should
see, and bewail the sinfulness of every sipping of the whores Cup, (as he
called it) (though the Whores cup do more intoxicate the mind, then the
drunkards Cup does the Body:) because bodily drunkenness and whoredom are
such notorious and gross sins, that no man having true Repentance in him,
cannot but be convinced of the sinfulness of them, and of the necessity of
repentance of them in particular, if he do remember them. But the whores Cup
being a mystery of Iniquity, the sinfulness of every sipping of it, is
nothing so evident and notorious, as that every repentant soul does at first
discern it. And therefore as the 3000. Converts, Acts 2.37. to 47. were
admitted into the first Christian Church, upon the Profession of their
repentance of the murder of Christ, though they neither saw nor confessed all
the superstitious leavenings wherewith the Pharisees had bewitched them: so
here, etc. Yea and the Disciples of John (whom he instanceth in) though they
did confess their sins, (the Publicans theirs, the Soldiers theirs, the
People theirs:) to wit, the notorious sins incident to their callings: yet it
does not appear that they confessed their Pharisaicall pollutions. And the
Gentiles in Act. 19.18.19. Though they confessed their curious Arts, and burnt
their conjuring Books, yet it does not appear, that they confessed all their
deeds.

Whereunto the Examiner returns a twofold Answer.

1. That spiritual whoredom and drunkenness is not indeed so easily
discerned as corporal: but yet not the less sinful, but infinitely
transeendent, as much as spiritual sobriety exceeds corporal; and the bed
of the most High God exceeds the beds of men, who are but dust and ashes.

Reply. 1. It is an exorbitant Hyperbole to make every passage of spiritual
whoredom, a sin infinitely transcendent above bodily whoredom. For
spiritual whoredom is not infinite in the act of it, but only in respect of
the object of it, to wit, in respect of the infinite God, against whom it is
committed. And is not bodily whoredom infinite in that respect also? Can a man
defile himself with bodily whoredom, and not sin against the infinite God?
What says Joseph? Genesis 39.9.

2. What if spiritual whoredom (though less evident) be more sinful then
bodily? The nature of true Evangelicall Repentance stands not in seeing and
bewailing every sin, no nor always of the greatest, but of those which are
most evident and notorious. A Christian man may more safely omit repentance of
greater sins, if unknown, then of less sins known. I suppose the
Israelites were guilty of many Idolatries, and superstitions in the days of
Samuel, yet their repentance was chiefly fastened upon their asking of a King,
of which they were then principally convinced, 1 Samuel 12.19. And such
Repentance was then accepted of the Lord, and of Samuel, ver. 22, 23.

The very truth is, the ground and root of the Examiners Error in this case
is, That he makes Church Covenant to be no better then a Covenant of works:
whereas indeed if Church Covenant be not a branch of the Covenant of grace, the
Churches of Christ are not built upon Christ. In a Covenant of works, all
sins must be avoided: or if not avoided, yet repented of expressly, and the
greatest sins most. But in Evangelicall Repentance, God deals not with us
after our sins, nor rewards us according to our Iniquities, Psalm. 103.10.
The Grace of Christ is not given either to his Church, or to any Christian,
upon the perfection of our Repentance, nor upon our Repentance of our greatest
sins, in the greatest measure. But if the heart be truly humbled for any
known sin, as sin, though the sin known be often less heinous, then
others unknown, yet God accepts his own work, and puts away all sin in
the acknowledgement of one. Yea in sins that be known, the compunction of
the heart is sometimes more expressed for the occasions and inducements of the
sin, which are less heinous; then for the greater sins, which are more
grievous and dangerous. Solomon in his solemn Repentance in the Book of
Ecclesiastes, does more expressly bewail his entanglement with lewd women,
Eccles. 7.27, 28. then all his Idolatrous Temples and worship, which were
erected, and maintained at his charge. By the Examiners Doctrine, Solomon had
never been received, and restored to the Church upon that Repentance.

His second Answer is, That though the converted Jews did not see all the
leavenings of the Pharisees, yet they mourned for killing of Christ, and
embraced him in his Worship, Ministry, Government, etc. and thereupon
necessarily follows a withdrawing from the Church, Ministry, and Worship of
the false Christ, etc.

Reply. This answer does not reach the defense of his cause, to wit, That it is
absolutely necessary unto Church Fellowship, to see and bewail, not only
actual whoredoms, but also whorish speeches, gestures, appearances,
provocations. Yet here he grants, that the converted Jews did not see all
the leavenings of the Pharisees, which yet were such, as in the end of that
Paragraph, he implies they had detained them under a false Christ.

But whereas he says, that they by embracing Christ, in his Worship and
Ministry, there necessarily followed a withdrawing from the Church, Ministry,
and worship of the false Christ.

It may truly be Replied, 1. That he will not grant us that liberty, that upon
our embracing of Christ in his worship and Ministry, there necessarily
follows our withdrawing from the Church, Ministry, and Worship, wherein we
had been formerly polluted in any sort. Is not this to deteine the glorious
Truth of our Lord Jesus with respect of Persons?

2. It is evident by the Story, that some of those members of the Church of
Jerusalem, who had been leavened by the sect of the Pharisees, they did
neither see nor bewail, nor did come off from fellowship with the Pharisees in
their Ministry, and false Doctrine, which taught the necessity of
Circumcision, and of the whole Law of Moses to justification and salvation,
Acts 15.1.5.

As for the confession of sin by the Disciples unto John Baptist, (Mat. 3.)
and by the Gentiles unto Paul, (Act. 19.) though it be not said, that the one
sort confessed their Pharisaicall pollutions, nor the other all their Deeds:

Yet (says he) if both these confessed their notorious sins, (as Mr. Cotton
confesses) why not as well their notorious sins against God, their
Idolatries, superstitions, worships, etc? Surely throughout the whole
Scripture, the matters of God, and his worship, are first and most tenderly
handled, etc.

Answ. It is not true, that the matters of Gods worship and defects there, are
always most tenderly acknowledged throughout the Confessions of the Saints in
Scripture. Solomon in his Repentance was most sparing of confession of his
Idolatrous Temples and worships. And the People in Samuel did more repent of
asking a King, then of all their other sins, and yet their Idolatries were
then flagrant, 1 Samuel 12 9, 10, 11. Besides, we never read of such deep
Humiliation of David for carting the Arc after the manner of the Philistims,
as of his bodily adultery with Bathshebah, and murder of Vriah.

The substance of my other Answer to his former Objection, which was to prove a
necessity lying upon godly men to see and bewail their pollutions in a former
Church Fellowship, before they can be fit matter for a new.

It was to this purpose, that we have not been wanting (through the guidance of
the grace of Christ) to perform that which he pleads for, so far as God
has called us to it: the which I expressed in my Letter in two particulars:

1. That the body of our members do in general Profess, that the reason of
their coming over to us, was that they might be freed from the bondage of
humane Inventions and Ordinances, under which as their soul groaned there, so
they have professed their sorrow, so far as through ignorance or infirmity
they have been defiled there.

2. That in our daily meetings, especially in the times of our solemn
Humiliations, we do generally all of us bewail all our former Pollutious,
wherewith we have defiled our selves, and the holy things of God in our former
Administrations, and Communions: the which we have rather chosen to do, then
to talk of, and therefore do marvel, that he should so resolutely renounce
us for that, which he knew not whether we had neglected or no, and before he
had admonished us of our sinfulness in such neglect, if it had been found
amongst us.

Whereto his Answer is; That we make no mention, what such Inventions, and
Ordinances, what such Administrations and Communions were, which we confessed
and bewailed.

Reply. And yet lest he should too much wound his own Conscience with such a
general charge, he acknowledges; That we have borne witness against Bishops,
and Ceremonies, and do constitute only particular and Independent Churches,
and have therefore so far at least seen the evil of a National Church. But
I dare say further, that his own Conscience bears him witness, that we have
witnessed also both in Profession and Practice, against Prescript Liturgies and
mixed Communions, both in Church Fellowship, and at the Lords Table.

What has been then wanting to us? That we do not fully see the evil of a
National Church; How does he make it to appear?

By two Instances.

By our constant Practice in still joining with such Churches and Ministry in
the Ordinances of the Word and Prayer: and by our Persecuting of him for his
humble, faithful, and constant admonishing of us for such an unclean walking,
between a particular Church, and a National.

Reply. Our joining with the Ministers of England in hearing of the Word and
Prayer, does not argue our Church Communion with the Parish-Churches in
England, much less with the National Church: as has been showed above in
Chap. 14.

Besides, when Jeroboam heard the word from the young Prophet of Judah, and
joined with him in Prayer, I demand whether in so doing, he joined in
Church Communion with the National Church of Judah? If yea, then was the
Church of Judah pollutedly the unclean Communion of Idolatrous Jeroboam: If
not, then the Examiner may easily discern, how weak an Argument it is to
argue our Communion with the National Church of England, from our members
joining in the Hearing of the Word, and Prayer in the Parish-Churches of
England.

His second Instance to make it appear, That we see not the evil of a
National Church, from our Persecuting of him, etc.

In this I choose rather to blame his memory then his conscience. But the one
of them is much to blame, in that it makes him so far forget himself and
the Truth, as boldly to avouch a notorious falsehood; That we Persecuted him for
his humble, and faithful, and constant admonishing of us of such unclean
walking, between a particular Church and a National.

It is one notable falsehood to say, that he did constantly admonish, either our
Elders or Churches of such an offense; much less, humbly, and faithfully. If
he did so admonish us, where are his witnesses? His Letters? his Messengers
sent to us?

Besides, It is another falsehood, and no less palpable, that we did persecute
him for such admonishing of us. It has been declared above, upon what grounds
the sentence of his Banishment did Proceed: whereof this Admonition (which he
pretends) was none of them; neither did they persecute him at all, who did so
proceed against him.

Now whereas in that Passage of the Letter even now recited I said, He knew not
what Professions we had made in our Churches of our Humiliations for former
Pollutions, nor had he admonished us of our defects therein: He demands how
be could possibly be ignorant of our estate, who had been from first to last in
fellowship with us, an Officer amongst us, had private and public agitations
concerning our estate and condition, and at last suffered for such Admonition
to us, the misery of a Winters Banishment amongst the Barbarians?

Reply. As if every man in fellowship with us, an Officer amongst us, one that
had private and public agitations with us, must needs know what our members
professed in their admissions to the Church, or what our Elders confessed in
their days of solemn Humiliation, when himself was generally absent, both on
the Lords days, and on the days of solemn fasting? Or as if the private and
public agitations that he had with us, were taken up about our Communion with
a National Church? I am yet to learn, what Arguments he did propound to us in
that cause: what convictions he left upon us. When he is still so full of the
miseries of his winters banishment amongst the Barbarians, it makes me call to
mind a grave and godly speech of a blessed Saint, now with God, (reverend Mr.
Dod) Where sin lies heavy, afflictions lies light: where affliction lies
heavy, sin lies light.

TO CHAP. XX.
THe maine Objection which Mr. Williams made against the Estate of our
Church Members, was chiefly this; That though he acknowledges them to be
godly, yet not sufficiently separate from Antichrist. And that he endeavored
to prove, 1. From the Texts that call for separation from Babylon, Isa. 52.2
Cor. 6. Rev. 18.2. From the confession of sins made by John's Disciples, Mat.
3. and the Proselyte Gentiles, Acts 19. To both these we have returned Answer
already.

His third Objection follows from Haggai 2.13, 14, 15. where the Prophet
tells the Church of the Jews, That if a Person unclean by a dead body, do
touch holy things, those holy things become unclean to him. And so (says he)
is this Nation, and so is every work of their hands, and that which they offer
here is unclean. And from hence he argues; That even Church-Covenants made
and Ordinances practiced by persons polluted through spiritual deadness, and
filthiness of Communion, they become unclean to them, and are profaned by
them: which he solemnly desires might be advisedly weighed.

Whereto my Answer was; That if he had well weighed this place himself, he
would never have alleged it to his purpose. His purpose was to prove, that
Churches cannot be constituted of such members, as are unclean by
Antichristian pollutions: or if they be so constituted, they are not to be
Communicated with, but separated from. To prove this, you allege (said I) this
place, where the Prophet acknowledges the whole Church to be unclean, and yet
neither denies them to be a Church truly constituted, nor stirs up
himself, or others to separate from them. If you say, why, but they were
unclean.

I answered; Be it so. But were they therefore no Church truly Constituted? Or
to be separated from? Did not Haggai, and Zachary themselves Communicate with
them? And did they not call others also to come out of Babel to Communicate
with them, even whilst Joshua the High Priest was still polluted with his
unclean Garments? Zach. 2.6, 7. with Chapt. 3.8.

Whereupon I took occasion to clear up to him the occasion, and scope, and
true sense of the words at large, as may appear in the Letter, which having
gathered up I said, That if he did apply it to the Point in hand, it would
reach nothing near to his purpose. Hypocrites in the Church, yea and godly
sincere Christians themselves, whilst they attend to the world more then to
the things of God, (as at that time the Jews did) both their persons, and
their labors, and their Civil Oblations are unclean in the sight of God:

Therefore the Church of Christ cannot be constituted of such: or if it do
consist of such, the People of God must separate from them. You might well have
gathered

Therefore the Church of Christ, and the members thereof must separate
themselves from their hypocrisy and inordinate love of this world, or else
they and their duties will still be unclean in the sight of God,
notwithstanding their Church Estate.

This Collection tends to edification; the other to dissipation, and
destruction of the Church, and wresteth Blood instead of Milk from the Breasts
of holy Scripture.

This Text is so evident, and pregnant, and full against himself, that I could
not but marvel, why he should allege it, and especially why he should desire
it might be thoroughly weighed, and the Lord to hold the scales himself. How
do you then think, that he will hence infer his Conclusion; That Godly
persons, if unclean, cannot constitute a true Church? or if they do, they are
to be separated from? Surely not from the words of the Text, nor from the
sense, which I make of it: nor from any sense, which himself can give of it.
How then? Only from his mistake of my words, and that surely either through a
drousie Oscitancy, or a sleighty Precipitancy.

What (says he) have I spoken more then Mr. Cotton himself has uttered in
his Explication and Application of this Scripture; As,

1. That Godly persons may become defiled, and unclean, by hypocrisy and
worldliness.

2. While they lie in such a condition of uncleanness, all their offerings,
persons, labors are unclean in the sight of God, notwithstanding their
Church Estate.

3. The Church cannot be constituted of such worldly Persons (though otherwise
godly and Christian.)

Or 4. If they do, the People of God must separate from them. These be (says
he) Mr. Cottons own express words.

Reply. He might as well say, these be the express words of Christ, Hang all
the Law, and the Prophets, because Christ says, ( Mat. 19.40.) upon these two
Commandments, Hang all the Law and the Prophets. So these be my express
words; The true and genuine meaning of the place, if you do apply to the Point
in hand, it will reach nothing near to your purpose. Hypocrites in the Church
and godly Christians themselves, whilst they attend to the world more then to
the things of God, their persons, their labors, their Civil Oblations are all
unclean in the sight of God. Ergo. The Church of Christ cannot be constituted
of such: or if it do consist of such, the People of God must separate from
them.

Who sees not that attends to what he sees, that in these words I express
not mine own meaning or reasoning, but his: and that I expressly say, The true
meaning of the Text will nothing near reach to his purpose, and so bring in
his reason, in form of an Enthymeme, which he draws from it? But if I had made
that Enthymeme the expression of mine own meaning, and of the meaning of the
Text, it had sully and closely reached his own purpose.

The next words following might also plainly have cleared my meaning to him:
when in stead of that false collection which he gathered, I tell him, you might
well have gathered: therefore the Church of Christ, and the members thereof
must separate themselves from their hypocrisy, and their inordinate love of
this world: Or else they and their duties will he still unclean in the sight
of God, notwithstanding their Church Estate.

This Collection tends to edification: the other to the dissipation, and
destruction of the Flock, and wresteth blood instead of milk from the Breasts
of holy Scripture.

Do I not here plainly express two several, and contrary Collections from
the Text, the one his, the other mine own; the one tending to edification, the
other to destruction? And yet this false collection, and misapplication of the
Text, which is his own, and a manifest Perverting both of the Text, and of my
words, he will needs force upon me, contrary to my meaning, and contrary also
to my express words above in the entrance of mine Answer to this Text. Where I
say,

Your purpose was to prove, That Churches cannot be constituted by such persons
as are unclean by Antichristian pollutions: or if they be so constituted, they
are not to be communicated with, but separated from. To prove this, you allege
this place where the Prophet acknowledges the whole Church of the Jews to be
unclean: and yet neither denies them to be a Church truly constituted, nor
stirs up himself or others to separate from them.

What by the way he discourses of the Excommunication in the National Church
of the Jews, somewhat has been spoken to it above. When he says, That their
Ceremonial Excommunication was either putting to death in Canaan, or
Captivity out of Canaan. If he mean this was all their Excommunication, I
cannot assent to it. King Vzziah was neither put to death in Canaan, nor
carried captive out of Canaan, and yet he was Excommunicated both from
Temple-worship, Synagogue-worship, and all familiar communion of the Saints.

Again, when he makes it an Excommunication from God, in case God sell his
Church into spiritual Captivity, to confused Babylonish Lords, and worship,
and that so he drives them out of his sight: He might remember, that God
sometime sold his people under the Bondage of Babylonish Lords, even in the
Land of Canaan, (Jer. 40.9. and 42.10, 11, 12.) And yet he had not straight way
driven them out of his sight.

TO CHAP. XXI.
IT was my serious and unfeigned endeavor, in my Letter which the Examiner
has answered, to have removed those two stumbling blocks out of his way, which
I perceived had turned him off, from holding fellowship with these Churches.
The former was, The want of fit matter of our Churches: The latter, Our
dis-respect to the separate Churches in England, under affliction, when
nevertheless our selves practice separation in peace.

From the beginning of his tenth Chapter, he has endeavored to fasten the
former of these stumbling blocks, that it may still lie in his way, and stand
(as an everlasting wall of partition) between us. Which nevertheless I have
(as you see) through the help of Christ endeavored to dig through the
sandinesse thereof, that if it were the holy will of God, it might fall down
(like the walls of Jericho) before the Ark of the Lord, and neither detain
him, nor others, from Communion with us.

The latter stumbling block, he goes about to re-establish in this, and the
following Chapters to the end of his Book; Come we therefore to consider,
whether there may be any hope, of removing this stumbling block also, and the
establishment thereof by the same help. The stumbling block lies somewhat
broader, then at first was propounded. The Examiner takes it as a great
offense; That we walk between Christ and Antichrist.

1. In practicing separation here, and not repenting of our preaching, and
printing against it in our own Country.

2. In reproaching himself at Salem, and others, for separation.

3. In particular, that my self have conceived and spoken, That separation is
a way, which God has not prospered: as if (says he) the truth of the Churches
depended upon the countenance of men, or upon outward peace and liberty.

To the first of these I answered in my Letter, That in stead of halting
betwixt Christ, and Antichrist, the Lord has guided us to walk with an even
foot between two extremes: so that we neither defile our selves with the
remnants of pollution in other Churches; nor do we for the remnants of
pollution, renounce the Churches themselves, nor the holy things of God amongst
them, which our selves have found powerful to salvation. This moderation so
far as we have kept it in preaching or printing, we have seen no cause to
repent of it; But if any shall show us cause, why we should repent of it, we
shall desire to repent of it, yea and to repent, that we repented no sooner.

The Examiner here undertaketh to prove this middle walking to be no less
then-halting, of which we have cause to repent. And this he endeavors to prove
to me, out of mine own Confessions.

First, says he, Mr. Cotton himself confesses, that no National,
Provincial, Diocesan, or Parish Church, wherein some truly godly are not, are
true Churches.

Secondly, He practices no Church Estate, but such as is constituted only of
godly persons, nor admits any unregenerate, or ungodly persons.

Thirdly, He confesses, that a Church of Christ cannot be constituted of such
godly persons, who are in bondage to the inordinate love of the world.

Fourthly, That if a Church consist of such, Gods people ought to separate from
them.

Reply. If these (which he calls confessions of Mr. Cotton) have been
stumblings to him, I shall (by the help of Christ) soon remove them out of
his way. For I do profess, that I never made any such Confessions, but look
at them all as contrary to my judgment, both in former times and to this day.

For the first, Though there were no truly godly persons in a Church, yet if
there be such as profess godliness (such as they call visible Saints) to
meet together in a Congregation to worship the Lord, and to edify one another
in the administration of his holy Ordinances, I do believe there is truth of
Church Estate.

It is true, I do believe, and confess, that God requires more then
profession of godliness, even sincerity of holiness in Church Members, and
it is no small sin in them, if it be wanting; But what if some, if most, if
all believe not? Shall their unbelief make the faith of God of none effect?
God forbid? Romans 3.3, 4. If an hypocritical Church were no Church, then an
hypocri^^call Minister were no Minister, and his administrations nullities.
Cultus institutus, in the whole latitude of it, as Churches, Min;isteries,
Seals, Censures, etc. they are all ordained for the Elects sake. And the Elect
God would have them to be (...), without careful scruples and distractions. If
truth of Churches, and Ministeries, and Ordinances, depended upon the personal
sincerity of the godliness of the dispensers, the Elect of God would ever be
entangled with inextricable scruples, touching their communion here or there,
with this or that Church, or the administrations of the Officers thereof. But
God has called us in peace.

For the second part (which he makes) of my Confessions, he had said true, if
he had said, I endeavor such a thing, that our Church should be constitute of
godly persons: but I do not say I have attained it; for God sees not as man
sees: man looks at the outward appearance, but the Lord regards the heart,
1 Samuel 16.7. And sure I am, we look at Infants as members of our Church, (as
being foedurally holy) but I am slow to believe that all of them are
regenerate, or truly godly.

As for the third and fourth point (which he makes) of my Confession; That a
Church of Christ cannot be constituted of godly persons, taken with the
inordinate love of the world: or that a Church consisting of such, ought to be
separated from: These are only his own palpable mistakes of those words of
mine, which I expressed as the sum of his words, which he (through have)
conceived to be mine, whereof we have spoken in the 20th Chapter.

Let him not say (as he does) that when I would not have Parish Churches to be
separated from, for the remnants of pollutions, I mean only, Ceremonies, and
Bishops: neither let him say, that I do extenuate and mince the root, mass,
and substance of the matter of National Churches, (though for the greater part
unregenerate) by naming only a remnant of pollutions.

For he knows we wholly avoyde National, Provincial, and Diocesan
Government of the Churches by Episcopal Authority: He knows also, we avoyde
their prescript Liturgies, and Communion with openly scandalous persons in any
Church Order; He knows likewise, (or at least may know) that it is a
continual sorrow of heart, and a mourning of our souls, that there is yet so
much of those notorious evils (which he names) still continuing in the
Parishes, worldliness, ignorance, superstition, scoffing, swearing, cursing,
whoredom, drunkenness, theft, lying, I may add also murder, and malignity
against the godly, suffered to thrust themselves into the fellowship of the
Churches, and to sit down with the Saints at the Lords Table.

But yet I count all these but remnants of pollution, when as the substance of
the true estate of Churches abides (as I opened above) in their
Congregationall Assemblies. And in so speaking, I follow the holy pattern of
the Prophet Isaiah, who acknowledging a great forsaking (or Apostasy) in the
midst of the Land, yet resembles the estate of the Church to an Oak, whose
substance is in it, (when the leaves fall off) and makes the holy seed to be
that substance, Isai. 6.12, 13.

TO CHAP. XXII.
THe second offense which the Examiner took at our neglect of the Churches of
the separation, Was the reproach of himself and others at Salem, for their
separation.

To which I answered in my Letter, That I knew no man who reproached Salem for
their separation, nor did I believe, that they did separate. Howsoever, if any
did reproach them for it, I did think it a sin meet to be Censured, but not
with so deep a Censure, as to excommunicate all the Churches, or to separate
from them, before it does appear, that they do tolerate their members in such
their causlesse reproachings. The errors of men are to be contended against,
not with reproaches, but with the sword of the Spirit. But on the other side,
the failings of the Churches are not forthwith to be healed by separation. It
is not Surgery, but Butchery, to heal every sore in a member, with no other
but Abscission from the body.

Whereto the Examiner answers, That the Church of Salem was known to
profess separation, and publicly reproached (yea he could mention a Case
wherein she was punished) for it, implicitly.

Reply. This answer is so implicit, that I cannot make an explicit answer to
it. That which I said, was, I knew no man that reproached Salem for their
separation: nor did I believe, that they did separate. His answer is, That the
Church of Salem was known to profess separation: which crosses not what I
said; for it might be so, and yet I knew not of it, unless the profession had
been more public. Nor did I ever perceive, that they refused communion with
us, when any of them came over to us. If they were publicly reproached for
separation, it was more then I heard of, till I read it in his Book. And for
any public punishment that Salem suffered for it, I may well say, it was
implicitly, if at all; for surely there is no Law of the Country, that
punishes such an offense, it her explicitly, or implicitly. But since he is
pleased to conceal it, I see no cause of giving account of it.

Nextly, He takes up from me a Confession of two things, which he leaves to me
to reconcile: 1. That I say, if any reproach them for Separation, it is a sin
meet to be Censured. 2. That Churches themselves may be separated from, who
tolerate their members in such causeless reproachings.

Reply. It is true, that I do not account reproaches, (which are a work of
the flesh) a meet remedy to heal an error: And therefore the reproacher meet
to be dealt withal, either by private admonition, if it were public. But the
latter of the two things which he says I confess, I am far from either
confessing it, or believing it; to wit, That the Churches themselves may be
separated from, who tolerate their members in such causeless reproachings.

I said indeed, that a causeless reproach is a sin meet to be censured: But
I said withal, it is not to be censured with so deep a Censure, as
excommunication, especially of all the Churches, and that too, before that it
do appear, that they do tolerate their members in such their causeless
reproachings.

But it may be, he will say, does it not imply, that if it does appear, that
they do tolerate their members in such causeless reproaches, that then I
think they are to be separated from?

Answ. No verily: Put it in a like case: Suppose a child should miscall and
revile his Mothers Sister, I might say, it is a fault meet to be corrected,
yet not with so deep a correction, as to be disinherited: or that his Mother
should be dispossessed of her inheritance, before it do appear, that she do
tolerate her child in such revilings. Would such a speech infer, that in
case it did appear, his Mother did tolerate him, that then his Mother were to
be dispossessed of her inheritance? The true meaning of my speech, was to
express, that such a sin, as reproaching of a Church for a sin, might
deserve a Censure: yet not forthwith excommunication: much less the Church to
be excommunicated, whereof such an one is a member, and least of all, before it
did appear, that the Church knew of it, or did tolerate it: The scope of my
speech was, not to hold forth the grievous desert of a reproach, but the
groundless proceeding unto separation for a reproach, both against a member,
and against the Church that tolerated him, without any further conviction, or
obstinacy, which was the case in hand of Mr. Williams. Some body, he says,
reproached the Church of Salem for separation, some member of some Church. But
what member of what Church, he says not? And yet this is one of the stumbling
blocks that turned him out of the way of communion with all the Churches in the
Country, who (for ought I know) never heard of it unto this day. Let him now
say, that mine own confessions are sufficient Answers to my self, as if I
granted, that in case the member had been known, who so reproached Salem, and
the Church known whereof he was a member, That then there were a lawful
separation from the Church that does but tolerate her member in a causeless
reproach, yea and from all other Churches too, that hold Communion with that
Church.

For he is not ignorant, more goes to a separation then so, unless he has
forgotten the principles and rudiments of Church Government.

He confesses that to be true which I said, That it is not Surgery but
Butchery, to heal every sore with no other medicine, but with Abscission from
the body: But yet as if he could make mine own expressions, confutations of my
self, he says that I have confessed (that which indeed is not my confession,
but my collection of his Argugument;) That Churches of godly persons must be
separated from, for inordinate worldliness.

If this be a Contradiction, it is his, and not mine, as I showed above;
neither do I own any such confession, as mine, which he subjoyneth; That
Churches may be separated from, when they tolerate their members in their
causeless reproaches.

It seems, he thinks, I neither remember mine own words, nor know any
Church-Censure, but Excommunication.

He proceeds to tell us his judgment in so weighty a case as excommunication
or separation is: It is not (says he) every sore of infirmity, or ignorance,
but an Ulcer or Gangreene of obstinacy, for which I maintained, that a person
ought to be cut off, or a Church separated from.

I know not how this judgment of his may satisfy his neighbors; but a good
Conscience willing to walk by rule, would still inquire, (where it was meet)
First, whether every obstinacy, even before conviction, and that in a sin
less heinous, be such an ulcer, or Gangrene, for which either a person ought
to be cut off, or a Church separated from? For there is an obstinacy against a
good way, as there is a scorning of a good way, which is before conviction,
even of ignorance: and to these Wisdom communicates good Counsel, Prove.
1.20.22. But there is a scorning, and so an obstinacy, after conviction, and to
such, Wisdom refuses to communicate any wholesome words, Prove. 9.8, 9.

If he mean the former, why did he refuse communion with us upon such an
obstinacy of ignorance? By what rule did he proceed?

If he mean the latter, let him produce his cause, and bring forth all his
strong reasons, whereby he did so much as offer to convince us of our obstinacy
in any crime, and we will acknowledge his separation to be just, and our sin
to be great in not hearkening to him.

If he tell us again, (as he does in the next words, as indeed the mouth is
most full of the abundance of the heart) if he tell us again of our
guiltiness of cruelty, both against consciences and bodies, in persecuting of
them, we must needs tell him again, that neither himself, nor any others,
(that I can hear off) did ever suffer any Censure, (which he calls cruelty
to consciences and bodies) till after his separation from all the Churches in
the Country. And though he says in the next words, He separated
Conscientiously and peaceably: Yet did ever peaceable Conscience (before him)
separate from Churches for an offense before it was committed?

If he tell us, he separated, for our communion with the Churches of England,
in hearing the word in the Parishes there, let all that fear God (whose hearts
are not forestalled with prejudice or partiality) judge whether his reasons
alleged to convince us of such a sin, (the strongest whereof were answered
in my Letter to him, and have been again refuted in this Reply) have been of
such convincing power, as that we for not hearkening to him must needs lie
under the guilt of an ulcer, or Gangrene of obstinacy, and that after
conviction. I may therefore well call it, not Surgery but Butchery, to cut
off not only so many members of Christ, but also so many Churches of Christ
from fellowship with Christ, before any ulcer or Gangrene of obstinacy was
discovered to us; Nay, I fear I might speak a further word, (and yet I would
be loath to speak any doubtful thing;) but surely (my memory much fails me
or else) he broke forth into this separation, before he gave us any grounds of
his separation at all, or of our conviction of any such sin, as might deserve
such a Censure. And whether that be Butchery or Surgery, let the upright
judge.

But, says he, if it be Butchery to separate conscientiously and peaceably
from the spiritual communion of a Church, or Saints, what shall it be called
by the Lord Jesus, to cut off persons, them, and theirs, branch, and root,
from any Civil being in their Territories, etc. Because their Consciences dare
not how domne to any worship, but what the Lord Jesus has appointed, and being
also otherwise subject to the Civil estate, and Laws thereof?

Here be many extenuations, and mincings of his own carriage, and as many false
aggravations of Guilt upon his sentence of Banishment, and the Authors of it.

As, 1. In that he was cut off, he and his, branch and root, from any Civil
being in these Territories, because their Consciences durst not bow down to
any worship, but what they believe the Lord had appointed: Whereas the truth
is, his Banishment proceeded not against him, or his, for his own refusal of
any worship, but for seditious opposition against the Patent, and against the
Oath of fidelity offered to the people.

2. That he was subject to the Civil estate, and Laws thereof, when yet he
vehemently opposed the Civil foundation of the Civil estate, which was the
Patent: And earnestly also opposed the Law of the general Court, by which the
tender of that Oath was enjoined: and also wrote Letters of Admonition to all
the Churches, whereof the Magistrates were members, for deferring to give
present Answer to a Petition of Salem, who had refused to hearken to a lawful
motion of theirs.

3. That he did but separate from the spiritual society of a Church, or
Saints: whereas he both drew away many others also, and as much as in him lay,
separated all the Churches from Christ.

4. In that he makes the cutting off of persons, them and theirs, branch and
rush, from civil Territories, a far more heinous and odious offense in the
eyes of the Lord Jesus, then himself to cut off, not only himself and his,
branch and rush, but many of his neighbors (by sedition) from spiritual
Communion with the Churches, and all the Churches from Communion with Christ.
As if the cutting off persons, them and theirs, branch and rush, from the
Covenant, and spiritual Ordinances in the Church. were a matter of no account
in respect of cutting off from Civil Liberties in the Territories of the
Commonwealth.

5. In that, what himself did, he predicateth as done conscientiously and
peaceably, as if what the Court had done against him, they had not done
conscientiously also, and with regard to public peace, which they saw he
disturbed, and stood stiffly in his own course, though he was openly convinced
in open Court (as I showed before) that he could not maintain his way, but by
sinning against the light of his own Conscience. As for his Marginall note,
wherein he charge Mr. Cotton to be deeply guilty of Cruelty, both against
Consciences and bodies, in persecuting of them.

I will only Answer thus much, (partly from David, partly from Job,) If the
Lord have stirred him up thus to reproach me, (as Shimei did him) I hope the
Lord will look upon mine affliction, and requite me good for all his slander,
this day, or this year, 2 Samuel 16 12. But if he himself (who without cause is
mine adversary) has whet his tongue like a sword, and his bow to shoot out his
arrows, even bitter words, ( Psalm. 64.3. as he frequently does in his Book)
surely I shall take his book upon my shoulder, and bind it as a Crown to me,
Job 31.36.

TO CHAP. XXIII.
HIs 23. Chapter examineth a speech of mine which might tend to the dishonor
of the Separation, as the reproach against Salem had done before. My Speech
was, That God had not prospered the way of Separation: which least it should be
mistaken, I interpreted, not in respect of outward prosperity: for they found
more favor in our native Country, then those who walked in the way of
Reformation, which is commonly reproached by the name of Puritanisme. The
meetings of the Separatists might be known to the Officers in the Courts, and
winked at, when the Conventicles of the Puritans (as they call them) are hunted
out with all diligence, and pursued with more violence, then any Law can
justify. But I said, that God had not prospered the way of Separation, in that
he had not blessed it, either with peace amongst themselves, or with growth of
grace, such as erring through simplicity, and tenderness of Conscience, have
grown in grace, have grown also to discern their lawful liberty, to
return to the hearing of the Word from English Preachers.

To give Answer to this, the Examiner bestows many Chapters. His first Answer
is, (that which is not unworthy to be attended to, by all whom it concerns,)
That doubtless the Lord has a great Controversy with the Land for their such
violent pursuit and persecution of both. For both of them have borne witness
to several truths of the Lord Jesus. Albeit, I deny not, the one party might
have borne witness to more points of Truth: the other might have borne
witness to fewer, and so have less exceeded bounds of Truth. To make the
English Churches, and their Ministeries, and their Worship, and their
Professors, either nullities, or Antichristian, is a witness not only beyond
the truth, but against the Truth of the Lord Jesus, and his word of Truth.

But for their sufferings; The Puritans (says he) have not suffered
comparatively to the other, (as but seldom Congregating in separate Assemblies
from the common:) And none of them suffering unto death for the way of
Non-Conformitie. Indeed (says he) the worthy witness Mr. Udall was near unto
death for his witness against Bishops, and Ceremonies; But Mr. Penry, Mr.
Barrow, Mr. Greenwood followed the Lord Jesus, with their Gibbets, and were
hanged with him, and for him, in the way of separation. Many more have been
condemned in dye, banished, and choked in Prisans, whom I could produce upon
occasion.

Reply. Paul accounts it a folly to make boasts in comparisons, even of
sufferings: And therefore I choose to be sparing and brief in this Argument:
wherein otherwise I could be copious, there being another Volume of the Book
of Martyrs (as I hear) extant in the Country, (though not in print) of the
sufferings of the godly Ministers and people, beginning where Mr. Fox left.
When he says, Their witnesses against Bishops and Ceremonies, (whom he calls
Puritans) have seldom met in separate Assemblies from the common: It seems
he never read the story of the Classes in Northamptonshire, Suffolk, Essex,
London, Cambridge, discovered by a false brother to Doctor Bancroft (Chaplain
then to Lord Chancellor Hatton, afterward Bishop of London, and after that
Archbishop of Canterbury;) nor that he ever took notice of Doctor Bancrofts
Book against them, entitled, Dangerous Positions and practices against
Religion and State; neither does it seem, that he does acknowledge their
frequent and continual meetings to duties of humiliation, as any separate
meetings from the common. But I doubt not, the Lord took notice of both, and
has now rewarded their sighs and groans, prayers and tears in private with
an open recompense and deliverance in the view of all men.

Besides, though he pleased to confine the witness of these he calls
Puritans, unto Testimony against Bishops and Ceremonies: yet I did not think,
he had been such a stranger in Israel, (if by his leave I may call it Israel)
as to be ignorant, how far both the Admonitions to the Parliament have
reached to bear witness beyond Bishops and Ceremonies. To say nothing of Mr.
Deerings Sermon before the Queen, or Mr. Chadertons at Paul's Cross, or Mr.
Parkers Ecclesiastica Politica, or Mr. Baines his Diocesans Trial.

Though he say, None of them suffered unto death, only Mr. Vdall was near it:
Yet the truth is, he dyed by the annoyance of the Prison, which he might as
well have acknowledged as he does of some of the Separatists in this very
Paragraph, that they were choked in Prison. This I have understood by
faithful witnesses, that when the Coroners Jury (according to the Law of
England) came (as the manner is in such cases) to survey the dead body of Mr.
Vdall in Prison, he bled freshly (though cold before) as a testimony against
the murderous illegal proceedings of the State against him: for so the godly
did apprehend it; judicious Perkins acknowledges such a kind of bleeding to
be a part of the accomplishment of that Scripture in Heb. 11. That the blood of
Abel still speaks.

In like sort, for the same cause (choked in the prison) suffered Mr. Randall
Bates (an heavenly Saint) nor could he be released, though Doctor Hering (a
learned and beloved Physician) earnestly solicited Bishop Neale for his
enlargement as he tendered his life, but the suite of the Physician was repulsed
with reproaches: And the life of his patient spilt by that rigor. He is
therefore much mistaken, when he says, None of them suffered unto death. And
it is alike mistake, when he makes Mr. Penry one of his witnesses unto the
death for Separation. I have received it from Mr. Hildersom (a man of a
thousand) that Mr. Penry did ingenuously acknowledge before his death, That
though he had not deserved death for any dishonor put upon the Queen, by that
Book (which was found in his study, and intended by himself to be presented
to her own hand:) nor by the compiling of Martin Marprelate, (of both which he
was falsely charged;) yet he confessed, he deserved death at the Queens hand,
for that he had seduced many of her loyal Subjects to a separation from
hearing the Word of life in the Parish Churches. Which though himself had
learned to discern the evil thereof, yet he could never prevail to recover
diverse of her Subjects, whom he had seduced: and therefore the blood of their
souls, was now justly required at his hands.

Let the Examiner consider, whether he will own this Mr. Penry for one of his
faithful witnesses hereafter; If he do, let him endeavor to do as he did,
seek to reduce those souls whom he has seduced from hearing the word of
life: or else, let him confess (as Mr. Penry did) the blood of those souls
may justly be required at his hands, if Mr. Penries witness be of weight with
him.

Touching his other witness, to the death of Mr. Barrow, this I can say, from
the testimony of holy and blessed Mr. Dod, who speaking of this Mr. Barrow, God
is not wont (says he) to make choice of men, infamous for gross vices before
their calling, to make them any notable instruments of Reformation after their
Calling. Mr. Barrow whilst he lived in Court, was wont to be a great Gamster,
and Dicer, and often getting much by play, would boast, Vivo de die, in spem
noctis, nothing ashamed to boast of his hopes of his nights lodgings in the
bosoms of his Courtizens. As his spirit was high and rough before his
reformation, so was it after, even to his death. When he stood under the
Gibbet, he lift up his eyes, and Lord (says he) if I be deceived, thou have
deceived me: And so being stopped by the hand of God, he was not able to proceed
to speak any thing to purpose more, either to the glory of God, or to the
edification of the people.

Mr. Greenwood (the Examiners last witness unto death) he indeed of all the
rest was the more to be lamented, as being of a more tender, and conscientious
spirit: but this have I heard reported of him by the same credible hands, That
if he could have been sundred from Mr. Barrow, he was tractable to have been
gained to the truth. But when the Examiner goes on to make comparisons between
the Sufferings of the Separatists, and of (those he styleth) Puritans, in his
Margent, and in his Book. No comparison will hold from the Separatists to
them, but a Minori. What compulsory banishments have been put upon those
blessed and glorious lights, Mr. Cartwright, Parker, Ames? To say nothing of
those in Scotland, or New England: When have the Prisons been vacant of some or
other godly Ministers, and Professors? When will the Examiner show forth alike
company of his witnesses, to those 300. Ministers (whom Mr. Parker compares to
the 300. Soldiers of Gideon) who in one storm of persecution, were some
suspended, some excommunicated, some imprisoned, all of them deprived of their
Ministry, and of their maintenance? And provision made, that none might
practice Phyficke, or teach School, unless they would accept a License with
subscription? So that of necessicie (had not the Lord been wiser, and stronger
then men) they must in remediless misery, they and theirs, have either begged,
or starved; But that with the Lord there be bowels of mercy, and fatherly
compassions, and with him are plenteous redemptions, and provisions, and
protections, when men fail.

The Examiner proceeds (in his Answer) to tell us further, That he believes
there has hardly ever been a Conscientious Separatist, who was not first a
Puritan. For (as Mr. Can has unanswerably proved) the grounds and principles
of the Puritans against Bishops, and Ceremonies, and profaneness of people
professing Christ: and the necessity of Christ's flock and discipline, must
necessarily (if truly followed) lead on to, and enforce a separation.

Reply. 1. If there were hardly ever any conscientious Separatist, who was not
first a Puritan, then it seems, that if there be any Conscience in the
Separatists, it was first wrought in them by the Ministers of those whom he
calls Puritans.

2. Say it were true, that he pretends, That the principles and grounds of
Puritanisme, did enforce Separation:) yet I do not understand, what it makes
to the point in hand.

3. Neither do I understand, how it suiteth with the Examiners profession who
is wont to renounce all communion with Antichristian inventions, so frequently
to take up into his mouth and pen the Nickname of Puritans: which was at first
devised by Sanders the Jesuit, to cast a reproach upon the persons and way of
reformers, to render them suspicious and odious to the State. The righteous
hand of the Lord struck him with madness who invented the name: nor does he
delight in them that delight to take up a reproach against the innocent.

4. How unanswerably Mr. Can has proved the necessity of Separation from their
grounds and principles, I will not judge, because I have not seen his Book.
But to separate from the Churches of England, as no Churches, or false
Churches, from their Ministry, as a false Ministry, from their Sermons as
false worship, from their professors as no visible Saints. And to prove all
this out of the Principles and grounds of those holy Saints of God, whom he
misnameth Puritans, will require a strong efficacy of delusions, to make it
appear probable to a sad and judicious spirit, that is not sorestalled with
prejudice, or partiality.

But the Examiner proceeds in his Answer to enquire, What should be the
Reason, why the Separatist (who witnesses against the Root of the
Constitution it self) should find more favor then the Puritan, or
Nonconformist?

And he tells us,

Doubtless the reasons are evident: 1. Because most of the Separatists have
been poor and low, and not such gainful Customers to the Bishops, their
Courts, and Officers. Mr. Ainsworth himself (though a worthy instrument of
Gods praise) lived upon nine pence in the week with roots boiled, etc.

Reply. In part I will not deny some truth and weight in this reason; But take
it for granted, and it does but confirm what I said, that the Separatist found
more favor then the Nonconformist, whatsoever the reason was.

The second reason that he gives is, That it is a principle in nature to
prefer a professed enemy, before a pretended friend. The Separatists have
been looked at by the Bishops, and their adherents, as known and professed
enemies: whereas the Puritans have professed subjection, and submitted to the
Bishops, their Courts, their Officers, their Common Prayer, and worships: And
yet (the Bishops have well known) with no greater affection, then the
Israelites bore the Egyptians cruel taskmasters.

Reply. 1. What the Non-conformists did bear, it was no more then they thought
they might bear with a good Conscience, according to the light they had
received. If they did bear more, then what in Conscience they judged lawful
to be borne, they had no reason to bear with themselves in so doing.

But if the Bishops bore the less with them in such their subjection, it was
because they looked at them not as pretended friends, but as more dangerous
enemies: as knowing both that the Lord was with them, (which made Saul the more
afraid of David, 1 Samuel 18.28, 29.) as also that the grounds which they gave of
their judgment and practice, were more agreeable to Scripture, and to the
judgment of all reformed Churches, and therefore more likely in time to
prevail, to the utter overthrow of their usurped Hierarchy. But as for the
Separatists, the Bishops did not discern, either the Lord going forth in like
sort with them, or their grounds so likely to subvert their freehold. Though
the Separatists struck at the root of the Constitutions of their Churches,
(which was indeed a greater blow then to strike at the root of Episcopacy:)
yet because the Episcopacy saw that the Separatists struck at the things of
Christ, together with themselves, they knew such strokes would not much hurt
their standing.

The next word which the Examiner answers, is unto that I said; God has not
prospered the way of Separation, neither with peace amongst themselves, nor
with growth of grace.

His answer is; 1. That want of peace may befall the truest Churches of the
Lord Jesus, as them at Antioch, Corinth, Galatia.

Reply. The distraction at Antioch was soon healed by the Counsel of the
Synod at Jerusalem, which is a way of peace which the Churches of the rigid
Separation have not known, nor will condescend unto: which makes their
dissentions destitute of hopes of reconciliation without separation one from
another. The like may be said of the Churches of Galatia and Corinth. I do not
read their differences were healed by Separation, but by listening to
Apostolical Counsel.

2. His second Answer is, that it is a common Character of a false Church
(maintained by the Smiths and Cutlers shop) to enjoy peace, none daring for
fear of civil punishment to question, or differ, etc.

Reply. Though it be a common Character of a false Church, to enjoy a forced
and violent peace: yet it is a peculiar Character of a true Church, to enjoy
holy peace with God, and one with another, which where it is wanting, there is
something else wanting, either in their Faith or Order.

3. His third Answer is, That Gods people in that way have sometimes long
enjoyed sweet peace, and soul contentment, in England, Holland, New England,
and other places, etc.

Reply. The Answer had been more clear and evident, if he had named those
Churches, who have long enjoyed such peace in that way: in that way I say, of
rigid Separation, separating from the Churches of England, as altogether false,
in their Constitution, Ministry, worship, and therefore refusing to hear the
word in the best of the Parish Assemblies. It is a wise Proverb of a wiser then
Soloman, The back slider in heart (from any Truth or way of God) shall be
filled with his own ways. They that separate from their brethren further then
they have just cause, shall at length find cause (or at least think they have
found cause) just enough to separate one from another. I never yet heard of any
instance to the contrary, either in England, or Holland. And for New England,
there is no such Church of the Separation at all that I know of. That separate
Church (if it may be called a Church) which separated with Mr. Williams, first
broke into a division about a small occasion (as I have heard) and then broke
forth into Anabaptisme, and then into Antibaptisme, and Familisme, and now
finally into no Church at all.

But whereas I said, God had not prospered the way of the Separation, as not
with peace amongst themselves, so neither with growth of Grace,

He answers, for growth of Grace, though some false brethren have crept in,
yet Satan himself cannot but confess that multitudes of Gods witnesses
(reproached with the names of Brownists, and Anabaptists) have kept themselves
from the errors of the wicked, and do grow in Grace, and knowledge of our
Lord Jesus, etc.

Reply. It is an unwelcome Subject to go about to convince others of want of
growth in Grace, especially, when we speak of Churches, and that before we
have in a more private manner dealt with them. I look at it as more seasonable
to provoke our own Churches to more growth of Grace at home. For even true
Churches (as that of Ephesus, Revel. 2.) may decay in their first love.

Only thus much I would say, the first Inventor of that way which is called
Brownisme, from whom the Sect took its name, it is well known that he did not
grow in Grace, but fell back first from his own way, to take a Parsonage of a
Parish Church in England in Northamptonsheire, called a Church: God so in a
strange (yet wise) providence ordering, that he who had utterly renounced all
the Churches in England, as no Church should afterward accept of one
Parish Church amongst them, and it called a Church, and from thence he fell to
Organs, in the Temple of his own Church (as I have been credibly informed) and
from thence to discord with his best hearers, and bitter persecution of them at
the last. It is not Gods usual manner of dealing to leave any of the first
publishers or restorers of any Truth of his to such fearful Apostasy from his
Grace, though I Judge not his final Estate.

I will not rehearse what I read in printed Books of the unkind, and
ungracious, and unbrotherly dealings of some of note in that way, whilst they
maintained the rigor of it. That which the Examiner himself has rehearsed in
this very chapter, may suffice to show what growth of Godliness was found in
that Church, the Officer whereof himself styleth a worthy Instrument of Gods
praise: and surely he was a man that deserved well of the Church, for sundry of
his Learned, and painful, and profitable labors. One would hope, that where
the Lord blesses a people with growth of godliness, the people would grow
best under the best Ministers of that way. Mr. Aynsworths name is of best
esteem (without all exception) in that way, who refused Communion with hearing
in England. And if his people suffered him to live upon nine pence a week, with
roots boiled (as the Examiner told us) surely either the people were grown to
a very extreme, low Estate, or else the growth of their godliness was grown
to a very low ebb.

TO CHAP. XXIIII.
IN his 24. and 25. Chapters, the Examiner gives Answer to that speech in my
Letter, That such (of the Separation) as erring through simplicity and
tenderness, have grown in Grace, have grown also to discern their lawful
Liberty for the hearing of the word from the English Preachers. This I speak
with respect to Mr. Robinson, and to his Church, who as he grew to many
excellent gifts both of Grace and nature: so he grew to acknowledge, and in a
Judicious, and godly discourse to approve and defend the lawful Liberty of
hearing the word from the godly Preachers of the Parishes in England.

But in this 24. Chapter the Examiner answers nothing against the truth of my
speech. Only he tells of four sorts of Backsliders from sundry Truths of
God, whom he has observed to be left of God to sad and exemplary spiritual
Judgments.

But because he speaks of such as have decayed in grace, and I speak of such
as grow in grace, his instances come not near the point in hand. I easily
believe that Hypocrites may grow from evil to worse deceiving and being
deceived: 2 Timothy 3.13. But a sincere humble Christian, though he may start
aside for a season, yet Christ is not wont to leave him so: but seeks up
every straysheep of his, and brings them to hear and know his voice in the
mouths of his Shepherds.

TO CHAP. XXV.
IN this 25. chapter, because I had said, as they have grown in Grace, they
have grown in discerning their lawful Liberty to hear the word from the
English Preachers.

He tells us, he might here engage himself in a controversy with me, but that
neither the Treatise will permit: nor is there need, since it has pleased the
Father of Lights to stir up the spirit of a faithful witness of his Truth,
in this particular, Mr. Can, to make a large and faithful Reply to a Book
printed in Mr. Robinsons name, tending to prove such a lawful Liberty.

Reply. Mr. Cann is unknown unto me, and his Book also: which I have not had
the Liberty to get, in these remote ends of the world. I shall willingly bestow
the reading of them if they come to my hands, and God give opportunity,
especially if I see the spirit of a faithful witness in them, which the
Examiner extolleth. Only I am apt to think, as young men grow in years, and
gifts, they will also grow up to the mellow-mildnesse, and softness and
moderation of riper age as Mr. Robinson in many things did.

Now from the name of English Preachers (which I used in my speech) the
Examiner though he seem to decline the engaging of himself in a controversy
about hearing of them, yet he takes occasion to enter into a threefold
discourse about them.

The first in (this chapter) concerning this title, English Preachers.
Secondly, concerning hearing them in chapter 26. Thirdly concerning their
calling in chap. 27.

The sum of his discourse about the title of these Preachers, stands in
these particulars.

First, that Mr. Cotton acknowledges, the ordinary Ministers of the Gospel, to
Pastors, Teachers, Bishops, Overseers, Elders: and that their proper work is,
to feed and govern, a truly converted, holy, and godly people, gathered into a
flock or Church Estate.

And not properly Preachers, to convert, beget, make Disciples, which the
Apostles, and Evangelists properly were: so that according to Mr. Cottons
confessions, English Preachers are not Pastors, Teachers, Bishops, Elders, but
Preachers of glad news (Evangelists) men sent to convert and gather Churches,
(Apostles,) etc.

Secondly, yet the Examiner confesses, that at the Pastors feeding his flock,
and at the Prophets prophesying in the Church, an unbeleiver coming in may be
convinced, etc. but this is accidental, etc.

Thirdly, the Examiner acknowledges that it pleased God to work personal
Repentance in the hearts of thousands in Germany, England, Low Countries,
France, Scotland, Ireland, etc. Yea, and who knows but in Italy, Spain, and
Rome, also, etc. but all this has been under the notion of Ministers feeding
their flocks, not of Preachers sent to convert the unconverted, and unbeleiving.

Reply. 1. Though I acknowledge the ordinary Ministers of the Gospel, to be
Pastors and Teachers: yet it is far from me to think (howsoever the Examiner
against my mind reports my mind otherwise) that they are not properly
Preachers, to converts beget, or make Disciples, etc.

For first though the work of ordinary Ministers were not to convert, but to
feed souls: yet their act of feeding is properly exercised by preaching the
word. Timothy (as a Minister) is taught of Paul how to behave himself in the
house of God which is the Church of God, 1. Tim. 3.15.

And this he gave him in charge (as one great part of his work) to preach the
word in season and out of season, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. Besides they were neither
Evangelists, nor Apostles, surely (for then they could not have been so
miscarried) but the ordinary Ministers of the Gospel, (Pastors, and Teachers of
Churches) of whom Paul speaks, ( Phil. 1.15, 16.) Some preach Christ says
he, even of envy, and strife, and some of good will: The one preach Christ of
contention not sincerely: the other of Love.

Again, Paul says the Lord has ordained, that they who preach the Gospel
should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. Speaks he that only of Apostles, and
Evangelists only, and not of ordinary Church Officers? of all doubtless,
according to Gal. 6.6.

Moreover, what are Preachers but publishers of the Gospel, or glad tidings of
the word of God? for so says the Apostle, preach the word, 2 Timothy 4.2. And
what is preaching the word, but explication and application of it? and is not
the explication and application of the word, as fit to feed souls, as to
convert them?

Secondly, when he makes it to be not the proper work of Pastors, and
Teachers, to preach for conversion, but accidental only, and counts and
calls it a most preposterous work for ordinary Ministers to preach for
conversion, etc.

He must needs give me leave to dissent from him, my Reasons be 1. from the
institution and work of the Ministry to the worlds end, whereof one is, to
make Disciples, Matthew. 28.19, 20.

Say not, that is a peculiar Act of the Apostolic Office: for the Lord Jesus
speaks of three Acts: making Disciples, Baptizing, Teaching: and in the
exercise of these he promises to be with his Apostles, and their successors
unto the end of the world, ver. 20. Successors I say, for the Apostles
themselves were not to continue themselves in the exercise of those Acts to the
end of the world, in their own persons, but in their successors, the ordinary
Ministers of the Gospel.

Secondly, from the end why Christ gave Pastors, and Teachers, as well as
Apostles and Evangelists: which was for the work of the Ministry, for the
gathering together of the Saints, as well as for the building of them up to a
perfect man, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.

Thirdly from the Estate of the Church, wherein it seldom or never falls
out, but some Hypocrites are found: and besides them, many Infants, and these
had need of converting Grace.

Fourthly, from the ordinary way of Conversion, which is by hearing the word,
and the word preached by a Minister sent, Romans 10.14. to 17. either therefore
there must be no conversion of souls after the decease of the Apostles and
Evangelists: or those who are to be converted, must be converted by private
Christians, or by the ordinary Ministers of the Gospel, the successors of the
Apostles; but surely not the first: for God will have in every age some or
other converted to his Grace to praise his name throughout all Generations.

Not the second: for they shall not be ordinarily converted by private
Christians, for the Apostle says, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by a
Preacher, and him sent. Therefore the third way remains, that Faith is
intended of God to be wrought from age to age by the ordinary Ministry of the
Gospel.

If the Conversion of souls were accidental to the work of the Minister, it
were then praeter scopum efficientis, besides the intent of the worker. But it
is neither beside the intention of the principal worker, God ( for he works
all things according to the Counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11.) nor
besides the intention of the Minister, for as has been said, it is one maine
intent and end of his Office, to make Disciples, and gather Saints; and Solomon
makes it an act of wisdom, and therefore not an act of accidental casualty
to win souls, Prove. 11.30.

If it be said why are they called Pastors, if they be also Fathers? Pastors
are for feeding: not for begetting.

Answ. Pastors are also Fathers: and though they be called Pastors, yet the
ordinary Ministers of the Gospel have other Titles also, which imply more then
feeding: as they are called Teachers, and Teachers of the ignorant, Romans 2.20.
(to minister saving knowledge to them) as well as of men of understanding. And
Elders in the greek Language have their name from Ambassadors, (...) an Elder,
from (...) an Ambassador, and it is one work of heavenly Ambassadors to
beseech men to be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5.20. yea and Pastors themselves
(whose work is properly to feed) their feeding is with the word of Life, which
is able to quicken dead souls to life, as to nourish living souls to growth
in Christ Jesus. The whole work of Peter's Apostolical calling was wrapped up
in a Pastoral name, and work, John 21.15, 16, 17.

Those two Reasons therefore are void of true and sound reason, which moved the
Examiner to enter upon this passage. First, because (says he) so many
excellent and worthy persons mainly preach for Conversion, and yet account
themselves fixed and constant Ministers to particular Congregations, etc.

Secondly, that in these great Earthquakes of all Estates civil and
spiritual, such a Ministry might be sought after, whose proper work might be
preaching for converting of souls to Christ.

For by that which has been said may plainly appear that those constant
Ministers who mainly preach for Conversion (so be it they attend, not to that
only, but to building up also) they do herein attend to a proper work of
their calling: and now to look for another new Ministry (say of Apostles or
Evangelists) to attend conversion of souls only, is to look for a blessing
which the Lord has not promised: and besides himself has ordained sufficient
ordinary means for that end, as has been showed both here, and in some former
passages of this Treatise.

TO CHAP. XXVI.
IN this Chapter the Examiner falls upon the second part of discourse, about
English Preachers, to wit, about the lawfulness of hearing of them, and though
he said before in the former chapter, he would not engage himself in this
Controversy: yet here he gives a double Argument against it.

His first Argument is, from my testimony, which how much he weighteth, is
better known to himself then to me.

Mr. Cotton (says he) himself maintains, that the dispensing of the word in
a Church State, is Christ's feeding of his flock, Cant. 1.8. Christ's kissing of
his Spouse, Cant. 1.2. Christ's embracing of his Spouse in the marriage bed,
Cant. 1.16. Christ's nursing of his Children at his wives breasts, Cant. 4. And
is there no communion between the Shepherd and his sheep? the Husband and the
wife in chaste kisses and embraces? the Mother and the child at the breasts?

Answer. 1. The dispensing of the word in a Church State (that is by
Church Officers to Church Members, united together in Church State) it is
indeed an expression of familiar and dear Communion between Christ and his
Church, as between the husband and his spouse, between the nursing mother and
the child, and between the shepherd and his flock: But suppose Pagans and
Indians should ordinarily frequent our Church Assemblies (as they are wont to
do in hearing the word) does he think, I would maintain, that there is the
like spiritual and familiar Communion between Christ, and them, as between
Christ, and his Church?

Answer, 2. Besides, the question is not what communion Christ may have with a
stranger in the hearing of the word in the Assembly of his Church: but what
communion there is between the Officer of the Church, who preaches the word
and the stranger. Christ out of his sovereign grace may dispense himself to
the stranger in what relation he pleases; he may make the word both as
spiritual seed, and as food to him, and so may declare himself both a father,
and a Pastor, and husband, and a mother to him; and yet no such Church-relation
pass between the Church Officer, and the stranger.

Answer. 3. Suppose there did grow some spiritual relation between the
Church Officer, and the stranger, (as God might so bless his Ministry, as to
make him a spiritual Father, and feeder to the stranger:) yet this Relation is
not between the Preacher and the stranger in respect of his Office, but in
respect of his gif, as I declared above.

The reason of the difference is evident:

1. Church-relation, between a Church Officer, and Churchmember, is constant,
and permanent, and not to be dissolved, but by consent of the Church: but this
relation between the Preacher and stranger is transient, and the intercourse of
the exercise of their relation easily changeable, at the discretion of the
stranger, without the consent, or cognizance of the Church.

2. Church relation between an Officer and a member, carries on the duties of
Church-worke between them unto full accomplishment. If any offense grow between
an Officer, and a member, the one has power to deal with the other in a
Church Way unto a perfect healing: but there is not the like power or liberty,
either in preacher, or stranger, so to proceed one with another, in case of any
such offense.

The Examiners second Argument is taken also from mine own confession, as if
there were no weighty Argument to be found in this case, but what might be
gathered up from the weakness, or unwariness of my expressions. But thanks
be to God, that has so guided my words, that no such advantage can justly be
taken from them, as to countenance so ungodly an error.

Mr. Cotton (says he) confesses, that the fellowship in the Gospel, (Phil.
1.5.) is a fellowship or Communion in the Apostles doctrine, Community,
breaking of bread, and prayer, in which the first Church continued, Acts 2.46.
All which overthrows the doctrine of lawful participation of the word and
prayer in a Church State, where it is not lawful to communicate, in the
breaking of bread, or seals.

Answ. If this be all the Conclusion that he striveth for, that participation
of the word and prayer, is not lawful in a Churchestate, where it is not
lawful to communicate in the seals, I shall never contend with him about it.
I should never think it lawful there to enter into a Church Estate, where I
thought it lawful only to partake in hearing, and prayer, and not in the
seals also. But this is that I deny, A man to participate in a Church Estate,
where he partaketh only in hearing and prayer, before and after Sermon; and
joyneth not with them, neither in their Covenant, nor in the seals of the
Covenant.

To CHAP. XXVII.
THe third part of the Examiners discourse touching English Preachers, takes
up this 27. Chapter: and it is concerning the calling and commission of the
English Preachers.

Mr. Cotton himself (says he) and others most eminent in New England, have
freely confessed:

First, That notwithstanding their profession of Ministry in Old England: yet
in New England (till they received a Calling from a particular Church) that
they were but private Christians.

Secondly, That Christ Jesus has appointed no other Calling to the Ministry,
but such as they practice in New England, and therefore consequently, that all
other, which is not from a particular Congregation of godly persons, is none of
Christ's.

As first, a Calling and Commission from the Bishops.

Secondly, From a Parish of natural and unregenerate persons.

Thirdly, From some few godly persons, yet remaining in Church Fellowship after
the Parish way.

Fourthly, That eminent gifts and abilities are but qualifications fitting or
preparing for a Call to an Office, 1 Timothy 3. Tit. 1.

All which premises duly considered, he desires that Mr. Cotton, and all that
fear God, might try what will abide the fiery Trial in this particular, when
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed in flaming fire, etc.

Reply. It is a weak cause that is maintained only by the testimonies of
adversaries, and them either mistaken or falsified.

It is in him either a mistake, or a fraudulent expression of our minds, to
say, That notwithstanding our former profession of Ministry in Old England,
yet (till we received a Calling from a particular Church) we were but private
Christians.

This speech may be so conceived, as if notwithstanding our former profession
of Ministry in Old England: yet indeed we confessed, our Ministry there was no
Ministry: and this is a false expression of our minds.

It may be also conceived, that we confessed, we had no calling from a particular
Church, till we came to New England. And this is also a false expression of our
minds likewise.

Or it may be conceived, that notwithstanding our former profession and
exercise of Ministry in Old England: yet being cast out from thence by the
usurping power of the Prelacy, and dismissed (though against their wills) by
our Congregations, (save only such as came along with us) we looked at our
selves as private members, and not Officers to any Church here, until one or
other Church might call us unto Office. This sense of our profession is true,
but nothing availeable to the Examiners intendment.

Secondly, It is in him another mistake, or else a fraudulent expression of our
minds, when he says, We hold and freely confess, that Christ Jesus has
appointed no other Calling to the Ministry, but such as we practice in
New England: And that any other Calling to the Ministry, which is not from a
particular Congregation of godly persons, is none of Christ's.

Though we do believe and profess the calling which we have received to the
Ministry in New England, to be of Christ: yet

1. It is an insolent phrase that savoureth of more arrogance, then either we
dare use, or allow in our selves or others, to seem to make our calling to the
Ministry in New England, a Rule, and pattern, and precedent to all the
Churches of Christ throughout the world. Did ever any man meet with such an
expression in any of our writings? That Christ Jesus has appointed no other
Calling to the Ministry, but such as we practice in New England? Such language
does neither become the lips of Mr. Williams, nor of any Minister in
New England.

2. Though we believe our calling to be of God, yet we do neither believe nor
profess, that every difference from us which other Churches may use in the
calling of their Ministers, does straight way make their callings no callings,
or no callings of Christ. Though it be our manner (and as we believe according
to the word) that every Church chooses and calls their own Ministers, and
ordains them by the Presbytery of the same Church: yet if the Presbytery of
other Churches commend a Minister to a vacant Church, and upon the acceptance
of the Church, if the presbyters of those Churches do ordain him with the
consent of the Church, we do not profess that this is no calling of Christ,
or that these are no Ministers of Christ. The f^ee choice of the Church is
preserved (for ought we know) in their free acceptance of a Minister commended
to them. And whether the Minister be ordained by imposition of hands, at all,
or no, and if by imposition of hands, by the hands of fellow-Elders of other
Churches with the consent of the Church: We neither put so much weight in such
a Rite, though Apostolical; nor do we so far restrain the liberty of
communion of Churches, that if they shall communicate such intercourse of
Church-actions one to another, then all their callings and administrations to
be of none effect. We are not so masterly and peremptory in our apprehensions:
And yet (with submission) we conceive, the more plainly and exactly all
Churchactions are carried on according to the letter of the rule, the more
glory we shall give unto the Lord Jesus, and procure the more peace to our
Consciences, and to our Churches, and reserve more purity and power to all our
Administrations.

3. Though we do believe, and profess, that a Church (by rule) ought to be a
Congregation of godly persons, or at least of such as profess godliness: yet
if (through neglect of the power of doctrine) few godly persons be left in a
Congregation, and (through neglect of discipline) few of those who profess
godliness be found so blameless, as the purity of the Sanctuary requires:
yet we do not straight way profess that such Congregations are no Churches,
or that a Ministry chosen by such a Congregation, are none of Christ's.

It is true, Gods chiefest regard is of his chosen Saints, godly persons. To
them, and for them, he has given Church Estate, Church Covenant, and seals,
Church Officers, with all the power of the administrations of the holy things,
the ordinances of Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. But yet that his holy Saints
might be preserved, (...), without scruples and distracting perplexities in
their Church Communion, the Lord is pleased for their sakes to tolerate much
hypocrisy, and many aberrations in Church Matters, before he reject Churches
as no Churches, Ministry as no Ministry of Christ, callings as no callings.

To speak then a word to the inferences, which the Examiner gathers from the
two former mistaken confessions of ours.

As, 1. That a Calling or Commission received from the Bishops is none of
Christ's.

Reply. 1. We do not believe nor profess, that the Ministers of England, who
received Ordination from the Bishops, did receive their calling from the
Bishops; their Episcopal ordination is no part of their vocation to the
Ministry. Their vocation or calling is from Christ by the Election or at least
acceptance of the Congregation: The ordination is only Adjunctum Consummans
of the solemnity of their calling, as has been showed above.

Reply. 2. Episcopal ordination, though it be an aberration from the
institution: yet we do not conceive, that it makes an abrogation of the
calling of a Minister. Extrinsecall pollutions, though they defile the calling,
yet they do not destroy it.

His second inference is; That a Calling from a Parish of natural and
unregenerate persons, is none of Christ's.

Reply. 1. It is an hard saying, to say that all of the Parish are natural and
unregenerate Persons. Such as are swift to judge themselves, are slow to judge
others.

Reply. 2. Suppose they were all natural and unregenerate persons; yet they
professing Christianity, and meeting together every Lords day, for the worship
of the Lord Jesus, and desiring to have a Minister to instruct them therein,
their calling is not a nullitie. I cannot say, that the worshippers of God at
Philippi, (whereof Lydia was one) (who met together for prayer every Sabbath
day) were any of them better then unregenerate persons, before Paul and Sylas
came amongst them. And yet if a man of Macedonia come and call Paul and Sylas,
to come and help them, they assuredly gather, that the Lord had called them to
preach the Gospel to them, Acts 16.9, 10.

His third infer^nce is; That a Calling from some few godly persons, yet
remaining in Church fellowship after the Parish way, is not of Christ.

Reply. Then it would follow, that a remnant of godly persons is not sufficient
to constitute and denominate a Church, if the greater part be corrupt and
unclean. But the Prophet Isaiah was of another mind, and has taught us by
the Holy Ghost to judge otherwise: Except (says he, Isai. 1.9.) the Lord of
Hosts had left us a very small Remnant, we should have been as Sodom, we
should have been like unto Gomorrah; In his judgment, it is not a multitude of
hypocrites and profane persons, that makes a Church (where a remnant of godly
persons are found) to become as Sodom or Gomorrah: But it is a remnant, a very
small remnant, that preserve the Church from becoming as Sodom, or Gomorrah.

His fourth and last inference is; That eminent gifts and abilities, are but
qualifications fitting and preparing for a Call, or Office, according to 1 Timothy
3. Tit. 1.

Reply. We readily acknowledge it: but yet if a few godly persons shall call
for the employment of these gifts to their spiritual edification: The men who
are qualified with these gifts, are not only fitted and prepared for a call,
or office, but actually called unto office; at least, to preach the word unto
them, though not to administer the Covenant, or seals of the Covenant, but
only to them and their seed, who yield professed subjection to the Gospel of
Christ Jesus. If any through ignorance or infirmity proceed further in their
administrations, I do believe the repentance of the Ministers, (for sins
known and secret) and the faith of the godly party, is more able to sanctify
the corrupt and unclean sort to their Communion; then the corruption of the
unclean sort is able to corrupt the Minister, and Worship, and Church Estate
of all.

To CHAP. XXVIII.
IN this last Chapter of his, though he do repeat some passages of the close
of my Letter; yet I do not discern how his Answer is fitted at all to those
passages. Nevertheless, because he is pleased to gather from those passages,
That I have not duly considered sundry particulars: I am willing to take up the
consideration of them, for a Conclusion: The first particular is, The
necessity of Separation between the garden of the Church, and the wilderness
of the world: As the Church of the Jews under the old Testament was separate
from the world; so ought the Church of the New Testament to be.

Reply. 1. Of this particular I have considered, not in a confused generality
(as he delivers it) but in a distinct apprehension, thus; The world is taken
in Scripture more ways then one, and so is separation: The world is taken
sometimes for the frame of heaven and earth, and all the hosts of them, man and
beast, etc. as when God is said to have made the world, Act. 17.24. Sometimes
for the state of the world; as when Christ is said to have redeemed us from
this present evil world, Gal. 1.4. Sometimes for the Civil Government of this
world; as when the Apostle exhorts the Romans, not to conform their
Church-bodies according to the platform of the Roman Monarchy, into
Oecumenicall, National, Provincial, Diocesan Bodies, Romans 12.2. Sometime for
the wicked of the world; as when it is said, The world loves his own, Joh.
15.19. And the whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. Sometimes
likewise, for the corruption that is in the world, 2 Pet. 1.4. The lusts of the
world, 1 John 2.16.

In like manner, there be more ways of Separation then one; As, first, there
is a separation in affection, Love not the world, 1 John 2.16. Jam. 4.4.
Secondly, there is a separation in habitation, which is part of the meaning of
Isai. 52.11. Revel. 18.4. Thirdly, there is a separation of Communion, 2 Cor.
6.14. to 17th. Besides, there be diversities likewise of Communion: for there
is a Civil Communion; and there is a religious Communion. And of either sort,
there is a confederate Communion: And there is a Communion without confederacy:
And of confederate Communion, there is a confederacy in matters of common
civilitie; and there is a confederacy in matters of more intimate friendship,
society, and familiarity.

To apply these different considerations of the world, and of Separations,
according to the due and right apprehension thereof in the word of truth.

First, It is lawful to have civil peace, and loving correspondency with
neighbors in the world, yea even with Idolaters, and Infidels, so as not only
to trade with them, but to feast with them, yea and to succor them in their
distresses, Romans 12.18. 1 Cor. 10.27. Luke 10.34.

Secondly, It is lawful to make leagues of peace with all men in the world,
(even with Idolaters and Infidels) to wit, for free commerce, for trade, and
inoffensive neighborhood, Genesis 31.44. to 53. Judge. 4.17.

Thirdly, It is lawful for the Subjects of the same State, to enter into
confederacy amongst themselves, and with their Princes, to submit to the same
Civil Government, and Laws, and to assist one another in mutual defense
against a common enemy, 2 Samuel 5.3. Eccles. 8.3.

But on the other side, this consideration I have had of Separation from the
world: which the Examiner may consider, whether it be due or no.

First, That from the world (as taken for the creatures of the world) we are to
separate in affection, to wit, from the inordinate love thereof, Jam. 4.4.

Secondly, From the world, as taken for the carnal malignant estate of it, we
are to separate both in our affection, and in our conversation, Gal. 1.4. Phil.
3.20.

Thirdly, From the world, as taken for the Civil Government of it, we are to
separate our Church-bodies, and the government thereof in frame and
constitution, Romans 12.1, 2.

Fourthly, From the world, as taken for the Cities and Countries thereof, which
are fit to pollute us with their prevalent pollutions, we are to separate in
our habitations; which is part of the meaning of Isai. 52.11. Rev. 18.4.

Fifthly, From the world, as taken for the corruptions and lusts thereof, their
evil examples, corrupt worship, Idolatries, superstitions, vain fashions, and
the worldly persons addicted to these things, we are to separate, both in
affection, and in Communion, whether we speak of religious Communion, or of
Civil Confederate Communion in matters of intimate friendship, society, and
familiarity. As we may not partake in Idolatrous feasts, or worship, nor enter
into marriage-Covenant with Idolaters, 2 Cor. 6.14. to 17. Nor may we
confederate with them in leagues of amity, to have friends and enemies in
common, 1 Kings 20.4. nor to have partnership in trade and commerce, 2 Chronicles.
20.35, 36, 37.

Sixthly, There is yet another separation whereby the Church and people of God,
do separate from the scandalous offenders of their own body, 2 These. 3.6. 1
Cor. 5.11. This, though it be in a special manner aimed at here by the
Examiner, yet is it by him most improperly and confusedly called separation
from the world. The Apostle does most expressly contradistinguish these, the one
from the other: I wrote unto you (says he) in an Epistle, not to company with
fornicators: yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world, or with the
covetous, or extortioners, or with Idolaters, for then must ye needs go out
of the world. But if any man that is called a brother, be a fornicator, or
covetous, or an Idolater, with such an one, no not to eat, 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11.
As who should say, a fornicator or Idolatrous brother of the Church is one
thing; a fornicator and Idolater of the world is another, from a fornicator or
Idolatrous brother, you are to be separate: from a fornicator or Idolater of
the world, in some kind you need not to separate; In as much therefore as the
Churches of England do not separate sundry notorious scandalous persons from
their Church Communion, though it be a leavening corruption: yet their sin is
not want of Separation from the world, but want of purification of the Church.
In the mean time, they are separated from the world of Pagans, and Infidels,
as the Church of Israel notwithstanding their toleration of all sorts of
offenders, Idolaters, murderers, adulterers, they were yet separated from
Pagans by profession of a different Religion, and the ordinances thereof.

The second particular which the Examiner says Mr. Cotton has not duly
considered, is, That all the grounds and principles leading to oppose Bishops,
Ceremonies, Common Prayer, prostitution of the Ordinances of brist to the
ungodly, and the true practice of Christ's own Ordinances, do necessarily
conclude a separation of holy from unholy, penitent from impenitent, godly from
ungodly. And that to frame any other building upon such grounds and
foundations, is no other then to raise the form of a square house upon the
keele of a Ship, which will never prove a soul saving true Arc or Church of
Christ Jesus according to the pattern.

Reply. I cannot acknowledge what he says, that I have not duly considered,
that all the grounds and principles leading to oppose Bishops, and Ceremonies,
etc. do necessarily conclude a separation of holy from unholy, etc. For I have
considered, and well weighed (after my slender measure) that they do indeed
conclude a threefold separation of holy from unholy.

1. Doctrinall, that the Minister of Christ, whilst he lives amongst such
dissolute and scandalous persons, he is to separate them in the application of
his doctrine, between the holy and unholy, between the precious and the vile:
so as to make sad the hearts of the wicked, whom God would have to be made sad,
and to strengthen the heart and hands of the righteous, whom God would have to
be comforted.

Secondly, A practical separation in a man's own person, that what a man
finds upon those grounds and principles to be unwarrantable and sinful, he
do forbear the same in his own practice, and dissuade others from the same by
his doctrine and example.

Thirdly, An Ecclesiastical separation, that when a man cannot continue in
fellowship with such a Church, but that he shall be compelled to the practice
of some sin, or of necessity to communicate with the sins of others, then
(after all good means used, in vain, to redress those evils) meekly to
separate and withdraw himself from fellowship with them in Church Communion,
as one that cannot enjoy the good which is found amongst them, without
partaking in sundry evils that cleave to them.

Thus far I have considered the grounds and Principles of Reformation, (of
which the Examiner speaks) and do find that they do necessarily conclude,
a separation of holy from unholy thus far. But I confess, I have not
considered, nor can I find out, by any further due consideration, that the
principles and grounds of Reformation do necessarily conclude a separation
from the English Churches, as false Churches, from their Ministry, as a false
Ministry, from their worship as a false worship, from all their professors, as
from no visible Saints. Nor can I find, that they do either necessarily or
probably conclude, a separation from hearing the word preached by godly
Ministers in the Parish-Churches in England: Nor can I find, that the building
of our Churches in these ends of the world is the raising up of a square house
upon the keele of a Ship, unless it be the Arc of Noah: for as the souls in
the Arc were saved from water; so we find by experience, and good evidence
from the word, that the Lord blesses our Church Communion and administrations
with soule-saving efficacy, through his grace in Christ.

Thirdly, The third particular, which the Examiner says, I have not duly
considered, is, The multitudes of holy and faithful men and women, who have
witnessed this truth from Queen Mary's days, by writing, disputing, and
suffering, far above what the Non-conformists have done, etc.

Reply. This particular has been considered above in Answer to Chapter 23.

Fourthly, The fourth particular, which he desires might be better considered,
Is our own practice, and profession. Our practice, in constituting our Churches
of none but godly persons, and uniting them into a body by voluntary mutual
Covenant, and adding none to them, but persons carefully examined and approved,
and entering by way of confession, both of their sins, and of their faith.
Our practice also, in suppressing other English, who have attempted to set up a
Congregation in a Parishionall way. Our profession in the late Answer we gave
to many worthy persons, (whom yet we account godly Ministers and people) that
we could not permit them to live in the same Commonwealth together with us, if
they should set up any other Church and Worship, then what our selves practice.

Reply. 1. Our practice in the constituting and ordering our own Churches here,
holds forth, what matter, and form, and order of the Church, we do believe
to be most agreeable to the pattern set before us in the Gospel of Christ. And
our not receiving all comers unto the Communion of the Lords Table, and other
parts of Church Fellowship, (saving only, unto the public hearing of the
Word, and presence at other duties) it argues indeed, that such persons,
either think themselves unfit materials for Church Fellowship, (and so they
never offer themselves to us) or else that we our selves conceive them to be as
stones standing in need of a little more hewing and squaring, before they be
laid, as living stones in the walls of the Lords house. All which amounts
only to this, That we do consider and bewail the defects of the Churches of
England, in receiving ignorant and scandalous persons to all the liberties of
the Lords Table, and of his house, as other ways. But it does not at all argue
(neither is it our mind it should argue) their Churches, and worship, and
Ministry, and members, should all of them be separated from as false, or none
at all.

Our practice in suppressing such as have attempted to set up a Parishionall
way, I never heard of such a thing here to this day. And if any such thing were
done, before my coming into the Country, I do not think it was done by
forcible compulsion, but by rational conviction.

But as for our profession, that we should answer many worthy Ministers and
people in England, that we could not permit them to live in the same
Commonwealth with us, if they varied from us.

I have cleared it above (in Answer to Chapt. 11.) to be a notorious falsehood:
and but that I know the Devil is able to create slander of nothing, (as God is
able to create truths of nothing) I should think it incredible, that any man
who has been in New England should be able to say, (as the Examiner here does)
that we persecute the Parishes in New England, and yet frequent the Parishes in
Old England.

Fifthly, The fifth particular which he thinks I have not duly considered is,
That in the Parishes (which Mr Cotton holds but inventions of men) how ever
they would have liberty to frequent the worship of the Word, yet they separate
from the Sacraments: And yet (according to our own Principles) there is as true
Communion in the ministration of the Word, as in the Seals. What mystery
(says he) should be in this, but that here, (to wit, in Old England) the
Cross of Christ may be avoided, if persons come to Church?

Reply. 1. It is an untruth, that Mr. Cotton holds the Parishes to be but
inventions of men; for though I hold, that the receiving of all the Inhabitants
in the Parish, into the full fellowship of the Church, and the admitting of
them all unto the liberty of all the Ordinances, is an humane corruption, (and
so if he will, an humane invention;) yet I do not hold, nor ever did, that
their Parishes were only an humane invention. For I believe, the Lord Jesus
has the truth of his Churches, and Ministry, and worship in them,
notwithstanding the inventions of men superadded to them.

Reply. 2. Though I do believe, there is as true Communion in the ministration
of the Word in a Church Estate (to wit, to such as are in Church Estate) with
the Minister of the Word, as in the Seals. Yet it is far from me to hold,
and from any principle of mine to infer, that there is as true Communion in
the ministration of the Word to every hearer, as in the Seals; for then we
might as easily admit our Indians to the Seals, as we do admit them daily to
the ministration of the Word.

Reply. 3. It is a malignant and Satanicall misconstruction of the intentions
of such godly persons, who (out of sincere affection to spiritual growth) do
hear the Ministry of the Word from godly Preachers in England, to accuse them
before God, and Angels, and men, that they do it to avoid the Cross of
Christ, (to wit, persecution) which may be avoided in a great measure, if
persons come to Church.

It is well known, that sundry of them are so sincere and constant in their
profession, that as they have suffered much for the cause of Christ, against
humane corruptions in Gods worship: so they would be ready to suffer yet more,
for neglecting to come to Church, if they suspected any humane corruption at
all in it.

Again, It is well known, that any stranger in London, (by removing now and
then his lodging) may escape not only persecution, but observation, for a
longer time, then any of our hearers are ordinarily wont to sojourne there:
Besides, in this time of universal freedom from all persecution during this
long Parliament, why do not our members of these Churches forbear to hear
the Word in the Parishes now, when there is no fear nor danger at all of
persecution, for not coming to Church?

His sixth and last particular consideration is, That how ever Mr. Cotton says,
He has not found such presence of Christ and evidence of the Spirit in such
(separate) Churches, as in the Parishes: What should be the reason of their
great rejoycings and boastings of their own separations in New England, in so
much, that some of the most eminent amongst them have affirmed, that even the
Apostles Churches were not so pure? Surely if the same new English Churches
were in Old England, they could not meet in Old England without persecution:
which therefore in Old England they avoyde, by frequenting the way of
Church-worship in the Parishes, which in New England they persecute.

Reply. 1. The Examiner might easily have satisfied himself in this
consideration, if he had been willing to understand that which he knows to be
our meaning. He knows very well, and has often told us of it before, that we
our selves in our Churches do practice some kind of separation here, to wit,
separation, not from the Churches in Old England, as no Churches, but from some
corruptions found in them. In such Churches as so separate, we never speak of
them, that we had not found the presence of Christ, or evidence of the Spirit
in such Churches. But I speak of such rigid Separatists Churches, as renounce
the Churches, and Ministry, and worship, and Saints of England, as if they
were all false, or none at all, and therefore utterly do refuse to hear the
word in their Assemblies, which is such a way of separation, as I told him in
my Letter, the Lord Jesus never delivered, nor any of his Apostles after him,
nor any of his Prophets before him. Of which he takes no notice, nor gives
any ground either from Christ, or his Apostles, or Prophets, for such practice;
but puts us off, that we practice separation our selves, and rejoice
therein, as if our separation and theirs were both of one nature, and measure:
which indeed differ as much (as I said before) as Surgery, and Butchery.

Reply. 2. When he tells us, We boast of our separations in New England, yea
so far, as that some of our most eminent have said, that even the Apostles
Churches were not so pure.

I must needs profess, I never heard, nor read of such a speech, but only in
this Examiners Book. The speech it self savoureth, I know not whether of more
ignorance, or arrogance, or blasphemy. The broadest speech in this kind, that
ever I heard to fall from the lips of any in this Country, was that of Mr.
Williams himself, who whilst he lived at Salem (as I am credibly informed)
would say, That of all the Churches of Christ in the world, the new English
were the most pure, and of all the new English, the Church of Salem. I am so
well acquainted with the liberty and boldness of the Examiners tongue in
calumniations, that until I know the name of that eminent person, whom he
reproacheth to have so spoken, he must give me leave to fear, either a
mistake, or that which is worse.

Reply. 3. It is a double calumny, (but suitable to many other of the former)
that we in New England do persecute the way of separation, whether the one
kind of separation, or the other. It is true of neither, for we practice the
one, and tolerate the other.

And again, that we frequent the Parish-Churches in Old England, to avoid
persecution.

Unless men's tongues were their own, I wonder, how they can allow themselves
to speak so excessively at random.

These his six Considerations, having so little considerable truth, or weight
in them, I justly said, That he in withdrawing the people of God from hearing
the voice of Christ in so many Congregations, both in New England, and in Old,
did not help Jehovah against the mighty, but Satan against Jehovah, and
against the mighty Ordinances of his Word, and Ministry.

But he answers, that he helps the zealous souls of the Separati^n, and he
helps us to seek the Lord Jesus without halting.

How he helps them I know not, unless it be by depriving them of many
precious means of grace, which they might enjoy by hearing the Word in either
England: or unless by his own example he now help them, Proficere in peius,
to separate further from all instituted worship of the Lord, to cast off their
own Churches, Ministry, Worship, as they have cast off others before, that so
they might seek (for that which will never be found under the Sun) new
Apostles to make all things new. And as little do I know, how he helps us to
seek the Lord Jesus without halting, unless it be to seek him, as he
himself does without Church-Ordinances.

For the Conclusion of his Book, he is willing to take up the conclusion of my
Letter; That whosoever will not kiss the Son, (that is, will not hear and
embrace the words of his mouth) shall perish in their way, Psalm. 2.12.

This word is established in heaven, and will take place in the earth
throughout all generations.

But least this word might profit himself, (as self-love is apt to apply a
word of threatening to any rather then to it self) he applies it to Mr.
Cotton, and to every soul, (to whom these lines of his may come) seriously to
consider, in this Controversy, if the Lord Jesus were himself in person in
Old, or New England, what Church, what Ministry, what Worship, what Government
he would set up, and what persecution he would practice toward them that would
not receive him.

For Answer, let me say in a word, this point has been seriously considered
already: and let it be still considered and pondered in the Balance of the
Sanctuary, and doubtless, for the first of these points, it will be found,
that if the Lord Jesus were here himself in person, he would set up no other
Church, nor Ministry, nor worship, nor government, then what himself has
appointed in his Word: which though the Examiner, and many others, have sought
and searched what enormities they might find in it, yet they have wearied
themselves, and found nothing. So true is the faithful promise of the Lord
Jesus, that he has built his Church upon a Rock, and the gates of Hell shall
not prevail against it, nor against the Ordinances thereof.

And for the latter point; What persecution the Lord Jesus if he were on earth,
would practice against those who would not receive him.

The Answer is near at hand, and is written for the warning of all
gainsayers; Those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them,
bring them hither, and slay them before my face, Luke 19.27. And yet I would
not be so understood (in alleging this Scripture) as if Christ did allow his
Vicegerents to practice all, that himself would practice in his own person.
For not all the practices, or acts of Christ, (as the Examiner seems to
intimate) but the Laws of Christ, are the Rules of man's Administrations. But
of that more distinctly in due time, if the Lord shall give liberty to enquire
further into the Examiners Bloody Tenent.

To the Lord Jesus, be the kingdom, power, and glory.

Amen.

FINIS.

