THE SCOFFER SCOFFED,

THE SECOND PART.

Being certain Select DIALOGUES, Of a Merry Wagg of Antiquity.

Newly put into English Fustian, for the Consolation of those that had rather
Laugh and be Merry, then be Merry and Wise.

LONDON Printed for Edward Goldin, in Rainbow-Court, in Aldersgate Street, 1684.

THE Epistle to the Reader.
HE was a stout Man, who first ventured to Eat an Oyster; was the saying of a
Crowned Head: And without all doubt, it is as True, as Witty: for all Men know,
that every Work is most difficult in the Commencement; and that it is easier to
Imitate, than Invent: Tho I never saw any thing of that Nature, but what came
very short of its Original: it is like the fancied Ghost of a departed Author,
so much unlike, and so wrapped up in its infernal Accoutrements, so very Thin,
and Pale, so Ghastly Horrid; that every man who sees, and reads it, is as much
Scared, and Frighted, as if he had been Bug-bear'd by some Stygian Spectre; Or
as the Celestial Author of the Winged-Wonder-Working-Angels has it; As if a man
had enjoyed a Sucubus in the shape of a Handsome Woman. For which reason, I
suppose a late Author called his Burlesque, Butlers Ghost; and certainly 'twas
a proper Name for it too; for I believe, it as much deserves to be Entitled
the Fourth part of Hudibras, as the Pilgrims Progress merits to be the Fifth,
to that Number; and this I say (not to lessen the Credit of the Ghost, or its
Author) but because no man can do too much Honor, to the memory of the
Ingenious, and Learned, though (much to be Lamented) Unfortunate Mr. Butler

And next to him, I cannot but mention the Admired Mr. Cotton, whose Scarronides
are more to be valued, than all the English Burlesque now Extant, setting Mr.
Butlers self aside: And since my doing of Lucian, I have seen a little Book
Entitled, the Scoffer Scoft (as I believe) written by the same Author; being
Lucian's Dialogues of the God's, in the same Burlesque: And truly had I seen it
before, I should not have ventured upon any of the Dialogues under that Title.
Knowing all that I could expect from so doing, must be only to publish to the
World, my Dullness; and draw a weak Copy, after so great a Master, without I
could have found some unintelligible Title to have atoned for the Presumption
(like that of the beforementioned Ghost); nor can I now be contented (being
much delighted with things of that Nature) without begging the Favor of Mr.
Cotton, to be so distinguished: Though perhaps some Pharisaical Critics may
object against the Reasonableness of it; as if it is impossible for a man, while
Living, to Fright the World with his wandering Ghost: But since I desire to be
so Honored, I hope he will grant me the favor, and the World forgive me; for
a Ghost is a Ghost still.

But now, perhaps it may be expected I should say something in behalf of my
own; but in the first place, I don't think they deserve it: It Is your Business
kind Reader, if ye like 'em: If ye Refuse it, I shall be content with the
Pleasure I took in Writing 'em; though I believe they would have pleased
better, had the Parenthesis in the Title, been left out; especially those who
don't understand a word of that Ancient Language; but however, you see I am
modest, as to my Learning. But the Bawdy of the First Part has given Offense (I
hear) to some of our Aged Ingenioso's, though they at the same time, are not
wholly guiltless in things of the like Nature; but granting there is a
sprinkling of it in some of the First Dialogues, I hope it is more excusable in
Youth, and Gingling Burlesque, than in Argumental Dialoguing Prose done by
Experienced Age: For such is Lucians Works, and such was Lucian.

Perhaps it might now seem reasonable for me, to give ye an account of Lucian
and his Works; but for two Reasons I decline it. First, Because the Illiterate
don't deserve it: And Secondly, The Learned, (if I should) would find nothing
therein (to them) Novel: But if any of 'em desire it, I must refer 'em to the
late Learned and Ingenious Translater Mr. Ferrand Spence.
; where (if they can understand English) they may be abundantly satisfied.

And now give me leave to tell you, I did at the first design a Dedication, to
these Dialogues: But for some Reasons I met with in the Interval, I thought it
would not be worth my while. First, Because the Patrons of this Age, the less
they deserve; the more they expect to be Complemented. And tho Speed and Baker
are not able to furnish one with History enough to entail 'em, to an honest
Family; it is impossible to please, without two or three Pages in Praise of
their Ancestors; when all the help too a man has for such a Task, is only to be
found in such like Authors. For another Reason too, because if the Writer be a
man, who pretends to Poetry, and has a little more sense, than the drudging Man
of Money can express over a Tedious Quart of Claret; It Is ten to one but he
must be forced to take up with an Old Proverb for his pains, Poet and
Pennyless: And if he be not so at that time, it is as many more, to nothing; but
his Patron shall endeavor to make him so for the future.

And in the next place, for a Story (something like this) a Friend told me the
other day.

A Young Scribler in Rhyme, after some Pains and Study, having finished a short
Poem on the Times; thought it convenient, as well as fashionable, to Dedicate
it to one of his Old Bottle-Companions, one that he had spent much Money with
in all sort of Fashionable Conversation the Town could allow, and was as
frolicksomly Vicious a man, as one would wish to drink withal. Many Complements
he gave him, and told him he was as Discreet and Judicous, as a Man would
desire to be. But see the effects of things of this Nature; This Patron of wit,
(being a Man of discerning faculties) in heat of Wine, (at which time some
People are very Witty) was pleased to tell one of his Female Conveniences,
That this little Spark of a Poet, did expect a Present for his Dedication; but
he swore, he should be bawk'd: for, for that Reason, he would not so much as
give him a Bottle of Wine, or ever drink with him again. A mighty loss, without
all doubt! which puts me in mind of a Piece of Modern Burlesque. Like play for
Naught, the Game to lose;
Or take you This, or That; or Choose:
Or like to One, (though not to blame)
Who Limps and Haults before he is Lame.
But this I fear is Tyresome, being a little out of the Method (Kind Reader)
You were used to be Treated in; but if I can, I Will make you amends some other
time; upon Condition, you will pardon me now.

And so I humbly take my leave.
LUCIAN.
A DIALOGUE Between MERCURY and the SUN.
Mer. IT IS the command, Sir Sun of Jove,
That for three days you do not move
To lengthen out a night for Love.
And let the hours that wait on you,
Unharness all your Horses too;
Then put your Candle out, and go
To bed, for Jove will have it so.

Sol. What is it that I have done, that he
Should thus resolve to punish me?
That Gammer Night should bear the sway,
And triumph over her Lord the Day?

Mer. That Is not the thing, nor is it of state,
His business is of greater weight.

Sol. Where is he now? don't tell me false.

Mer. In Boeotia with little Alce.

Sol. Will not one Night allay his fires,
And cool his lecherous Desires?

Mer. It Is not for that, but to complete,
And make a Hero strong and great,
Whom he did the other day beget.

Sol. Much Joy to him, but Mercury,
I Will tell you now 'twixt you and I,
Such idle things were never done
When good old Saturn wore the Crown,
He never stole out in all his life
To occupy his Neighbors Wife,
But always kept to Rhea's Coney,
And thought her fit to change his Money.
Day was day the^^ no^ paltry scurvy
Punk the World turned topsy turvy;
For want of Exercising too
My Horses, they will Restive grow.
Briers and Thorns will choke the way,
And men will languish for the day;
And all to make some blustering fool.

Mer. Hold now, lest he your courage cool.
Mean time as I was bid I Will go
And charge the Moon to saunter too,
That she abandon not Mankind,
Lest they the alteration find.

A Dialogue between Vulcan and Jupiter.
Vulcan. HERE is the Ax you bid me get,
What am I now to do with it?

Jup. Strike hard my head, nay do not wonder,
And cleave my aching Jaws asunder.

Vul. Sure yo'ave a mighty mind to see
If I am mad, then laugh at me.
But prithee Jupiter don't joke,
And tell me what you mean by th'stroke.

Jup. You idle sot, to cleave my scull,
And if you do refuse it, fool!
I Will swinge you off by fatal Styx!
Strike hard, and leave your foolish tricks.
For my poor head beats like a Tabor,
And achs as if I were in Labor.

Vul. Take heed, for faith you now command
What I did never understand.
You Would better get some Midwife do it,
Lest you repent, and after rue it.

Jup. Strike boldly Dog, and do your best,
And then let me alone for the rest.

Vul. I Will do it 'cause you must be obeyed,
Though it was never my way of Trade.
Have at your head! uds Death and Hell!
What Is this I see? it is wonderful!
Well you might have such swinging Pains,
While such a Wench was in your Brains.
See how she capers over the stools,
As if she would been at Dancing-schools.
And how she brandishes her spear,
She almost makes me shake with fear.
Well you might be so cross of late,
When such a Girl was in your Pate.
s'Wounds! she is a strapper of her years,
How brisk and handsome she appears;
She Is very tall and Blew-ey'd, but
Her Helmet makes her a pretty slut.
Give her to me, I prithee, Jove,
She Is big enough, for I Am in Love.

Jup. With all my heart, I am content,
But she will never give consent:
For she has vowed a single Life,
And hates the very name of Wife.

Vul. Let me alone, since I have got
Your word, I Will try her on the spot.

Jup. Berul'd by me. and quit the Place,
She Will never endure thy sooty Face.

Numb. 2.
LUCIAN.
A DIALOGUE Between NEPTUNE and MERCURY.
Nep. I'Despeak with Jove, Coz. Mercury:

Mer. He Is busy, sir,

Nep. Tell him it is I.

Mer. Pray be not now s' importunate;
If you would see him, you must wait.

Nep. Where is he now? is he with his Wife?

Mer. No, he is not there upon my life.

Nep. Is he with his Boy that he does love?

Mer. You Are much mistaken still in Jove.

Nep. Where then? and what a doing, tell?

Mer. Why truly he is not very well.

Nep. Phoogh! that is a Sham, come tell me true,

Mer. I am ashamed to tell it you.

Nep. Ashamed to tell it to your kin?

Mer. I beg your pardon, he lies In.

Nep. How! was he an Hermaphrodite?
I never perceived it by this Light,
Nor did his Belly big appear.

Mer. No, he had never much aching there.

Nep. Was it where he Minerva bred?
Who from his brain was brought to bed,
He has a Teeming Logger-head.

Mer. No, he in's thigh the child did bear:

Nep. How! is he fruitful every where?

Mer. Juno being filled with Jealousy,
Did put a Trick on Semele,
Persuading her, pray mind the Story,
To lie with Jove in all his Glory,
Who being possessed with fierce Desire,
Strait set the Room and her on fire.
For when (you know) he is armed with Thunder,
He does destroy things to a wonder.
All he could do, things were so spoiled,
Was just the saving of the child;
For which he in his thigh made room,
When bloody hot it dropped from the Womb.
And now he is once more free again,
But wonderfully weak with pain:
Or as you 'ave often heard it sed,
He Is very finely brought a bed.

Nep. Now I could laugh until I burst,
But pray where must the child be nur'st?

Mer. Why I have carried him to Nysa
To be brought up (pray mind what I say)
The Nymphs of him great care will take,
And use him well for's Fathers sake.

Nep. And Jove after this mighty Do,
Is Father to it, and Mother too?

Mer. Yes, yes, but I Have no leisure now
To let you any further know;
For I must go and buy some strings,
And other necessary Things
To bind him up, some Hartshorn Jelly,
Caudle and what is good for's belly;
To nourish him, poor Mercury!
Thou must I fear, his dry-Nurse be.
With other things unknown to you,
So honest Nuncle Nep. adieu.

A Dialogue between the River Enipeus and Neptune.
Enip. FAith Neptune you were much to blame,
T'assume my shape and take my name:
TO abuse my Mistress, faith you were.

Nep. No, rather you were too severe,
You were unjust unto her love,
Since she so very kind did prove:
Which bred in her a thousand fears,
And overwhelmed her still in tears,
For on your banks she every day;
The Oblations of her love did pay.

Enip. And must you therefore cheat her thus?

Nep. 'Twas pity made me Courteous,
Besides I pleased the Beauteous she.

Enip. It Is true because she thought 'twas me:
But when she found out who 'twas Acted,
She Would almost like to have run distracted;
Besides I Am mad that any he,
Should Reap the Joys belong to me.

Nep. It Is you are to blame, and wondrous base
To Abuse so fine, so sweet a face;
Therefore for the future learn to improve,
The short, but Precious hours of Love.

LUCIAN.
Printed for Charles Corlet at the Oxford Arms in Warwick lane.

Numb. 3.
LUCIAN.
A DIALOGUE Between MENIPPUS and TROPHONIUS in the Presence of AMPHILOCTUS.
Men. HOw comes it, since yo'ave lost your breath,
And falln into the hands of Death,
That idle, silly, Country People,
Should build to you a Church and Steeple;
And then, as if 'twere such a Prize
As to a God, t'you sacrifice.

Tro. Am (I do you think) Accountable
Forth' foolish Whimsies of the Rabble?

Men. Well, but the People, never had don it.
If you had not put them upon it,
You made your ends, and interest of it,
And told 'em all, you were a Prophet.
And like a true Dissenter, strove
To break the Allegiance, sworn to Jove.

Tro. It does behove, Amphiloctus,
(Whom you see now is here with us,)
To give an Answer unto you;
And tell you all the Meaning too,
For my part it is well known I can,
Prove I am something more than man:
And can foretell (like any thing,)
And am, or would be more than King.
No Hero e're had such a Name,
I was the first in the Rank of fame,
And ever scorned to Crouch, or bend
To Father, Uncle, Wife, or Friend.
But one would think, by what you say,
You Would never bin in Labadia:
For there I never could walk abroad,
But still attended by a Crowd,
Hollowing, and hooping as they went,
As if they would rend the Firmament.
Long live Trophonius! they would cry,
While Jove past unregarded by;
All this would sure have made it plain,
That I was born a God, (Again)
You cannot tho misdoubt, that I
Am (now) of Heavens Progeny
So must believe, (tho never the near now)
That I am more than Man; a Hero.

Men. There was no need of being there,
One might have heard on it any where:
Nor of doing things that thou have done,
Thou foolish, base, rebellious Son,
Dull, Canting, Idle, Logger-head;
To make it appear that thou art dead,
Nor of doing what the Foolish do,
When e're they Sacrifize to you,
Or to explain that thour't more base,
Than any of thy God-like race;
Have more Imposture, and less Wit,
Than e're was found in Hero yet?
But now I do Conjure thee by
Thy Canting, or thy Prophecy,
To tell me what by Hero's meant,
For I am wholly ignorant:

Tro. A Hero is a thing between
A God, and Man (that never was seen)
Or rather both together joined,
The Body, Man, the God, the Mind.

Men. If so, pray tell me then sweet heart,
What is come of thy better part?
For you are of all, that is good bereft,
And not one spark of Grace have left.
Else thou such things would never have don,
As Elbowing Jove, from off his Throne,
For thou did that, which was the same,
By robbing him, of his good name,
And drawing People from his shrine,
To make 'em sacrifize to thine.

Tro. Away with this, but you would know,
Where my diviner part is now?
It Is in Boeotia, where yet,
My old Acquaintance, worship it:

Men. Well I don't understand, what you,
By all this trade can mean to do,
But thus far, I may truly say,
I do believe you're out of the way,
And if I must, it plainly tell,
I Am sure you are Entire in Hell.

LUCIAN.
Readers. These Dialogues will be Published every Tuesday and Friday.

Printed for Charles Corbet at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1684.

Numb. 4.
LUCIAN.
A Dialogue between Diogenes and Pollux,
Dio. SInce Pollux it is next morn' thy right,
To visit Earth, and view the light;
Bid Menippus the Philosopher,
The little brook that parts us Cross over,
Without delay, and make have hither,
That we may Crack our sides together,
For he that here, cannot Laugh his fill,
Shall never laugh more, by my good will;
Provided that he does not tell ye,
He has already broke his belly:
For surely there he'has cause enough,
If he be not Pease-Porrige Proof.
And tell him tho the folk about
The place he dwells, are much in doubt
How People fare when they are dead,
Of which they nothing know, but Dread,
Here Is none below, but what still keep tick
With says; for Hell undoes a Skeptic.
He Will wonder too, when he comes down,
To see that men of high Renown,
Should be no more than Every Gaffer,
And only subjects here of Laughter:
And hardly known, but by their bawling;
A sort of Hellish Caterwawling:
Then bid him bring his Crusts to seed on,
With other things that he will have need on,
For here is nothing to be got,
That Is fitting for the Spit or Pot:
Nay here one may, (although in have,)
As soon ones Neck break, as ones fast.

Poll. Pray sir don't make of me a Tool,
And send me like an April Fool,
But tell me now before I go,
By what mark I the Spark shall know?

Dio. Have thou not seen below the Sky,
Men that cry Silk, and Taffaty,
With tattered Cloak on one Arm Tossed,
So Patcht, the Original is lost,
Who find out all the strong Bub places
And wear it is livery on their faces:
Just such a one is he, you can
Not be mistaken in the man;
At Corinth you will find him fooling,
Or else at Athens Ridiculing,
For the Philosophers he hates,
And with his Banter breaks their Pates,
Because they bounce, and brag they know,
The truth of every thing below,
And understand too, those above,
As well as Mercury, or Jove,
When they are not so wise by half,
As Goatham's Mayor, or Waltham's Calf.

Poll. If he be such a one, no doubt
But I shall quickly find him out;
But have you naught for me to tell.
The Grave Philosophers from Hell?

Dio. Yes, yes, I have, come let me see;
Bid 'em leave studying Sophistry;
Idle Disputes, and Arguments,
Which nothing breeds but discontents;
Bid 'em forbear the search of Nature
And meddle each, with his own Matter,
And speak their knowledge, at a word
And not be Fools thus on Record:

Poll. And then they will say that I Am a fool,
And never learnt my book at School,
So call me Dunce, and swear that I
Don't understand Philosophy.

Dio. Tell 'em that they must cry and bawl,
As loud, as at a Funeral
The Irish do, and every whit
As true, as theirs is all Deceit.

Poll. Well, I Will remember what you say,
And all your wise Commands obey.

Dio. As for the mighty men of worth,
Tell 'em I bid you thus hold forth.
Why do you give your selves such Pain,
About what is perishing and vain?
What signifies your pomp and state?
Your being Noble, Rich, or Great?
Your vast Attendance, and Calashes?
When you are fallen to Dust and Ashes;
And Threed-bare Vicar going first,
Cries here is the hole, and in you must.
And tell the Smock-fac't Megibus,
And the Wrestler Damoxenus,
That here strong Back, nor able Thighs,
Nor curled Hair, nor sparkling Eyes,
Nor all the Charms adorned by Art,
In this place signify a Fart.

Poll. It shall be done, and free from Passions,
I Will do your hearty commendations.

Dio. Go to the Poor, whom you will see,
Groaning beneath their misery,
And comfort 'em, and tell 'em all,
They must no longer howl and bawl,
Since there is no difference when we are dead,
Between the Poor, and Crowned head;
For Monsieur Mors, that ancient Traveller
Was always known, to be a Leveller,
And tell each Spartan to his face,
They are all degenerate and base;
That those who used to fight with Half-staff,
Are dwindl'd now into a Falstaff.

Poll. If you speak ill of them, good Sir,
I will not be your Messenger;
But all the rest I will obey,
To a Cow's Thumb, (as one may say.)

Dio. Well, do in that as likes you best,
But pray be punctual in the rest.

Printed for Charles Corbet at the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane. 1684.

Numb. 5.
LUCIAN.
A DIALOGUE Between ACHILLES and ANTILOCHUS.
Ant. What Is that you said unto Ulysses?
Sure you have here no factious Wishes,
That you had rather be as Poor,
As those who beg from door to Door;
That want a Belly full of Bread,
And han't a hole to hide their Head:
Than over the shades a Ruler be,
So much you still hate Monarchy;
But faith and troth you don't do well
To preach these Sentiments in Hell,
For here are none but what obey,
And Reverence to their Monarch Pay.
Nor are you worthy of your Name,
Or of the Place from whence you came,
Who like a hardy fool did Choose
Your life and fame, and all to lose.
Such was your foolish Zeal, (or Spite)
Than live and do what is Just and Right,
Though in full Splendor and Delight.

Ach. All this is true, faith honest Tory,
But then I thought that worldly Glory,
Was the only Summum Bonum tho
I now find that 'twas nothing so:
No, notwithstanding Father Homer,
Said it was so, upon his Honor;
With other Modern Poets too,
But I find none of them spoke true;
Here Strength, and Handsomness, (that rare thing)
Don't signify one single Farthing;
Nor can I find the Grecians (hear me)
Do Reverence or Trojans sear me.
Nor is here any difference neither,
But just like Birds of the same feather,
We Are all alike and flock together.
Therefore I could wish that I were
To breath a little Grecian Air,
Tho at the hazard, (I must tell you)
Of being but some little Fellow:

Anti. Come, come, leave off this murmuring trade
The laws of the World must be obeyed.
And Nature too must have her swing
And all Obey Great Order's King:
Besides your mighty Men are too,
All gone, or dead, as well as you.

Achi. Antilochus it is in vain,
To comfort me, I tell you plain,
For I am filled with strange Regrets,
Which thoughts of life in me begets.
And you are troubled too (I see,)
Tho you dissemble more than I:
If she not daring to complain
When overwhelmed with Fear and Pain.
Ben't full as foolish, and as vain,
As the little tricks, that Children play
Upon a Summers Holy Day.

Anti. It Is Resolution rather tho
To suffer with a serious Brow;
Yet yours was not so I (Profess,)
But only a Fool-hardiness.
Nor is it wisdom to Complain,
When by it we no good can gain;
And it is better much, to bear
Ones sufferings with a cheerful Air,
So one but leave unto his Nation,
An honest, spotless, Reputation,
Than to become a laughing-stooll,
By vain complaints to every Fooll.

LUCIAN
Printed for Charles Corbet at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1684.

Numb. 6.
LUCIAN.
A DIALOGUE Between ZEPHYRUS and NOTUS.
No. THe Cow you see so briskly move,
Friend Zephyrus, was Whore to Jove;
Whom Mercury, his Man, is driving
To Egypt, there to graze her Living:

Ze. I know it, and then she was a Maiden,
As good as ever Leg was lay'd-on;
But Juno's plaguey Jealousy
Has since transformed her, as you see.

No. And think thou Jupiter does know it?
Sure if he did, he would not do it;

Ze. Yes, yes, he knows it well enough,
And has forbidden us to puff
'Till she is arrived, and out of fear;
Besides she is to lie Inn there;
Her bastard too, (although it odd is,)
Will be a God, and she a Goddess;

No. A Cow a Goddess! that is a Bull;

Ze. Jove can do any thing you Fool:
Over sailers she will govern too,
And what she pleases we must do:
It Is very hard, we must not roar
But when commanded by a Whore.

No. Nay then, betimes let us court the Minion,
To get into her good Opinion:
Our Interest says it must be done,
And all Men court the Rising-sun.

Ze. See, she is arrived upon the plain,
And is a Woman too again,
And goes no longer now on four
But walks like any other Whore.

No. This is a Miracle! for now
She' has naught remaining of the Cow,
And Mercury to wait on her
Has turned himself into a Cur.

Ze. Let Us curb our Curiosity
For there must in it some Mystery be,
But Mercury better knows than we.

A Dialogue betwixt Jupiter, Esculpaius and Hercules.
Jup. LEave off, i will have no more such stirs,
Always a quarrelling ye Curs?
No sooner I sit down to table in
The Parlour, but you sall to squabling,
Growling and snarling just like Dogs,
One might as well go eat with Hogs;

Her. Why father is it fit that he,
Damned Quack, should take the wall of me?

Escu. No Quack you Ruffain as you flout,
But God of Physic, absolute:
A thousand times your Betters too,
You Clumsie Lubber, Bouteseau!

Her. Betters! you Clod-Pate undertaker,
This must not do, you Piss-pot shaker;
Tho your dull Brains were dashed with Thunder,
And then restored, the greater Wonder.

Escu. It much becomes you Scoundrel tho
To jeer me with my dying so,
When you on Oeta, pray compare
Were burnt alive, as Wizards are.

Her. Mine was a voluntary Prank
Thou dull Quack-salving Mountebank:
After the Monsters I had hurled
To several Deaths, who'd plagued the World;
Whilst thou, dull swaggering Ignoramus
By canting on a Stage grew famous,
And bantring in a Purple-cloak,
So cheating honest Country-folk.

Escu. But when you came to us so mauld,
Grill'd, scorcht, and roasted, fried, and scawld,
I was your Docter, (Beast,) to cure ye
Although you cannot since endure me:
And now I think on it (by the by,)
I never was an Hostler, I;
Nor was I servant to a Whore,
To make me spin from door to Door;
And if my task I did not do,
Be beaten with the Distaff too,
Nor did I (slay upon my life)
My little Children and my Wife,
As thou did lately do, foul beast!

Her. Stop your Gally-pot-mouth you would best,
Or else Jove's self shall not secure ye,
From my inveterate Rage and Fury;
I Will make thee cut a Caper down,
From Heaven to Earth (dull senseless Clown;
Which shall so shake thy Adle-brains,
That thou with all thy Art and Pains,
To cur't, shall find enough to do,
Tho thou art good at probing too.

Jup. Leave off damned Dogs, or else uds boo^s!
I Will turn ye both out of my Doors:
The Docter's oldest, therefore pray
You Clubster, let him have the way.

Printed for Charles Corbet at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1684.

Numb. 7.
LUCIAN.
A DIALOGUE Between MERCURY and CHARON.
Mer. PRithee Tarpaulin let us see,
How much thou art in debt to me?
Least we should both forget it, come,
And let us cast up the total sum;
For if we should mistake a Groat,
Thoud'st fret, and never mind thy boat.

Cha. Reckon Mercury? for my part,
I am content with all my heart.

Mer. Imprimis, for thee I laid out
To buy an Anchor for thy boat,
Twenty five pence (in ready Dust)
For honest Swabber I Will be just.

Cha. So much do you say? (I Will vow and swear,)
As things go now, that is very dear.

Mer. Why faith and troth, what e're you think,
It Cost so much, in ready Chink.
Item, (let me see,) two pence more
For that, to which, you tie the Oar.

Cha. That Is very well, to the other score
(Pray be exact,) set two pence more.

Mer. Item, A Needle I did buy,
Which cost me, four pence halfpenny,
To mend the sails, last storm we had;

Cha. Add them together now my lad.

Mer. Item, For Pitch, and Tar, and Nails,
And a small Rope to hoist the sails,
Just ten pence I laid out for you,

Cha. That Is very reas'nable I vow.

Mer. And this is all I think (dear Chroney)
But prithee when wilt pay the Money?

Cha. Why truly friend, (I will not harrangue thee,)
But if I have a farthing, hang me:
Yet if the times do mend, I swear,
And there should come a Plague, or War,
That so I might a little juggle,
And now and then the Custom smuggle,
I Will pay thee every farthing (know me)
That thou will say that I now owe thee.

Mer. And in the mean time I must by th'Loss*
Sit down, with folded Arms Across
And wish that Plagues and Mischiefs may,
Take half the wicked World away,
Before you will able be to pay me,
Faith it is not fair, you should delay me.

Cha. I shall not be able troth before,
(Friend Mercury) to pay thy Score.

Mer. I Would rather never be paid by thee,
Than all those strange Misfortunes see;
But this does put into my head,
A thing relating to the dead;
Why those dye now, should differ so,
From those folk, who died long ago;
For then they all were brisk and strong,
Plump, fleshy, vigorous, and young.
And seldom with a body whole,
But cut and slasht from feet to poll;
With darts and spears, and many a thwack,
Often looked like the man in the Almanac.
Whereas they now are little things,
Most dying of their surfeitings;
Pale, wan, and weak, and hardly able
To go a hi-lone, by a Table.
Some killed by Wine, debauched with stum
Or drinking, Supernaculum
Others with something else, (but Mum)
Some have been sent too, by their friends
To bring about their private ends.
Others have suffered by their heirs,
While some have pined away with cares.

Cha. I do not wonder (honest friend)
That Interest should so many send;
For it is a hard thing now to get
Ones own, tho proved, by law a debt:
Therefore much more, to get it by
Ones Labor, or ones Industry.

Mer. Wonder not than, (for well you know me)
I spoke oth'money, that you owe me.

LUCIAN.
ADVERTISEMENT.
There are lately Published some Modern Dialogues Entitled Lucian's Ghost done
out of French, Printed for James Norris at the Kings Arms without Temple Bar.

Printed for Charles Corbet at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1684.

Numb. 8.
LUCIAN.
A DIALOGUE Between MENIPPUS and CHIRON.
Men. CHiron I Have often heard it told
That thou did wish ('fore thou wast old)
Death would thy flesh and spirit sever
Tho thou had leave to live for ever:
Come prithee tell me why thou wast
So fond of Death, and in such have?
That thou thy self shoud'st break the Bonds
Of Life; and fall by thy own hands,
As if thou'd'st weary bin of breath,
'Cause I see no such Charms in Death.

Chi. I Will tell thee, if thou will not teaz me,
Something fell out, that did not please me,
Which was the cause I would not stay.

Men. Were you not glad to enjoy the Day?

Chi. No, I had too much discontent,

Men. And did thou never for it repent?

Chi. No, I was never yet so vain,
And it is as little to complain.
Besides it is dull to live, since we
In life have no Diversity,
For still we do, (to our great Pain)
The same things over and over again;
We eat and drink and to our sorrow,
We drink and eat again to Morrow;
To Night we sleep, and dream, and then
Next night we do the same again,
Thirsting, Drinking, Eating, Hunger
So tired me I Would live no longer.

Men. But how did you support your Death,
When your for it, had swopt your Breath?

Chi. Without a Grudge, or was I troubled,
For here my Pleasures all are doubled?
Here Is no Ambition, no great places,
No haughty looks, nor bold Menaces.
No striving to be Rich, or great
But all is Hail-fellow here, well met.
It Is like a Pop'lar-state, for here
No one must huff or domineer;
Where every Cobbler is as free
And of as high Nobility,
As any man dare show his face,
Or live, in such a Governed place:
And what care I (for my delight)
Whether it be or day or night,
And then we'ave this advantage too;
We neither eat nor drink below,
Nor are we Plagued with Thirst or Hunger,
(Which than a stone Wall's counted stronger)
Or with any other Clogs of Life,
Or with that Cursed plague a Wife;
Obedience unto friends, or kin,
Or any other idle sin.
Nor do we Covet this man's Coney,
Or that man's house or Patrimony,
Here we are never wanting neither
Of shelter, from the stormy Weather,
And let the frost be never so furious,
Unto our Poor it is never Injurious.
Nor do they howl, or bawl, for Bread,
Or are the wealthy surfeited.
But all are here alike and free
from mortal Inconveniency.

Men. Chiron take heed you do not do
What you would willingly eschew,
And so relapse (as if decoyed)
Into the fault you would avoid:
For if thy life (to thee) was pain
By doing the same things over again,
Sure now thou'st 'cause to grieve since we
In Hell, have no variety.

Chi. Tell me Menippus (if it Please thee)
What I must do to make me Easy.

Men. Why, what was done in former Ages
To gain Content by the Ancient Sages,
And to believe what cannot be cured
In life, or death, may be endured.

LUCIAN.
Printed for Charles Corbet at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1684.

Numb. 9.
[Tuesday Feb. 19th. 1684.]
LUCIAN.
A DIALOGUE Between AEACUS, PROTESILAUS, MENELAUS and PARIS.
Aea. BY Pluto! I demand the Cause
Why thou do thus, Protesilaus?
No sooner thou art entered Hell in,
But straight thou Kick'st and Buffets Helen;
And fal'st upon her in such manner,
As if thou'd'st make a Devil on her.

Pro. Furies and Hell! pray is not she,
The cause of all my misery?
Such Wheed'ling things, the Baggage did do,
That my poor Wife lived (like) a Widow;
Besides my Family was spoiled,
For by her means I had no Child.

Aea. Ud's Death! bang him who was the cause,
That (to'ther Cuckold) Menelaus,
Who to those Mischiefs led thee on,
By which thou fairly, art undon?

Pro. By Heaven! that is truly said,
Have at thy Plotting Loggerhead!

Men. Hold, hold: you are beside the saddle
Or else your Coxcombs brains are addle;
It Is not with me, but Monsieur Paris,
(If you will do the thing that fair is,)
You ought to Quarrel with, for he;
Sans Right of hospitallity
Debauched my Wife, and (as you knew well,)
Ravished away my precious Jewel.
The Bastard like a Thief would come
In The Night, when I was drunk as Drum,
And firk the Gipsie'bout the Bum.
My servants bribe, and for a Whimsie
Would often hide himself in the Chimme,
With Scaling Ladders, (made of Garters,)
He Would often mount into her Quarters.
For this he well deserves a banging,
and (for what else I know) a hanging
The Trojans reason have to hate him.
The Greeks when er'e they can, will beat him.
Both sides so hate the Cursed Elf
That now he may go hang himself
For want of one to do the favor,
(So save some body else, a Labor,)
All that have lost their lives of late,
Have reason too the Fool to hate.
He led them on to their undoing
And on himself and them brought Ruin.

Pro. Thou doubly damned to Hell! with Clods,
I Will break thy Head, by all the God's:
I Will strangle then away thy breath,
For gulling Men so into Death,
Nay, flinch not Dog, for I Will assure thee,
Now, thou shall feel my Rage and Fury.

Paris. Truly I think Protesilaus
Your angry now without a Cause.
For you your self a Votary
Are to the self same Deity:
Besides you know we are forced to do
What e're he is pleased to lead us to.

Pro. It Is true, that God is much to blame,
And is the chief Cause of all our shame.

Aea. He might have said tho if he would
Thou drew'st upon thy self thy blood,
Since thou must needs run pushing on,
To purchase Honor and Renown,
And so wast chopped to death (before)
Thou wast well landed on the shore,
Forgetting that thou had a Whore.

Pro. I rather should complain of Heaven,
To leave me thus at six and seven;
And Destiny that cursed Jade,
That I should now be thus betrayed;
Nay, faith and troth it was not Civil,
To send one headlong thus to the Devil.

Aea. Blame and accuse whom e're you please,
But let these People live at ease;
And leave off all this foolish stuff,
For Hell without it is bad enough.

LUCIAN.
Printed for Charles Corbet at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane, 1684.

Numb. 10.
LUCIAN.
A DIALOGUE Between PLUTO and MERCURY.
Tuesday Feb. 26th. 1683/4.
Pluto. MErc'ry do know that Fellow there?
Who Is old, and rich, but wants an Heir,
On whom so many people wait
In hopes he will leave 'em his Estate.

Mer. Do You mean the Sicyonian?

Pluto. The very same Grey-hair'd old Man.
And prithee Merc'ry do not grudge
To be unto his Age a Crutch;
And let him live and Guzzle on,
Until those Fools are dead and gone;
Who after him so often dance,
Expecting his Inheritance.
Do this and you will obliege me too,
In troth you will, I prithee do?

Mer. No, it is unjust to kill the Young,
And let the Aged live so long.
Besides, the like was never known,
It Is turning Nature upside down.

Pluto. Come nimble Tongue you are mista'ne,
It Is very just as I Will explain:
For why should they have his Estate,
Who by no way to him Relate;
And before his Face to gain his favor
Desire he may live for ever?
Make Vows in public for his Health,
As if they valued not his Wealth:
When privately they wish him cold,
That they may share his Bags of Gold.
Therefore good Merc'ry see it done,
He ought to outlive 'em every one:
And tho perhaps it make 'em snort all,
Let 'em believe he is Immortal.

Mer. And now I think on it faith they do
Deserve to be all Punished so,
Because each Dog may have his due.
But that which pleases me the most,
Is to observe how they are tossed,
By him from Pillar (back) to Post.
For still before them he seems a dying,
With all his Fam'ly round him Crying;
Tho when they are gone he is very well,
And drinks, and eats a hearty Meal:
And this to make 'em all redouble
Their Assiduity and Trouble;
That as their hopes (of Death) increases,
They may improve their kind Caresses;
For he much pleasure takes to teaze 'em,
And is resolved never to please 'em.
But now I am afraid at last
They Will want the Means to break their Fast,
By over eagerness to get
Another's Wealth to make 'em Great.

Pluto. Therefore because they have bin so vain,
Let him be brisk and young again.
To boast and brag let them have no cause,
But make him strong again like Jolaus.
And for their parts let me Entreat it,
That to the Guts they may be fretted,
To see their greedy hopes defeated.
In Dreams let him his Wealth be sharing,
Thinking them dead as any Herring,
But when they waking find it not,
Let each man cut his proper Throat.

Mer. But Master Pluto (I assure you)
You ought not to instruct Mercury;
Come let me see, (then he did wink,
And cried) they are seven just (I think)
I Will bring 'em all, one after the other,
(Each Son of Whore, or honest Mother.)

Pluto. D'b'uy and then you will please me too,
But pray take heed in what you do,
And let the old Man (free from cares)
Out-live's Imaginary Heirs.

LUCIAN.
Printed for Charles Corbet at the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1684.

LUCIAN.
A DIALOGUE Between MENIPPUS and CERBERUS.
Men. THOU Great Triumvirate of Pates!
And Porter of the Infernal Gates;
Tell me, when Socrates came down,
What Face and Humor, wore the Clown?
Deal frankly with me, since we are,
(As well as Cyniques) Chronies here:
For as you are a God, you can;
Or bark like Dog, or talk like Man.

Cer. At first he sullen was, and Mute,
Seemed very bold, and Resolute;
And fain would pass for one that never
Was shokt by death, or shak'd by fear:
And did behave himself, as well,
At's death, as any he, in Hell:
But when within these shades his foot
He'ad set, (and drawn the other to it)
The ('fore so stout, then) trembling Spark,
Did quake and shake, to see it so Dark.
And when my twice-three Ears I shook,
He looked just like one Thunder-strook.
But when I snarl'd at him, and groul'd,
And with my gaping three-mouths howled:
Snapt at his Shins, (and's Stockins Spoiled)
He cried (and bellowed) like a Child;
Tormenting's self, as if he had,
Been drunk (with Nants) or Raving Mad.

Men. If so, as far as I can gather,
Than Valiant, he a Cheat was rather,
And did not when he hither Coasted
Despise and bear death as he boasted.

Cer. Yes, when he saw (I must confess)
That on he must without redress,
He showed some Courage, and ('it is said;)
He did not seem to be dismayed;
But bore it with as bold a Brow,
As the occasion would allow;
And looked, as if 'twas not Necessity,
But pure Chance-Medly in Adversity:
Tho I believed 'twas partly done,
To be admired by the Lookers on:
Or, to beget the Reputation,
Of Stout, he died that surly fashion.
The same too may be said of most,
Who for that Cause, came to our Coast:
They Are wondrous Valiant just before,
But when they come to the very Door;
The boldest Spirit of 'em fails,
(And look like Dogs, that hang their Tails.)

Men. But Cerb'rus what can say of me?
When I came down to visit thee.

Cer. Thou art a Worthy brave Philosopher,
And boldly did the Ferry cross over,
As Great Diogenes did before thee,
(If there be any truth in Story).
I Will swear for thee, thou came not here
Unwillingly, by force, or fear,
But in a cheerful manner, Gay,
Tickling, and Smiling all the way;
As if you had naught else to do,
But to be merry here below;
While others in this place are Weeping,
And always such a Noise are Keeping;
One had as good be in a Mill,
(In troth it is true) as live in Hell.

A Dialogue between Jupiter, and Ganymede.
Jup. HOW is it, my pretty One? Come, speak,
Now I have neither Claw, nor Beak;
You Will Kiss me sure: you need not Fear,
Nothing, my Love shall Hurt you here.

Began. Where are they then? I Am zure that you,
A Hugeous Eagle, was but now:
Vor as I did my Vathers Zheep,
Upon our Vurzie Common keep;
You Zwopt me up, while I lay Kicking,
As if I Would been a Tiny Chicken.
How could you do it, pray? Vor now,
You look as our Town-Zhepherds do;
And are a Man, I vancy too.

Jup. I Am neither Man, nor Eagle, Love;
But King of all the the Powers Above:
Who so Transformed my self to be,
More Strong and Fit, to Carry thee.

Began. But tell me Grandzir, if you can,
Who it is you are? Or are you Pan?
Yet now I think more on the Matter,
He looks as Wild, as any Zatyr.
Horns on his Head, and Cloven Paw,
With Hairy Feet, and Pipe of Straw;
The only Marks, I know him by.

Jup. Know thou no other Deity?

Began. Not I, do you think I Would tell you Lies:
But every Year we Zacrivize,
To him a Goat, in his own Cave,
Because he zhou'd our Cattle Zave;
But you, vor all you're zuch a Ztrapper,
I vear, are but zome zly Kidnapper;
Who Get your Living by Decoys,
And Money make, of Little Boys.

Jup. Did thou never hear, of Mighty Jove?
Whose Temple is in Ida's Grove,
Who Lightens Heaven at his Pleasure;
And Thunders People so together.

Began. O yes, is it you who make that Noise,
And Vrighten Women zo, and Boys:
To whom my Vather, every year,
Does Zacrivize a Ram for Vear,
He should make Bread, and Butter Dear.
But why did you znatch me away?
The Woolf, will all my Lamkins, Zlay.

Jup. Thou think of nothing, but thy Sheep;
You Are now Immortal, and must keep
Dull Brutes no more; but Live with me,
And ever keep Gods Company.

Began. But will not you zet me down again?

Jup. No: All my Labor's then in Vain.

Began. But my poor Dad, will Nangry be,
If he his Boy should never zee;
And Beat me 'cause I left my Zheep.

Jup. Fear not, I will thee always keep.

Began. Don't keep me now; I pray now, don't,
I wonnot ztay now, that I will not.
Yet, if you will but let me go;
I Will Zacrivize a Ram to you.

Jup. How simple is this pretty Boy;
Come ben't dismayed, Cheer up my Joy:
You must forget all things below,
My Nubsie, you're in Heaven now,
And may do good unto your Friends;
And never think on private Ends.
You shall no longer be a Boy,
But have what ever the God's Enjoy.
Instead of Butter, Cheese, and Whey,
Have Nectar, and Ambrasia:
And have your Star amongst the Rest,
And Shine as Glorious, as the Best.

Began. That Is mighty Brave: But Zir, if I
Would Play, Who Will keep me Company?
For when I was on Ida's Hill,
I had my Playvellows at Will.

Jup. Cupid, my Lad, shall Play with thee,
If thou will Brisk, and Cheerful be:
For he is as Arch a Wagg, as thou;
But mind no more the Things below.

Began. I marry Zir! that is pure indeed,
But have you any Vlocks to Veed?
Else what shall I do here Above?

Jup. Thou shall be Cup Bearer to Jove,
And fill him Nectar little Love.

Began. Is that zo good as Milk, and Whey?

Jup. Better, my Joy by far, than they;
And thou shall Drink it every day.

Began. Where must I Lie a Nights, Zir tho?
With Cupid, my Vine Playvellow:

Jup. No, no, with me; my pretty One.

Began. What, are you 'vraid to lie alone?

Jup. It Is better with a pretty Lad;

Began. Zure you are Drunk good Zir, or Mad;
What good can Pretty do a Bed?
When Zleep is got into ones Head.

Jup. Sleep 's not so Pleasant, when Alone;
Two is much better (Dear) than One.

Genesis When I lay with my Vather, he
Did always vex, and vret at me;
Because I zuch a do did keep,
Tumbling, and talking in my Zleep:
And Puncht him on the zides and head,
And kicked him almost out oth' Bed,
That he would zend me to my Mother,
I always kept zuch ztir and pother,
If you took me vor this Idain,
You Will quickly zet me down again.

Jup. I than thy Father love thee more,
I Will kiss and handle thee all over:
Besides, I Have other things in store.

Began. You may do what you will, and keep
What ztir you pleaze, but I will Zleep.

Jup. We'll talk of this another day.
Here! take him (Mercury) away,
And see'm drink Imortality,
That he may serve's in Quallity;
Of Cupbearer, and teach the Fool,
To make a Leg, and give the Bowl.

A Dialogue between Crates and Diogenes.
Cra. DID you know that Old Cinque and Cater,
Who such a stir made on the Water;
With Ships and Boats of every size,
As if the Sea he would Monopolize?
He lived at Corinth in the High House,
His Name was (let me see) Maerichus;
Whose Cousin was, as great a Rascal
As ever drank of Wine a flasque all
Believe me, or his Neighbors, ask All;
And full as Rich, and Old as he,
And had as much Frigidity;
As near, and Covetous he was,
And every whit as much an Ass:
Repeating still that piece of Honor,
Delivered to the World by Homer:
Into his Ears, Do thou kill me,
Choose which thou will, or I'^e Kill thee:
It Is pity that we both should live,
Let him take all who must Survive;
For you must know, they had made over
Their whole Estates to one another;
Consulted all the South-sayers,
Conjurers and Astrologers,
To know whom Monsieur Mors his Worship
Would give it all, by Survivorship.
But these Damned scoundrels, one would Wheedle
And then the other Trout, they would tickle;
So both of them a while were eased
Tho neither of 'em Thro'ly pleased;
For all those Fellows at the best,
Are Cheats, and prate for Interest.

Dio. But what became on it, Prithee Crates.

Cra. Why I will tell thee what their fate was:
They both together on a day,
Dropped into the Grave (as one may say)
And left their Riches all to them,
They never so much as in a Dream,
Did ever think of, or the (Wench-on)
Conjurers did ever Mention.

Dio. I Am glad on it Faith, it makes me Jolly,
And much delights me: but such Folly,
By thou and I, was never Committed;
Or were we e're so basely Cheated:
(Such foolish idle things, but mean is,)
I never wished that Antisthenes
Would die, and leave his Oaken Plant
To me, tho I stood then in want:
Or, did thou ever wish for mine,
That Tub, and Scrip, might both be thine.

Crates. That Is true, because we were content
With that small Stock kind Fortune sent;
And I thought 'twas enough to Inherit
Thy Virtues, and thy God-like Spirit:
As thou had done, on the same Score,
By Great Antisthenes before.
Which Wealth is more to be desired,
Tho not of late so much Admired;
You never saw any come to us,
To learn how to be Virtuous;
Whereas you see they never fail
Pursuing Riches, Tooth and Nail;
While others striving to be Great,
Admiring Titles, Pomp and State;
Will live on Pottage, Herbs and Carrot,
So they may hurry't in a Chariot,
Attended on by tattered Pages,
With Lanthorn Jaws, starved at Board-Wages,
Which never was known in former Ages.

Dio. It is no Wonder this to see,
Their Souls are spoiled by Luxury:
They Are void of Honor, and so Vain,
They cannot any good contain:
They Are like the Bellides here in Hell,
Whose Barrel runs out faster still,
Than they have Power and Strength to fill:
But should you dare to be so bold
As Venture, but to touch their Gold,
So much to good men they are helps,
You might as well a Lyoness Rob of Whelps.

Crates. Besides, this Comfort too we have,
We carry all our Wealth to the Grave;
Whilst they (than us) do bring no more,
So leave behind 'em all their Store:
And honest Charon (if they have any)
Does ease 'em of their last poor Penny:
Which is thrust in their Mouths by those
Who put 'em on their Bur'ing Clothes.

A Dialogue between Charon, Mercury, (a Company of Dead Men,) Menippus,
Charmoleus, Lampichus, Damasias, a Philosopher, and a Rhetorician.
Charon. COme Listen, All, to what I say,
My Ferry-Boat's gone to Decay;
It Leaks, is Old, and very Rotten,
Besides, my Bench and Oars are Broken;
Therefore sit still, and Trim it well,
Or else, twon't Carry you to Hell:
For here is so many come together,
That if we should but have foul Weather,
Their Luggage is fo very Great,
They will my Wherry Over-set:
Then those that cannot Swim, will be,
In a pretty Pickle presently.

The Dead. What shall we do than, prithee Charon?
For to get over Acheron?

Charon. I Will tell you, you must come as bare,
As when you first breathed Grecian Air;
And leave your Trumpery on the Shore,
And never so much as think on it more.
And since my Boat's so very Small,
It Is well if then it hold ye All.
Be it thy Charge too, Messenger,
TO Examine every Passenger.
That none but half-Stav'd Fellows come,
Expecting in my Wherry Room.
Take Care too, and be sure you Mind 'em,
To leave their Baggage all behind 'em;
Then on the Ladder stand Equipt,
And force 'em all to enter Stripped.

Mercury, I will Obey, and now let us see,
Who it is comes first oth' Company.

Menip. It Is I, Menippus, who am come,
To be a little Troublesome.
Tho I have thrown into the Lake,
My Staff, and Wallet, for the sake
Of easy Waftage: And it is well,
I brought no Gown, nor Sursingle;
(Tho if the Naked Truth. were known,
In all my Life, I never had One.)

Mercury. Enter Menippus to the Sculler,
Thou best of Men, before it is fuller;
And take the Highest Place, that thou,
From thence may see, what others do;
But who is this that comes to see us?

Charmoleus. I am the Lovely Charmoleus,
Who for a Kiss, took as much Money's,
As would have Purchast'd Fifty Coneys.

Mercury. Cast off your Beauty, and your Pride,
Your Lips, Red-Cheeks, and Hair beside:
And do not think to enter in
To Hell, and sleep in a Whole Skin;
But pull it off, and do not Venture.
It Is Well, so now you are fit to Enter.
But what Grim Sir is that, when Dead,
Dares Venture with a Crown On's Head?

Lampichus. I am Prince Lampichus of Gela.

Mercury. Why thus Laden, prithee Fellow?

Lampichus. Why should a Prince come Naked too?

Mercury. A Prince should not; but Dead Men do.
Therefore put off your Ornaments.

Lampichus. There Lie, my Rich Habiliments:

Mercury. And you must put off too, (beside,)
Your Hanghty-Looks, your State, and Pride;
For if they Enter, you shall see,
They Will Sink the Boat immediately.

Lampichus. Let me but keep my Robe, and Crown:

Mercury. No, you must even them lay down.

Lampichus. There then, what more have I to do?

Mercury. You must put off your Fury too.
To Wit, and Knowledge, your pretense,
Your Cruelty, and Insolence.

Lampichus. See, I am Naked to the Skin,

Mercury. It Is very well, Now Enter in.
What great Fool's this? (Fat as an Ostler.)

Damasias. I am Damasias the Wrastler.

Mercury. I thought so, you Iv'e often seen.

Damasias. True, therefore Naked, let me in.

Mercury. You are not Naked Understood,
When Clothed with all this Flesh, and Blood:
Therefore pray Strip; nay, you must do it,
And Cast away your Crowns to Boot;
For else your Weight will Sink the Boat.

Damasias, See, I Obey, and am Industrious,
To make my Slender Ghost Illustrious! See an Elegy on Prince Rupert.


Mercury. So, now come in, for you are, as Fit,
As any ever Entered yet:
You Crato, throw away your Riches,
You that Wore Coats, instead of Breeches;
And bring not here your Poetry,
Your Titles, nor your Pedigree.
Your Statues neither, which for Money
The City did bestow upon you:
And speak not of your Tomb, for that
From the Remembrance gathers weight.

Crato. Well I will do it, for who that lives,
But needs must go, when the Devil drives.

Mercury. Bless me! I think the man is mad,
What carry Trophies now you are dead?

Crato. Who for this Honor would not strive,
When 'twas a Cities Donative.

Mercury. Come leave your Arms to your living Race,
For Hell's a very civil Place:
What shade is that? who does behave
Himself so well and looks so Grave?
Who knits his brows, in such strange fashion,
And is so filled with Contemplation;
And wears so very long a Beard,
(Enough to make a Horse afear'd.)

Menippus. He is, Mercury, a Philosopher,
Who in one hand two Eggs can toss over:
A Jugler, Mountebank or Zainye,
Who can be every thing to any:
Strip him and you shall ten to one,
Find Pretty things beneath his Gown.

Mercury. Come, lay aside your Gown and Dress,
And let us behold your Nakedness.
O Jupiter! What Ignorance,
Intricate Notions, Arrogance,
Vainglory, Trifles, and Contention,
(With many more too long to mention)
Did this proud Fellow car' about him
(That he will be nothing sure without 'em:)
Pleasures and Gold too, (by the bye,)
With Wantoness and Luxury;
All this I know, tho you would it hide;
Cast off your Lying too, and Pride;
Your fond Conceit, that you are blessed
With Gifts far better than the best;
For if you enter burdened so,
A first Rate Ship will not carry you.

Philosopher. Since you will have it so, it is done,

Menippus. Pull off his Beard which is so long,
There Is no enduring't, it is so strong:
And does in filth so much abound,
I do believe it weighs a pound.

Philosopher. But who shall cut it Mercury?

Mercury. Menippus, he will do it Cleverly:
Here, take the Axe with which the Boat
We mend, but have a care of's Throat;
And Chop it off, 'twill save a Groat.

Menippus. Lend me the Saw: for that will do,
And't's more Ridiculous of the two.

Mercury. No, do it with Axe now if you can:

Menippus. So, now you look like any man;
Now this Damned Plaguey stink is gone:
But shall I leave his Eyebrows on?

Mercury. O Yes, for those he used when he,
Did strive to look most Piously:
What, do thou cry? (O foolish Man)
Afraid of Death! Come enter than.

Menippus. He still has one thing strong I see.

Mercury. What is it?

Menippus. Confounded Flattery.

Philosopher. Do you Menippus than lay by
Your Boldness, Joques, and Liberty.

Mercury. By no means; keep them still, for they
Being light, will help us in our way:
And you too Pleader, pray lay by
Your Similitudes and Oratory;
Your Barbarisms, and other Trade,
Which you Damned Rhetoricians made.

Rhetorician. It Is done. --

Mercury. It Is well, now set from shore,
Pull up the Anchor, Ply the Oar;
Haul in the Ladder, spread the Sail:
Now for a brisk and nimble Gale.
Look to the Stern there, you can tell
Charon best how; Hey! Hey! for Hell.
Why howl ye Fools? What, are ye afear'd,
Sure thou cry'st, 'cause thou'st lost thy Beard.

Philosopher. No, it is (tho ye on me retort all)
Because I thought the Soul Immortal.

Menippus. He lies, he does not weep for that;

Mercury. Prithee Menippus than for what?

Menippus. Because he cannot be invited more,
To Costly Suppers as before;
Nor muffled up steal forth by Night,
To please his Beastly Appetite;
When he is not able for to do,
What Nature calls Mankind unto;
Yet he next Morn does Wisdom Preach,
And Virtue does pretend to Teach:
And takes men's Money too, to do it;
These are the things that grieve the Sot.

Philosopher. Art thou not troubled, being dead?

Menippus. Thou art a silly Loggerhead
To think so, when I made a Venture,
And came my self, before I was sent for.
But hark from Earth, I hear a Noise!

Mercury. It Is a Company of Men and Boys;
Who are met together to be Merry,
Since Lampichus came into the Wherry:
The Women Maull his Wifes poor bones,
While at his Children Boys throw Stones:
Others in Sycyconia Praise,
And him Diophantus gives the Bays;
For the Oration he did bawl,
At our Friend Crato's Funeral:
Damasias's Mother too in the Fashion,
With other Fools makes Lamentation:
But no body Menippus cries,
To Celebrate thy Obsequies.

Menippus. Not so, for when they bury me,
You Will hear the Dogs bark Dolefully:
The Crows shall beat their VVings, and all
To Solemnize my Funeral.

Mercury. You Are Valiant to a Miracle;
So, now we are arrived at Hell:
Go all to the Court of Justice straight,
While I and Charon get more Freight.

Menippus. Farewell Mercury, we will on;
And see what here is to be done.
What will become of you my Friends?
You must b' Arraigned; besides the Fiends
Have strange Prodigious Methods here
To Punish; some with Wheels they Tear,
Some they Expose in Frozen Parts,
Where Vultures prey upon their Hearts.
Others do Maull their flesh and bones,
By Rolling weighty Craggy Stones;
While others are with Serpents Lasht,
And into boiling Caldrons dashed.
Here all your thoughts will opened be
That every one Accordingly,
May have his Just reward of Misery.

A Dialogue between Pluto and Terpsion.
Ter. IT is Unreasonable Pluto,
That I should Dye so Youthful (you know;)
And that at Ninety-Odd, Thucritus
Should still remain Alive, to Spite us.

Plu. You are mistan'e; it is very Just,
That such base men should still dye first:
For those alone deserve to Live,
Who Wish their Friends, and Kin' may Thrive;
And those do Merit well the Grave,
Who Wish Folks Dead, their Wealth to have.

Ter. But is it not Just, the Old should Dye,
And leave their Gold to such as I?

Plu. Thou make new Laws, when thou do Wish,
That those who cannot Enjoy the Flesh,
Should be no more: Besides, it is Vain,
For Heaven (certainly) did Ordain,
More Stranger Things than this should be:
(And that from all Eternity.)

Ter. It Is their Decrees that I too Blame;
Besides, methinks it is a Shame,
That Old Men should remain so long,
And Death take off, the Brisk, and Young:
As for Example (mind I pray)
That an Old Fellow doting Gray,
With Palsy, Pox, and Gout, at once,
A sniveling fribbling Bag of Bones,
Who makes no other Use of's Senses,
Than pestring People with Pretenses;
A Walking Churchyard, Living Grave,
A Frigid, Senseless, Testy Knave,
Should Live, when such Young Men as I,
Who Brisk, and Vigorous are, must Dye.
It Is just like one who is made by Force
A Slave, for better, and for worse,
Where the Gray Mare, proves the better Horse.
Or other ways to Express the Thing,
Like Rivers, mounting to their Spring;
But at the last, I think it is Vain,
Since we know nothing, to Complain.

Plu. Why do you than so much admire,
And what is other men's, desire?
Why so much Love do you pretend,
To Rich Old Men? (and call 'em Friend;)
Wheedle them too, to call you Son,
As if your business then were done;
To make us Laugh at you, when they,
Attend you to your House of Clay.
For it is Pleasant (Troth) to us,
To see men Brisk and Vigorous,
Carress Old Age, and be Enamored,
With what is so Fulsome and Ill-favored;
Yet this ye only do when They Are
Or Childless, or without an Heir;
Then you in hopes to get their Gold,
Direct your Courtship to the Old.
Gold! which can make the Aged Young,
The Cripple Walk, the Feeble Strong,
The Ugly Handsome, Swarthy Fair,
And teach the Cunning Knave to Swear;
May well persuade you, for I see,
All Humane-kind so Worship me,
That Gold's their only Deity.
But these Old Men often Countermine,
And pay you off in your own Coin;
For if it happen to their Lot,
That many Children they have Got;
They will pretend before you to abuse 'em,
And Beat, and Thump, and basely Use 'em,
That they may be by you presented,
And your Vain hopes in part contented:
Yet when Grim Death, on them does call,
They Will Settle on their Children All,
As Nature at the First designed it;
(I wish that all the World would mind it,)
And not make all this Factious 'Do,
But give to every one their Due;
While you may easily count your Gains,
And take your Labor for your Pains.

Ter. And this it is spoils my Content,
For I a World of Money spent,
In Courting this Old Hypocrite,
This Fumbling Limberham'd Thucrite:
For every day he had the hick up,
Which made me think, he straight would kick up;
And caused me to present him double,
That I my Rivalls all might bubble;
Which I believe (I Vow and Swear)
Was the Cause of my coming here:
For I in nothing could delight,
Nor did I sleep by Day or Night.
And tho of Gloves I made a Cap well,
I could not steal a Nap in the Chapel;
At which this Cursed Dog did flout,
When the Old Women laid me out.

Plu. Old Heart of Oak! Hold up thy Head
And see 'em all as door-nail Dead.

Ter. I wish Chariades might dye,
Before him too, as well as I.

Plu. Melanthus, Phido, all shall come,
I have already read their Doom.

Ter. That pleases me to the Heart, and Liver,
Happy Thucritus! Live for Ever.

A Dialogue between Notus and Zephyrus.
Notus. D'b'uy! Friend Zephyrus, I have been,
Where I more rarer Sights have seen,
Than ever I saw before, (I vow)
Tell me dear Zeph. saw thou 'em too?

Zeph. Not I in troth, I kept my Station,
And Laboring was in my Vocation,
Toward the Indies I was blowing
And only saw what there was doing.
The Bantamer I saw, (for shapes)
As Comely as a Jackanapes,
(Tho some large Monkeys, I suppose,
I Have seen more handsome 'bout the Nose:)
Some other Beasts too I saw there,
But nothing else I vow and swear.

Notus. Well, well! say what you will it is vain,
The like can never be seen again:
Do know King Agenor my Lad?

Zeph. The beautiful Europa's Dad?

Notus. You are in the Right, it is she I mean
To speak of now, (a pretty Queen)
And you know Jove that Rampant Woer,
Had long since a Months mind unto her:
So far you're right, but what came on it,
I Am sure your'e wholly Ignorant:
Yet I will tell thee, therefore put-on
Grave Looks, while I the Tale unbutton:
She being one morn' on the Sea shore
With her Play-fellows (ten or more)
At Hide-and-seek, and Prison-bace,
Hot-cockles, Leap-frogg, and Clap-A --
Jove came in the form of Milk-white-Bull,
To VVheedle and Kidnap the Trull;
Leaping and Cap'ring to delight her,
And tame as any Lamb, to envite her:
Which she observing, (straight the Gull)
Resolves to back, and Ride the Bull:
So on she flings her self a-stride,
No sooner pleased, but up and Ride;
When straight the Bull with furious have
Into the Brinish Ocean dashed;
While she with hand on's Horn did sit,
And looked as if she would been besh --
The Wind blew so, she had no fence,
Nor Veil to hide her Twenty-Pence:
With head behind she thus sat bawling,
And on her scared Companions calling.

Zeph. Is this the Exc'lent Show (you Lout)
Which you have made such stir about?
Jove turned a Bull, and on his back
To Spirit away a silly Crack.

Notus. You Will like it well I do not doubt,
When you have heard the Story out;
For straight the Winds left off their Clutter,
The Foaming Ocean ceased to sputter;
So general was the Quiet Dress,
Nature's whole self seemed Motionless;
A Thousand Cupids fluttered round,
(To grace the show,) with Roses Crowned:
Some cut the Air with nimble Motion,
While others Caper'd on the Ocean:
So brisk and Airy still they trod,
There was not one of 'em wet-shod:
And what was strange, not one of the Host faild,
Tho not a Boy of 'em was Frost-Nail'd:
Some carried Links, (although 'twas day)
Others sung Ballads all the way;
As Colly-Cow, and the Ladies fall,
With Hey Boys up go we (and all.)
Next came a Troop of Gods of the Sea,
With Oyster-shells, Armed Capapea:
The Nymphs too scorned to be behind,
When such a business was in the Wind.
These mixed together as they went,
And made a motly Regiment.
Each one upon a Fish did Ride,
Or God, or Goddess, all a-stride;
And 'twas a pretty sight to see,
Each Nereid naked to the Knee:
But that which set me all on fire,
Was when I saw -- a litter higher:
The Tritons too did there resort,
And played their tricks to make 'em sport:
Neptune and Amphitrite were there,
TO attend their Brother Jupiter,
To give the Bride, as it is the Fashion
On such Occasions, in that Nation:
But one thing I forgot to tell,
Venus was there too, in her Shell,
By Tritons drawn, enough to scare one,
Scattering of Flowers, on the Fair one:
Briskly in faith she laid about her,
The sight had nothing been without her
Thus Jove Traveled with his sweet one,
From off Phenicia to Crete on:
When straight he changed his Beastly shapes,
And looked a God; at which the Trapes
To see him thus so finely 'quipt,
Looked just as if she had been Whipped:
Then to the private Cave Dutean,
He lead the silly blushing Queen,
And did -- You know, you know what I mean.
At which the Sea Gods all went home,
The Winds too blew, the Sea did Roam;
All that did thither then resort,
Withdrew and left 'em to their Sport.

Zeph. I envy thee, (by this good Light)
The Pleasure of this Pleasant Sight,
Which but related gives Delight.

ADVERTISEMENT.
LUcian's Dialogues, done into English Burlesque, the First Part: Printed for
William Bateman, next the Kings Head Inn, in the Old-Change. 1684.

FINIS.

