Several QVESTIONS OF Serious and necessary Consequence, Propounded by the
Teaching Elders, Unto M. JOHN COTTON of Boston in New England. WITH His
respective Answer to each Question.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Banks, and are to be sold in Blackfriars on the
top of Bride-well Stairs, and in Westminster Hall, at the sign of the Seal.
1647.

Certain Questions propounded by the teaching Elders in the Bay, to M. John
Cotton Teacher in the Church of Boston.
Quest. I.

WHat the seal of the Spirit is?

Answer.

The Seal of the Spirit is taken by some good Divines to be the sanctification
of the Spirit, as that which like a Seal: 1. Distinguishes, the faithful: 2.
Consents, the faithful: 3. Confirms the faithful:
Others take it for the Witness of the Spirit it self, as it is distinguished
from our Spirit, Rom: 6.18. In which sense it is commonly used by our Brethren
in the Church: Though I my self do generally forbear to call it by that
name, and do not usually call it the Witness of the Spirit, least I might give
offense to any, who may conceive the Seal of the Spirit to be more general.

Quest. II.

Whether every Believer be sealed with it?

Answer.

Every Believer is not sealed with the Seal of the Spirit, if the Seal be
taken for the Witness of the Spirit it self, but in the former sense, all
Believers be sealed with it.

Quest. III.

What ground from the word of that Distinction, a Bread Seal, and the other
Seal, and the difference between them.

Answer.

I know no such Distinction between the Broad Seal and the other Seal: Nor was
that Distinction propounded by any of our Members, but by one of your selves,
who expressing his conception in that Speech, one of our Members answered him
according to his meaning in his own word, if you call it so, says he;
Nevertheless thus much may truly be said: There is a difference between the
Witness of the Spirit, as it regenerateth and renews our spirits; and the
Witness of the Spirit as it comfort us with evident assurance of our
Adoption, Rom, 8.16.

Quest. IV.

Whether a man may or ought to see any saving work of Christ in himself, and
take Comfort from it, before he be sealed by the Spirit?

Answer.

A true Believer may and ought to see (if it be declared to him in the use of
the means) any work of Christ in himself that he accompanies salvation (as
Cornelius did) before he be sealed with the witness of the Spirit it self:
yet full settled comfort he cannot take, nor rest in, till it be witnessed unto
him by the Spirit: for Comfort without the Word is false Comfort, and neither
Word nor Spirit, do teach us to take any Comfort so much from the Work of
Christ in us, as from the Object of it.

Quest. V.

Whether the testimony or Seal of the Spirit be so clear, as to witness
immediately by it self, without respect of any work of Christ in a man, or so
constant, that it being once obtained, a man does never after question his
Estate.

Answ.

The Testimony of the Spirit is so clear, as that it may witness immediately,
though not without some work of Christ in a man, yet without respect unto the
Work: Nevertheless it is not so constant or permanent, at least not in all
Believers) but that a man after he has received it, may come in time of
temptation to question his Estate, though not so frequently nor so desperately
as before.

Quest. VI.

Whether a Christian may maintain like constant Comfort in his soul, when he
has fallen into some gross sin, or neglected some known duty, as when he
walked most closely with God.

Answ.

A Christian man cannot find like constant comfort maintained to his soul,
after he has fallen into sin, whether of Commission or Omission, as when God
keeps him in a close walking with him: For the Spirit of God in him being
grieved, (and grieved it is by any gross sin especially) it will not speak
wonted Peace and Comfort to him. If David fall into such gross sins, as
Adultery and Murder, it cannot be, but the bones of his comfort will be broken,
Psalm. 15.8. Nevertheless, the assurance of a man's good Estate may be
maintained to him, when the frame and course of his spirit is grown much
degenerate, Isai. 63.16.

Quest. VII.

Whether a weak Believer may not warrantably apply some promise to himself as
given by God, although he does not yet discern his interest in it by the Broad
Seal of the Spirit?

Answ.

A weak Believer may warrantably apply some promise to himself, and may have
it also given him of God, even whilst he is yet waiting for it, before he can
discern his interest in the promise, by the witness of the Spirit it self:
For the soul that waits for Christ, may come to see and know (by his renewed
knowledge) that he does wait; and may from thence conclude, that he on whom he
waits, will not absent himself for ever.

Quest. VIII.

Whether a Christian must of necessity have his first assurance from an
absolute, and not from a conditional promise?

Answ.

A Christian man's first assurance does arise from the Spirit of God, applying
Gods free grace in an absolute promise. Or if in a conditional promise, it is
not to works, but to faith, and to faith, not as it is a work, but as it
reveals the free grace of God offered, and applied in Christ Jesus.

Quest. IX.

What you mean by Christian sanctification, whether immediate acting of the
Spirit, or infused Habits: If habits infused, whether such as are contrary to
corrupt Nature, and all vicious Habits: and if so, whether you must not mean
the Image of God in Adam renewed in us, to be our sanctification?

Answ.

I mean by Christian sanctification, the fruit of the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in true Believers, working and acting in us, both infused Habits and
actions of Holiness, contrary to all vicious Habits and actions of corrupt
Nature. And yet I do not mean, that the Image of God in Adam renewed in us (and
no more then so) is our sanctification: our sanctification in Christ has in it
this more; Faith in the Righteousness of Christ, and Repentance from dead
Works, (and that which is the root of all) the indwelling power of the Spirit,
to act and keep Holiness in us all, which Adam wanted.

Quest. X.

Whether this sanctification being discerned by us, be not a true Evidence of
Justification?

Answ.

If this sanctification be evidently discerned, it is a true evidence of
Justification, a Posteriori, as Justification is likewise a true Evidence of
Sanctification, a Priori.

Quest. XI.

Whether sanctification being discerned, may not be, and often is a ground of
primitive Comfort, as it is an evidence of our being in Christ?

Answ.

I do not believe that this sanctification being discerned, is a ground of
Primitive Comfort, though when it is evidently discerned, it be an evidence of
our being in Christ. I conceive our faith depending on Christ is as soon
discerned, and sooner then our sanctification by Christ; and yet, neither will
discerning of it yield settled comfort to the soul, till the Spirit of God does
witness from Christ, Gods thoughts of peace toward him.

Quest. XII.

Whether when my sanctification lies prostrate, I may not prove my self in a
state of Grace by my sanctification?

Answ.

If my justification lies prostrate, that is, altogether dark and hidden from
me, I cannot prove my self in a state of Grace by my sanctification: For whilst
I cannot believe that my person is accepted in justification, I cannot believe
that my works are accepted of God, as any true sanctification.

Quest. XIII.

Whether evidencing justification by sanctification, be a building my
justification on my sanctification: or a going on in a Covenant of Works.

Answ.

To evidence my justification by my sanctification, though it may seem at first
blush a plain and evident Phrase, yet is it indeed ambiguous, or at least
obscure: Give me leave to clear the sense of it and then give you mine answer.
To evidence my justification by my sanctification, is no more at first hand
then to give or hold forth my sanctification for an evident Argument of
justification: Thus far the Phrase is plain. But now when I give it for an
evident Argument, I may give it either for an evident cause or ground of my
justification, or for an evident sign or effect of it. Again, when I give it
for an evident sign of justification, I may either give it alone for an evident
sign (having nothing else to show for my justification) or I may give it for a
concurrent sign, together with other signs and witnesses, which may make both
my justification and my sanctification evident and clear to my self and
others. Having thus cleared the ambiguity and obscurity of the Phrase, I give
you mine Answer distinctly in these several Propositions.

Proposition. 1.

To give my sanctification for an evident ground, or cause, or matter of my
justification, is to build my justification upon my sanctification, and to go
on in a Covenant of Works.

Propos. 2.

To give my sanctification for an evident ground or cause of my faith, whereby
I am justified, as when I do not nor dare not depend upon Christ for my
justification, till I evidently see my sanctification, this is also to build my
justification on my sanctification, and to go on in a Covenant of works. For
sanctification (or which is all one) good works are not the cause of
justifying faith; but justifying faith the cause of them.

Propos.

To give my sanctification for an evident cause and ground of my faith (not
whereby I am justified, but) whereby I believe my self to be justified (which
they call the Faith of Assurance) this may be a building my justification on my
sanctification, or a going on in a Covenant of Works two ways:

1. If the soul have no evidence of his dependence upon Christ for
righteousness, nor no evidence of his effectual calling unto Christ, and unto
faith in Christ (by the Fathers drawing him to come to him) but only he sees
an evident change in himself, from a profane and civil course to a
sanctified conversation; or at least, upon that which is worse, to wit, upon
that which seems true Christian sanctification, which indeed is not, but a
legal Reformation. For when a man has been humbled under the Spirit of bondage
by the terrors of the Law, yet he may never come to feel his need of Christ,
nor his own insufficiency or unworthiness to receive him.

Though he may obtain 1 Restraining grace to keep him from known sins. 2.
Constraining (or exciting) Grace to provoke him to duty (or else his Conscience
sometimes terrified by the Law would fly in his face.


And though in this way he may find comfort (as the stony ground did, and
thorny soil much more) and so from this great change he may build up to
himself the faith or Assurance of his Justification, yet in truth, in so doing
he builds upon such a sanctification which is indeed a sandy foundation.

2. To give my sanctification for an evident ground or cause of faith, whereby
a man believes himself to be justified, may be a building of Justification,
upon a Sanctification in another case: to wit, when we shall give a man no
other ground or evidence of his justification, but only from the evidence of
his sanctification: For the Publican did not (as the Pharisee thought himself
did) see any evident fruits of his sanctification, but was deeply affected with
the sense of his sins, so that he smote his breast with the Anguish of sin,
and durst not lift up his eyes to heaven through confusion of face for sin,
but only cried out to God to be merciful unto him in this sinful estate: and
yet by our Saviors own judgment. this man went home justified, rather then
the other ( Luke 18.) though he saw no evidence of his sanctification, but
rather Evidence of his sinful corruption. If any of our brethren doubt hereof,
I would pray them to call to mind what some of them that lived in Essex have
heard our brother Hooker and Master Rogers also teach soundly, and argue out of
the Word; that there be saving graces which are not sanctifying, but are
wrought before sanctification, which yet may bear witness to a safe estate
(and I may add to Fellowship with Christ, for there is no safety but in him)
before the soul can see any evidence of his Sanctification.

Propos. 4.

A man may give his sanctification for an evident ground or cause of his faith
whereby he is justified, and yet sometimes not build his justification upon his
sanctification, nor be under a Covenant of works, but only sometimes go aside
to a Covenant of works: As in case, when a man is truly justified, and sees it
not, he does then betake him to his works for the hastening of his assurance.
As Abraham when he had long waited for the Promised Seed, thought he was
justified by believing the free Promise: yet, for the more speedy satisfying of
his faith and hope, he turned aside to go into Hagar (who was a Type of the
Covenant of works) for the hastening of his sight and fruition of the promised
Seed: So there be sundry Children of Abraham, even of his elect Seed, that
having been driven out of their sins by a Spirit of Bondage, and finding a need
of Christ, and their own insufficiency and unworthiness to receive him: do
therefore seek and wait for him (by the mighty power of God) in every Ordinance
and Duty. Such men are already truly justified, though it may be as yet they do
not know so much, because this their seeking and waiting for Christ, in the
sense of their own need and emptiness, and unworthiness, is a true act of a
lively justifying faith. But now if such souls, because God may tarry long,
before they can see and feel Christ given to them, shall therefore seek Christ
in their own works or sanctification and in the promises and blessing given
to such works and not finding such works, can find no Peace nor Assurance:
such souls, though they do not build their justification upon their
sanctification, for indeed they were truly justified before, while they depend
on CHRIST for righteousness, according to the free Promise of Grace, and so
are truly under a Covenant of Grace, yet they go aside to a Covenant of
works, as unto Hagor, to bring forth to the sight of Christ, the seed of
promise, whom they so long waited for. The failing of such souls is this, that
they having Christ laid in their hearts, as the foundation of their
justification, though they know not so much. Upon this golden and precious
foundation they build hey and stubble, in seeking, and settling, and grounding
their faith of assurance not upon Christ, nor upon the free promise of grace,
nor upon the witness of the spirit it self applying the same, but upon the
holiness of their own works. In which case they are often put to many and sad
doubts, ever and anon renewed upon them, till the faith and confidence, which
they had built upon their own works, be at length burnt up with the fire of
temptation, and the clearer daylight of Gods Word and Spirit And then, though
their own works and their own building thereupon be burned, yet their souls
will be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Propos. 1.

The soul that has lain under the terrors of the Law, and comes afterward
to see and feel his need of Christ, and his own strength and worth to receive
him, and does depend upon Christ for righteousness and mercy, he may come in
his estate to see, by his renewed knowledge, his dependence on Christ, and
withal some fruits of sanctification, that flow therefrom, as prayer,
sometimes, with unutterable sighs and groans, brokenness of spirit, mourning
for sight of Christ, longing desire after the sincere Milk of the word, love of
the Ministry that wounded him, etc. And seeing God helping him here, he may
thereby gather, that he that has begun to help him, will go on to help him
still. But yet to give these for certain evidences of his justification, the
poor soul dare not, though another Christian of better discerning, may justly
so apply to him as good evidences of his justified estate. But nevertheless he
will still seek and wait for further and clearer fellowship with Christ, till
the Spirit of God himself do witness to him, the gracious thoughts of God
toward him in a free Promise of Grace, before he can plead his own good works,
(whether after Conversion or before) for good evidences of his justification.
For (as it has been observed by some of our godly learned Countrymen) the
graces of Gods Spirit in our Souls, are like the Stars in the Firmament, which
shine but with a borrowed Light from the Sun: If the Sun were hid from them,
their Light would be obscure: so is the light of our graces, if the Spirit of
God do hide his light from us.

Propos. 6.

But now if the spirit of God do show abroad his light into such a Soul, and
give him a clear sight of his estate in a free Promise of grace in Christ; such
a one evidently discerns both his justification and his sanctification; and
the one of them giving good Evidence to the other, the blood to the water, and
the water to the blood, and the spirit to both, 1 John 5.9.8. And thus in
evidencing his justification by his sanctification, he does not build his
justification upon his sanctification, nor hereby go on in a Covenant of works,
nor go aside to it.

Propos. 7.

But though the Soul may gather knowledge of his estate, from such Evidences
of Sanctification, yet if he shall therefore build his justifying Faith upon
such evidences, he shall again go aside to a Covenant of works, though his
person may be under a Covenant of grace; For justifying Faith cannot safely
build or rest upon any ground, save only upon Christ and his Righteousness.

Quest. XIV.

Whether a Christian be not further active after Regeneration, then before, if
there be a difference, wherein it lies?

Answer.

A Christian is more active after Regeneration then before, before Regeneration
we are not active at all in any spiritual Christian Action, no nor in Proximam
Potentiam, Passive to receive help from God to do it, but after Regeneration,
Acti Agimus. If we act and go forth in the strength of our own spiritual
Gifts, without looking up to Christ, we fall as Peter did, Math, 26.23.

Quest. XV.

Whether it be not a safe way to conclude my safe estate by my practical
Reasoning?

Answ.

It is not an unsafe, but a lawful way to conclude a man's safe estate by way
of practical reasoning, so it be, the reason be not carnal but spiritual.
One Proposition being expressed in the Word, or safely deducted thence; the
other being experimental observation of a good conscience, enlightened by the
Spirit of God, and looking up to Christ to clear the conclusion from both.
Nevertheless a good conscience will not satisfy himself in this way till it
be established by the witness of the Spirit; or if it should so satisfy or
rest it self for a season, God will awaken it in time, to a sense further need
of Christ.

Quest. XVI.

Whether a Christian may not press the Lord for spiritual Mercies, with
Arguments drawn from the graces of Christ in himself?

Answ.

A Christian soul is more usually wont to press the Lord for spiritual
Mercies, by Arguments drawn from his own spiritual miseries and infirmities,
then from the graces of Christ in himself. Nevertheless the Saints do also
make use of Arguments drawn from the graces of Christ, when they do discern
the same in themselves, but they are usually such graces whereby they go out of
themselves, and their own strength and worth, (as faith, hope, desire,
seeking, waiting, etc.) or such as do express their spiritual bent and
inclination, or affection, which they desire might be quickened and satisfied
with their spiritual proper Object or end, but the force of their Arguments
from those graces is fetched not from the force, or fullness, or power of them,
but from the weakness and emtinesse of them.

Thus have you (according to your desire) a plain and short Answer to all your
demands, except the thirteenth; which being exposed to greatest agitation, and
exception, I have spoken the more largely and distinctly to it; that so, I
might avoid carefully, as I see it needful, all suspicion of ambiquity and
obscurity.

Now the God of Truth and Peace lead us by his Spirit of Truth into all Truth,
through him, who is made unto us of God, the Way, the Truth, and the Life, AMEN.

FINIS.

