THE Countries Address TO THE LORDS SPIRITVAL in PARLIAMENT.
My LORDS,
YOUR Preposterous Dealings, and Evident Prevarications, are not only the
Wonder, but Astonishment of all Honest Men, within this Nation. And truly, as
the greatest part of you hitherto, have behaved your selves liker
State-sophisters, than sound Well-meaning Divines, whose main design was God's
Glory, the Prefervation of his Church, and Peoples Good; so now do you discover
your selves Scismaticks and Incendiaries, who would divide the Kingdom against
it self, set the Nation on Fire, and Sacrifice both Church and State, to your
seduced Appetites, and Self-interest. Were not you they, who not only Invited,
but Importuned the Prince of ORANGE; (yea, prayed to God to put it in his
Heart) to hazard Life and Fortune, for the Preservation of your Religion,
Lives, Laws, Liberties and Estates, etc. and are you now become so ungrate
Monsters of humanity, as to requite, yea, baffle him (by whom God has wrought
so great and miraculous Deliverance) thus? And is it fit this populous Nation
should be led in matters of Faith, by such unsettled, jealous-pated
Weather-cocks, as know not their own minds, and can stand steadfast to nothing*
but objecting against their own Overtures, oppose for Ostentation, Vainglory,
and to look Big, the surest and best Proposals, which God has laid before us
for the Kingdoms Peace? as Herostratus desired to be reputed famous, by burning
that wonderful Church which he himself had built. Is your Intellectual Glass a
falsifying Perspective? Or is the other end turned to your Eye? Is the great
Objectum Attributionis, the Opposing of Popery, and Preservation of the Church
of England, turned to a Necessarium secundum quid? Is the Worthy, Valiant,
Victorious, and Triumphant* Prince (who was the sure Remedy, and Restorer both
of Church and State) become your Eyesore? And the grant of your Prayers, a
scruple of Conscience? Cannot the Religious Orange down with you, nor relish
your squeamish and liquorish Appetites and Stomachs now, without a Dram of the
Whore's Abominable Cup? Laying aside Conscience and Religion, with his Royal
Descent, Bare common Civility might prompt you to be more than thankful to so
Worthy a Person, whose very Behavior, Parts, Prudence, sober Life and
Magnanimity, have extorted Love, Duty and Respect, from his greatest Enemies,
and strangers of greater repute than Men of your Birth and mean Pedigree. But
Nihil dat alteri, quod in se not habet. And as it was said of the baseborn,
beggarly Pope, Urban VI. Asperious misero nihil est, qui surgit in altum; so
may it be said of you. Cord stat inflato pauper honor dato. Mali Corvi malum
Ovum. Patrem sequitur sua proles. But I think it no Solicism in Civility, nor
Paradox in Divinity (without any reflection on those Noble Bishops, whose Divine
Prudence has proved their Zeal and Pious Care, for God and their Country) to
tell those Ignoble, Inferior, Upstart, Canting, Seditious, Never Contented,
Unlearned* Brawling, Backbiting, Church and State betraying Bishops (who would
Lord it over God's Heritage, and put the heavy Yoke of Antichristian Popery on
the Kingdoms Neck; which we nor our Forefathers were able to bear) that they
are the Enemies of the Cross of Christ, and of their own Country. And that men
of their Lineage, know not how to behave themselves in State Affairs, with
persons of innate Candor, and unspotted Clemency, above the rustic Sphere of
a Gaffar and Gammar. And, although you pretend to be the Teachers of others,
you your selves stand in need of a Schoolmaster, to teach you the first
principles of good Breeding and Religion. Pope Julius III. was (as some of you
were) promoted, a Rhemo ad Tribunal; and yet, as all Historians Record, he was
the greatest of Tyrants, and more imperious than any of his Ancestors. Yea, it
is reported by John Functius, in his Commentaries, that in seven years space,
he was the occasion of the Murdering 200000 Christians. You trace his
footsteps, threatening the Nation with Division and Civil War, which (as our
Savior says) is the surest means to overthrow both us and our Religion;
especially in such a dangerous time as this. But it is a Country Proverb, Dogs
make Swine agree: The Rabble let loose would be a good Scar-crow, to frighten
such black Birds of prey to their right senses, and to know themselves; and not
presume to transgress their Limits, nor elevate their Judgments above the low
Sphere of their shallow Capacities. But why should Passion eclipse Reason? What
can we expect but a preposterous Order, when by an Hyperbolick
Hysteron-Proteron, the heels of the Nation are set upmost. And, to speak as
freely as you act, several of you are fitter for the Plough than a House of
Peers. Neither is this more than has been foretold by Christ and his Apostles,
viz. That in the latter days, should be seducing Prophets, Wolves in Sheeps
Clothing, Men carnally minded, and destitute of the Spirit, Wells without
Water, Clouds carried about with every Tempest, Wandering Stars of Apostasy,
heedy, high-minded, covetous, not feeding, but devouring both Flock and
Pasture, following the way of Balaam, who loved the wages of Unrighteousness,
and the Praise of Men, more than the Glory of the invisible God. And truly,
your pride makes it evident, that you have no less Ambition for Superiority,
than John of Constantinople had for Supremacy. Remember Tower Hill, Jan. 10.
1644.

Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
Farmers in Kent.
William Ploughshear, Richard Wheelbarrow,


With Allowance.

LONDON* Printed in the Year 1689.


