A brief ABSTRACT OF THE QVESTION OF PRECEDENCE, BETWEEN ENGLAND and SPAIN.

Occasioned By Sir Henry Nevil Knight, the Queen of Englands Ambassador, and
the Ambassador of Spain at Callys, before Commissioners appointed by the
French King: Who had moved a Treaty of Peace in the two and fortieth year of
the reign of the same Queen, by ROBERT COTTON Esquire, at the commandment of
the Queens Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by L.N. and R.C. for Thomas Slater, at the sign of the Swan
in Duck lane, November. 24. 1642.

THE PRECEDENCE OF ENGLAND and SPAIN.
Place; Antiquities, Kingdom, or a Christian Kingdom of the throne Roya^.
or Eminency;
Or Person; Nobility of blood, or Antiquities of government.



precedence of England in respect of the antiquity of the Kingdom.
TO seek before the decay of the Roman Empire the antiquity of any kingdom, it
were a mere vanity when as the kingdoms of Christendom, now in being, had
their rising from the fall thereof; at which instant Vortigeras, a native of
this Isle, first established here a free kingdom 450. years, from whence her
Majesty is in descent Lineally.

And it is plain, that as we were later than Spain reduced under the Roman
yoke, so were we sooner freed from it.

Subsequence of Spain.
Spain, since the dissolution of the Roman Empire, articuled no King till of
late.

For Attala^icus (from whom they would upon slender warrant ground their
descent) was never styled Rex Hispaniae, but Gotharum. Rodoricus Sanctus page
312.
And the kingdom of Castile, wherein the maine and fairest antiquity of Spain
rested, began not before the year of Christ 1017. whereas they were but Earls
of Castile before.

So that the kingdom of the English begun (which was always, as Beda observes,
an Heptarchy) 460. years before Castile or Spain. Precedence of England in
respect of Antiquity of Christian Religion.

Joseph of Aramathea planted Christian Religion immediately after the Passion of
Christ in this Realm.

And Aristobulus, one of them mentioned by S. Paul, Romans 16. Baronius.
Dorothorus Beda. Beda. Baro. and Donaco Constantini.
was Episcopus Britannorum, and so likewise was Simon Zelotus.

The first Christian King in Europe was Lucius Sirius.

The first that ever advanced Papacy of Rome was the Emperor Constantius, born
at York, of whom in the Roman Laws near his time is written, Qui Veneranda
Christianorum fide Romanorum immisit Imperium. And to him particularly more
than to other Emperors are these Epithetary attributed, Divus divae memoriae,
divinae memoriae, orbis l^^erator, quietus fundator, reipublicae instaurator,
publicae libertatis a^^ magnu^, maximus invectus restitutor urbis Romae, atque
orbis.

And there have been more Kings and Princes of the blood Royal Confessors and
Martyrs in England, than in any Province in Europe: And from Ethelbert King of
Kent (converted in anno 596.) until this day Christianity has been without
interruption continued.

Subsequence of Spain.
In the time of Claudius S. James preached in Spain; but gained only nine
souls: So did he in Ireland, (as Vincentius says) and they cannot count
Christian Religion to be then planted in Spain, which shortly after was first
tainted with the heresy of Prisilian, then with Gothish Arianism, and after
defaced with Moorish Mahometism from 707. years after Christ, in continuance
770. years, until Ferdinando King of Aragon and Castile utterly expelled the
Moors from thence.

Precedence of England in respect of the more absolute authority political.
The Queen of Englands power is absolute in acknowledging no Superior, nor
invassalage to Pope nor Emperor. For that subjection, which by King John was
made to Innocentius the third, after in Parliament, Per praeceptum Domini Papae
septimo Julii cum fidelitate homagii relaxatur omnino.

Sir Thomas Moore in his Debellation says, The Church of Rome can show no such
deed of subjection, neither that the King could grant it of himself. And
Eugubinus in his Defense of Constantius Donat. names not England, where he
recites all the feodary Kingdoms to the Papacy.

Ex legibus Canat.
The Peter Pence were not duties, but Eleemozynae Regis, neither the Roman Scot,
but Regis largae benignitatis parem non habet Rex Angliae in regno suo multo
fortius, nec superiorem habere debet, says Bracton.

Ipse non debet esse sub homine, sed sub Deo, and habet tantum superiorem
Judicem Deum.

Likewise in appointing Magistrates, pardoning life, appeals granting
privileges, taking homage, and the like. And this Jura majestatis not limited
in sensu numerato, bello Judicando, pace ineundo.

Eulentherius the Pope, 1400. years ago, in his Epistles to Lucius King of
Britain, styles him Vicarius Dei in regno suo.

So is the King of England in Edgars Laws; and Baldus the Lawyer says, Rex
Angliae est Monarcha in Regno suo: and Malmesbury, post conversionem ad fidem,
tot and tantos obtinuit libertates quot Imperator Imperio.

Subsequence of Spain.
The King of Spain has no Kingdom, but is Feodary, as Castilia enthralled by
Oath of subjection and Vassaledge from King Henry to Charles the fifth of
France, 1369. ex foedore con^racto: And for the Netherlands there is due to the
French King, or the Papacy; as Aragon to Innocentius the third by Peter, 1204.
confirmed by Ferdinando and Alphonsus, 1445. and from James by the like Oath,
1453.

And to Sardinia and Corsica the Kings of Aragon from the Bishops of Rome were
under Oath of subjection invested ex formali fiducia.

The Kingdom of Portugal in vassall^ge to the Pope under an Annual tribute.

And the Canaries, Hesperides, and Gorgon Islands subjected to the Sea of Rome
under the chief Rent of four hundred Florens by Lewis King of Spain, 1243. of
both the Indies, Alexander did reserve the regalities of Scicilia to the
Church, as chief Lord.

And Grando and Navar were made Feodary to the Pope under Julius the second.

Naples at every change sends a Palphery, as an Heriot due to the Church of
Rome; and of the Empire he holds the Dukedom of Millain: So that it is
questionable among Civilians, whether he be Princeps, which holds in foedo
all, of others; his absolute authority restrained in Aragon by Justitia
Aragonica; in Bisca and other places, by particular reservations; and his Jura
Majestatis in sensu numerato, bello judicando, pace ineundo, etc. limited by
the privilege of the State, as in Braband, and elsewhere in his Spanish
territories, ex propriis constitutionibis and privilegiis.

Precedence of England in respect of more absolute Authority Ecclesiastical.
Her Majesty's power is more absolute in this, confirmed by ancient custom and
privilege more than any other Christian Prince, for no Legate de latere in
England de Jure allowed but the Archbishop of Canterbury, if any be admitted by
courtesy, he has no authority to hold plea in the Realm contrary to the Laws
thereof. Placit 2. H. 4. And before he was admitted, and entered the Realm, he
was to take oath to do nothing dirogatory to the King and his Council, placit.
an. 1. H. 7. No man might denounce the Popes Excommunication, nor obey his
authority, on pain to forfeit all his goods without assent of the King or his
Council, placit. 32. and 33. Edw. 1. Malmsb.
Dunst. Rot.

Henry the first called a Provincial Council; and so did Canutus and others:
No appeal to Rome without the Kings license, an. 32. and 34. Edw. 1. Investure
of Bishops and Churchmen in the Kings hand, ex Matthew. Paris, and Hen.
Huntington. De gratis Pontific. Dunel. placit, 32, Edw. 1, and in 32. Edw. 3.
where the reason of the Ecclesiastical authority to suspend or bestow Church
livings, is yielded, Quia Angliae unguntur in Capite.

Subsequence of Spain.
The King of Spain can pr^s^ribe no custom to prohibit the Popes Leg^te, nor
uses any authority penal over the Clergy.

Spain can produce no example of any Provincial Council by call of their
King. Bodin. lib. 1. cap, 2. toward the end, writes that the Kings of Spain,
Non sine magna mercede impetrarunt sexti pontificis Romani rescriptione
peregrinis sacerdocia tribuerentur.

Appeals from the King to Rome allowed, so the Kings of Spain has no power
Ecclesiastical, having dispoiled themselves of all, by inthralling their
kingdoms to the Church of Rome.

Precedence of England in respect of eminency of Royal dignity.
The Kings of England are appointed as the Kings of France, who only have their
preheminency before other Kingdoms, declared by miracle in the cure of the
Regis morbus, which they can effect only, and that of antiquity; from Edw. the
Confessor, who lived in an. 1067. who healed many.

Beda. lib. 2.
They are superior Lords of the Kingdoms of Scotland and Man, and Vicarii
Imperii, as Edw. 3. and Oswold entitled him Rex Christianissimus. They are
filii adoptionis Ecclesiae; as the Emperor is filius primogenitus, and the
King of France, filius natu minor. They are accounted among Reges
superillustres, in this Order, Imperator Rex Franciae, Rex Angliae and
Franciae. Vido Corset.

England in the general Councels at Constance and Pisa was made a nation, when
all Christianity was divided into four Nations, Italicam, Gallicam, Germanicam
and Anglicam, ex lib. Sacrarum Ceremoniarum Ecclesiae Romanae; Whereupon a seat
accordingly was allowed at the three General Councels (viz.) Constance, Pisa,
and Sienna, to the English Ambassador, next to the Emperor on the left hand,
to the King of France on the right hand, which were ancient themselves, before
the Spaniards at Brasill, 1431. began to contend for precedence, where it was
in the first Session ordered, that all Legates should hold such places as they
had enjoyed then before, according to their worth and antiquity, yet in the
common Council of Trent, the precedence of France with Spain was made
questionable.

Augustus de Carallis, as the strongest reason to bar the French interest,
inferred the Queen of England from her Ancestors, both in respect of
inheritance, conquest and gift, de Jure Queen of France; by which reason, when
he does shake or overthrow, as he does consequently the precedence of England.

And at a treaty between Hen. 7. and Philip of Castile, 1506. the
Commissioners of England did subsigne before the others, and in the Treaty of
Marriage with Queen Mary, an. 1533. those of England are first rehearsed, and
at Burburgh, an. 1588. they gave it to her Majesty's Ambassadors.

And in respect of the eminency of this Royal throne to the Sea of Canterbury
was granted by Urbane at the Council of Claremount, an. 1096. for ever the
seat in General Council at the Popes right foot, who at that time uttered
these words, Includamus in Orb nostro tanquam alterius orbis Pontificem
maximum.

Subsequence of Spain.
1 The Kings of Castile are never anointed, neither has the Spanish Throne
that virtue to endue the King therein, and be invested with the power to heal
the Kings-evill; for into France do yearly come multitudes of Spaniards to
be healed thereof.

2. No Kingdom held in Fee of him.

3. Spain at the said Council not remembered one of the Sons of the Church.

4. The King of Spain placed last after the King of England,
Intersuperillustres by the said Corsetus.

5. The Kingdom of Spain then comprised under Italica natio, and no Nation of
it self, as in old time it was called Iberia minor, as a member of Italy,
England being Britannia major.

At which time the Spaniard contented himself with the place next the King of
France.

Precedence of England before Spain, in respect of Nobility of blood.

Her Majesty in lineall descent is deducted from Christian Princes for 800.
years by Ethelbert a Christian, 596. and the matches of her progenitors have
been most Royal with France, Germany, Spain, Scotland and others.

Subsequence of Spain.
For their antiquity of Descent as Kings of Spain, is chiefly from the Earls
of Castilia, about 500. years since; for they cannot warrant their descent
from Attalaricus the Goth, and as Dukes of Austria from the Earls of
Habspurgh, only about 300 years since.

Their matches anciently for the most part were with their subjects, and of
late in their own blood.

Precedencie of England in respect of antiquity of Government.

Her Majesty having reigned now most happily about 42. years.

This we would not at this time have alleged, but that the Spanish Ambassador
at Basil objected, in this respect, the minority of King Hen. 6. Her sex herein
is nothing prejudicial, when as both divine and humane Laws do allow it, and
accordingly Spain, England and Hungaria, insomuch, that Mary the last Queen
was always styled Regina Maria Hungariae.

Subsequence of Spain.
The King of Spain is yet in the infancy of his kingdom.

For the precedence may be viz. the antiquity of the Kingdom, when as Castile,
Aragon, Navarre, and Portugal, had their first Kings about 1025.

The ancient receiving of the Christian Faith by Joseph of Arimathea, Simon
Zelotus, Aristobulus, yea, by S. Peter, and by S. Paul, as Theodoretus and
Sophrinius do testify. This kingdom was held of God above, and in no
Vassallage to the Emperor or Pope, as Naples, Sicilia, Aragon, Sardinia, and
Corsica.

Sir Thomas Moore denies that King John either did or would make England
subject to the Pope, and that the tribute was not paid (page 296.) but the
Peter pence were paid to the Pope by King John by way of alms. The absolute
power of the King of England within other Kingdoms is much restrained. England
is accounted the fourth part of Christendom. For in the Council of Constance
all Christianity was divided into four Nations, as aforesaid, and accordingly
gave their voices. England in the opinion of the Pope is preferred, because it
is contained in the Ecclesiastical division. Two large Provinces which had
their Legati nati, when as France had scantly one. The Emperor is accounted
Major filius Papae. The King of France is Filius minor. The King of England
Filius adoptinis. The Archbishops of Canterbury are accounted by the Pope*
Tanquam alterius orbis Papae, and appointed to have places in General Councels
at the Popes right foot.

The title of Defensor fidei, as honorable and as justly bestowed upon the
Kings of England, as Christianissimus upon the French, or Catholicus upon the
Spaniard.

Edw. the third was created Imp. vicarius perpetuus Imperii cum jure, rite
notisque in omnes, 1338.

Imperii subditi, and the Kings of England Papae vicarii by Pope Nicholas the
second (viz.) Coporave, 1065.

Innocentius the fourth said, Vere hortus delitiarum est Anglia, vero puteus
inexhaustus ubi multa abundant, etc. 1246.

King Hen. 2. elected King of Jerusalem by the Christians, 1185.

Richard the first conquered the kingdom of Cyprus, and gave it to Guy L^ whose
posterity reigned there until of late years.

This kingdom has heretofore challenged the superiority over Scotland, as
aforesaid, and is now at this time the absolute Lord of Ireland, besides it
still retains the title to the Kingdom of France.

FINIS.

