THE COVNTRY-MANS CARE, And the Citizens fear, In bringing up their Children
in good Education.

Set forth in a Dialogue between a Citizen and Countryman.

Citizen.
a well-dressed urban gentleman Country Man.
a well-dressed rural gentleman

Printed at London for T.B. 1641.

THE Country Man's Care, AND The Citizens Fear in these dangerous, and
Troublesome Times.
Citizen. WEll met Countryman, what is the best news that the Country does
afford at this time?


Count. Alas sir! I wonder you should so earnestly enquire news of me, that
live in the Country, whenas we receive all our news from you. I confess, you
did prevent me, therefore I pray, what is the best news in the City?


Citiz. Alas! the ambiguous rotation of the World is very mutable, nothing is
constant, nothing durable, but all things do praecipitate themselves most
strangly in a mutual levitie.


Count. This news is hard indeed: for I did expect better, in regard that I
have a Son, truly a pretty Scholar (as his Master tells me) and of a hopeful
expectation, whose preferment I intend to raise (God willing) Therefore I
beseech you (if you can) instruct me, what way I may ^^ttle him in.


Citiz. What can he understand the Latin tongue, or how far has he
proceeded therein?


Count. Truly sir he is past his Propribus quae maribus, and his Ass in
praesentibus too I Will assure you; yea, and he can read any Chapter in the
Bible very punctifully, and withal he has read toe Master Practice on the
Piety, and many other Godly books I thank God for it, who has endewed him
with so much grace: Therefore because he is come to some knowledge now, I would
willingly bring him up to some Scholler-ship: what think you Sir, if I should
send him to the University?


Citiz. Sir I commend your fedulity herein: but I have often heard, and withal
I know by experience, that the University is much polluted, and contaminated
with Popish superstitions, which if your son should be seduced into, perhaps
it will cause both his utter ruin, and your perpetual sorrow.


Count. Is it possible that the University should be corrupt? It Is no marvel
then that the whole kingdom is misled, since the very fountains themselves
are poluted.


Citiz. I Exhort you as a friend; and I hope you will not contemn my friendly
admonition.


Count. But my Son may avoid their crafty allurements, and if he then
uncessantly follow his studdy, he may one day prove a Minister of God word.


Citiz. Pish, a minister of Gods word quother? Now a days every man will
become a Minister: therefore it will be but vanity for you to send your son
thither to attain to the Sacerdotiall function.


Count. But dare every man presume so far without learning?


Citiz. That is the chief cause thereof: for learning is abused, contemned,
derided, neglected, despised: they will have noe praying, nor preaching,
unless it be performed by instinct and inspiration, as the spirit mooves them.
And if a man heaps up knowledge, and Scholler-ship by indefatigable studdy, he
is thought to have filled his mind only with more advantage to do wickedness.


Count. Oh lamentable!


Citiz. Yea you may see Cobblers and Tinkers rising from the very Dunghill,
beating the Pulpits as conformably, as if they were the Kings professors of
Divinity, scattering their new doctrine and discipline in the Church, and are
accounted great divines too of the vulgar. Here you shall see one making
himself a Prophet preaching in a Tub as confidently, as if he were Doctor in
Divinity. There you shall see another thumping forth his new doctrine in a
Barn among his conniticles (I should have said) conventicles, as if he were
Master of Arts. In the mean while revolve all, and you shall find
Scholler-ship most shamefully despised.


Count. But if he diligently continue in his studdy. God knows but that he may
one day become a Bishop.


Citix. How? a Bishop? alas! I fear there will be no more of that dignity: for
the general assent and consent too of the Commons will admit of no Bishops:
and they must all very shortly resign their Titles, which shall be abrogated.
Your son shall never be Archbishop I Will warrant you: and if you intend to
make a Divine of him, he must have a great care least the Archbishop do not
cut of his ears. But I will free you from that fear, for I tell once again
that there will be no more Bishops: Yet if it seems more just, and secure,
that the holy Church should admit a degree of less, and greater, they will
have no Bishops, but only Lay Elders: to the election of which dignity, they
judge and suppose none more fit, and none more prepared for the performance of
every thing, belonging to Gods word, then those venerable, and reverend Fathers
Master Cobbler, Tinker, and Button-maker, men (although but of a mean
Scholler-ship) yet most wonderfully inspired. Therefore I think it mere vanity
for you, to bring your son up to be a Scholar.


Count. Alas! then what shall I do? unless I should put him to the Innes a
Court.


Citiz. So you will make a young Suckling of him, and then he will run away.


Count. But I intend to make him a Lawyer.


Citiz. Alas the Star Chamber, and High Commission Court is down long agone:
and he must be as busy as a Ducke, or else he will loose preferment. For
Lawyers are not respected, neither are they accounted Honest, because they sell
their lines dearer then Apothecaries Physics, which I confess is dear
enough, yet nothing comparable to the price of their lines, which gape wider
then an Oyster-wises mouth, and straddle wider then a French-man's legs. Fie,
fie! Lawyers are accounted Knaves over all the Country.


Count. It Is strange! For I Am sure they have more Angels come hourly to them in
Term time, then all the Puritans in the Town.


Citiz. But here lies the differnce: Their Angels do wear crosses: and
because the Puritans will admit of no cross, therefore they hate the Lawyers
the more, because they are so ready to receive them.


Count. And there is none of their whole Tribe, that will deny such crosses,
I Will warrant you.


Citiz. But Lawyers are so little regarded now adays, that I fear before they
can procure other men's Suites at Law, they will want Suites to their own Backs.


Count. But perhaps he may come to the honor of a Judge one day.


Citiz. I hope you do not desire to have your Son hanged. That Is a dangerous
title I Will assure you: Did you not hear that most of the Judges are to be
judged under other Judges, yea and they will hardly escape hanging too, unless
they give ample satisfaction to the Parliament: for they are acknowledged to be
the Original of all our greivances. Therefore if you be wise desist from that
opinion.


Count. Alas! What education shall I then impose upon my Son? Since all these
grounds of hope has deceived me. What think you Sir, if I train him up to be
a Soldier?


Citiz. He must swear lustily then: and brag of many things with
ostentation, although he can perform nothing. But stay! Now I think on it:
Perhaps he may be suspected to be some Trooper, (for they say the Country is
very full of them) then apprehended and so incontinently committed only upon
suspicion.


Count. You say true indeed Sir: Therefore I know not what course to take with
him. I entreat you Sir, to lend me your advice.


Citiz. If the Lad be so hopeful, as you declare him to be: I care not greatly
if I take him under my Tuition, and if you please to condescend thereunto, he
shall be my Apprentice, and I Will assure you for your sake he shall be both
kindly kept, and religiously instructed.


Count. I humbly thank you for your love, wherefore I acknowledge my self much
engaged to you: But I pray what trade are you off Sir?


Citiz. I am a Vintner by my Trade.


Count. I am very glade to hear of that: and if my Son be wise enough, but
to take forty Shilling a Tun, he may prove an Alderman too. Well Sir, I am
much obleiged unto you, for your love unto him, and I will bring him unto you,
and if you like his morality and ingenuity, I will willingly send him unto you.


Citiz. He shall be most lovingly respected.


Count. Thanks Noble Sir; In the mean while farewell.


FINIS.

