THE COUNTY OF SVFFOLKE Divided into Fourteen Precincts for Classical
Presbyteries, together with the names of the Ministers and others nominated by
the Committee of the said County, according to Master Speakers Direction by
Letter; With the names of the several Committees of the County of Suffolk in
their several Divisions.

LONDON, Printed for Christopher Meredith at the Crane in Paul's Churchyard.
1647.

The names of the several Committees for the County of Suffolk in their
Several Divisions, November. 5. 1645.
The first Division containing the Hundred of Samford with the Town of
Polstead; their meeting appointed at East Bergholt.
For the first Division.
SIr Philip Parker John Gurdon Esquier William Cage Esquier Tho. Blosse
Esquier.
Ministers.
Mr. Joseph Clifford of Belstead Robert VVicks of Erwarton Gilbert Coxe of
VVashbrooke Samuel Hudson of Capell John Trebick of Eest-Bergholt Robert Asty
of Sratford Tho. Warren of Polstead Bezaleel Carter of VVolverstone
Others to be joined with the Ministers.
Charles Ueasey Gent. of Hintlesham. Lionell Bacon Gent. of Heigham Capt
Richard Gooding Gent. of Wherstead Capt. Jonathan Goff of E.
Bergholt.
Daniell Wall of Stratford Rodes Hayward of E. Bergholt John Layman sen. of E.
Bergholt Richard Patridge of Bently Sam. Dale of Burstoll Christoph. Hayward of
Fresson Christoph. Hayward of Wolverstone. Tho. Lumley of Roydon John Stephens
of Stratford James Hayward of E. Bergholt John Trenham of E. Bergholt John Pope
of E. Bergholt
The 2. Division containing the Town of Jpswich and the liberties, and the
Hundred of Colnes and Calford: their meeting appointed at Jpswich.
William Bloyse Esquier Nathaniell Bacon Esquier
The Bayliffes for time being of Jpswich.
John Brandlyn Esquier Peter Fisher Robert Duncon
Ministers.
of Ipswich Mr Matthew. Laurence John Ward Robert Stansby John Fuller Nicholas
Stanton
John Harrison of Trimleyes Tho. Warren of Witnesham
Others to be joined to the Ministers.
John Clinch of Culpho Esquier Tho. Atherall of Burgh Esquier Capt. Daniell
Clinch of Burgh Ellis Jessup of Grunsburge Jpswich Joseph Pemberton Manuell
Sorrel Richard Jennings Jacob Caley Henry Parkhurst Tho Brown Christopher
Glascock Benjamin Wade Isaak Day, Senior William Hawys, Sen.

The third Division containing the Hundred of Loes, Wilford and Thredling;
their meeting appointed at Wickham-Markett.
John Cotton Esquier. John Hodges Esquier.
Ministers.
Mr. Robert Cade of Woodbridge Charles Nickolets of Winston Richard Goulty of
Framingham. Robert Sayer of Cretingham Patrick Lindsay of Earle-soham. VV.
Redgrave of Rendlesham John Gyles of Debenham.
Others to be joined to the Ministers.
Tho. Redgrave of Woodbridge Gent. Gregory Nicholls of Dallinghoe Edward Hamond
of Ufford Robert Smith of Wickham Gent Capt. Richard Turnor of Wickham. John
Harrison of Alderton Oliver Stebbing of Earl Soham Henry Stebbing of
Brandestone Gent. John Lovell of Debenham Henry Blumfeild of Debenham Jsaak
Woodcocke of Framlingham. John Bond of Ashfeild George Keede of Sutton John
Smith of Framlingham.
The fourth Division containing the Hundred of Plunsgate with the Corporation
of Aldeburge and Orford, with the Parishes of Feberton, Knodishal, Middleton,
Fodley, Layson, and Aldringham cum Thorpe in Blything Hundred, and Kellishall,
and Carleton in Hoxon Hundred: their meeting appointed at Saxmundham.
Alexander Bence Esquier Squire Bence Esquire Thomas Bacon Esquier John Base
Gent.
Ministers
Mr. Tho. Nuttall of Saxmundham. John Swayne of Crasnford William Powell of
Kendham George Jarmy of Knodishall Samuel Pearce of Kellishall Thomas Bathoe of
Layston John Thirlby of Orford. Searles of Aldeburge.
Others to be joined to the Ministers.
Capt. Tho. Johnson of Aldeburgh. Capt. Henry Cheney of Aldeburgh. Tho. Edgar
of North Glemham Gent. Tho. French of Knodishall Edward Pratt of Frestone
William Mace of Cransford Richard Crow of Kellishall John King of Farnham
Nathan: Flower. Dew of Farnham. John Mannock of Saxmundham William French of
Kellishall Capt. Edmund Bence of Benhall Robert Mann of Rendham Tho. Grimsby of
Benhall John White of Benhall William Aldus sen. of Saxmundham.
The Fifth Division containing the Hundred of Blything, with the Corporations
of Dunwich and Sowald excepting the Towns of Blything Hundred in the fourth
Division, their meeting appointed at Halesworth.
Sir Robert Brook Knight Sir John Rouse Knight John Brook Esquire William
Hevingham Esquier Rob. Brewster Esquier Francis Brewster Esquier
Ministers.
Mr. John Philips of Wrentham Benjamin Fairefax of Romborough William Cockraym
of Westhall. Nicholas Leverton of Heveningham. William Dowglasse of Yoxford
Henry Young of Blithburgh (...)Wood of Henstead (...)Brown of Dunwich
Others to be joined with the Ministers.
Anthony Baker of Wrentham Thomas Slath of Wrentham James Keeble of Halesworth
Francis Verdon of Linstead William Knights of Chesten William Bird of Dunwich
James Harvy of Wissett Hoystens Wilkinson of Linstead Thomas Reeve of Walpoole
Christopher Berry of Wesleton Thomas Crowfoot of Vggeshall Gualter Strowjer of
Chesten Nicholas Veasey of Yoxford Richard Thomson of Romborough William Smith
of Yoxford (...)Barker of Sibton Esquier
The sixth Division contains the Hundred of Wangford, Mutford and Lothingland,
their meeting appointed at Beckles.
Sir Butts Bacon Knight Sir William Playters Knight Sir John Wentworth Knight
Theophilus Vaughan Esquier Edward Reed Esquier
Ministers
Mr. VV. Hodgeskin of Rushmer George Cock of Barsham Edmond Barber of
Somerly-Towne James Aldrich of Bradwell John Clarke of Beckles John Allen of
Metingham
Others to be joined to the Ministers.
Humphrey Brewster of North Cove Gent. William Smith of Al-Saints Benjamin
Staygolt of Gorlston Samuel Newson of Michaels Richard Battelly of Andrews
Edmond Nevill of Beccles (...)Eacherd of Barsham Gent. Samuel Cock of Barsham
William Ricks of Michaels Richard Page of Redsham Francis Aldrich of Somerley
Town Edmond Harvy of Gisleham Gent.
The seventh Division containing the Hundred of Bosmer, and Claydon and Stow,
their meeting appointed at Coddenham.
Sir Roger North Knight Thomas Terrill Esquire Francis Bacon Esquire
Ministers.
Mr. Thomas Young of Stow-Market Thomas Sotheby of Combs Samuel Spring of
Creeting John Penn of Newton Jeremy Catlyn of Burgham Matthias Candler of
Coddenha^ John Swayne of Stoneham Ashpall Samuel Bathe of Hemmingston Henry
Cooper of Earlestoneham
Others to be joined to the Ministers.
James Tyrill of Chipping Esquire Captain George Sparling of Needham Richard
Girling of Coddenham Barnaby Gibson of Little Stoneham Dennis VVhinnery of
Earlestonham John Smith of Helmingston Edmond Blunfeild of Ashpalstonham John
Hayward of Stowemarket John Revel of West Creeting John Goslyn of Earlstonham
John Martyn of Earlstonham William Richardson of Creeting Thomas Rewse of
Creeting Edward Clough of Combs Edmund Mayhoe of Gosbeck Thomas Dey Ibid. Gent.
Edmond Dove of Coddenham Gent. Francis Blowers of Blackenham Parva
The eighth Division contains the Hundred of Hoxon, except Rellishall and
Carleton, their meeting appointed at Stradbrooke.
Nicholas Bacon Esquier Henry North Esquier Thomas Baker Esquire
Ministers.
Mr. Richard Holmstead of Denington Thomas Crosby of Laxfeild Joseph Ward of
Baddingham John Ashburne of Monkesoham Francis Herdson of VVilby Paul Raynham
of Bedfield
Others to be joined to the Ministers
George Borret Senior of Stradbrooke Capt. John Boxter of Mendham John Tuthill
of VVay-bread Samuel Laurence of Syleham Capt. Anthony Barry of Syleham
Samuel Bancroft of Monk Soham John Jeffery of Tannington John Smith of
Dennington Thomas Heart of Syleham John Borrett of Laxfeild John Herring of
Dennington Robert Bacon of Monk Soham
The ninth Division containing the Hundred of Hartsmire, their meeting
appointed at Eye.
Sir Edmond Bacon, Knight and Barronet Wiseman Bokenham Esquire Ed. Harvey
Esquire
Ministers.
Mr. Richard Chamberlain of Rickingale super Christopher Wragg of Medlesham
Abraham Chaplayne of VVetheringsett Robert Andrews of VVyverstone Richard
Proud of Thrandestone John Symonds of Gislingham Robert Harris of Mellis John
Forgan of Ockald
Others to be joined to the Ministers.
James Harvy of Eye Esquier John Gray of Thrandestone Gent. Capt. William
Seaman of Mendlesham John Rivett of Rush-angles Gent John Grocer of VVestthrope
Thomas Rust of Rickingale super. John Rust of VVartham John Kew of Burgate
Samuel Flowerdew of Eye William Freeman of Gislingham Barnaby Barker of
Mendlesham Thomas Folkard of Mendlesham Thomas Hubbard of Oakely William
Hunting of Thrandestow Robert Savage of Wetheringsett Edward Baldry of
Wyverstone
The tenth Division containing the Hundred of Blackborne, their meeting
appointed at Irworth.
Mauris Barrow Esquire Sir Symonds Drury
Ministers.
Mr. Phillip Jacob of Rickinggale Junior Robert Howlet of Hinderclay Clement
Ray of Watsfeild John Legate of Barnham George Speed of Stowlangtoft Munns of
Norton
Others to be added to the Ministers.
John Osborne Gent. of Watsfeild Capt. Page of VValsham Thomas Rampley sen. of
VValsham Henry Rewse of Fakenham Edmond Craske of Bardwell John Craske of
Irworth Edward Cole of Fakenham magna Thomas Syer of Langham William Barnes of
Elmswell Simon Smith of Hunston John Amys Jun. of Hunston
The eleventh Division containing the Hundred of Thingo, Lackeford, and
Thedwastr. with the Corporation of Bury, their meeting appointed at Bury.
Sir William Spring Baronet. Robert Reynolds Esquire Richard Pepys Esquire
Gibson Lucas Gent. Samuel Moody Gent. Thomas Chaplin Gent. Thomas Gypps Gent.
The Alderman for the time being of Bury.
Ministers.
Mr. John Wall of Bury Peter Saint-Hill of Bury John Clegate of Bury John Hale
of Mildenhall Ambrose Salisbury of Whepstead Edward Wright of Pakenham John
Cradock of Barrow Zachary Catlin of Thurstone (...)Downs of Brockly.
Others to be joined to the Ministers.
Dr. Jasp. Despotine of Bury John Clerk of Bury Miles Borough of Bury
Nathaniel Crask of Bury Will. Fisk senior of Pakenham John Fiske of Ratlesden
Henry Bright of Pakenham George Groom of Ratlesden John Sparrow of Read Samuel
Sparrow of Depden Anthony Sparrow of Read Gregory Forgan of Ratlesden Olofernes
Cook of Eirswel Thomas Wells of Risby Richard Gipps of Wheltham Thomas Sage of
Hercunger John Sage of Wheltham Henery Munnings of Elden
The twelfth Division containing the Hundred of Cosford, with the Parishes of
Monks Ely, Presson, and Milding of Babergh Hundred, their place of meeting
appointed at Bilstone.
Ministers.
Mr. John Browning of Seamer Samuel Maile of Monks-Ely William Munning of
Preston Isaac Harison of Hadleigh John Weild of Bildestone Miles Birkit of
Hitcham
Others to be joined to the Ministers.
William Richardson of Hadleigh Gent. Capt. Thomas Alabaster, Ibid John Hudson,
Ibid Thomas Gates, Ibid Richard Tilson, Ibid James Abbot, Ibid Will. Blumfield
of Bildston Esquire (...)Markhant of Seamer William Chaplin of Hitcham Nathaniel
Lovekin, Ibid William Cook of Kersey George day of Monks-Ely.
The 13. Division containing the Hundred of Babergh, with the Corporation of
Sudbury, except Monks-Ely, Preston, Milding, and Polstead, their place of
meeting appointed at Lavenham.
Isaac Appleton Esquire Brampton Gurdon Senior Esquire Brampton Gurdon Junior
Esquire
Ministers.
Mr. Tho: Mott of Stoak-Naila^d Thomas Walker of Assingto^ (...)Thornbeck of
Bures William Leigh of Groton Francis Quarles of Newton William Gurnal of
Lavenham Ric. Petchy of Waldingf. mag. Seth VVood of Melford Daniel Sutton of
Cavendish John Smith of Cockfield
Others to be joined to the Ministers.
Dr. Goodyard of Lavenham Henry Copping Sen. Ibid John Mead Senior of Sudbury
Col. John Fothergill, Ibid Joseph Brand Esquire of Edwardst: William Abbot of
Sudbury John Panel of Sudbury Junior John Cole of Sudbury John Kent of Nayland
Isaac Keys of Nayland Edward Gerrard Ibid Thomas Winterfloud, Ibid Robert
Allen of Assington Thomas Gilson of Sudbury Francis Long, Ibid Roger Brown of
Boxford Thomas Hubbard of Melford John Gerrard of Bures Robert Kerrington of
Newton Roger Kerrington of Acton
The 14th Division containing the Hundred of Risbridg, their meeting place
appointed at Clare.
Sir Nathan. Barnardiston Knight Sir William Soam Knight Sir Thomas
Barnardiston Knight Henry North Junior Esquire Thomas Cole Esquire.
Ministers
Mr. Richard Blakerby of Thurlo magn. Sam. Fairclough of Keddingt. John Allot
of Thurlo Parva Roger Cook of Clare Sam. Boardman of Stansfield Barth: Adrian
of Bradly mag.
Others to be joined to the Ministers.
John Soam of Bradly Parva Major Westthrop of Hundon Captain Samuel Ward, ibid
Edmund Phillips of Clare Tho: Edwards Junior of Stoake Mr. Farrence of
Haverhill John Ray of Denstone George Moody of Moulton Robert French of
Keddington Phil. Sparrow of Wickambrook (...)Brown of Ousden Nich: Tweed of
Stoake
These several Divisions and Persons are approved to be for Classical
Presbyteries within the County of Suffolk. Manchester. April 29. 1647.

