A LETTER BY The Lord GENERALS direction, from Colonel CARRE Governor of
Plymouth, to the Lord ADMIRAL. ALLO, Good news from Ireland, of INCHIqVINS
declaring himself against the Rebels, and 14000 Scots marched toward them; and
other passages from thence. AND, HASTINGS Forces routed in Derbyshire; 1.
Sergeant Major, and 1. Captain slain. 30. other commanders and common men slain
also. 140, taken prisoners, whereof 80. at Egington. Many wounded. And 60.
Horse taken, besides Arms.


Printed according to Order.

August. 5.


LONDON, Printed, for MATTHEW WALBANCKE. 1644.

A Relation how Prince Maurice his Forces are Routed, and pursued by his
Excellency the Lord General.
IT is notoriously known, how mad the Enemy is against Gods people, yet the
more they plot and Combine, and bend themselves against Christ and his Church;
the more their strength decaies; and it is very observeable that when they came
against any part of our Army with their greatest power, that they usually have
the greatest loss, we heard a Malignant noise in the City, last week that my
Lord General was hemd in, but by several Letters it is since Certified that
his Excellency pursues the enemy.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT Earl of Warwick Lord High Admiral of England:
these present.
My very good Lord:
I AM commanded by his Excellency the Earl of Essex, to acquaint your
Lordship with the sucesse, it has pleased God to give him in Cornewell, which
is this: Yesterday morning his Lordship advanced over Horsebridge into
Cornwall, from whence the Enemy being struck with a pannicke fear,
confusedly ran away; and left three barrells of powder, besides Arms behind
them. At Launceston also being about 2000. they ran away, leaving two brass
pieces behind them, and 50 barrells of powder, 30 that they had prisoners,
wheref 25 are Country Gentlemen, and five of his Excellencies Army, Sir
William Belfore and the Lord Generals own Regiment being sent thither to fetch
it off, if he can get Carriages, otherwise, to spoil it. From Salt-Ash the
Enemy, the same day ran also, as soon as the Forces I sent out of this town,
faced the town on this side the water, and our Brigade is now in possession of
Saltash. His Excellence intends to quarter this night at Bodmin, and from
thence to write to your Lordship more at large. In the mean time, his
execellencie desires your Lordship to block up Foy by Sea.

This morning your Viceadmirall riding in the sound, sent a trumpet to Causon
to summon it, and they are contended to yield it, with 5. pieces of ordinance
in it. My Lord I have no more at this time but that I am,

Your Lordships most humble servant JAMES CARRE.
Plimoth, 28 July, 1644.
BY one of Credit, who is come out of the West from my Lord Generals quarters
it is also certified, that the Lord General has again fallen upon Greenvill;
and Routed him, and taken Foy, and 34 piece of Ordnance, and that Greenvill
himself if fled as is supposed, either to Pendennis Castle, or (which is
indeed more probable) to the mount, that is, a Castle upon a mount called
Michaels Mount standing upon a Rock in the Sea; at the further end almost of
all Cornwall.

The Relation (as it is made by the Messenger) of the Lord Generals Victory in
the West.
SInce my Lord General has raised the siege at Plymouth, and taken Mount
Stamford, and Plympton, His Excellency has also frighted 2000 of prince
Maurices forces away, that were quarteted about Launson, and took there two
pieces of Ordnance, and has also taken Foy, and there 34. piece of Ordnance,
in the Town and and in some ships that are taken, and since his Excellency
beat Greenvill and his forces from Newbridge, and taken his horse, and his
soldiers well flesht with the purchase there which Greenvill had plundered,
the Lord General has again fallen upon Greenvils quarters and routed him: the
Lord General has taken many prisoners, and between two and three thousand
are come in to him out of Plymouth: besides diverse others out of other parts of
Cornwall, and many of Prince Mawrice his forces come in and submit to my Lord
General, desiring to take the Covenant: there are many arms found fcattered
up and down, which the Enemy throw ftom them in the flight, here a Musket,
there a sword, and here a pike, and there another piece of arms, and it cannot
be possible that Greenvill can ever rally his men again to any purpose, but is
fled, as it is supposed; either to Pendennis Castle, or to the Mount: but it is
thought that as Arundell did oppose the Queen, fo he will hardly admit
Greenvill to shelter there: so that it is rather beileved he is gone to the
Mount, whither the Lord Admiral is putting forth ships, and the Lord Roberts
is in pursuit of Greenvil. The King is at Exeter as is supposed, expecting
Prince Rupert to come thither, by that time my Lord General returns out of
Cornwall.

On Satterday last, there were Letters read in the House of Commons, which
brought good news out of Ireland, and to this effect.

That 14000. Scots are come out of the North of Ireland toward Dublin, and
that the Protestants in Munster rise against the Rebels, and are nigh 1000.
That Inchiquin is in Ireland, and has laid down his Commission, and declared
himself for the Parliament, against the Rebels in Ireland.

It is also certified from thence, that the Rebels sent to the Marquis of
Ormond, to desire him to appoint the English Commanders that are in Dublin, to
lead the Catholics against the Scots, but the Marquis of Ormond returned
answer, that it was advise as he conceived did not tend to any good to them,
for if the English Commanders should be put upon such a design, it would cause
them to leave all as he thought, and join with the Scots against them, and
therefore the Marquis as it is certified from thence, would do nothing at all
in it. The Scots by this time it is believed is within 12. miles of Dublin.

A Relation of the routing of Hastings Forces at Egington and Burton, by Sir
John Gell in Derbyshire.
SInce Winkfield Manor is besieged by Sir John Gels forces from Derby,
Hastings with a party of horse and foot from Ashby de la Zouch, Tetbury, and
Lichfield, were designed to plunder about Derby, but being discouraged,
retreated and quartered about Burton, and Egington, Sir John Gell having
intelligence hereof, sent to Major Sanders at the siege at Wingfield Manor,
who drew out 6. troops of horse, and on Wednesday last surprised 80. of them at
Eginton, about 12. at night, with their Captains and commanders, and from
thence marched to Burton and gave them an alarm, and drove them out of the
Town, where was slain Sergeant Major Peate, and one Captain more, besides some
other Officers about 30. in all, and wounded many, took 60. prisoners more, and
diverse Arms, and routed the rest.

FINIS.

