A TREATISE OF SUBJECTION TO THE POWERS.

Preached almost a year since, and now copied out for the Press; yet not to
flatter any, but to inform all.

To the Powers I say as Jehosaphat did,

2 CHRONICLES. ^9. 6. Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for men, but for the
Lord who is also with you in the judgment.

To others I say in the words of the Apostle,

1 PET. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whether it be to King, as to Supreme; or to Governors, as unto them that are
sent of him for the punishment of them that do evil, and for the praise of
them that do well.

Homo sum, non possum non errare:
Haereticus esse nolo, quia sum Christianus.
By THO. CARRE.

London, Printed for Andrew Kembe, and are to be sold at his shop on Margarets
Hill in Southwark, 1651.

To the Honorble Committee for Plundered Ministers: Happiness both here, and
for ever.
HONORABLE GENTLEMEN,
YE are in place of high Trust under the Supreme power of this Commonwealth:
whom God has y,

1. Advanced to highest dignit

2. And made prosperous even to wonder and admiration.

Never was this Commonwealth more populous. Never were

1. Armies more potent,

2. Soldiers more resolute,

3. Successes more (if I may use the word) Fortunate. The Heavens have been
Auspicious: The Celestial Influences Propicious: And God himself obvious to
the eyes of all that can see, In Miracles, in Mercies, in Victories. Eternal
fame attends the Assertors of our Liberties here, Immortal glory in Heaven.

But my Intentions aim in particular at you, Noble Trustees; For ye are the
Fathers of the Clergy, to protect or to punish, to Settle or Sequester
according to merit and desert. And I, having from the first hitherto
endeavored to advance the Justice of the Cause, so far as my weak abilities
could attain. To which end I both preached it up in the Country, and penned an
Apology, which had the allowance of an Imprimatur by M. John White, 1643. But
it miscarrying, how I know not, I made it as common as I could with my pen,
witness two Copies wherewith I presented the Honorable Committee at Bury:
besides others which I gave to some Commanders, and other friends in the
country. And now the last September I preached the substance of this wherewith
I now present your Honors, in my Cure at Mickfield in Suff. But how it took I
may in part judge. I therefore now fly to you as to my City of Refuge, humbly
craving safeguard under the wings of your Benignity, hoping of better
acceptance from the Press, then from the Pulpit at that time.

This subject I know well is not pleasing unto all: it has I know not whether
more enemies or friends. Men love Liberty, Restraint is tedious to the most.
Every one would rule, few are willing to be ruled, unless it be under such a
person, or in such a way as they do best affect. But I look

1. Upon Government in general, as upon a special gift of God.

2. Upon the present Government as upon a Notable and Singular Dispensation of
overruling Providence.

And as Joshua said to the people, Choose you whom Jos. 24. 14.
ye will serve, as for me and my house we will serve the Lord. So say I, Let
others do what they please; I, for my part will honor the present power with
all realty and faithfulness: and I will submit thereto; both for his sake that
has set it up: and for conscience of my duty.

The nature of this Discourse considered, I durst not adventure it abroad but
under favor, and Protection of Authority. And I hope your Honors will

1. Both allow the matter,

2. And Protect the Author, who lays himself low at your feet: humbly craving
acceptance, and, if worthy, countenance against all Anti-Parlimentarian
Critics, Carpers and Deriders.

And so rests he that is, and will be

A Servant of Servants to the Power: and a faithful Observant of your high
authority under that power of this Commonwealth. Tho. Carre.
From my Study, July, 31. 1650.
To all my Loving Countrymen the free Commoners of the Commonwealth of
England, Grace, and Peace.
Men, Brethren and Fathers,
My Respects answerable to your several Places premised; Know ye that I do
herein endeavor to hold forth

1. The much Questioned,

2. But unquestionable Truth of Subjection to the Powers. For men are miserably
distracted at this time by reason of the overtures in Government. They halt
between the two opinions of Monarchy and Commonalty. And as it was in times
past, the people were divided into two parts: the one half followed Tibni the
son of Ginah to make him King, the other half 1 King 16. 21.
followed Omri, and which prevailed ye may there see. So now a great part is
for one kind of Government, and a great for another. I, for my part look upon
the present Power, and I verily think I ought so to do; for Providence is
predominant in this, as well as in all other occurrencies. For Promotion comes
neither from the East nor from the West, nor from the South (it is neither by
Casualties, nor from Constellations) but it is God that puts down one, Psalm.
75. 7.
and sets up another: And Daniel tells King Nebuchadnezzar, That the most
High rules in the Kingdom Dan. 4. 17.
of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will: and sets over it the basest
of the People. And what God sets up, who can pull it down?

Beloved Country men, I would the world should know,

1. That as I would be loath to show my self a Claw-back Time server.

2. So I would not willingly be thought to be a rigid Time-opposer.

But a most humble waiter upon God in the dispensations of his most wise and
just providence. And this I do solemly profess, that I would sooner have

1. My Brains beaten out with Bats,

2. My Tongue plucked out by the Roots,

3. My hand chopped off with a Sword,

Then I would

1. Strain my Wit to invent,

2. Give my tongue liberty to speak,

3. Or publish ought with my Pen,

Whereby a lawful right or interest might suffer the least prejudice.

I meddle not therefore with the much spoken of Right, whether by Succession
(as men are pleased to call it) or otherwise. I leave that to Statists. I
meddle only with the Visibility of the Power. And

1. Where, or in whose hands it is, we all see.

2. From whom it is, we cannot but know.

3. What is our duty I do endeavor to show. Leaving the rest to your
considerations.

Brethren, I will not use many words, for a word is enough to the wise, and
they that are otherwise will hear no reason. Yet let me speak freely to you in
the words of the Apostle, Romans 9. 1.
I speak the truth in Christ Jesus, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me
witness in the Holy Ghost. I have written nothing in all this Discourse of
Subjection, but what is (if I be not grossly mistaken) according to the truth
of Gods Word. Si quid rectius nosti, Candidus imperti: si non, his utere mecum.

But if any shall cavil and contest, I say again with the same Apostle, Am I
therefore become your enemy because Gal. 4. 15.
I tell you the truth? And so between hope and fear rests he that is, and
will be

Your Servant in and for Christ, and for the Public peace, Tho. Carre.
From my Study, this 1 of Aug. 1650.
A TREATISE OF SUBJECTION TO THE POWERS.
ROMANS 13. 1, 2. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers: for there is no
Power but of God, the Powers that be are ordained of God.

Whosoever therefore resists the Power resists the Ordinance of God: and
they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation.


THis whole Epistle consists of two parts.

1. The former part contains matter of Doctrine, viz. of Predestination,
Justification, Calling, Sanctification, and Salvation. These are discoursed in
the eleven first Chapters.

2. The other contains exhortation: by way of use and application: in the
Chapters following, to the end of the Epistle.

And this was Paul's method in all his other Epistles; for every where he
harpeth on these two strings.

1. Doctrins of holy faith.

2. And exhortations to a godly life.

And that which was Paul's method in all his writings is the fittest method for
a Minister in his preaching; namely, to join Doctrine and Exhortations as
inseparable companions. That so,

1. By sound Doctrine the judgment may be settled in the truths of God.

2. And by powerful application the conscience may be pressed, the manners
reformed, and the conversation ordered in the ways of godliness.

And that Sermon which wants one of these may be said truly to be maimed and
defective.

It was the commendation which Lactantius gives of Cyprian, that he was plain
in his Doctrine, powerful in his Exhortation. And it is required of a Minister,
not only to feed, but to do it wisely, and faithfully; considering, Time,
Place, and the state, and condition of the people. Hereupon Paul speaks of
milk for babes, and stronger meat for grounded christians 1 Cor. 3. 2. Heb. 5.
12.
; as if he should say, principles for the one, deeper points for the other. Yet
in both, he must respect

1. Both Science that he may divide the word of truth aright 2 Timothy 2. 15.
.

2. And Conscience that he may divide the word of truth aright 2 Timothy 2. 15.
.

And as he has a Mission, so he must look into his Commission, and that with
diligence, and conscience. That he may take the mind of God aright, and deliver
the same faithfully to the people. Hereupon it is that Paul gives Timothy in
charge, To hold faith, and a good conscience 1 Timothy 1. 19.
, and to attend to Reading, to Exhortation, and to Doctrine 1 Timothy 4. 13.
, and he warns Titus to exhort, rebuke, with all authority Tit. 2. 15.
. And this teaches those that are hearers, that they must be content, nay they
must be desirous to hear both. And not to be

1. All for Doctrine; as the Athenians were for news Acts 17. 21.
.

2. Nor all for use, and application; as the injudicious vulgar are, who would
have particular sins inveighed against, and damnation preached from every text.

I confess it is fit that sin should have a blow upon all occasions: and that
damnation should be preached; yet with respect unto the Text: for he may justly
be charged with rashness that wrongeth his friend to harm his enemy. So he
that inveigheth a against sin more then is occasioned from his text.

Application must be grounded upon Doctrine; even as a house cannot hang in the
air; it must be settled on a sure foundation: even so that application which
wants Doctrine to support it, is not much better then an impertinent
discourse. This for the general of the whole Epistle.

Now the Apostle having spent the eleven first chapters in Doctrine, as I said
before. Now he proceeds in the rest of the chapters to press his Doctrins
home, by several Exhortations. For,

1. In the twelfth chapter he lays down three several Exhortations; as
first, To the sincere service of God, in the two first verses. Then to a sober
use of spiritual gifts unto the 9th. verse. Lastly, to certain offices of
charity, to the end of that chapter.

2. In the thirteenth chapter he speaks principally of those duties which
concern us toward civil Magistrates. And withal, he commends love unto
Christians, and dehorteth them from some gross sins unbeseeming their
profession.

3. In the fourteenth chapter, he shows the use of indifferent things, about
which there was a very hot contention between the believing Gentiles and the
converted Jews; and shows how the strong should bear with the weak; and both
the strong and weak should behave themselves one to another.

4. In the fifteenth chapter, he finisheth his former Exhortations to the
strong, how they are to bear with the weak: and to that purpose he presses the
example of Christ.

5. In the sixteenth chapter he concludes his Epistle with familiar
salutations.

Q. Only the Question may be made, Why the Apostle did so earnestly press
subjection to Civil Magistrates?

R. I answer, that it was to acquit the Christians of that imputation that was
cast upon them, and upon their profession: and for which they were persecuted
by the Heathens. They were defamed to be enemies to the policy of
Commonwealths, and to Civil Magistracy. But Paul acquitteth them and their
Religion from that imputation, by pressing Subjection upon Christians.

Obj. But it will be said that the Magistrates then were Infidells. For the
Roman Emperors, and their subordinate officers did Lord it over the Christians
at that time.

R. True: yet subjection was due to them, because they were in place of Civil
superiority. Though they were lawless persons in themselves, yet were they
lawful Magistrates in their times. They were under God; they were his
Vicegerents, though themselves were wicked. And for this cause it is, that the
Apostles did press subjection upon the Christians at that time when they were
under the Civil power of Heathen Magistrates.

1. Paul, not only in this text, but in other places does press it. For writing
to Timothy, he says, I exhort that first of all Supplications, Prayers, and
Intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men; for Kings, and all
that are in authority: that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty; 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
and he bids Titus to put them in mind to be subject to principalities and
powers, and to obey Magistrates Tit. 3. 1.
.

2. Again, Peter says, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether it be to King as to Supreme, or to Governors: as to them
that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of
them that do well 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
.

3. And Jude faults them that despise Government, and speak evil of them that
are in authority Jude 8.
, to whom also the Apostle Peter does agree 2 Pet. 2. 10.
. And because there is so much grumbling, and heart-burning at this time, by
reason of the overtures in Civil government, I shall take occasion to speak of
that subjection which is due to those that are now in place of eminency; and
the Visible power at present, both to promote virtue, and to punish vice.

We were not long since, and for a long time before under Monarchical
Government: under the Power of famous Princes. But now we are altered into
another form. This the Lords doing. He foundeth, and confounds Kingdoms. By
him Kings reign Prove. 8. 15.
, and by him they come to ruin. If ye do wickedly, ye shall perish both ye and
your King 1 Samuel 12. 25.
. The Lord it is that puts down one, and sets up another Psalm. 75. 7.
. And it is said in Daniel, that the most High rules in the Kingdom of men,
and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets over it the basest of men Dan.
4. 17.
. And what is of Gods doing, man may admire, it is in vain for him to resist.
For as Gamaliel said to the Council concerning the Apostles; so say I in
behalf of the Power, Refrain from these men, and let them alone, for if this
council or work be of men, it will come to naught: but if it be of God, ye
cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found to fight even against God Acts 5.
38.
. Come and see (faith the Psalmist) the works of the Lord: he is terrible in
his doings toward the children of men Psalm. 66. 5.
. He does cut off the spirit of Princes: he is terrible to the Kings of the
earth Psalm. 76. 12.
.

Come, I say, see, and admire. Few men look higher then on secondary causes.
They complain of this thing or that: of this man or that: if it were not for
this or that, things would have been otherwise. But a wise man looks up to
God as the author of all alterations. The chief men of Israel rejected Christ
to reign over them: of whom Peter says, to whom coming as to a living stone,
disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious 1 Pet. 2. 4.
. And David spoke of him Prophetically, The stone which the Builders rejected
is become the head stone of the corner. This is the Lords doing (says he) and
it is mavelous in our eyes Psalm. 118. 22.
, which text of David is alleged by Christ Mat. 21. 42.
, and by Peter Acts 4. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 7.
, and hence I conclude, That the Lord has an hand in all Alterations, Civil
and Ecclesiastical: Political and Oeconomicall: Personal and Public. And if
a sparrow lights not upon the ground, but God has a finger, a Providentiall
finger in it Mat. 10. 29
; Then in all alterations, and altercations Providence must be prevalent.

1. The Lord gave the Israelites a King at their foolish importunity 1 Samuel 8.
5.
, in which regard the Lord says he gave them a King in his anger Hos. 13. 11.
.

2. And the Lord takes away a King in his displeasure. Josiah was a good King.
He did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and walked in the ways of
David his father, and turned not aside to the right hand, nor to the left 2
Kin. 22. 2.
; like him there was no King before him that turned to the Lord with all his
heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to the Law of
Moses: neither after him arose there any like him. 2 King. 23. 25.
Yet he was taken away in the flower of his age, in Gods anger to Judah 2 King.
23. 26.
, And Jeremiah and all Judah lamented the loss of him 2 Chr. 35. 25.
.

We had a King, but our sins have taken him away, and the Government from his.
The State is now the visible power: they have taken the Government upon them.
They make Laws, they order the Coinage, they do all things, and we must be
subject. God has set them up: and there is no struggling against the
dispensations of his overruling Providence: lest, like a fish in the net, or a
beast in the mire, we bring our selves into a worse condition. For my text
says, There is no power but of God. Therefore,

1. How ever the Power had advanced it self;

2. Or however it shall manage matters;

Yet we must be subject, either doing things that shall be commanded, if
lawful: or submitting to censure, or to punishment, yea though the cause
deserve it not.

Q. But will some man say, Is the State incontrollable? may there be no
resistance in case of Tyranny, or oppression? It is a rule, that from whom
Kings have their Precedence, by the same they may be resisted, and as case may
require deposed: but this must be by the whole State, not by any private or
particular power. So the Parliament being the Kingdoms Trustees for the
Kingdoms good; may not the Kingdom rise against them, if they falsify the
trust reposed in them?

A. The case seems to be alike. But it is a captious question, therefore I
shall not determine it. Yet this I say, there is some difference: for the
Parliament are the Kingdom Representative; and what they do the Kingdom does
it. And can the Kingdom have two Representatives at once? or by what authority
shall they make a new Election while the former are in being? This passes my
understanding. But to proceed.

1. Kings are not simply necessary unto Government: though a King may be an
ornament, a beauty, a benefit, and a blessing: The Israelites had no King for a
long time; yet were well governed.

2. There may be Governors that may exercise Kingly authority, and not have
the title: which made Peter require subjection unto Governors as well as to
Kings 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
.

We had a King, but now we have none in Esse, nay not so much as in Posse, so
far as we can see with the eye of worldly possibility. I say nothing of the
Right, I leave that to Statists, who are versed in the fundamental laws of
this Nation. But to the visible face of things as they now stand, God has
transferred the Government: and we must wait upon God, making no disturbance.
Let him alone with his work; and let us mind our own, which is Subjection.

These things I have spoken by way of preface, not for any evil will that I
have to Kingly Government: but to press subjection to the Powers. My intents
are known to God only, to whom I must be accomptable.

Q. But what say you to the posterity of the late King, as relating to the
title of Succession?

R. I answer, It is transcendent, far above my capacity. I, for my part, meddle
only with the visibility of the Power. And where it is we all see. For,

1. Whose is the Coin;

2. Who make laws;

3. Who exact and receive Custom, Tributes, Taxes, we all know.

These are appendent to the Power. Therefore though I shall

1. Honor that Posterity in my heart.

2. Wish well to it in my thoughts.

3. Speak honorably of it with my tongue.

4. And endeavor to advance the dignity of it with my pen upon all necessary
and just occasions;

Yet I shall leave it for the present to the wisdom and justice of the
Superior power now in being. And shall acquiesce in the judgment and
determination of the Highest Court, which is, and ought to be Judge, next under
God, and his Word, of all Queries of this nature. And now to my text, which
has these two parts.

1. First, is a duty which is enjoined by Apostolical authority.

2. Secondly, the reasons wherewith the same duty is urged, and enforced.

1. First, the duty; which has three particulars.

1. First, the persons whom this duty does concern, with the generality. Soul.
Every Soul. None excepted; none exempted from it.

2. Secondly, the duty it self, what it is; with the strict command of it. Be
Subject. Let be subject.

3. Thirdly, to whom this duty is to be performed. To Powers. To the High
Powers.

2. Again, the Reasons wherewith the duty is enforced; which are these two:

1. The advancement of the Power whence it is? The Powers that be ordained of
God.

2. The danger of resisting the Power, which reflecteth,

1. First, upon God, whose Ordinance is thereby resisted.

2. Secondly, upon him that makes, and manageth the resistance; who thereby
incurreth no less them damnation.

Of these severally, and in order.

1. First, of the duty, with the several particulars that are in it: Which I
said were three.

1. First, the persons whom this duty does concern: with the generality. Soul.
Every Soul.

1. First, Soul. And Soul signifies Person in this text.

The word Soul (I confess) signifies diversely in the Scriptures.

Sometimes it signifies the spiritual part of man distinguished from the
body. As in that saying of Christ, Fear not them which can kill the body, but
are not able to kill the soul, etc. Mat. 10. 28.
.

Sometimes Soul is put for life, which is resident in the soul. Thus says
David, my soul is among Lions Psalm. 57. 4.
. And in many other places of Scripture: specially in the Psalms Psalm. 7. 2.
17. 13. 59. 3. 63. 9.
.

But it is often taken for the whole man: the person consisting both of body,
and soul. The soul that sins shall die the death Ezekiel. 18. 4.
. All the Souls which came with Jacob into Egypt, etc. Genesis 46. 26.
; which Moses in another place thus reports, Thy fathers went down with
threescore and ten persons Deuteronomy. 10. 22.
. So in this text, Soul signifies the person,

2. Secondly, the generality, Every Soul. That is, Every one, man and woman.
There are none excepted, not one exempted. I say, Every man and woman.

1. Wheresoever they live;

2. Of what sort, state, condition soever they be. Whether Civil or
Ecclesiastical. They must be subject.

The Papists are hereby condemned; for they

1. To advance the Lordship Paramount of the Pope,

2. Do discharge the Clergy of all sorts from their Subjection to Civil
Magistrates. But,

1. In the Old Testament the Priests and Levites were subject to the Kings,
they were commanded by them 2 Chr. 17. 7. 29. 5. 35. 6
.

2. And in the New Testament, we read, That Christ paid tribute Mat. 17. 27.
; And that Paul appealed to Caesar Acts 25. 11.
. And Paul commands Subjection in my text. And Peter required Submission 1
Pet. 2. 13.
. Therefore Every Soul, one and other, must be in subjection to Civil
authority.

The case is plain for the Person. Yet before I pass this, in that the person
is comprehended under the term Soul, which is the more noble part of the
person. By the way, it hinteth unto us, That every one must have a special
regard of his Soul.

1. The body is not to be neglected.

2. But the Soul, the good of the Soul is specially to be regarded: and that
for special reasons.

1. First, Because it is the better, the more noble part of the person.

2. Again, because therein properly is the image of God.

2. Thirdly, because that is first converted.

4. Lastly, because that shall first be glorified.

That has the first in privilege: therefore let it have the first of our care.

1. Men are careful of their body, to feed, cloth, and nourish that.

2. But who almost regards his precious soul?

1. The Word is the food of our souls.

2. Christ's righteousness is the true clothing.

3. And Christian graces are as Jewels to adorn the soul.

1. In Justification, Christ's righteousness is put upon us. In whom we are
complete Col. 2. 10.
. To this end are those expressions of putting on Christ Romans 13. 12. Gal. 3.
27.


2. In Sanctification, we are clothed with the righteousness of the Spirit. To
this end are those expressions, Of putting on the new man Ephesians. 4. 26.
, Of putting on the whole armor of God Ephesians. 6. 11.
, Of being clothed with humility 1 Pet. 5. 5.
, of putting on bowels of mercy Col. 3. 12.
.

3. And in Glorification, when this mortal shall have put on immortality 1
Cor. 15. 53
, then shall we be clothed upon with our house from heaven 2 Cor. 5. 2.
. But who regards these things? who labors for these? Men are taken up
with thoughts and desires of earthly contents, to be clothed with wealth,
honor, and such like transitory contents. Of which Christ says, What will it
profit a man, if he gain the whole world, and lose his soul? Mat. 16. 26.
? The loss will not countervail the gain. Above all things then mind this.
First seek the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof Mat. 6. 33.
First, that is, in the first place, and with our first and best strength. But
this is but occasionally, and by the way. And so from the person, with the
generality of the person, I come

2. Secondly, to the duty, with the strict command of it. Be subject. Let be
subject.

1. First, be Subject. The word signifies to be subordinate: and it implies
the order that is upheld by Government: which whosoever disturbeth, he endeavors
to bring in confusion. And it is well observed, that the Apostle does not say
Be obedient, but be Subject: which is a general word, and is inclusive of all
Dues, and Duties.

1. For as there are duties on the Governors part, which are these three.

1. To make Laws.

2. To maintain Laws,

3. And to urge the execution of Laws.

That so, the good may be protected, and the refractory restrained, and the
evil punished. And above all to have a special care of Religion.

1. To advance the true;

2. And to suppress all forms of false worship. In which regard Princes are
and ought to be Nursing fathers Esa. 49. 23.
.

2. So on the other side Subjection implies three things.

1. The first is Honor. Their persons are to be honored. Saul required it of
Samuel. Honor me (says he) now before the people 1 Samuel 15:
; Nathan bowed himself before David 1 King. 1. 23.
. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, says God Exo. 20. 12.
. Under which terms of Father and Mother all sorts of Superiors are
comprehended. As Fathers of Countries, of families, and fathers in Christ. The
Apostle says, Honor all men 1 Pet. 2. 17.
, Superiors, Equals, and Inferiors are to be honored: but every one as his
place requires. Superiors must be reverenced: Inferiors supported: Equals
regarded.

2. The second is Obedience. Obedience I say to their Laws and Commands. Either
to do them, if lawful and possible: Or to submit to punishment for not doing
them, if impossible, or unlawful. For what is commanded by full authority of
the Power, obedience is to be showed, either active obedience to do the same,
or passive, making no resistance. And yet in this passive obedience there must
be retained

1. Both fidelity to the Power: no acting, no complotting. For this we have
David's Example, He would not avenge himself upon Saul when he had him at
advantage 1 Samuel 26. 8. etc.
. And Jeremiah persuaded the Jews to seek the peace of the King and Kingdom,
where they were held in captivity Jer. 29. 7.
.

2. And Piety, to pray for oppressing and tyrannical Rulers. As Daniel did,
who prayed for the life of Darius Dan. 6. 21.
.

Q. But here it will be said, If Active or Passive obedience is to be yielded
to all the commands of Superiors: how came it to pass that against the late
King, and against his commands there was made open resistance.

R. I answer, you must remember what I said even now, when I spoke of the
commands of the full authority of the Power. For though the late King was a
Monarch; yet his Kingdom was not an absolute, but a mixed Monarchy, which is
of all Monarchies the best. For an absolute Monarchy does easily degenerate
into a Tyranny: but so cannot a mixed Monarchy, because the People in their
Trustees have some real and appendent power.

And that this was a mixed Monarchy it appears in this: that though the late
King, and his Predecessors were to keep and defend the Laws: yet they were not
the sole Makers of the Laws. They could neither make new Laws, nor repeal the
old of themselves, that is, by their absolute and sole authority. The People,
by their Representatives in Parliament had a power with the Kings. They to
contrive and frame such Laws as were for the benefit of the Subject; the Kings
to ratify and confirm those Laws for the good of his people. To the King and
Parliament this belonged, as is evident in all former Parliaments, by the
disanulling of Patents, and the punishing Monopolists, which have been
burdensome and prejudicial to the Commonwealth. And if all power in these
things had been in the King, then had he been absolute of himself: and by
consequent there ought to have been no resistance: but passive obedience (or a
submission to punishment) where active obedience could not with a safe
conscience be yielded.

For this we have the case of the three Children: Nebuchaddezzar's command was
unlawful, yet they made no resistance; but submitted themselves to the
censure, and sentence of the King Dan. 3. 16,
. Now Nebuchadnezzar was an absolute Monarch: he had indeed Counselors, but
none to correct, or contradict his extravagances. But so it was not with the
late Kings of England: for Patents and Monopolies have been disanulled; and
Patentees, Monopolists, and Projectors have been censured by former and later
Parliaments. And therefore the full authority of the Power was not in the King
alone, but in King and Parliament conjunctim.



England had a dispensing power, by virtue of Prerogative.

1. Yet not simply of the Law it self.

2. But in regard of the execution of the right of the Law.

They could extend Royal favor if they pleased: yet the virtue of the Law was
no whit abated thereby. Put the case, Two persons under the same doom of Law,
for one and the same offense: the one suffers for the same, the other has
his pardon. There is power enough in the Law for execution, with which the King
(for some causes) does dispense. And properly to be above Law, is to have
absolute, and independent power

1. To make Laws.

2. To alter Laws.

3. And to take them away at pleasure: which was not in the sole power of any
of the Kings of England. If otherwise, Parliaments were Null, and needless, of
no use, of no necessity, of no benefit.

3. The third duty implied in Subjection is Maintenance: by Tribute, Poll
money, Matthew. 17. 24.
and by other lawful taxes, and Impositions. Give to every one his due,
Tribute to whom Tribute, etc. Romans 13. 7.
Christ paid tribute Mat. 17. ^0.
; And exhorted to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's Mat. 22. 17.
. And maintenance is due to the Magistrate by a fourfold right.

1. First, as a sign, and testimony of subjection.

2. Secondly, as a reward for his pains.

3. Thirdly, for the honor of his Person and Court.

4. Fourthly, for the safety of State or Common wealth. And so much for the
duty, be subject.

2. Now secondly, the strict injunction of the duty; the Emphasis is in the
word Let. Let be subject: which enjoineth the strict performance of the thing.

Let all things be done decently, and in order, says Paul 1 Cor. 14. 40.
.

Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor 1 Timothy, 5.
.

Let your women keep silence in the Churches 1 Cor. 14. 34.
.

Let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself Ephe. 5. 33
. So here, Let every Soul be subject. That is, Let every one submit, or yield
himself to authority. And this implies a threefold necessity.

1. The first is Duty, to which we are obliged.

2. The second is Benefit, that will redound to us, by doing our duty.

3. The third is Danger which will follow upon denying to do our duty.

3. Now thirdly, to whom subjection must be yielded? To the Powers. To the
Higher Powers.

1. All Powers, even the inferior and subordinate must be submitted to.

2. Much more the Superior Powers, to which the other are in subordination.

And it is to be understood of the Civil, the secular Powers in this text:
because the Apostle speaks in this chapter of Tribute, and custom which is
due to such only.

And be the Powers what they will, good, or bad: by what right or wrong they
obtain the place of Superiority: how ever they demean themselves in the use, or
abuse of their Power, rule they rightly, or rigidly: yet being in the place of
Civil Superiority, subjection must be yielded to them. The Apostles bids
servants to be obedient to their Masters with fear, and trembling: with good
will doing service, as to the Lord, and not unto men Ephe. 6. 5. Colos. 3. 22.
. And Peter says, Servants be subject to your Masters, not only to the good
and gentle, but also to the froward 1 Pet. 2. 18.
. And the Roman Emperors by force and might, rather then by right, Lorded it
at the time when Paul pressed subjection to the Powers. Wheresoever then, or in
whomsoever the visible Power is at present, to it we must be subject. And we
see where the visible Power now is, God has trans-ferred the Government, as I
said before: for without him nothing can come to pass. It is Gods disposing for
his own ends: in mercy, or in judgment: how ever we must be subject.





1. Proceeded against the late King.

2. Deposed his Posterity.

3. Taken the Government to themselves, to the use and benefit of those that
have betrusted them.

And all this is by the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, as they have solemnly
declared. I must believe it: for I cannot contradict: yet, that evil
Magistrates have their power, not only from permission, but by Divine
Disposition appears,

1. Not only from this text, the Powers that be are ordained by God. And yet
those Powers were usurped and Tyrannical.

2. But from other texts of Scriptures. As it is said in Job, When he hides
his face, who can behold him, whether it be done against a Nation, or against
a man Job 34. 30.
? David says, It is God that puts down one, and sets up another Psalm.
75. 7.
. And it is said in Daniel, that the most High rules in the Kingdom of men,
and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets over it the basest of men,
Dun. 4. 17.
. And if he set up, it is not in man to pull down. The Lord by the Prophet
says, I gave them a King in mine anger Hos. 13. 11.
. It is likewise said that the Lord raised up, or advanced the Assyrians (b),
and the Babylonians (c). Therefore evil Governors are not set up without Gods
Ordinance, and disposition, for the punishment of some. And in that Daniel
prayed for Nebuchadnezzar, wishing that the calamities signified in his dreams,
might betide to his enemies, and that he himself might escape them, Dan 4 19.
. It shows that people are to pray for the welfare, and prosperity of their
wicked Governors. For a bad Government is better then none at all. And a
Tyranny is better then an Anarchy. Jeremy bid the Jews seek the peace of the
City, whither the Lord had caused them to be carried away captives, and to pray
unto the Lord for it: for in the peace thereof they should have peace Jer. 29.
7.
. Paul exhorts that prayers, and supplications be made for all men, for Kings
(and those that exercise Kingly authority) when they were Tyrants, and
persecutors of Gods people, 1 Timothy 2. 1.
: the like does Peter. Submit your selves (says he) to every Ordinance of man
for the Lords fake 1 Pe. 2. 13, 14.
.

And now to reflect upon the present Government in the hands of the Parliament,
and those that are in subordination to them: What is the Parliament, but the
Commons representative?

1. Legally summoned,

2. Legally chosen,

3. Legally admitted,

4. Legally constituted,

5. Legally continued,

6. Legally proceeding in whatsoever they have done.

7. And still they propound the Legality of what they intend to do. And all by
the fundamental Laws and constitutions of this Nation.

What would men have more?

1. They have taken the Government into their hands for the good, and freedom
of them that have betrusted them.

2. They, by their Declarations, promise to manage all for the Public good.

3. They constantly affirm that they have no ways falsified nor betrayed the
trust reposed in them.

4. And though they take up Arms, yet not against the King directly, but
against his, and the Kingdoms enemies.

5. Again, the Kings power Politic was tied to the Parliament by the Act of
Continuation. He took up Arms first, they only in defense of themselves, and
of his Power which he had secured to them by the foresaid Act. He fought
against himself, they for him. Besides, all Declarations, and the Covenant it
self were for the preservation of his Majesty's person, Power and Estate. The
sequels I leave to be answered by them that know, and promise to defend the
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. Hoping they can give a fair account of all
proceedings with his late Majesty, and his surviving Posterity.

6. However, they are in possession of the Power, and it is not my part to
enquire how, nor to dispute the equity thereof. The Power is in them, and I,
for my part will be subject.





1. They make no Laws.

2. They order the coynage.

3. They impose taxes, and customs.

And we see no visible Power Superior to them. So long therefore as the Power
is in them, we must be subject to them, as to the Superior Power.

Thus much of the former part of my Text: with the particulars in it.

2. Now secondly, the reasons enforcing the duty, which, as I said, are two.

1. The first is, the advancement of the Power, whence it is? There is no power
but of God, says my text. Chance and Fortune has no place nor power in this
thing, as is showed before, both from that passage in David Psalm. 75. 7.
and from that in Daniel Dan. 4. 17:
.

Hos. 8. 4.
. If he had no knowledge of, nor hand in those advancements: then all Powers
are not ordained by him.

Jeroboam, and those that followed him in the Kingdom of Israel. They obtained
not the Kingdom by virtue of the promise made to David: but either by defection
of the people, or by usurpation, they intruded themselves. Therefore, for that
cause the Lord spoke as he did. Yet God did know it, and had a hand in it: as a
judgment upon Rohoboam for his folly, that the people did set up Jeroboam. For
the Lord owneth the thing: This thing is done by me, says the Lord 1 King.
12. 24. 2 Chronicles. 11.4.
. The Lord does, many times, punish one sin with another: and yet God may be
said not to will the thing. It is said of Elies sons that they harkened not
unto the voice of their father, because the Lord would slay them 1 Samuel 2. 25.
, that is, the Lord had given them up to a wilful, and disobedient heart, for
their wretchedness, that they might perish. So in the Israelites setting up of
Jeroboam God had a Judicial hand, as a punishment to them: not an effecting
hand, and as a thing pleasing to himself.

Yet further to clear this matter, we must know, that in Government these two
things are to be distinguished.

1. First, the office it self, with the institution of it: this is of God. Gods
will is, that there should be Authority in some, or other, that justice may be
duly, and truly administered. That is, that the good may be protected: the
refractory may be restrained, and punished according to desert. This the
Apostle shows in the third and fourth verses of this Chapter. Where he
shows the ends of Government, in these words. Rulers are not a terror to
good works, but to the evil. Will thou not be afraid of the Power? do that
which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same: for he is the Minister
of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid: for
he bears not the sword in vain: for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil Romans 13. 3, ^.
.

2. Secondly, the abuse of the Authority. In which regard it may be said, that
the Power is not of God: when the right ends, for which it was ordained, is not
observed. Therefore if ye mark the text in Hosea, ye shall see it is said.
They have set up Kings, but not by me, id est, not by virtue of my promise:
and they have made Princes and I knew it not, id est, I approved not. For
though the Lord likes Power: yet he disliketh the abuse thereof.





1. The power of acting,

2. From the exercise of that power.

In regard of activity, so all that ability whereby we are able to do good
and evil, is of God, In whom we live, move, and have our being; But the
exercise of that activity to diverse (o) Act. 17. 28.
things, as to good, and bad, is from contrary principles. The one is from the
grace of God the Creator. The other is from the pravity of the creature.

Ioh. 14. 30.
. And Paul calls him the God of the world 2 Cor. 4. 4.
. And the Prince of darkness Ephesians. 6. 12.
. And the Prince that rules in the air Ephesians. 2. 2.
.



1. First, we must distinguish of the word World. For by World is sometimes
meant the faithful that are in the world, over whom the Devil has no ruling
power. Sometimes the wicked of the world: these are they that are under the
power of the Devil. The whole world lies in wickedness, says John 1 Ioh. 5.
19.
.

2. Again, the Devil is a God but in repute: and a Prince but by usurpation.
God is the King of all the Earth Psalm. 47. 7.
. The Devil has no lawful authority to rule, or reign: only he incroacheth
and usurpeth in Gods jurisdiction. This for the first reason.

2. The second reason is from the danger of resistance, which reflecteth,

1. First, upon God, whose Ordinance is resisted. He that resists the power
resists the Ordinance of God: the powers being ordained of God. Now
Ordinances signify Decrees and Appointments. There are wicked Ordinances of
men, of which the Prophet speaks Esa. 10. 1.
. But this is the Ordinance of God for the good of his people.

God, in the beginning, gave man a threefold power.

1. First, over himself, to rule all his actions, by the power of his Free
will. This is lost in Adam, In whom we all died 1 Cor. 15. 22.
.

2. Secondly, over the Creatures. Have thou dominion (says God) over the Fish
of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, and over every living thing Genesis 1.
18.
. This is much impaired, and almost utterly lost. For as man disobeyed his
Creator: so many of the creatures have cast off the yoke of their subjection
unto man.

3. Thirdly, one man over another: and this is twofold.

1. First, Oeconomicall in the family.

2. Secondly, Political in the Commonwealth.

Both these remain. Man has them still, though many men do miserably abuse
them.

God then has instituted, and ordained Government: it is his Ordinance, and
man must submit, and at no hand resist.

Now the Power is resisted two ways.

1. First, by force, in rising up; and practicing against Authority.

2. Secondly, by fraud: as when the Magistrate is either by ill suggestions
misinformed, and incensed; or when his just dues are detained.

Now mark the generality. Whosoever by any ways resists the Power which is of
God, resists God himself. And whosoever resists God, medleth with more then his
match: and he is sure to go by the worst. For who ever rebelled against God
and prospered Job 9. 4.
? Whosoever, says my text. No qualification of the person can qualify the
sin of the person. For the Commands of God do concern all. And the Soul that
sins shall suffer for it Ezekiel. 18. 4.
. Greatness is no privilege, Meannesse no excuse: neither can bear out. For
indignation and woe to every soul of man that does evil Romans 2. 8.
.

2. Again it reflecteth on man to this prejudice. They that resist shall
receive to themselves damnation, says the Apostle in my text.

1. It is not said damage.

2. But damnation, which implies punishment both in this life, and in the
next. And that,

1. Both by the hand of men, for the Magistrate may punish his with some severe
punishment, as Imprisonment, Confiscation, and with death it self.

2. And God will punish him both here, and hereafter.

And whereas it is said that such shall receive to themselves damnation, it
implies that they are accessory to their own dunishment of what sort soever
it be. Wherein their madness and folly does appear, in running upon their own
hurt, and ruin.



1. First, for information, to teach us that God is the Author of all order,
not of confusion 1 Cor. 14. 33.
.

1. As in heaven he has set all things in order. There is order among the holy
Angels: for we read of Michael the Archangell Dan. 12. 1. Jude; v. 9. Revel. 12
7.
. And though that Michael was the Lord Jesus, who is called the Angel of the
Covenant Mal. 3. 1.
: yet because it is said Michael and his Angels, it shows that there is an
order even among those glorious Spirits. And one Star differs from another in
glory 1 Cor. 15.
.

2. So in the Church: for Paul reckoning certain orders in the Ministry, he
says God has set some in the Church, First Apostles; Secondarily Prophets;
Thirdly Teachers; After that Miracles 1 Cor. 12. 18.
. First, Secondarily, Thirdly, After that, who sees not plainly a difference
of order, a priority?

3. So amongst men on earth, God will have Superiority in some: he requires
Subjection in others.

1. Some would have neither Governors, nor Government. They despise Government
Jude, ver. 8.
. And speak evil of them that are in dignity 2 Pet. 2. 10.
. As if all Authority, and Superiority were usurpation: When as my text says,
It is an Ordinance of God.

2. Others not contented with the present Government, specially, not in the
hands of those in whom it is now, are faulty in their duty of willing
Subjection. But, as I said, we must look up unto God, who sits at the helm, and
guides the steering of all things below. And we must not look so much upon
the person, in which there may be some miscarriages: as upon the Author of the
Power, who can not be faulted. For which cause we must be subject to the
lawful power, even of those, that in themselves, are lawless persons. And
bless God for it, in that he makes not man like the fishes of the Sea: or as
the creeping things which have no Ruler over them Hab. 1. 14.
.

It is a blessing that we live under Government, whereby we enjoy our Lands,
Goods, privileges, and proprieties: and whatsoever we can justly call our own.
We read in the Hiry of the Judges, that there were diverse outrages committed.

1. Of Micahs Idolatry Judge. 17. 6.
.

2. Of the violence done to Micah by the children of Dan Judge. 18. 1.
.

3. Of the indignity done to the Levites Concubine Judge. 19. 1.
.

4. Of the rape committed by the Benjaminites Judge. 21. 25.
.

And in every of these miscarriages, this is rendered to be the reason,
Because, in those days, there was no King in Israel. That is, there was then
no settled Government: no constant Magistrate, either to promote virtue, or to
punish vice. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, says God Exodus 20. 12
. And Paul urges the same command even now, in the Gospel times Ephesians. 6. 2.
. Give unto Caesar (says Christ) the things that are Cesars Mat. 22. 21*
, and yet Caesar was no Christian, but Heathen Emperor. Let every Soul be
subject, says my text. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, says the Apostle 1 Pet. 2. 13.
, Ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but for conscience sake, says
Paul Romans 13. 5.
.

So then Christians are bound to subjection by a threefold right.

1. First, in respect of God: for it is his Ordinance.

2. Secondly, in respect of the Powers: it being due to the Magistrate.

3. Lastly, in respect of our selves: that we wound not Conscience; For even
Conscience has this principle in it, that Authority must be obeyed.

2. Again, this is for condemnation of those that despise Dominion, and speak
evil of Dignities. As if all Authority were Usurpation, and an Anarchie the
best form of a Commonwealth. But it is sufficiently showed before, that the
Lord would have Order, and Government among men. And my text is a concluding
text against these, which requires Subjection in every Soul.

To these may be added, those that would have Government, but it must be of
their own framing: and therefore will not yield their Subjection to the present
visible Power.

1. Some would have a King: as the Israelites said to Samuel, Make us now a
King to judge us like all Nations 1 Samuel 8. 5.
. And though Samuel told them what inconveniences might befall them under
Kingly Government: yet they were instant, and importunate. Nay but we will have
a King to rule over us 1 Samuel 8. 19.
.

2. Others do better affect a State Government, a Common wealth. But
Subjection is required to both, as God shall set up the one or the other. Put
them in mind (says the Apostle) to be subject to Principalities, and Powers,
and to obey Magistrates Tit. 31. 1.
. Magistrates indefinitely, as not limitting it to any one sort, or kind of
Superiors.

These things considered, I, for my part, can find no ground for resistance; be
the Magistrate what he will, if he be invested with the Power, Subjection is
his due, and it is our duty. And for the present Power in the hands of the
State,

1. God has set it up for his own ends.

2. We must not, of our selves, go about to pull it down: leave that to him,
to whom it belongs to alter or establish Psalm. 75. 7. Dan. 4. 17.
. God has disposed that to be the Power: So long therefore as it is the Power,
every Soul must submit, must be subject to it.

Q. But how if the Power does advance it self? and by indirect ways and means?

R. Yet we must be subject to it: for though we may, while any usurping power
is attempting, make resistance to defeat it: yet if it has got possession,
then there is a kind of conquest, and that alters the case. For it cannot
get possession but by Gods disposition. And Gods judgments are always just,
though the means subservient cannot always, nor in all things be justified.

1. Jacob got the blessing, (which was his brother Esau's right) by indirect,
unjustifiable means Genesis 27. 19. 35.
: and yet could not get his father to reverse it. I have blessed him, says
Isaac, yea and he shall be blessed Genesis 27. 33.
.

2. But more appertinent to our purpose is that of Baasha, he conspired against
Nadab, and slew him, and reigned in his stead 1 King. 15. 27.
: and yet it is said the Lord exalted him. For as much as I exalted thee out of
the dust, and made thee Prince over my people Israel 1 King. 16. 2.
. The like is said of Jeroboam. He gat the Kingdom of Israel by a faction 1
King. 12. 19.
, yet the Lord says he exalted him, and made him prince over the people Israel
1 Kin. 14. 7.
. And Zimri conspired against Ela the son of Baasha, and reigned in his stead 1
King. 16. 10.
, of whom it is said that he destroyed all the house of Baasha, according to the
word of the Lord 1 King. 16.
.

Ob. Some may happily say, that I am no friend to Kingly Government.

R. I am a friend, and will be a friend to Government: to what Government so
ever the Lord is, and shall be pleased to set up.

1. If he set up Kingly Government again: as I have been, so I shall be subject
to it.

2. And now that he has set up another Government, I dare not make resistance.

The visible power for the present is that which I shall eye with reverence and
respect.

1. If good, then have I cause to joy with the people of God.

2. If bad, I must reflect upon the cause, which is sin. However therefore,
Paul, in my text bids me be subject.

And what I have now spoken as in mine own person, I do entreat all Subjects
to apply it to themselves, because my text says, Let every Soul be subject to
the Higher Powers.

I had thought here to have made an end: but I am necessitated to enlarge my
self, to free my self from imputations which might be cast upon me, for some
things which I delivered in the beginning of our unhappy Distractions, viz.
Concerning the Hostility: the Arms which were taken up by the Parliament, for
the security of the State.

And then I said, and so I say still, That Arms were first taken up by the
counsel, and advice of an adverse disaffected party.

1. To deprive the Kingdom of its undoubted rights.

2. To invade Religion.

3. And to suppress all Parliamentary power for the time to come.

Notwithstanding the many humble addresses, and large proffers of both Houses
then sitting, of augmentation of Honor and Revenew.

And therefore Arms were reassumed by the best affected, for the Kingdoms
safety: and to defend what the Law of Natures, and the Laws of this Nation had
made our own. And what He, by whom Kings reign, had given unto us.

To clear this, we must remember that Arms were first taken up by the
instigation of a discontented party.

1. To force conditions upon the Parliament: and thereby to bring the Kingdom
into a miserable slavery, under Prerogatives lawless and unlimitted power.

2. And to protect and keep notorious incendiaries from the hand of Justice.

And consider withal;

1. Both, what Proclamations were procured to render the Parliament, and
Parliamentary proceedings odious to the people.

2. And what attempts were made to Quash, Quell, Suppress the present
Parliament, notwithstanding its establishment by a Law to which his Majesty
then was a party: and thereby to deprive the Kingdom of all hope of benefit by
Parliaments for the time to come.

Let all indifferent men judge if the Parliament had not cause to stand up in
the Kingdoms and its own defense. And if the Kingdom was not concerned (as
the case then stood) to stand up with, and for the Parliament (the Kingdoms
Trustees); and to Covenant with them, in the presence of the King of Kings.

1. The Laws were violated,

2. The State distracted, and distempered by factious Spirits.

3. Religion (the joy of our lives, the very life of our souls) was in danger.

4. The Subjects Privileges, and Proprieties were invaded.

5. Notorious Delinquents stood up, and were protected from Law, against all
Law.

1. The Cause was common.

2. The Faction great.

3. Their violence insufferable.

4. And every ones Interest was concerned in it.

By which means the Kingdom lay bleeding, and weltering in its blood. Consider
these things, and judge righteously. For Arms were not taken up against the
King directly: but against his, and the Kingdoms enemies. Against those that
had set the Nations in Combustion.

Ob. But that was the Kings party. And was it the part of Subjects to take up
Arms against him in his party?

R. The Kings party was two ways to be considered.

1. Either as his person was engaged by mere sur prizall only.

2. Or as he might engage himself by voluntary consent, whereby he may be
said to be surprised in his judgment also.

1. For the first, the case is clear: that Arms might be taken up to
disingage his person, howsoever, or by whomsoever it might be in danger of
surprising: or if it had been actually surprised. To this purpose we have the
example of Abishai his reskuing David's person from Ishbi-Benob, when slaughter
or surprizall, was justly to be feared 2 Samuel 21. 16.
: and Abraham's example in reskuing of Lot is Genesis 14. 16.
not altogether impertinent. And if none can be be excused, if he help not the
innocent when he is in danger, as Solomon says, If thou forbear to deliver
them that are drawn to death and those that are ready to be slain, etc. Pro.
24. 11.
. Then much less can Subjects be excused, if they see their King in apparent
danger, and withdraw from him.

2. For the second, grant it was so: yet where his voluntary consent was not
regulated in the judgment of the Grand Council of the Kingdom (which ought
to be Judge next under God, and his word of all State Queries) and in this
case: Arms might be taken up by the advice and Authority of that Grand
Council, rather then the whole should wrack and come to ruin.

And this makes the case clear, that Arms were not taken up,

1. Against the person of the late King,

2. Nor against his Politic power,

3. Nor against a Legal party:

But against a discontented, a perfidious party to their country, that had
Captivated his Majesty's person, or his judgment, or both, by force, or
flattery, for their own pernicious ends. Thus was King Charles abused, and made
resolute to the ruin of himself, and of his Posterity.

Besides the King in one of his Messages to the Parliament, or in one of his
Declarations confessed that the Parliament had power sufficient to take up
Arms,

1. In their just defense,

2. For the Kingdoms safety,

3. And to bring Delinquents unto Justice.

Which is an unanswerable argument to prove the Legality of the Defensive
War: it being concluded directly from his grants.

Obj. Some say that he was driven from the Parliament.

R. I demand, Who drove him? Not the Parliament, for they used no force, nor
any thing that might terrify and affright him. If it were clamours of
discontented people: I dare say, if he would been pleased to stay, they would
have provided for his safety before their own. The truth is, he was drawn away
by the adverse party for Destructive ends. But let me demand, Did not many
petitions follow him from place to place? To Newmarket, and almost, if not
altogether, to York? were not many proffers made to him of increase of honor,
and revenue? And yet all would not prevail.?

Obj. But did not the Parliament, or their Forces, or the Parliament by their
Forces seek his life?

R. Yes, the preservation, not the destruction of it. For justification
whereof, consider

1. The Protestation,

2. All Declarations,

3. The National Covenant.

Show me any thing in any one of them, that sounds that way, by any
construction that can be made of them, or any of them: and then I am convinced.

Ob. But did they not detain his revenue from him? and who so detaineth that
which should preserve life, do they not in effect, what in them lies to take
away the life it self? I am sure it is within the compass of the Sixth
Commandment.

R. It was not simply detained from him: but rather reserved for him, lest it
should be employed contrary to the original uses, or uses for which it was
conferred upon him. For that vast maintenance was, at first, annexed to the
Crown, both for the Honor of the King, and for the welfare of the Kingdom.

And the Parliament did declare to be responsall for it, whenever the King
should be pleased to return to his place, and duty. In the mean time it was
reserved, lest the enemies of King and Kingdom, should have been enabled
therewith to manage their cruel and destructive ends.

Obj. But you said that Religion was in danger. Did not the King in his
manifold Declarations, and that with deepest Protestations, and bitter
Execrations on himself, and his, Declare for the Protestant Religion? what
would men have had more?

A. I confess I saw those Declarations, and stood amazed, when I considered
withal,

1. A Proclamation in Popish parts for the advancement of the Catholic
Religion in England.

2. The Irish Rebels (professed Papists) invited, and called to his assistance.

3. A Popes Nuncio entertained here.

4. Papists licensed to arm themselves, and admitted into his Armies.

5. A Bull from Rome.

6. And Letters that were intercepted, for an Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, to be
confirmed by the Pope.

There was some poison under this Plantain.

But the Parliament declared for more then the General Name of Protestancy.
And I would fain know whether

1. Be better in it self,

2. Or more be desired? the Protestant Religion in general; or the perfection
of it by Reformation?

Obj. But where is your Glorious Reformation? Is not all turned to confusion
under pretense of Reformation?

R. The Reformation has so far proceeded as to out the Pope and Popery; and to
free us from Prelaticall Impositions, Inquisitions, Innovations. This is more
then could have been expected if the other party had prevailed. Yet it grieveth
my heart, that it sticks there; the cause I know not; I dare not judge: yet in
my Prayers I shall not be a wanting to the cause of Religion.

Obj. But you said, that the Parliament or their Forces did not seek the Kings
life: how comes it then to pass that they took away his life?

R. He is dead, and that by the hand of Violence, a violent death; but not
without the hand of Justice. And for my part I do often lament over him, as
David did over Abner, Died Abner as a fool 2 Samuel 3. 33.
? There is a Prince, a great man fallen in Israel 2 Samuel 3. 38.
. And as David did over Saul, and over Jonathan his son, How are the mighty
overthrown 2 Samuel 1. 19.
? How were the mighty slain 2 Samuel 1. 25.
? The beauty of Israel is slain 2 Samuel 1. 19.
And for the death of the King I have already answered so far as concernneth
Declarations, Protestation, Covenant; at which time I am confident there was no
such intent, what ever others conceit to the contrary. How the case altered, I
know not, unless his

1. Wilful adhering to the adverse party.

2. His not complying for the good of the Kingdom.

3. His rejecting all tenders and addresses made to him: did render him liable
to further suspicion, as not to be confided in any longer: but to be stripped
of his honor which he had prostituted to others base designs. And therefore
by the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom (wherewith I am not acquainted) to be
deprived of his life as well as his Honor, and Livelihood. And therefore I
leave it to be further answered, by those that are versed in the Fundamental
Law: and are able to give an account of all their proceedings against him, and
his.

Obj. And what say you to David's words? Touch not mine Anointed Ps. 105. 15.
.

R. I answer, that text speaks to Kings, not of Kings. It was a restraint to
Kings to warn them not to oppress, nor resist Gods people, who are called Gods
anointed ones, because they have an unction from the Holy one 1 John 2. 20.
. This appears to be so by the context. He reproved Kings for their sakes,
saying, Touch not mine Anointed.

1. This did literally concern the Israelites in their progress to the promised
land.

2. And it reflecteth upon Christians in all the time of their pilgrimage
toward the Heavenly Canaan, Jerusalem above, which is the Mother of us all
Gal. 4. 26.
.

The Israelites were not to be hindered in their journey: nor Christians to be
discouraged in their Christian course.

Obj. But what say you to David's Example?

1. His heart smote him when he had cut off Saul's skirt 1 Samuel 24. 5.
.

2. He stayed his servants from doing any hurt to Saul's person 1 Samuel 24. 7.
.

3. He excused his innocence in not taking away Saul's life. For, said he, He is
the Lords anointed 1 Samuel 24. 10.
.

4. And when the Amalekite accused himself as guilty of the death of Saul: he
answered, Wast thou not afraid to stretch forth thine hand against the Lords
Anointed 2 Samuel 1. 14.
?

King Charles was the Lords anointed, and yet the Parliament was not afraid, to
resist, affront, attach, condemn, and to put him to death.

A. The answer hereunto has diverse particulars.

1. First, that David was a private person: for though he was anointed to be
King, yet he was not to succeed till the Lord had made Saul's place void. This
appears by David's words to Abishai. As the Lord lives,

1. The Lord shall smite him:

2. Or his days shall come to die:

3. Or he shall descend into battle, and perish. The Lord forbid that I should
stretch out my hand against the Lords anointed 2 Samuel 26. 10.
. By which it appears that David was an ordinary subject, though he was
anointed: and therefore resolved to be faithful to Saul all the days that Saul
should live.

2. Again, Saul was nominated by God: and actually anointed at Gods command 1 Samuel 9. 17. 10. 1.
. Therefore he was to reign till God did take him away. But Kings now are not
named by God, nor actually anointed: They are only said so to be in a large
sense, and metaphorically.

3. Thirdly, none did stretch forth his hand against the King directly; but the
forces were raised at the first to dis-ingage him from the disaffected party
(whose project was to ruin all for their own ends) and to reduce the King to
his bounden duty.

4. Lastly, violence may be resisted by force, when there is no other way left.
And though every particular person may not manage that business of Resistance
by his own authority: yet by the authority of the State it may be done. For,
not only usurping Tyrants, but wicked Rulers, that is, such Rulers as

1. Oppose the State,

2. And oppress their Subjects by Illegalities, may be resisted and removed
too, by the whole State. For from whom Kings do receive their dignity,

1. Whether by Election and composition with the people,

2. Or by Succession: by the same they may be compelled to return unto their
duty, and to keep within their bounds. And this holds

1. Not only in such Kingdoms as are merely by Elections.

2. But in those also which are by Succession, and Inheritance: specially if
such Kings be bound by oath, or Solemn promise, at their Coronation, to
conditions: as it seems it was in this Kingdom. And David's demeanor toward
Saul does justify this State in their raising of Arms. For, though David did
not assault Saul, yet he stood upon his defense, yea though it was against Saul
who was the Lords anointed 1 Samuel 22. 2.
.

Obj. But what say you to the oath of Allegiance? What? swear Allegiance to
him, and fight against him, and kill him?

R. For killing him I say no more but what I have said before, p. 29.

2. But for resistance: besides what I have said before, Read, and consider the
form of that oath of Allegiance, and ye shall find in it nothing to the
contrary: but that the Hostility was lawful notwithstanding that oath: The
oath has in it four particulars.

1. First, that King Charles was lawful, and rightful King in all his
Dominions. Who ever denied that?

2. Again, that the Pope has no power to depose him, nor to dispose of any of
his Dominions: nor to discharge his Subjects of their Allegiance. Who ever
affirmed, the Pope had any such power but Papists? and yet they were admitted
into his Armies, to be the Assertors of his Prerogative.

3. Thirdly, notwithstanding any Declaration, or sentence of Excommunication
derived, or pretended to be derived from the Pope: yet to bear true Allegiance
to his Majesty. Now in all that has been done to his late Majesty, it was by
Parliamentary Power, and not from any Power from the Pope, neither directly nor
indirectly.

4. Lastly, to defend the King, his Person, Crown, and Dignity from all
conspiracies, and attempts. And to disclose all Treasons, and Treacherous
conspiracies. Now no man dare say that there was any Treason, or Treacherous
conspiracy in any of the proceedings against him. And what was done to him was
not done in a secret way of conspiring: but in the Public way of Justice. Nor
was it secretly carried on, but made Public and manifest by Declarations.

Consider the several heads of that oath, and you shall find that none of them
were violated, no not by the Hostility. Because Arms were not taken up against
the King directly: but against Incendiaries, evil instruments which were about
him, as has been said, By whom

1. The Kings person was captivated.

2. His power abused.

3. His Subjects tyrannized over.

4. His Dominions put into a fearful combustion.

5. And the Kingdom by their means in the way to Desolation.

And in a word, to free the Kings person from their Engagement, that so, his
person and power politic, which were so far distant in place, might have been
united again.

But there are three Texts in Solomon's writings, which were objected against
the Hostility of the Defending party.

Arg. 1. Solomon says, I counsel thee to keep the Kings command, and that in
regard of the oath of God Eccles. 8. 2.
.

A. I answer, that that text of Solomon seems, in sound of syllables to speak
as much as can be spoken against the Hostility: but if well examined it proves
nothing: no such thing for which it is produced. I find that Text two ways
expounded.

1. Some by King in the Text, understand God himself: as if this were the
sense. I counsel thee to keep all Gods commandments, for his solemn promise
and Covenant sake.

And they that so expound it do refer it to that in Exodus Exodus 24. 3. etc.
, where Moses relating the words of God to the people, they with one voice
said, All that the Lord has spoken we will do. Whereupon Moses built an
Altar, and caused Burnt-offerings to be offered, and Peace Offerings to be
sacrificed thereon: and took of the blood and sprinkled it upon the people, and
said, Behold the blood of the Covenant.

This was a solemn manner of protesting; and is called, The Oath of the Lord,
as all solemn oaths are called in the Scripture. For confirmation whereof, take
notice what is said

1. Concerning a beast that was lent, and it die, or be hurt, and be taken
away, no man seeing it: Then an oath of the Lord shall be between them, that he
has not put his hand to his neighbors goods Exodus 22. 10, 11.
.

2. And concerning Shimei that went out of his City, to which he was confined
by oath, Solomon says to him, Why have thou broken the oath of the Lord 1 Kin.
2. 42.
?

3. And that Covenant which was between God and the people for obedience spoken
of in Exodus Exodus 24. 3.
, It is called, The Lords oath Deu. 29. 12.
.

And if this be the sense, that text alleged out of Solomon proves nothing:
it not speaking of an earthly, but of the Heavenly King.

2. Others, and I think more properly, by King do understand the Supreme
Magistrate, by whatsoever title of dignity he be called. And that clause, In
regard of the oath of God, they take to be a limitation. As if this were the
sense; or as if Solomon had said,

1. Let Magistrates be obeyed.

2. Yet so far, and no further, as will stand with faith, a good conscence, and
with our allegiance unto God.

And the reason is good, because there is no power but of God Romans 13. 1.
; and that power which the Magistrate has from, and is to exercise and execute
under God, must not be used to deprive God of his due: nor to force obedience
contrary to the will of God: which obedience to himself the Lord requires of
all, and has sworn he will exact it of all. I have sworn by my self, the word
is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, That every
knee shall bow to me: and every tongue shall swear to me Esaias 45. 23.
.

Here is the oath of the Lord* and it must be showed me out of Gods word what
is contrary, or this must be the sense. Namely, Swear to obey Magistrates, yet
so, as ye infringe not your allegiance unto God. And this seems to be the
more probable, because where obedience is commanded in larger terms to Parents
and to Masters, as, Children obey your Parents in all things Col. 3. 20.
, Servants be obedient in all things Col. 3. 22.
, It is, elsewhere, limited to all lawful things. Children obey your Parents
in the Lord Ephesians. 6. 1.
, and so of Servants Ephesians. 6. 5.
. And so, by consequent are Magistrates to be obeyed, viz. in all lawful and
just things. For there is the same reason of both, as appears by the tenor
of the fifth Commandment: Honor thy Father and thy Mother Exo. 20. 12.
: Where, under the terms of Father and Mother, all sorts of Superiors
(Political, Oeconomicall, Civil, and Ecclesiastical, Superior and
Inferior) are comprehended. And this is a truth undeniable, that

1. To God, universal obedience and without any limitation is required.

2. But to men, obedience has its limitations.

And upon this ground, the Three Children refused to worship the image which
Nebuchadnezzar had set up Dan. 3. 16.
. And Peter with the rest of the Apostles told the Council that we ought to
obey God rather then men Acts 5. 29.
. And Peter and John appealing to the Council said, whether it be right in
the sight of God to hearken to you rather then to God, judge ye Acts 4. 19.
.

But we may answer yet otherwise; Namely, That King Charles his power was
virtually in and with the Parliament, though he was not there in person. And so
he in his Politic power, was in the raising the Armies against the Adverse
party. For

1. Though his person was absent, and estranged from his Parliament;

2. Yet King and Parliament being a body Politic, could not be severed. God,
and the Law had conjoined them: and those whom God had so firmly conjoined, no
man could justly put asunder. Wherefore wheresoever the King was in person,
where could we seek his power Politic but in that place, and with those
persons to which himself by royal obsignation of that Law had confined it?

For confirmation whereof three things are to be taken into serious
consideration.

1. First, the Legal Call of this Parliament, which was common to this, with
all precedent Parliaments; it was summoned by writ from the King: and that
summons was necessitated by want of counsel and support, which otherwise could
not be had but in a Parliamentary way.

And herein we are to admire and reverence the Providence of God, to send a
free Parliament beyond all hope and expectation. For had we fallen to blows with
the Scottish Nation in either of those Expeditions which were made against them,
one or both Kingdoms had in all probability gone to ruin. As Jacob therefore
said of Simeon and Levi: Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and their
wrath, for it was cruel (s): So say I of those that were the Counselors and
contrivers of that destroying project, Cursed was their counsel, for it was
full of cruelty. Yet God who only can bring good out of evil, turned this to
both Kingdoms good. For by that means the King was necessitated to call a
Parliament,

1. To the joy and admiration of the Best affected.

2. To the terror and astonishment of the Adverse party. Some whereof being
conscious of their guilt, not willing to abide the trial, betook themselves to
flight.

The Parliament therefore was lawfully called this none can deny. Let those
therefore that have called this a forced, not a free Parliament, either answer
this, or for ever hereafter hold their peace for shame.

2. Again, the solemn confirmation of the Parliament by Act of continuation. In
which this present, differs from all precedent Parliaments, that ever I could
hear or read of. I say the continuation of it,

1. In its full authority.

2. And with all its rights, and Privileges.

Did not the King, by that Act, tie his presence, at least the presence of his
Politic power, and Sovereign authority, as Head, and Chief in Parliament to
the place, or with the persons, to which he had confined, and confirmed it? Let
all the world judge. If otherwise, I would fain know,

1. Of what force that Act was,

2. Or what benefit could accrue to the Kingdom thereby.

Let us put a case or two.

1. If any man should purchase, Estate Right or Privilege of any other, and
have the same made over to him by written and by sealed evidence, and have a
lawful seizure thereof: the purchaser has an Indefeisable, an unavoidable
title thereto: and great reason to hold and enjoy what has been so made over
to him upon valuable considerations.

2. Or if a father (for this similitude fitteth the case best) shall freely
give an estate to his son or sons, for his, or their preferment, specially in
the way of Marriage: though the father take no consideration in lieu thereof:
such gift is good in Law, and does debar the father from all Re-entry. But if
in lieu and recompense he take the Dowry, or any part thereof, or any other
collateral satisfaction: that estate being therewith purchased, no Law can
ever reverse, or make the fathers act of none effect.

Here is the case: for if our father the late King had freely given that act of
Continuation for the bettering of our condition, it had been sufficient for the
duration of it. But passing it over by way of purchase for vast sums by
Subsidies, Pole-monies and the rest, this makes the case strong: and the
Kingdoms armies which were advanced by the authority of the High Court were to
maintain that act, to defend that title.

And if a father, after such act done shall wage Law to disseise, and
dispossess his son or sons: shall it not be lawful for him or them to defend
the said title, by the same Law? or is it any injustice in such son or sons?
Certainly it is no disobedience. Our father the late King did estate the
Kingdom as has been showed: and after did commence suit by taking up of arms:
and might not the Subjects then defend their purchased title by the same Law of
Arms: and as it were in the same Court of Judicature?

3. Lastly, Consider the late Kings Grant, his free acknowledgment, that the
present Parliament at Westminster was the Parliament of England. Mark the
emphasie,

1. Not only a Parliament,

2. Not only a Parliament in England;

3. But, in full expressions, The Parliament of England, that is,

1. The Legally called,

2. The Solemnly confirmed,

3. The Legally continued,

4. The one and only Parliament of England; And here

1. No fallacious Equivocation,

2. No mental Reservation,

3. No forged Cavillation,

4. No forced Construction must have any place. But all words in commerce and
contracts must be understood according to the Grammatical construction, common
use, and received sense: or all parties, contracts, grants, and promises would
prove but mere illusions, and devoid of confidence. So much for the first
Argument.

Arg. 2. Again, Solomon says, where the word of a King is there is power; and
who may say to him, What do thou? Eccle. 8. 4.
.

A. This argument has two parts.

1. First, that every word of a King has power.

2. Again, that in his ways and doings he is uncontrollable.

1. For the first, Has every word of a King power? How then came it to pass,
that King Saul's words had no more power? He said, and bound it with an oath
that Jonathan his son should die: but the people gainsayed, and rescued
Jonathan 1 Samuel 14. 45.
, And we do not read that ever the people were faulted for it.

But this is certain, that when a Kings word is rash, ridiculous, impious or
impossible, it has no power in it.

1. No commanding power in regard of the thing commanded.

2. Though there may likely be a condemning power in respect of the person
refusing.

2. Again, is a King in all his doings not to be controlled? Solomon does not
speak of the Illegality of the thing: but only of the danger, He does not say,
It is not lawful to say to a King, What do thou? but he does insinuate that
it is full of danger, Who may say? that is, Who may safely do it? For,

1. First, it seems to be lawful, it may be said to a King, What do thou?
as appears

By that of Samuel to Saul, What have thou done 1 Samuel 13. 11.
?

And by that of Elijah to King Ahab, I have not troubled Israel, but thou and
thy fathers house 1 Ki. 18. 18.
.

And by that of John the Baptist to Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have
thy brothers wife Mat. 14. 4.
.

2. But it seems to be very dangerous, if we consider Jeroboams dealing with
the man of God. Lay hold on him said Jeroboam 1 Kin. 13. 4.


Or Ahabs dealing with Micaiah. Put this man in prison 1 Ki. 22. 27.
.

Or Amaziah his dealing with the Prophet that did reprove him. Art thou made of
the Kings Council? Why should thou be smitten 2 Chapter 25. 16.
?

It is therefore lawful, person and manner considered: but is very dangerous.

Arg. 3. Again Solomon says, The fear of a K. is as the roaring of a Lion:
whosoever provokes him to anger sins against his own soul Pro. 20. 20.
. Where ye see Sin and Soul joined together, and it must needs imply that such
an one sins damnably, or to death.

A. I answer, that this is a fallacy of the figure of speech; for neither Sin
nor Soul are used in a proper sense. For,

1. First, by Soul is meant Life, as in diverse other texts of Scripture, but
especially in the Psalms: as in these passages that follow.

Deliver my Soul from the ungodly Psalm. 17. 13.
.

They have laid wait for my Soul Psalm. 57. 4.
.

Lest he tear my Soul like a Lion Psalm. 7. 2.
.

And in many other such like passages Soul is used in that sense.

2. Again, the word Sin is not always used to signify a transgression of a
Divine law, which is properly called Sin, as John defines Sin to be the
transgression of the Law 1 John 3. 4.
. But,

1. Sometimes it is largely used for missing of a mark; Thus it is said of the
Children of Benjamin, that they could sling stones at an hairs breadth and not
sin, or miss Judge. 20. 16.
. And says Solomon, He that is hasty with his feet sins or slippeth Prove.
19. 2.
.

2. Again, a man is said to sin against another man by doing some injustice to
him, whereby he is either hurt or wronged. In which sense Reuben said to his
brethren, Spoke I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the child Genesis 42.
22.
?

3. And a man is said to sin against his own soul, when he does something
which may call his life in question. And thus is Solomon to be understood, in
the text objected, viz. He that provokes a King to anger sins against his
own Soul. And that this is Solomon's meaning it appears by two other passathe
Proverbs, viz.

The Kings wrath is as the roaring of a Lion Prove. 19. 12.
.

The wrath of a King is as the messengers of death Prove. 16. 14.
.

But if any list to interpret Sin and Soul properly, then it must be
understood of a just provocation: and not of every anger or offense rashly
taken. And it cannot be forgotten, who took up arms first, and who stroke the
first blow.

But why do I speak of provoking a King, when we have no King in Esse, no not
so muth as in Posse, so far as we can see with the eyes of worldly possibility?
But a King we had when I first delivered these things. But he is dead and gone,
and as I said before, I do often lament over him as David did over Abner 2 Samuel 3. 38.
, and over Saul and Jonathan 2 Samuel 1. 19.
, and as all Judah did over Josiah. The crown is fallen from our heads: woe to us
that we have sinned Lam. 5. 16.
. O brethren we have sinned.

1. Our sins miscarried him into Illegal courses.

2. Our sins apprehended, secured, arraigned, condemned, executed him.

Let the Nation therefore lament her sins: and prize Superiors at a higher
rate. And, for our sins, God has made an alteration. Let us not struggle
against the Dispensations of overruling Providence. But let us say, with the
Psalmist, This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes Psa. 118.
23.
. And let us own the Power in their hands to whom God has transferred it. And
we now see where the Power is: let us own it, and be subject to it. And spoken
be it to every Soul. Let every Soul be subject, etc. The Conclusion.

All that is said before considered, I, for my part, can see no ground

1. Either in Reason,

2. Or of Religion,

Why I should make any scruple of Conscience to subscribe the Engagement. Why I
may not

1. Freely subscribe,

2. Faithfully observe,

3. Cordially obey,

4. Constantly submit unto that Government which is now settled by full
anthority of the Power in Being: which must be acknowledged (as things now
stand) to be in the hands of the Commons of England, by their Trustees, and
Representatives in Parliament.

The form of the Engagement is this.

I (T. C.) do declare and promise to be faithful to the Commonwealth in the
Government now established without a King, or House of Lords.

And note I pray you, that faithfulness to the Commonwealth in the Government
established, to which we do oblige our selves by subscription; is not to be
understood of an unlimited subjection in regard of things to be done: but it is
to be understood of things lawful, possible, and honest. Which is the
condition of all Civil Engagements; for unlimitted obedience is due to God
only, as is showed before, p. 27, 28.

Obj. But it will be said that this Engagement does cross, and contradict

1. Both the Protestation made in Anno 1641.

2. And the Covenant made in Anno 1643.

3. And a Declaration of the House of Commons made in Anno 1646.

1. In the first we did Protest, according to our duty of allegiance, to
maintain, and defend his Majesty's Royal person, honor, and estate. Where was
a full stop, as not relating to any conditions.

2. In the second we did covenant to preserve the Kings Majesty's person and
authority, in the preservation and defense of the true Religion, and the
Liberties of the Kingdom. That the world may bear witness with our
consciences of our Loyalty: and that we have no thoughts and intentions to
diminish his Majesty's just power, and greatness.

3. In the last, it was declared by the House of Commons (which Declaration was
published in every Church, and was commanded to be fastened up in every Church:
and is to be seen still in many Churches) that their intentions were not to
alter the Government by King, Lords, and Commons.

These things being protested, covenanted and declared, now to subscribe a
Government without a King or House of Lords; This is that which sticks most,
and with many that are very moderate, and truly conscientious.

R. This is thought to be hard to be answered. But let us consider how things
then stood. And distinguish of the times.

1. As things then stood, all was really intended.

2. But the Kings noncompliance: and some miscarriage in the House of Lords,
have been the cause of the alteration of things both really intended, Solemnly
protested, and Publicly declared.

2. And though the Protestation was larger then the Covenant, there being a
full stop, as not relating to any Conditions as I said before.

2. Now his late Majesty continuing wilfully in his ways which threatened
ruin, by his Forces, to Religion, and to Liberties. Therefore the Covenant
was, upon second thoughts, framed: which was an addition to, and an exposition
of that clause of Defense, as to his Majesty's Person, and Authority. Showing.

1. Both wherein,

2. And how far, we should manage that Defense: namely, to the good of
Religion, and to the safety of the Commonwealth, with all its just Rights, and
Privileges: and not to the prejudice of either.

So long as the King did show himself a Father, a foster Father of the Church,
and State, the Kingdom was bound, by its manifold engagements, to defend his
Person, and his Power. And had the King done his part timely, and effectually,
it had been somewhat. But consider,

1. What Petitions were presented to him.

2. What large proffers were made to him,

3. What Delays, that I say nothing of Denyals, were made by him.

4. What Sinister Successes the many Addresses had from him.

5. How fruitless all the Treaties have been since those engagements.

6. What underhand Dealings, (by his Party, and not without his Privity) there
have been even during the times of those Treaties.

Whosoever shall but read that Declaration which sets forth the reasons of
the Resolves of both Houses then sitting, for no more Addresses to be made to
him: shall see enough to make his heart relent in him even in both regards,
viz. of Religion, and of Liberties. I speak the truth in Christ Jesus, I lie
not, my Conscience bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost Romans 9. 1.
, That I cannot read it but my very Soul resolves into tears, at many things
therein Declared which were of dangerous consequence both to Church and State.
And I hope no man can justly brand that Declaration with the imputation

1. Either of flattery on the one side:

2. Or of falsehood on the other.

If so, it were ten thousand pities, it is not published for general
satisfaction.

What passed in the Isle of Wight, I cannot fully relate: but somewhat there
was which savoured not well as to security of Religion, or Liberties: which was
the main cord of Obligation in all the Solemn Engagements, both by
Protestation, and by Covenant.

1. If any Commissions were then given underhand.

2. If any Plottings by the Royal Party, by virtue of any new or old
Commissions to make that Treaty fruitless, and Invalid, even during the time
of that Treaty.

3. If any Combinations by the Royalists to attempt their own ends by making
Factions, and Parties. As who for King? who for Parliament? Of which the best
affected had great Jealousies, and not without just cause, and many fears. Then
consider how far that clause of Defense did oblige. The ends being despaired
of, for to which those Engagements did relate.

Ob. Now some say, that the whole Kingdom has broken Covenant, in not rising,
but sitting still, till the King was put to death,

R. No: the Covenant it self is not broken, because the ends could not be
secured. And besides private men by private authority, may not manage a rising
against Authority. The power of the Commons is in their trustees: to them it
belongs to Legitimate all public Force. He that takes the Sword, shall
perish with the Sword, says Christ to Peter Mat. 26. 52.
: that is, he that takes the sword of private revenge, shall perish by the
Sword of Public Justice.

Well, dead he is, and not without the disposing hand of God. It cannot be
denied, but he was a personage of Rare, and Royal parts. And had he not been
seduced by evil Counsels to his own ruin, as Ahaziah was, of whom it is said,
his Counselors were the cause of his destruction 2 Chronicles. 22. 4.
He might still have been,

1. A Glorious King,

2. Over a most faithful people,

3. In a most flourishing Island.

But he is translated (though by an untimely death) to a more glorious company.
And now sits in a more glorious estate, then ever he did on earth.

It was his Destiny laid on him by God: and therefore, while we lament, as
reflecting on his sad fate here, let us rejoice in contemplation of his Glory
in Heaven, among the blessed Saints and Angels. And now let us cast our eyes
upon the Power now in being: and since God has set it up, it is not in man to
pull it down. Subjection to the power is commanded by the Apostle. And, for my
part, since God has set up this power, and by it the Government, I shall
Subscribe freely: resolving to be subject to the present Power, because it is
of God.

Ob. Here again some take offense. Do you not see (say they) what a Confusion
is crept in amongst us?

1. All things,

2. And almost all persons out of order,

Call you this a Reformation according to the Covenant?

R. I do both see, and mourn. And it much dejects the hearts of many precious
Saints, to see

1. The Churches almost empty, and the People running into Corners.

2. The Public Worship neglected.

3. The Sacraments, that of the Supper, in particular, discontinued.

4. The Ministry discountenanced.

5. Zealous Professors derided.

6. Learning undervalued.

7. Christian Liberty set upon the Rack to usher in a world of Errors.

8. And Liberty of Conscience walking up and down: and running into manifold
extravagances.

Exurgat Deus, Let God arise Psalm. 68. 1.
.

It is time for the Lord to work, for they have made void thy Law Psalm. 119.
126.
. But now, where shall we lay the blame? what? directly on the Power? I cannot
but say that there has been some failings in the Power: but other Emergent
businesses have so taken them up, as of necessity they were forced to attend to
other matters. But indeed the fault is principally in the people, who should
have acted, in their places, according to the Ordinances of the Power. The
fault I say is principally in the people: and that in these two regards.

1. The first is the vanity and instability of the minds of the people, who
fall into strange miscarriages, they being infected with the poison of
ungrounded Tenets: which they uphold with a strong hand, and will not be
controlled. And they take advantage and encouragement in this Juncture of time,
wherein the power is, and has been in a manner wholly taken up with urgent,
and emergent occurrences. Namely,

1: First, the securing of the New molded Commonwealth, in this time of so
many distractions, and distempers. Some being wholly for Monarchy; others for
Anarchy: some for one thing, some for another.

2. Again, the reducing of Ireland, which is of great concernment to the
security of the State. This meets with strong opposition: and therefore,
cannot, but it must needs take up much time.

3. Lastly, to hold a Brotherly correspondency both with our fellow
Covenanteers of the Scottish Nation: and with other States, and Churches
abroad. And what retarding, the New fallen difference between the Scots, and
our selves, may occasion, I cannot foretell.

The second is, the want of obedience to former Ordinances of the Power. For
had the Prebyteriall Government set forth by Ordinances of the Power, found its
wished entertainment: and with that ready compliance as was expected: a blessed
effect for suppressing both Errors, and enormities had seconded those
Ordinances long ere this.

Therefore if we search into the causes of these our confusions, and
distempers, we shall find them to flow principally from these two Springs.

1. First the vanities of men's minds: being neither zealous for, nor constant
to the Truth.

2. Again, a lawless Liberty which many take to themselves, whereby they have
rejected a Tendered Government. And this later is,

1. Partly from the ignorance of those that neither know, nor will own the
excellency of a Presbytery. Both for restraining the extravagancies of the
exorbitant: and for the encouragement of the godly party.

2. Partly from the dislike of those that are scandalous, who are, as we say,
Tooth and Nail, against all means of restraint: which would have been urgent,
and effectual under that kind of Government.

3. And partly from the madness, and malice of those that are infected with
Antinomian, Anabaptisticall, and other erroneous principles. These cry up I
know not what kind of Lawless Liberty, and are not willing to be brought
under any limitting, and restraining Government.

Put all these together, and ye have the true cause. And now to fly upon the
face of the Power, this is a fallacy, that is, when that that is not the cause
is put for the cause. And to speak plain English, It is a trick of the Devil
to hold men the faster in their Ignorance, Errors, and Extravagancies.

And because there is so much grumbling at the present state of the Church, and
Commonwealth, in respect of the Covenant, I shall therefore take Liberty, to
take the Covenant in pieces, and to take a view of all the particulars in it.
And so it will plainly appear, that while these men insist so much upon one
clause in the Covenant, they neglect all the rest of it. The particular heads
or branches of the Covenant are these six, as they follow now in order.

1. The first is Reformation of Religion in Worship, Discipline, and Government
according to the Word of God: and the example of the best reformed Churches,
etc.

But the most, and they that grumble most, cry all Reformation, they extol
Prelacy: they would have their old Service, their old Ceremonies.

2. Secondly, the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Scism,
Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine,
and the Power of Godliness, etc.

But who almost regards sound Doctrine, and the power of godliness? I am
sure that Schism, and Profaneness abound more now, then in former times.

3. The third is, with Realty, Sincerity, and Constancy, with our Lives, and
Estates mutually to preserve the Rights and Privileges of Parliament: the
Liberties of the Kingdom. And to preserve the Kings Majesty, Person, and
Authority in the preservation, and defense of the true Religion, and the
Liberties of the Kingdom, etc.

But the Rights, and Privileges of Parliament are in no grace: for they that
grumble most do contemn the Parliament, and condemn all Parliamentary
proceedings. Their proceedings against the late King, fills their hearts with
madness, and their tongues with clamor.

4. Fourthly, with all faithfulness to endeavor the discovery of all such as
have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion: dividing the King from his people: or
making any faction, or parties among the people, etc.

I appeal to all men, (I, for my part, have found it so) if many of those that
cavil most, be not of the same hair: and if they would not be glad of any
opportunity,

1. To make a faction,

(...)
