A COVNTER-PLOT Against POPERY.

Suggested By way of short considerations, touching the necessity and
usefulness of some agents, to correspond betwixt the Protestant Churches, in
matters of public Edification.

NOLI ALTVM SAPERE



LONDON: Printed, Anno Domini, 1642.

Short CONSIDERATIONS Touching The necessity and usefulness of some Agents, to
correspond betwixt the protestant Churches in matters of public Edification.
IT is certain that since the Council of Trent, Papists have taken up a joint
resolution to overthrow all Protestant states and Religion, either by open war,
or policy, as occasion shall be offered. Of this Council the Pope is head, and
to compass his ends, the Princes of his Faction, and all the Orders of his
Clergy are set a work: amongst the rest the Jesuits are the chief Agents, who
although they be at variance in diverse particulars with others, yet in this
they, and all the rest unanimously conspire, and with a great deal of
Emulation strive to go before one another.

2. It is known, that this purpose and aim is the chief matter of all their
Cabinet Councels, and that in all their public Treatise with Protestants, all
of them by the instigation and suggestion of the Popes instruments, they labor
to gain ground upon us, and to this effect many special consultations have
been held at Rome by the Cardinals; and in all other places by the Bishops and
Jesuits.

3. By their constant and joint conspiracy in prosecuting of this purpose, they
have wasted many flourishing Churches, and made them quite desolate, they have
diminished the strength of many, and they have laid dangerous plots to subvert
and trouble those that are yet in any good case.

4. Their proceedings are not taken to heart by the Protestants, neither is
there any course observed to countermine their intentions; for which cause they
are like to prevail more and more. Chiefly, because the manifold divisions of
Protestants which distract an I divide their intentions, and whereby they not
only neglect those Machinations, but also help unto their own overthrow,
whiles they persecute one another.

5. It is not possible as yet to unite the Protestant Counsels in this, that
their Temporal heads should jointly aim at the overthrow of Papistry, and
combine themselves together, in some constant course, to oppose it by their
power, and correspondency; which on the other side is long ago effected.

6. Therefore seeing the outward, and public means cannot yet be improved
because of the Reasons of State, and the differences of Religions, and opinions
amongst Protestants, it is worthy of consideration, whether or no any other
means might not be set a work, which in a more spiritual manner might
countermine their proceedings.

7. This means I conceive to be such, as might be able with the assistance of
God, powerfully to support the truth of the Gospel, and by little and little
join the intentions of the Protestants to correspond one with another in
matters of mutual edification, and in the communion of certain duties,
whereby the scandals which occasion the judgments of God, and their insensible
overthrow be taken out of the way in due time.

8. The means to support powerfully the truth of the Gospel is, 1. to gain
the common consent of all Protestants to make a Fundamental Confession of
their Christian Religion, wherein they all shall agree, that by this means
their Schisms may be taken out of the way. 2. To procure that a body of
practical Divinity may be compiled, and fitted to the capacity of learned and
unlearned, that all things belonging to godliness and a good conscience, may
be contained in it, and so be received by all parties without dispute, and
become a means of public edification in the Universities and Pulpits.

9. The means to gain the Fundamental Confession, and to procure the body of
practical Divinity, are not difficult, but may easily be attained by few
Agents, who might make it their work to solicit the chief Divines, and
ablest men of all the Churches to correspond together to this effect. For if
there were Agents maintained for Fundamental Confession, thence peace and
unity would arise, and if the practice of Piety were propagated, and urged, by
this means the scandals would cease, and the Communion of Saints would be more
and more entertained for mutual edification.

10. Both these works are already set upon by some, and consented unto by all,
so that nothing is further requisite, then to continue by the agency of of some
fit correspondents betwixt the Churches, the motion till it come to perfection,
whereby (God willing) not only the inward divisions of Protestants will come
to an end, but also the truth of the Gospel will break forth most invincibly
to convince the consciences of Papists, who think that in the Protestant
Churches there is neither Christianity, Unity, nor Piety, but mere Heresy,
division, and profane licentiousness.

11. For seeing it is certain that Babylon will not fall by might or by power,
but by the Spirit of the Lord of Hosts, Zach. 4.6. it seems that the only
means to set the Spirit of God a work in the hearts of his Servants, and to
give him some occasion to enter into the consciences of the Papists, is first
to labor to unite the faithful Preachers of the Gospel into a holy
Communion, to perfect these most spiritual objects. And 2. to propose, by
common consent in the name of all Protestants, the irrefragable truth of
Christian Doctrine, and the undeniable duties of righteousness and holiness,
to convince the consciences of such Papists, as are not wilfully and
Atheistically blind, that we maintain not such abominable errors as they
father upon us, but that our Religion is the only saving means of Salvation.

12. The necessity and usefulness of these two works may be showed in this,
that they will prove the only means of joining the intentions of Protestants
in one spiritual purpose, which is most of all others material in the
furthering of the Gospel. 2. Of taking away public scandals and offenses
which we give one unto another, and which Papists and Sects (not without some
fair pretense) take at us all. 3. Of confirming saving truths. 4. Of
propagating godliness, and beating down impiety, superstition and ignorance,
which by this means must needs fall to the ground as Dagon did before the Arc
of the Covenant.

13. And indeed it may be wondered at, that hitherto among so many endeavors,
for the good of the common cause in Religion, and in so great plenty of
spiritual and temporal means, where so many well affected professors wish so
earnestly for the prosperity of Sion, that this means has not been seriously
thought upon and advanced, seeing it is the only safe, laudable, commendable
and infallible way to countermine the malicious practices of Papists, that
seek our overthrow with more diligence then we do provide for our own
safety, and their conversion.

Now if there were but some hope to find a competent maintenance for the
planting of a Seminary, (as it may be called) of a few Agents that apply their
studies wholly to these enterprises, the means of bringing them to pass might
be made so plain that none should be able to doubt thereof, and besides this,
there might be other matters jointly intended by them, for the advancement of
public peace and all kind of solid Learning; which by themselves might deserve
a peculiar Agency, if men knew the worth and consequence of them, or were
zealous to further good works of a public nature, for the love of God and a
good Conscience.

FINIS.

