A TREATISE OF THE COVENANT OF GRACE, As it is dispensed to the Elect Seed,
effectually unto Salvation.

BEING The substance of diverse Sermons preached upon Act. 7.8. by that
eminently holy and judicious man of God, Mr. John Cotton, Teacher of the Church
at Boston in N. E.

The second Edition, by a Copy far larger then the former; and Corrected also
by the Authors own hand.

This Copy was fitted for the Press, by Mr. Tho. Allen Minister in Norwich.

LONDON, Printed by Ja. Cottrel, for John Allen, at the Rising-Sun in Paul's
Churchyard. May 1659.

The 13. of the third Month.
THe Works of this Reverend Author (now with God) have already praised him in
the gate. The name of Cotton is as an ointment poured out; nor needs there more
to commend a Book to any godly Readers acceptance, then to say, it is his. But
as the name of this Author puts a great value upon the Work, so the Subject
matter does it much more. The Covenant of Grace is a taking Title. How free is
Grace! how sure is the Covenant! The freeness of grace, and the sureness of the
Covenant of Grace, as made with Jesus Christ for us, or with us in Jesus
Christ, is the Subject of this excellent Piece. That unbelievers may be enticed
into the bonds of this Covenant, and believers grow up in the joy and comfort
of it, and that the unsearchable riches of grace, may be admired by all, are
the reasons of this Publication.

Joseph Caryl.

THE STATIONER TO THE READER.
THe former Edition of this excellent Treatise of the Covenant of Grace
(containing the sum and substance of diverse Sermons preached by that precious
servant, and man of God, Mr. John Cotton, Teacher of the Church at Boston in
New England) having found good acceptance amongst godly and judicious
Christians; and the Book being much desired and sought for still by diverse, I
am encouraged to publish this second Edition; and so much the rather too, in
regard that by the good hand of the Lords Providence, I have of late received
(from a near Friend and Relation, one of the reverend Elders of that Church)
another Copy of the said Treatise, far larger then the former (above a third
part) corrected also in some places by the Authors own hand before his death:
the reason of which enlargement, is not from any addition by any other hand,
but (as may easily be conceived) from the diversity of the Amanuenses, who did
take the Notes of his Sermons, some writing the same more largely and exactly
then others, and several Copies so taken, being presented to the reverend
Author to correct, He, as he had leisure (willing and ready to gratify the
desire of his Friends) did peruse and rectify the sense with his pen, as he
went cursorily over the same. It Is not for me to say any thing by way of
commendation of the Book, and what is contained in it; and therefore I shall
wholly forbear, it being sufficient to speak for it self: only I shall crave
leave to say thus much, viz. That in the judgment of some who have perused it,
(were there only one of them to be had) 'twere worth its weight in gold.

J. A.

A Table of the Contents.
Doct. THe Coherence of the Text Page 1 In the Covenant which God made with
Abraham, God gave himself to be a God to him and his seed; and received Abraham
and his seed to be a people unto himself; and the chiefest of this seed, the
Lord Jesus Christ, he took to be the Meditator or Surety of this Covenant
between them both Page 3 In the Covenant, these three things are employed Page 4
Viz. 1. That God gave himself to be a God unto Abraham, and his seed. 2. That
God did receive Abraham, and his seed to be his people. 3. That God takes the
Lord Jesus Christ to be the Mediator, and Surety of this Covenant.
1. God gave himself unto Abraham; contains three things. 1. The Blessing
given, viz. 1. The whole Nature of God and all the Persons Page 6 2. All the
Ordinances, Creatures, and works of God Page 8
2. The Order in which it is given. 1. God does first give, and not the
Creature Page 11 2. God is the first thing that is given ib.
3. The Manner of giving; wherein the Freedom Of the Gift Page 12 Eternity Of
the Gift Page 12
Object. The Lord did require, that he should give himself again. Answ. Page 13
Object. The Lord did require, that himself and seed should be circumcised.
Answered ib. 2. The Lord did take Abraham and his seed, by a double act Page 15
1. By preparing them by a spirit of Bondage Page 16 Burning ibid
2. By giving of himself to them, and taking possession of them by his Spirit
Page 19 Quest. How does the Lord give himself unto his people, and they receive
him? ib. Answ. 1. The Spirit takes up his seat in the soul, making it his
Temple ib. 2. The Spirit also works faith in the soul, to Give it self to the
Lord. Page 20 Receive Jesus Christ. Page 20

Which Faith is built upon some absolute Promise of grace Page 22 From Union
with Christ, there springs Communion with him in spiritual blessings Page 24
Viz. 1. Relative blessings, not created in us, adoption and justification ib.
2. Positive blessings, created in us, sanctification and glorification Page 25
3. The Lord did take Jesus Christ (the chiefest of Abraham's seed) to be the
Mediator of his Covenant. Page 27 Quest. How did the Lord constitute him so to
be? ibid Answ. 1. By taking Jesus Christ the Son of the Virgin Mary, to be one
Person with the second in Trinity ib. 2. By giving him to be a Covenant ibid.
Wherein He Receives from God all the Promises and gracious gifts requisite
for him to be King, Priest, and Prophet Page 28 Performs all things needful
for Application of redemption, unto the souls of his people ib.
Use 1. To teach the difference between the Covenants of works and of grace
Page 29 1. Difference: in the one God offers himself upon condition of
obedience, not so in the other ibid 2. In that of works, the union that is
between God and a soul, is by that faith from which people may apostate Page 30
3. In that Covenant, the fruits which flow from it (viz. the semblance of
justification, adoption, and sanctification) endure but for a season Page 32
Quest. Is that sanctification the same that is in Gods children? ibid Answ. No:
being the sanctification either of Washed Swine Page 34 Goats ibid
4. In respect of the Mediator of the one and the other Page 36 Use 2. It
holds sorth an Argument against the whole body of Arminianism Page 37 Use 3.
To teach Gods people to bear a gracious respect to them that are under a
Covenant of works, and not forthwith to condemn them ibid Use 4. To clear up
sundry passages that concern the Covenant of grace, by answering of diverse
Questions 1. Quest. What is the first gift that the Lord gives unto his Elect?
Page 39 Answ. Christ is first given, and with him faith to receive him ibid
Quest. Does not the Lord give saving preparations before Jesus Christ? ib.
Resp. negatively, and the Reason thereof ib. 2. Quest. In what order does the
Lord give the covenant and the Blessings of it; whether faith before them, or
those blessings before faith to apply them? Page 40 Answ. He does give himself
to work faith, before faith can be there: and then faith does receive the
blessings of the Covenant, as adoption and justification Page 41 3. Quest.
Whether do we receive Christ in an absolute or conditional Promise? ib. Answ.
It Is always in an absolute Promise Page 42 4. Quest. Whether a man may
evidence his union with Christ from his sanctification Page 43 Answ. In four
Propositions 1. Prop. That sanctification which may be found in a Covenant of
works, is no evidence of union with Christ ib. The difference between the
Sanctification which flows from the Law Page 44 Gospel Page 44
1. In the Root in which it springs; which is hard to discern Page 47 2. In the
Rule whereby they are guided, viz. the word of God Page 49 Yet the difference
here, is not easily to be discerned Page 50 No not by professing universal
obedience to all Gods Commandments Page 51 3. In the end and scope which they
aim at, that also is difficult. Page 52 Yea, though they may suffer Persecution
Page 53 2. Prop. True sanctification is many times dark to a Christian Page 55
3. Prop. True-sanctification is not discerned, neither is it discernable, until
justisying faith be first discerned ib. 4. Prop. Though the resemblance be near
between the Legal and Evangelical holiness; yet there is a real difference,
which is discernable by the Spirit of God Page 57 Viz. both in the Root, which
is faith Page 58 Rule, by which they walk Page 60 Scope and end which they aim
at Page 61
5. Quest. Of what use are Promises, if not to bring us unto Christ; which it
seems they do not, if Christ must first be given? Page 63 Answ. There is a
threefold use of Promises ibid 1. Before union with Christ, Viz. for Doctrine,
to teach what things are laid up in Christ ib. Instruction, showing whither to
look for life and salvation Page 64 Exhortation, inviting and persuading to
come to Jesus Christ Page 65
They have also a threefold effect in some of all sorts, good and bad. Viz. of
Illumination Page 66 Taste of Christ, so as to be affect-with him ib.
Conviction, so as to leave inexcusable, if despised ibid
2. In union with Christ; for the Lord gives himself to the soul in a Promise
Page 67 3. After union with Christ, more efficacious still Page 68 Viz. for
Doctrine, to teach us what gifts of grace are in Christ ib. Instruction, to
direct us whither to look for qualifications Page 69 Prayer ibid To know our
spiritual state, and means to discern it ibid To work all the qualifications in
us, to which the blessings are promised Page 70 To stir up to such duties, to
which the blessings are promised Page 71 To strengthen faith ibid
6. Quest. To what use serves the Law, if God gives himself to his people,
without respect to any work? Page 75 Resp. It Is of use both unto them that are
Carnal Page 75 Spiritual Page 75
1. To carnal, both to Elect, to aggravate their sins Page 77 Not elect, in
regard of Disobedience Page 78 Obedience Page 79

2. To them that are spiritual, and under a Covenant of grace Page 81 Viz. as
they are under the Law to Christ, which is explained Page 82 There are two
effects of Gods people being under the Law Page 85 Viz. 1. The sense of Gods
Fatherly displeasure, when they transgress ibid 2. The sense of Gods gracious
acceptance of their obedience Page 86
Yet a Christian is not under the Law, i.e. the Covenant of it Page 89 So as
neither to Look for justification and salvation from obedience Page 90 Fear
condemnation by his disobedience Page 92 Look for conjugal comfort, from his
obedience Page 94 Nor fear conjugal divorce, from his disobedience Page 94
Claim his right unto any conditional promise, by his performance of the
condition Page 96
Application, by way of use, it serves to show, Viz. 1. The Doctrine of the
Covenant is free from Antinomianism Page 97 2. How far Gods servants are freed
from the Law Page 99 3. Men some coffeehouse of their spirits and state ibid
4. How to build our faith and hope Page 100
7. Quest. If the Lord gives himself, and his holy Spirit, what need is there
of any gifts of holiness to work and act by? He can do all in us without us
Page 102 Answ. There is a necessity of holiness, and of following after it Page
103 Quest. What need is there to follow after holiness, if the holy Spirit
dwell in us? Page 105 Answ. To be fitter instruments for every good word and
work ib. Quest. But if there be need of gifts of holiness, what need the Holy
Ghost dwell in us? ibid Answ. 1. To keep these gifts in us Page 106 2. To act
them in us ibid 3. To witness to them in our souls Page 107 4. To comfort us in
the changes that may come upon us Page 108
Quest. How, and to what end are we to employ and improve our sanctification?
Page 109 Answ. 1. We are to look to Christ, for Our supply of it ib. The
perfection of it ib.
2. Not to trust in the gifts of holiness and sanctification Page 111 Neither
for The performance of any duties without Christ ibid Justification from them
Page 117
3. In point of witness ibid 4. In point of rejoicing Page 118 5. To grow up in
grace and holiness Page 120
8. Quest. A further main Question for the clearing of the Point, is, How does
God the Father give himself? Page 124 Answ. God the Father does give himself by
a threefold work or act Viz. 1. By giving his Son for the redemption of Abraham
and his seed, and giving him also unto them, in their calling ib. Quest. How
does the Father call and draw us to his Son? Page 128 Resp. 1. by his Word and
Spirit ibid 2. By giving the Spirit of Adopon Page 135 3. By a work of
Reconciliation Page 130
Hence follow two Acts of God upon the soul 1. Adoption Page 140 2.
Justification ib.
1. It Is useful to teach us how we came to fellowship with Christ ib. Four
sorts of persons fall short of union with Christ. 1. Such as bless themselves
in their natural estate Page 141 2. Such as rest in their Reformations ib. 3.
Such as rest in a Faith in Christ, which is of their own making ibid 4. Such as
Wait on the Lord in their own strength Page 143 Use 2. To show upon what
grounds a soul comes to close with Christ, viz. upon an Absolute Promise Page
146 Use 3. Hence see that it is not safe to build upon Qualifications in our
selves, until Christ be first received in some Promise Page 150 Use 4. Of
Consolation to such as rest upon the free grace of God in Christ Jesus revealed
in some Promise Page 151 9. Quest. How does God the Son give himself to Abraham
and his seed? Page 152 Answ. 1. By his taking our nature upon him, and giving
himself to redeem us by his obedience, whether active or passive Page 153 2. By
revealing the Father unto us, and his free grace Page 158 Whence arises
liberty From the burden of fears Page 160 Of hope, through the filling of the
Spirit Page 162
3. By keeping us in this state Page 163
Both by Praying for us Page 164 His ruling Providence ib.

Use.
1. Then our state before redemption is a state of Bondage Page 166 2. To teach
such as are in bondage, where their Redemption lies Page 167 3. To teach
Christians to hold on in this way Page 170 4. To wait on the Lord for this his
Redemption ibid 5. To stand fast in our Christian liberties Page 171 Quest. 10.
How God the Holy Ghost does give himself to Abraham and his seed ibid 1. For
Inhabitation Page 172 Which is necessary 1. For Union with Jesus Christ Page
173 2. To keep possession against all adversary powers Page 174
2. For Sanctification, opened at large Page 177 3. For Revelation, and what
things he does reveal Page 185 How he does reveal, viz. by Witnessing to our
spiritual state Page 188 Making known all necessary truth, yea, even our faith
and justification. Page 192
For Application, it is useful, 1. To teach Christians not to be afraid of the
word Revelation Page 199 2. Not to look for any Revelation without the Word
Page 201 3. In Justification to look for no word but such as holds forth some
absolute Promise of free grace ib. 4. The fourth work of the Holy Ghost is
Consolation Page 203 Viz. by Bearing witness with an abundant measure of
consolation Page 204 A more constant and abiding comfort Page 205 A powerful
and strong consolation ibid Here two Queries 1. What is the Seal of the Spirit?
and how it does seal? Page 206 1. By confirming the Promises to the soul ib. 2.
By engraving the likeness of Christ in the soul Page 210 3. By distinguishing
the Saints from others Page 211
2. How is the Holy Ghost an earnest? Page 212
Answ. 1. As he binds the bargain between God and the soul ibid 2. As he is
the first fruit of the payment ibid

Use.
1. To teach us how to speak of the Seal of the Spirit Page 213 2. To teach the
danger of laying claim to a Promise by any work of grace, before we have the
Seal of the Spirit ib. Yet the Spirit does not seal immediately, but by and in
some word of Promise Page 214 3. To teach such as have received the first
fruits of the Spirit, to know that they have received an earnest of an
everlasting possession Page 215 4. To teach us, that if we have received
Christ, never to rest till the Holy Ghost does stamp more of the image of
Christ in us Page 216
The second branch of the Doctrine.
That God received Abraham and his seed to be a peculiar people unto himself
Page 217 For which, three things are opened. 1. That God did take Abraham and
his seed to be a peculiar people to himself Page 218 2. How he did so take them
to be his people ibid 3. Who are meant by Abraham and his seed Page 219 Quest.
Whether the carnal seed had any portion in the Covenant of grace Page 219 Answ.
1. They were called to outward fellowship of the Covenant Page 220 2. They are
not far from the kernel and blessing of the Covenant ibid
1. They have not only outward Ordinances, and common gifts of the Spirit, but
a liberal use of the Creatures, much patience of God ibid 2. They have the
Offer of the sure mercies of David Page 222 Now the Causes of their being
discovenanted are Either Mocking or persecuting of the Covenant ib. The love of
worldly sensual blessings Page 223 A self-confident cleaving unto gifts
received by the Covenant Page 224

The Use.
1. To justify the righteousness of God in the confusion of the children of
Christian Parents Page 227 What we may think of the Infants of Parents in
Covenant, if they die Page 229 2. To teach Parents that are in Covenant, to
bring up their children under the wing of the Covenant Page 230 3. To teach
them that are in Covenant, to be all (themselves and theirs) for God Page 231
Here is a ground 1. For Family Duties ibid 2. To improve all we have for the
glory of Gods grace Page 232
4. To look to the Lord in all duties to receive us and ours Page 233
The third Branch of the Doctrine.
That the Lord took the chief of Abraham's seed, the Lord Jesus Christ, to be
the Mediator and Surety of the Covenant between God and Abraham Page 234 Christ
is a fit Mediator in respect Of his Person, being Godman, whereby he is Fit to
be the ground of union with God Page 235 Able to maintain it ib.
Offices, by Removing offenses ib. Communicating good things ib.
1. As a Priest, offering Sacrifice, making intercession, etc. Page 236 2. As a
Prophet, he teaches us all things 3. As a King, he applies all to us, subdues
Us to himself ibid The creature to us ibid
In particular, He is a Mediator of the Covenant in a threefold respect. 1. In
that he is the Messenger of it, to publish it Page 237 2. In that he does
ratify and confirm it by a threefold Seal 1. By his blood ib. 2. By his Spirit
ib. 3. By the Seals of the Covenant Page 238
3. In that he is the Prince and Head of it ibid Which implies three things 1.
That all the Covenant is made first with him ibid 2. That he does inherit the
blessings of the Covenant Page 239 Therefore He Fulfilled all the conditions of
the Covenant ib. Communicates the blessings of the Covenant ib.
3. That he does apply the comforts of the Promises to us ib.

Use.
1. For refutation of the Popish Doctrine, that devises other Mediators Page
240 Object. We pray the Saints to pray for us. Resp. 1. Christ bath bidden us
to pray one for another, but not to the Saints in Heaven ibid 2. We do not
depend upon the merit of their Prayers 241
2. For Instruction how to make an holy use of all the gifts of Gods grace, and
duties of Gods worship Page 242 3. A ground to strengthen faith; and for
encouragement to the duties and fruits of it Page 246


THere seems to be a gross mistake or Errata through the leaving out of one
word [not] in page 240. within 3 or 4. lines of the bottom. It Is said, it were
Idolatry. I think it should be, It were not Idolatry.

THE COVENANT OF GRACE, As it is Dispensed to the Elect Seed, effectually unto
Salvation.
Act. 7.8. the former part of the verse. And he gave him the Covenant of
Circumcision.
THis blessed servant of God, Steven, being called to account concerning what
he had said touching Jesus Christ his destroying the Temple, it is the scope of
his whole Discourse throughout this Chapter, to justify the Doctrine that he
had taught; that though he had taught Jesus of Nazareth should destroy that
place, yet in so teaching, he taught no Blasphemy: And this he does in an
Historical Narration make clear and evident:

1. From the sweet Communion which their Fathers had with God before either
Temple or Tabernacle was built: and if so, then he would not have them look at
it as unsafe for them, or as an utter ruin to Religion, if that both the
Temple and the Ordinances of the Temple were destroyed in themselves, and
fulfilled in Him. Three passages of Abraham's communion with God, Steven does
relate and maintain that he had them before any of Moses his Customs were
known.

1. God did effectually call him; which call he did also obey, (2, 3, 4. ver.)
though as yet he knew no Circumcision.

2. God gives him a trial of his Faith, wherein he found Abraham faithful, 5,
6, 7. verses. God promised to give him the land of Canaan for a Possession, but
he gave him not a foots breadth. He promised to give it unto his Seed, when as
yet he had no child: and when God gave him Seed, yet they should sojourn in a
strange Land, and be in Bondage four hundred years.

3. God gave him the Covenant of Circumcision, in the words of the Text. And
Abraham in the strength of the Blessing of God begat Isaac, and circumcised him
according to Gods direction; and all this before Moses gave any Ordinances unto
them to keep; and before either Temple, or Tabernacle was built. From hence we
have heard, that the soul may have very spiritual and gracious communion with
God, before it partake in any seal of Church Fellowship. For Abraham's Faith was
thoroughly tried before he had the Seal of Church Covenant given him. We heard
also this propounded, which is the words of the Text, that God gave unto
Abraham the Covenant of Circumcision: which Doctrine does imply in it four
principal parts, all of them serving to clear Stevens meaning.

1. The Author and manner of dispensing it: God gave, so it was by Gift.

2. The Articles of it; and they are to be inquired into.

3. The Confederates, and they are expressed; God on the one side, and Abraham
and his Seed on the other side.

4. The Seal of it, Circumcision, which was also the Seal of Church Covenant.
These four parts do yield so many Notes; the first of them was spoken unto in
the last point formerly handled. Now for the second and third parts, (to wit,
the Articles of the Covenant, and the Confederates) we comprehend them both in
this one Note.

That in the Covenant which God made with Abraham, God gave himself to be a God
to Abraham, and to his Seed; and received Abraham and his Seed to be a People
unto himself; and the chiefest of this seed, the Lord Jesus Christ, he took to
be the Mediator, or Surety of this Covenant between them both. This is the sum
of the Articles, and of the Confederates: what the Articles be, is not here
mentioned; but Genesis 17.7. they be, (for to speak of Circumcision before the
Covenant, it is but a seal to a blank) where the Lord expresses himself thus,
saying, I will stablish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after
thee, in their generations, for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee,
and to thy seed after thee. As for other parts of the Covenant, they were more
properly given unto himself, as to be exceeding fruitful, and to be the Father
of many Nations, to inherit the land of Canaan, etc. those things were more
peculiarly proper unto Abraham, though they have also a moral and universal use
and force in all the Faithful, whom the Lord does make fruitful, and gives
them a Nail in his Tabernacle. In the Covenant these three things are implied:

1. God gave himself to be a God unto Abraham, and to his Seed: this is such an
Argument as the strength and wisdom of men and angels cannot unfold: It is a
Catechism-point, and by way of Catechism to be opened, (as the Lord has
revealed it) I mean, plainly, and familiarly.

2 God did receive Abraham, and his Seed, to be his People: this is employed,
and necessarily inferred by the rule of Relatives: for if God do give himself
to be a God to Abraham, and to his Seed, and does not firstly require it of
Abraham and of his Seed that they should give up themselves to be his People,
then it must of necessity follow, that the Lord will undertake to receive them
to be a People unto himself, and so he will perform both his own part of the
Covenant, and Abraham's part also, according to what we read, Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8.
The Lord thy God has chosen thee to be a special People unto himself: Not
because ye were in number more then any people, (for ye were the fewest of all
people: but because he loved you, and would keep the Oath we^ he had sworn unto
your fathers, therefore has be brought you out with a mighty hand, etc. when
as they were in a land of Idols, and the Lord lifted up his hand to have
destroyed them there; yet he remembered, and wrought for his own Names sake: So
that though they were far off, yet the Lord (to make good his Covenant) brought
them out of Egypt, and so from one Covenant to another: by all which things it
does appear, that the Lord will keep our part of the Covenant also; and this is
necessarily implied, in that he promises to be a God unto Abraham, and to his
Seed, and there is no Restipulation on Abraham's part; we see this likewise held
forth; Deuteronomy. 29.1. and 13. where the Lord enters into another Covenant with
them in the land of Moab, besides the Covenant which he made with them in
Horeb; and in this Covenant he does establish them to be a People unto himself,
as well as give himself unto them to be their God, ver. 13. And as God required
it of them to circumcise the outward man, even the foreskin of their children;
so he will also circumcise them, taking possession of them, and circumcising
their hearts, taking away the stoniness of them, and so fitting them to be a
Temple for himself to dwell in.

3. The Lord in this Covenant takes the chiefest of Abraham's Seed, even the
Lord Jesus Christ, to be the Mediator and Surety of the Covenant, and unto him
do all the Promises belong; so the Apostle does expound it, Gal. 3.16. Unto
Abraham, and to his seed were the Promises made: He says not, And to his
seeds, as of many, but as of one, And to thy seed; which is Christ. And so by
him are all the Promises and Blessings of the Covenant conveyed unto Abraham,
and to his seed, (his faithful seed) all the world over: and therefore he is
called the Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb. 7.22. meaning the Covenant of
Grace, Heb. 3.6. These three things do contain the sum of the Covenant of
Grace, and of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and would therefore be plainly
discovered unto Christians: As,

1. What is the meaning of this, that God gave himself unto Ahraham?

2. How does he take Abraham, and his seed, and make them his People?

3. How does he take Jesus Christ, and make him the surety of the Covenant
between them both? For the Covenant is established, and so is a firm, and sure,
and everlasting Covenant: Now in this gift, that God gave himself unto Abraham,
Observe 3. things, 1. The Blessing given. 2. The Order in which it was given.
3. The manner of giving it.


1. In the Blessing given: when God does by Covenant give himself to be a God,
it does imply 2. things.

1. That God does give himself, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; the
whole Nature of God, and all the Persons of the Godhead, with all the
Attributes of that Nature, and all the Offices of those Persons: For it is not
a confused God, that vanishes away in a general imagination, but God
distinctly considered in his Persons, Attributes, Properties, etc. thus the
Lord gives himself to Abrabam and to his seed: I will be a Father unto you, 2
Cor. 6.28. and that is not spoken to the Jews only, but unto all the Israel of
God: He gives the Son also, Isa. 9.6. Unto us a Son is born, etc. and God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son: Joh. 3.16. And for the
Holy Spirit, This is my Covenant with them, Joh. 16.7. and 13.
says the Lord, (Isa. 59.21.) My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words that I
have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the
mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed from henceforth, and
for ever: and this is it which the Apostle also says, Gal. 4.6. God has sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father: thus the
Lord gives himself unto his servants from one generation to another. If
therefore the Lord God the Father give himself, he will not be wanting to draw
his people unto the Son, Joh. 6.44. No man can come to me, except the Father
which has sent me draw him: And what is the chief business, and work that the
Son has to do about us? No man can have fellowship with the Father, but he
must have fellowship with Jesus Christ; so our Savior himself says, Joh.
14.6. No man can come unto the Father but by me: this therefore the Lord Jesus
Christ will do for all the elect seed of Abraham: He will open their eyes to
see, that the Father did not draw them to Damnation, nor utter desolation, but
unto Salvation by him: this has he promised to do. And if it be the work of
the Spirit of God to establish us both in the Father and the Son, then will he
convince the world of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment, Joh. 16.8. to 11.
and so will stablish our hearts in the Comforts of the Lord our God; and this
is that which the Apostle prays for the Ephesians, chap. 3.16. That the Lord
would grant unto them according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened
with might by his spirit in the inner man: and hence it comes to pass, that
what the Lord would have us to do, he is present by his Spirit to teach us, and
to strengthen us, and so to do it for us: All these things does the Lord work
for Abraham, and for his seed; so that look what is meet for a Father to do, or
for a Brother to do, or for the Spirit of God to do, that will the Lord do unto
his elect ones; and so he gives all his Attributes, and they are even God
himself; and therefore when Moses desired to see his Glory (and he desired it
from the Grace that God had showed him) Exodus 34.6. the Lord proclaimed his
Name before him, Jehovah, Jehovah, strong, merciful, and gracious,
long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth: thus does the Lord give
himself, and all the Persons in the Godhead (as they are called) and
Attributes, they are no more, nor other then God himself.

2. And as God himself is employed; so when God is given by Covenant, all the
Ordinances, and Creatures, and Works of God are given also: For so it was in
all Covenants of old time; when Jehosaphat makes a Covenant with Ahab King of
Israel, 2 King. 22.4. then, I am as thou art, and my people as thy people, and
my ho ses as thy horses, and all that he has is for Ahabs service; as the King
goes, so goes his strength: So thus it does come to pass, that if the Lord
of Hosts be for us, and give himself unto us, then also does he give us his
eternal Election, and Redemption, and whatsoever he has wrought for the
salvation of his Elect: He has not so dealt with any Nation, (Psalm. 147.20.)
but only with the Israel of God, unto them has he given his Laws, and showed
them his Judgments: And for his Creatures, they are all given to be for his
people, to whom he has given himself: If God be a God unto Abraham, then shall
all Gods people be sor him; Melchizedeck shall bless him; Aner, Eshchol, and
Mamre shall be confederates with him. The Sun, Moon, and Stars shall fight in
their courses for the people of God; the Sea shall give way unto them, to pass
through it on dry ground: What ailed you, ye streams of Jordan, to go backward?
Why, all the creatures of God must stoop unto the people of God, when he is in
Covenant with them: this is that which the Lord promises unto his people, Hos.
2.18. to 22. when the Lord shall marry them to him in faithfulness. In that day
(says the Lord) I will make a Covenant for them with the beasts of the field,
and with the fowls of the heaven, and with the creeping things of the ground;
and I will break the bow, and the sword, and the battle out of the earth, and I
will make them to lie down safely. And it shall come to pass in that day, I
will hear the Heavens, and they shall hear the Earth, and the earth shall hear
the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and they shall hear Jezreel. Whether Paul
or Apollo; or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death, or things present, or
things to come, all are yours, 1 Cor. 3.22. This is the large Gift of Gods
Covenant: Nay, and (which is wonderful, and beyond all comprehension) when I
say all the creatures and ordinances of God are ours, the very expression of
the phrase does imply that the Lord gives himself to be the staff and
strength of them, so that you shall see the presence of God in them; he will
not only give a man Wife, and Children, and Ordinances, and Providence, but he
himself will be in all these, and bless his people in the enjoyment of them
all, so as that they shall enjoy God in all: Psalm. 16.5, 6. The Lord is the
portion of mine inheritance. He saw the Lord in what he did enjoy; and when he
had any thing, it was in God; and when he wanted any thing, it was supplied in
him. The like did Jacob find, when his brother Esau came against him with 400.
men, and the Lord turned him from the fierceness of his wrath: here was the
Covenant of Abraham, the Lord gave him the mouth, and arms, and tears of his
brother Esau; what says Jacob to all this? Genesis 33.10. I have seen thy face as
though I had seen the face of God: He saw the power and mercy of God in
changing the countenance of his elder Brother: and that is it which sweetneth
all that a man does enjoy; the loving kindness of God in all, is the Blessing
of all: and this likewise does Jacob acknowledge, Genesis 33.5. These are the
Children which God of his grace has given me; and so he looked at them, as
Gods wives, and children, and servants, and cattle; and this is the very life
of the Covenant of Grace, when as the Lord is wrapped up in all his Blessings,
when as he gives himself, and in himself his Christ, and in Christ, Peter, and
Paul, and all things unto his Church. This is the main thing given, God
himself, the God of the Covenant, his Persons, Nature, Ordinances, Providence,
and now Abraham is made the Lord of the world, and so the Apostle does
interpret it, Romans 4.13. The Promise that he should be heir of the world, was
not to Abraham, nor to his seed through the Law, but through the righteousness
of Faith; and this is that which Abraham did receive, in receiving the Lord to
be his God.

2. In the order of giving the Covenant, there is something to be observed:

1. God gives first, and not the Creature, it was not Abraham that gave unto
God first; for which of all the creatures shall offer a Covenant unto the
mighty God? Romans 11.35. Who has given unto him first? and it shall be
recompensed unto him again; the Lord has the pre-eminence in giving; for what
should Abraham give unto God, if God give not something unto him first? he is
the first giver.

2. He is also the first thing in order that is given: For does he give the
world first? or ordinances first? or any other spiritual or temporal blessings
first? No doubtless, the Lord is the first thing that he gives by his
Covenant, and with himself all things else also; Romans 8.32. and there is the
precedence of Jesus Christ; he is given, and in him all spiritual blessings, as
the Apostle says, Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus. And this for the order in giving the Covenant, not obedience
first, nor faith first, nor any thing else first, but Himself is Donum primum,
and primarium, and in him all his goodness.

3. For the Manner of giving; in that he gives himself, there is implied both
the freedom and eternety of the gift: Firmness therefore, and that unto
eternity. In that he gives himself, it must of necessity be done freely; for
what can any creature give to purchase God? if a man could give thousands of
worlds, they were not enough to redeem or purchase one soul; and if he had
millions of worlds to give, what were they all to purchase so great a gift as
God himself is? therefore it must needs be of free gift; for the creature can
do nothing to prevent God: God indeed may give with a purpose to receive back
again; but he looks to receive no more then what he first gives us, and
gives us strength of Will and Deed to give him back again. He required this of
Abraham, that he should walk before him, and be upright, Genesis 17.1. but the
very truth is, though Abraham shall perform these things in an Evangelical
manner; yet God himself does undertake in this Covenant to be the Author and
Finisher both of his Faith and Obedience, Heb. 12.2. And this does argue the
marvelous freedom of the Covenant of Grace: for the Lord offers it out of
his Grace, without the foresight of Faith, or Works; for he undertaketh to give
both Will and Deed of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13.

But it may be said,

Truly then it had not been of Free Grace: Abraham did give himself, it was
because God did take him first; and therefore it is that the Apostle tells us
that the Lord took hold of Paul, that he might take hold upon the Lord, Phil.
3.12. I follow after, if that I may apprehend that, for which also I am
apprehended of Christ Jesus: is not he the Father that has bought us? has not
he made us, and established us? Deuteronomy. 32.6. If we give up our selves unto the
Lord, it is because the Lord has taken hold upon our hearts first.

But does not the Lord require of him to circumcise his seed the eighth day?

So he does indeed, he does give him Circumcision, and gives him the grace to
circumcise his children: I know that the Lord does call for many things under a
covenant of Grace, but then the Lord does

1. Work those things in them: And,

2. He will have them know, that those things are nothing, without the working
of his Grace. It is true, he may circumcise Isaac, but who shall circumcise the
heart of Isaac? it is a small matter to circumcise the flesh: so it is a small
matter for us to baptize with water; but who must wash us from our sins, save
only the Lord our God? so that he does secretly intimate, that what his poor
servants do outwardly, he would do it inwardly and effectually. The children of
Israel shall at the Lords commandment march about the city Jericho seven days
together, and not speak a word, and hereby the walls of the city shall fall down
flat; of what use were these weapons to such an end? what would the Lord show
his people hereby? hereby he teaches them to know by what ability and power to
bring mighty things to pass: they shall do duties as the Lord commands them,
but he himself will breath in them to make them effectual. For though we do
never so much, yet we cannot reach unto the accomplishment of any good thing;
not by might, nor by strength, but by my Spirit: the Lord therefore by his
Spirit must work all our works for us: Here is the freeness of Gods Covenant,
in that the Lord gives himself first, Jer. 32.40. I will make an everlasting
Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good: but I
will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. You may
speak of Conditions in this kind: but the Lord does undertake both for his own
part, and for our parts also: for as the Covenant is free, so the Lord will
freely maintain, and preserve all his Elect, and all from the immutable Nature
of God; it is not possible that God should lie: I am Jehovah, I change not,
Mal. 3.6. therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed: Hence springs our
Eternity, and perseverance unto it (Romans 11.29.) for the gifts and callings of
God are without repentance: And I am persuaded (says the Apostle Paul) that he
that has begun this work will perfect it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil.
1.6. The Lord took your Father Abram, and brought him from the other side of
the flood: Josh. 24.3. and he being called, obeyed, Heb. 11.8. Thus (mind ye)
the Lord deals in the Covenant of Grace; he looks toward those that look
not toward him, as is held forth, Hos. 3.3. where the Lord bids the Prophet
love a woman that was an adulteress, and say unto her, Thou shall be for me,
and I will be for thee; this is a branch of the Covenant, when the Lord does
undertake to receive Abraham and his seed unto himself; his giving himself unto
them does breed a reciprocal returning of them unto him. Now it may be demanded,

How the Lord did take Abraham and his seed to be his people?

By a double Act: As,

1. Of Preparation, not on Abraham's part, nor on his seeds part, but on his own
part, the Lord prepared them.

2. The Lord did invest him with the Blessings of this Covenant.

1. For Preparation: the Lord prepares them by a double work of his Spirit,
which are manifest in all the seed of Abraham.

1. By a spirit of bondage, whereby he cutteth off the seed of Abraham from all
worldly intanglements, and delights: thus God took Abraham, and brought him
from beyond the flood, and so does he take men off from their countries and
fathers houses; he separates them from all such things, that he might draw them
unto himself: thus he dealt with the children of Israel, and called them to be
a singular People unto himself, Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. Thus does the Lord deal with
all those, whom he receives to be a people unto himself: by this spirit of
Bondage, he draws them from all their sinful lusts, and passions, so as that
they can find no life in them, nor any hope of mercy at all in any thing: by
this Bondage, the Lord sets home unto the consciences of men, the weight and
danof their sins, and binds them under the sense of his wrath unto fear of
Damnation. The Romans first received the spirit of Bondage to fear, before ever
they came to receive the Spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.25. But thus the Lord does
even shut a Soul out of doors, that he may open to him another and a better way.

2. The Lord also prepares his people by a Spirit of burning, which upon a
Spirit of Bondage he does shed abroad into the hearts of men: this we read of,
Mal. 4.1. Behold, the day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud,
and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day that comes shall
burn them up, and it shall leave them neither root nor branch. It is spoken of
the Ministry of John Baptist, which did burn like an oven against all the
Scribes and Pharisees, and left them neither the root of Abraham's Covenant, nor
the branch of their own good Works. He cutteth them off from the Covenant of
Abraham, Mat. 3.9. Think not to say within your selves that you have Abraham to
your Father; for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham: and so by cutting them off from the Root, he leaves
them no ground to trust on. From their good Works also the Lord Jesus Christ
cutteth them off, Mat. 6.2. When thou do thine alms, sound not a Trumpet
before thee as the Hypocrites do, that they may have the glory of men: and
verse. 5. When thou prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are, etc. and
verse. 16. When ye Fast, ye shall not be as the Hypocrites are, of a sad
countenance, etc. This was a Spirit of Burning which the Lord conveyed by the
Ministry of Christ, and of John Baptist, to burn up all the Hypocrites like
stubble; and the beauty of their works were blasted by it: and this is Gods
usual manner of dealing. Now there are many under a spirit of bondage, that
never came under a spirit of burning; and they being convinced of sin, and of
the danger thereof, yet hope to wrestle it out, and work it out by their own
performances, till the spirit of Burning come and consume all that false
confidence. But when the spirit of Burning comes, he then blasteth all the
fruits and branches of their righteousness, and burns up all that a man has
wrought, or can work. And this is that which the Prophet Esaias, chap. 4.4.
speaks of, that the Lord will purge away the filth of the Daughter of Zion,
with a Spirit of Judgment, and of Burning; the one is a spirit of
Sanctification, and the other is a consuming Fire, which forces them not to
build any comfort upon any works that they have done: this may Hypocrites reach
unto in their judgments, so as that they may be convinced that they have
neither root within them, nor branch growing upon them; and yet in the mean
while they may not come unto a Spirit of Adoption: but hereby also the Lord
uses to prepare his people. Some bless themselves in worldly courses, and
never came unto a spirit of bondage. Some do find comfort in their
performances, and never saw the vanity of their own Righteousness: But there
are those whom the Lord does carry further, unto a spirit of burning, even unto
a sensible feeling of Gods wrath burning against whatsoever is as stubble, (and
such is a man's own gifts, and parts, and worth) so that now the poor soul
finds that he has no Root, not any sure mercy of the Covenant of Grace, that
he can rest upon: no green branch of righteousness remaining, but all is
blasted and broken in pieces, according to what the Prophet Isay says, chap.
40.6, 7. All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of
the field: the grass withers, and the flower fades; because the Spirit of
the Lord blows upon it: and so the Lord comes to leave a man neither Root
nor Branch: For by a spirit of Bondage the Lord blasteth all flesh: but when it
comes unto the goodliness of flesh, that is consumed by a spirit of Burning.

2. As God thus prepares us for himself: so he does give himself unto us, and
takes possession of us by his blessed Spirit: the Father gives himself and
his Son by his blessed Spirit, (for the Spirit it is by which he does visit the
hearts of his people) and this is the main Blessing of the Covenant of Grace.
For the better clearing of it, it may be demanded,

How does the Lord give himself unto his People, receive him?

1. They being thus prepared, made an habitation of God through the Spirit,
Ephesians. 2.22. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into your hearts, etc. Gal. 4.6. (He speaks not of sons by actual
Regeneration, but by Gods eternal Counsel.) The fame Spirit is also called the
Comforter, whom Jesus Christ has promised to send, Joh. 16.7, 8, 9. If I
depart, I will send you the Comforter; and when he is come, he will reprove the
world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment; of sin, because they believe
not in me: this the Holy Ghost convinces men of, to be the greatest misery of
the soul, that they have not believed upon Jesus Christ. And look as a talent
of gold, or some weighty metal falling into a vessel of water, dasheth out all
that is in the vessel, to make room for it self: so the Lord Jesus Christ
coming into the soul, dasheth out all watery confidences, and makes room for
himself. And in very deed, because the heart of man is not only like unto
water, but is hard as ye, and strong; therefore the Spirit of God comes like
fire, and melts the iron stone of the heart, and softneth it into flesh; so
that now the soul is utterly at a loss, not only in regard of his sins, but in
regard of his best works also; and is most of all convinced of his unbelief.
Now this holy Spirit of God being thus shed abroad into the heart, at the very
first entrance of it into the soul, as it does chiefly convince the soul of
unbelief; so,

2. The same Spirit works Faith in the soul, to yield himself unto the Lord,
to receive the Lord Jesus Christ; and this is a true saving work; he now
submits unto the will of God: so that the Spirit of God becomes unto the
soul not only as a Spirit of burning, to consume all that is like stubble; but
does also melt the iron stone of the heart, and softneth it into flesh, that
the word may take deep impression in it: Now there is room for Jesus Christ,
now Faith is wrought there; and now a soul can plead with God by Faith in
Prayer: he sees there is no former safe hold of his Covenant that he can
plead, nor any righteousness of his own, but such as hypocrites will quarrel
for, and rise up to maintain, as they did against John Baptist, pleading their
covenant, and their righteousness: with these things a poor soul is not
satisfied: but unto you that fear my Name, shall the Son of righteousness arise
with healing in his wings, etc. Mal. 4.2. Herein is implied such a reverent
fear, as distrusting our selves, gives all the honor to the Lord Jesus: this
Fear of the Lord accompanies Faith, and is of like nature to it: both of them
distrusting our selves, and both of them giving all honor to Christ; the one
out of confidence in him, the other out of reverence to him.

Thus it is in our Effectual calling; the Spirit of God taking possession in
our hearts, and working this Faith in us, thereby we submit unto the Lord; and
this is Faith in Jesus Christ, that makes us one with Christ: for our
Effectual calling brings us to be one with him, 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful,
by whom ye were called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ. This
fellowship stands in two things:

1. In the unity of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord is
one Spirit.

2. In a lively Faith on our parts. So that by Believing this is the first
thing we do, we yield unto the work of God; when this stronger man comes, to
wit, Christ by his Spirit, we yield up all our armor to him; and herein
stands our coming on to be in Christ, and in God the Father, by this Spirit
of God that takes possession of the heart, and has not only burnt up root and
branch of our Legal righteousness, but has also melted us unto a soft frame to
yield up our selves unto the Lord; and now we are fit for any duty, the Lord
having possessed us with his powerful presence: herein lies our Effectual
calling; and this is true spiritual union between the Lord and our souls. Now
this Faith thus wrought in our Effectual calling, is not built upon any
conditional promise of Grace preexistent in us, nor can it be built upon any:
but upon some absolute free Promise of God unto the soul, according to what we
read, Isai. 43.22. to 25. Thou have not called upon me O Jacob, but thou have
been weary of me O Israel; thou have not brought me the small cattle of thy
burnt-offerings, neither have thou honored me with thy sacrifices: I have not
caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with incense: Thou have
bought me no sweet cane with money, neither have thou filled me with the fat of
thy sacrifices; but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied
me with thine iniquities: I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. In all this we see the
absolute freeness of the Grace of God. But if the Promise be conditional, it is
a condition subsequent to Faith, not antecedent before it.

You will say,

I pray you consider it: Was this work wrought before Conversion, or after?
Every Christian knows, that all works before conversion are but dross, and
dung: to apply promises to such works, were indeed to build upon a sandy
foundation. What say you then to works after conversion? All works after
conversion are fruits of Faith; and if they proceed from Faith, then faith went
before, then a man's faith was not built upon a conditional promise; how is it
possible that it should? when as all works after conversion, are either fruits
of Faith, or else they are no true sanctification; then faith went before in
order of Nature, and so was not built upon works, but works upon it.

Our Faith closes with Christ upon a promise of Free Grace, Calvin. Inst. l.
3. c. 2. s. 29.
otherwise (as says Calvin) my faith would always be trembling and wavering,
as my works be. Upon a promise of Free Grace therefore my Faith is built, as
upon the promise of God in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, 2 Cor.
5.18, 19. The word is (it may be) spoken outwardly unto all Christians: but if
God do set it home particularly unto any Soul, that man receives this Gift of
God, and it is made his own: First, he believes the promise of Free Grace, and
then afterward come other promises, that do bear witness unto the right
application of that promise unto the soul: but I am first built upon a promise
of Free Grace, or else there is no true closing with Jesus Christ: well then,
being thus united unto Christ, from this union with Christ do flow all other
blessings and benefits of the Covenant of Grace: for hence springs communion
with Christ in all spiritual blessings, that the Lord has wrought for us in
him; and they are two of them Relative blessings (as they are called by
Divines) and two of them positive blessings. The two Former are laid up in Gods
own Hand, and are not created in us: the other two positive Blessings are
created in us.

1. For the uncreated Blessings, They are 1. Adoption. 2. Justification.
And they spring immediately (simul and semel) from the former union with
Christ; for as soon as ever the Spirit of God is in our hearts, and has
wrought faith, that we do not spurn against Jesus Christ, but receive him, now
is the Divine Nature of Christ in us, and we are now become the sons of God, as
Christ himself is. Look as in a man's first natural conception, as soon as ever
one does live, there is an heir of Adam, even so soon as the soul lives: so it
is in the new spiritual Birth; as soon as the Holy Ghost comes, and has
wrought this Faith, now is the Seed of God in us, the Life of Christ, and the
Spirit of God; and now we are the Sons of God, as we read Joh. c. 12. As many
as received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God. Immediately upon
this union with Christ, we are Sons by Adoption; and as we are adopted, so
likewise our sins are now imputed unto Christ, and his righteousness unto us,
and so our persons are justified. For how, and when was Adams sin imputed unto
us? Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, in sin did my mother conceive
me: So soon as over there was life, it was the life of Adam, and then the
imputation of Adams sin falls immediately upon the soul. So when we do
receive Christ by this living Faith, having the Life of Christ in us, we have
the righteousness of Christ (the second Adam) imputed to us. For what does the
child in the womb? though it does neither good nor evil, but is merely
passive, yet sinful it is, and a child of Adam: So also in this our
Regeneration, the soul receives Christ by that Faith which the Lord has
wrought in it, whereby also it is made capable of the privilege of Adoption;
and so the Lord accounts us his children, and imputes the Righteousness of
his Son unto us, whereby we are Justified. These things do dwell in Gods
Bosom, and the meaning of them is afterward revealed unto the soul; but
communicated they are, both that of Adoption, and this of Justification, by
this gift of faith wrought in us. But we are still upon the first work of
conversion, wherein a Christian is only passive, and receptive; and truly it
must needs be so in the first work of God upon us.

2. Now for the Positive Blessings that are wrought in us: They are 1.
Sanctification. 2. Glorification.


1. When we are called, then are we Sanctified, then are we Glorified, 1 Cor.
1.2. as in our natural conception, as soon as ever the child lives, Adams sin
is first imputed, and then there is a proneness in it to carry it captive unto
fin, and to make it backward unto any goodness: So when the Life of Christ is
dispensed unto the soul, now the Lord comes to convey with it Justification, or
pardon of sin, and then there is a promise in a Justified person to walk in the
spirit, Gal. 5.25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. By
Faith our hearts come to be purified, Acts 15.9. and the same Spirit quickneth
us unto holy duties, so that we live, yet not we, but Christ lives in us;
neither are we only in his hand, but the Spirit sanctifying, draws us into an
holy confederacy to serve God in Family, Church, and Commonwealth; and this
Sanctification grows, and increases more and more, 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 These. 4.1.
and 5.23.

2. The other positive gift is Glorification, which we read of, Romans 8.30. Whom
he called, them also he justified; and whom he justified, them also he
glorified: this the Apostle Peter mentions, 1 Pet. 5.10. The God of all grace
has called us into his eternal glory it Christ Jesus: And in truth, he has
begun the work from the time that he first began to sanctify us, 2 Timothy 1.9.
He has saved us, and called us: from the very first time that God works upon
the soul graciously, there is a glorious work in that soul; and others may see
it, though himself sometimes sees nothing that he has received. Thus we see
the second branch of the Doctrine opened, How the Lord does receive Abraham and
his seed unto himself, preparing them by a spirit of Bondage, and of Burning,
and then taking possession of them savingly by the inhabitation of the blessed
Spirit; the same Spirit begetting Faith, we are alive in Jesus Christ, and so
come to be Adopted, and Justified in him: the same Faith which receives
Adoption and Justification, does begin to stir a little, and to breath forth
into gracious desires, and some holy mourning, and begins now to put forth
such works as the holy Ghost carries the soul an end in; working all our works
in us, and for us.

3. Now for the third and last part of the Doctrine: The Lord took the chiefest
of Abraham's seed to be the Mediator of this Covenant, unto whom all the
Promises were made, Gal. 3.16.

How did the Lord constitute him so to be?

1. By a double Act: first, Jesus Christ the Son of the Virgin Mary, to be one
Person with the second in Trinity, hereby laying a ground of a firm Mediation
between God and us: for Jesus Christ being of Gods Nature, therefore he will be
faithful unto God; and being of our Nature, therefore he will be compassionate
toward us. And here is the root of all the life and power of this Mediation,
to wit, this Personal Union of the Son of man, with the second Person in
Trinity, which is a firm and everlasting Union

2. By Gods giving him to be a Covenant, Isa. 42.6. I will give thee for a
Covenant of the People, for a Light of the Gentiles. What is meant hereby? the
Lord means, that he gives him to be a Mediator of this Covenant:

1. To receive from God all the promises and gracious gifts, whatsoever is
requisite for him to be, King, Priest, and Prophet; and all these things he
receives from the hand of the Father, Col. 1.19. for it pleased the Father
that in him should all fullness dwell: thus he becomes a plentiful Redeemer.
And as the Lord gave him to be a Covenant, so he gives him also to work all
things needful for our Redemption; partly by his passion, and obedience unto
the Death of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. and partly by fulfilling all the
righteousness of the Law, Mat. 3.15. The Lord Jesus Christ did fully accomplish
whatsoever was requisite for him to accomplish in his own Person.

2. He does perform all things needful for the Application of this Redemption
unto our souls, Isa. 26.12. And to this end, he it is that sheadeth abroad his
Spirit into our hearts, Joh. 15.26. and 16.7. and when this blessed Spirit
comes, he applies unto the soul all this gracious Redemption of Jesus Christ,
by giving Jesus Christ and all the Fruits of his redemption, and by working all
those blessed works, that the souls of his people come to be partakers of; and
so performs all those conditions that are required on our parts: if it be
needful for us to have Faith, he will work it in us; if it be needful for us to
live a life of Faith, he will help us so to live, for it is not of our selves,
it is the gift of God: Ephesians. 2.9. Thus has the Lord made him a complete
Mediator of this holy Covenant; and whatsoever we receive, we receive from him:
for unto him first, as the head of the Church, are all blessings given; and
unto us, all promises in him are Yea, and in him Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. for though
Christ be not a sinner in his own Person, yet in respect of his Members, he is
many times lost in them, though not in himself; and poor in them, though not in
himself: for us therefore he receives the Promises of God; and that is the
great security of them, that they are laid up safe in him, and belong unto us
if we have union with the Head; and in him we perform whatsoever God requires;
whether we pray, or preach, or hear, we do all in the Name of Jesus Christ,
going forth in his strength, and power: Col. 3.17. Thus is the Lord Jesus
Christ a firm surety of this better Covenant, stablished upon better Promises,
Heb. 8.6.

In the first place: difference between the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant
of Grace. In the Covenant of Works,

The Lord offers Himself as a Father, if they shall keep his Laws, and obey
his voice, then they shall be a peculiar treasure unto him above all people,
Exodus 19.5, 6. This also they undertake to do, Deuteronomy. 5.27. All that the Lord
our God shall speak unto thee, we will hear it, and do it; but, O says God,
that there was such an heart in them, verse. 29. When they rebelled, he did not
pardon them graciously, but the Angel whom he sends with them, he bids
them beware of him, and obey his voice, and provoke him not, for he will not
pardon your transgressions, for my Name is in him: In the Covenant of Grace he
will, but not in this: here is indeed a conditional Redeemer and Savior; and
so it is expressed, Isa. 63.8, 9, 10. He was their Savior; in all their
affliction he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them in his
love, etc. But they rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit, therefore he was
turned to be their enemy, and fought against them: with many of them God was
not well pleased (almost with none of them) but overthrew them in the
wilderness: Thus in the Covenant of Works all is given upon condition of
obedience.

The Lord giving himself, Relative Union, expressed, Jer. 32.32. Which my
Covenant they brake, although I was an Husband to them. He was married unto
them in Church Covenant, this was some kind of union: He was their God, and
they were his peculiar people; and yet the Lord cast them off, a generation of
his wrath, from this Marriage-Covenant between them and him: from this union
there springs a kind of Faith, by which the soul cleaves unto the Lord in
some measure; else there could not be this Marriage-Union; and this Faith is
that of which you read, Psalm. 106.12, 13. They believed his words; they sang
his praise: they soon forgot his works: they waited not for his counsel: So
also Exodus 14.31. it is said, They believed the Lord, and his servant Moses:
this is that Faith which men may receive, and yet may Apostate from it, spoken
of, Heb. 6.3, to 6. For a while some do believe, and in time of temptation fall
away, Luke 8.13. But all that Faith was never grounded upon any free promise of
Grace, but all was built upon Ordinances, and Duties, and upon no higher
ground. In the 2 Chronicles. 13.8, to 12. marvellously strong are the expressions of
Abijah, when Jeroboam came against him; You think to withstand the Kingdom of
the Lord in the hand of David, etc. Have not you cast out the Priests of the
Lord? says he, etc. But as for us, the Lord is our God, and we have not
forsaken him; and the Priests which minister unto the Lord are the Sons of
Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business; and they burn unto the Lord
every morning, and every evening Burat-sacrifices, and sweet Incense; the
Shewbread also they set in order upon the pure Table, and the Candlestick of
gold, with the Lamps thereof, to burn every evening: for we keep the charge of
the Lord our God, but ye have forsaken him. And behold, God himself is with us
for our Captain, and his Priests with sounding Trumpets to cry Alarm against
you. O ye children of Israel, fight ye not against the Lord God of your
fathers, for you shall not prosper. Thus we see what Faith he did express; and
hereupon (verse. 18.) the children of Israel were brought under, and the
children of Judah prevailed; and yet this Kings heart was not perfect with the
Lord his God: 2 King. 15.3. and yet (mind you) a strong confidence he had,
that the Lord was with him, and that he would be present with his own
ordinances; there Faith built upon fellowship with Ordinances, like unto that
Faith in the Scripture before alleged, Luke 8.13. Men are affected with the
Word, and believe, and find comfort; and all this springs from that Relative
communion which they have with the Lord; they find refreshing in their way and
work, and many times take it for the very Seal of the Spirit of God; all which
may be, and often is found in Hypocrites: but here is the difference; In a
Covenant of Works God gives himself conditionally; in that of Grace,
absolutely: in both, he makes a Covenant, in the one of Grace, the other of
Works, in which the voice of the Lord is, If you be true to me, then I will not
renounce you; and in this Covenant is Faith found, but it is only built upon
such changes as they find in themselves, and will in the end vanish utterly
away.

There is a Difference also that springs from the fruits of these two
Covenants in their continuance: semblance of Justification, and Adoption, and a
kind of Sanctification, yet they endure but for a season; and therefore he
calls them Lo-ammi, for ye are not my people; and Lo-ruhamah, for I will no
more have mercy, though sometimes they were his people, and he then had mercy
on them: they may also have pardon of sin for a season, Psalm. 78.37, 38. Being
full of compassion, he forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not; yet they
were such whose heart was not upright with him, neither were they steadfast in
his Covenant: this is plainly held forth in the Parable, Mat. 18.23, to the
end: when the servant had not wherewith to pay his Lord, he fell down and
worshipped him, saying, Lord, have patience with me, and I will pay thee all,
his Lord was moved with compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the Debt:
but when he had not like compassion on his fellow servant, then his Lord was
wroth, and charged all his iniquities upon him, and cast him into prison until
he should pay all that was due unto him: So that this pardon is not
everlasting, but only respite from outward punishment, and from inward pangs of
conscience many times; and this they take for pardon of sin, and acceptance in
Jesus Christ, when indeed they are deluded: So likewise their Sanctification is
but for a moment, they come at last some of them to tread under foot the Blood
of the Covenant wherewith they were sanctified, Heb. 10.29. For, Christ was but
a conditional Redeemer unto them: they had only gifts of Tongues, and
utterance, and wisdom, and discerning of Spirits, and a common Faith: which
things are not that Sanctification which is a fruit of Saving Faith; but only
such gifts as do sanctify them unto the work of the Ministry perhaps, or
Magistracy, and fit them for houshold-government, or the like: and so much
positive work there is in them, as does make them in some measure fit for the
work, or service which they are called unto. For a little more explaining of
this:

Sanctification which is in Gods children?

God forbid. Hypocrites two sorts (and you shall find them in the Church of
God) some are washed Swine, others are Goats.

1. The Swine are those of whom our Savior Christ says, that they return unto
their wallowing in the mire: like unto these are such men, as at the hearing of
some Sermon have been stomack-sick of their sins, and have rejected their
wicked courses, but yet the swines heart remains in them; and as a swine,
when he comes where the puddle is, will readily lie down in it; so will these
men wallow in the puddle of uncleanness, when their conscience is not pricked
for the present: but these are a grosser kind of Hypocrites.

2. There is another sort that go far beyond these: and those are Goats, so
called, Mat. 25.32, 33. and these are clean beasts, such as chew the cud,
meditate upon ordinances; and they divide the hoof; they live both in a
general, and particular calling, and will not be idle: they are also fit for
sacrifice: what then is wanting? Truly they are not Sheep all this while, they
are but Goats; yet a Goat does loath that which a Swine will readily break
into: but where then do they fall short of the nature of Sheep? A difference
there is, which stands principally in these Particulars.

1. The Goat is of a capricious Nature, and affects eminency; his Gate also
is stately, Prove. 30.31. Agur reckons the Hee-Goat among the four things that
are comely in going.

2. And they are full of Ambition; they cannot abide swamps, and holes, but
will be climbing upon the tops of mountains; there is not that plain, lowly,
sheep-like frame, that attends unto the voice of the shepherd to be led up
and down into fresh pastures: they attend upon their own ends, and will
outshoot God in his own bow; and therefore when they have done many things for
Christ, he will say unto them, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity: more
eminency they did affect, then they were guided unto: thus it was with Jehu,
who in his zeal for God, thought to promote himself; and herein he will not be
persuaded of his sin, and therefore walking along in crooked ways, the Lord
led him forth with evil doers; he comes at length to cleave unto the sins of
Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin: notwithstanding you may
receive a Goat into Church Fellowship for all his capricious Nature, and he
will be a clean creature, and of much good use: the five foolish, (Mat. 25.2.)
were all of them virgins, all of them abhorring Idolarry, and all go forth to
meet the Bridegroom; and yet they are foolish, and never shall you make them
wise, to be all for Christ, in him, and from him, only hearing and obeying his
voice.

3. They are of a rankish nature all of them, specially the old Goats will have
an unsavory relish, far from the pleasant sweetness that is in a Sheep; and
herein hypocrites are greatly different from the Sheep of Christ; and many
times also they do push with the shoulder the poor sheep of Christ, as the
Prophet speaks, Ezekiel. 34.21. And they mar the pastures with their feet, and
will be at length mudling the fair waters of the Sanctuary also: And in their
best sanctification they fall far short of a sheeplike frame of spirit,
diligently to hear the voice of the shepherd; this will not be found in the
sanctification of the best hypocrite under heaven; they may go far, and yet at
length fall away: this is no Arminianism, but if you search the Scriptures
diligently, you will find these things to be true. But such instances deceive
the Arminians.

There is a fourth Difference between the Covenant of Works and of Grace in
re^pect of the Mediator: Diff. 4.
Gal. 3.19. The Law was given and ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator;
Moses was a mediator according to their Works; and this our Savior tells the
Jews, Joh. 5.45. You have one that accuses you, even Moses in whom ye trust:
and as for Jesus Christ, if he be given to be their Redeemer, it is but
according to their works, if they shall obey his voice: but if they shall sin
against him, he will overthrow them body and soul into the nethermost Hell. But
now in the Covenant of Grace, Jesus Christ has obtained a more excellent
ministry, to be the Mediator of a better Covenant, stablished upon better
promises, Heb. 8.6. Thus we see in this first Use the difference between the
Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of Grace.

I might (in the second place) from hence also gather an Argument against the
whole Body of Arminianism; Faith, or Works of the creature foreseen: if you
speak of Election, they tell you it is of Faith foreseen; if of Glory, it is
upon condition of perseverance: but we see how contrary it is unto this truth
of God; for he gives himself first, before he gives any thing else
accompanying salvation: he gave us Christ in his eternal Counsel, before
Election; and so does he also in our Effectual calling; not Faith before
Christ, to enable us to choose whether we will have him, or not have him: but
he is God, and first gives himself, and with himself, Faith, and so works
our wills unto himself, not otherwise, leaving it to us to choose whether we
will have him to be our God or no. Many things in Popery and Arminianssm, come
to be confuted from hence; for in truth they hold forth no more but a Covenant
of Works: and if we will not grant Faith and good Works to be the cause of all
the blessed gifts of God, they will take it marvellously unkindly; but they
were as good deliver unto us another Gospel.

This may also serve to teach the people of God to bear a gracious respect unto
those that are under a Covenan tof Works, calls any unto fellowship with
himself in a Covenant of Grace, but ordinarily he first brings them into a
Covenant of Works. The ignorant look to be saved by their good prayers, and by
their good serving of God. After, God may terrify and humble their souls with
the sense of their palpable wickedness. Then they may reform and trust in their
performances: and then God may burn up all such false confidence; Therefore
those that are under a Covenant of Works, may belong unto the Lord, as well as
thy self; pray for them therefore; Paul was under a Covenant of Works, Steven
prays for him; and as most conceive, that prayer was effectual unto his
Conversion, and Paul was as dear unto the Lord as Steven himself was. Men under
a Covenant of Works, the Lord may bring them home unto himself, by dashing all
their works in pieces, and showing them the presidence of their spirit: and the
Lord will also come and pluck away the caul from their hearts; and then they
will have none in heaven but Christ, nor in the earth in comparison of him; and
then the Holy Ghost convinces them of this sin above all their other sins,
that they have not believed on Jesus Christ. Do not therefore censure any such,
as to say there is no likelihood that they should ever come to have fellowship
with Christ; for if the Lord make them to fall down before him, and to yield up
their spirits unto the Lord in holy reverence, and fear, these have now
received some fecret smoking affections (besides a Spirit of burning) which the
Lord will not quench.

It may serve in the next place to clear up our judgments in sundry passages
that do concern the Covenant of Grace,

1. first Gift that ever the Lord gives unto his Elect?

First of all he gives himself: the Father,

But whether does not the Lord give us some saving preparations, before Jesus
Christ?

Reserving due honor to such gracious and precious Saints, as may be otherwise
minded, of Jesus Christ: for if there be no Name under heaven given, whereby we
must be saved, but only Jesus Christ; nor his Name, but in a way of fellowship
with him; then it seems to me apparently to follow, that whatsoever saving
work there be in the soul, it is not there before Christ be there. It is true,
John Baptist was sent to subdue all flesh, by a Spirit of Burning, which
burns up carnal confidence in the Covenant of Abraham, and all their fruits
of righteousness: here were indeed preparations for Christ, but these were not
saving, they were still children of wrath; ye serpents, ye generation of
vipers, notwithstanding all this. Further, John did indeed dispense poverty of
Spirit, unto which a saving Promise was made; but then Jesus Christ was there
also; whether they knew it, or knew it not, that is not greatly material in
this Argument: but if the Kingdom of Heaven was there, Jesus Christ was there
first, otherwise it will prove dishonorable unto the Name of Christ. Indeed
there is a saving preparation before consolation in Christ, and the
manifestation of our gracious union with him; but for our first union, there
are no steps unto that Altar, Exodus 20. ult. but Christ does prepare his
Tabernacle for himself to dwell in. This is in the first place for instruction,
concerning what is the first gift which the Lord gives unto the soul, before
any work. He gives spiritual union with his Son: this stands firm from the
tenor of the Covenant, and the nature of it.

2. and the blessings of it: whether Faith before them, or those Blessings
before Faith be able to apply them?

He does give himself to work Faith, Gal. 5.22.
the Spirit is in the soul in which Faith (as a fruit) grows; and this Faith
does receive the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ himself by his Spirit; and
it does also receive Adoption, and Justification: but to be able actually to
apply Christ, before we be in Christ, our first birth will not bear it; for a
man is as passive in his Regeneration, as in his first Generation; only the
Lord gives us his Spirit that does unite us unto Christ, which is received by
Faith, together with Adoption and Justification: and this is the true and
native order of the Lords working.

3.

We know the Lord can convey himself in an Evangelical commandment, Fear thou
not, worm Jacob, I will help thee, etc. He can also convey himself in a
^hreatning unto the Devil; as unto our first parents he did convey himself,
wrapping up a promise in it, as Genesis 3.15. I will put e^^nity between thee and
the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and
thou shall bruise his heel: and from hence the Lord gave them to suck a sweet
and comfortable promise of his Free Grace: and when the like is conveyed in a
commandment, the Lord undertaketh to work that which he so commands: But now
it is questioned, Whether the promise wherein the Lord gives himself, be
absolute, or conditional. Faith uniting us to Christ, it is ever upon an
absolute promise; or a condition subsequent, not antecedent. If you will say it
is a Promise to a Condition; What kind of condition was it? There is no
condition before Faith; for then a man is out of the way of any gracious
Blessing from heaven; no condition before it, whereby a man can close with
Jesus Christ: and if it was a condition after Faith, unto which the promise was
made, then Faith was there before; and whatsoever follows conversion, is no
ground of Faith, but a fruit and effect of it: therefore I say, our first
coming on to Christ, cannot be upon a conditional, but upon an absolute
Promise. If the Lord bear witness unto Justification, it is either absolute, or
to Faith. If he come to bear witness unto a man's Sanctification, then the Lord
does it from some work or other of his Grace in them; as unto Abraham, Genesis
22.12. By this I know that thou fear me, seeing thou-hast not withheld thy
Son, thine only Son. It is true indeed, after a man's Justification is born
witness unto from Grace, or from Faith, then Sanctification and Justification
do mutually bear witness one to another: that is, when Justification is not
wholly doubted of, but in part, then Sanctification is of use to witness; but
not when Justification lies wholly prostrate.

There is a fourth Question, which is as a further branch of the fourth Use; of
which I would not speak, but that I might through the good hand of God, the
better clear things, that we may not stumble in our expressions, nor in any
office of brotherly love, in conference about the covenant of Grace and Works.

4. may a man evidence his union with Christ from his Sanctification?

I answer in four Propositions,

That Sanctification according to the Law, Word, and find comfort therein,
(and great consolation many times) in such a case as this Christians do much
differ upon the point; and yet I do not know any of all the Teachers in this
Country that withdraw their consents from this Doctrine, that such
Sanctification as is wrought in hypocrites, though that it may reach to great
improvements, yet it is no evidence of Justification at all. It has been
handled in another Congregation, (and I think not without weight of truth) that
to distinguish in men between that Sanctification which flows from the Law,
and that which is of the Gospel, is a matter so narrow, that the Angels in
heaven have much ado to discern who differ: a work fitter for Angels to cut
the scantling in it, then for the Ministers of the Gospel, though indeed there
be great difference of the one from the other. Now though this do not tend to
heal any difference in judgment; yet it is useful to heal a misprision of
sanctification, that may be found in all hypocrites. Three things are to be
attended unto in all Sanctification: As 1. From what Root it springs. 2. By
what Rule it is guided. 3. At what End it aims.


And commonly under some one or other of these three, are put all the
differences between the one Sanctification and the other: I speak it, that it
may be searched, and (God is my witness) not to unsettle the well-grounded
comfort of any soul: but if any man has built upon an unsafe foundation, or
has built hay, or stubble; better it is to know it at first, whilst there is
hope in Israel, then when it is too late. In those three things formerly
mentioned, are all the differences between the sanctification of Hypocrites,
and of the Children of God; and they go so close together, that you will say,
it is not an easy matter to discern Justification by Sanctification.

1. For the Root of it: The soul having fellowship with Christ, by the Holy
Ghost coming into the soul, and working Faith in Jesus Christ. This is the Root
of all Christian Sanctification: Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit within you,
etc. And, he that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. and for
Faith, it is Faith that purifieth the heart, Act. 15.9. and, without Faith it
is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. So that Faith must concur unto the
rootedness of our Sanctification in Christ. But the Apostle does attribute both
these Roots unto those Christians that shall afterward fall away to sin the
sin against the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6. They have tasted of the heavenly gift, and
were made partakers of the Holy Ghost: that heavenly gift was Faith, which the
Apostle reckons chiefly among the Principles of our Christian Religion, verse.
1. A taste they had of it; yet from both these they fall away: you know what
was said of Saul, 1 Samuel 10.10. The Spirit of God came upon him: And so did it
likewise upon Judas, and Demas, acting them mightily in their administrations;
and as they were thus carried along by the Spirit: So likewise the Spirit of
Bondage will marvellously prevail with the sons of men, to draw them on to
strong works of Reformation, from whence they reap no small consolation; but
think and say, (as Abisah did) that the Lord is with them, whilst they are
with him: And as sometimes David said of himself, I believed, therefore I
spoke: So the Israelites also, (Psalm. 106.12.) believed, and sang the praises
of God, upon the Red-sea-shore, and yet were they but an hypocritical
generation. And if Hypocrites may work miracles in the Name of Christ, (as they
did, and expostulate with Christ about it, Mat. 7.22. Have we not prophesied in
thy Name, and in thy Name cast out devils, and in thy Name done many wondersul
works?) then may a temporary Faith work ordinary works in Christianity also:
and therefore you shall read (Mat. 13.22.) that there is no fault found in the
thorny soil for their want of root, or for their want of depth of earth; for
the want of both which, the stony soil was taxed: but look as it is with the
bran^hes of a Vine, what depth of earth the root has, they have it, being
graffed into the Vine, though they be but (...), branches of the wild Olive,
and will bring forth but wild Fruit: for though the branch of the wild Olive
be graffed into the fat Olive, and may flourish there; yet will it bring forth
its own fruit; but in the root you will not find a difference: yet there is a
difference, but it is very hard to be discerned.

Yes, for an Hypocrite is ever full of himself, but a true Christian does all
in Faith: he seeks God daily, and waits upon God daily; and these are not
the ways of Hypocrites.

Consider I pray you what the Word of the Lord holds forth as the Root of
this Sanctification, They seek me daily; and this is spoken of hypocritical
Israelites: and for waiting, we often hear it spoken of the five foolish
Virgins, they all went out to meet the Bridegroom, Mat. 25.1. though whilst he
tarried long, they all fell asleep; and so did the wise Virgins also. And for
more particular application of God unto themselves, we find that also, Hos.
8.2. Israel shall cry unto me, My God, we know thee; and yet (in the same
Scripture) this Israel had transgressed the Covenant, and cast off the thing
that is good: And for a further act of Faith, which is a staying a man's self
upon God; what says the Text? Isa. 48.2. They stay themselves upon the God of
Israel, (and yet these are obstinate; their neck as an iron sinew, and their
brow as brass) but it was not in truth and uprightness; True, it was not: But
how shall we know the difference? Truly it is hard to perceive when men differ,
and therefore it is not an easy matter to make such use of Sanctification, as
by it to bear witness unto Justification: and it will be a very hard case, yea
much more difficult, when men cannot feel the presence of spiritual gifts, but
want spiritual light: and when they do find Faith in themselves, they will
find it in Hypocrites also, even Faith to seek the Lord, and Faith to wait
upon him, and Faith to apply him, saying, My God; and Faith to stay upon the
God of Israel: and yet these men do vanish away in hypocrisy. This Hypocrites
may do: seeing therefore what easiness of error may befall Christians, whether
this or that Grace may be of the right stamp, or no, it will behoove Christians
to be wary; for even Eagle-eyed Christians will have much ado so to discern of
Sanctification in themselves, before they see their Justification, as to cut
off all Hypocrites from having the like in them. For the sanctified frame of
life in Gods children, and that which seems to be like it in Hypocrites; both
of them spring from the Holy Ghost, and both from Faith: but now the Spirit of
God has this farther work in his own people, beyond what he works upon
others; though he melts both, yet Hypocrites are melted as iron, which will
return again to his hardness; but his own people are melted into flesh, which
will never return to his hardness more; neither can they rest in any measure of
softness, unto which they have attained, but still are carried toward Jesus
Christ. So that the one is a Temporary Faith, and the other Persevereth; though
both work in the Name of Jesus Christ, yet this difference will be found
between them; not only when Hypocrites come to be blasted, but even in the
midst of their profession. As for the Faith of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, it
is not president of his own power, but his strength lies out of himself in
Jesus Christ, whereas hypocrites and legal Christians are confident of their
Faith, that they can make use of it unto such and such ends: they think they
need no more but look up to Jesus Christ, and their work is at an end; and such
strength they find in themselves, that they do not fear but that they shall
carry an end all their work in a safe course to Gods glory, and their own:
where as the strongest Faith, even of the Thessalonians (whose Faith was such,
as that none of all the Churches went before them) if it be not supplied, and
strengthened, they know, and the Apostle Paul knows that it will warp; this
may we see by comparing 1 These. 1.3. with chap. 3.2, 10. and the Faithful
people of God, Isa. 26.12. acknowledge him to work all their works for them:
and therefore as there is a real difference in the presence of the Spirit: so
also in the work of Faith in hypocrites, and the children of God; for the one
puts confidence in himself, and the other in Jehovah. This is the first
difference of Sanctification.

2. There is difference also in the Rule whereby they are guided: though both
seek to the Word of God, and take delight in that, insomuch as you shall not be
able to difference them there, yet a great difference there is in the
apprehension of the word: the one is so confident of the strength and comfort
that he has in the word, as he will be ready to take it ill at Gods hand, if
he find not assistance from him, and acceptance before him. Now the other see
their need they have of the Lord to maintain their strength and comfort for

them: this manner of affection we find in David, when as the Lord had brought
him and his people into a sweet frame and temper of spirit, to offer willingly
toward the building of the Temple; what says David now? does he think this to
be enough? No, no, But he prays to the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 29.18. O Lord God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, our Fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination
of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their heart unto thee:
thus is he sensible, that these comforts and strength would soon fail them, and
they should again wax barren and uncomfortable, if the Lord should not still
keep them: and here is the nature of true strength and consolation in Christ;
to look up unto the Lord to preserve and maintain it; and so he is still drawn
nearer and nearer unto Jesus Christ. But now though both attend unto the Word,
as their Rule of Sanctification, if you take it in the way in which the one and
the other hold it forth, yet there is a great difference. Then shall I not be
ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy commandments, Psalm. 119.6. Here is a
Rule: what may not Hypocrites walk according to this Rule? Truly, they profess
no less, and they think it is enough, if they have but a rule in their eye; and
therefore under a spirit of Bondage they are confident, and say, Whatsoever the
Lord commands us, we will hear it, and do it, Deuteronomy. 5.27. and what says
Balaam? Though Balak would give me an house full of gold and silver, I cannot
go beyond the commandment of the Lord, Numb. 22.18. and yet he loved the wages
of iniquity: and indeed those that undertake so much in their own strength,
they come afterward to be weary of the Lord, and weary of his commandments; as
Amos 8.5. When will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the
Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat? etc. and they say at last, It is in vain
to serve God; and what profit is it that we have kept his ordinances? Mal.
3.14. These are but like washed Swine that will crop grass for a while in a
fair pasture; but if you keep them long there, they will not delight in such
manner of feeding, but will rather choose to go into the mire, and into a
jakes; (that I may so speak with reverence to the Assembly) but as for Goats,
they will delight in the commandments of the Lord, Isa. 58.2. They delight to
know my ways, and delight in approaching unto God: It is not a very hard thing
unto them, nor grievous to keep solemn fasting-days together; they come
willingly, they delight to come, therefore the difference will hardly be
discovered; and unless you be a Christian of a very clear discerning, you will
not find the difference.

But an Hypocrite will not delight in all Gods commandments: if you take Herod,
delight in John Baptists preaching, and reform many things; but if it come to
his not having his brother Philips wife, then put John into prison; and in the
matter of Herodias, off with John's head.

We see what hypocrites profess, Deuteronomy. 5.27. Whatsoever the Lord commands us,
we will hear it, and do it. But you will say, Not always: It is true, a
difference in time will grow; but whilst they hold forth universal obedience,
how will the difference be discerned? Discerned it will be, when the Lord
leads them forth with workers of iniquity; but many may be led on to their
death before they can be discovered: and therefore what will the servants of
God say? I have seen hypocrites (to outward view) well rooted, and more
comfortable then I my self; and for zeal, and love, the Galatians would have
plucked out their eyes to have done Paul good; they thought themselves blessed
in his ministry, blessed souls they took themselves to be: whereas the dear
servants of God are slow to see so much goodness in themselves, they see so
much corruption.

But you will say, last end, but will out-shoot God in his own bow; and at the
highest, he seeks no more but his own salvation, without respect unto the
glory of God in it.

It is true, Jehu did not only think that he had zeal for the Lord, as he said,
Come see my zeal for the Lord of Hosts; but good Jonadab likewise did so
persuade himself, and therefore did readily join with him in his reformation;
and when he proclaimed a sacrifice for Baal, he thought that Jehu would do no
harm to himself in the Temple of Baal. Thus therefore sometimes it comes to
pass; because an hypocrite may for a long time find all his own ends attained
in seeking the glory of God, as Jehu did: but, but in conclusion, when a man,
and his own honor must part; then either he must hold to his own glory, or
else he must neglect it, and keep him close to the honor of God: but in the
mean time, what can I tell, but that I may shake hands with, and bid farewell
unto Gods glory, when his and mine lie at stake together?

But may not a man perceive a plain difference, when it comes to persecution?

No, give his body to be burned; and yet want Jesus Christ, and everlasting
salvation by him, 1 Cor. 13.3. Now when a poor Christian comes, and sees how
much such an one does magnify God both in doing, and suffering, and yet
falls away; It makes him conclude, Surely I also shall at length turn away
from the Lord. So that whether you look at the Root, or Rule, or Scope, and
bent of holiness, an hypocrite will carry all things in so fair a way, that you
shall hardly discover him to his very death; and when a Christian comes to
measure his own Sanctification by this man's sanctification, he will verily
think the one to be as light as the other; and unless it be one that has his
wits well exercised, marvelous much ado he has to clear himself in such a
point as this. There be that think there is no reality in hypocritical
sanctification; but certainly it is a real work, the gifts be real, though
common Graces; and not mere counterfeit pretenses: there are indeed some that
do merely pretend, and do but outwardly make fair weather in their profession:
but (believe it) it is not so in all hypocrites, there is a real work in some,
Heb. 6.4, 5. They are enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and are
made partakers of the holy Ghost, etc. these things are real, and not
imaginary: God casting in their own ends, and their own glory in their way; the
servants of God have given them the right hand of fellowship; and so long they
have held out, that it was never known when they did apostate: yea, and so
glorious may this common Sanctification be, that it may dazzle the eyes of the
best of Gods children, and especially of poor Christians, and almost discourage
them, when they see such to fall away. This very point has been one principal
root of Arminianism; as another is, that men receive Christ by their own
Free Will: they are able to prove, that there is not only a pretense in
hypocrites, but a real work; and so indeed the Scripture does call it
Sanctification, Heb. 19.29. now hereupon they do believe, that the very best of
all the servants of God may depart from, and forsake their Justifying Faith:
but there in they show the bleat of a Goat; in so saying they condemn the
generation of the Righteous. It is true, that the best of their righteousness
may dye; for they have known no more but the way of works. Thus much for the
first Proposition.

That true Christian Sanctification, is many times dark to a sincere Christian;
it is generally granted to be so, in the first conversion, and in time of
Temptation, and desertion; as also when a man looks at the Majesty, and
Purity, and Glory of God: Woe is me, for I am unclean (says the Prophet Esaias)
at such a time: there is so much power of flesh even in spiritual Christians,
specially in young Christians, so much power in their lusts, and in their
passions, as will put their best friends to a stand, what to think of them, and
much more themselves, when as they come to be pressed with the power of their
corruptions, specially when they compare with such Hypocrites, as run along
with more freedom of spirit then themselves; for sometimes their corruptions do
less appear, and they are more free from temptations; and not exposed to such
sinful courses, as sometimes true-hearted Christians are subject unto: so a
poor Christian is discouraged, and an hypocrite is imboldened, seeing himself
more sanctified in the outward view then the other.

That the true sanctification of a sincere Christian is not discerned by him,
nor is indeed discernable, until he first discern his Justifying Faith. A
double ground of it, and so leave it to your Christian disquisition, and
search; they are both taken from the necessity of Faith, both to the acceptance
of a man's person, and of his work: there is a necessity of the activeness of
Faith in a man's sanctification: The Lord had respect to Abel, and to his
offering, Genesis 4.4. a man's person must be first accepted, otherwise all his
work will not go beyond the work of a legal Christian, and without Faith it is
impossible to please God: no acceptance therefore without faith. It is also
necessary to the performance of all spiritual and holy duties: for all
sanctification is from that faith which Christ does convey into the soul: Now
if the just man live by his Faith, whether it be the life of sanctification, or
consolation; then no Christian can discern his sanctification to be lively, but
he must discern his faith living in it; he must see his faith, deriving
strength, and grace, and life from Christ, or else he cannot approve his
sanctification to be the Sanctification of the Gospel: for as there can be no
true Sanctification, unless there be Faith whereby the person is accepted, and
whereby life is received to act in all sanctification; so there can be no
knowledge of Sanctification, but there must be knowledge of Faith, whereby a
man's person is accepted, and whereby strength is conveyed to Sanctification:
for if a poor soul be doubtful of his acceptance with the Lord, he is where he
was, notwithstanding his Sanctification, and wants comfort; for this doubt
remains, whether he be accepted, or no; which (until the Lord do manifest a
man's Faith unto him by the revelation of the holy Ghost) he is still at a loss
in: for though true Sanctification be an evidence of Justification, yet it self
must be first evident. Thus we see by this third Proposition, that a further
light is required to the sight of Sanctification.

Notwithstanding this near resemblance between legal and Evangelical holiness,
yet there is a real difference between them: and such a difference as is
discernable to Christians, whose wits are exercised in the ways of the spirit
and Word of God; and is discerned by the Revelation or manifestation of the
Spirit of God, both of the state and work of good Christians: and that
ordinarily also; for I would not count it extraordinary, being that which the
Lord by his Spirit does reveal unto his people. A real difference there is,
both in the root, and in the rule, and in the scope which they aim at; and so
it will appear to be at the last day: Mat. 2.23. Depart from me (says Christ)
you workers of iniquity, I never knew you: though they came and told him that
they wrought by Faith in him: indeed they stood in some relation to him, but
not as members to the head, only as branches to the vine, which may be cut off,
and yet the vine not maimed; but if the members should be cut off, any one from
the other, then is the body maimed, and Christ will not suffer his body to be
maimed: but take you never so many branches from the vine, and it is not
maimed, but will bring forth the more fruit: if therefore there be no more
fellowship between Christ and a Christian, then between the branches and the
vine, you may take them away, and yet not hurt the vine. But wherein should
this relation stand? It is very hard to conceive; in so much that those who
have been most exact, and diligent to enquire into it, have professed that it
is Angels work; very hard it is so to distinguish them from Gods own children,
as not to discomfort poor Christians, nor to imbolden hypocrites; we must be
tender therefore, that the least of Gods children may not want their bread:
Better leave 99. sheep, then that one poor stray sheep should not be sought
after; and better an hundred hypocrites perish, then that one poor Christian
should want his portion; and yet it is not meet that hypocrites should wallow
themselves in the fellowship of the Saints, and always bless themselves in
their carnal condition. If you shall ask a difference in the Root: both of them
are partakers of the Holy Ghost; Hypocrites may have a taste, and a poor
Christian will fear that his best fellowship with Christ is but a taste, and
that manifold experience makes good. Wherein then lies the difference? does
the Spirit of God leave the heart of an hypocrite stony, and unmelted? It is so
indeed with the stony, but not with the thorny soil; for the hearts of some
hypocrites are melted as iron stones; they may come to melt about their own
estates through fear and sorrow: and so all those melt that want not depth of
earth, as the thorny soil did not: but mind you, they will grow hard again, as
iron, or lead will do, after it has been melted. Now look at the Spirit of God
when he comes to work effectually, and he does not only melt the heart, but
takes away the heart of stone, and gives an heart of flesh; for it is not
enough to break a stone, it will be a stone though it be broken; but when the
Lord changes it into flesh, then it will be hard no more; but though a man may
have many temptations, yet the Lord will keep his heart soft for ever. This is
the first difference between hypocrites and Gods own servants in the root;
though both may work in the Name of Christ; yet as the one is temporary, and
the other persevereth: so this difference you shall find between common and
sincere Christians; and that not only when legal Christians are blasted of God,
but even then when they do most flourish in their profession. The true Faith of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ is never president of his own strength, but goes
out of himself, and is dependent on Jesus Christ: whereas the legal Christian
is confident in his Faith, that he can make use of it to these and these ends
which are before him. He thinks there is no more needful, but to look up unto
Christ; and so his work is done: whereas take you the strongest Faith of the
Thessalonians, who were grown to such height, that none of the Churches were
before them; yet the Apostle does not think their Faith strong enough, but
prays for the supplying of something that is lacking in their Faith:
otherwise, when it is at the best it will warp; whereas one that has but a
temporary Faith, he is confident in the strength of that Faith, insomuch that
he does not fear but to carry an end his profession in a safe course to Gods
glory, and his own: thus we see there is a real difference between the presence
and work of the Spirit in an hypocrite, and in a child of God: in particular,
we see there is a difference in the Faith which is given unto both of them; the
one has confidence in himself, the other in Jehovah, Isa. 26.12, 13. This is
the first Difference in the Root of their profession.

2. There is difference also in the Rule by which they walk: though both seek
to the Word, and delight in that, you shall not difference them there; yet this
difference you shall find in their apprehensions; the one is confident of his
comfort that he has in the Word, the other sees need that the Lord should
maintain his comfort for him, 1 Chro. 29.18. David prays thus: O Lord God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, our Fathers, keep this for ever in the thoughts of
the hearts of thy people, and prepare their hearts unto thee. As being sensible
that this their comfortable frame of spirit would soon fail them, and they
would quickly grow listless unto such spiritual work, as then they had been
about: and this is the nature of true consolation in Jesus Christ, it makes a
man to have recourse unto the Author of it, to preserve it. Now though both
attend unto the Word, yet here they differ: The one has enough if he can see
the Rule, like to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 5.27. All that the Lord our God shall
speak unto thee, we will hear it, and do it: they have enough if they have the
Rule: but a Christian attending rightly unto his rule, finds it far off from
him to walk according to it; unless the Lord be pleased so to set it home unto
him, as that by his power he may be carried an end in obedience unto it: for
though he know, and see his Rule, yet he wants some body to rule his heart,
according to his Rule; otherwise, though the Rule be straight, his walking will
be crooked; as a child will write crookedly, though his line be straight: so a
Christian man is sensible how his feet and hands will shake, when he comes to
walk or do any thing by a rule; therefore he does wholly look unto Christ, as
being sensible of his own inability, unless he find help and strength from him.

3. There is difference between hypocrites and Gods people in the scope and end
which they aim at: though both aim at the glory of God, yet both cannot attain
to this, to make the glory of God their last end; but the one of these do
secretly wind about to their own glory in the end: as Jehu does, 2 King.
10.16. Come, see my zeal that I have for the Lord: but he brings about his
own glory by it, and here is the main deceit of the work: he seeks the glory
of God in himself, and in his own hand; whereas the principal care of Gods own
people is, and ^ught to be, the glory of God in Jesus Christ: but the other,
his chief care is to have it seen that God is glorified by his hand; Come, see
the zeal that I have.

You will say,

Yes brother; him: but all this while he wants those single affections after
the glory of God for Gods sake. But how then should a man seek to promote the
glory of God? If it be the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, which a
man seeks after, he will then rejoice as much that God may be glorified by
his brother, as by himself; and that is the spirit of a true Israelite indeed:
so that the name of Christ may be magnified, it is no matter by whom; I therein
rejoice, yea, and will rejoice, says the blessed Apostle, Phil. 1.18. If any
man therefore aims at Gods glory then only, when it may be an honor to his
profession, no thank to you brother for that; much close work may be found, so
long as both are carried an end together: but if when I hear that my brother
glorifieth God, I could have wished that such a thing had been done or spoken
by me; and it is the worse because it is not done by my hand: if that, which is
the rich goodness of God to my brother, be not my rejoicing, it is because of
the Core of hypocrisy in my heart. Thus have we seen particularly the
difference between Legal and Evangelical holiness.

We proceed still in this fourth Use, to a fifth Question

If Jesus Christ be the first Gift that is given to the children of God, before
he gives right unto Promises, or to me to challenge promises, yea, before he
gives me any other gifts of his saving grace; then any soul may ask this
Question:

Of what use are promises, end are conditional promises made (that is to say,
Promises to such and such Qualifications) if I may not take a Promise in the
one hand, and a Qualification in the other hand, and bring them both to God,
and lay hold upon Christ with both hands, in the strength of this Promise made
to this Qualification? Thus arises the Question, if God give Jesus Christ
first, before any other blessing; as we read before, To Abraham and to his Seed
were the Promises made, (he means unto Christ) and all the Promises are in
him Yea, and in him, Amen: no having of Promises therefore before Christ: to
what purpose are they given then, if not to bring me unto Christ? It is a point
needful to be known, because we read promises in Scripture daily: and certainly
great use is to be made of them; and if we shall make no other use of them, but
to bring us unto Christ; and God has not sanctified them unto that end; then
we shall take them all in vain, and the Name of God that is called upon them.

There is a threefold use of Promises in Scripture, to wit, 1. Before union
with Christ: In union with Christ: 3. After union with him.

Before union with Christ,

1. They are of use for Doctrine, to teach all the people of God what great and
glorious things are laid up in Jesus Christ, even the unsearchable riches of
Christ, Ephesians. 3.8. and this all the Promises of God do hold forth: if the Lord
promise to be your Father, your Husband, your Shepherd, your Head, your Root;
if he promise to be any other blessing in the world to you; what ever promise
you read, or hear, the Lord shows you by it, the unsearchable riches of Jesus
Christ; and that is no vain use of Promises, for a man to know by them the
great good things that are treasured up in Jesus Christ by the Father:
therefore they are called great and precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4. Why so?
because they declare the great and precious privileges and blessings in Jesus
Christ: therefore it is that the Lord will have all his people to look at him
in his Word, and Promises, and to know what great good he has in store for all
them that trust in him, and seek after him in Jesus Christ. Thus all the
promises of Grace declare his excellency, as Cant. 5.10. My beloved is white
and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand: so do all the Promises declare him
to be a plentiful Savior, and a mighty Redeemer of all his people.

2. As they are of use for Doctrine, so for instruction: it is good for the
honor of God, to know them; but instruction is a further thing, and distinct
from Doctrine, 2 Timothy 3.16. by instruction men are taught not only what to
know, but what to do; to know, and see whither they should resort for the
enjoyment of all those precious blessings that God has laid up in Jesus
Christ; and this is a precious use of the promises, that by them the soul
should be thus instructed whither to go for life and salvation: such
instruction we find, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved, all ye ends of
the earth: here is a direction to me before I look, whither to look; I do not
only see great things, and so vanish away, but I am directed to look, and be
saved thus are we taught of God likewise by his blessed Apostle, Acts 2.38, 39.
Repent, and be baptized into the name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of
sins: for the Promise is unto you, and to your Children, and to as many as the
Lord our God shall call: thus are we taught by the Promises, whither to look
for life and salvation.

3. The Promises serve also for exhortation; as the Scripture last alleged
holds forth: for so many blessings as you see propounded in the Promises, so
many invitations are there to persuade, and provoke men's Souls to come unto
Jesus Christ; as old Jacob sometimes provoked his sons, saying, Why stand ye
gazing one upon another? behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt, etc.
Genesis 42.1, 2. so says the Lord to the sons of men in his Promises; Why stand
you gazing in the want of this and that blessing? is there not pardon of sin,
and all manner of blessings in Jesus Christ? thus is the Soul exhorted not
only to look for mercy, but not to rest till he may enjoy it. Though it be not
the Promises that can by their own power (without the Spirit) carry men an end:
yet this is the end to which God gives them, to stir up the Sons of men, not
to rest in beholding the good things in the Promises, but to exhort them to
provoke themselves and one another to look after the Lord: thus did the Apostle
Peter exhort the Jews, and testified to them of the free grace of God in his
Promises, Acts ^.40. and indeed, the promises in themselves are strong grounds
of Exhortation, to stir up the spirits of all Gods people to look to Jesus
Christ, and to come unto him, in whom such abundance of rich grace is laid up.
Thus do the promises of God furnish both Ministers and People, with Doctrine,
with Instruction, and with Exhortation in their kind.

Now there is a threefold effect that they have in some of all sorts, good and
bad, that live in the bosom of the Church.

1. They have a power of Illumination: they will enlighten the minds even of
Hypocrites, and men that are endued with no more but common gifts, as well as
the people of God: of such the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6.4. who were once
enlightened, etc. and had tasted of the good word of God.

2. When not only enlighting, but a second thing is expressed, An Hypocrite
may have a Taste of Jesus Christ in the Promises, and be so affected with him,
that he does despise all other things in comparison of him, so as that he
comes to resolve for his part never to forgo him; and has so much confidence
in God, that he says with Haman, Whom will the King delight to honor more
then my self? and this illumination, he takes to be a strong and effectual
conversion unto the Lord.

3. The Promises have a work of Conviction upon the Soul: if any man refuse,
and despise them, they leave him unexcusable, Prove. 1.24, 25, 26. etc. Because
I have called, and ye have refused: I have stretched out my hand, and no man
regarded: but you have set at naught all my Counsels, and would none of my
reproof: I will laugh at your calamity, etc. thus is their blood justly upon
their own head, that refuse and despise his Promises, and they aggravate their
condemnation another day: and to this end the Apostle makes use of a precious
Promise of God, Acts 13.38, 39, 40, 41. Be it known unto you men and brethren,
that through this man is preached unto you forgiveness of sins: and by him all
that believe are justified from all things, from which you could not be
justified by the Law of Moses: beware therefore, lest that come upon you which
is spoken of by the Prophets: Behold, you despisers, wonder, and perish, etc. A
strange Application of such a gracious Promise; a sign, there is a power in the
Promises even unto this end. Thus we see there is a marvelous gracious use of
Promises before Union with Christ, as to help Ministers and people with matter
of Doctrine, and Instruction, and Exhortation, so also to awaken men unto
Illumination, and Affection, and Conviction, and to seal them up unto
everlasting destruction if they turn their backs upon them.

As the Promises are of use before our Union with Christ: In our Union with him
they are of great use; for when the Lord gives himself to the Soul, he does it
in a promise: He comes unto the Soul riding (as it were) upon the Chariot of a
Promise, and begets faith in the Soul by the Promise, or some such word of
grace as is equipollent to a promise, Ezekiel. 37.11. whereby we receive Jesus
Christ, though before him we can have no Promise, yet in a Promise we do
receive him. This is the very first stroke of closing with Jesus Christ; he
gives himself, and we take him as he offers himself, even in a Promise: such
a like Dispensation of himself we read of, Acts 3.25, 26. Ye are the Children
of the Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made with our fathers, saying
unto Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed:
unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to besse you, in
turning away every one of you from his iniquities: Here is Christ offered in a
Promise of free grace, without any previous, gracious qualification mentioned.
Howbeit, many of them that heard the word, believed, and the number of the men
was about 5000: about 3000 of them believed before; so that here are 2000 that
believe upon this gracious Promise: the Lord Christ is offered to them, and
they receive him by faith. Thus we see that Promises are not vain things, but
there are great use of them; before our Union, all Promises are of excellent
use, as also In our Union.

3. After our Union with Christ, they are of abundant use^: They were of use
before we were in Christ, for Doctrine, and for Instruction, and for
Exhortation: but now they are of more efficacy in the same kind, and

1. They serve for Doctrine, to teach us, that there is not only free grace in
Christ, but there are gifts of grace in Jesus Christ, and all the Treasures of
the good things of God are in him, and all the blessings of the promises made
unto qualifications are laid up in him also.

2. They serve for instruction, to direct us whither to look for
qualifications, and the blessings Promised unto them; namely, to the Lord Jesus
Christ, to receive the blessing through him, and the qualification by the same
hand: for they are first fulfilled in him; there is no good Condition, but it
is found in Jesus Christ, no blessing belonging thereunto, but it is found in
Christ also; in him therefore they are to be sought for: so that though a poor
Soul see himself wretched, and blind, and naked, yet he has an husband in
whom all riches is laid up: this he is taught to know by the Promise, and
directed also to go to Jesus Christ, that enjoying him, he may enjoy all good
things in him.

3. They are of use to stir up unto prayer: for now, I see, that all these
good things are in Christ, and in him they must be enjoyed, if they be enjoyed
at all; hereupon the Soul is set awork (the holy Ghost concurring therewith) to
consider, Is there so much grace in Christ, and in him abundantly? has the
Lord made so many gracious Promises unto such and such gracious qualifications?
whither then should I go either for the one, or for the other, but unto Christ,
that he may work in us a spirit of faith, of love, and of a sound mind, and
what else soever we stand in need of?

4. They are of use to help us to know our spiritual state, and means to
discern thereof: All these qualifications to which the Promises are made, are
fruits of the Spirit, and will more or less declare unto you your sanctified
state; which is a mavelous blessing: upon the promises made unto such
conditions, the Lord stirs up the hearts of his people to seek for such
conditions, to which the promises are made; and when the Lord has given us
them, he then opens our hearts to see what he has given us, and so to
discern our sanctified estate: Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou
have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son from me; so the Lord said to
Abraham, Genesis 22.12. wherein he bare witness to his work; and this does fill
Abraham with strong Consolation, together with the oath of God unto him: for
now the Lord does not only know it, but causes him to know it also: so that
if the Lord do but breath in such a fruit of the Spirit, if he does but give
power to the Soul to do such a work unto which the promise is made, and do make
it appear unto the Soul to be indeed such, by the revelation of his own blessed
Spirit, then does the Lord fill the soul with consolation, Psalm. 9.18. The
patient expectation of the meek shall not perish for ever: when the poor soul
is meekned by Gods hand, and the Lord lets him so discern it, that now he
quietly rests upon the Lord, now the Spirit of God does help David along to
be supported with some stay: and besides, the waiting of a Christian upon him,
who has made the promises, does make him yet more patient and hopeful: and
this is a fourth use of conditional promises.

5. They are of use to work all these qualifications in us, to which the
blessings are promised: By the exceeding precious promises we are made
partakers of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and this is no small work, or use
of these promises, that from them should spring all our gracious
qualifications; for the Lord having promised such blessings in them, these
promises being received and enjoyed, and meditated on by us, we beholding them,
and the glory of the Lord Jesus in them, are changed into the same image from
glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. this great
power there is in the promises to help an end the work of God in the soul of a
Christian: so that, though they were never given to bring us to Christ, yet to
this end they were given, to work all those qualifications in us to which the
blessings are promised.

6. They are of use to provoke and stir up Christians to all such duties to
which blessings are promised; they stir them up effectually: The Lord makes
a Promise, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. that such as touch no unclean thing, he will
receive them, and be a father to them, and they shall be his sons. And mark
what use the Apostle makes of this conditional promise, chap. 7.1. Having
therefore these promises (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
Implying, that the having of these promises stirs up Gods people unto
duties, and the Lord is wont to breath in them, and so to set forward the work
of cleansing in the hearts and ways of his servants.

7. They are of use further, to strengthen faith; for the Lord that has made
such promises will accomplish them for his servants, Genes. 32.9, 10. Jacob
there puts the Lord in mind of his promise, and says, O God of my father
Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, and the Lord, which said unto me, Return
unto thy Country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee: and he
was now returned according to the appointment of God; but what now does he
plead the condition? mind in the next words: I am not worthy of the least of
all the mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant:
Yet now, though hepleadeth not any worth at all, yet seeing the Lord has
promised such a mercy to him, he prays for it, verse. 11. Deliver me I pray
thee from the hand of my brother: thus his faith is strengthened, though he
does not plead his worthiness to receive mercy. So also do absolute promises
strengthen faith, and the prayer of faith, 2 Samuel 7.13.14. etc. the Lord there
promises David that he would build him an house, and that he would not take
his mercy from his Children; this stirs up, and strengthens the faith of
David, verse. 28, 29. Now, O Lord, thou art that God, and thy words be true, and
thou have promised this goodness unto thy servant; therefore now let it please
thee to bless the house of thy servant, etc. this well ordered and sure
Covenant of God was all his stay, and all his salvation, though his house was
not so with God, 2 Samuel 23.5. So when the Lord promises to heal the
backslidings of his people, Hosea 14.4. their hearts are strengthened to come
unto the Lord, and to say, O Lord, thy words are true, let it please thee to
heal the backslidings of thy servants. Thus by the promises of God, the faith
and faithful prayers of Gods servants are both of them strengthened together.

Now let me further say thus much, Let us rightly discern what use to make of
the principal part of the Scriptures; take heed you do not close with promises
before you have Jesus Christ, specially take heed you make not use of promises
to a qualification to give you your part in Jesus Christ, neither be taken
aside to make account that the Lord did give you himself graciously in a
conditional promise; for these are aberrations from the Covenant of Grace:
Consider therefore well what the Promises be, and what use the Lord would have
us to make of them: It is not for a woman to take her husbands inheritance
before she take his person; and you know that all the blessings, and all the
promises are (as it were) the Inheritance of the Lord Jesus, given unto him,
and to no other, but in his name; and therefore there is not any Soul under
Heaven that can challenge his right in Christ at the first by any promise, till
Christ first be given: if you know that you are in Christ, you may then know
that the promises are yours, otherwise you shall not be able to know your right
in Christ by your right in the promises; and therefore do not turn them upside
down beyond the scope and intendment of the Covenant of Grace: we may take
occasion by them to admire the goodness and grace of God, as David did, Psalm.
31.19. O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee! thus ought we to consider of them, and whither to look that we might
enjoy them, and the blessings in them: If you shall say, We have been
converted, and we have had gracious changes wrought within us; be not deceived:
such work may reach no farther then conviction, and you may come at the last to
turn your backs upon Jesus Christ. Consider therefore, did ever the Lord give
himself to be one with you? whenever the Lord does strike up the bond of
Union, it is in an absolute, and free-promise of his grace. Trust not therefore
unto every leaning of your Souls upon conditional promises; for so you may
build upon a Covenant made upon a work, and in the end you, and your Covevenant
will fail together: but when you read how the Lord has made such promises to
such and such qualifications, then consider that those things are indeed
requisite to be found in you; but who is there in heaven, or earth that is able
to work them in you? there is none but Jesus Christ; and unless you have him
to be in you, you cannot have any of these things wrought in you. But, will a
poor Soul say, I am not able to reach the Lord Jesus Christ, therefore all the
promises of the Gospel do fall heavy upon a man, and he sees that they are too
burdensome, and weighty for him; he does not say, Here is the qualification,
and here is the blessing promised to it, and therefore I will take it to my
self, but one that is taught of God, does forthwith go, and pray unto God, that
he will set him in the way of those blessings, and that so he will make him
partaker of them; he prays that God will give him his Son, and that he will
adorn him with his grace, as a bride of Jesus Christ. Thus while the soul
looks toward Jesus Christ, and grace in him, the Lord does secretly
transform him into the image of Christ, by working such qualifications in him,
and then bears witness to that sanctification which is wrought in his heart,
thereby enlarging his soul with strong consolation in Jesus Christ: and in the
same way it is that the Lord does strengthen the faith of his people to believe
that all those things which God has promised are accomplished in Jesus Christ,
and the Law fulfilled in me so far as Christ is in me; and therefore I come
unto God in prayer to make good those promises unto me in a right way, which
would have been preposterously applied before Christ was given. And this may
serve for answer unto this fifth question.

We come now unto a sixth question. himself before any blessing, before any
promise in order of nature (though he gives himself always in a promise) or
in a word that is equivalent to a promise, as Cant. 5.9, 16. chapter 6.1. if we
cannot claim any blessing from God at the first in any conditional promise,
therefore not by any condition in our selves, but as we received all things
from God, so we claim all things from God in Jesus Christ, and so do first seek
for him, and for all things in him: If thus, to what use then serves the Law
of God, which requires such and such conditions in us? do we not abrogate the
Law, and make it of none effect, and root it out from having any power over
Christians? And truly, some under pretense of the Covenant of Grace, have
thought it altogether bootlesse to bind Christians unto the Law of God, and to
look at it as any part of the direction of their course: because this is an
imputation usually reflected upon the Covenant of Grace, let us consider
therefore, and enquire to what use serves the Law of God, if God give himself
first unto his people in the Covenant of his Grace?

Though the Lord gives himself freely to the soul, Law, yet the Law is of
special and notable use unto all the sons of men, both unto them which are not
yet brought home unto God by converting grace, and also to those that are
regenerate in Jesus Christ. The Apostle Paul did observe that the question
would arise upon the Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace, Gal. 3.16, 17, 18. for
if the blessing of Abraham comes upon the people of God by Jesus Christ; to
what end then serves the Law, which came 430 after? it cannot disannul to make
the promise of God of none effect: to what end then serves it? some say it is
of no use, others say that it is of such use, that they had rather renounce the
Covenant of Grace then it: but the answer is, It is of especial use both unto
spiritual, and carnal men.

First, unto carnal men, and they are of two sorts; some belong unto the
election of grace, though they he not yet called; others are not written in the
Lambs books of life, but will in the end finally perish: and yet the Law is of
use unto both sorts of them.

1. For those that are the elect of God, it is of use unto them, to aggravate
their sin, and to multiply it unto them as it were, that is to say, to
aggravate the apprehension of the heinousness of sin upon their consciences,
and to set home the burden of their sins unto their souls, thereby to drive
them to feel their great need of the Lord Jesus Christ, whom otherwise they
should for ever have despised. Thus the Apostle answers in the place
forenamed, The Law was added because of transgressions: that they might clearly
appear, and be aggravated thereby; that a man might plainly discern how be has
made himself liable unto the wrath of God, by so manifold breaches of so many
Commandments in one kind or other: the Law gives clear knowledge of sin, and
so much the more does it set on the weight of it upon the conscience, working
fear in the heart, Romans 8.15. and hence it is that the Apostle tells us, Gal.
3.24. that the Law was our Schoolmaster to Christ; as a Schoolmaster drives
his Scholar through fear unto this or that duty: so the Law of God drives the
soul through fear unto Jesus Christ; not that it does reveal Christ a Savior
and Redeemer of free grace, but the soul being once brought down under the
sense of sin by the terrors of the Law, will readily and diligently hearken
unto the news of Christ a Savior: for being once made sensible of his own
inability to redeem himself, and unworthiness to be redeemed from the wrath of
God, now is the Soul fitted to hear the voice of the Gospel, now is the news of
Jesus Christ beautiful, and glad tidings: and of this use is the Law unto the
Elect of God, before they come under the Covenant of the Grace of God.

2. But of what use is the Law unto other men? Answ. First, In regard of
disobedience it is of use unto them, and 2. the obedience to it is of use,

1. In regard of disobedience: for if men had not known sin, it had been some
pretense, though they had committed sin; but when men have the knowledge of the
Law, and yet commit sin willingly, now they have no Cloak for their sin, Romans
1. verse. 21. compared with 32. where the Apostle speaks of the great sin of
the Gentiles, and much more of the Jews, who though they knew God, and the
judgment of God, and that they which commit such wickedness are worthy of
death, yet not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them. When
a man shall not only do such wickedness, but bless himself in it, this
aggravateth a man's condemnation: if men will not come unto Jesus Christ that
they might have life, Joh. 5.40. what says our Savior in such a case? verse.
54. Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father, there is one that
accuses you, even Moses in whom you trust; Moses will judge all those that
please themselves in wickedness, and will not turn to the Lord Jesus Christ:
thus there is use of the Law unto disobedient persons, their disobedience will
leave them without excuse when they sin against their consciences, and against
the means which the Lord has administered unto them: for though the Lord never
gave them such grace as did accompany salvation, yet such Illumination he did
give them, that they needed not to have broken his Law so many ways, with such
wicked hands as they have done: therefore when they have been enlarged to
perform many duties, and might avoid much sin, and yet will sin against their
consciences, and tread under foot those means of grace that were committed unto
them; It is then most righteous with God that they should be condemned.

2. Of what use is the obedience of the Law unto such whom Gods Soul takes no
pleasure in? Truly, it is of sad and dreadful use unto unto them; for it
serves to harden them in their sins, (though that be but an accidental use
thereof) their sins are thereby made out of measure sinful, Romans 7.13. They
harden their hearts, 1. by their obedience to the Law, 2. by the Comfort which
they take in that obedience; both these do marvellously harden their hearts.
For the first of these, The Apostle Paul, Acts 23.1. had kept so good a
conscience, that he knew not any sin against the Law that he lived in; but
though he was unrebukeable, he did count it all loss afterward, Phil. 3.7, 8.
those things that before he thought had been his gain, now he counts them but
dung that he may win Christ: when a man attaineth to outward conformity unto
the Law, he is then ready to think it is indeed good for poor sinful men to
look for salvation by Jesus Christ; but for himself, he hops in his devotion,
and that he is able to save himself: these are such as just^fie themselves
before men, to whom our Savior speaks, Luke 16.15. and of whom he says,
That Publicans and Harlots shall go into the Kingdom of heaven before them,
Mat. 21.31, 32. for many times you shall have the most deboist and profane
wretches more humbled, and readier to hearken to the voice of Christ, and
sooner convinced of the necessity of the Covenant of Grace, then those that are
but morally righteous by the Law, Romans 9.30, 31, 32. the Gentiles which
followed not after righteousness have attained to righteousness, even the
righteousness which is of faith: but Israel which followed after the Law of
righteousness, has not attained to the Law of righteousness; wherefore?
because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law:
and chap. 10.31. They being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the
righteousness of God. Thus the Law becomes a snare unto them; and that which
is of singular and wholesome use unto the Children of God, is made death unto
them. And as their obedience to the Law is thus a snare unto them: so secondly,
the delight and comfort which they take in their obedience is a greater snare
then the other: The stony and thorny soil did hear the word with joy, and so
those Hypocrites, Isai 59.2. did delight to approach unto God: but what
followed upon the delight which they took in God, and in holy Duties? it made
them ready to expostulate with God, why he did not answer them according to
their works: the delight which they found, did so fill their hearts with
assurance of the grace of God, that they looked at their Duties as so many
tokens of the love of God unto their souls; and then when men come to find more
comfort in their obedience, then in the grace of God in Jesus Christ, it makes
them ready to expostulate with God, touching the worth of their own
Righteousness, Isa. 57.10. Thou have found the life of thine hand, therefore
thou wast not grieved; as long as a man finds life and comfort in his own
duties and performances, what need can he see to be grieved for the want of
Jesus Christ? or at the best, if he do grieve, and find his heart comforted in
grieving and delighting in the course of humiliation, he then thinks he has
no need of being farther solicitous about his spiritual estate. Thus we see
plainly that the Law of God is of mavelous use in the days of the Gospel, of
great use unto those that belong unto God, to break their hearts for sin, and
to drive them to Jesus Christ; and for others, the disobedience of the Law,
leaves them without excuse, that so disobey it; again, the obedience of it, and
comfort in that obedience, does harden the hearts of others from Jesus Christ.

But what say you then unto men that are under a Covenant of Grace, and brought
unto fellowship with Christ therein? of what use is the Law of of God unto
such? is it utterly antiquated, or is there any more to be done with it?

The Apostle answers this Question, I am not without the Law to God, but
under the Law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21. so (mind you) the Law is of use unto the
Apostle Paul, but how? as the Law comes under Christ, so Paul comes under the
Law; this is the sum of the Answer, but that would be further explained. What
means he when he says, I am under the Law to Christ? In some sense a
Christian is wholly freed from the Law: In some sense he is yet under the Law.
So far as the Law is any way besides, or out of Christ, so far the Apostle is
without the Law: So far as the Law is under Christ, so far he is under the Law.
Keep close to these two Principles, and you shall safely avoid Rocks on every
hand: thus by the use of the Law shall you not go aside to a Govenant of Works,
nor by attendance unto Grace, shall you need to neglect the Law. How far is the
Law under Christ? when it has brought the soul nearer unto Christ, and in a
remote manner prepared him, the Law is in Christ, and you subject to it in him.
1. As the Law is given by Christ. 2. As in Christ help is given to perform it.
First, as the Law is given by Christ, as 1 These. 4.2, 3. You know what
Commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus: for this is the will of God, even
your Sanctification, etc. and many other commandments he gave them, all which
are legal commandments, and yet the Apostle gave them by the Lord Jesus: so
Mat. 5.17. to the end of the chapter: our Savior Christ would not have us
think that he came to destroy the Law or the Prophets, but to fulfill them. And
to that end he does there expound the spiritual and true meaning of the Law,
that whereas the Pharisees held forth the outward letter of the Law to be
observed only, as thinking that unless a man did commit the Act of Murder, he
was not guilty of the breach of the sixth Commandment; and if he committed not
the Act of Adultery, he transgressed not the seventh Commandment, and so of the
rest: Our Savior Christ expounds the Law more spiritually, showing that
anger against a man's brother is the breach of the sixth Commandment; and
whosoever shall look on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with
her in his heart, and broken the seventh commandment; thus Christ has as it
were revived Moses: but as the Law is given by Christ, it is not a covenant of
Works, but a commandment of well-doing; and he having given it, we take our
selves bound to be subject to it. The Apostle also, presses the Moral Law upon
several relations of men, Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3, etc. It is an honor to Jesus
Christ, that his servants should be holy, as he is holy; it is for the glory of
God, and he requires it: The Apostle James presses it, Chap. 2.8. to the end
of the chapter. If you fulfill the Royal Law according to the Scripture, (Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thy self) ye do well. And again; Whosoever shall
keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. Thus we
see the Apostles of Jesus Christ put it upon Christians to keep the Law of God,
and Christ himself bears witness to the Law: for God will never justify sin
to be no sin, though he will justify the person of a sinner.

Now as the Lord Jesus gives the Law, and as it were renews it, so he does
also give his Spirit unto his servants, enabling them to keep it, Jer. 31.33.
Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. And again, I will put
my law in their hearts, and write it in their inward parts. Now this Law would
he not write in the hearts of his people, nor give unto them his holy Spirit
enabling them to keep his Law, were it not his will in Jesus Christ, that the
Law should be the rule of holiness and righteousness unto his people: hence it
is, that the children of God, though they be not under the Covenant of the Law,
yet take themselves to be bound to the obedience of it; for if Jesus Christ
have given the Law, as well as Moses, and if he have ratified it by giving them
his Spirit, to teach and strengthen them to keep it, though not perfectly, yet
sincerely, then they take themselves bound to obey the Law, though they be
under the Covenant of Grace; for do we make void the law through says? God
forbid yea, we establish the law. For what need have Christians of free
Justification by Christ, if they were not bound to obedience by the Commandment
of the Law? Therefore the free Justification of men under a free Covenant of
Grace, does establish the obedience of the Law, otherwise what need they run to
Christ to save them from the curse of the Law? Why do we still run to Christ
for the continuance of our justification? But that we find our selves ungodly
creatures against the righteous and holy Law of God: therefore if God have
given men the Law, and his holy Spirit to strengthen them in the obedience of
it, and his grace to save them from the curse of it; then Christians are to
know that they are bound to keep the Law; they lie under the authority of it,
and dare not pluck their necks from under that yoke.

Now, there are two Effects springing from the subjection of Gods people to the
Commandment of the Law.

1. As they take themselves bound to the obedience of it; so they believe, and
many times feel the fatherly displeasure of God, when they transgress the Law:
now the transgression of the Law could not bring them under Gods displeasure,
unless they were bound unto the Commandment of the Law: this displeasure David
was sensible of, Psalm. 38.1, 2, 3. etc. There is no soundness in my flesh
because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin
And many complaints of like nature does he there make, which do all of them
spring from the conscience of the disobedience of the Law, which God has
framed in the hearts of his servants, whereby they reflect upon their sin as
the ground of all the distempers which lie upon their bodies or minds. This is
the first effect of the subjection of Gods people to his Law: they lie under
the faith and sense of the danger of the disobedience of it.

2. They are under the faith and sense also of Gods gracious acceptance of
their ways, when they are suitable to the blessed directions of his word; not
that they can raise therefrom the assurance of their justified estate, but by
the same Spirit of God, whereby they are helped to obey the Commandment, they
do see the Lords gracious approbation of them in their poor and weak
endeavors: for the Lord knows the way of the righteous; that is,
acknowledges, and approves it, Psalm. 1.6. when the Lord by his Spirit boweth
the hearts of his servants to obedience, then he knows and accepeth their
obedience; Genesis 22.12. Now I know that thou fear me, seeing thou have not
withheld thy son, thine only son from me: thus the Lord bears witness to his
servants that he does accept their works; so that they sensibly know, and
believe that the Lord does acknowledge their poorest and weakest endeavors,
unto which they are carried forth by his Spirit in the obedience of his word:
This the Prophet David confirms, Psalm 18.20, to 26. The Lord rewarded me
according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands has he
recompensed me; for I kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly
departed from my God: for all his judgments were before me, and I did not put
away his statutes from me; I was also upright before him, and kept my self from
mine iniquity: therefore has the Lord recompensed me according to my
righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight: with the
merciful, thou will show thy self merciful, and with the upright man thou will
show thy self upright, etc. This David speaks of his righteous dealing with
Saul; and whereas his enemies laid it to his charge, that he was an enemy unto
Saul, the Lord bears him witness that he had walked toward Saul, with a good
conscience: now the Lord having led him an end to deal justly, and righteously,
and purely with Saul, having kept him from all the malice and outrage of Saul,
and maintained his cause against Saul, and delivered him out of the hands of
Saul, whom the Lord had now rejected; herein the Prophet sees the Lord
accepting him, when in the name of his Son, by the power of his Spirit, he is
helped to attend unto the Commandments of God. This is comfortable unto a
Christian spirit, when the Lord bears witness to his soul, that he has an
eye to all the Commandments of God. And all this argues that the servants of
God, being in a state of grace in Jesus Christ, have looked at themselves as
bound by the Commandments of the Law, and as being under the law to Christ, who
has given the Law, and power unto his servants sincerely to keep it, both by
writing in their hearts a law of obedience, and by putting his holy Spirit
within them: for if the people of God were not sensible of their bounden duty
to the observation of the Law of God, they would neither have faith, nor sense
of Gods fatherly displeasure when they negligently break these laws; neither
would they be sensible of Gods acceptance of their conformity thereunto; but we
know what the Apostle Paul says, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the
world, etc. and truly the Lord does often bear witness unto the integrity of
his servants against the oppositions of men; so he did to Abraham, to David, to
Paul, and to sundry of the Saints of God: though the servants of God are not
wonted thereupon to build their safe estate, yet this kind of Gods acceptance
of their ways and obedience they do discern; yet in their best obedience,
which they do perform, they see the need they have to go unto God for
justifying grace, because if they have failed in any one circumstance, their
best righteousness is polluted; therefore they have need of Jesus Christ to
cover the failings of their most strict performances. This Nehemiah was
sensible of, when he had been very faithful in reforming the abuses of the
Sabbath, and of many other Ordinances of God: and though the Lord had helped
him to undertake the reformation with much dexterity, and success; yet for all
this he runs unto Christ for acceptance and pardon, Nehem. 13.22. Remember
me, O my God, concerning this, and spare me according to the greatness of thy
mercy: and what would he have done if he had been conscious of some gross sin?
He would then much more have run to the Lord Jesus. Thus the Law is established
by faith; for there is no justified person, but he is very apprehensive of his
sins, and so of his continual need of Christ, whose blood cleanses us from all
sin, 1 John 1.7. and who is faithful and just to forgive our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness, verse. 9. who is an Advocate if any man
sin, and a propitiation for our sins, Chap. 2.1, 2. and what do all these
things argue? but that a Christian being under the Covenant of the Grace of
God, does submit himself unto this yoke of God. Thus far then a Christian is
under the Law to Christ; so far as the Law is under Christ, he is under the
commandment of Christ, and under the power of Christ, and under the displeasure
of Christ, if he negligently sin against the Law; and unto Christ he runs
for pardon, and cleansing, and unto Christ he comes for acceptance of his
obedience: so that he has no use of the Law, but unto Christ, and in and under
Jesus Christ.

But how is a Christian not under the Law?

So far forth as the Law is not under Christ; I mean, so far as it is without
Christ freely justifying of us by his grace, so far a Christian is freed from
under the Law. In one word, a Christian man under a Covenant of Grace, is not
under a Covenant of Works. Romans 6.14. You are not under the Law, but under
Grace: he means, not under the Covenant of the Law, nor under the power and
authority of the Law, as of their husband, Romans 7.1, 2, 3, 4. The husbandly
Jurisdiction of the Law is taken away; The Law is not made for a righteous man,
1 Timothy 1.9. that is, not the Covenant of the Law, for else we are under the
Commandments of the Law to Christ; but the Jewish Teachers taught more, to wit,
the Covenant of the Law unto salvation: not but that the Law is good, if a man
use it lawfully; he means the Covenant of the Law: but how shall a man use it
lawfully? for it is not given unto a righteous man; but he reckons up the
breakers of every commandment, and unto them it is given; to the lawless, and
disobedient; to the ungodly, and sinners; to the unholy, and profane; to
murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers; to man-slayers, and
whoremongers; and to them that defile themselves with mankind; to
men-stealers, to liars, to perjured persons, and if there be any other things
that are contrary to sound Doctrine; the Covenant of the Law is given unto such
(and unto none but such) to convince them of their sins against the Law, to
humble them to the death, and to drive them out of themselves, and considence
in themselves. But how does it appear that the Covenant of the Law is not given
to the children of God? from hence it is manifest;

1. Because a Christian man neither looks for Justification and Salvation
from his Obedience to the Law, nor fears Condemnation though he fail in his
Obedience; and this is a fruit of his exemption from under the Covevenant of
the Law: for if a man should look for Life by his Obedience to the Law, and
fear condemnation by the breach of it, this would bring a man under the
Covenant of the Law: for the sanctification of the Covenant of the Law, is life
to them that obey; and to them that disobey, death, and the curse. But a
Christian looks not for Life by his Obedience; and that is plain, Psalm.
143.2. Enter not into Judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no
flesh living be justified: so Romans 3.20. By the deeds of the Law there shall no
flesh be justified, for by the Law is the knowledge of sin: therefore no hope
of salvation from our Obedience to the Law. But methinkes (you will say) a
Christian may fear his condemnation because of his Disobedience to the Law.
Truly this is a great snare, and this Doctrine will be scandalous to many a
poor soul, but without cause: Indeed, if God give a man to be under the
Covenant of Grace, and not to see it, then he may fear; but if a man know
himself to be under the Covenant of Grace, then he does not fear condemnation
from his disobedience: notable to this purpose is the considence of David,
Psalm. 49.5. where the Prophet calls upon all People in the world to take
notice of it, Both men of high degree, and men of low degree: Wherefore should
I fear in the days so of evil, when the iniquities of my heels shall compass
me about? wherefore? truly if there be any fear in the world, one would think
this might procure it; what should a man fear, if not this? David professes
it, and would have all to know it, that there is no cause therein why a
Christian man should fear, Wherefore should I fear? etc. though it should
follow you to the stocks, or to prison, yet there is no cause why it should
make you fear: Men that trust themselves in their wealth, and boast themselves
in the multitude of their riches, none of them can by any means redeem his
Brother, nor give to God a ransom for him, that he should live for ever, and
not see corruption: had David had nothing but the wealth of his Kingdom, he
might have feared well enough; but here is his confidence, verse. 15. God will
redeem my soul from the power of the grave, for he shall receive me. But will
not this make a Christian wanton against God, and cause him to abuse his libety
to hardness of heart? no, no, brethren, this is the kindly melting of a godly
heart, to consider a Redeemers love drawing him from the power of the grave,
and that he should by his sins pierce the Lord Jesus Christ; this melts his
heart more then all his other sins, specially considering the abounding Grace
of God, which where sin has abounded, grace abounds much more: thus when a
man does not look for life by his own Righteousness, but knows the Redemption
of souls to be more precious then so; this shows a man not to be under a
Covenant of Works, and then his very iniquity shall not make him afraid; there
is such a state in Christianity, and let all men know it. But will it not make
men think the worse of Christian profession? No, David will have all to know
it, that they may see the difference between all worldly confidences, and the
confidence of Christians; all their glory will leave them, to be like the
Beasts that perish, and cannot redeem their souls, that the Lord only might be
exalted.

2. As a Christian looks not for salvation by his obedience to the Law, nor
fears condemnation by his disobedience: so neither does he seek for any
blessing from his obedience, nor fear any curse from his disobedience, he
seeks not for blessings from his obedience, and therefore if there be any
promises of blessing made to any obedience, though God should help him to as
much obedience as might be, he does not look for any blessing from that
obedience, Romans 4.4, 5, 6. To him that works, the reward is not reckoned of
grace, but of debt; but to him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted to him for righteousness, even as
David describes the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works. He looks not for his blessedness from his works;
though he should perform all the conditions to which the promises are made, yet
he expects all his blessing from free justification, and union with the Lord
Jesus Christ: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin, this is the
blessedness of Christians. It is true, the Lord does bless the workings of his
servants, and accept them, Mat. 25.34, 35, 36. The king shall say unto them on
his right hand: Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you, from the foundation of the world: for I was an hungry, and ye gave me
meat; I was thirsty, and you gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me
in; naked, and ye clothed me; sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye
came unto me. Thus Christ blesses them: but they are not sensible of their
good deeds, so as to expect blessings for their obedience sake, and therefore
they make answer, and say, Lord, when saw we thee an hungry, and sed thee; or
thirsty, and gave thee drink? etc. neither do they fear the curse of God, or
that their sins should separate them from God: those that are under the Law,
are cursed indeed, if they do not continue in all things that are written in
the Law to do them; but this curse is removed from the elect by Jesus Christ.

3. This also is a third effect of the freedom from the Covenant of Works; that
a Christian does not look for conjugal comfort from his obedience, nor fear
conjugal divorce from his disobedience. In a Covenant of works, it is with a
man, as it was with Leah, Jacob's wife, who expected love and fellowship from
her husband, because of her fruitfulness, Genesis 29.32. when she brought forth
her firstborn, she said, Now therefore will my husband love me; and when she
brought forth her third son, ver. 34. Now this time will my husband be joined
unto me: but thus does not a man under a Covenant of Grace; for when he has
done all he can, he is ready to say, I am an unprofitable servant, Luke 17.10.
and does not challenge God for any of his dealing with him: he sees he
deserves not his daily bread, and so looks for no reward from his good works:
though the Lord will graciously acknowledge his servants in what they do
according to his will, yet they are not wont to plead any such thing; which is
very observable in the practice of Jacob, Genesis 32.9, 10. etc. O Lord God of my
father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, the Lord which said unto me,
Return unto thy country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee; I
am less then the least of all the mercies and truth, which thou have showed
unto thy servant. So he does not press his performance of Gods Commandment to
procure blessing, but acknowledges his unworthyness, and looks for Grace
from the Promise of God. Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother;
for thou saidest, I will surely do thee good. Nor does a child of God fear
divorce by his disobedience, though it have been very great. Sometimes the
people of God have not only rejected the servants of God, but the Lord
himself, 1 Samuel 8.7. but when Samuel had pressed hard upon them for their sin,
Chap. 12. and they were truly humbled, then Samuel said unto them ( verse. 20,
21, 22.) Fear not (ye have done all this wickedness, yet turn not aside from
following the Lord, but serve the Lord with all your heart: and turn you not
aside, for then you should go after vain things that cannot profit nor deliver
(for they are vain) for the Lord will not forsake his people, for his great
Name sake: because it has pleased the Lord to make you his people, therefore
fear you not, he will not cast you off: So that (mind you) a poor Christian
does not fear divorce from his disobedience; for if we should look for blessing
from the one, or cursing from the other, we were not under Christ, but under
the Law: but he that is freed from the Covenant of Works, is freed also from
expecting salvation, or fearing damnation from what he does; he knows the
Lord will hide his face from him if he do evil, but he knows the Lord will
not cast him off for ever; yet he dares not commit sin, but being under Grace,
he is the more affected if he shall at any time displease God, and procure
chastisement to himself: and by this means the Lord does mortify his
distempers. On the other side, if he do well, he will not say, Now my husband
will cleave unto me, and dwell with me; no, no, we are freed from the Law, Romans
7.4. which we were not, if we look for conjugal love from God, for our
obedience to the Law: it is true, if a man be married to the Law, his obedience
unto it will supply comfort unto him; but if we be dead unto the Law, we have
no life in it nor by it, but only in Jesus Christ, from whom we expect our
comfort: indeed we are troubled that we should sin against the grace of God,
otherwise we look not at our obedience or disobedience, to make us accepted or
rejected.

4. And finally, the soul does not claim his right unto any conditional
promise, by his performance of the condition; nor does he deny himself the
blessing that the promise may reach forth unto him, though he be wanting in
obedience to this or that Commandment: pregnant for this purpose is the example
of Jacob (which we mentioned before) Genesis 32.9, 10. who though he had a plain
and a full promise of God, to do him good if he would return to his Country,
and to his kindred, yet when he did return according to the word of God, he
claimed not his interest in that promise, for that he had done as God commanded
him, but I am less then the least of thy mercies; and yet he comes unto the
Lord for the performance of his promises, but not upon this ground; only for
the sake of mercy and truth, Deliver me I pray thee: for thou saidest, I will
surely do thee good, ver. 11, 12. so that (mind you) though the soul can make
use of a conditional promise, and come to God for the blessing of it, yet not
expecting it in the least manner, by virtue of his obedience: and truly this is
the freedom of a Christian soul; whereas another man, if he have kept the
Commandment, and performed the condition, he then looks for acceptance from
God: as if the Lord make this promise, that he that confesses and forsakes
his sin, shall find mercy; this man confesses his sin unto God, and forsakes
it, and therefore he looks for mercy: but this is not the manner of Gods
people; and yet if they look for any mercy, it is in the way of God, but not
because of their own goodness; their hope is in the faithfulness, and free
grace of God: they may make mention to the praise of God, how he has guided
them, and carried them an end in his own ways; yet they challenge nothing from
any thing that they have done, but put the Lord in mind of his free promise,
that as of his free grace he has freely promised: so from the same grace he
may make good what he has promised.

Antinomianism, and say, it teaches men freedom from the Law of Moses; and if
they commit any sin, they plead they are not bound unto the Law; we see how
false such an aspersion would be: for all the people of God, know that the Lord
is an avenger of every such wickedness. There is none under a Covenant of Grace
that dare allow himself in any sin; for if a man should negligently commit any
sin, the Lord will school him thoroughly, and make him sadly to apprehend how he
has made bold with the treasures of the grace of God. Shall we continue in
sin, that grace may abound? God forbid: none that have a portion in the grace
of God, dares therefore allow himself in sin; but if through strength of
temptation he be at any time carried aside, it is his greatest burden, 2 Samuel
12.8, 9. compared 13. Has not the Lord (says Nathan) done these and these
things for thee? wherefore then have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord?
then David confesses, I have sinned. It pierced him to the heart to consider
it, that he should abuse his Neighbors wife, and kill her husband, and commit
such wickedness against God, that had dealt so graciously with him. So that the
children of the Covenant of grace will only tell you, that they are free from
the Covenant of the Law, but not from the Commandment of it: for as it is given
by Jesus Christ, and ratified in the Gospel; and as Christ has given us his
Spirit enabling us to keep it, we are under it so far, as to take our selves
bound by the authority of it; and if we do transgress against it, we know it is
sin in the sight of God, and therefore it is that the soul in such a case is
sensible of the wrath and displeasure of God, whether it be his own sin, or the
sin of his brethren: therefore he runs unto God for mercy; which he would
not do, if he did not know, that his desert according to the Law did utterly
cut him off from mercy: else would he never pray for pardon of sin, nor rejoice
when the Lord helps him to do that which is right and just in his sight, nor
bless the Lord for strengthening him unto obedience, unless he thought it to be
his duty: and therefore,

It is of use also to teach the servants of God, how far they are freed from
the Law; Covenant of it: so that they neither look for justification, nor
salvation from it. And let it not be grievous to any soul, that a Christian
should say, He does not fear condemnation by his disobedience: he will be apt
to fear in this kind, until he be assured of the favor of God; but when he
knows his portion in the Covenant, then indeed he does not fear condemnation
by his sin, nor does he think that the Lord will cleave unto him because of his
fruitfulness; he casts not off his comfort, nor looks at himself as
divorced from Christ, because of his barrenness before the Lord; nor does he
look for his daily bread from all his obedience, but expects all goodness and
blessing from the treasures of the free grace of God.



of your own; in such a case either thou art under a Covenant of works, or at
the least thou art gone aside to a Covenant of works; and if ever the Lord open
your eyes, and bestow his free grace upon you, you will know your redemption
from such dependances as these be. I know a Christian man, that has not been
clearly taught the distinct differences of the two Covenants, may be misled
into dangerous ways, that might tend unto the utter undoing of his soul; but
it is a sin of ignorance, and the Lord will not leave his servants, but clear
up his truth and grace unto them.

May serve to teach the servants of God, Law you shall; for if a man be married
to the Law, the Law will cast in comforts upon him because of his obedience;
but if you shall believe that Christ is yours, and comfort your selves because
you have been by the power of the Law constrained to duties, and restrained
from sin, and thereupon build your conjugal communion with Jesus Christ, you
will find your souls full of sadness and fear ere long, specially if you have
true grace in your hearts: and therefore it is the faithfulness and tenderness
of the grace of God unto his people, that when Christians come into this
Country, though they have been marvelous eminent in our native Country, they
cannot pray fervently, nor hear the word with profit, nor receive the seals
with comfort: they wonder what is become of their old prayers, and hearings,
and Sacraments, and of their lively spirits in holy duties; truly the Lord has
disenabled them (as it were) from such things, because they did build their
union and fellowship with Jesus Christ upon them, that so they might know the
freedom of the grace of God, that justifies the ungodly; then will the poor
soul be glad to seek after the Lord Jesus Christ, and say (as the people of God
sometimes did, Hos. 2.7.) I will go, and return to my first husband; for then
was it better with me then now: now the soul will plainly see and discern, that
he closed not with his true husband, when as he built so much hope and comfort
upon his duties; therefore he will find himself weak, and dead, (as it were) to
all spiritual duties, and can find no life in them, no comfort from them; and
it is the marvelous goodness, and free grace of God unto such a soul, whom the
Lord will not suffer to bless himself in his works; for if a man should lay the
foundation of his comfort in them, and be ready as it were to take it ill, if
he should not find God accepting his works; Wherefore have we fasted, and thou
regardest it not? Isa. 58.3. If a man rejoice in the sparks which he has
kindled, this shall he receive at the hands of God, to lie down in sorrow. Isa.
50.11. whereas the light of God shall graciously break forth unto the servants
of God, though they wait upon him, though they be for present in darkness, and
see no light. Trust not therefore in any legal comforts, but wait upon the free
grace of God, both to justify, sanctify, comfort, and glorify your souls;
and this is the way of constant peace: and if the Lord do at any time check his
servants, when they walk in by-waies; it is, that he may build them upon a
surer foundation. So that their salvation will not lie upon their obedience,
nor damnation be procured by their disobedience: this is the way of constant
peace and safety unto all the Israel of God.

This Doctrine may serve in the next place, necessity of Sanctification. For it
may be demanded, If the Lord will give himself unto the soul in the Covenant of
his Grace, not only his attributes, but his person, all that is God is given by
virtue of this Covenant; If God will give himself, not only to choose us to
life and glory, but his Son to redeem us, and his holy Spirit to sanctify us,
Ezekiel. 36.27. what need is there of Sanctification? for if the Holy Ghost will
dwell in us, he can take our wits, and understanding, and understand all our
Meditations for us, without any such actual concurrence of ours, as might be
requisite for that end; if the Lord gives himself to be my righteousness, and
holiness, what need I then these gifts of holiness? So that this in sum is the
Question, If the Lord will give unto us himself, what need we these gifts to
work any thing, which God is much more able to perform then we can be? This
springs naturally from the Doctrine.

Though the Lord gives us himself, Holy Ghost should dwell in us? or will not
these carry an end our souls unto immortality? Truly we have need that the Lord
should give us his holy Spirit to dwell in us, notwithstanding all the gifts of
his grace, though they indeed are necessary conditions to be found in the souls
of all Gods servants, Heb. 12.14. Follow peace and holiness, without which no
man shall see the Lord. As if he made it of absolute necessity to salvation,
not only in another world, but for a comfortable condition in this world;
follow Peace and Holiness, as if so be that they were ready to fly away from a
man: and indeed, the word does imply no less; for (...), does signify the
pursuit of something that flees from a man, as peace will many times flee from
one, and a man will have much ado to attain unto it, Psalm. 120.6, 7. My soul
has long dwelt with him that hates peace: I am for peace; but when I speak,
they are for war: it is not easily attained unto, therefore should not be
suffered to depart, but held fast when it is enjoyed. And so for Holiness; the
Apostle would have us make an holy kind of pursuit after it, as if it were
still withdrawing from us; which comes through the corruptions of our heart;
for we are soon weary of holy Duties, as Prayer, or Conference, or the like: if
Holiness be in any thing, it soon grows wearisome to flesh and blood; but
though our weak and feeble nature will be withdrawing us from Holiness, yet the
Lord would have us to follow it, and pursue it; and so shall a man be withdrawn
from the world, and from the temptations and bad examples thereof. Do not say,
What, shall we be wiser then our Fathers? and, Is not Moderation best in all
things? but consider what the Apostle says, Follow still after it, even unto
perfection; and his words do intimate the reason of it, without which no man
shall see the Lord: for what is Holiness in its own nature? it is that which
gives God his due, as Righteousness gives man his due. And this is a main
ground why we are so slow in works of holiness; for were they of another
nature, and did they serve our turns more, as we think, we should not then
account them tedious: If I were to sit and tell money all day long, this is for
my self (says a man) and for my profit; and if it were for another, we should
not think the time long, it may be, at that work neither: but (mind you) when
it comes to any thing which does concern the Lord, then it is so far above a
man's reach, whatsoever we have to do in the things of God, that we should soon
be weary of reaching forth our hands all the day long unto the Lord, and to be
constantly for God, from God, and with God, in all our Actions: our base
spirits are soon ready to be withdrawing from the Lord; therefore the Apostle
bids us follow after Peace, and Holiness, without which no man shall see
God: so that great is the necessity of Holiness, and worthy to be followed
after: for though a man's own heart, and the world, and men, and Satan withdraw
us from it, yet follow after it, for without it no man shall see God. There is
a kind of holiness which some men have attained unto, many a fair day ago, but
it is a thousand to one, whether it be the holiness which does accompany
salvation, for that Holiness is not easily attained unto; but the other will
easily cleave close unto a man.

Now if you shall ask me, pursue after Holiness; and what needs it, if the
Spirit of Holiness dwell in me by an everlasting Covenant? if it did withdraw
from us as it did from Adam, it was another matter; but though it may be
quenched in us, yet abides it for ever: what need then of gifts of Holiness?

That one word may be sufficient, Tim. 2.21. If any man purge himself from
these evils, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for the
Masters use, and prepared unto every good work. This shows us why gifts of
Holiness are requisite to be in Gods people, namely, that they might become
meet instruments in the hands of God, and fitted unto every good word and work;
therefore it is, that the Lord will have us to be filled with all the gifts of
Righteousness, and fruits of his Spirit, that we might be more fit Temples for
the Holy Ghost to dwell in: and this is the principal Reason of the Point.

If then there be such gifts of holiness, Holy Ghost dwell in us? is it not
enough that he should shed abroad these things into our hearts? cannot the Lord
carry an end the work of our salvation by these gifts?

There is need that the Holy Ghost should dwell in us, keep these gifts in us.
2. To act them in us. 3. To witness these unto our souls, for our comfort, and
the good one of another. Some Scriptures for all these.

1. That there is need of the Holy Ghost to keep these things in us, 2 Timothy
1.14. That good thing which was committed unto thee, keep by the Holy Ghost
which dwells in us. There is a very worthy thing committed to us, how shall
we keep it? not by our own wit and wisdom, careful watchfulness, and
faithfulness, (though such things ought not to be wanting) but the charge is,
Keep those things by the Holy Ghost, which dwells in us. We stand in need of
Gifts, to be fit instruments in the hand of God; we stand in need of the Spirit
of God, to maintain that which God gives us: and though Adams Gifts were in
perfection, yet not having the holy Ghost to keep them for him, they all fly
from him, as soon as ever he had tasted of the forbidden fruit, and left him
naked and desperate. Therefore in the Covenant of Grace the Lord gives the
Holy Ghost to keep strong possession in his servants, against the strong man
armed. This is the first ground why the Holy Ghost dwells in us.

2. It Is the Holy Ghost, that acts the gifts given to us, and enableth them
in us: for the Holy Ghost who keeps possession, does derive continued
strength into our faith, which puts life into all the gifts of God. And if
you shall ask how love, and patience, and the rest of the gifts of God do work?
The Holy Ghost stirs up faith to look unto Christ, who returns strength by
his Spirit unto Faith; and so faith works by love, and by meekness, and by
all the rest of the fruits of the Spirit. Thus the Spirit of God acts
according to what we read, Romans 8.14. As many as are led by the Spirit of God,
are the sons of God: come to any holy duty, and it is the Holy Ghost, that
leads you along, and atteth in you: so Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and you shall keep my
judgments, and do them. And, holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost. It is the Spirit of God that moves us to any good work, and that
acts the gifts of his grace in us.

3. The Spirit of God does not only keep these gifts for us, and act them in
us; but it is the same Spirit of God that witnesses to these gifts, and
shows what gifts he has given us; for such is the blindness of the nature of
all the sons of men, and it is a wonder to see, that generally Christians when
the Lord first works these gifts in them, not one of a thousand but they
think they are in a sad and fearful condition, and so they are very
uncomfortable: but now left that we should always mistake that which the Lord
has given us, we have received the Spirit of God, that we might know the
things that are freely given unto us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. he indeed takes his
own time to discover it, to some sooner, to some later; but this is his
intendment, that he might honor his grace unto us, by all the rich and gracious
gifts which he has given us.

He does also reveal unto us the duties which he helps us to do, Romans 9.1. I
say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness in
the holy Ghost, That I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in mine
heart: For I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my
Brethren, my Kinsmen according to the flesh. The Holy Ghost that wrought in him
this brotherly-love, the same Holy Ghost bears him witness that he does not
lie; and that he had continual sorrow in his heart, and that he could have
wished to have been accursed from Christ, that they might be saved; it grieved
him so much that the whole Nation should be destitute of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Thus we see how great need there is of the Holy Ghost to dwell in us, to keep
all the gifts of his grace in us, to act them according to his will, and to
discover to us what gracious gifts the Lord has wrought in us, and what duties
he has helped us to do, that we may be able to give account of them by the
Holy Ghost that dwells in us, and bears witness with us. So there is
necessity both of the gifts of grace, that we may be fit Temples for the Holy
Ghost to dwell in, and fit instruments for him to work by: there is need also
the Holy Ghost should dwell in us, for the causes we have spoken unto.

And I might add this, to comfort us in all the changes that may come upon us:
it is a strong Scripture which we read in Joh. 15.26. When the Comforter is
come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth which
proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me, (our Divines have no place
of more clear evidence to prove the procession of the Spirit from the Father)
both of what mighty redemption he has wrought for us, and what grace he has
wrought in us. This the Holy Ghost shall testify, even he that proceeds from
the Father; this is the comfort of Gods people. Thus we see both these points
opened to us.

How may we then employ and improve this Sanctification which the Lord has
given us,

If so be it, Cor. 1.30. Christ is made unto us of God, wis. dom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: therefore we are to see him
principal author of all these things in us, and for us. This is the principal
comfort of all, and the glory of all our safety; and so far as any of these
lies in our Sanctification, we ought to see that it be sanctification in Jesus
Christ; and then it is sanctification in Jesus Christ, when the Lord gives us
to look unto the Lord Jesus in it, and to it in him; and as we look for our
holiness to be perfect in Jesus Christ, so we look for continual supply of it
from him: and this it is to make Christ our sanctification, when as whatsoever
gift the Lord gives us, we go not forth in the strength of it, but in the
strength of Jesus Christ. There may be a change in the soul, which may spring
from a spirit of Bondage, and may captivate our consciences unto the Law, that
may restrain us from sin, and constrain us unto duties: but such holiness
springs not from union with Jesus Christ; for there may be a conscience of
duty, without sense of our need of Jesus Christ: as it was with the Israelites
at Mount Sinai, Deuteronomy. 5.27. Go thou near (say they to Moses) and hear all that
the Lord our God shall say, and speak thou unto us, all that the Lord our God
shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it, and do it: they have well said, all
that they have spoken, says the Lord; O that there were an heart in them, that
they would fear me! and so forth. This I say, therefore, is the first thing to
be attended unto; as ever you would make a right use of your holiness, see that
it be such as flows from Jesus Christ, and that there be not only an heart
awed with the Law, but waiting upon Jesus Christ to be all in all in us, and to
us: so shall we neither neglect the gifts of God in us, nor Christ, and his
Spirit; but shall give their due honor unto all of them together.

2. This may also teach all Christians not to trust upon the gifts of their
Holiness: though they do spring from the Holy Gbost himself, though they be
such as are unchangeable, though they spring from Jesus Christ, and knit your
souls in Union with him; yet trust not in the gifts themselves: the Lord lays
it down as the Apostasy of Israel, Ezekiel. 16.14, 15. Thy renown went forth among
the Heathen, for thy beauty; for it was perfect through my comeliness which I
had put upon thee, says the Lord God. But thou did trust in thine own
beauty, and playedst the Harlot, etc. Trust not therefore in any of these; but
let all our confidence be in Jesus Christ, not in any of the gifts of his
Spirit, whatsoever. For a little further opening of it.

1. Trust not in any gifts that you have received for the performance of any
duty, for it is not the strongest Christian that is able to put forth a good
thought, 2 Cor. 3.5. But our sufficiency is of God. He that abides in me, and
I in him, the same brings forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing,
Joh. 15.5. And the Apostle Paul cannot only not do any great matter by his own
strength and grace, but nothing at all without Jesus Christ; and therefore he
gives us to understand, that it is God that works in us both to will and to
do, Phil. 2.12. if therefore we have any new work to do, look to the Lord Jesus
Christ afresh by Faith, that he may carry an end our works in us, and for us;
otherwise it is not any strength or grace in us, that can produce any good
work, word, or thought: And therefore (mind you) the Apostle makes it a
Principle of Christian Religion, that The just man lives by his Faith; and he
often mentions it, Gal. 2.20. The life which I now live in the flesh, I live
by the faith of the Son of God; where he puts it into his own experience:
why? did he not live by Love, and Patience, and Zeal? etc. yes truly, they were
lively in him, if ever in any man, besides our blessed Savior; and yet
notwithstanding, he never attributed life to any of these gifts of his; but if
he speak of his Life, he makes this his Universal Life, I live by the Faith of
the Son of God, and I am I am able to do all things through Christ which
strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. This is the true savor of a Christian spirit,
that when gifts are at the highest, the heart is then at the lowest: 1 Cor.
15.9, 10. The Apostle Paul there acknowledges himself to be as one born out of
due time; for (says he) I am less then the least of the Apostles, not meet to
be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God; I, but by the
grace of God I am what I am, and his grace which was bestowed upon me was not
in vain, but I labored more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace
of God in me. This is truly spiritual sanctification, that when the soul is
full of the Holy Ghost, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, yet he is like a man in
great penury, as having nothing of himself: This is a marvelous spiritual
poverty, and you shall ever find (and I desire the Lord would open the hearts
of his people to know what I speak) that if Christians have fallen, their
greatest falls have been in their most exemplary gifts. If you shall mark the
sins of all the servants of God, they have been chiefly found in the very
exercise of their best gifts. Let us take a little taste of them, that we may
learn to use our gifts in the strength of Jesus Christ.

Abraham, a man full of faith, none went beyond him in Old nor New Testament:
yet if you read of any failing in him, it is in want of the acting of faith.
What made him afraid not once, but the second time, that his wife would be
taken away from him by Pharaoh? Genesis 12. by Abimelech? chap. 20. had not the
Lord promised that he would bless him wheresoever he came? Genesis 12.2. He had so
much of the knowledge and grace of God shining in him, that Sarah needed not
have dissembled; and Abimelech (a poor Heathen) could say as much, chap. 20.16.
Behold, thy husband it a covering of the eyes to all that are with thee, and
with all other; thus she was reproved: as if he should say, Thou need no
shifts and lies for thy protections, and to be a vail unto thee: this a poor
Heathen can discern, that such a man as has God with him, needs no other
shifts nor covering to defend and shelter him. Thus we see that these great
failings of Abraham, were proper acts of unbelief. Moses, a meek man, none like
him for meekness on the face of the earth; there is but one sin storied of him
after he was called to the Government of that State, and this was his failing;
Hear now you rebels, Must we fetch you water out of this rock? so he lift up
his hand, and with his rod he smote the rock twice, Numb. 20.10, 11. they
provoked Moses, as meek as he was: sometimes, when Aaron and Miriam dealt as
peremptorily with him, he was not moved from the meekness of his spirit: but
now he falls into Passion, and this was the very sin, for which the Lord
excluded him out of Canaan, Numb. 27.12, 13, 14. It was the breach of this
royal grace, chap. 20.12. Because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the
eyes of the children of Israel, therefore you shall not bring this congregation
into the Land which I have given them: which words show us the reason of his
failing in the grace wherein he so much abounded, because ye believed me not.
The Lord will have him know, that he must live by his fiath in his meekness. If
any man think himself to be a meek man, and nothing shall over-wrastle him
there, if you believe not in God but in your meekness, your confidence will
soon fail you. Peter, a man full of courage; and you read of two of his
principal failings, and both in point of courage; he failed in the high Priests
hall at the voice of a Damsel, and in the porch at the speech of another Maid;
and the third time, at the voice of one that stood by, Mat. 26.69. etc. whereas
afterward when he lived by faith, he became undaunted. Another failing of his
in point of courage we read of, Gal. 2.12. He feared those of the circumcision;
and whereas before he did eat with the Gentiles, when certain of the
Circumcision came from James, he withdrew, and separated himself, and so
dissembled, and others likewise with him, insomuch, that Barnabas also was
carried away with their dissimulution. Thus the Apostle Peter's most eminent
gifts did not bring forth their fruits. Know therefore, that the best of all
your gifts, faith, meekness, courage, wisdom, love to your brethren, will fail,
if you trust in them; and you will be most apt to fail there wherein you do
most excel. If a man be wise, he shall fail in that point, and it may be in
nothing so much, as in that, even in those things wherein he thinks he
walks most wisely: and such an one will find most trials in point of his
wisdom; and the like will be found in all other graces, and all to this end, to
teach the Israel of God to know, that no man lives by his wisdom, nor by any
thing in himself, but by faith in Jesus Christ, whom God has given unto his
people; and who is only able to give new supplies of his Spirit unto his
servants to act every gift which he has given them. I might have mentioned the
example of Sarab, a meek and a quiet godly spirited woman, subject and obedient
to her husband, and called him Lord; whose daughters you are while you do well,
1 Pet. 3.6. and yet you know one of her greatest failings, was in point of
Reverence to her husband, Genesis 16.5. When she saw that she was despised in the
eyes of her maid, whom she had given unto her husband, she said to Abraham, My
wrong be upon thee, and the Lord judge between me and thee. Where is the
reverence of Sarah now? Will you have the daughters of Sarah to imitate her
herein? What had her husband done? There was no fault in him in this matter;
she had no reason to tax him upon this point; it was her own counsel, ver. 2.
that he should go in to her maid, that I may obtain children by her: therefore
there was no color of any just complaint on her part; yet see, this
meek-spirited woman failed in the point of her meekness herein, and did
express no greater failing all her life long, that we read of: she was weak in
faith once, but there was great reason, for that her womb was dead, and her
Lord (as she called him) was old also; nor does the Angel so much blame her
about it: but that action wherein she most failed, was against that grace
wherein she most abounded. And though every grace of the Spirit be of great
force, when the Lord does act and move it, yet let a man go forth in the
strength of his greatest gifts, and if ever his heart fail him, it will be in
them.

Think not when you have done all you can, that you are worthy of any thing,
but say, that you are unprofitable servants: for though Sanctification be the
way wherein the Lord will pour out all his blessings upon his servants, yet he
does require them to boast in none of their excellencies, but look at them all
as freely given them of God: and consider that the right unto all springs
from fellowship with Jesus Christ, that so not only the gift it self is grace,
but the blessing that follows upon it is grace also. And suppose that we have
attained all that we pray for, shall we then exalt our own gifts? No, but let
us say with Jacob, Genesis 32.10. I am less then the least of all the mercies and
truth which thou have showed unto thy servant.

Do not trust upon gifts, nor upon duties performed by those gifts, to reach
the blessing; so look not for your justification from thence at all: for the
Apostle is plain, that he looked not for any thing for his righteousness before
his conversion; and after his conversion, he counts it all, as dross, and
dung, that he might win Christ, Phil. 3.6, 7, 8. And for our faith; they are
not to be trusted upon, as grounds of it: for all the gifts of our
sanctification, are fruits of our faith; and therefore faith is said to work by
love, Gal. 5.6. And so it does by all other gifts of the Spirit; and if they be
fruits of faith, then faith is not built upon them. And thus much for the
second Use which Christians are to make of their sanctification.

3. There is in the next place, a point of witness, which this Sanctification
does yield, and the Spirit of God by it. The water bears witness to the
blood, and the blood to the water, and the Spirit unto both, 1 John 5.6, 7, 8.
A man's own spirit bears witness also, Romans 8.16. The Spirit of God bears
witness with our spirits, that we are the children of God; and therefore as a
witness of God unto our faith, we may lawfully hear what it speaks: but this
is the life of a true evidence, that all these gifts of God do not bear witness
any further then a man sees the Lord Jesus working them in him, and for him:
for it is faith that makes all the graces of the Gospel active, and it is a
condition so requisite, that unless our works be of faith, and flow from it,
they are not acceptable before God, Heb. 11.6. for without faith it is
impossible to please God; therefore unless faith carry an end our works, they
are not works of holiness, such as should bear witness to the soul. Therefore
the Apostle does stir up the Corinthians unto this mainly, Examine your selves
whether you are in the faith, 2 Cor. 13.5. if he do exhort them to examination,
it is in point of faith: and therefore some of our Divines, as Reverent Forbes
of Middleburgh by name, who has written a Sermon upon it, wherein he notes
this, that unless men find faith in their holiness, none of all their
Sanctification will become a sound witness of the grace of God unto them: but
if faith be found, then you shall see Jesus Christ accepting you, and breathing
in you, except you be reprobates. There is a marvelous gracious witness, that
sanctification gives unto him that lives by faith in Jesus Christ, if it be
in Christ, and from Christ, and for Christ. This only is that sanctification
which the Lord commends unto his children, to seek after it.

4. A fourth Use of our sanctification is, that the Spirit of God helps us by
it in point of rejoicing; and therefore it is that you shall see the servants
of God, rejoicing in their holiness; so does the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 1.12.
This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity, and
godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had
our conversation in the world; he rejoices at what the Lord does by him, and
with him. Let every man prove his own work, and so shall he have rejoicing in
himself, and not in another. Gal. 6.4. But what is it that makes the Apostle
to rejoice before God? When he rejoices in his work before the Lord, you shall
ever find him rejoicing at the Lords acting these gifts in him, and blessing
him in his work: let us look upon two or three Scriptures for this end, 1 Timothy
1.12, 13. I thank Jesus Christ our Lord, who has enabled me, for that he
counted me faithful, putting me into the ministry; who was before a blasphemer,
etc. this he thanketh God for: so that, mind you, as he sees God giving him
these gifts, and enabling him unto the work, so he blesses God in that behalf.
You shall find him also blessing God, that had prospered this work of the
Ministry wheresoever he came, 2 Cor. 2.14. Thanks be to God which always
causes us to triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the savor of his
knowledge by us in every place. The Lord working in him, and for him, makes
him to triumph, and to over-wrastle all the difficulties which he meets
withal. The Lord had given him gifts, and taught him to exercise those gifts,
and does accept him; and therefore he expresses himself in a marvelous strong
speech, Phil. 1.20, 21. I am in nothing ashamed, but that with all boldness, as
always, so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by
life, or by death: for to me to live, is Christ; and to die, is gain: to me to
live, is Christ; as if he had said, I have no life but from Christ, I put forth
no act of life but for Christ: this is the sum of all his conversation; and if
Christ be his life, then death will be his advantage, and Christ will be
magnified in either. Thus we may see how the Saints of God have made use of
their sanctification; they are careful to see that it flow from Christ; and yet
when they have it, they dare not trust in their best gifts for the least duty,
neither do they look for their faith from their best gifts, but they expect
their best gifts to flow from their faith: they make use of the testimony of
their holiness, when they see Christ in it, and faith in it, and the Spirit of
God carrying them along in the ways and duties thereof: thus they see their
holiness, and take comfort in it, and from the witness of it, as that by which
the Lord dispenses comfort unto his people, when they receive it from the
hands of Christ, and by faith in him, by which they are taught of God, to carry
an end their whole conversation in his name.

5. Furthermore, as we receive it from Christ, and trust not in it, but in
Christ, and receive the witness of it in Christ, and in the holy Spirit of
Christ; and as we receive Joy and Comfort also, which the Lord does minister
unto us, in a sanctified course, by his holy Spirit: so we grow up, and perfect
our Holiness, which we have received in his Name: there is growth in grace;
this sanctification is not bedrid; Christians are not as weak now, as they were
seven years ago, nor do they stand at a stay, but go forward in Christianity:
and hereupon the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians, Ephesians. ^.6. to speak the
truth in love, that they may grow up into him in all things, which is the head,
even Christ; implying, that men that enter into ways of Holiness, ought to
grow on unto perfection in the fear of God. The Righteous shall hold on his
way, and he that has clean hands shall grow stronger and stronger, Job 17.9.
And many sweet means the Lord has appointed for this end; the communion of
Gods people tends hereunto, Prove. 13.20. He that walks with the wise shall
learn wisdom: all the Ordinances of God are appointed for this end also, to
beget and increase faith and holiness; therefore a Christian in the use of all
these Ordinances does not stand at a stay, but is still thriving and growing;
and that not in his own strength, but in the strength of Jesus Christ, seeking
for his acceptance and help in every duty he goes about: and this is that
which the Apostle Paul does exhort the Colossians unto, chap. 2.6, 7. As ye
have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, rooted and built up in
him, and stablished in the faith. This ought Christians mainly to attend unto;
that as you see the branch, the more juice it sucketh from the root, the more
fruitful it is: so also it becomes the people of God, to know, that the more
need we stand in to be fruitful, the more need we have to derive a continual
fresh supply from the Lord Jesus Christ, that by his Spirit, renewing grace in
us, we may be enlarged, and carried an end in the ways of God: whereas
otherwise the hearts of Christians would soon fail to go on in those things,
wherein they desire to be growing up unto perfection. What is the reason that
so many servants of God, are not so lively in their profession, as they were
wont to be many years ago? Truly, we attend upon Ordinances, but it is only
upon the outward act of them, and not upon Jesus Christ in them. This is many
times wanting in the hearts of Gods people: but truly if this be our constant
frame, and we do not recover our selves, then is not our sanctification that
which flows from fellowship with Jesus Christ, and the Spirit of his grace;
for you shall ever find this to be true, that there is no gift of Jesus Christ,
nor sanctification accompanying salvation, but it does knit us nearer and
nearer unto Christ; for the more we are filled with true spiritual gifts, the
more empty we are of our own strength, and of self-conceits, and so we ought to
be; otherwise you shall constantly find this, that if the Lord do not preserve
this empty frame in us, the more full we are of any gift, the more full shall
we be of our own strength, and consequently we shall feel the less need of
Jesus Christ; and if this be our constant frame, it will be a sad argument that
our best sanctification will not endure, but fall away, unless we be knit unto
Jesus Christ by the Spirit of his grace; for by all true sanctification, we are
the more knit unto him: so that if any man would know whether the
superscription of Christ and his image be stamped upon his sanctification, this
you shall ever find to be the stamp of the grace of Jesus Christ; That the more
you receive from him, the more need you stand in of him: insomuch, that
notwithstanding all the gifts of the Spirit, there is not the ablest Minister
of the New Testament, but (if your gifts flow from the Spirit of Christ, and
knit you unto Christ) you will find as great need to cleave unto Jesus Christ,
as ever you did the first day, when you came trembling into the Pulpit. If
therefore we feel our selves full, so that the more we have received, the more
sufficient we are; and go not about the duties we have in hand, in fear and
trembling, but in self confidence; if this be our usual, and constant practice,
it is but counterfeit Christianity: I do not say, That the gifts are
counterfeit, for they are from the Spirit of God, and men may by them be very
serviceable to Church and Commonwealth: but this is certain, that the stronger
and the more your gifts are, if you sit loose from Christ, the emptier your
hearts are of him. But you will say, May not a Christian be sometimes full of
himself, and depend upon the strength of his own gifts? Yes, brethren, God
forbid I should deny that, for the best Christians have gone astray in the
exercise of their best gifts; and hereupon Abraham has been wanting in faith,
and Moses in meekness, and Peter in courage, and Sarah in her modesty; they
have been so apt to trust upon those graces of God, wherein they have most
abounded, that they have principally failed therein: but this you shall find,
that if they have been overtaken once, or twice, as the burnt child dreadeth
the fire; so they grow to be more sensible of their need of Jesus Christ, more
fearful of departing from him, more careful to cleave unto him, that they might
grow up in his name to all well pleasing in his sight. If therefore there be a
sanctification that stands at a stay in any man, it is a great suspicion
whether it flow from fellowship with Christ, or no: if gifts be truly
spiritual, a man shall ordinarily grow up in them: Habenti dabitur, Employ
them, and multiply them; but if you have received gifts in your own strength,
and you are now full of your own sanctification, truly this is but froathy
work, and does not convey true nor lively nourishment and comfort: but to him
that in his most spiritual gifts is empty of himself, and only full of Jesus
Christ; to live, or die, is his advantage. This is the Use which I would
commend unto you touching your Christian Sanctification. Thus we see sundry
things have been cleared from this Doctrine concerning the Covenant of Grace.
There remains another thing to be resolved, and cleared from the Doctrine:
For if God in the Covenant of his Grace, do give himself to be a God to
Abraham, and his seed, It is then to be enquired, 1. How God the Father gives
himself. 2. How God the Son gives himself. 3. How God the Holy Ghost gives
himself: For these are the Fundamentals of the Covenant of Grace, and necessary
to be opened for clearing the Doctrine of it.

1. Abraham, and to his seed; that is, to the faithful seed of Abraham?

By a threefold work does God the Father give himself, a God unto Abraham, and
to his elect seed.

1. The first Act of God, is by Giving his own Son out of his bosom, for the
redemption of Abraham, and his seed. That is the first and Fundamental of all
the rest, that God does put forth, or any other person in Trinity, for the
applying of the Covenant unto the hearts of his people. And God in giving his
Son does give himself, Joh. 9.14. and 10.30. He that has seen me, has seen
the Father; and, I and my Father are one: if God gives us his Son, he gives
us himself also: so says the Apostle John, 1 John 2.23. He that has the Son
has the Father, and he that has not the Son has not the Father. Herein has
God commended his love toward us, that while we were yet sinners Christ died
for us; Romans 5.8. this is the love of God to send us his Son, that whosoever
believes in him, might not perish but have everlasting life. Joh. 3.16. As God
gives us his Son, so he gives us all things else in his Son, Romans 8.32. for,
he that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he
not with him also freely give us all things? So then this is the first and the
great work of God, that he has given his Son out of his own bosom, to take our
nature upon him, to lead a miserable life, and to die a cursed death; and in
him has given all his attributes, his mercy, and power unto the sons of men;
an undoubted sign that God intends to give himself in the Covenant of Grace
unto his people, when he gives Jesus Christ himself in that Covenant, as he
does say expressly, Isa. 42.6. I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and
will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and will give thee for a Covenant of
the people, for a light of the Gentiles. Wherein we may see, that God gives
another, even that God the Father gives God the Son; thus it is a gift of the
Covenant that the Lord gives Christ to be the foundation of the Covenant, and
the chief blessing of it; in chap. 49.8. He speaks to the same purpose, In an
acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped
thee, and will preserve thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the people, etc.
No man has seen God at any time, Joh. 1.18. nor can see him, nor will God the
Father have immediate fellowship with any creature, but the only begotten Son
of the Father, the Lord has given him that he might reveal him. Thus we may
perceive that the Lord is gracious, and marvelous gracious, in that he gives
us his dear Son, the second person in Trinity; and thus he says to his elect,
I will be a God unto thee, and give thee my Son, that shall redeem thee out of
all distress, and danger: This does the Lord for his people, and it is a clear
evidence of his grace, and shows that his love unto his people is beyond all
banks, and bottoms, for the Lord to give us his Son, and this Son so soon as he
was promised; not the Lord only, but his people saw him afar off, Job. 8.5, 6.
Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. For
when the Lord Jesus Christ was promised unto him, Genesis 17.16, 17. and the Lord
had said unto him, I will bless Sarah, and give thee a son of her; yea, I will
bless her, and she shall be a mother of many nations, kings of people shall be
of her; then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed; he did rejoice that the
Lord would give him a Savior out of his loins: how it could be brought to
pass, it may be he knew not; but by a Spirit of Prophecy did he discern it
much, no doubt. This is the first work of God in giving himself by Covenant;
and this was done long ago, before we were born: he gave him in his eternal
Counsel, when he did elect us in him; he gave him when he sent him into the
world: but this is more, when he gives us unto his Christ, by Covenant, and
draws us unto him, and gives Christ unto us also: and this grace of God
comes nearer unto us; the other did leave us like Lambs in a large pasture:
but now as he gives us unto Christ, so he gives him to us, and both in
present possession; and this the Father does, Joh. 6.44. for no man, says
Christ, can come unto me, except the Father, which has sent me, draw him: and
every one that has heard and learned of the Father, comes unto me. Now this
hearing, and learning of the Father, is a strange kind of learning, which the
Lord teaches the soul by, when he draws him unto Christ; an effectual
Teaching, and powerful, 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by whom ye were called
unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. This is our effectual
calling, and this is the Lords giving us unto his Son, Joh. 6.37. All that the
Father gives me, shall come unto me: all this is properly the work of the
Father. Men are said to be well given, when they give themselves to their
Books, to their Works, and business: but this we may well say, that we are
indeed well given, when the Lord gives us unto his Son; for otherwise we are
but in an ill state, which way soever we are given.

Quest. If you shall ask how the Father gives us, and calls us, and draws
us to fellowship with his Son? (for they are Scripture-phrases, and all of them
of like value in Scripture-sence.)

Ans. In a word; The Lord draws us unto his Son by his Spirit, and calls us
as by his Word, so by his Spirit also, and gives us by his Word and Spirit
unto Jesus Christ. In this thing I shall speak no more unto you, then what you
have often heard, and I suppose long ago received, as, that the Lord calls
his people out of their sins, by the light of the Law, and by the spirit of
bondage he sets home the Law effectually unto the soul, and thereby draws
us from sin, and from the world in some measure, that we have now no might to
those things, which before we were full of delight in: whether they be sins
against the Law, or sins against the Gospel; it is the Lords usual dealing by
his Spirit, to set home sins against both; Insomuch that thereby we come to be
afflicted with some kind of trembling, and fear, and torment about our
spiritual estate: and thus it was with Saul, (who afterward was Paul) Act.
9.3, 4, 5, 6. when Jesus Christ called unto him out of heaven, he all
trembling, and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me to do? So it was
with the Jailer, Act. 16.29. after the Lord had shaken his heart with an
earthquake, (which is a sanction of the Law, and a ratification of it) as all
Gods Judgments are) he called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling
to Paul and Silas. Thus the Lord draws men out of themselves, and their
sinful ways, by a spirit of bondage, whereby they are greatly and deeply
afflicted with fear; concerning which, the Apostle Paul says, 2 Timothy 1.7. God
has not given us the spirit of fear, or bondage; but of power, of love, and of
a sound mind, etc. such fear also the Apostle John speaks of, 1 John 4.18.
when he says, Perfect love casts out fear, for fear has torment; which
comes from the sense of a man's state, whereby he is many times forced to cry
out, and to say, Woe worth my soul, that ever I was born; for the Lord causes
me to possess all my sins, and presses me down to the nethermost hell: this is
one work of the spirit of bondage, by which the Lord draws the soul out of
itself, and its sins, though of it self the spirit of fear goes no further
then to shake a man's carnal confidence: but there is a further act of the
spirit of bondage, according to that power which was given to the faithful
witnesses, Revel. 11.

Besides this spirit of bondage, the Lord has another work, which is called a
spirit of burning, Mal. 4.1. The day comes that shall burn as an oven; and all
the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble, and the day that
comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts; and it shall leave them
neither root nor branch. This is a spirit of burning; let us speak unto it a
little. The Prophet says, It shall leave them neither root nor branch. There
are two things in the root.

1. First is the root of Abraham's Covenant, which this people much trusted
upon; and that is it of which John Baptist speaks, Now the ax is laid to the
root of the tree, etc. and this he spoke ( Mat. 3.9.) after he had said, Think
not to say with your selves, We have Abraham to our father, ver. 8. So that all
the confidence that they had in Abraham's Covenant, and Temple, and Tabernacle,
and such things, is burnt up; and so they have no root left them to stand upon.
And this is one thing intended by the root. But

2. There is something more in it: for with this spirit of burning, the Lord by
the power of his Spirit does cut us off, from any power of our own natural
gifts, or parts, and spiritual gifts also, whereby we thought to lay hold on
Jesus Christ; and we are cut off hereby from all that confidence that we have
in our own sufficiency, when once the Lord intends to bring a soul unto
himself; for there is an usual prefidence that we have of our own state: though
the Lord have cut us off from hope in the righteousness of our parents, and
from boasting of his Ordinances, yet we think there is some power still left
us, and therefore we hope, and will seek, that the Lord may reveal himself to
us in mercy and peace; but when the Lord comes nearer unto us, he will show us
how unable we are to take up the least good resolution; we shall be like
bruised reeds, and not find our selves able to hold up our heads; for Christ
came to seek and to save that which was lost. So that Christ will not seek us
until we be lost; and therefore he says, Mat. 16.24. If any man will come
after me, let him deny himself, and follow me; and according hereunto it is,
that those converts, Act. 2.37. do cry out, when they were pricked in their
heart, and said unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men, and brethren,
what shall we do? Hence it is also, that the poor souls that came unto Christ,
Mat. 12.20. were like bruised reeds that could not hold up their heads; for the
Lord in this case bruiseth them, and lays them low, that they see no more
hope of mercy, no likelihood that God should show them any hope. Thus does the
Lord burn up the root of Abraham's Covenant wherein men trust, and the root of
all our self-sufficiency; that now we find our selves dried up, and our
strength consumed; that now we are not able to think, as of our selves, a good
thought.

And again, The Lord by this spirit of burning, does burn up all our branches
also, how fair and green soever they have been; all our fastings, and
humiliations, and alms-deeds, and prayers; such things as the Pharisees much
boasted in, Mat. 6.1, 2, 3. etc. but these things are all burnt up. This is a
spirit of bondage, partly as it works a trembling and fear, and partly as it
works to the burning up of all the hope that we have in our selves. There is
a spirit of bondage, I confess, that only works unto fear; and now all the
hope is, that a man sets upon reformation: but if the Lord love a man's soul,
he will not let him stay there; but goes further with him, and shows him
that his prayers and fastings are all empty, and fall short of the life and
power of Jesus Christ. I, but yet, the soul is not quite out of hope, though
the Law cannot save me; if it cannot, I must get me to Jesus Christ then, and
lay hold upon him for salvation: as if all were to be had by faith in Jesus
Christ, if once he can lay hold upon him, and nothing else were required but
faith in Jesus Christ, and my laying hold upon him. I see plainly (says a man
in this case) that there is no hope in me, as has been rightly observed; and
therefore he trusts upon Jesus Christ, and gives himself to Jesus Christ:
but now if the Lord love thy soul, he will not suffer thee there to rest, the
spirit of burning will not leave thee so. How come thou by faith in Jesus
Christ? Why? Thou tookest it up of thy own accord; thou thoughtest, all thy
gifts and duties were in vain, and therefore now thou will believe in Jesus
Christ; Is it so easy a matter? Can any man come unto Christ, except the
Father draw him? And is thy faith any more then a resolution of thine own, when
thou wast convinced of the emptiness of thine own gifts and abilities? When
this spirit of burning has blasted this thy faith also, and that by the clear
evidence of the Gospel put upon it; now, says the soul, I see that I am not in
Christ: though I said, I would trust in Christ; yet I see it is not every one
that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: now I see it is
not my faith that will reach Jesus Christ, it is not a faith of my own
undertaking that will serve the turn; I see now Christ alone must work this
great work in me, and Christ in the way of his own Ordinances; therefore I must
look for it in his word, and in the fellowship of the Sacraments; therefore I
will look up unto the Lord in all these, and wait for him, and seek him
therein. And so the poor soul makes account, that in time he shall find Jesus
Christ in the Ordinances, and so hammereth out a faith from thence, and therein
blesses himself. Now (mind you) the Spirit of God (when the Lord God the
Father will draw home the soul thoroughly to Jesus Christ) will burn up all thy
confidence: for if thy soul be not utterly lost; so long as it has any root,
or power in it self: though I cannot work, I will believe; and if I cannot
believe, I will wait that I may believe; and so here is still the old root of
Adam left alive in us, whereby men seek to establish their own righteousness,
whereof the Apostle Paul often makes mention: This old root puts forth it
self, and will not suffer the soul to be wholly for Christ, and for Christ
alone; and all because there is a spring of Adam still in the soul: whence it
is that the soul is marvelous apt to have hope and confidence more or less from
some virtue or power in himself; therefore it is no small matter to be cut off
from Adam, that is contrary to nature ( Romans 11.24.) as says the Apostle: For
if thou were cut out of the olive tree, which is wild by nature, and were
graffed contrary to nature into a good olive tree; this is marvelous strong
work, when the Spirit of God comes to act contrary things to nature: for
nature is fully possessed, that what God commands, I am able to do it: nature
will not be persuaded to the contrary: If I hear God command any thing, I will
do it, (says a carnal heart) and if I cannot do it, I will believe; and if I
cannot believe, I will wait that I may believe: this is still but nature. Now
when the Lord comes indeed to engraft us into Jesus Christ, this is quite
contrary to nature. Why wherein is it so contrary to nature? I answer: whereas
nature is active for it self, now it comes to pass, that whereas a soul has
been stirring and busy in his own strength, at length the Spirit of God by the
mighty power of his Grace, being shed abroad into the soul, does burn up root
and branch, not only the root of Abraham's Covenant, but all the fatness of the
root of the wild Olive, by which we are fat, and lively to spiritual work, in
our apprehensions; so that we work in our own strength, until the Lord come,
and cut us quite down, and make us to see, that there is not in us the least
good thought, as of our selves; and therefore unless the Lord be wonderfully
gracious to us, we cannot be saved: till it come unto this, the soul is not fit
for Jesus Christ. Thus the Spirit of God may work powerfully in the hearts men,
and burn up their root and branch: and this a spirit of burning may do, and yet
leave the soul in a damnable condition, for ought I know; and such as many a
soul may be in, and yet never come to enjoy saving fellowship with Jesus
Christ. Therefore as this is one arm of God stretched forth for the salvation
of his people, when he draws them home to Jesus Christ: so

2. Secondly, there is a further work of God, when he gives the spirit of
adoption, which reaches beyond all the former work: he has cut us off from
our selves, and now we stand in a state quite contrary to nature; and if any
saving-work be wrought in us, it is quite contrary to nature; if any thing fall
upon the heart and soul of a man, to bring his will to this pass, to lie down
at Gods feet, that he knows not what to do; and yet whatsoever the Lord
calls him unto, he is willing if it were possible to be done; he would run
through fire and water to do it: but he finds himself unable to do any thing;
and now he will tell you, that to believe is as impossible for him, as to build
a world. Why then bid him wait: wait? says he; I but I cannot wait; and if I
seek the Lord, I cannot find him: and I see others of the servants of God
wrought upon graciously; but dead hearted I, nothing will work upon me. Now in
such a case as this, the Spirit of adoption comes into the heart of a
Christian, and takes possession of the soul for Jesus Christ, and so draws
the soul unto Jesus Christ, and makes it there to stay, and there to lie down,
and to be willing to be drawn yet nearer and nearer to Jesus Christ, and to be
carried an end by him, to take all from him, and to give all the glory to him.
This spirit of Adoption does give a man a son-like frame, to lie prostrate at
his Fathers will: like unto the Prodigal son, Luke 15.17, 18, 19. who when he
came unto himself, and saw how unable he was to provide for himself, and how
unworthy he was that his father should do any thing for him; he came and lay
down as it were at the feet of his father; for he is unable, and unworthy of
any mercy: now this stooping of the heart unto God, and yielding unto him to do
with us as seems good in his own eyes, is such a prostration of the heart
wherein the Lord has taken possession of the soul, that now a man is led unto
fellowship with Jesus Christ, that there is none in heaven but him, none in the
earth in comparison of him, that the soul desires after: and now a man waits
upon Christ, to see what he will do for him; and though he cannot tell you that
he waits, yet he does wait that he may be helped of God to depend upon him:
thus he receives all from Christ, and gives all unto Christ. This is the
Fathers drawing of the soul, which is expounded to be the hearing and learning
of the Father of which John speaks, chap. 6.45. He that has heard and
learned of the Father, comes unto me; which is, when the Lord has drawn the
soul out of his natural corruptions, legal reformations, pretenses of faith,
and waiting upon Christ in his own strength for faith if it be wanting: then
when the soul does lie at his feet to disposed of according to the will of God,
and is in some measure subject unto the Lord, though not so much as he could be
desirous he were; and therefore now the soul does not content and bless himself
in his faith, not any other gifts or works of his own; but yields himself
humbly unto the Lord, to work in him both will and deed, of his own good
pleasure, and to teach him how to seek, and wait, and believe, and long after
Jesus Christ; these things he waits for: otherwise, until he be thus taught
of God, the soul will always think that he can do something, and is not able to
come out of himself, to an utter denial of himself: but if any man will come
unto Christ, he must deny himself, even all his own gifts, and parts, and good
works whatsoever: for a man is never utterly denied, until there be nothing
left of which a man can say, This I am able to do, or this is an excellent
thing in me; and when it comes unto this pass, then will the soul lie down at
the will of God, and acknowledge that if the Lord would never show him mercy,
just and righteous are his judgments. Now when the soul and will of a
Christian are convinced of these things, as well as his judgment, that now he
waits upon Christ, as well that he may be able to wait, and seek the Lord, as
he does for any other good thing from the Lord; he waits now upon the Lord
for a poor spirit, and cannot perk up himself, as a bruised reed cannot do.
Thus when it comes unto saving-work, the will and soul of a man is so cast
down, that a man cannot tell what to make of himself; but there he lies, to
see what the Lord will do with him, whether he will reach forth the hand of
salvation unto him. In this case the soul is left utterly void, and has in
himself neither root nor branch; but sees how unable he is to believe, or
wait: nor can he tell whether Jesus Christ be his portion; and now does the
Lord take possession, and fill the empty soul. If you shall ask me how this
spirit comes into the soul, to make it thus to stoop unto Jesus Christ? You
shall find that the Lord uses to convey himself unto the soul in some word of
promise of the Gospel, that shows unto the soul the riches of the grace of
God in Jesus Christ: something or other is declared of Jesus Christ: This word
being taught in the public Ministry of the Word, or brought to remembrance in
some spiritual duty, as prayer, or conference, or the like (for I will not
limit the holy One of Israel, yet) usually it is done in the Ministry of the
Gospel; and though the Lord does not limit himself, yet he does limit us to
attend upon the means, which he usually works by: but whatsoever the way be,
this is the manner of Gods working, he does universally come into the soul, in
some word or other of his grace: as for instance, that in 2 Cor. 5.19. God was
in Christ reconciling the world unto himself; or that in 1 Timothy 1.15. Jesus
Christ came into the world to save sinners, of which I am chief. In some such
word of Gods grace, he comes and puts life into the soul, and makes it
somewhat quiet, and causes it to see that there is hope in Israel; and the Lord
is able to save me, and there is riches enough in Jesus Christ to save me. By
such kind of work it is, that the Lord brings the souls of his servants
effectually to Jesus Christ. And now has God the Father given us unto Jesus
Christ; and until now, thou never came home savingly. This is the second act
whereby God the Father gives himself unto the soul.

3. The third Act or work of God the Father which follows both these: So soon
as ever the Lord has given this self-denying spirit unto the soul, and has
made it like unto a bruised reed, or like a Traveller that is out of his way,
and willing to take any man by the hand that will lead him into his way again;
when the soul is in such a frame, now God the Father comes by a third work of
actual reconcilement: The first work, was of conviction: The second, was a work
of subjection: And the third, of reconciliation. This is the third work of the
Father: though there is in all these works a concurrence of the whole Trinity,
yet some are more proper unto each person, as our Catechisms teach us, and we
are not wont to scruple such expressions in them. God the Father created us;
and we cannot expound it, but as God the Father created us at the first, so he
does again create you, or else if we acknowledge it in the one, and not in the
other, we do God the Father wrong. Well, he is then reconciled unto us, having
given us the Spirit of his Son, and now he does pronounce us reconciled unto
him: this is the work which is spoken of, Romans 5.10. When we were enemies, we
were reconciled unto God, by the death of his Son. And this is the work of God
the Father, according to that which is before alleged, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in
Christ reconciling the world, etc. now there are two acts of God, as fruits
that follow hereupon, and both of them done at once upon the soul.

1. Act of God is Adoption, whereby he makes us his Children; as Gal. 4.4, 5,
6. When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman,
made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law; that we might
receive the adoption of sons: and because ye are sons, God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. And as many as
received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God, Joh. 1.12. So
that now we are the brethren of Christ, and the sons of the eternal God.
Adoption is properly the work of the Father: but Jesus Christ being the natural
Son of God, we must be knit unto him, before we can be accounted sons.

2. Act of God is Justification, It is God that justifies, who is he that
condemns? Romans 8.33, 34. This is the Fathers work, and it is principally
attributed unto him to forgive our iniquities, and to reconcile us in Jesus
Christ. And look as it is in our natural being; so soon as ever we have
received natural life from Adam, we become the sons of Adam, and his sin is
imputed unto us: so it is in the new birth; so soon as ever the life of Christ
is shed abroad into our hearts, so soon are we heirs with Christ, and the
righteousness of the second Adam is imputed unto us now to our justificacation,
as was the sin of Adam before to our condemnation.

The Doctrine it self is but an Use. wherein lies our spiritual union with
Jesus Christ, and how it is wrought and obtained: and this is necessary; for as
it has been observed by others, so we may now gather it from what we have
heard, that there be four sorts of men, that fall short of this union with
Jesus Christ.

1. You have some that bless themselves in their natural state; it may be they
are rich, and honorable among men: well, they bless themselves in that state,
and will never go any further.

2. There is another sort, that are convinced of the danger of their natural
estate, they dare not rest there, and hereupon they fall to reformations, and
so to duties of humiliation, and the like; wherein they find such a blessed
change, and so much comfort, as does satisfy them: and indeed the Lord does
comfort men in their reformations; for God will have no man lose by him, Mat.
6.2, 5. Hypocrites have their reward for their alms, and for their prayers.
Herod when he heard John, reformed many things, and heard him gladly. Mar.
6.20. here was a great change, and doubtless much comfort: yet these men never
had the work of God the Father, to burn up all that they have received by any
strength of their own.

3. A third sort go a step beyond these: They have been convinced, that they
went forth to reformation in their own strength: they plainly see it, and
discern it; and therefore they know that it is impossible to be saved by the
righteousness of the Law, and that it is not of works neither, of one kind, nor
of another: They are convinced, that faith only must do the deed, and upon this
ground they will take up faith to believe in Jesus Christ for salvation; and
that faith which formerly they have pitched upon their good duties, they will
now pitch it upon Jesus Christ: but still it is the same faith, for the root is
not yet burnt up, their old corruption still remains in them: and so here is
your old faith translated from one object to another; it was fastened before
upon duties and reformations, and now upon Jesus Christ: And now a man is ready
to plead, and say, If God had not loved me, he would never have set me upon
such reformations, nor have enlarged me with such comforts as he has done, if
he had not been well pleased with me in Jesus Christ: but though he may be
sometimes burnt up touching his hope in reformation, yet he will translate his
faith to Jesus Christ: but how came you to do that, brother? Why, I saw my
hopes in my own reformation would not serve my turn, and therefore I believed
in Jesus Christ; and now shall nothing draw me from Jesus Christ, nor pull me
from my confidence: for I have built upon some word of God, and some promise of
his unto such reformation as I have set upon; and is not this true faith in
Jesus Christ? This is far from true faith, it is no other but a strong fallacy
whereby the Devil does cheat men; and in truth, this faith is but a faith of a
man's own making, that I may so speak; it is no more but a spirit of burning at
the best, that has burnt up his confidence in his own works, and taught him to
resolve to believe on Jesus Christ.

4. There are a fourth sort, that fall far short of Jesus Christ also, and yet
go beyond all these: they go beyond works, and beyond this faith also which we
have spoken of, which was not a lively faith in Jesus Christ, whereby we are
justified; but men justify themselves by it, God does not justify them: now
this fourth sort come plainly to see that their faith is shaken, and they dare
not look God in the face, to justify the truth of their faith before him: It
is true, many an heavenly spirited man cannot tell what will become of him, nor
can he tell whether his faith be sound: but many an hypocrite also is so far
convinced, that he cannot tell what will become of him, nor can he say that his
faith is right, nor that he is able to believe: what faith the soul now in such
a case as this? He will say, I see it is not my reformation, nor my faith, that
will serve the turn: what is it then? I see that now I must wait upon Christ
that I may believe, and unto him must I seek for help. Is not this soul in a
state of everlasting fellowship with Jesus Christ? Truly this is that which the
Lord many times brings the souls of his servants unto; but he leaves them
not here, if he mean to do them good. For I would examine again, how came
thou to wait upon Jesus Christ? Thou have been driven out of conceit of thy
former faith, and so have been forced, and have seen a necessity to wait upon
Jesus Christ for faith, or else thou can not believe: force of argument has
constrained thee thus far. If thou have taken up a course of waiting only upon
this ground, here is a spark of old Adam still kept alive in thee: thou art
able to seek, and wait upon Jesus Christ, and yet I cannot promise thee that
thou have any part or portion in him. But a soul will say, Has not the Lord
made gracious promises to all those that seek for him? Has he not said, that
all they are blessed that wait for him? Isa. 30.18. and am not I wrapped up
hereby in a bundle of grace and peace? Mind you; there is no promise of life
made to such as wait and seek in their own strength, who being driven unto it,
have taken it up by their own resolutions; though I grant it is true, that
every one that waits for, and seeks the Lord aright, is driven unto it by
the Lord: but if ever the Lord mean to save you, he will rend as it were the
caul from the heart, I mean, he will pluck away all the confidence that you
have built upon, as a man would rend the entrails of a beast from him: so the
Lord will bring you to a flat denial of your selves, and that you have neither
good will nor deed as of your selves; and you know not what God will do with
you; but this you know, that whatsoever he does, he is most righteous. When the
Spirit of God comes as a Comforter, he will in this manner convince the soul
of a man, that he has heretofore hung upon his reformations for hope and
comfort; but now he is brought plainly to see, and flatly to deny, that he had
not so much as one drop of the fatness of the true Olive in him, when he most
trusted unto his own excellencies. Now a man being thus far brought on, does
not only deny himself in his Judgment, but in his will, and is ready to say,
as David sometimes did; If the Lord say, he has no pleasure in me, here I am,
let him do unto me as seems him good; the Lord is righteous in all that
comes upon me: this only the soul has for his support in such a case, the
Lord is able to do all for me that I stand in need of: If he show me no mercy,
he is just; if he be gracious, I shall live to praise him. Now when a man's will
is thus subdued, that he has no will of his own to be guided by, but the will
of God, this is true brokenness of heart, when not only the judgment, but the
heart and will is broken. The soul being thus convinced that neither his
working, nor believing, nor waiting, nor seeking as of himself will do him any
good, there is no mercy that he can challenge for any goodness sake of his own;
then comes the Holy Ghost in some declaration of Gods free Love, and takes
possession of the heart, and then the soul begins to pant after Jesus
Christ, and nothing in heaven but him, nor in the earth besides him: The soul
being thus wrought upon, begins to put forth it self toward the Lord Jesus;
but the Holy Ghost had taken possession before, and so helps our infirmities,
Romans 8.26, 27. he alone must help us, and no other: observe it I pray you, for
it is most necessary to know it to be impossible, that a conditional promise
should save the soul. A man is convinced that there is no condition will quiet
his spirit until the grace of God in Christ be manifested to him. This is the
first Use.

The second Use may give light touching a controversy, if it be stirring in
the Country, I know not whether it be, I fear it is, and yet hope that if
matters were rightly understood, there would be no material difference: for if
the Question be not about grace, but about the discerning of grace, you will
find that differences which tend unto the discerning of grace, will be of much
less dangerous consequence then the other; for thereupon lies the very
foundation of a Christian man's safe estate. How far there is difference in the
Country, I cannot give an account; but I desire that you may all understand
what I say.

If you demand, conditional, or upon an absolute promise? And are they not both
free?

I answer, trust upon Christ: I, will he say, with that faith by which I
trusted upon works before. If you tell him of promises made to faith, he will
say, But not to mine, that has only sprung from my own reformations. Consider,
all you that search the word of God this day, when the soul comes, to deny
that it has true faith, what promise can it apply unto that which it denies
it self to have? A soul will be ready to refuse promises, even when the Spirit
of God has taken possession; but then it is his sin: yet all the time before,
there is no reason but that the soul should refuse to apply Promises; when
there was nothing but a power of the spirit of Reformation, and till we be cut
off from the old Adam, we shall be ready to quarrel and snarle that the Lord
should deal thus with us; and why did he suffer Adam to fall? and put upon us
such a Law to obey, and then condemn us for that which we were never able to
perform? Truly there is nothing to help in this case: but the Lord will take
away thy crabbed spirit, he will make thee to lie flat at his feet, and to say,
If he will kill me, here I am; and if he will save thee, he will make thee
content to receive all from Christ; and to be willing that he should do with
thee, that which is good in his own eyes. And what can help a soul now, but
only an absolute promise? Whereby the soul is raised to look to the Name of
that Christ, whom he has all this while blasphemed and persecuted. Thus we see
upon what terms and grounds any one is jealous of building his comfort upon
conditional promises, and why we are so loath to say, that sanctification is an
evidence of a man's justification; it is because men may produce sanctification,
and promises unto it, when it is but legal righteousness. Yet some men will
say, I have been driven out of my own legal righteousness, and now I rest upon
Jesus Christ, and may I not take comfort in such faith, and sanctification
flowing therefrom? I confess faith in Christ, and sanctification flowing from
it, are precious treasures; but how came thou by them? If thou know not
how, I cannot but think that thou stoalest them, and came not by them in the
right way: you will say, Well, though I have no righteousness, nor faith of my
own, yet I can wait upon Christ: How came thou by power to wait upon Christ?
Here is a branch of the old Adam still springing forth afresh; thou art
confident in thine own strength, and worth; and if God deal otherwise with thee
then thou expectest, thou will be apt to wrangle with the Lord, so far will thou be from stooping to his will. Search the Scriptures, and see if it be not
the truth of God. See whether it be thy qualifications taken up upon unjust
grounds, that will save thy soul; thou have not been drawn far enough all this
while: if thou say thou have been drawn to reformation, and faith, and
waiting; If thou have been indeed drawn, it is a comfortable sign; but truly
the Promises do not belong unto thee, until thou art brought unto a flat denial
of thy self; and thy will be made to lie prostrate before the will of God, and
is unable to satisfy it self in any thing besides Jesus Christ; the want of
either of which, will leave a man still a member of old Adam; that either he
will cavil with God, or else will go away, and be jolly, and frolic, and free
of spirit, though he knows not what the Lord will do for him: which is a
plain sign that the Spirit of God is not there, and then there is no condition
of which it can be said, This is the spot of Gods children, This is the seal of
the servants of the Living God. If then the Spirit of God come upon the wings
of a promise, it is an absolute promise; and then you must not wonder, if we be
thus afraid that men should build their faith upon conditional promises: if men
build their consolation upon conditions of obedience, hypocrites have gone
beyond it: if you have trusted in your own faith, hypocrites will plead that
they have gone beyond that also; for they have waited upon God that they might
believe. And therefore see the reason why we do so much mistrust the building
of our faith upon promises made unto conditions in us. And I have given you the
grounds from the word of God: for I should be a Traitor to the Lord Jesus, if
I should speak from any other grounds. And though it be true (which I have
formerly said) that the fruits of the Spirir of grace in the heart of a
Christian, as Faith, and Patience, and Love, cannot be denied to be evidences
of a good estate; yet let it first appear from whence they come: first draw
near unto God in Jesus Christ, and when any are brought on to Christ by
self-denial, such men's faith and love are indeed evident tokens of salvation
and communion

with Christ; but until men be thus brought on, they can have no Evidence from
such graces. Therefore you see why we are so fearful to build our faith upon
qualifications; for any self-denying soul will tell you, that no promise will
serve his turn to build his faith upon, but some such as speaks of Gods
wonderful and free grace: if there be any promise made unto faith, he will find
himself very unable to apply it, until the Lord by some word of his free grace
has wrought faith in him.

You may see here the unsafeness of any such building; Christ in the Promise;
and then we must look up unto him to bring us unto the promises, and to apply
them to us. It is not possible that a corrupt tree should bring forth good
fruit: but first make the tree good; and good trees we cannot be, till we be
ingrafted into Christ: which is indeed the ground of my great fear, and
solicitude, and the reason why I dare not be so unfaithful, as to set men in a
way of faith, or any other qualifications, thereby to conclude their safe
estate, before they have received Christ in a promise. Indeed, when a man's soul
is wounded, and convinced of some heinous sins, the Promises of God in such a
case may support his soul; but do not lead a man in such a case to see his
faith, or any other qualification, therein to satisfy himself: but if I would
help and comfort such a soul, I would declare to him what the Lord has done
for us in Christ; I would show him all the treasures of the rich grace of
Christ; I would set in order before him, how he loves freely without any
deserts in us; I would tell him how freely the Lord Jesus Christ does invite
men to come to him, that have neither money, nor moneys worth: and if the Lord
take delight to do him good, and to do him good by my mouth; he will convey his
Spirit of grace in some such word as I have spoken unto him; but if the Lord do
not breath by his Spirit in my words, then I would advise him to go and talk
with some other Christians, I would not limit him to any one brother; but let
others also tell him, what Christ has done for their souls; it may be the Lord
may thereby convey himself: and I have sometimes known this in experience, that
when some have spoken scornfully of the free grace of God, yet when the same
has been held forth, their spirits have been subdued to stoop unto it; so
great is the power of the word of Gods free grace, set home by the Spirit of
God; and the meditation thereof does serve greatly to the firm rooting of the
peace of Gods people.

The fourth Use, Jesus Christ, and actually justified; being first adopted, he
is reconciled to God, and is become the son of the most High, and has all his
sins pardoned, both past, present and to come. It is a ground of much
Consolation to such a soul who has the Holy Ghost dwelling in him, he cannot
rest till he find the free grace of Jesus Christ revealed to him by his holy
Spirit, in some promise thereof; for Christ himself has said, That the Spirit
of truth will take of mine, and show it unto you, Joh. 16.14. There is strong
consolation laid up for all those that cannot rest without the manifestation of
the free grace of God unto their souls: other things will not satisfy them;
the Lord doubtless will withhold no good thing from such.

We now proceed unto the ninth Question, Son give himself unto Abraham, and to
his seed, in an everlasting Covenant and union that shall never be dissolved?

In three acts or works about Abraham and his seed.

1. First, in giving Christ, God does give himself; and therefore here is the
Son's work, to come, and take our nature upon him: For the Father gave him for
that end, and the Son came to fulfill the will of the Father; and that is the
Son's work, even the true distinct work of Christ. It properly belongs unto
the Son, to be our actual Redeemer from all sin and misery.

2. As the Father draws us to the Son, and reveals the Son unto the soul; so
does the Son reveal the Father also: Joh. 1.18. Mat. 11.27.

3. As the Father does accept us in his Son, as justified by his righteousness,
so the Son does preserve us in this estate, even to his heavenly Kingdom. These
therefore are the three works of the Son in the Covenant of Grace.

He takes our nature upon him for our redemption.

He reveals the Father to us.

He preserves us in the Father and in himself. Let us speak something to each
of these in particular.

1. For the first of these, That he took our nature upon him; the Apostle
says, Heb. 2.14, 15. etc. For as much as the children are partakers of flesh
and blood, he also himself took part of the same, that through death he might
destroy him who had the power of death, that is the devil, and deliver them who
through fear of death, were all their life time subject to bondage, etc.
Therefore it was truly said, Isa. 9.6. Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son
is given, etc. He took our nature upon him, lived a miserable life, died a
cursed death; this is the proper character, and work of the Son; and thus he is
made an horn of salvation to us, Luke 1.69. and all this flows from the
everlasting Covenant, as also Zachariah Prophesied, Luke 1.72, 73. To perform
the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant, the oath
which he swear to our father Abraham: By him we have redemption through his
blood, Ephesians. 1.7. Col. 1.14. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. Tit. 2.14. This then is the first work of the Son, to Redeem us: And the
very phrase of Redemption does imply a double state of those that are redeemed,
without which it cannot be understood, to wit, The state whence and whereunto
they are redeemed,

Even from a state of bondage, unto Christian liberty; this is found in all
redemption properly so called: It finds us in bondage, and sets us in a
state of liberty, Heb. 2.14, 15. He took our nature upon him, that he might
deliver them, who through fear of death were all their life time made subject
to bondage. And this third thing also is employed (in the word Redemption) with
both the former, namely, a certain price by which we are redeemed from bondage
unto liberty. In a state of Bondage we were under the Law and curse of God, but
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law: Gal. 3.13. and now sin shall
no more have dominion over us, for we are not under the law, Romans 6.14. that
is, not under the Covenant of the Law, though we lie under the Commandment of
it in Christ: we were sometime under the bondage of sin, under the guilt and
strength of sin; but by Christ we have redemption, even the forgiveness of our
sin: and as the Law was the strength of sin; so sin was the strength and sting
of death, 1 Cor. 15.6. but now, O death where is thy sting! O grave, where is
thy victory! the Lord has delivered us from him that has the power of death,
Col. 2.15. Heb. 2.14. and from this evil world: Gal. 1.4. and from the wrath
come, 1 These. 1.10. so then this was bondage we sometimes lay under, when the
Law of God pressed heavily upon us the conscience of sin even unto death; both
first, and second death; and both Law, and sin, and death delivered us unto the
power of Satan, and held us under the wrath of God; the world turned to be our
enemy in all the blessings and crosses of it: from all these bondages Christ
has redeemed us; and it is a marvelous work in the eyes of all that enjoy the
ben fit of it.

If you shall ask, what Ransom the Lord did pay, that we might be redeemed?

The answer is given, in 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. There is one mediator between God and
man, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, etc. so that he
himself is the Ransom. I will not stand disputing whether he gave his active,
or passive obedience, or both; The Text is large, He gave himself, from the
height of glory to become a mortal man, not sinful, but by imputation; so that
from first to last he gave himself. Consider him therefore from his first
taking our nature upon him, and all is but one ransom; for his very active
obedience was passive, and his passive obedience was active; if he had not been
active in his sufferings, his sufferings had not been satisfactory, therefore
he willingly laid down his life; No man takes it from him, but he lays it
down of himself, Joh. 10.17, 18. else had not his death been of any sweet
smelling savor to the Lord: forced death is no acceptable sacrifice.

Again, on the other side; his active obedience was passive; he suffered
himself to be closed in his Mothers womb, and when he was born he suffered
himself to be laid in a manger: and although being God over all, blessed for
ever, he was subject to no Law, yet now he suffered himself to be obedient unto
his Father: now for great Princes to live in other Dominions, to observe their
Rules, and be guided by their Laws, it is a suffering. This did the Lord Jesus;
for he had a special commandment to observe both Law, and Gospel; and in this
the Divine Nature does suffer as much, as for the Creator to become a creature,
and to take upon him the terms of hardship which become a creature: It is no
debasement unto Angels, nor unto Saints, to be obedient; but for the Creator to
be obedient unto the Law of God given unto the creature, in this he greatly
humbles himself; when he says, Thus it behooveth us to fulfill all
righteousness, Mat. 3.15. And this is such kind of passion as has all things
tending to satisfaction in it. And by all this you may see, that from the first
to the last the Lord Jesus is a Ransom; take him in his Cradle, and he is a
Ransom; take him throughout all the course of his life, and he is passive, and
in all his sufferings he is active: He went up and down doing good, and
suffering evil all his life long; and thus he is a Ransom: but above all, when
as he came to wrestle with the wrath of his Father, he did therein exceed all
the rest of his sufferings: It was much indeed for the Son of God to make
himself a servant; but when he that is the Son of the eternal God, and in
regard of his Godhead equal with the Father, shall now stand to wrestle with
the unsupportable wrath of God, and to cry out, My soul is in an agony unto the
very death, and through anguish thereof to sweat drops of blood; and though his
heart as it were seems to recoil, so that if it were possible he desires the
cup might pass from him, yet he is carried before Pontius Pilate, and is there
condemned, and afterward suffers the death of the Cross: this was the
chiefest part of the ransom, which the Lord did intend to pay to the justice of
his Father; wherein he did also undergo the very pangs of Hell for our sins,
and so gave himself a Ransom for us. And had not all this been, we should never
have been redeemed from the terrors of the Law. Thus therefore did the Lord
give himself, in taking our nature upon him, and giving himself unto a state of
bondage, from a state of liberty, to redeem us unto liberty from a state of
bondage under the curse of the Law of God, even unto liberty from sin, and
death, and Satan, and this World, and from the indignation of the most High: A
wonderful deliverance!

But as it is in all other liberties; so this Christian Liberty does stand in
two things: First, As in removing some bondage, and burdens: Secondly, So it
carries with it some such privilege and enfranchisement as whereby me claim
some liberties which others cannot reach unto; and those the Lord Jesus has
dearly paid for, by suffering his Fathers wrath, which did so drink up his
Spirits, that I believe he died not by the pains of his body, for he died
before his time; but the wrath of God did swallow him up principally, though
his bodily pains did help it forward. Now by this means we have access unto the
Lord, and into this grace wherein we stand, Romans 5.2. and that with boldness,
and confidence, Ephesians. 2.12. even to enter with boldness into the holiest by
the blood of Jesus, Hob. 10.19. Hereby we have liberty to call God Father, and
to come unto him as to a Father, and to expect all blessings from him for this
life, and for a better, both wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption from all miseries and dangers, even from death to life, even life
eternal; besides all blessings of the Kingdom of grace here below: All
Church Priviledges, and Commonwealth-priviledges, has the Lord purchased for
us by his blood: great and large are the liberties which the Lord has
purchased for us, that are recorded every where in Scripture. So that if the
Son shall make you free, then are you free indeed

2. Now for the second work of the Son in this everlasting Covenant.
Presupposing the Lord God the Father to have drawn the soul unto the Son from
all confidence in the world, and in his own righteousness, and in his own
returnings unto God by believing through his own power, from confidence in his
own resolutions, and his own waiting upon Christ; and from all confidence in
privileges, and power of nature, and grace received; now it may be all this
while the poor soul knows not who it is, that has wrought all this work in
him, and for him; and it may be he is so far to seek in this, as that he knows
not whether it be the Lord God the Father, or the work of some enemy to deceive
him: though he all this while sees his need of Christ, and has none in heaven
but him, none in earth in comparison of him, of the want of whom he is
sensible; yet the soul knows not whether all this humiliation, which is wrought
in him, come from the wrath or mercy of God, and whether God has not in all
this, given him only a taste of the very torments of Hell, and the pledge of
them, to his everlasting perdition.

Thus may the poor soul be afraid notwithstanding all this gracious work
wrought in him, above all the power of the creature: though the Lord has not
said much of it unto him, yet he has done it; and happy we that ever the Lord
has owned us so far.

Now here is the special work of the Son, he does bring us back again to the
Father, and reveals what the Father has done unto us, even his rich grace that
has taken all this pains with us; for as no man knows the Son, but the Father:
so neither does any man know the Father, but the Son, and be to whom the Son
will reveal him, Mat. 11.27. So that the Lord Jesus does enlighten the soul, by
the anointing of his blessed Spirit, to see what it is that the Lord has done
for him in mercy; which heretofore he thought was done in wrath: whence the
soul begins to see the Fathers love, even the goodness of a God in what has
passed upon him, far beyond what he could have asked, or thought for; And
therefore now begins with some more hope, and liberty to call God Father: for
from this work of the Son, there does arise the two characters of a Son in the
soul, both which are comprised in this one, that is liberty: and there is a
double liberty wherein a son does stand: 1. First, He has ease from all his
doubtful fears, or at least from a great part of the burden of them; some
refocilations, some kind of quietness falls upon the heart of a wearyed
sinner, whence the heart is eased beyond his thoughts; although as yet his
comfort stands rather in expectation, then in actual fruition; as our Savior
says, Come unto me all you that are weary, and heavy laden, and I will give
you rest, Mat. 11.28.29. He does not promise sudden rest: He will give you
present ease; but learn of me, for I am meek and lowly, and you shall find rest
unto your souls. The Lord will give rest unto the souls of his people; at the
present he gives them ease, and an expectation of much more plentiful fruition
of rest and peace, which they have begun to taste of.

And how does the Lord ease the soul in such a case, so as that they feel the
burden a great deal lighter? How does the Son quiet, and still, and refresh the
soul? Is it by the sight of his own hungering and thirsting after righteousness?

What says the Lord in such a case? Or how does he satisfy the soul? He
tells us plainly where our satisfaction is, Joh. 7.37, 38, 39. If any man
thirst, let him come unto me and drink: So that if a man thirst, how shall he
satisfy himself in his thirsting? This is the main question in many a soul;
May I not draw consolation out of this, that I do thirst after the Lord Jesus?

You shall find, that the Lord does not bid me go satisfy my self by seeing my
thirst: If a man shall say, I am exceeding thirsty, and I shall tell him that
he is a man of a healthful constitution, because a man in a Frenzy is thirsty,
and knows it not; this will not satisfy his thirst.

How therefore comes the soul to be freed of his burdens? He thirsts after
Christ, and none of all the creatures can quench his thirst; therefore our
Savior proclaims this in the last and great day of the Feast, when most of the
Jews were present (for this Feast lasted eight days) If any man be now
athirst, and not satisfied with all the Ordinances they had now enjoyed: he
does not send them back again, nor does he bid them satisfy themselves with
their own thirstings; neither does he tell them, that their blessedness lies
in that they do thirst (though there be a blessedness in it) but how then shall
they be satisfied? Let him come to me, and drink.

So that this is the Christian Liberty, which the Lord brings us unto, when he
works in us unquenchable desires after Christ: if you would comfort a soul, and
tell him you do thirst after Christ; and that you could not have done if Christ
had not wrought it in your soul; you say true, and there may be more in such a
soul then he is aware of; yet Christ is not wont to leave the soul to quench
his thirst with his thirst: but you will say, Is not hungering and thirsting a
sign of health? For a surfetted body does not hunger: true: yet the Lord does
not direct the soul to content himself with his own act; but, Come unto me. But
will the Lord Jesus give him drink? He promises that he will; Let him come to
me, and drink: And he says moreover, He that believes on me, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of water of life: this he spoke of the Spirit, which they
that believe on him should receive; for the Holy Ghost was not yet given,
because that Jesus was not yet glorified: so as that which now the Son does, is
not the proper characteristical work of the Spirit; but Jesus Christ does come
unto the soul, and comforts it in some measure; and, which is a second degree
of liberty, gives some liberty of hope, that the Lord will at the length be
pleased to fill him with his blessed Spirit, which the Lord did more abundantly
pour out upon the Disciples after his Resurrection: And there is yet a more
abundant fulfilling of all, when he does come unto the proper work of the
Spirit; and therefore he distinguishes his own work, from the work of the
Spirit, Joh. 14.16, 17, 18. and 16.7, 13. he says of himself, that He will not
leave them comfortless; but he puts this difference between his own work,
and the work of the Spirit, Joh. 16.25. Hitherto I have spoken unto you in
parables; but the time comes, when I shall show you plainly of the Father; yet
he had spoken much unto them, and told them that he loved them, and that the
Father loved them; but all is but a kind of parable in comparison of what the
Lord will further reveal, when he does more fully send forth his Spirit into
their hearts. In the mean while himself sets on some word or other of his
grace, whereby he gives the soul such a taste of himself (more then reprobates
can have) as makes him thirst after more and more of Christ, until he be
satisfied with the riches of the grace of God.

3. Thirdly, When the Son has thus brought us unto the Father, and showed us
his fatherly love toward us, as he says, Joh. 16.26, 27. I say not, that I
will pray the Father for you, for the Father himself loves you. Then does he
keep us in this estate: And (which is a farther work of the Son) for this
purpose, he will send us his holy Spirit, as He told his Disciples, Joh. 16.7.
It is expedient for you, that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you Thus as the
Father sent the Son: so will the Son send the Spirit; and in the mean while he
does preserve us until the Spirit come; and then he preserves us by his
Spirit. Now sometimes he makes his people tarry longer, before he send the
Spirit in this kind of dispensation (but we leave the times and seasons
thereof, unto the free purpose of the grace of God) but I say, mean while the
Son preserves us, Joh. 6.39. This is the Fathers will, that of all that he
has given me, I should lose nothing. So Joh. 17.12. Those that thou gave me
I have kept, and none of them is lost. He keeps us in a waiting frame of
spirit, so that we cannot but thirst after him, and long for him, and mourn for
the want of him; and then a bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax
shall he not quench, until he bring forth judgment unto victory, Mat. 12.20.
Thus has the Lord Jesus promised to keep us, and this he does perform,

1. Partly, by praying for us, Luke 22.31, 32. Simon, Simon, Satan has desired
to have you, that he may sift you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee that thy
says fail not: so Joh. 17.11, 20, 21, 22, 23, etc. Holy Father, keep through
thy own Name, those whom thou have given me, that they may be one, as we are,
etc. and this is the eternal efficacy of the Son, whereby every believing soul
is kept until he do find fullness of accomplishment of his spiritual desires:
and though we may be many ways wanting in prayer for our selves, yet he will
give us his Spirit to pray within us with sighs and groans that cannot be
expressed.

2. And as he 'will keep us by his prayer: so secondly, by his ruling
Providence; for all power is given unto him, both in heaven, and in earth, Mat.
28.18. and this power he does employ to preserve his servants from all the
delusions of the sons of men. The Prophet Ezekiel complains of some, that
thrust away, and shoulder out the people of God, Ezekiel. 34.21, 22, etc. but,
says the Lord, I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them,
even my servant David: verse. 23, and 25. They shall dwell safely in the
wilderness, and sleep in the woods. None of all the delusions of Antichrist,
none of all the power of Tyrants, not all the flattering world, nor all the
persecuting world shall be able to shoulder off the Saints of God from him, 2 Timothy 1.12. I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed
to him against that day: and the Lord Jesus engages both his own power, and
his Fathers power for this end, Joh. 10.28, 29. I give unto them eternal life,
and they shall never perish, neither shall they pluck them out of my hand: my
Father, which gave them me, is greater then all, and no man is able to pluck
them out of my Fathers hand. Thus have you seen how Jesus Christ gives himself
unto Abraham, and to his seed, to become one with us, to lead a miserable life,
and dye an accursed death, thereby to redeem us from all our enemies unto a
state of liberty, by an invaluable price, even by himself. And having thus had
the Father drawing us unto Christ, (though the Father said little unto the soul
who had been about him all this while, and so leaves the soul in no small
distress) as the Fathers work is Power, so the Sons work is Liberty; and he
reveals to us our redemption; and reveals it so, that the soul is set in an
earnest longing after Christ, (in whom there is a way to the Father) and a
great mourning after him, hungring for him; so that nothing in heaven nor earth
can satisfy him: in which case, the Lord does give such strength and constancy
unto the soul, in looking toward Christ, as encourages him to expect
refreshing in the end; though at present he looks at all that he has attained
as a parable in comparison of what he would further enjoy in communion with
Jesus Christ: but it often befalls the servants of God, as it did the Disciples
of Christ; they were put unto new demurrs, and doubtings: We thought (say they)
it had been he that should have restored the kingdom to Israel, Luke 24.21.
(these were Simon, and Cleophas) if it had not been He, where was the comfort
and blessed hope of rest, which they looked for in Jesus Christ? we thought it
had been he; a sign it was a demurr, and dispute in them, whether it was Gods
grace in them, or Christ that had been with them, yea, or no: whilst they are
at this debate in themselves, Jesus himself comes unto them, and reproves them
for their unbelief, and charge them to tarry at Jerusalem, and there to wait
for the promise of the Father. And thus does the Lord Jesus teach us to know
the Father, and reveals him to us by strengthening us unto all such holy duties
as he calls us unto: and though we be many times afraid to pray, to hear, to
come to Christian conference; yet the Lord will not suffer us to refrain, but
we must pray, and confer, and hear; and when we have used all, he teaches us
to know, that it is not in all these, as of themselves, to work any thing in
us; nor does he suffer us to content our selves in any thing wrought in us, but
causes us to thirst after more of himself in every Ordinance, until the Spirit
comes in a plentiful measure, according to all the latitude of our desires
after Christ Jesus.

Now for the Use of this; Son be such a work of redemption, then certainly our
state is a state of bondage, before we be thus redeemed; yea, it is such a
state of bondage, as wherein we lie bound under Gods Law, and under sin, under
Gods wrath and curse; under the Devil and death, and under the power of this
world; and all these enemies have power over us, to carry us captive unto sin
and misery: so that great is the misery we lie under, if we knew our misery;
few know it, but are ready to say, with those Joh. 8.33. We were never in
bondage to any: oh poor hearts! then were you never redeemed to this very day:
if thou never yet knew thy bondage, thou never yet knew thy Redeemer; the
Lord will never so dishonor his own work, as to pay so great a price to work
so great redemption, for those that never knew what it meant: nay, first he
will teach them their bondage, ver. 34. He that commits sin is the servant
of sin; therefore if the Son make us free, we shall be free indeed; but
otherwise we cannot be free.

Secondly, liberty and hope, and spiritual redemption lies: Isai. 45.22. Look
unto me, and be you saved, all the ends of the earth: look unto him.

Object. But may I not look at such good desires, and hungrings and thirstings,
and mournings after Christ, as are in me, to satisfy my self with them

Answ. Alas, you may look long, and it may be much ado to kindle a spark of
comfort; it may be you may get out a spark, but then it is but a sparkling
light, neither will the Lord suffer his servants to fasten the satisfaction of
their souls there: shall a man that is hungry look to his hungring and
thirsting? will that satisfy him? It is indeed a sign of health, but it will
not satisfy him: so neither will spiritual hungring and thirsting: therefore
he says, Come unto me, if you mean to find rest: it is not a man's weariness
that does set his bones at rest; but, Come unto me, all you that are weary and
heavy laden, Mat. 11.28. there has he laid up our peace; in coming to him we
shall find ease, even a certain secret refocilation at least, that will
strengthen us to bear temptation; so as that you may see the Fathers love, and
you may also see your own hungrings and thirstings; for unto such the Lord
calls us, and that puts a great deal of difference between a great deal of
common work, and such as is wrought by Gods efficacious drawing of us home to
Jesus Christ. Take you an hypocrite, and if he begin to mourn for Christ, and
the like, he satisfies himself in these things; but is this the way of the
working of Gods almighty power, to bring men unto something that is in
themselves? Is it not his effectual calling of us unto Christ? does not Christ
say, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink? Otherwise all is but
unprofitable work, until you come unto Christ; so far as Christ is there, so
far there is life; if we be drawn unto him, that as he begins the work, so
he is the end of it in us; and the soul cannot rest but in cleaving unto him,
then is there something more then flesh and blood has revealed. So that this
is the way that God calls his servants to walk in, namely, to look unto
Christ, to turn unto this strong hold, Zach. 9.12. By his blood he has
delivered his prisoners out of the pit, wherein there it no water: our strength
lies not in our own hungring and thirsting, and poverty, though there be truth
in these; and everlasting truth, by reason of the Spirit that wrought them, and
the blood that bought them; yet your strong hold is not in them, but in the
rock of Israel; he is the horn of salvation to his people: so that I would
advise every poor soul, in whom is wrought any mourning after Christ, through
sense of your need of him, make the Lord Jesus your strong hold. And this is
the true work, and way of the Son of God to bring you to the Father; and the
more you find the Lord Jesus, the more you shall discern the gifts that are
given unto you, and the comfort and power of them: not that I deny that Jesus
Christ does open unto the soul, what he has done for him, Joh. 6.69. We
believe and are sure that thou art Christ, the Son of the living God; so Joh.
16.30. but he does not show them for this end, that you should satisfy your
selves in them, but still come unto him: what though you have many gracious
promises that promise many future consolations? it is, that you should seek
unto the Lord, in whom they are laid up; and unto the Father of Jesus Christ,
that promised them, in whose hand it is to make them all good unto us: thus in
all this does the Lord train up his servants unto an heavenly and Christian
frame; and if the soul should rest in any work he does, or gift he has
received; it is a strong jealousy the work is not sound: for if it be of the
grace of God, and in truth, it will still lead the soul to look up unto Christ;
and the soul cannot quench his thirst in it, but comes to the Father, and
earnestly beggeth, that out of his Fatherly love he would give him Jesus
Christ: this is the spirit and way of a true-hearted Christian.

Thirdly, Isai 43.1. Fear not, O Israel, for I have redeemed thee; none of the
redeemed of God need to fear, Luke 1.74. We are delivered, that we might serve
him without fear: It is in the Lord Jesus that the Apostle does so triumph,
Romans 8.31. etc. Who can be against us? who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods elect? who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, etc. and
hereupon he triumphs, saying, Who shall separate us from the love of God?
etc. and though we may say, That he was grown to a greater measure of strength
then we now speak of; yet this is the work of all the Israel of God, to hope in
the Lord, in whom is plenteous redemption, Psalm. 130.7.

Fourthly, Psalm. 103.4. Bless the Lord O my soul, who redeemeth thy life from
destruction, etc. Let us learn to serve him with thankfulness, and to grow up
therein; for this is the great redemption, wherewith the Lord has redeemed us
to himself: he that has thus redeemed us, will still redeem and deliver us, 2
Cor. 1.10. he that has done this, will not leave us, until he has finished
all his thoughts of peace toward us.

In the Fifth and last place, Covenant and curse of the Law of God (from the
Laws of men much more, that are not according to God) be not therefore servants
to lusts and passions, to the world and to the Devil: let us tread the world
under foot; seeing God has redeemed us, let us walk as his redeemed ones,
redeemed from all errors of mind and judgment; standing fast in all that
liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, Gal. 5.1. and be not again
entangled with the yoke of bondage: it was a bondage that we were in before,
and a bondage greater then either we or our fathers were able to bear; let us
therefore stand fast in our liberty.

We now come to the tenth Question, Holy Ghost gives himself to Abraham, and
his elect seed, in the Covenant of Grace? For if God give himself, he does not
only give his nature, but his persons: God the Father gives himself, and God
the Son gives himself, and God the Holy Ghost gives himself unto the people of
God: Joh. 14.16, 17. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of truth, whom
the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him: but ye
know him; for he dwells with you, and shall be in you: if then the Holy Ghost
be given, as well as the Father, and the Son, How is he given? Or how does he
give himself unto the Church, and unto all the Israel of God?

Acts or works whereby the Holy Ghost is given to the Church, and to his
people: for though the Lord Jesus pray the Father for him, and the Father
sends him, and the Son also sends him, Joh. 15.26. yet the Holy Ghost
himself does comes upon his people, Act. 2.2. etc. and He comes by a fourfold
act:

1. First, by indwelling or inhabitation in the Church.

2. Secondly, by an act of Sanctification.

3. Thirdly, by an act of Revelation; and therefore he is called a Spirit of
Revelation, and that is proper to the Holy Ghost.

4. Fourthly, by an act of Consolation; and therefore he is called the
Comforter.

1. First, for Inhabitation, so says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.22. You are builded
together in Christ, for an habitation of God through the Spirit: in this
respect also it is, the Apostle demands of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.16. Know
you not that you are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in
you? so in the place fore-alledged, Joh. 14.16, 17. and when he says, dwell in
you, it notes the constancy of his being in them; he will abide in his
dwelling place: so 1 John 2.27. the anointing there promised, is the Spirit;
and great is the necessity of his in-dwelling in us, for two principal reasons.

The first is taken from the necessity of our union into one mystical spiritual
body with the Lord Jesus; He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit; in as
much as that one Spirit who dwells in Christ without measure, dwells in us
according to our measure; and so we are all one mystical body: and I cannot
tell how better to compare it, then to a musical Instrument, wherein though
there be many pipes, yet one blast of the bellows puts breath into them all;
so that all of them at once break forth into a kind of melody, and give a
pleasant sound to the ears of those that stand by; all of them do make but one
Instrument, and one sound, and yet variety of music. So is this very case:
look at all the living members of Christ, they are all compacted together, and
set into one stock, and root; by which means it comes to pass, that though they
be many thousands, yet they all make a melodious harmony in the ears of the
Lord of Hosts: therefore for the combining of us into the unity of one Spirit,
necessary it is, that the same Spirit that breathes in the humane nature of
Christ, should breath in us all: and though the divine Nature of Christ be God,
the humane Nature is finite, and yet has the Spirit above the capacity of the
creature; and this same Spirit does act, and guide, and move all our affairs in
him; and (which is wonderful) it comes to pass, that the same Spirit breathing
in Christ and in us, we have not only a measure of the Spirit to do one duty,
but he does concur with us in all spiritual duties which we undertake according
to him; for without him we can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. This is the first reason
of the inhabitation of the Spirit, to keep alive spiritual union between Christ
and us; therefore is there one Spirit in us all.

Secondly, inhabitation of the Spirit, is to keep possession for the Lord in
our hearts against all adversary power; for if the Lord should leave his gifts
only to keep possession there, the devil would make very hard work with the
best gifts that we have received: he blasted all the precious gifts that Adam
had received, which were more perfect in degrees than any we receive; and yet
when all the powers of darkness and gates of hell are banded together against
Jesus Christ and his servants, there is not the least of the servants of God
that falls away finally: and the Apostle John gives the reason of it, 1 John
4.4. Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them, because greater is
he that is in you, then he that is in the world. Neither are we preserved by
faith only, but by the mighty power of God, 1 Pet. 1.5. The Spirit it is that
sets Faith awork, and Christ it is that sets the Spirit awork, to keep us
unto his heavenly kingdom. And from this possession of the Spirit, there comes
a garrison, as it were, to be kept in our hearts, whereby our souls are kept
alive; so that the Spirit does not only shed abroad his gifts into our hearts,
but he keeps our hearts in a sweet frame of sanctification, 2 Timothy 1.14. That
good thing which was committed to thee, keep by the Holy Ghost, which dwells
in us; that goodly depositum, his Evangelistical Gift that did accompany his
own salvation, and the salvation of the Church, he must keep it by the Holy
Ghost that dwells in us; otherwise our gifts would soon vapor out into smoke
and ashes, whether it be faith, hope, zeal, patience, courage, or whatsoever
else is requisite for the salvation of Gods people: the Spirit by his power
dwelling in us, acts, and preserves them: the sons of God are led by the
Spirit, Romans 8.14. nor is this a confining of the Spirit of God unto poor
houses of clay: Solomon's Temple could not contain him; no, not the heaven of
heavens; he dwells above all heavens unmeasurably, yet he dwells also with
him that is of an humble and contrite spirit, Isa. 57.15. though it were a poor
kitchinboy that has such a spirit, he dwells there, to revive the spirit of
the humble. As those that dwell in earthly houses, there they take up their
rest, and lay up their treasure; and there they delight to converse: even thus
does the Spirit of God; and it is a wonderful Indulgence of the most High, that
dwells in temples made without hands, so to be pleased to dwell in the sons and
daughters of men, to make good his own eternal counsel for their salvation.
There is I confess also some kind of presence of the Spirit of God even in
hypocrites, that are only fitted to some work of God, and therefore only attain
to some work of common Grace, but not such as does accompany salvation: you
will find this difference between them, and Gods own children; the Spirit of
God indeed comes upon them, as he did upon Saul, 1 Samuel 10.10. so that he
prophesied; and more then so, he does sometimes continue with them for a
season, and so journeth a while in them, according as sometimes it is said,
Jer. 14.8. he is like a stranger, or a wayfaring man, that tarrieth for a
night; thus we read, 1 Samuel 16.14, The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul,
and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him; a sign the Spirit of God had
been with him before. So Zedekiah, when he smote Micaiah on the cheek, and
said, Which way went the Spirit of God from me, to speak unto thee? 1 King.
22.24. a sign it may be that he had sometimes found the Spirit of God, but now
he was departed: however it be, the Spirit of God is in them but for a season,
until he be grieved by them, and then he does depart; and indeed did never
bestow any regenerating grace upon them, but only fitted them for some kind of
service for his Church, or the Commonwealth. So likewise Jehu, and Judas, and
Demas, did much for a season, by the Spirit of God; he did enlighten their
minds, and open their mouths, and gave free passage to their administrations;
and you may sometimes wonder how men have been assisted in the pulpit both in
prayer and preaching, that have been notorious in wickedness: thus it pleases
God to come, and sojourn in them, and work great works by them, such as may be
of great use among his people, and may leave themselves without excuse: but you
see where the difference lies, even as it lay between the anointing of Saul,
and Jehu; David, and Solomon; the anointing of Saul, was with a Vial of Oil,
and of Jehu with a Box of Oil, 1 Samuel 10.1. 2 King. 9.1. the word in the
Original is the same in both places, and it was not an empty Ceremony; Gods
Ceremonies are accompanied with gifts suitable unto them: his Spirit came upon
them both, and they did mighty service in their times; but when David was to be
anointed, God commanded Samuel to fill his horn with oil, in 1 Samuel 16.1. and
in like manner did Zadok unto Solomon, 1 King. 1.39. Now an horn is not of a
brittle Metal, but a glass is soon broken; the horn is the beauty and power of
the Beast: so that when the Spirit is conveyed in the horn and power of Jesus,
Christ, it now gives beauty and strength unto the soul, and is not dried up,
nor broken in pieces, but abides in the Saints unto the heavenly Kingdom. This
is the first work of the Spirit of God; he does give himself unto his people in
a way of Inhabitation: he dwells in them, and unites them to Christ, and
keeps them from being drawn away from God, by men or Angels, (I mean evil
Angels) and preserves alive all their gifts and graces; and acts and quickens
them, so as may be for the edification of those that are with them in Church
and Commonwealth.

2. Secondly, as the Spirit of God gives himself in a work of Inhabitation: so
does he give himself in a work of sanctification: and that is a work usual in
all our Catechisms, [the Holy Ghost does sanctify and preserve us.] Let us
look into some places of Scripture for the proof of it, 2 These. 2.13. God has
from the beginning chosen you, through sanctification of the Spirit, etc. he
chose us to be saved through a course of sanctification: it is not the cause of
election, but the way of salvation, in which the Spirit leads us: so 1 Pet.
1.2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God, through sanctification of the
Spirit unto obedience. So that it is the Spirit that sanctifies us to be
obedient: and a notable place to this purpose have we in the delivery of the
Covenant of Grace, Jer. 31.33. I will put my law in their inward parts, and
write it in their heart; he means, the law of holiness and righteousness; and
he will so write it in the hearts of his people, that it shall be carried an
end with power in them: accordingly does the Apostle testify concerning the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 3.3. Ye are manifestly declared to be the Epistle of Christ
ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God;
not in tables of stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart: it is the Spirit of
God therefore that writes these laws in our hearts, and leaves an impression
of some measure of power to be guided by them; He works in us both to will,
and to do, of his own good pleasure; he stampeth upon the soul such gifts of
his grace, as make us serviceable in our course to his heavenly Kingdom: and
hence it is, that we read, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit with in you, and
cause you to walk in my statutes, etc. this is a spirit of sanctification. To
make it somewhat more plain; The Spirit of God is said to be our sanctifier,
partly as he does work the work of the two other persons, and partly as he
works his own work; though in all these works they all concur, yet they have
their several characters, wherein they more peculiarly shine forth: whatever
work any of the persons do, they do it by the Spirit; and yet he does a
peculiar work, wherein though they concur, yet he is eminent in it. It is the
proper work of the Father to draw us unto Christ: Joh. 6.44. and 1 Pet. 1.3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his
abundant mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope; that is the proper
work of a Father, to beget; he sheddeth abroad the Spirit upon us through Jesus
Christ our Savior, Tit. 3.6. thus does the Holy Ghost sanctify us, as the
Father does regenerate us, and frame us to be new creatures; though it be the
Father's work in us, yet he works it by the Holy Spirit. And for the work of
the Son, the proper character of a son is liberty, a servant is in bondage; a
child in the way of child-like liberty may expect much from his Father: this
the Lord Jesus properly gives, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me, and I will give you
rest; freedom, and ease of Conscience he gives his servants: and how does he
work this ease and liberty, but by his Spirit? the same Spirit that is in him,
dwells in us, and breaths a kind of liberty in us, which it has from Jesus
Christ: For where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. and
where he is, you may see the soul has liberty from the anguish of Temptations:
so that, is there any ease? any liberty? It is from Jesus Christ the Son of
liberty, who has spoken some peace unto the soul. Thus the Father does reveal
the Son in us; and in point of sanctification the Father does regenerate us,
but it is by a spirit of regeneration; the Son redeemeth us into liberty by a
spirit of liberty; he comes in the Fathers name, and in the Sons name, to carry
on that work, which they have in hand in the Saints, Joh. 14.26. and chap.
15.26. the Father will send him, and I will send him; and the Holy Ghost does
kindly work all, to make us regenerate sons unto the Lord: these things he does
in their name; he does some things also in his own name, though from their
power also: now though both these are sanctifying works, there is a third work
of sanctification which is proper to the Spirit; this was foretold by Christ,
Act. 1.8. You shall receive power after the Holy Ghost is come upon you: they
were the sons of God before, and free sons before, set at liberty by the Spirit
of the Son; but there is yet more to come; You shall receive power after the
Holy Ghost is come upon you: so this is the proper sanctifying work of the
Spirit, to give a further power in sanctification; he does imprint a character
of power upon our sanctification, that we have not only power to be called the
sons of God, nor to be free sons of God, but powerful also, 2 Timothy 1.7. the
Lord has given us the Spirit of power: when the Spirit works this, he
works his own proper work. And as there is such a kind of threefold degree in
a spirit of sanctification: so there is a kind of semblable work, that is found
in hypocrites in some measure; for as you read of the Holy Ghost his coming
upon them, so shall you find mention made of their sanctification, Heb. 10.29.
they are said to tread under foot the blood of the Covenant, wherewith they
were sanctified: so Mat. 20.16. Many are called, but few are chosen: does he
mean, by the outward call of the word? truly you shall find, that the context
will carry you much farther then so; for consider upon what occasion our
Savior speaks it: there was a certain rich man, that would have forsaken
all, and followed Christ, but he found it too costly; but Peter said, We have
forsaken all, and followed thee, what shall we have therefore? verily, says
Christ, Ye that have followed me in the regeneration, (meaning, in the
regeneration of the world) shall sit upon twelve thrones, etc. but many of
those that do forsake much, shall be last; and the last shall be first: for the
kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain householder, that hired men into his
vineyard; and some he hired early in the morning, some at the third hour, some
at the sixth, some at the ninth, some at the eleventh; and when he comes to
reckon, he pays every man a penny: they that bore the heat of the day,
expected to have received more; whereupon the Lord Jesus gives this as one
answer, Many are called, but few are chosen: they may be called to forsake
brethren, and sisters, and fathers, and mothers, and that out of conscience
unto Christ; and much they have done for Christ; they have labored for Christ,
and born the burden and heat of the day; they had a calling to come into the
vineyard, and there they have wrought; and yet of these; few are chosen: so
that it was not a mere verbal calling, no, here is a kind of strong spiritual
calling; which did prevail to withdraw them, from all the comforts of this
life, so far it was effectual; and yet these were not chosen: so that there is
a sanctification, that does not flow from Gods eternal election; and therefore
it is not to be despised, that the Apostle does add, Romans 8.28. To them that
are called according to his purpose; otherwise there is a calling, that comes
from Gods purpose of free grace; and then it carries them along no farther,
then to do some outward service for God; they may do much harvest-work, and yet
not be called according to purpose: so then we see there is a calling and
sanctification, that reaches unto them that are but common hypocrites; whence
it comes to pass, they will work much according to it, for sanctification is
that which works from God, the things of God, and for the glory of God; this
is sanctification in the proper meaning of it; and this you shall find in
hypocrites: For they will work from God, Mat. 7.22. Have not we prophesied in
thy name, and in thy name cast out devils? they knew their own name would not
reach it, therefore they will make God their efficient cause: and it is a great
word, which the Lord spoke unto Jehu, 2 King. 10.30. Because thou have done
well in executing that which was right in my eyes, and have done unto the house
of Ahab according to all that was in my heart; thus he wrought the things of
God, and pretended the glory of God, verse. 16. and which is more wonderful,
that they should for the sake of Jesus Christ do many things, Mat. 19.29. and
these not chosen, and such as shall be last in the recompense; and what is yet
wanting in these men's sanctification? is the change of their heart wanting?
truly, not altogether; for the Lord gave Saul another heart, 2 Samuel 10.9. But
mind it, though it was somewhat altered in quality, yet not in substance; it
was not a new heart, not an heart of flesh, for that is peculiar to the
Covenant of Grace; they want that self-denying faith that is found in all
new-hearted Christians, whereby they deny even themselves, Luke 9.23. for a man
to be all from Christ, and all in Christ, and all for Christ; this is wanting
to these moral sanctifications that are found in men. But wherein then is the
defect of their sanctification discovered? in this: Take you a man sanctified,
as Saul, Jehu, Judas, Demas, these were men of good account; Samuel had a good
esteem of Saul; and Jonadab bears Jehu record, that his heart was upright with
him; the Disciples mistrust themselves rather then Judas; and Paul ranketh
Demas, with Marcus and Aristarchus his fellow laborers; yet in all these here
was no selfdenying faith: for he that comes to Christ, and closes with Christ,
must deny himself; so then in this these men do show themselves different from
the chosen of God, they come not to Christ with a self-denying heart; they seem
to work all in the name of Christ, yet they still work in their own power and
strength, or at least they work for themselves. You read of some, that took
delight in the Lord, Isai. 58.2, 3. and yet if God do not hear their prayers,
they are offended; a sign they wrought in the sense of the worth of their own
works: so also those in Mat. 7.22. Have not we prophesied in thy name? they do
expostulate with God, why he should cast off them; they expected a bountiful
reward for the works they had done: they wrought from themselves, and for
themselves: and so those many that were called, Mat. 20 they had denied father,
and mother, and wife, and children; and therefore they looked for great reward,
having borne the burden and heat of the day: and this is the proper character
of an hypocrite, he does challenge his reward out of the worth of his work;
whereas the chosen ones of God are taught to say, When we have done all that is
commanded us, we are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. this is one difference
in the rise of the work.

Again, there is a difference in the work it self: Gods chosen ones work the
will of Christ, and not their own, though their will also goes along with it:
others work the will of Christ, as far as it will stand with their own: Jebu's
zeal did root out Baal, and the house of Abab freely; he drove on furiously,
for it was an act of his own ambitious heart, to settle his own Kingdom: this
he aimed at, no further would he go; from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat
he departed not.

And Lastly, Hypocrites will out-shoot Christ in his own bow; they will aim at
their own ends in Christ's works: Jehu will root out Ahab, and Baal, but it is
to establish his own Kingdom; to walk in all the Lords Commandments he did not
regard: while Gods will accomplisheth his will, he goes along with it, but no
farther. Thus we see there is a work of sanctification under a Covenant of
works, such as whereby men have another heart, and many gifts of courage, and
wisdom, and zeal, and power come upon them for the service of the Church; and
yet you will find that they will work from themselves, and for themselves; and
for God they will not work beyond their own ends: and though they seem to walk
with him for a while, yet you shall soon see the Lord will take one course, and
they will take another.

3. We now come unto a third work of the Holy Ghost, in which he does give
himself as God unto his people; for in all these works he does work as God, and
so expresses himself: this work is Divine revelation; he does reveal himself
like a God in the soul, that so you may acknowledge his presence, power and
truth: a very clear place we have for it, Ephesians. 1.17, 18. etc. I cease not to
make mention of you in my prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of glory, may give unto you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of him, etc. mark how the Apostle does consider God in regard of his
most eminent glory, and power; as he is the God of Jesus Christ, and the Father
of glory, That he might give us the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of him; that is, of the Father, Son and Spirit: That the eyes of your
understanding being enlightened, ye may know what is the hope of his calling,
and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, etc. mind
what Divine revelation here is, see how gloriously God is set forth that gives
it, and also the gift that is given: and these things the Apostle prays not
only for glorious and transcendent Christians, men of renown; but for all the
Ephesians, for all ordinary Christians among them; he would have none of them
destitute of a Spirit of wisdom and revelation: and what should this Spirit do?
it should enlighten the organ, even the eyes of their understanding, otherwise
it is beyond the power of created gifts, to reach the clear discerning of the
mysteries of the Kingdom of God, as they are dispensed in the Gospel of Christ:
and as in all sight there is the Organ, and the Medium, and the Object; the eye
is the organ, the air is the medium, the thing seen is the object: so does the
Apostle here pray, that the eyes of their understanding might be enlightened,
far above the capacity of Reason, yea, above the capacity of the spiritual
gifts, which they had received; for he desires that a spirit of wisdom and
revelation might be given them: though the Lord had blessed them with all
spiritual blessings already; they had believed, and had been sealed; yet here
is something more to be attained, they want a further enlightening by the
clearing of the word of God, which is the medium, by which we discern all
things therein: and for the Object, he does express what it is; that you may
know what is the hope of his calling, and the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the saints: and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to
usward which believe, etc. these things the Apostle prays that the Spirit
would reveal, even the hope that God has laid up for his Saints: glorious
things are spoken of the church of God; great and glorious hopes are prepared
for them, and they are begotten unto them, even to an inheritance incorruptable
and undefiled; that by virtue of our calling we might have fellowship with God
the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.2, 3. some degree of
fellowship we have already; but the hope of that which is to come, is beyond
all our comprehension, and beyond what any created understanding can search
into the depth of: and yet we may see much in the hope of preservation, and
quickening to that which is good: in the hope of God's turning all things to
the best for us; we may see much of the rich and plenteous redemption which God
has wrought for us, and what goodness of God is reserved to every poor servant
of his, and what is the riches of his glorious inheritance in his Saints, and
what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe, even that
mighty power, which he did put forth to bring us to believe, that ever he
should bring such hearts as ours were, to be enlightened, to see the blessings
of his heavenly calling, to be called unto fellowship with the Father, and with
the Son, and with the Spirit, and with the Church of God in all the promises of
God, and gifts of grace, and duties of sanctification: our calling is to be
exercised in them all, until at length all their enemies be subdued, and death
at length swallowed up in victory: This the Apostle prays for, that their
eyes might be opened to behold all these mysteries. And thus does the Holy
Ghost clear up our understandings, and the Scriptures, whereby we understand,
and the objects which are to be understood by us, even the riches of grace here
bestowed upon us, and laid up in heaven for us.

But how does the Holy Ghost work these things?

The Spirit does reveal himself partly in witnessing unto our spiritual estate,
revealing all other counsels of his truth needful for us to know in this our
age and time wherein any Christian man lives.

Touching our estate, He is called a witness, 1 John 5.6. It is the Spirit that
bears witness; because the Spirit is truth: there are six witnesses mentioned
in that text: three in heaven, the Father, the word, and the Holy Ghost: three
in earth, the Spirit, the water, and the blood; but it is the Spirit that
bears witness in all these.

But does not the water and the blood bear witness? truly they do, but it is in
the hands of the Spirit; and that is plain by the 9. ver. wherein the Apostle
gives us to understand, that if any thing be confirmed by any of those
witnesses, it is the witness of God, because indeed the Spirit witnesses in
them all.

You will say, water of sanctification, and the blood of justification Divine
works? and will they not reach a Divine Testimony?

It is not a Divine Testimony, Magicians of Egypt do profess, when Moses
brought the Plague of Lice, that it was the finger of God; when as in greater
works they did not acknowledge it, but thought they could do the like: and what
was the reason that they were confounded in the Lice? truly, because the Spirit
of God would on purpose breath in that work to confound them in so mean a
creature: all which shows us thus much, that it is not in the power of Divine
works, though they be never so immediate, that are able to work Divine faith in
us, unless the Holy Ghost breathe in them; and then, though it were but some
creeping work, or word, it would breathe a strong testimony to some former work
of God: so that it is the Spirit of God, that does make Divine Testimony both
in heaven, and in earth; otherwise howsoever the judgment may be by some means
convinced, yet a lively faith will not be wrought. To speak something unto
particulars: the Father bears witness, and the Son bears witness of
himself, and many great works which He wrought bear witness of him all his life
long. Take you now the Father's work, which is to draw the soul unto Christ,
through a spirit of bondage to make us sensible of our need of him; for every
man that has heard and learned of the Father comes unto Christ, Joh. 6.44. and
no man can come unto Christ, except the Father draw him: so Mat. 16.17. Flesh
and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven: so
Gal. 1.15, 16. When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me; now though these be
the work and witness of the Father, yet does he not work them immediately, but
by his Spirit, as he says expressly, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. Eye has not seen, nor ear
has heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, the things which God
has prepared for them that love him: but God has revealed them unto us by the
Spirit, etc. In like manner, when the Father does discover Christ unto us, and
draw us unto Christ, it is by the Spirit that he does these things.

When the Son brings on the soul unto Christian liberty (for liberty is the
property of the Son) and reveals the Father's love unto the soul, Joh. 16.27. a
son-like spirit does this; it is the Spirit of his Son that makes us cry,
Abba, Father. Gal. 4.9, 7. Also the Spirit bears witness, by a testimony from
it self, which it does set on more clearly, then either of the former
testimonies; according to Joh. 16.25. The time comes, when I shall speak no
more to you in proverbs, but I shall show you plainly of the Father: He comes
with power, and speaks peace more plentifully unto the soul. Act. 1.8. Psalm.
85.8. Isai. 57.19. All which shows us, that the Spirit sets on his
testimony with more clearness, power, and certainty unto the soul; therefore he
is called the unction by which the Saints know all things, 1 John 2.20. by his
testimony we have more full assurance of all things concerning our spiritual
estate. It is he also that does bear witness in the water, and in the blood;
for otherwise though the Spirit be never so much broken in the sense of sin, as
David's was, and he saw it, Psalm. 51.17. it was the Spirit that gave him to see
it, and yet he still begs the upholding of the free spirit, ver. 12. for
without him, neither the water of sanctification, nor the blood of
justification will clearly establish the heart in the peace of God: Faith it
self is not able to beget more assurance of faith; nay, it is not all the word
of God, that is able to put life into faith, though the whole word of God
bears witness unto faith: wherefore is the word excluded from the number of
the witnesses? all is certainly carried home unto the soul by the word; whether
the Father reveal the Son, or the Son reveal the Father, all is by the word:
likewise also whatsoever the Spirit does reveal, it is by the word, Joh. 14.26.
He shall bring all things unto your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto
you; he makes the word take deep impression upon the soul; but the word of God
of it self, does not testify, though it be the counsel of God: for the Lord
would not have his people to scramble out a testimony from the word, nor from
his works; for they will not afford it, unless the Spirit be in them: but when
the Spirit does accompany them, then will the soul find matter to build upon;
otherwise though sanctification may convince a gainsayer, yet Divine faith is
only wrought by the Spirit breathing in the word of life. Thus have we seen
that it is the Spirit that bears witness (in all the six Witnesses) unto the
state of a Christian.

It is the Spirit also that bears witness unto all things else that are
needful for us to know in our times, 1 John 2.20. Joh. 14.26. The anointing
teaches you all things: the Comforter shall teach you all things. Great is the
power of the Spirit to beget and increase faith, by the word of God, and by the
works of his providence, he causes the soul to trust in God, and to say, He
that has delivered me out of six troubles, will not he deliver me out of the
seventh? otherwise if the Spirit do not set in, though judgment be convinced,
yet the heart is not enlarged to believe: David could not gainsay Nathan, when
he told him from the Lord, that God had put away his sin, he should not dye;
yet still he prayed for mercy, Psalm. 51.1. and for establishment with Gods free
Spirit, ver. 12. and, Make me to hear the voice of joy and gladness, ver. 8.
why? had he not heard it already? it was a most gracious word that Nathan
spoke; true, but he is not yet clear in it; it is that Holy Ghost, that must
make him to hear the voice of joy and gladness: otherwise, though a man has
much experience of Gods goodness to him, and sits and talks of the wonderful
things that God has done for him, to the warming of the hearts of all that
hear him; yet the soul cannot reach that abundant satisfaction, which he does
desire, till at length the Lord comes in some Ordinance of his, and bears
witness freely of love bestowed upon us; and such a testimony will marvelously
settle and establish any soul in the world: so that it is the Spirit that
bears witness unto faith, and nothing can do it but the Spirit only; and yet
if the Spirit should breath out of the word, it were but a delusion, Isai.
8.20. To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to that, it
is because they have no light in them: And therefore the Lord couples his word,
and his Spirit together, Isai. 57.19. I create the fruit of the lips, peace,
peace: though it be creating work, yet it is by the fruit of the lips: so
likewise Isai. 59.21. My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words that I have put
in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy
seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from henceforth and for ever.
Thus the Spirit of God in the word is mighty to begin, and mighty to carry an
end spiritual work in the soul. Now the ordinary manner of the revelation of
the Spirit is, if he reveal Gods free justification of us, it is by revealing
his free grace in a promise not made to works, no not to faith it self, but
rather as a thing to be created by the word of a free promise: unto
sanctification indeed he does bear witness in any promise; as, if the question
be about Abraham's sanctification, how did the Lord reveal it? we may see, Genesis
22.12. By this I know that thou fear me, seeing thou have not withheld thy
son, thine only son from me: but for his justification, the Lord had revealed
that in another promise, Genesis 15.5, 6. wherein God brought him forth, and bids
him, Look now toward heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number
them: and he said unto him, So shall thy seed be; and among them he shows him
that seed, that shall be a blessing unto all nations: this is a thing beyond
his capacity, but this he believed, and it was counted unto him for
righteousness: now in this the Lord reveals nothing but his free grace, without
any respect unto any goodness in Abraham: faith was in him before, and had put
forth it self; by faith when he was called, he went out, not knowing whither he
went, Heb. 11.8. but a man is justified not by the habit of faith only, but by
every act of faith; and as often as this is revealed, so often is the grace of
God revealed unto the soul: for it is nothing that God sees in Abraham, for
which he does reveal his justification to him; but this he does freely of his
grace; and so Abraham receives it, Romans 4.4, 5, 6. etc. To him that works
not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted to
him for righteousness; which shows us, that Abraham looks at himself as an
ungodly man, when he considers his justification: not but that Abraham was
now godly in Scripture account before, but he looks at him that justifies
the ungodly: as David describes the blessedness of the man, to whom the Lord
imputes righteousness without works: for thus the Lord sets it home unto
the heart without works, saying, Blessed is the man whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered; so it is free blessedness that the Lord
reveals unto the soul: and lest you should think, that these things were
peculiar to Abraham and David, etc. he tells us, ver. 23, 24. that it was not
written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him; but for us also, etc.
As it was with the Father of the faithful, so it is also with all believers,
which are his children: that as he considered not his own body that was dead,
nor the deadness of Sarah's womb: so neither should we consider this or that in
our bodies, or souls; for if we were thus and thus fitted for justification,
then the reward would be of works, and so a debt unto us: now though works be
there, when justification is again and again revealed, yet it comes not into
sight, for a double reason;

First, justice, and a throne of grace together, not accepting any
righteousness but that which is complete, and adequate, Romans 3.26. To declare,
I say, at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier
of him, that believes in Jesus: it is not justice for God to pronounce a man
just upon any other righteousness, besides the righteousness of his Son; for if
God should mark what we have done, no flesh living should be justified in his
sight: Psa. 143.2. but through the righteousness of Christ, which is perfect,
the Lord justifies every one that believes in him; and that act of faith
whereby a man takes hold on Christ, and receives Christ, that is it which
quieteth the soul: for it is not meet that the Lord should justify any simple
work of mine; for if the Lord should justify me so, mine own clothes would
defile me: and if I should come before him with any work, which he has wrought
in me, to be accepted for it, this would be preposterous, and out of place: for
he will have a full righteousness to accept me, before he will pronounce me
righteous: and therefore I am first called to his Son; for as there is no more
required to make me a sinful man, but that I be found in Adam: so there is no
more required to my justification, but that I should have union with the second
Adam.

Secondly, justice, when he justifies a soul, so he does also upon a Throne of
grace, Romans 3.24. We are justified freely by his grace; therefore he will not
justify any man upon works, lest they should boast before him; and therefore
you shall find it to be true, that if the Lord be to declare his acceptance of
the sanctification of his people, he will not do it in respect of the worth of
their works, but according to the grace of his promise.

But is not my sanctification a work of free grace? is Bellarmines reason
against justification by grace: what? (says he) does grace fight against
grace? if we say, We be justified by our works, it is grace that gives us those
works, and a will unto them; thus does he confess.

Our Divines answer is, That if our justification be of grace, it is not of
works; and if it be of works, it is not of grace: so in like manner, if the
Lord do show himself in a matter of grace, let all our works be silent; for if
Abraham has whereof to glory, it is not before God: so then, if grace appear,
it is not in our works: and therefore if God do speak any comfort unto
sanctification, he will put his servants quite off from the conceit of their
own holiness. Thus we find it, 2 Samuel 7.18. Lord (says David) what am I, or
what is my fathers house? etc. though at that time the Lord took notice of his
sanctification; and so indeed it is usual with the faithful, when the Lord
pronounces any mercy to them, they see no reason in themselves why the Lord
should vouchsafe it: as you see when the light of the Sun shines upon a
candle, it dampes the light thereof; so it is in this case, when the riches of
Gods mercy shines upon the soul, he is not so taken up in the consideration of
his own works and holiness, because his heart is lifted up higher in the
consideration of the grace of God: and yet let me say thus much; There is a
kind of revelation that is under the Law, Ezekiel. 18.5, 6. If a man be just, and
do that which is lawful and right, and has not eaten upon the mountains,
neither has lift up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, etc. he is
just, he shall surely live, says the Lord God. Thus a man is pronounced just
upon his righteousness, that is to say, so far just as the Law declares him
just: if either he keep the Commandment, or if he break the Commandment, and
come and bring his Sacrifice, then his sin shall be forgiven him, Lev. 5.10,
13, 16. somewhat suitable unto what we read, Mat. 18.23, 24, 25. etc. when the
servant was required to make payment to his Lord, and had nothing to pay; he
falls down and worshippeth his Lord, saying, Have patience with me, and I
will pay thee all; so out of compassion he forgave him the debt: just as when
the Lord takes hold of a man by sickness, and is ready to expose him to death;
then he cries, Lord be merciful to me, and I will become a new man, and all
the world shall know it, and all my friends shall see it: then the Lord out of
compassion delivers him from his sickness, according to Psalm. 78, 34, 35.
etc. when God slew them, then they sought him, and returned, and required early
after God; and though they did but flatter him with their lips; yet he being
full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not: Thus the
Lord may let men see, that he does forgive them; and no small comfort sometime
does arise, and all this from some works that they have done: but when the Lord
reveals himself graciously by his Spirit in our justification, he does banish
the sight of our works, so that the soul does look at himself as the chiefest
of all sinners, as not having so much as the crawling, or creeping of any work
of sanctification: Yea, when the Lord reveals to his people their
sanctification; the manifestation of his love unto their souls, upon that
point, does take them off from the sight of their own works; and move them to
wonder that ever the Lord should manifest himself graciously, to such as they
are.

Now for the Use of this; Revelation: you have heard of many that have attended
to Revelations, that have been deceived: it is true; for the Devil himself,
will transform himself into an Angel of light: he will be foisting in
delusions, yea, many times when the soul waits for the revelation of Gods
mercy, the Devil will be apt to foist in such revelations, from whence many
delusions may grow: but yet on the otherside, let not men be afraid, and say,
That we have no revelation but the word: for I do believe, and dare confidently
affirm, that if there were no revelation but the word, there would be no
spiritual grace revealed to the soul; for it is more then the Letter of the
Word that is required to it: not that I look for any other matter besides the
word. But there is need of greater light, then the word of it self is able to
give; for it is not all the promises in Scripture, that have at any time
wrought any gracious change in any soul, or are able to beget the faith of Gods
Elect: true it is indeed, whether the Father, Son, or Spirit reveal any thing,
it is in and according to the word; but without the work of the Spirit,

there is no faith begotten by any promise: the word of God, and all his works,
may beget you some knowledge, if you be not mistaken in them: but to beget the
faith of Gods elect, that may be able to stand against all the powers of
darkness, and to crush all the temptations of that wicked one; it is not all
the works of God, nor all the word of God, of it self, that is able to beget
such faith; if there be any, it is but an historical faith, a dead faith that
is not able to bring the soul nearer to God.

I beseech you therefore consider of it, as a mystery of God indeed, yet
marvelous plain in Scripture, as I conceive: That neither the word of grace,
nor all the works of grace, are able to clear up the grace of God unto the
soul; it is the Spirit of God that must do it; he must reveal the grace of God,
if ever we see it, otherwise it is not possible that we should believe: for
though we should attain unto (...) fullness of knowledge, we shall not attain
unto (...), fullness of faith. As for our works in justification, the Lord will
dash them to pieces, and cast them out of his sight: and though faith comes by
hearing, yet it is the Spirit in the word, that makes the New Testament a
lively Letter; otherwise, as not the flesh of Christ, so nor the word of Christ
profits any thing, it is the Spirit that quickens; therefore look for this
revelation of the Spirit to show you the need of Christ, and the Lords offering
and presenting Christ unto you, and his drawing your hearts to believe upon
him; otherwise you neither can have any faith, nor can you discern any gift of
God bestowed upon you.

In the second place; revelation out of the Word; for the Spirit comes in the
mouth of the Word, and the Word in the mouth of the Spirit: take heed therefore
of all Revelations in which the Word of God is silent; for the Spirit of God
will speak Scripture to you: when he comes, he will not bring a new Gospel, and
new Revelations; but he always speaks in the Word of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, which is given unto us: therefore if any Spirit shall speak, and not
according to the Word, it is but a delusion: rest not therefore in any
assurance, nor revelation, unless thou have a word for it.

In the third, and last place; Justification, to look for no word, but such as
holds forth some absolute Promise of Free Grace; for the Lord looks for no
work in our Justification, but the Works of the Son; it is the work of his free
grace to justify the ungodly: therefore if any man, having been in desperate
anguish of soul, have built his faith upon some Promise made unto some such
work as he finds in himself; this is no other but a legal righteousness: for
when the Lord does pronounce Grace in a way of Justice, he will pronounce it
unto that soul, that he is most ungodly, and that he himself does justify him
freely: for example, take that promise which we read, Acts 10.43, 44. To him
give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever believes on
him, shall receive remission of sins: there is a promise of remission of sins
unto them which believe. But was this faith in them before? Nay; but while he
spoke these words, the Holy Ghost fell upon all them which heard the word: and
this Holy Ghost it was that did beget that Faith by this Promise, whereby they
did receive the Promise. So in like manner, if the Lord do promise, that he
that confesses and forsakes his sin, shall find mercy, as Prove. 28.13. if he
does manifest his free grace in such a promise to any soul, that soul will look
at his old confessions, as mavelous poor works, and will not challenge this
mercy promised, by virtue of them: for when the Holy Ghost does apply a
conditional promise to the soul, he does work the condition by the promise in
the soul: therefore when the Lord comes to testify his acceptance of our
persons, it is freely of his Grace; and thou can not build any thing thereof
upon any of thy works: and if he do acknowledge our sanctification, in any word
of his grace; he will let us see, that every such gift or work of grace is
freely given unto us; so as that we shall be ready after all this, to say with
David, Who are we, or what are our fathers houses, that the Lord should ever
accept such as we are, and such poor sacrifices as we offer unto him?

Thus having spoken of three distinct Works, wherein the Holy Ghost does give
himself unto the soul, to wit, 1. In a work of Inhabitation, 2. In a work of
Sanctification, 3. In a work of Revelation;


It now remains, The fourth work of the Spirit.
that we speak unto the fourth work, wherein the Holy Ghost gives himself unto
the soul, and that is a work of Consolation. This is one of the great
Characters of the Holy Ghost; and this the Lord Jesus does in special ascribe
unto the Spirit: Joh. 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter: so verse. 26. and this is no other, but the Spirit of Truth,
Joh. 15.26. thus does he style the Holy Ghost, the Comforter. Why? had the
disciples no comfort before, think you? was there no comfort in the Fathers
drawing them to Christ, and revealing Christ in them? Mat. 16.17. Was there no
comfort in Christ his revealing the Father to them? doubtless there is comfort
in all these works: the work of the Father mentioned in Joh. 6.44. is the same
with what we read, Isai. 54.13. All thy children shall be taught of God, and
great shall be the peace of thy Children: though it be but peace for the
future, yet light is sown for the righteous herein, and gladness for the
upright in heart, Psalm. 97.11. there is some groundwork of light and comfort
in the Fathers work, and some sparkles of it do appear; for the Father reveals
the Son; and the Son is no sooner seen, but hope is seen, for Jesus Christ is
our hope, 1 Timothy 1.1. and hope it self (I mean the grace of hope) is a
comfortable blessing: so that the soul has supportance in the very work of our
being drawn to Jesus Christ: and moreover, the Father adds further comfort in
his Justifying grace; for by it we have peace with God, Romans 5.1. and chap.
8.34. it is God that justifies, who shall condemn? such gracious supports, and
more then transient tastings of his mercy; not such as hypocrites may have, but
such as do more or less stay with the Saints, and people of God: so that at the
least, there does ever remain a seed of consolation in the hearts of all those,
whom God has by his Spirit drawn home unto his Son.

And when the Son receives the soul, he does amplify this comfort; he reveals
the Fathers work unto the soul, Mat. 16.16, 17. Blessed art thou Simon
Bar-Jona, flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father which
is in heaven: and Luke 10.20. Rejoice in this, because your names are written
in heaven. So that there is consolation also in the work of the Son: but you
shall find it true, that it is by the Holy Ghost that both of them work, and
that either of them comfort the soul, with those beginnings of consolation that
afterward break forth into more abundant riches of increase.

But what does the Holy Ghost do more?

1. For Answer; He does bear witness with a more abundant measure of
consolation, Romans 14.17. The kingdom of God is not meat, and drink; but
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; He does so clearly reveal
our acceptance through the righteousness of Christ, that from thence springs
peace unto the soul, which grows up until it passes understanding, and
brings us unto joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. therefore he
is called by way of eminency, The Comforter; because when he comes, he does so
clearly ratify unto you your righteousness to be in Jesus Christ.

2. Secondly, The comfort of the Holy Ghost, is more constant and abiding; as
Christ (speaking of the Comforter) promises unto his Apostles, Joh. 16.22. I
will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man
take from you: not but that God may sometimes eclipse it, for the trial of his
servants; yet ordinarily it is more constant, and leaves faith even then more
constant and firm, Nehem. 8.10. The joy of the Lord is your strength: when the
Holy Ghost takes in hand to comfort his people, he does abundantly strengthen
them with his consolations.

3. Thirdly, As the comfort of the Holy Ghost is more abundant, and constant,
so it is more powerful; Luke 24.49. Behold, I send unto you the promise of the
Father: tarry ye at Jerusalem, until you be endued with power from on high: so
Act. 1.8. You shall receive power from on high, after that the holy Ghost is
come upon you; not by the gift of him, nor by his inhabitation, nor by
sanctification, nor by revelation only; but in the power of all these, that in
the midst of strong opppositions, you might have strong consolation:
therefore this is the ground of the Apostle Paul's thanksgiving, 2 Cor. 1.5. and
chap. 2.14. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us: so also our
consolation abounds by Christ; and thanks be to God, who always causes us
to triumph in Christ. Thus you see the truth of the Point, that the work of
consolation does in special manner belong unto the Holy Ghost: yet for the
further clearing of it, there is a Question or two to be answered: There is
mention made, Ephesians. 1.13, 14. of the seal of the Spirit, and of the earnest of
the Spirit: Therefore it may be demanded, 1. What is the seal of the Spirit. 2.
What is the earnest of the Spirit.

What is the seal of the Spirit? Grieve not the holy Spirit, whereby you are
sealed unto the day of redemption: so likewise there is mention made both of
the seal, and earnest of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 1.21, 22.

For answer hereunto, seal of the Spirit to be nothing else but the Spirit it
self; as the name of Christ is often put for Christ himself: for you shall not
read in Scripture, that it is called the seal of the Spirit, but they were
sealed by the Spirit; He has sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in
our hearts. 2 Cor. 1.22. So that as the Spirit is the anointment, and the
earnest: so he is also the seal: when the Angel mentioned Revel. 7.2. is said
to have the seal of the living God; it is meant of the Spirit.

But, Holy Ghost said to be a seal? and in respect of what workings of his is
he so called?

I Answer, seal; and he does express the nature of a seal in them all.

1. First, He does confirm and ratify all the gracious promises of God unto
the soul, bearing witness in truth and power of them unto the soul, and thereby
begetting and confirming faith in the soul: for the use of the seal is to
confirm; and this is the principal work of the Holy Ghost, to confirm all the
promises of God as an authentic seal. There is a place of Scripture, which
being a little miss-translated, leads (I cannot say into a little) but into a
great inconveniency, Ephesians. 1.13. In whom after that ye believed, ye were
sealed: Calvin is much troubled about it, and so is Piscator: the truth is, it
implies thus much, that in believing they were sealed; this is the true
English of those Greek words: so that it is the Holy Ghost, that comes in every
promise of grace wherein Jesus Christ is conveyed unto the soul, and he sets
it home, and confirms it to the soul, by begetting faith in that grace, and
so sets to his seal that it is true to thee: and hence it is, that the faith
which is wrought by the Holy Ghost, is said to be a seal, Joh. 3.33. He that
has received his testimony, has set to his seal that God is true: so then,
the Holy Ghost sets his seal to it, when he gives us faith; and thus he is
the seal, as he does confirm all the word of Gods grace unto us: and hence it
is that faith is called the spirit of faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. Calvin disputes this
point at large, when he speaks touching the authority of the word of God;
which though it be none of the most learned, nor elegant of his works; yet I
think there be so many plain arguments, that they may convince the most
arrogant Atheist: yet to make him believe it you cannot, except the Holy Ghost
set in to convince a gain-sayer; for it is the Spirit that gives the seal and
confirmation of every word of the Gospel.

And to speak a little more plainly in this point: although the Apostle John (1
Epistle chap. 5. ver. 7, 8.) speaks of six witnesses, that bear witness unto
Jesus Christ; yet you shall find this to be true, that there are none of all
that do set it home unto the soul, but the Holy Ghost only: when the Father
bears witness, he does it by the Spirit: 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. etc. God reveals
the hidden things of his love unto us by his Spirit, etc. when the Son does
show us the Father, and so sets the soul at liberty, and eases our
consciences thereby, The Lord is that Spirit; and where the Spirit of the Lord
is, there is liberty: 2 Cor. 3.17. And it is the Spirit that sets on his own
work much more plentifully by the powerful efficacy of himself upon the soul,
Act. 1.8. and for the water, and the blood, who applies them? as for the water
of sanctification, it is but a creature, and it is not in the power of any
creature to beget faith: for the word of God it self cannot beget faith: can
any work of God do it? no, no, it is neither the blood of justification, nor
the water of sanctification that can beger faith, but the Spirit only:
otherwise you will ever and anon suspect your faith, and your sanctification;
and every Christian knows what I say, That if a man have nothing but his works
of sanctification to trust unto, they will fail him, unless the Spirit of God
do breathe in them, and testify the Lords acceptance of you: All the works of
creation though they may convince my judgment that there is a God, yet they
cannot beget lively faith in me, unless the Holy Ghost set in with them; for
the word of God cannot do it, no nor the Sacraments, though they be seals: but
when are they seals? only then when the Holy Ghost is conveyed in them; and
therefore we see why the Holy Ghost is called a seal, because he does confirm
our faith in the works, and word of God.

You will say, But may not a soul comfort himself, in the former experiences of
Gods mercy? True, but the Holy Ghost must then breathe in them; and his work it
is also to bring them to remembrance, Joh. 14.26. if he will reveal his loving
kindness in these footsteps of his grace, then they do come in to confirm your
faith, otherwise both word and works are dead, unless the Spirit of God
breathe in them: he it is that reveals free grace, justifying the ungodly,
and afterward will let you know the works of your sanctification: he teaches,
and none like him: 1 John 2.20, 27. You have an unction from the holy One, and
ye know all things, etc. and in this respect every Christian is a sealed one of
God, more or less: when as the Angel was sent to set the seal of God upon his
servants, Revel. 7.2; 3. he did not leave out weak Christians doubtless, but
did seal all the servants of God. Christ is careful to keep his weak servants
from inundations of evil, as well as others: so in Ezekiel. 9.4. The mark of God
is set upon all, that mourn for the sins of the times: therefore in some work
of this seal, the Holy Ghost is not wanting to seal all believers; otherwise
thou could not believe, that the Father has drawn thee to Christ, unless
the Lord had revealed it; nor could thou believe, that the Father is thy
Father, unless the Holy Ghost has sealed thee; thou can not know that thy
faith is accepted of God, that thy sanctification is in truth, unless the
Spirit of God do clear up these things unto thy soul: though thou had many
promises before thee, yet unless the Lord by his Spirit apply them, thou can
not see thy right in them.

But is not that my sin?

It is your sin; Jesus Christ unto you, and your faith in him, and your
deriving of your works from him; you will neither know your justification, nor
your sanctification to be true: therefore there is ever a sealing work of Gods
Spirit upon the souls of his Saints, though this may be done before the Holy
Ghost come to seal you in his own proper work; for you have many gracious
workings of God about you, before he come to seal his own work in your soul.

2. The second work of the Spirit, in respect whereof he is called a seal, is
his ingraving the likeness of Jesus Christ upon the soul; for the Lord has
predestined us to be conformed unto the image of his Son, Romans 8.29. and how
come we to be so conformed? even by the Spirit of God, who writes (as it were)
Jesus Christ in our hearts, as with the finger of the living God; and hence
Christ is formed in us, Gal. 4.19. and this image of Christ the Holy Ghost
writes in us, by making us conformable unto the death, and resurrection of
Christ; and unto that end, he does breathe in both the Sacraments, Romans 6.4, 5,
6. for he is both a Spirit of mortification, and vivification, so as that
through him we do not only find sin mortified, but do live by the faith of
the Son of God; and the Spirit it is that does preserve these gifts, and
acts, and stirs up our faith to look unto Christ: this is another use of
the seal, not only to confirm, but to conform; so that of his fullness we all
receive grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. and we live, yet not we, but Christ lives
in us; and this seal the Holy Ghost does set on more or less in every
Christian, but in his own proper work he does it with more power.

3. The third work, whereby the Holy Ghost does express the nature of a seal,
is in distinguishing the Saints from other men, Rev. 7.2, 3. the servants of
God were sealed, and in sealing them he does conceal them, as a seal does, so
that the world knows them not, Joh. 14.17. and 1 John 3.1. we are called the
sons of God, therefore the world knows us not, etc. and the more the Spirit
does distinguish a man from the wicked of the world, the less they do discern
him to be a gracious man; the more lively grace is, the more it is hidden from
the world: as men grow more in godliness, so they grow more and more to be
suspected by the world this is sealing work, to distinguish, and yet to
conceal: these things does the Spirit of God, as a seal upon the hearts and
consciences of his people; he begets and confirms all their faith, more or
less; he does conform them to the image of Christ more or less; he does also
conceal, and distinguish them from the world.

The second Question needful for the clearing of this point, How is the Holy
Ghost an earnest?

For Answer, earnest in two respects. 1. First, As he binds the bargain
between God and the soul; he does confirm all the promises of God to us, and
fasteneth them upon our hearts, and settleth our hearts with an unmovable
faith: God having given us his Spirit, does give us all in him, for he binds
our union with Christ, and our relation to the Father; the Covenant of Gods
grace unto us, and us unto it; the Gospel to us, and us unto the Gospel.

2. Secondly, He is an earnest, as he is the first fruits of the payment: if a
man give a pledge, he means to take his pledge again: but if he gives money
in earnest, he means not to take that again, for it is part of the payment,
and the whole is but a greater payment of the same kind: so in like manner,
what is all our inheritance? surely a fullness of the fruition of God the
Father, and of Jesus Christ, and of the blessed Spirit of God; this is all our
inheritance that we look for in another world: Ephesians. 1.14. He is the earnest of
our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the
praise of his glory: here we have but a little portion of the Spirit, a little
earnest-peny; but this little portion is an assurance unto us, that he will
make it up, until we be able to receive no more.

Now for Application of this Point; seal of the Spirit, all those that desire
to speak the language of Canaan: no man has part in Christ, but he has the
seal of the Spirit also; for if the Holy Ghost had not given thee Christ in
this or that promise, thou could never have believed it. True it is indeed,
there are many Christians, yea, and sealed Christians, which are not sealed
with the proper work of the Spirit, I mean with that full consolation, and
universal conformity to Gods image; every Christian has not received that
measure of power; but every Christian waits for it, and is sealed by the
blessed Spirit, having set home some word of Gods grace, wherein Jesus Christ
is brought unto the soul.

In the second place, a promise of God by any work of grace, such as we can
have before we have the seal of the Spirit; I mean such a work of the Spirit,
as wherein he does come in with power upon the soul, above the power of the
word and works of God; for they are both creatures: and unless the Lord come in
with his immediate power, above the power of any Ordinance, all that you have
received amounts not to the faith of Gods elect; and unless it be the Spirit
of God that enlighteneth, we have received no saving light; and when he does
come to seal up Jesus Christ unto our souls, he ever speaks in some promise
of the free grace of God; for the Lord justifies no man upon an imperfect
righteousness, but in that work does ever declare himself to be just, and a
justifier of him that is of the faith of Jesus; Romans 3.26. therefore seeing in
this work, he sits upon a throne to declare his own righteousness, there is
no place now for our righteousness to appear; hence it is, that if he justify,
it is freely by his grace, Romans 3.23. thus God dealt with Abraham, when he
showed him the innumerable stars of heaven, and told him, So shall thy seed be;
He believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness, Genesis 15.5. it was
the free grace of God, which he mentions unto him. But suppose the Lord
should reveal a work unto you (as a work there is in every soul that is
justified) if you should see any work in your soul, yet unless the Spirit of
God should above the power of the work breathe in it, it is not possible that
it should beget a Divine Faith; it is only the work of the Spirit of God: it is
he also that shows you your acceptance with God, and that manifests your
sanctification, and makes it a sign unto you of your justification; otherwise
neither word, nor work can set on a promise; with power upon the soul, until
the Holy Ghost confirm it; it is his immediate work.

What then? Spirit do this immediately without the word?

No: peace unto the soul, he ever does it in some word of promise; and if he
testify our acceptance, it is in some word; and in that respect, it is
mediate: but he does set on a power above the word, and in that respect I call
it immediate: and therefore if a man shall seek to hammer out any thing by his
own knowledge, though he may add to his knowledge, yet he can do nothing to the
begetting of faith, unless the Lord come in by a power above the word: and when
he does speak in any word of his grace, he does not in the first place speak to
you of your own righteousness; but first convinces you, that you are a chief
sinner: as when he said to Saul, Why persecutest thou me? when he sends his
Spirit, it is first to convince the world of sin, (Joh. 16.8, 9, etc.) and
what? of your sanctification, next? no, of your justification next; he will
convince the world of righteousness; that is, of his righteousness; and
afterward of judgment: and that is sometimes put for sanctification, Mat.
12.20. A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not
quench, until he bring forth judgment into victory. But it is the Spirit that
does all this, and therefore let not men deceive themselves in any conclusions
that they can make; for their enlightened conscience is but a creature; and
unless the Lord come in with a greater light, then your conscience will afford
you, all will be but lost work unto your souls; you will build but castles in
the air, which in time of temptation will vanish away.

In the third place, first fruits of the Spirit, to know, that they have
received an earnest of an everlasting possession; that Spirit will never leave
you till you become a full vessel, and running over: if he have given you one
promise, he will give you more; and if he have given you Christ, he will with
him give you all things else.

In the fourth and last place; Christ, and our hope be in him, never to rest
until we do more fully and clearly see that the Lord is our God; until the Holy
Ghost do fill your hearts with more power, and stamp more of the image of
Christ in you: grow more and more sensible how dead and insufficient you are
unto any thing that is good: be meek, and lowly in heart; think meanly of your
selves: you cannot pray, you cannot preach, you cannot of your selves perform
any Christian duty; it is Christ that must work all our works for us: know
therefore, that if you be lively and active, it is because your life is hid
with Christ in God; he it is that stirs up your faith to look up unto
Christ, to expect all help from his hand. Sometimes you must look to be severed
from the world; and the more clear the truths of God are unto you, the more
they are hidden from the world; for if a man cannot look upon a candle, how
shall he look upon a torch? and much less upon the shining Sun. Therefore it
behooves all the servants of God, to grow up in the power of God, and the
strength of his might; not holding forth insolency of Spirit, nor uncharitable
censoriousness; such things are far off from expressing the Spirit of Christ;
but it is the part of the servants of Christ, to be faithful, meck, lowly,
humble, and courageous in the ways of the Lord; and when you have done all, be
contented to be counted the offscouring of the world; as 1 Cor. 4.9. for it
must be the part of all that fear God, to take heed that you give none occasion
to any to speak evil of us: for if we do consider the great hope of our
calling, how should it cast holy shame upon our faces, that we walk so unworthy
of our calling! for if there be any work of God upon our hearts, it is no
transient work: if God begin, He will perfect until the day of Christ: the work
of grace is an uncessant work; but as in the first creation, the Spirit of God
hatched upon the face of the waters, till the work of Creation was perfected:
so does the Lord by his Spirit in his Saints; he does not leave hatching in
their hearts till he has separated light from darkness, and made every thing
fruitful in the soul. We must not rest therefore in former weak beginnings; but
if we be born of God, and under a Covenant of grace, we must look to grow up in
all well pleasing unto God, that we may not be strangers to any of all the
heavenly works of the grace of God, but that we may grow up to abound in
fruitfulness in them all.

Thus having explained, Second Branch of the Doctrine.
how the Lord gives himself in a Covenant of grace unto Abraham, and to his
seed; we now come unto the second part of the Doctrine; which is, that he
received Abraham and his seed to be a peculiar people unto himself; which
although we have spoken somewhat unto in the opening of the point, let us
further premise these three things, before we come to the Use of it.

1. First, That the Lord did take Abraham, and his seed to be a peculiar people
unto himself.

2. Secondly, How did he so take them to be his people?

3. Thirdly, Who are meant by those, whom he did so take, to make them a
peculiar people unto himself?

1. For the first of these, That he did so take Abraham and his seed, etc. we
find it plain in Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. The Lord thy God has chosen thee, to be a
special people unto himself, etc. and ver. 8. Because the Lord loved you, and
because he would keep the oath, which he had sworn unto your fathers. The like
we read in 2 Samuel 7.23, 24. Thou have confirmed to thy self thy people Israel,
to be a people unto thee for ever; and thou Lord, art become their God: and
this mercy does he magnify toward them, when they had no thoughts of him; but
as he sometimes called his Apostles, when they were mending their nets: so he
called his people Israel, when they were making bricks in Egypt, then he said
to Pharaoh, Let my people go; and again, If thou slay my son, my first born, I
will stay thy son, thy first born; and as he sometime took Abraham himself out
of Caldea: so he took his seed out of Egypt, that they might serve him in the
Wilderness.

Now secondly, how the Lord called them?

I answer,

1. First, By solemn outward Covenant; and that partly in the loins of Abraham;
and partly in mount Sinai; and yet more solemnly in the plains of Moab, Deuteronomy.
29. for that was a Covenant of Grace wherein the Lord promised to circumcise
their heart, and the heart of their seed. Deuteronomy. 30.6.

2. And secondly, In one word, by this Covenant he does draw them into union
with himself, and with his Son: from whence it comes to pass, that we have
communion with him, both relative, in adoption, and justification; and
positive, in sanctification, and in fullness of time, perfect glorification.

In the third place, Abraham, and his seed? does God call all the seed of
Abraham into a Covenant of grace with himself?

The answer is shortly this, Abraham does here principally stand as the father
of the faithful, and so received Circumcision as the Father of the faithful,
not only of such as were Circumcised, but also of such as were uncircumcised
The Covenant he received when he was uncircumcised; and the seal when he was
circumcised, that he might be the father of the faithful among Jews and
Gentiles: and all the Jews are not the seed of Abraham, but the children of
the promise are counted for the seed; for they are the seed unto whom the
promises are made; and he says it not, Unto thy seeds, as of many: but, To thy
seed, as of one, even Christ, Gal. 3.16. so that unto Christ, and unto all
those that have the seed of Christ in them, is this Covenant made.

You will say unto me, carnal seed also? have they no portion in the Covenant
of grace; was not Ishmael circumcised as well as Isaac? and is it not said,
Unto them were committed the covenants of God? Romans 9.4. so that both the
Covenants were committed to them that fell away from God: and has not God said
to those that were circumcised, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my
mind could not be toward this people? and the Lord rejects them, Jer. 15.1.
and 6. ult. and 7.29. and yet, these (whom God rejects) were made partakers
of the seal of the Covenant: would God call them to the seal, and not to the
Covenant? would he call them to profane the Covenant? the point is weighty:
shortly and plainly to speak something to it.

1. First, they had their part in the Covenant of Grace: this they had, that
they were all called to the solemn receiving of the covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.10. to
15. Ye all stand this day before the Lord your God, etc. that thou should
enter into covenant with the Lord thy God, etc. this was the Covenant of grace:
now thus far are all the carnal seed of Christian Parents, called into the
outward fellowship of the Covenant.

But why would God call them to the outward fellowship of the covenant, seal of
it, and mean while not give them the blessing, and kernel of the Covenant? this
is weighty, and considerable; how it stands with the faithfulness of God.

For answer, Blessings of the Covenant are not far from them: for there are two
sorts of blessings. Some do consist in the outward letter of the Ordinances;
the Gospel of grace, the Sacraments, and seals of it; and sundry common gifts
of the Spirit that are plentifully dispensed in the fellowship of the Church;
besides a liberal and bountiful use of the creatures; for they are all
serviceable to the People of God: and all these things do flow from the
Covenant of grace, which God has made with their Fathers. When as Abraham had
understood that God would establish the Govenant with Isaac, and thereupon made
a sad prayer unto God, that Ishmael might live in his sight, Genesis 18.18, 20.
the Lord answers him; As for Ishmael, I have heard thee; behold, I have
blessed him, and will make him fruitful, etc. and (which is wonderful) he had
the liberty of all the Ordinances until he cut himself off from them. Unto this
Covenant belong those gifts, which the Lord bestows on men from the blood of
Christ, Heb. 10.29. so that it is not a mere blank, for by it here are sundry
spiritual, and outward blessings; the patience and bounty of God is abundantly
poured out upon the carnal seed of Christian Parents, as in the wilderness,
when the displeasure of God was ready to kindle against that carnal generation,
and he was ready to cut them off; he remembered the covenant of his mercy to
Abraham, and often times spared them: so that if you see much patience extended
to the children of Christian Parents, and many gifts bestowed upon them,
whereby they become very serviceable sometimes in the Commonwealth, sometimes
in the Church; know, that all these things spring from the Covenant of God with
their Fathers.

I, life and kernel of the blessing be wanting; if Ishmael do not live in Jesus
Christ, what will all these blessings do him good? will they not aggravate his
damnation?

For answer, Church liberty, and fellowship; nor only bestow upon them sundry
gifts of grace, and great bounties, and manifold preservation from evil: but
likewise he does offer them the sure mercies of David: for so God does
distinguish the sure mercies of the Covenant, Isai. 55.3. Incline your ear, and
come unto me; hearken, and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting
covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David: wherein you see the Lord
puts it upon such terms, that if the soul come not by it, it is because he
would not: not that any can come when they will, as by the power of their own
will; but this the Lord will leave upon the children of Christian Parents, that
they shall not say, that God forsook them, until they have forsaken him; and
that, when there lay no necessity upon them, but voluntarily they did despise
the grace of the Covenant: for do but observe the causes wherefore the Lord
has discovenanted the children of gracious Parents.

1. The first that ever fell off from the Covenant of grace made with Abraham,
it was Ishmael: and what was the ground of it? he mocked Isaac, Genesis 21.9, 10.
what mocking was it? in regard of humane frailty? no, no; it was a plain
persecution, and that implies such a persecution as was cast upon him in
respect of the Covenant of grace made with him; as if he should say, Here is
the child of promise! or the like, insomuch that Sarah could not endure he
should tarry any longer in the house; for this was not humane frailty, but
humane insolency against the Covenant; whereas happy he, if he might have
fallen under the wing of it.

2. The second that you read of, who fell from the Covenant, fell not upon
those terms; but the love of worldly sensual blessings did choke the affections
of Esau toward the Covenant of grace, which was the chief blessing of the first
born in the days of Abraham and Isaac; but he coming in hungry, sells his
birthright for a mess of red pottage, Genesis 25.31. etc. Thus Esau despised his
birthright: so this sort of children despise the grace of God, not out of a
malicious frame of spirit, but they are choked with the cares of this world;
and the best seed that was sown in them, becomes unfruitful: and this is the
case of all the good husbands of the world that despise the Covenant of grace;
for when once a man is taken up with the profits and pleasures of this life, he
then cares not a rush for the Covenant of grace: mount Sion is not now
commodious for him, so profanely do they undervalue the Covenant of grace in
comparison of sensual lusts: and do men thus fall from the Covenant of grace,
because it is a duty above the power of nature? no, no, the very common gifts
they had, might have restrained the one of these from mocking, and the other
from selling his birthright for a mess of pottage: it is evident that the
children of Christian Parents, when as they come to fall off from God, they do
not fall upon such things as they are not able to prevent: but either they
scorn and persecute the things of God, or else they prefer sensual lusts before
them.

3. A third way, whereby the children of Christian Parents fall from the
Covenant of grace, is a self-confident cleaving unto those gifts of grace,
which by the Covenant they have received: besides these causes of their falling
from the Covenant of grace, I have observed no more in Scripture, nor have I
found any more in mine own experience. When men are invested with many
spiritual blessings; sweetly endowed with many sprinklings of the blood of the
Covenant, whereby they come to be great in knowledge, and sometime excel in a
spirit of prayer, and some are good at one thing, and some at another; and
being full of such gifts, it may easily come to pass that they may grow so
confident of these, that they will not subject themselves unto the
righteousness of God in Christ Jesus. And this was the rejection of the whole
house of Israel, Romans 10.3. They being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and
going about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves
unto the righteousness of God: and hence the Covenant of grace is unto them
turned into a Covenant of works; they are now become the children of the
bondwoman, and not the children of the freewoman: for they that have their
faith in themselves, and not in Christ, they fall under a Covenant of works. So
that (mind you) the Lord is just and righteous in all these his dispensations.

I said before, God did receive Abraham and his seed into this Covenant: I mean
the faithful seed; and they are received into the second sort of blessings of
the Covenant, which are truly saving: for the Lord receives them into inward
fellowship with his Son, so as that they shall be justified, sanctified, and
glorified. But are the carnal seed then rejected? no, but they partake in many
bounties of God, and grow up and live in his sight; what? in the enjoyment of
outward blessings only? no, of spiritual blessings also: I, but the Lord gives
them not the spiritual blessing of saving grace by the Covenant: does he not?
and why is it? not because he does not offer it to them: but because they fall
off from it upon such terms, wherein there lay no necessity upon them, that
they should so fall off: Ishamel needed not have mocked Isaac; Esau needed not
have sold his birthright for a mess of pottage: never let them pretend the
necessity of corrupt nature; corrupt nature puts no such necessity upon us,
to sell away such blessings upon such terms. And for others that trusted in
their own righteousness, had not the Lord convinced them, that it was not their
own righteousness that could save them? did not David say, If thou Lord mark
iniquity, Lord who shall stand? Psalm. 130.3. and in thy sight shall no flesh
living be justified, Psalm. 143.2. so that, it is not the blindness of man's
nature that excuses, but this flows from a malignant, and affected
self-confidence; therefore now they are justly disinherited: for the Jews were
not rejected until it was made plain to them, that their righteousness would
not stand before the Lord; therefore says the Apostle, Act. 13.46. It was
necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken unto you; but
seeing you put it from you, etc. and he had said before, They contradicted and
blasphemed; and why was it necessary that the word should be spoken unto them?
truly, that God might be faithful in his Covenant; for if all the children of
Christian Parents, may not have liberty in the means of grace, then the Lord
should be wanting to his Covenant: so that if they be Jews by nature, the Lord
is bound by Covenant, that they shall not for want of means perish; nor upon
such grounds as are far above the nature of creatures to reach unto: for though
it be above the power of the creature to repent and believe, yet it is not
above the power of nature to abstain from profaneness and malignity, and such
strong confidence in their legal righteousness; therefore does he call them to
Church Priviledges, and common gifts and graces, things that are above the
power of nature to reach unto: and he does also preserve them from many evils,
and tenders unto them the sure mercies of the Covenant: but if they will
malign it, and cast it behind their backs, and choose other things before it;
such degenerate children of godly Parents, their blood shall be upon their own
heads.

The Use hereof in the first place, justify the righteousness of God, in the
confusion of the children of Christian Parents: if thou see any child of the
godly perish, write upon him, He is either a persecutor, or a worldling, or a
presumptuous hypocrite; otherwise he had been an heir of grace: The spirit of
God deals fairly, and sweetly, and comfortably with them: whence it is that
they are ofttimes sweetly trimmed up with many good gifts and parts, that you
would wonder to see how forward and dexterous they are in their places; and how
comes this? is it not from the faithfulness of Gods Covenant, that we might
see and say, That on Gods part there was no want unto his salvation, but it was
his own ungracious gracelessnesse, that cast off grace in the means of it? let
Ishmael perish, and Esau perish, and all civil justiciaries perish; and their
blood will be upon their own heads, the Lord and his Throne is guiltless; it is
not for want of grace offered unto them: for though he had not purposed to save
them merely of grace; yet he meant to let them see, that he did not only deal
justly with them, but also graciously in some kind. What a warning should this
be to the children of godly Parents! take heed what you do; Ishmael had a godly
Father, and Esau both godly Father and Mother; therefore bless not your selves
in that. Take heed also that you rush not upon another rock: for you will be
ready to say, Notwithstanding the fair Covenant, which I am under, I cannot
have grace unless God work it in me: stand not with God upon those terms; for
either God will bring you home unto himself, or else you shall fall upon such
terms, as that God will take you by the throat one day, and make it appear that
you did forsake the Covenant of grace, upon such grounds, as many a Reprobate
in Hell would never have parted with it upon the like: either you do malign
the grace of God, or are profane, or else you stand upon your own
righteousness, and stablish that; and then your heart begins to rise against
your Parents: and you think your self wiser then seven men that can render a
reason; or if you break not out upon these terms, then you will begin to see
that God has enlightened your mind, and to seize upon your heart; and then
you see that you can do something, you can pray, and you can hear with profit,
and the like: and hereupon you come to build an undoubted hope of salvation;
you believe upon this, that your soul is wrapped up in a bundle of life and
peace: and if any man come to shake your foundation, you are like a stone-wall
that beats back all: therefore if thus you fall off, the Lord and his throne
is guiltless, and you are justly miserable: it is the blood of the Covenant
that did sanctify you; but it will not save you, because you did not look to
be justified by it: so that as you have despised the Covenant of God, you are
now cut off from the saving fellowship of it, which else the Lord had called
you to enjoy. It was not the Jews crucifying the Lord of life and glory in
their ignorance, that cut them off from God; for notwithstanding that, Christ
prayed for them, Luke 23.34. Father, forgive them, they know not what they do:
but when they grow malignant, and despise, and contradict, and blaspheme, Act.
13.40, 45, 46. and put off from them the word of life, now they are cast off.
Therefore let all the children of Christian Parents understand it, and the
danger of it; do not think that you shall be saved, because you are the
children of Christian Parents, but take heed of scorning of Religion, and of
high-prizing the world: and if you be forward in spiritual gifts, take heed of
blessing your selves in them: for if you have any thing of your own to build
upon, you will in time tread under foot the blood of the Son of God, wherewith
you were sanctified, if you be not justified by it: work out therefore your
salvation with fear and trembling; otherwise by one means or other you will
fall off from God, upon such base and unworthy terms, whereby it will appear
that the Lord is just in rejecting you, and you justly left in a state of
perdition.

You will say, Infants?

Peter Martyr says, holy, for so says the Scripture, and therefore they are
in the Covenant generally: sometimes Parents may cut off the free passage of
their Cavenant from their seed: though God give them one child and another,
they are not greatly sensible what need the poor Infant stands in of a
Covenant of grace; they do not believe for their children, nor humble
themselves in respect of them; and then no wonder if the child miscarry through
the unbelief of his Parents. Otherwise I do not know whether ever God reject
any upon other grounds, then what we have already laid down.

In the second place, under the Covenant, to be careful to bring up their
children under the wing of the Covenant: it may be some of you have sold away
great estates from them; these were but the appurtenances of the birthright:
but if you have parted with great inheritances for the liberty of the
Ordinances, you do your children no wrong: for as ever you desire that they may
have a share in the Covenant, bring them under the Ordinances of the Covenant,
for faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. Received you the Spirit by the works of
the law, or by the hearing of faith? Gal. 3.2. and this is the door of the
Covenant, Jesus Christ believed on, Joh. 10.7, 9. Act. 14.27. therefore
whatsoever inheritances you sell, if it were the inheritance of a Kingdom,
bring them to the Ordinances of God, if they cannot be brought to them: and so
you have done your part; and then if your childrens blood be upon their own
heads, through their own forsaking of the Covenant, the Lord is guiltless, and
his Covenant guiltless; they have forseited their birthright, which is not to
be bought again for many worlds.

In the third place, seeing that, receives the faithful seed of Abraham into
the Covenant of his grace, and in like manner takes not only you, but all of
yours by virtue of the Covenant: and seeing that the Lord does in giving
himself, give us all his Persons, Attributes, Ordinances, Providence; for he
is the Lord of hosts, and therefore all that is Gods is ours also: It will
follow semblably, that we must be as God is, and our children as his children;
and our servants as his servants; and our wits, and parts, and authority, and
power, and times, must all be for God, and not for our selves: moreover, all
that is in our Churches is for God, Cant. 7. ult. At our gates are all manner
of pleasant fruits both new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my
beloved.

Now from hence two things follow,

1. First, Here is a ground for family duties; for if all that I have must be
the Lords (for he takes me as he gives himself) then it is for us to give up
all our relations unto him, as much as lies in us: we can do nothing but set
them before the Lord; but it will be requisite that we should constrain them to
duty, pray with our children and servants, teach them the will of God; restrain
them from wickedness: I know Abraham, says the Lord, That he will command his
children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord,
etc. Genesis 18.18. and the Lord commands Parents to bring up their children in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. we must therefore teach
them to know the God of their Fathers, as David, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou
Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect
heart, and with a willing mind, etc. and so old Lois and Eunice were careful
to train up Timothy in the knowledge of the Scriptures from a child: this the
Lord requires of us; as ever we look to have right in his Son, he will have
right in our sons: if we have right in his Spirit, he has right in our spirit;
if you have any right in his servants, he has right in your servants: and
therefore use the means to draw them home to him, and leave the blessing unto
the Lord: but if Parents be watchless in conveying the blessing to their
children, and children careless in receiving it; God is faithful, and his
Covenant faithful, though they fall short of it.

2. Secondly, This also follows, that as God betrusteth us with any gifts, or
parts, or talents; with honor, wealth, health, strength, beauty, liberty, or
what else soever: if the Lord have given us any blessing, it is wohlly his, for
we must be unto God, as we would have him be unto us; and therefore the Lord
took it unkindly from his people, Hos. 2.8. That the corn, and wine, and oil,
and silver, and gold, which he had given them, they prepared for Baal. Israel
is an empty vine, when he brings forth fruit unto himself, Hos. 10.1. so
likewise he takes it ill, Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. that they took his sons, and his
daughters, and sacrified them unto Moloch: so sometimes men count it a gentile
thing to train up their children to idleness, and other vanities; whereas in
truth it is as if they trained them up to Moloch: and this the Lord does abhor,
and will sadly require it in his own time. If therefore we must give up our
selves and ours unto God; then here is a foundation for family duties, and also
to improve our selves, and all that we have, wholly to advance the glory of the
grace of God in Jesus Christ: else we pluck asunder the Covenant of grace.

In the fourth place, manner of the performance of all holy duties; for as we
are still to be doing in the use of means to help our knowledge, and faith; so
in all let us still be expecting from the Lord to lay hold upon us and ours,
and to receive us: for our hope stands more in Gods receiving us, then in our
giving our selves unto him; rest not therefore in all the good means that you
use, for that will not hold unless the Lord be pleased to receive us, and ours.
Joh. 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me: so that unless the
Lord give our children to his Son, though we devote them to him, it is a
question whether he will take them or no: look we up therefore unto the Lord,
that he may take them graciously unto himself: the Prophet exhorts Israel to
return unto the Lord, Hos. 14.1, 2. But how shall they return? not unless the
Lord take away their iniquity, and receive them graciously; and thus the
Propher teaches them to pray: so that they do not stand upon their own
reformations, nor look to this and that which they can do; no, no, take with
you words, and say, Take thou away our iniquity; otherwise we shall never get
it out: he also must receive us graciously, and so shall we render unto him our
selves, and all that we can do. This is the way of the Covenant of grace;
whatsoever duties the Lord requires to be done on our parts, let us look unto
him in all to receive us and ours, otherwise we and ours shall soon turn our
backs upon God, and upon his Covenant which he has so graciously invited us
unto in Jesus Christ.

We now come to the third and last Branch of the Doctrine; Third Branch of the
Doctrine.
which is, That the Lord took the chief of Abraham's seed, the Lord Jesus
Christ, to be the mediator and surety of the Covenant between God and Abraham:
this is expressed, Gal. 3.16. To Abraham and his seed were the promises made:
he says not, And to his seeds, as of many, but as of one, And to thy seed,
which is Christ: so that he is the chiefest of the seed with whom the Covenant
is established, as also the Prophet Isaiah testifies, chap. 42.6. and 49.8. I
will give thee for a covenant of the people, and a light of the Gentiles, etc.
and the Apostle speaks fully, when he says, Heb. 8.6. that he is the
mediator of a better covenant: and a surety of the Covenant. Heb. 7.22. Christ
is therefore the chiefest of the seed, and the Mediator and Surety of the
Covenant.

Now a Mediator he is between both parties; partly in respect of his person,
and partly in respect of his Office.

1. In respect of his person, as he is God and man, he is a fit person to be
the ground of our union with God, and to maintain our communion with him: for
what is a Mediator? but a middle person to bring two persons, that are at
difference into one? now Christ as he is God-man, is most fit for this work.

1. First, To be the ground of our Union: for being God-man, he has united
both the differing natures into one; so he is a middle person, and fit to be
the foundation of our union, and therefore he is called Immanuel, Isa. 7.14.
That is, God with us.

2. Secondly, By his person he is fit to maintain our communion; and there are
two things requisite unto that:

1. First, The removal of all offenses; and Christ is most fit for that: for as
he is the ^on of man, he is most fit to suffer all punishment due unto sin; and
therefore as man he became sin for us, that we might become the righteousness
of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. ult. And as he is God, so he is fit to overcome sin,
and to prevail against the wrath of God.

2. Secondly, He is fit to communicate all the good things of God unto us: as
God, he is fit to bestow upon us all spiritual comforts, and heavenly gifts and
blessings: as man, he knows what is most fit for the spirit of man, and so he
is fit to communicate unto us all the good things of God: he has suffered
himself, and has been tempted, and so he is fit to succor such as are
tempted, Heb. 2.17, 18. thus he is a fit Mediator in regard of his Person.

2. Secondly, He is fit to be a Mediator in respect of his Offices; he is a
Priest, a Prophet, and a King; and in all these Offices he does properly, and
lively exercise the Office of a Mediator.

1. First, As a Priest, He does offer Sacrifice for us, Heb. 9.12. even
himself, Heb. 10.10. He gives his life a ransom for many, Mat. 20.28. and he
does not only thus give all this, but apply it also unto us, as it belongs unto
a Mediator for to do. And as a Priest, he does sit at Gods right hand, and
makes intercession for us, Romans 8.34. and if any man man sin, we have an
advocate with the Father, which is Christ the righteous; by him God reconcileth
the world unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. thus he takes away the sins of the world,
Joh. 1.29. and becomes a propitiation for us, Romans 3.24, 25. these things he
does, as he is a Priest.

2. Secondly, As he is a Prophet, he teaches us all things, Acts 3.22.
whatsoever things he has done and suffered for us, those things as a Prophet
he teaches us.

3. Thirdly, As a King, he does apply all this grace unto us, subduing us by
his Spirit unto himself, and all the creatures unto us. God by him as a
Mediator, does bring us on effectually unto himself, by the mighty power of his
Word and Spirit, and keeps us with himself in spotless communion unto his
heavenly kingdom These Offices give him power and authority to do it, as also
faithfulness, and mercy, according unto his tender compassion on our
necessities. Thus we see how the Lord Jesus is a Mediator.

In particular, he is a Mediator of the Covenant between God and us, and that
in a threefold respect.

1. First, Because he is the Messenger of the Covenant: thus he is called, Mal.
3.1. he did first publish it unto our first Parents, Genesis 3.15. and unto
Abraham, and by all the holy Prophets, and in the days of his flesh, and by
the Apostles, and their successors, unto the end of the world.

2. Secondly, He is called the Mediator of the Covenant, as he does ratify
and confirm the Covenant by a threefold seal.

1. First, By his blood: for a Testament is confirmed by the death of him that
made it, Heb. 9.15, 16, 17. he is the mediator of the new testament, that by
means of death, etc. that they which are called, might receive the promise of
eternal inheritance. He made it sure on Gods part, and on our parts he does
seal it up with his blood, that it might be confirmed unto all Generations: and
as no man alters a Testament after a Testatours death, so this is unalterable.

2. Secondly, As he has confirmed it by his blood, so also by his Spirit,
Ephesians. 1.13, 14. etc. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit, whereby you are sealed
to the day of redemption: Christ is the Angel that ascended out of the East,
having the seal of the living God, Rev. 7.2, 3. And look as it was the manner
of the Priest of old, to sprinkle the blood of the Covenant upon the book of
the law, and upon the people: so does the Lord Jesus besprinkle us, and that
which is taught us, with his blood and Spirit, and thereby begets the
experience of the savor of God in our hearts, and seals it up unto us.

3. Thirdly, He does seal it by the seals of the Covenant, which are Baptism,
and the Lords Supper: so it is here said, He gave him the covenant of
circumcision, which was a seal of the righteousness of faith; instead whereof
he has given us Baptism. And by the Lords Supper he seals it; for that is
the blood of the new Testament, Mat 26.28. by all these means he does confirm
the Covenant, Dan. 7.27.

3. Thirdly, He is not only the Publisher, and confirmer, but also the Prince,
and Head of it; for you shall see that in all Covenants there are some that are
Princes of the Covenant, as we read, Dan. 11.22. where speaking of the league
between Egypt and Assyria, he makes mention of the Princes of the Covenant. So
in this respect the Lord Jesus is called the Covenant it self: Isai. 42.6.49,
8. as being the Head and Prince of it; and that implies two or three things:

1. First, If he be the Prince of the Covenant, then all the Covenant is first
made with him, Gal 3.16. To Abraham, and to his seed, even unto Christ: and to
the Church his mystical body in him, and under him; and therefore all the
promises are in him yea, and in him amen^: 2 Cor. 1.20. that is to say, all the
Promises, and all their conditions are fulfilled in him; as he says, It
behooves us to fulfill all righteousness. Mat. 3.15.

2. Secondly, He does inherit the blessings of the Covenant, so far as his
blessed nature is capable of them; he has received the crown of inheritance of
all the blessings both of this life and of another, Mat. 28.18. he sits at
Gods right hand; having led captivity captive, he treads down Satan under his
feet; therefore,

1. First, He has fulfilled all the conditions of the Covenant; as this is one
part of the Covenant, The redeemer shall come out of Sion, and shall turn away
ungodliness from Jacob; as the Apostle, Romans 11.26. expounds the words of the
Prophet, Isai. 59.20. for he fulfilleth in us all the conditions of the
Covenant: he it is that turns us to the Lord, and undertaketh to do all
things in us and for us.

2. Secondly, He does communicate the blessings of the Covenant to us, having
himself exactly fulfilled all the Conditions of them.

3. He does apply the comfort of the Promises unto us; and having done all
these things, he leads us still to wait upon him for further and further
blessings in his Ordinances: Thus we have seen in particulars how the Lord
Jesus is the Mediator of the Covenant. He is the Publisher of it, the
confirmer of it, by his blood, by his Spirit, by the seals of the Covenant: he
is the Prince of it, and has received all the promises from God; they are
accomplished in him, he has fulfilled all the conditions, and received all the
blessings, and applied them unto us, and wrought all things in us, and for us,
and still leads us on unto further and further fellowship with himself.

For the Use of this Point; refutation unto the Popish Doctrine, that has
devised other Mediators besides Jesus Christ: they come unto God in the
mediation of Saints and Angels, and pray to them, to pray for them in Heaven;
and look that by the virtue of their prayers they shall be saved: and whereas
the Scripture is plain, 1 Timothy 2.5. there is one mediator between God and man,
the man Christ Jesus: yea, (say they) one Mediator of Redemption, but many of
Intercession: whereas (mind you) it is the work of a Mediator, not only to do
that which may prevail for the obtaining of peace; but he must apply it also,
or else he has not brought us unto union and communion with the Father. And
when they make intercession unto Angels for the virtue and merit of their
prayers, it does evacuate the mediation of Jesus Christ: for bring in other
Mediators, and you weaken him in his Office. A sign they trust not in him, and
therefore are accursed when they put confidence in other things, Jer. 17.5.

But you will say, Saints on earth to pray for us?

It is true we do so: England to pray for us, it were Idolatry: Paul indeed
does write unto the Churches to pray for him, but not unto the Saints or Angels
in heaven.

2. We do not depend upon their prayers, that by the merit of them they should
prevail: but we look at it only as a way, wherein the Lord calls us to wait
upon him: so as that when we have done desiring, we look for all blessing from
Jesus Christ, even then when we beg the prayers of our friends. When as God was
angry with the friends of Job, because they falsely accused Job, chap. 42.7, 8.
he bids them take a sacrifice, and go to Job, and he shall pray for you; for
him will I accept: but must they now trust upon Job? or upon his acquaintance
with God? no verily, but upon the Lord Jesus, who was held forth by the
Sacrifice. So that though we crave the help of our brethrens prayers, yet the
Lord does not allow us, to make our friends Mediators between Christ and us;
we look not for any thing from them, but from the Lord Jesus Christ alone in
that way. Now they look at Mary as able to command the Lord Jesus, ( Jube Matter
Filium, command thy Son,) and when they pray to this Saint and that Saint, they
look that the right and merit, and efficacy of their prayers shall carry all an
end: whereas they need a Mediator themselves; and therefore they cannot by
their own right be Mediators unto us. But that we might the better understand
the mystery of iniquity: do not they make the Saints and Angels the Mediators
of their Redemption also? what is the ground of the Popish indulgences? have
not they a treasure of Church-merit which they boast of? and therefore have
they power, as they say, to grant pardons, and to apply the merits of the
Saints unto this and that soul: now (mind you) he which is a Mediator of the
pardon of my sins, is a Mediator of redemption, and justification; and this is
the dangerous gulf into which the Popish Religion sinketh many millions of
souls.

The second Use, Instruction how to make an holy use of all the gifts of Gods
grace, and duties of Gods worship; this Doctrine will properly hold it forth:
for here is as dangerous a rock for our souls to be split upon, as is among
them: for we also may be subject to the like danger, in making our own
righteousness our mediators, as they be in making their prayers, and merits of
their Saints their Mediators: if we shall make any graces in our hearts the
ground of our union with God, we have forgotten that Jesus Christ became God
and man, and that he only is a fit person to remove all offense, and to
communicate all good things from God unto us: if we shall say within our
selves, Were I but thus and thus humbled, the Lord would accept me, and all the
blessed promises would be mine: if I could but pray as such a Christian can,
then I know the Lord would accept me. This may be a piece of refined Popery,
but it is Popery at the very bottom: if we look unto our graces, or duties, to
bring us unto union with Christ; or if we think that by the right of them,
communion shall be maintained, we have forgotten our Mediator Jesus Christ,
God and man; for if he be our Mediator, he does work both these for us: these
things cannot bring us unto Christ, for they all flow from him; if therefore we
have no other union with Christ, then that which flows from them; we are not
united unto this very day. But you will say, Cannot our gifts, and works
maintain this union when it is true? If they can uphold it, they are in part
Mediators: that they do uphold it by merit, no Protestant will say: neither is
there any right, or power in them to do this; and therefore to trust in them,
is to put confidence in the arm of flesh: and though it be not so gross as
Popery, yet it tends unto the like dishonor of Jesus Christ. It was a faithful
saying of the Apostle Peter, and worthy of all acceptance, when they saw the
people ready to attribute much unto their holiness, Acts 3.12. etc. Ye men of
Israel, (says Peter) why look ye so earnestly on us, as if we by our power, or
holiness, had made this man to walk? the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of
Jacob, the God of our fathers, has glorified his Son Jesus, etc. so it is not
in the power of the best spiritual gifts or works, to make a creeple go: much
less is it in their power to make a feeble soul stand upright; but the God of
our fathers glorifieth his Son Jesus, in doing all this work for us; for he is
our only mediator of reconciliation, redemption, and intercession; and if we
look for any such virtue, power, or right in any other means under heaven, we
deprive Christ of the Office of a Mediator. There is an Opinion, as I hear,
stirring in our native Country, that though none of our works give us merit,
right, or power to reach the blessing, yet they give us fitness. Now truly this
is but an English word; in Latin we call it congruity: and this the Papists
come unto, that when they be driven hard unto it, they will acknowledge that we
have no merit of condignity, but only merit of congruity: therefore in truth it
is plain Popery in English: it is true indeed, there is a fitness, but it lies
not in doing; it is such a fitness, as whereby the soul judges it self
unworthy of any grace: and now the creature being emptyed of it self, is fit to
receive mercy from God; it is now fit to receive all from Christ. Consider
therefore, I beseech you, what kind of Use God calls us to make of all gifts,
and works of grace; do not think we cry down sanctification, because we do not
put it into Christ's Mediatourship, because we do not shut Christ out of heaven,
and out of his Office by it; for we give it his honor: if we give it this
honor of mediation, we cannot come to God, but we must be united: you will
say, We cannot be united, till by faith we have uniting. Is faith then a
Mediatur between Christ and us? can there be no union with Christ, unless we
bring faith, and repentance with us? truly then we must have Mediators to
bring us unto Christ: but does not the Gospel require faith and repentance in
all that be in Christ? true: but how comes a man by the faith and repentance of
the Gospel? Zach. 12.10. I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, a Spirit of grace, and supplication; and they shall
look on him whom they have pierced, and mourn for him, etc. This looking is
faith, and this mourning is repentance; thus Christ sees us before we see him,
and because we are sons, God has shed abroad the spirit of sons into our
hearts: Gal. 4.6, 7. and hereby we come to see him, and more and more of him;
and this, is the way of the Gospel of Jesus Christ: First, We have him, and him
drawing us, and fitting us by his Spirit, whereby we come to see him; and then
we mourn over him for all the wrong we have done him; this is that faith and
repentance that flows from Christ, and then brings us unto him: if it flow not
from him, but first brings us unto him, it is not the faith and repentance of
Gods elect, nor that which the Gospel holds forth: First take Christ, and then
you have all things in him.

Again, As nothing can first bring us unto Christ: so neither will it be able
to maintain our communion with him: for as he is the door; so he is the Surety
of the Covenant, he is the Publisher, and Confirmer, and Prince of the
Covenant; and he receives and keeps all the blessings of the Covenant for us.
You will say, What then would you have us to neglect repentance, and faith? no,
no, brethren; but exercise your selves in all godliness, 1 Timothy 4.7. but let it
be godliness then; let it not be righteousness only, but godliness; even such
as spring(...) from fellowship with God in Jesus Christ: but when you have done
all you can, do not think that this will give you rest: be not deceived; you
will not find that your souls are any thing nearer to God, when you have prayed
constantly morning and evening: indeed if the Lord strengthen your faith, and
give you comfort, this is effectual; but it is because you did not rest in the
Letter of the duty, but you did exercise your self unto godliness in a way of
faith, and by faith the walls of Jericho fall down, and the walls of Jerusalem
are built up: and so make account that your godliness must be exercised to
fetch all from Christ, otherwise that which you have will not uphold you; when
you have done all you can, wait upon him to speak a word of comfort to you in
his own way, for his own names sake: and so shall you indeed exercise the gifts
of God as not abusing them, and so exercise godliness, as not to talk of it,
but to practice it; and so use it as it ought to be used, as fit to be an
handmaid, but not fit to be an husband: fit to be serviceable unto Christ, but
not fit to justle him out of his Kingdom.

In the third place, strength unto faith, and encouragement unto all the
duties, and fruits of faith; that the Lord has made such a Covenant as this
is; an everlasting covenant, stablished upon better grounds, in the hands of a
better mediator; that is, so fit to bring us unto God, and to maintain union
and communion between God and us; to remove all offenses, and quicken our
spirits toward God: it is our strength to rest upon this rock of Israel; this
is indeed eternal life, Joh. 17.3. when we can say to Saints, and Angels, We
know you not, and to our own righteousness, and all the duties of it, We know
you not, in point of mediation: but Jesus we know, and his righteousness and
mediation we know: as for other things, bring them in their places; but if you
bring them in point of mediation, they will keep us from closing with Christ.
Therefore such as desire to maintain and to see maintained firm and full
communion with Jesus Christ; let the Lord Jesus only be their Advocate, and
Righteousness, for it is he that works all our works for us, and in special
this main work of making and maintaining peace for us: if then we rest not on
what we are or do, but look unto Christ for our acceptance, and know that we
are unprofitable without him; then do we not abuse our gifts, and duties, but
use them as fruits of Christ's mediation: if we look at them as causes of our
mediation, we do utterly evacuate the mediation of Jesus Christ; neither can we
continue in that state, without the same hand of grace: for even the Angels in
heaven (as is generally received) stand confirmed in Jesus Christ: if therefore
they could not stand firm were it not for Jesus Christ, much less shall the
sinful sons of men come unto union, or stand firm in communion with God by
their best graces; but when you have done all, your union will be broken, if
the Lord does not both begin, and perfect it to immortality. Yea, even then
when you are full of all the power of the most High, and of all heavenly
consolation, it is Jesus Christ, that maintains your union with himself:
therefore let creatures know that they are creatures, and let them look at the
gifts bestowed upon them, and works done by them, as the way, which the Lord
has given them to walk in. Say not, We have all we look for, nor think we our
selves fit to be accepted of God: it is a Popish delusion; it is not all our
endeavors or duties, that will maintain us in communion with God one hour to
an end. Thus you see that all these things are as they are, you have done but
your duty in them all, and but a piece of that neither, and you have neither
power, nor right, nor fitness in your selves to stand in Gods sight. In the
mean while, this is a point of much consolation, that the Lord has laid up the
promises in a safer hand then our own, so as that now there is no fear of
breaking between God, and Abraham, and his faithful seed, for the Lord has
promised to take us to be his people, and given Christ to be the Mediator of
the Covenant; then he will see this Covenant maintained, and perfected, and all
the blessings, promises, and treasures of it accomplished to us from day to
day: do but know him, and be acquainted with him, and it will be of effectual
power to root out all the diffidence that is in us; look upon Jesus Christ, and
wait on him; and yet neither can we bring our waiting unto him, but it is our
part to be convinced of our own poverty, and insufficiency; and then all our
power, and help, and hope, is in maintaining our fellowship with Jesus Christ:
wait upon him, that he may carry an end the whole work of a Mediator for you,
and that he may never leave you, till you be settled in heaven, nor then
neither: for even the Angels in heaven would not be steadfast, but that the
Lord has laid a sure foundation in a middle person, that he might unite God
and the creatures together. There is comfort in knowing this, though we have
but little experience of it, because there is comfort laid up in it: therefore
that we might not ravel out our time in vain, know we, that there is an Aliquid
ultra, something further to be sought after, besides what we have found in our
selves: we sometimes hear of conditional promises, but as the Lord Jesus is the
first and last in other things, so in the Covenant, he is the first and last
condition: he does first bring us unto God, and so to the right of the
Covenant; and when we are in Christ, we cannot be active of our selves, nor
keep our peace with God but through him: if you stay in any thing that you can
do, you have forgotten that Christ is the last condition; you have no right
unto the Covenant before you have him; you have no condition of the new
Covenant, unless you have him. But when I have Christ, have I not now the
condition in my self? which the promise requires? truly you have not, for
Jesus Christ is the last condition, as well as the first; and if your right
unto the promise be not maintained by him, you forfeit the promise, as soon as
you lay hold of it: you must therefore look back again unto Christ, not only to
give you the right unto the promise, but the accomplishment of it; otherwise
you may stay many a seven years, if you look for it in your own works: though
thou had right in Christ, and fellowship with Christ, and shall look for
comfort from thine own duties, thou may look till thine eyes fail, and not
find it. Christ is the first, and the last in the Promises he gave you; the
Yea, and he must be the Amen: therefore know, that in all the duties you
perform, you must, as it were, be dressing a meal for Jesus Christ, Luke 17.7,
8, 9, 10. and he content to feed after him, and upon him, who is the beginner
and maintainer of the Covenant for us; and will perfect all the powerful
blessings of it, in us and for us, in his own time.

FINIS.
Books sold by John Allen, at the Sunrising in Paul's Churchyard.
Viz.
Caryl on Job, Vol. 5. quart. Caryl on Job, Vol. 7. quart. Caryl on Job, Vol.
9. quart. Beza Novum Testamentum. fol. Allen's Scripture-Chronology. quart.
Baxter's Call to the Unconverted. twelve. Lukin's Practice of Godliness.
twelve. Burges of Original sin. fol. Davenport and Hook of New England, their
Catechism. Gataker against that wicked Cheat, Judicial Astrology: proving it to
be the Abomination of the Heathens, and that it ought not to be tolerated in a
Christian Commonwealth. Isa. 47.12. Jer. 10.2. The Faith and Order practiced in
the Congregational Churches in England, agreed and consented unto by their
Elders and Messengers, at their Meeting at the Savoy. October. 12. 1658.

