THE POURING OVT OF THE SEVEN VIALS: OR AN EXPOSITION, OF THE 16. Chapter of
the REVELATION, with an Application of it to our Times.

Wherein is revealed Gods pouring out the full Vials of his fierce wrath.

1. Upon the lowest and basest sort of Catholics. 2. Their Worship and
Religion. 3. Their Priests and Ministers. 4. The House of Austria, and Popes
Supremacy. 5. Episcopal Government. 6. Their Euphrates, or the stream of
their supportments. 7. Their gross Ignorance, and blind Superstitions.
Very fit and necessary for this Present Age.

Preached in sundry Sermons at Boston in New England: By the Learned and
Reverend JOHN COTTON BB. of Divinity, and Teacher to the Church there

LONDON, Printed for R. S. and are to sold at Henry Overtons shop in Pope's Head
Alley. 1642.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, Thou have here presented to thy view, a taste of the
ordinary Weeke-daies exercise, of that Reverend man, taken from his own mouth,
whose Pen would have more fully answered thy greatest expectations, could his
time (drunk up with continual weighty, and various employments) afforded him
more liberty and leisure, to have fyled over his own notions: It is hoped they
may be of great use unto thee, and the rather, because of the excellency and
seasonablenesse of the Subject, to erect thy hopes, and to put an edge upon thy
Prayers, and desires, for the more spedier bringing forth of those great
works, which this and the following Age are to produce. The good that may
accrue to thy self, and the common cause, produced this Work into the light;
which was not intended, when first delivered, for any more public use, then of
his own private Auditotie. Now the Father of lights, and God of all grace,
fill our hearts with the life and power of faith and zeal, to pray for, long
for, speed, and write for the most desired ruin, and speedy begunne-downefall
of that most cursed Kingdom of Antichrist, according to the scope and drift of
that Prophecy, expressed in the pouring out of these Seven Vials.

Thine in the Lord, I. H.

Vial I. The pouring out of the SEVEN VIALS: OR AN EXPOSITION, with an
Application, of the 16th. Chapter of the REVELATION.
REVELATION 16.1.2. And J heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying to the
Seven Angels; Go your ways, and pour out the Vials of the wrath of God upon
the earth.

And the first went and poured out his Vial upon the Earth, and there fell a
noisome, and grievous sore upon the men which had the Mark of the Beast, and
upon them which Worshipped the Image.


YOu have heard in the former Chapter, of the Preparation of the Seven Angels,
to pour out the seven last Plagues of God upon the Antichristian State. In
this Chapter, you read a large Description of their Execution of that work,
which is,

First, Commanded, Verse 1.



Commanded, wherein observe that Commandment set forth, First, by the
Jnstrumentall efficient Promulger of it, a great voice [I heard a great Voice.]

Secondly, By the Subject-place, whence this Voice came forth, out of the
Temple. [A great voice out of the Temple]

Thirdly, By the matter commanded by the voice, [Goe your ways and pour out
the Vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.]

This Commandment thus given, was accordingly performed by all the seven
Angels, in this whole Chapter.

The first Angel pours out his Vial, ver 2. and that is, first set forth by
the subject upon which he poured it, [upon the earth.]

Secondly, It is amplified by the effect it wrought [There fell a noisome and
grievous sore upon the men] What men? They are of two sorts:

First [Such as had the Mark of the Breast.] Secondly, [Such as worshipped his
Image.]
The words are somewhat dark, and there is much variety in the Interpretation
of them: I shall shortly open to you, what (by the comparing of this, and other
Scriptures together) I take to be the meaning of the Words.

First, when he says [I heard a great voice] It is a voice of

[Out of the Temple] It implies it was a voice delivered not by one of the
four Officers in private, but came out of Public Administration, where only
the Lord speaking, did with Authority set forward these Angels upon this work.
And it may further Imply, that it sprung upon some Prayers of the Church in the
Temple: for all the voices in the Temple, are either, the voice of the Church
unto Christ, or of Christ unto the Church: And if the Lord speak graciously in
the Temple. It is commonly obtained in the Prayers of the Church, craving
answer from him,

[To the seven Angels] That is to say, Seven sorts of Gods Messengers, whether
Magistrates or Ministers, or whosoever they be that pour out these Vials, they
are Angels of God, as being the Messengers of his wrath. Neither is it meant of
seven Individual persons, but seven sorts of Persons, that set forward this
work. And withal I do accord with those that say, that in all these
administrations, there is some presence of the heavenly Angels accompaning the
men in the work.

Go your waies] [your waies] is not in the Original, but [Goe] pour out the
Vials.] The Vials are vessels of large content, but of narrow mouths, they
pour out slowly, but drench deeply, and distill effectually the wrath of God:
Vessels they are of full and just measure, as all these judgments are
dispensed in weight and measure.

Of the wrath of God] That argues, that upon what subject soever these Vials
fell, the wrath of God fell together with them, upon the same. And that helps
not a little to open the place, and to show the danger of some interpretations,
which do expound the Sun verse. 8. to be the Scriptures. If these Vials be
the Vials of Gods wrath, how shall any of them be conceived to be poured out
upon the Scripture, is the wrath of God kindled against the Scripture? And for
the Earth, verse. 2. Some conceive it to be meant of the common sort of godly
Christians; but though some soar plagues might befall some of them, yet how
can the wrath of God be conceived to be powered upon them? It cannot therefore
be meant (as some of good note say) of the Waldenses, and Albugenses, Hugonets,
and Lollards; but the wrath of God falls upon such, as worship the Beast and
his Image: And therefore take that for certain, that what things soever the
Vials of Gods wrath are poured upon, they are such as God is deeply displeased
withal.

Upon the earth] They thought right, that thought it to be meant of the common
sort of Catholics: but let us further consider how it comes to pass that
the first of these Angels pours out his Vial upon the earth, and the rest
upon other things, yet they a^l have a Commission to pour out the Vials of the
wrath of God upon the earth. For the opening of this difficulty (which else
might exercise some) we must know, that in this Prophecy sometimes [earth] is
opposed to Heaven, and then as by Heaven is meant the pure Church, as Revel.
4.1. and 12.1. So by Earth is meant an earthly and corrupt Church. Sometimes
also by Heaven is meant, a corrupt state of Religion, wherein heavenly and
divine honor is given to Satan, or Idols, as Revel. 12.3.7. Again, sometimes
Earth is opposed not unto Heaven, but unto some other Element in the World, and
so is it in this Chap. The first Angel pours forth his Vial upon the Earth,
the second pours his Vial on the Sea, etc. So then in this case, the Earth
is to be understood in a double sense. In general, of the Antichristian state,
or world, Verse. 1. And in the Antichristian World they have some things that
represent the Earth, and some things the Sea, and some things represent the
Sun of that World, and some things represent that Air of that world;
therefore in the particular execution of this Commission, When the first Angel
pours out his Vial upon the Earth, it is upon the lowest and basest Element
in the Antichristian world, and that can be no other, but the lowest sort of
vulgar Catholics, and they were the first that had the wrath of God poured upon
them, which did afterward arise higher to the Sea, and then to the Fountains
and Rivers of water, then to the Sun, then to the throne of the Beast, then
to the River Euphrates, and last of all to the Air, and in all these does the
wrath of God ascend higher and higher, as may afterward more clearly appear.

The first Angel went and pour out his Vial upon the earth.] This first Angel
must be these first sort of Gods Messengers, that did pour out some wrath upon
Common Catholics. And doubtless such wrath it was, as being poured out, did
work a Noisome and grievous sore upon them that worshipped the Beast, and his
Image (as the Text expresses) They that had the Mark of the Beast (you heard
before out of the 13. Chapt.) are such as receive some indeliable Character of
the Beast; such are their Secular, or Regular Priests, and all that receive
religious Orders from the Church of Rome. Who then are they that worship his
Image? The Jmage of the first Beast (you know) is all National, and Diocesan,
and Provincial Churches; and they that rule them are the Image of the second
Beast: So then they that worship the Image of the Beast, be such as are devoted
to the Canons of Popish Churches, who drink them up, and receive them as
Articles of their Faith; these are all afflicted with a noisome and grievous
sore by the pouring out of this first Vial: For those who did pour it out,
they were such as did convince them of the Damnable estate of a Catholic, and
taught them, that by their Religion they could go not beyond a Reprobate; and
this was the common practice of the Martyrs of Jesus Christ in Queen Mary's
time, in Edward the sixth, and in Henry the eight's time, who discovered unto
you, that all their Religion was but the worship of God after the devises of
men, even Will Worship, such as they were led into by the Man of Sin, who
being himself blind, leads those that are blind, and both fall into the
ditch; those that thus discovered the unsoundnesse of the Religion of these
Catholics, who before seemed to be good Churchmen, and good Housekeepers, and
good Christmas-keepers, they were the men that poured out this first Vial upon
the earth. And upon this their discovery, there fell a noisome, and grieveous
sore upon their Catholic Priests, who had borne the common sort in hand, That
Ignorance was the mother of Devotion, and such ignorant Devotion was the way of
Salvation, when they see that all their People, who were heretofore their
honest and good Neighbors, full of benevolence toward them, were now
informed, that they lay under a state of deep Damnation, it was an eyesore to
their Catholic Priests, and all of that Religious Order, a double sore fell
upon them.

First, a sore of envy, and malice, against all the Martyrs of Henry the eight,
when he sat in Parliament, Complaining of the stirs that were made about
Religion, There are many (says he) that are too busy with their new
(Sumpsimus) meaning those that clave to that which he counted the new Religion,
though withal others he taxed, who doated (as he said not amiss) much upon
their old M^mpsimus. The new Religion (though true). He, and they all envied:
the Old (though his own) he despised.

Secondly, there was a noisome loathsomenesse discovered, Idleness, of
Ignorance, of Covetousnes, of Pride, and of Hypocrysie, and that they had laid
such a foundation of Religion, as was not Jesus Christ the true Foundation, but
had indeed reared up an Antichristian Religion, whereof (as it is said ( Isai.
28.19.) it shall be a vexation to hear the Report. A grievous malignant ulcer
it was, and the more they stirred in it, the more they were vexed. And this let
me further add, for open ng the words, it is an allusion to that noisome sore
of Egypt that fell upon the Common sort of the people, and upon the Magitians
also, Exodus 9.11. So that they could not stand before Moses; and so it was
here, these noisome sores of which we have spoken, did so fall upon the common
sort of Catholics, and upon their common Religious Orders, that they fell
before the Angel that poured out this Vial, as Dagon before the Arc. Thus
you see meaning of these words.

Now for the Notes that arise from them. -- You may observe that ( Chap. 15 7.)
One of the four Beasts gave unto the seven Angels, Seven golden Viols full of
the wrath of God, but they went not then, to pour them out, until they hear
a great voice out of the Temple, and now they go. So that the Doctrine in the
first place to be observed, is this.

Isaac gave Jacob a Commandment and Instruction to go to Padan-Aram, Genesis 28
6. And thereupon Jacob went on his way, Verse. 7. But the first night that he
lodged out of doors, when the Lord appeared to him in the House of God ( Verse
15.) and tells him, That he will be with him, and keep him in all places
whithersoever he goes, and will bring him back again into this Land. Then
Jacob ( Chap. 29 1) lifts up his heels, and goes on his ways, Like a Giant
refreshed with Wine to run his Course. And the like was the Practice of the
same Jacob, when they told him that Joseph was yet alive, Genesis 45.27.28. his
spirit revived, and he said, He would go down to see him; but first he goes
to Beersheba and there offers Sacrifices, and consulteth with the Lord, Genesis
46.1.2.3 4. and the Lord encourages him to go^ down, bideth him not fear, He
will be with him, and there make a great Nation of him, and bring him back
again (and so he did to be buried) thus are his hands fully strengthened in his
way: The like also was the case of the men of Samaria, Ioh. 4. When the woman
had told them that Jesus was the Christ, because he had told her all that ever
she did, they believed, because of her saying, Verse 39. But when they came
unto him, and talked with him, then they said unto her Verse 42. Now we believe,
not because of thy saying, for we have he^rd him our selves, and know that this
is in^e^d the Christ, the Savior of the World. Thus the voice of Christ
carries his people an end in the ways of their callings, with effectual
power unto sudden and speedy execution.

The Reason is taken first, from the greater power of the voice Paul puts a
great difference in this case, Acts 19.21. The Text tells us, That he
purposed in his Spirit to go up to Jerusalem, afterward going on his way, he
meets with certain Disciples, Act. 21.4. and they by reason of the Prophecy
of Agabus concerning Paul, verse. 11. fell upon him and wept, and besought him
not to go up to Jerusalem, What mean you (says he) to weep, and to break
mine heart, for J am ready not to be bound only, but to dye at Jerusalem for
the name of the Lord Jesus. Behold here the Spirit of God had revealed clearly
himself in the heart of Paul, to strengthen him to go up to Heirusalem, these
Disciples (upon the Prophecy of Agabus, that he should be bound at Jerusalem)
said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go up: By what spirit? By
the gifts of the Spirit, the spirit of love, and their care of the Churches;
but Paul waves them all, for he had the mind of Christ, by the voice of the
Spirit himself; this was indeed in times of extraordinary Revelation: but it
shows you nevertheless the difference between the voice of the Spirit, and
of the gifts of the Spirit, he gives the greater power to the Spirit, then to
the gifts of the Spirit, being such kind of Gifts, wherein humane frailty might
be mingled.

The second Reason is taken from the greater power of Gods Such as the advice
of Nathan was unto David, to build the Temple, 1 Chro. 17.2. But had he come,
(as afterward he did) in way of Public Administration; He could not have
been so mistaken as then he was; For therein does the Lord more specially
reveal the presence, and the power of his Spirit, and grace, Matthew. 18.18.19
20. Therefore it is, That when there comes a great voice out of the Temple,
it carries along the Seven Angels to a speedy dispatch of this great work, of
pouring out the Vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.

Psalm. 87. Last, For there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for
evermore, Psalm. 133.3. Eternal life does he give in the Public fellowship of
his Saints, there does he confirm their callings to them, look unto the Lord
therefore for his blessing in this way, and so shall you be faithful followers
of these holy Angels of God, who being privately encouraged, wait for a
public voice to carry them an end in their Administrations, wherein the Lord
by the mighty power of his Spirit does confirm al his Promises, threatenings,
and Commandments, and more thoroughly stirs up the hearts of all his people
to take hold of all that is spoken unto them; therefore if ever you perceive any
voice or spirit to take off a man from Public Ordinances, and cause him to
slight them, then ever look at it as a manifest delusion, for every
dispensation of God, does but enkindle a more earnest longing that the Lord
should confirm the same by his broad Letters Patents, the Public Word and
Sacraments in the Church. Yea so far do the Saints of God stand hereupon,
that whatsoever is in private only brought unto them to believe, they will
find much ado to rest satisfied in it, until they see it confirmed in
public also. As when men have any special grant from their Prince, and have
it confirmed by the Privy Seal, they will not rest therewith, but will go to
the Lord Keeper for the Broad Seal, to confirm what was before Sealed to
them, though either of them apart be sure, yet both joined together will make
it more sure: Shall men be so careful for this world, and for temporal
Patrimonies, and shall Christians take up every motion in private and slight
public Ordinances? Be not deceived, whatsoever is brought unto you by the
spirit of God in private, Will cause you to seek for more clear evidence from
his loud voice in Public, where his voice goes on more strongly and
powerfully, convincing the Conscience, and breaking down all Temptations and
discouragements that might hinder the comfort of Gods people.

The use in the 2. place serves to reflect a just reprofe therefore Thus much
for the first note. Go pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.

And the first Angel went, and poured out his vial upon the Earth, etc.

Here is a world you see discribed, having an earth and sea, and rivers, and
fountains, and sun, and air, and they all belong unto the Beast, and
therefore the first Vial is poured upon them that had the mark of the Beast,
and the last brought in the fall of Babylon: So that from first to last, they
are the judgments of God upon the Roman Antichristian state, as six of the
seven seals brought in judgments upon the Pagan Roman world, and the seven
Trumpets, his Judgments upon the Christian world, as they were ruled by
Christian Emperors: so are the seven last Vials powered out upon the
Antichristian world; From hence therefore you may note thus much.

Euphrates, and the Air; whereby the Holy Ghost holds forth unto us, that
all these are but earthly, the sea is but earthly, the fountains and rivers
earthly, their sun an earthly sun, and the throne earthly, etc. And though
it is true (as some say) pour out any judgment upon any element, and the
earth fares the worse for it: yet take the description of the Holy Ghost, as
it is plain, and it intends the antichristian world alone: They are of the
world, therefore they speak of the world, and the world hears them, 1 Ioh. 4
5. And he that is of the earth, speaks of the Earth, Ioh. 3.31. And so also
are all their ordinances earthly.

Rev. 13.18. The whole number of the Beast, whatsoever is numbered to belong
unto him, is but the number of a Man, humane inventions and will-wisedome, men
will have it so, and this is the Sum of all Popish Religion.

drive at, but the maintenance of an earthly Pompious, stately Prelacy; nothing
in the world but devices to get money: they are full of covetousness and
ambition; both which, what are they but an open door to their earthly
liberty? these are sensual (says Jude ver. 19.) not having the spirit: There
is nothing spiritual in all their orders, nor in their pleasant sights, sweet
smells, delightful music, and many goodly Feasts they have, and what are
they but to please the tastes of men; and all their carved and painted stocks,
and stones, their goodly Images, what do they but please men's fancies, And

This you shall find in the third place, that their best devotions Rev. 13.8.
That all that worship the Beast, their names are not written in the book of
life, of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world: There is not a man
of them, that knowing and believing no more then what he has from the Beast,
can be saved, therefore they thought not amiss who have written, that a Papist
by his Religion cannot go beyond a Reprobate, so then whatsoever is meant by
these things in the antichristian world, whereon these vials were poured, all
is but earthly; an earthly sea, an earthly sun, an earthly light, an earthly
air, fitter to choke men (so far as it is Antichristian) then to breath any
life into the souls of Christians.

To show you the vanity of all their endeavors, that study to reconcile Popish
and Protestant Churches together, I will Popery and Protrolemy meet together.

In the second place let all men beware, lest they have any licourish affection
toward the old Religion, as they call it, if you and scourgings, and fastings,
and these (they will say) are no such earthly dainties; Truly these so far
as they are Antichristian are but earthly; they fast from flesh indeed, and
from white meats, but they have the dainties of the Apothecaries shops,
preserves, and conserves, and such kind of pleasant meats, and what have they
done all this while? these their practices are not sanctified of God, and
therefore do leave the souls of men still under carnal delusions, being no
other, but earthly and bodily exercises. Go and pour out the vials of the
wrath of God upon the Earth, and the first went and poured out his vial upon
the earth. This is upon the lowest and basest element, in the antichristian
world, Thence we may observe.

That God in his Judgments upon wicked persons, and Rev. 8.7. The first
judgment came upon the earth; The second upon the sea; The third upon the
rivers and fountains of water; The fourth upon the Sun, then comes
Antichrist the King of the Bottomless pit, Rev. 9.11. and here in the 5.
Vial his throne is smitten, and upon the sounding of the sixth angel, the
four angels in the River Euphrates were loosened, and here pouring out the 6th
Vial, the River Euphrates is dried up. And the consideration yields great
light to help us in the exposition of these seven vials: for by the same steps
whereby antichrist came into the world, by the same steps does the Lord
undermine him and bring him down. For as first the common sort of Christians
were corrupted when antichrist was brought in, so first the Common sort of
Catholics are blasted, when antichrist begins to fall: The like course did
the Lord take in the plagues of Egypt, Exodus 7.19. etc. He begins with the
lowest, first to turn their waters into blood, and thereby kills their fish,
but still men subsist well enough, but then he brings frogs into all the land
of Egypt, and they crawle into their kneading troughes, then he changes the
dust of the land into lice, and that was a great deal more loathsome to men,
and at length he kills all their first borne, and at last overwhelmeth
Pharaoh and his host in the bottom of the red sea; and all this is according
to the old covenant of his justice, Levit. 26.18, 21, 24, 28. If you will not
for all this hearken unto me, J will punish you yet seven times more for your
sins, so he threatens again and again in all those verses, until at last he
bring upon them such fearful and horrible Judgments, that they become an
hissing to all nations.

The Reason of Gods dealing thus, is to magnify Gods patience Romans 2.4. It
becomes the Lord to magnify his patience and when he does strike he will
not suddenly stir up all his wrath, therefore when here he comes to judge
Antichrist, he first pours out his wrath where it is least of all sensible to
the great Lords of the Antichristian world, to magnify the equity of his
Justice, and that he might also leave them without excuse, if the lowest
judgments do not prevail: this God does that he might be justified when he
judges, Ps. 51.4. Thus though his wrath be revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, Romans 1.18. yet such is the holiness
of Gods proceedings, that he will show his patience, and will strike gently
upon the least and lowest in estate first, and afterward he goes on further
in wasting to waste, until he have overspread a state with punishment; thus
does he together magnify his patience, and justify his justice, and leave
men without excuse.

This may serve in the first place to teach all men in the fear of diseases in
your body; and if you hearken not for all this, what if he let the Devil loose
upon the souls and consciences of men and women? What will the heart of a
poor Creature do in such a case? O consider this all ye that forget God!
least he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver. When the Lord
strikes aloof from us, It is but the Vial of the first Angel, but when the
Lord begins, he will go on further; therefore it must be the wisdom of the
sons of men to take heed of his strokes afar off. This also is the Method
of Gods dealing with his own Children: He did not fall upon the Conscience of
his Servant Job at the first, but upon his Cattle, then upon his Servants,
after that upon his Children, and nextly, upon his Body, and at last, writes
bitter things against his soul. Be we warned therefore by the first hints of
chastisements, by small and gentle visitations, and happy they that learn to
profit by such, to turn unto God, and to make their peace with him, before his
wrath break forth like a devouring fire, and there be none to quench it.

Jude, Verse. 1.3. writes unto all the faithful, and exhorts them, That they
should contend earnestly for the Faith once given to the Saints: otherwise they
shall have the first hansell of Gods Judgments, for they will be soonest
corrupted, and shall be soonest punished,

common sort of Christians) It was their conviction of their damnable
Ignorance, and Superstition, Idolatry, and Hypocrisy; and this the Lord
threatens, as a judgment unto Jerusalem, Ezeck. 16.37. That he will
discover her nakedness, that those that loved her, and these that hated her
should see her nakedness, Thus is his wrath revealed against all
unrighteousness of men.

For the Lord is the first cause of all the Evil that is done among Amos 3.6.
So that, is men's wickedness discovered, is their loathsome, sinful, carnal,
corrupt estate laid open? The Lord has done it.

Because it is the proper work of the Spirit of God to convince John 16.8. and
he works it by the Law, For by the Law comes the knowledge of sin, Romans
7.7. And what the Law does, the same do the servants of God by the Ministry
of it, yet all is the work of the Spirit of God.

The Use may be, first to teach the Sons of men, to take

Let it teach all such whose sins are discovered at any time,

That the discovery of the sins of the Common sort of people There fell a
noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the Mark of the Beast, and
upon them that worshipped his Image. When all this wickedness is discovered in
the common Catholics, then does the lewdness of their leaders also grow
notorious; what say you now to all their Catholic Priests, Their wickedness
appears, their Idleness, Hypocrisy, Covetousness, and wantonness,
breaks forth. A grievous sore lay upon them all, to see that all their
labors are discovered, to be but a building men up in wrath, the Spirits of
the Popish Leaders were greatly disturbed and troubled to see men so busy with
their new Sumpsimus. A noisome blemish was it to all their Religious Orders,
and to all that did countenance the^ in the same. Evident this is unto al those
that read the Stories of our own times, or the times of our Fathers, how this
noisome sore fell upon their Guids and Leaders, And so it has done of old,
Esaias 9.15.16. The Leaders of this People cause them to err: So Jer. 5.31. The
Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my
people love to have it so: Thus are their false guides blemished.

Jer. 23.22. Therefore if they lead them into evil ways, needs must a noisome
sore fall upon them, when the wickedness of the people is discovered.



THE SECOND VIAL:
REVEL. 16.3. And the second Angel poured out his vial upon the Sea, and it
became as the blood of a dead man, and every living soul died in the Sea.
THis Verse describes the pouring out of the Vial of the second Angel: For the
subject, He poures it on the Sea; and the effect was, the Sea became as the
blood of a Dead man, and the effect of that, on the living souls in the Sea,
they all dyed. The allusion is, to a like plague upon Egypt, in the 7. of
Exodus 20 21. Where Moses struck the River Nilus, and it was turned to blood,
as here The Sea became as the blood of a dead man; and all the fish in the
Rivers dyed; that is, of all sorts some.

Now for the meaning of this second Vial. First, for the Sea, What is here
meant by the Sea? And what by the Sea becoming blood, and as the blood of a
dead man? And how is every living soul in this Sea, said to dye by this means?
The Sea cannot be meant the ordinary Sea of waters, for you cannot bring any
judgment on that sea, that can afflict Antichristians more then Christians; if
you should corrupt all the Sea (as the Papists expound it, and yet they believe
all these evils redound to Antichrist.) What hurt will it be to Antichrist more
then to the Church of Christ? If all the fish in the sea died, What would it
hurt Antichrist more then Christian Nations? cannot Antichrist be supplied with
other dainties on the shore, out of the Flocks and Herds, and out of the
Fields and Woods, and out of the Air from the Fowls there, though he never
had any Fish at his Table? That therefore cannot be the meaning. But the sea
is the sea of the Antichristian world, a distinct world from that heavenly
state wherein other Reformed Churches stand. The Sea, as you know, is the
confluence of all the Rivers and Fountains of waters; they all finally are
gathered together into one place, and are called Sea. And truly the confluence
and concourse of all the springs of the Churches, they do meet together in one
Religion, that is the common receptacle of all; All my fresh springs are in the
Lord, Psalm. 87.7. In that Religion which the Church professes: And therefore
Religion was resembled in the 4 of the Revel. verse. 6. By the sea of Glass
like unto Crystal, that is, all the Ordinances of God they were so clear, as
that you n ight see Christ's face in them as in a mirror or glass, 2 Cor. 3.18.

Wherein the state of Religion in the New Testament differed from the state of
Religion in the old Testament, Where the Brazen sea in Salomons Temple was
indeed bright as brass, but thick and not transparent, you could not see so
clearly the blood of Christ in it; and yet there was a sea of Waters: What to
do? In the 2 Chronicles. 4.2. to the end of the 6. verse, which was for the Priests
to wash in. Now what is it that can cleanse the Priests, but only the blood of
the Lord Jesus. Now that was resembled by the water in the Brazen sea.
Therefore all the Ordinances of Christ, which did hold forth the blood of
Christ, to the washing and purging of the Priests and people of God, that is
the sea. Now this sea, as you heard in the 15. Chapter of the Revelation, the
2. verse, In the Reformed Churches is a sea of Glass, though mingled with
Fire; mingled with some contention, yet the face of Christ might be clearly
seen in it. But this sea here, that is, the Popish Religion, is the
confluence of all their Ordinances, as they do administer the worship of God:
And upon this sea, upon this Religion, is the second Vial poured. In the
former Vial, First, men stumbled at the lives of Papists, and thereupon at the
lives of them that led them, at their Priests covetousness, ignorance, and
hypocrisy, they liked not their lives, though at first they stumbled not at
their religion, but thought it was the fault of their lives; but soon after,
they stumble at their Religion; so that the next Vial is poured on their
Religion, the Ordinances themselves, as they are dispensed by them: the Vial
is poured on them so far as they differ from Reformed Churches. Then what?
This being the sea, how is this sea come to be as blood? That is this Religion
of theirs is convinced, and discovered to be, not such as holds forth the
cleansing blood of the Lord Jesus, as the Sea in Salomons Temple did: and as
the sea of Glass like unto Crystal did, but holds forth the blood of a dead
man: A dead Christ, and dead Ordinances to any spiritual life. There is no
life, no power, no savor of goodness in it; as the blood of a dead man, which
is not like the living blood of Christ, to cleanse and purify, and to give
life; Whosoever eats my flesh; and drinks my blood has eternal life, John
6.54 But this is the blood not of the liveing God, but of a dead man, there is
the best of it, and what is that? Fit to pollute and defile, fit to choke a
man, but not to feed him; not to cleanse and purge him. And every thing living
in that sea dyed: Every thing, That is every soul that had no other life, but
what was bred and fed in that Religion; and had no other Christian life but
what he sucked and derived from that Religion, they all perished everlastingly,
this is the meaning of the words of the Text.

Now then it may be further demanded for clearing of this meaning, who is this
Angel that poures out this vial of Gods wrath on this sea? the sea (you say)
is Antichristian religion, for the first began with the earth; this goes up
higher, and so higher, and higher, till it come to the throne, and till at
length Babylon be fallen: So that all these plagues fall on the antichristian
state. But who is this Angel that pours out this Vial? There be some
conceive that they are they who met in the council of Trent, and gathered all
the streams of Popish priests, and their doctrine, and practice, and ratified
them all in that Council; yea some think that Bellarmine has done the Church
of God good service, in gathering the body of Controversies, between
protestants and popish Churches, and has delivered them in so many volumes
that you might have a whole sea of antichristian doctrine, worship, and
government by him confirmed, though I do not dislike the notion, and it will
fall into the true meaning, yet that holds not close to the letter of the Text,
for the Text makes all the Angels to be such as come out of reformed Churches,
Rev. 15 5.6.
the Temple open in heaven; members of reformed Churches, all clothed in pure
and white linen, godly Christians, righteous souls, and girded with golden
girdles, stablished in the truth of the Gospel, therefore they cannot be the
Bishops, and Doctors of Rome, nor Bellarmine nor any of them that have held
forth Popish Religion in a Popish Church; What then? Then it must be other
Ministers and Professors of reformed religion, who have discovered the religion
of the antichristian state to be as it is.



Trent indeed have, Bellarmine makes it worse by maintaining and confirming of
it. True but can Ministers of reformed Churches be said to do so. Mark they
are said to pour out a vial, not by making their religion worse, but making
it appear as bad as it was; They being righteous men, they could not corrupt
religion, but discover it, and make it appear, that all the decrees of the
council of Trent, and of Bellarmine, and such Popish writers; they discovered
them to be nothing but a sea of corrupt doctrine, and worship: all the
streams that run in that sea, are all polluted and filthy, that who so lives
and dies in them, perishes everlastingly. And such were all those worthy
servants of Christ, that have written either against the Trident Council, or
against Bellarmine, that have convinced their Doctrine and worship to be all
polluted and corrupted, and to be such that if a man know and practice, and
believe no better he cannot be saved, such has been Chenmitius, and Junius,
Chamier, Whitaker, and Reignolds, Perkins, and Ames, and the rest of the holy
Saints of God, that have poured out this vial of Gods wrath, that is, that by
their doctrine, and writings from the word have poured out such clear
conviction, and refutation of their doctrine and worship, that to all that are
not partial, it appears to be not the blood of the Lord Jesus, but of a dead
man, and therefore who ever lives and dies, in that religion, he cannot die
better then a reprobate, nor live better then an hypocrite, this is the true
meaning of the second vial.

The first note that we may gather (I will not be long in it, nor

As upon the corruption of common Christians follows the corruption of
religion, so by the discovery of the corruptions of Christians, or upon the
discovery of the corruption of common Christians, follows the discovery of
corruption in Religion.

This note follows upon the former words, compare this verse with the second
trumpet, upon the sounding of the second trumpet, there was brought in
corruption of religion, in the Imperial Christian world, as in the 8. Chapter
of this book, and the 7.8.9. ver. The first Angel sounded, and there followed
^aile and fire mingled with blood, whereby all the green grass was burnt up,
etc. The first Angel poured out fire and blood, that is uncharitableness, and
contentiousnesse, and so corruption grew in the spirits of common Christians,
and what followed upon that? And thereupon the second Angel founded, and there
fell a great mountain burning with fire, cast into the sea, on the
contentiousnesse, and quarelling of common Christians and their ambition. There
grew contention, about primacy in Church Governors, and that so far corrupted
the sea (A mountain of high preferm^nt being cast into the sea) that a third
part of the sea became blood, here was a third part a great part of their
religion, specially that which concerns government, became blood, very
noisome, both their doctrine and government: so that look as on the
corruption of the lives of Christians, presently religion grew corrupt, so on
the discovery of corruption in common Christians. In this second vial follows
the discovery of corruption in religion it self, in this second vial: and
look by what degrees, the trumpets sounding, brought in corruption into the
Church; by the same degrees, the vials bring forth the discovery of corruption
in the Church the vials of Gods wrath discover corruption and pollution in
Religion.

The reason of this point is taken from the powerful efficacy is the spirit of
all that are sincere, and serious professors of it, and therefore if there come
in any corrupt doctrine, and corrupt religion, our Savior tells us, by their
fruits ye shall know them, for such as their corruption is in judgment, such
will it be in their lives, in Mat. 7.15. Beware of false prophets, etc. by
their fruits you shall know them, a good tree cannot bring ^orth evil fruit,
neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good f^uit, and so it was with the
Pharisees, though they were the strictest sect of the Iewists Religion, Act.
16.5. Yet as they were corrupt in their lives, so their Religion was corrupt,
and those that were Proselites to it. Mat. 23.15. They made them twofold more
the children of hell then themselves, 2 Timothy 3.13. Evil men and deceivers wax
worse, and worse, deceiving and being deceived; and the ground of that is this,
the concurrence of the spirit of God with his own word, and the concurrence of
the spirit of Satan, with his ordinances and instructions, there is a spirit
goes with both, that does assimulate and transform a powerful professor of
sincere Religion, to be sincere in heart. And the Professors of corrupt
Religion to transform them into the nature thereof: In the 59. of Esaias, verse
21. My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of
the mouth of thy seeds seed, from henceforth and for ever. Gods spirit goes
with his own Ordinances, where ever they are rightly and sincerely received,
as always by some they are, where ever they have free passage, they will have
some good issue, and some persons or other, on whom they will work such a
change, in 2 Cor. 3 18. We all with open face beholding, as in a glass, the
glory of God are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, as by the
spirit of the Lord. Consequently if Antichrist come with his delusions, he
shall come with all the power of Satan, whose coming (says the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.10.) is after the working of Satan, and with all power of signs and
lying wonders, with efficacy of delusions; a sign these delusions are not
merely National, but effectual, to transform the heart like unto the mind,
their will like unto their judgment, and their life like unto both, that you
shall have the whole frame of their state, such as is their Religion: if the
lives of Catholic Professors be corrupt, an evident argument their Religion is
corrupt, and if their Religion be corrupt, their lives cannot be sound, they
that live by that Religion must needs be corrupt: so that upon the discovery of
the corruptions of the lives of Catholics, then men began to scruple their
Religion; at first it was fairly interpreted of some Catholics, that were
reformed, and brought to the truth, they thought that all abuses found in the
Friars and Monks was but from the lives of men, their religion was better,
their religion did not teach them so: and therefore thought still, they might
appeal to the Pope himself, as Luther did, they thought it was the ignorance
of the Priests, that brought Pardons into the Country to sell them, for groats
and shillings; but this was but a charitable opinion, and in truth, the Priests
the ministers of that Religion, did but act the spirit of that Religion, the
whole heart was sick, and the whole head and body mortally distempered.

The Use is thus much, it must be a word of holy admonition and warning to all
Professors, England for purity of Ordinances, to be very circumspect, pure, and
faithful, and zealous in all their whole conversation: for believe it, you
will find this true, and remember it while you live, if you be corrupt in
New England, if you be unfaithful here, if you be worldly minded here, false
of your words and promises here, injurious in your dealings here, believe it
one of these two will unavoidably follow, either all England will judge your
Reformation but a delusion, and an invention of some of your Magistrates, or
Elders, or otherwise look at you, as not sincere but counterfeit. This
unavoidably you will find true, you cannot pour forth a Vial of more wrath
on Religion, as it is here reformed and established, through the blessing of
God, you cannot load it with a heavier Vial of Gods wrath; then if here you
shall grow worldly and covetous, deceitful and contentious, and unbrotherly.
Are these your Church members, such and such things were done, but I hope it
was not your Church Members, are we not all brethren? Does our Estates lie much
of them in Common? Well, what ever things may be, though Christian love will
pass by much; yet believe it, if men make no conscience of their bargains,
but that they do defraud others. If men make no conscience of heavenly
mindedness of purity and zeal; and think it needs not, but rest in mere
forms of Church Ordinances, you will unavoydably, pour a Vial of Gods wrath,
as much as in you lies, on all the purity of Gods Ordinances, and judge you how
dishonorable it is to God and holy religion, and how blameworthy it is in
such as are faulty herein, however you will answer this before the Lord at his
coming? For you cannot avoid it, this will be the issue; either we are
counterfeit Professors of Reformation, or that our reformation is counterfeit,
you say you came over for purity of Ordinances: But in truth, you did but
dissemble, and however you thought, it was not in your hearts, the event proves
the contrary; if you be not sincere, but hollow Members of the Church, and
corrupt livers, under the government and worship of God here established and
ordered, I say, you will force all whose eyes are on you, throughout the
Christian world to think, these are but the inventions of men; there is no
truth, no true heartedness in the Religion here established: and for the
Religion established in England, what ever you talk of humane inventions, we
know there is no such unfaithful dealing, and hollow heartedness, no such
bitterness between Christians. A Ministers Presence is amiable, and his feet
beautiful, and where he comes, it is not thought too homely to be regarded,
of better then himself, If Religion in our Native Country, of them that are
sincere, if it hold forth more purity there, believe it, it bears more
evident witness to the truth of God there, so much as is truth, then as we
do, that profess greater simplicity; these are but the names of things, but
the reality is wanting, It is never to be forgotten, the Argument of the
blessed Apostle, the Corinthians took offense at him (as they were humerous,
though godly men) yet a generation of them were haughty by their great gifts,
Paul said he would come to Corinth, he promised to come, but he did not, and
they thought he used lightness; it was an easy thing with him to be Yea and
Nay: What says the Apostle? When I said I would come, did I use lightness,
that with me there should be Yea, and Nay? Nay, says the Apostle, (I pray yon
mark it, and I could wish, it were engraven on the tables of godly men's
hearts) in the 2 Corinthians. 1.18. as God is true, our word toward you was not Yea
and Nay: How does he prove that? For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was
preached amongst you, by us was not yea and nay, but in him was yea, and all
the promises of God in him, are Yea and Amen. What is this to the purpose? If
the Gospel he preached be not yea and nay, then neither are his pr^mises yea
and nay: this is his intendment; else his inference is nothing.

I you will say, Ministers and Apostles ought to be such, but this that
follows wraps in all professors. Now he which stablisheth you with us in
Christ (it is not Elders only) and he that anointed us is God, who anointeth
with such oil as falls on every member of his body? who has also sealed us,
and given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts, and makes us every way like
himself, therefore says he, I call God to record that to spare you I came not
yet to Corinth, otherwise as the Gospel preached by him and Silvanus and
Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but in him was yea, no more was his promise;
this is the spirit of Christians, and Ministers, and so of all that are
established together with their Ministers, anointed, and sealed and confirmed
in grace with their Ministers, and have received, the earnest penny, to bind
the bargain of eternal salvation, to faithful souls; So look what a
Christian does promise, he is bound by the earnest penny of Gods Spirit, he
dares no more alter his words, to the discredit of his profession, then the
Spirit of God to lie.

So that consider, if Professors grow corrupt, Religion will grow corrupt; and
on the discovery of the corruption of common Christians, corrupt religion will
be discovered, else you will be discovered to be carnal professors.

But there will be these two events, either it will cast aspersion on you, and
so they will say none are better; the spirit of the Country is deceitful in
their bargains, there is no constancy in their words.

Or else that your Religion is corrupt, and this will also follow unavoidably,
though your Religion be of God, and the Lord himself will bear witness, it
is of God, and according to the true pattern of the Word; yet if we in this
generation shall defile it, by our unfaithfulness, unspiritualnesse,
unheavenlinesse, and ungodliness, this will be the issue; on the corruption of
the lives of Professors, follows corruption of Religion, and upon the
discovery of the one, follows the discovery of the other.

That Religion, which by the blessing of God, and the power of his grace, is
dispensed here in simplicity, will be corrupted in the very next generation;
you will find your Children after you (of whose state you ought to have as
much care, and I think, I may speak it without inconveniency) more then of
your own: you may know the worst of it for your selves, being near the grave
many of you: but verily, what will befall your Posterity? They will degenerate
out of measure, by the unfaithfulness of your lives, and unrighteousness of
our promises, they will fall to be stark naught in point of Doctrine,
Worship, and Government, they will utterly degenerate from their Ancestors, let
but us be polluted, and all the waters that come from us will be polluted, it
cannot be sweet water that runs through a poisonous earth, if the earth be
unsavory, the Waters, and Deepes, and Rivers be poisoned, what will the issue
be, all will be corrupt: and therefore as you desire to leave Religion with a
blessing, leave it pure in the conversation of Brotherly love, and purity, and
faithfulness, and fruitfulness, and heavenly mindedness; that so as Religion
always loves to lie clean, as was a grave speech of an ancient Saint, it will
not lie nasty as a Swine, and a Dog in a kennell, it must lie sweet and
clean: if the hearts and ways of men be not pure and holy, you shall not
always have the Sea clean, but Religion will grow to Apostasy, and that which
is our glory, will be our confusion.

It became as the blood of a dead man.

Doct. 2.

The faithful Ministers, and Professors of Reformed Religion, and Churches, by
pouring out the wrath of God on Popish Religion, have discovered it, not to
hold forth the blood of the Lord Jesus, but to be as the blood of a dead man.
That is the Sea, the Antichristian Sea, the confluence of all Ordinances in it,
not to be the blood of the Lord Jesus, which is only able to purify and to
pacify the Conscience, no such thing to be found in it. But a blood fit to
quicken and give life, John 6.50.51. He that drinks of my blood, shall live
for ever: but they have discovered it to be the blood of a dead Man.

It was the speech of Master Perkins often in his Sermons, and throughout his
Writings (who was one that powered out this Vial) he would say to his hearers,
Young Scholars: Popish Books in holding forth the blood of the Covenant, they
hold it forth in a moral manner, but without the life and power of his death;
he expounds it thus: They will very evidently set forth the cruelty and
treachery of Judas, that betrayed him, and the Wordly-mindednesse, and
Covetousness, and Ambition, of the High Priests, that bought and plotted his
death; they will (says he) make bitter invectives against the profaneness of
the Jews, that were ready to renounce him, Away with him, away with him,
Crucify him, and declaime against the timorousness of Pilate, and
base-mindednesse, that could not deliver an Innocent; and declaime of the
cruelty of the Soldiers, and magnify the Innocence of Christ Jesus, and make
the people many times to weep, that Jesus an Innocent man, had been thus
profanely sold and bought, and thus basely condemned, and cruelly handly: All
this might be done, and all but to show forth the blood of an Innocent man. But
to show the need of Christ's blood, and how they should walk worthy of it, and
how they should obtain it, it is the least part of their discourse, and
indeed, no part at all: What is this but the blood of a dead Man, to raise up
bitter detestations against the Jews, and Soldiers, and Pilate, etc. But to
raise it up to any powerful effect in the hearts of Christians, it is not
their endeavor that are most devout.



From their holding forth, not indeed the true Christ: Whether you speak of
their Doctrine, Worship, or Government, they do not hold forth the true
Christ. They hold forth Christ God and Man, that is true; so far the go with
us, and hold that Christ dyed and rose again, as we do, but when they come to
speak of the Offices of Christ, in which indeed, he is savingly held forth
to the people, there they bring in another Christ, and renounce him; For either
take the true Christ, as the true Christ, or else none, for he will not divide
stakes. Look at all his Offices, (And I will give you but a touch of them)
Take the Mediatourly Office of Christ; they will have other Mediators, of
Reconciliation, and Intercession, besides the Lord Jesus. Does not the Priest
every Sacrament of the Lords Supper, offer a Propitiatory Sacrifice (if I may
call it a Sacrament of the Lords Supper) this is constant with them.

Now this is to bring in other Christ's for Reconciliation, besides the Lord
Jesus, Whereas the Apostle in the 10 Chapter to the Hebrews, the 14. Verse,
says, By one offering, he has for ever perfected them that are sanct^fied:
and he professes, that only the Sacrifices of the Law were often repeated,
because they could not make the comers thereunto perfect, Hebr. Chapter 10.
verse. 1. to the 14. verse. So that to bring in any other Sacrifices, is
absolutely to renounce his Mediation and Reconciliation; and they are not
ashamed, I confess, a man might stand and tremble, those that are more devout
and zealous Catholics, they will not own that Doctrine; but they will own
this, they are not ashamed to entreat Christ by the Merit of the blood of
Thomas, to give them a blessed Resurrection; by the blood of Thomas, which for
us he did spend, make us to rise whither he did ascend.

Now, if they put on Christians the blood of Thomas, and give them to rise by
the blood of Thomas, there is another reconciliation joined with the blood of
the Lord Jesus: and indeed, all Satisfactory Penance, and Whippings, and
Masses, what are they all but Copartners with Christ, in helping forward his
fatisfaction, as if it were not sufficient; other sacrificers, and other
sacrifices, every Priest is a sacrificer, and every new sacrifice is to make
atonement.

And so do I say for his mediatourship of intercession, you know they ioyn
saints, and angels, especially the Virgin Mary as the mothers and fathers of
grace, and pray the Lord to hear for their merits sake, so that take the whole
mediatourly office of Christ, for reconciliation, and intercession; you must
have more Christ's then one, and then he is of none effect, if he may not do
all in point of merit and fatisfaction: even all the righteousness that he
has taught us to do, it is unprofitable for such ends, we may profit our
brethren, and help our selves by his grace, for many spiritual good ends, but
for satisfaction, for merit and the like it is to set up a New Christ, besides
the Lord Jesus, thus is his priestly office evacuated. And so his Prophetical
office, to bring in other scriptures, as the Apocrypha that he confirms not,
besides scriptures, of unwritten tradition carried from h^nd to hand, and yet
many great points of their Religion are built thereon, even all the corrupt
doctrine which they deliver by tradition. For his Kingly office, you know they
set up other Lords and Governors of the Church besides him, I mean such
governors as neither are the Lords, nor ever were instituted by him, as the
Pope, and Cardinals and Primats, and Metropolitans, and the whole rout of
Popish Hierarchy from the Apparritor to the Pope, they are of his invention
and appointment; and as they have other Lords so other laws; the whole cannon
Law is none of the ordinances of the Lord Jesus, for the government of his
Church, much of it contrary to the word of God, and as they have other Lords
and laws, so they have other frames of C urches, Oecumenicall, Catholic
Church, Metropolitan, Patria^c^all, Archipiscopall, Episcopal, Diocesan, which
Chist never ordained in the New Testament, and they have brought Kingly or
Monarchical power into the Churches which Christ never gave them, and that not
only to excommunication, but to dethrone Princes, and to substitute others in
their rooms; and in one word, they are not ashamed to say, it is lawful for
the Pope to dispense with the Apostle Paul, and he does dispense with
incestuous Marriages, and with absolutions and notorious sins, for such sums
of money, given for some religious, or rather superstitious use, and they will
dispense with oaths which God himself will not, nor can, he will not suffer
Iosuahs oath, and the Princes with the Gibeonites to be broken, because it was
the oath of God with them, therefore they must keep it, so that here is not
more then civil, but more then spiritual power, brought into the Church; so
that well does the holy Ghost say, here is not the blood of Christ but the
blood of a dead man.

Again, I might show the like in other the chief streams, whereof their sea
consists, that Faith which they have, it is built on the Scripture, and the
authority thereof they have from the Church, their faith is built on the
Scripture, and the Scripture on the Church, and so the last resolution of it,
is but humane authority, and so that says is no assurance, (for that they say
were presumption) but humane credulity, and so for justification and salvation,
they will have it by merits, and for worship, worshipping Saints and Angels,
and in a strange language, which common people understand not, an unreasonable
service, so that here is nothing but as the blood of a dead man they want the
vitalls of Christianity.



It may serve to show the weakness of their imaginations that do believe
Popish and Protestant religion may be reconciled together, and Popish and
Protestant Churches, may be brought to be one, were it not for hot spurred
Jesuits on the one side, and for hot spirited Protestants, Puritants, on the
other side, if moderate spirits had things in hand, they have hoped to bring
both ends together. Alas to bring heaven and earth together, go your ways,
pour out your vials on the earth, their sea is but an earthly sea, their sun
is but an earthly sun, and their rivers, and fountains are but earthly, and
yet all may be reconciled, the blood of a dead man, and God, life, and death,
heaven and hell, and all shall be reconciled.

Use 2.

It shows what great reason we have everlastingly to stand out against all
compromising with them, and all subjection to any thing that pertaines to that
Religion, for they have sacred truths, as they believe, Father, Son, and
Spirit, and that Christ is God and man, but otherwise, for the body of all
their other Ordinances, they are such, as in very truth, have not the blood of
the Lord Jesus in them, but are as the blood of a dead man, as they have them,
and corrupt and pollute them.

Lastly, Every living soul dyed in the Sea, why did none live on the earth,
but were all dead in this Sea? All that live on the earth, all Catholics, they
live in that Religion, Jesuits, Friats, Every living soul died in that Sea.

The last note then is.

Doct. 3.

A Popish Catholic that lives according to this Religion, and no better, he
lives and dies in a state of Death and Damnation: For so says the Text, Every
living Soul in that Sea dyed, If he had no other life, then by that Religion,
no other goodness then that which he got from that Sea, living in those
waters, which they sucked from that Religion, from the Ordinances there: if he
have no more then that, he cannot come to a State of Salvation, he dies in that
Sea.

The Reason of the point,

Is taken, First, from the Grace held forth in that Religion: Secondly, from
their Faith. Thirdly, from their Repentance: and Fourthly, from their
Obedience; they are all such as are but dead: their very Grace holds forth
dead Works; the Faith of a Catholic, is a dead Faith; their Repentance, is
dead Repentance, their Obedience, is dead works, and that is all their
Religion: and in these is the life of a Christian, the life of Grace, the life
of Faith, the use of Repentance, and the life of Obedience, if these be dead,
what life is there? For the grace of God, By grace ye are saved, not of Works,
Ephesians. 2.8.9. Now they will not have it of Grace but of Works, not of living
Grace, but of Works, that is the most general opinion. Nor no redemption of
Christians, but common to all alike, Reprobates and true Christians, and the
difference arises in vocation, and that is out of works, out of merit of
Congruity, and their Justification is out of Merit of Works, and Perseverance
in Grace, is out of Concurrence of Free will, and Glorification is from Merit
of Condignity of Works, and if all these be of works, here is all the grace
of God to seek, (what says the Apostle?) If it be of Works, it is not of
Grace, Romans 11.6. And verily, this is the best grace of Popish Religion: all
their grace is of Works, and then it is utterly evacuated.

What shall I say to their Faith, it is no other but Historical. As that all
that is contained in the Word is true: and verily, the Devil believes as much,
he knows it to be true, and will tremble, James 2.19. And if that be the
Devils faith, as James says it is, then woe worth all Popish Faith; and that
faith if you come to apply it, That it shall be a confidence on Christ to
salvation, they look at that as Heretical presumption; what hope is Judas
held forth: as great they require, Confession, contrition, and satisfaction, he
did it all; he was not a little broken with the sense of his sin, and the
horror of it: He makes confession of it, I have sinned in betraying the
Innocent blood: he made satisfaction, he brought again the 30. Pieces of
silver, and throws them down; away with them, I have sinned, in betraying the
innocent blood, this is the best repentance they have: for any repentance that
springs from the sight of Gods favor, applied to the faith of Gods people,
this they will by no means hear tell of, and yet without faith applied to the
soul, by a promise, or word of grace, there is no life in repentance. They see
him, whom they have pierced, and mourn for him; they see him pierced by them,
and for them, and this mourning is Evangecall and saving.

For their obedience, they look at it, as such as is able to keep the whole
Law of God, and if they can do that, they seek life, then by Works, not of
Grace: and that Obedience that is able to keep the whole law of God, is the
Obedience of the Scribes and Pharisees, for they so taught: and therefore our
Savior tells his disciples, Matthew. 5.20. Except your righteousness exceedes
the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; Such obedience, as that a man is able to keep the whole
Law, and by that to merit, and do no more then the Law requires, it is the
obedience of Heretical presumption, not of confidence and affiance of Faith:
that is, obedience of heretical presumption, that is able to keep the whole
law, and make satisfaction to the justice of Christ, and then Christ died in
vain, unless he died to make us Saviors of our selves, and that is as
notorious as the former.

The Use of this point is.

Use 1.

To reprove a wicked practice of many Protestants that are not ashamed, to sow
pillowes under the elbowes of Catholics that make them believe, they may be
saved in that religion, so they live honestly and well; Oh Brethren! does not
the Text expressly say, every one that lived in that Sea, died, and died
everlastingly; there is no living blood of the Lord Jesus there, there is no
saving grace there, but works all, and there is no lively faith there, but
dead says, no repentance, but hardness of heart, or legal contrition at the
uttermost, nor obedience, but such as is too good for him to apply the Blood of
Christ unto, for it is able to keep the whole Law, and make satisfaction for
the breaches of the Law, or if their own obedience be not so perfect, they
have some other saints, whose obedience may be imputed unto them; so that
though they abhor Christ's Righteousness, to be imputed to them, they have
found out a way, that the righteousness of Saints may be applied, to make
others righteous so that they put more honor upon the servants of Christ, (if
some of them were the servants of Christ) then upon Christ: and say it were
well their righteousness should be imputed, but that Christ's own righteousness
should be imputed, they look at it as aputative righteousness, as they are
not ashamed to call it so, that see the desperate danger of living and dying in
that state, in the Romish religion, in that Sea.

Use 2.

Secondly, Let me exhort all Christians to hold steadfastly to the purity of
Religion, whether in our public Ministrations, or private conversations, let
all savor and reake forth the warm blood of the living Lord Jesus, for there
is the difference of our Religion from Popery: Their religion holds forth such
a Christ as leaves him and his blood, like the blood of a dead Man: The soul
is dead for any true Grace, or Faith, or Repentance, or Obedience, or living
Comfort; the heart is still dead, no life of Gods favor, no life from the
Word, no hope of Salvation, but all conjecturall, there is indeed the life of
Papists, no live-blood of Christ Jesus among them: But for Christians, It is
for us to live, as those that are made partakers of the blood of sprinkling,
that speaks better things then that of Abel, that does pacify, and purify the
Conscience, and both work effectually more and more, until the soul be
established in perfect peace, thou will keep them in perfect peace, whose
mind is staid on thee, because he trusts in thee. I speak of perfection
that may be attained in our measure, in Esaias 26.3. So that be diligent to look
up to the Lord Christ, still as out of Grace, to accept us, and by the grace of
Faith to receive us, and so drawing the soul to lively repentance from dead
works, and quickening and awakning us to lively obedience. In this lively
estate, we may walk before him according to the good pleasure of his will, to
the praise of the glory of his Grace in Christ Jesus.

THE THIRD VIAL.
REVEL. 16. VER. 4, 5, 6, 7. And the third Angel poured out his vial upon the
rivers and fountains of waters, and they became blood. And I heard the Angel of
the waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shall be,
because thou have judged thus: For they have shed the blood of Saints and
Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy. And I
heard another out of the Altar say, Even so, Lord God Almighty, true and
righteous are thy judgments.
THese seven Angels (as you heard) that had the vials of the last wrath of God
to pour out, they pour it all out upon the Antichristian world, upon the
Beast, or something or other pertaining to the Beast; for the first that poured
his vial on the earth, vexed them that had the mark of the beast; he begins
therefore with the beast, And the fifth Angel poured forth his vial upon the
throne of the beast, in the 10. ver. and when the seventh Angel poured forth
his vial, Great Babylon came up in remembrance before God, etc. in the 19. ver.
So that (in a word) all these vials being poured out from first to last upon
the earth, and the earth being the Antichristian state, opposite to heavenly
and pure Churches, all the vials are poured upon the Antichristian world or
state. And (as you see) they begin with the lowest elements first; The first
upon the earth, the next upon the sea, the third upon the rivers and
fountains, the fourth upon the sun in that world, the fifth upon the throne of
the Beast, the sixth upon Euphrates, the seventh upon the air. Now the second
Angel (of which you heard the last day) having poured out his vial upon the
sea, it became as the blood of a dead man, and all that lived in that sea, dyed.

The sea (you heard) is the confluence of waters anld rivers, and does hold
forth the confluence or concurrence of all the oracles, and ordinances, and
means of grace and salvation, or those that are pretended so to be. The
concurrence, or confluence of them all to one body, which in one word was their
Religion in the old Temple, it was resembled to a brazen sea, wherein the
Priests washed themselves; In the Apostolic Church of the New Testament, it
is resembled unto a sea of glass, like unto crystal, wherein you might see
the face of Christ, as in a mirror; In Reformed Churches, it is as the of
glass, mingled with fire; In Popish Churches, it is as the blood of a dead
man; no living blood is there to be found to wash the people in, but as the
blood of a dead man, without life, to them that are washed in it, and rather
fit to choke, and poison, and kill, then to give life. Now that being the sea;
Then here the next vial is poured out upon the rivers and fountains of waters
that run into this sea, and derive this sea up and down the earth, The third
Angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of waters: And the
pouring out of his vial, is described, First, by the subject on which it is
poured, Upon the rivers and fountains of waters: Secondly, by the effect, and
they became blood: Thirdly, the pouring out of this vial is amplified by the
testimony given to it, and the effect of it; What is the testimony? It is
double, 1. Given by the Angel of the waters, in the 5. ver. I heard the Angel
of the waters say, what does he say? he gives to God the glory of his
righteousness, and of his unchangeable righteousness, which art, and wast,
and shall be, because thou have judged thus: And the reason of it (he gives) is
taken from the equity of the law of retaliation, in the 6. ver. For they have
shed the blood of Saints an Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink,
for they are worthy. The second Testimony by which this pouring out of the
Vial is amplified, (and the effect of it is justified) is by another Angel
out of the Altar in the 7. ver. who says Amen to this: Even so Lord God
Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments. For the meaning of the words.

The sea being Religion, the confluence of ordinances, such ordinances as are
dispensed in any religion: The rivers and fountains of water that spring from
the sea, and return to the sea, and derive all their springs and waters from
thence, they are (and it is generally so received, and therefore with more
freedom of spirit a man may declare it) these rivers, and fountains of waters
are generally conceived to be the Priests, and Ministers of the Popish Church,
who carry Popish Religion, as Fountains and Rivers do the Sea, up and down the
earth; so do they Popish Religion, up and down the Nations, carry it to and
fro, only there is this difference between them, and ordinary rivers and
fountains, ordinarily rivers and fountains are fresh, though the sea be salt,
but here the fountains and rivers are salt and brackish also; as those salt
springs be, that run through salt mineralls, which are of like nature with the
sea, and these keep their brackishnesse still: And so it is with these rivers
and fountains, they run through the earth, on which the first Angel poured out
his vial; they run through the cursed earth, as it is plagued of God, and
therefore still retains the like unwholesome streams which are found in the
bloody sea: And therefore it is said, that as the sea became blood, so these
rivers also became blood, and carried but the like kind of water which they
received from the sea, corrupt. As the Religion it self is corrupt, so are
these fountains and rivers, the Priests and Jesuits, whether secular or
regular, that is, the Parish Priests of their Churches, or Regular Monks that
are in Religious Orders, or who ever are sent forth by these, they are these
rivers and fountains of waters that run to and fro to fill all the world with
their sea, with their Religion. It is the same word which the Apostle Peter
has in expressing the nature of false teachers, though there it is wells, yet
the words are both one, They are wells without water, meaning without water of
life, carrying their own drugs and dregs, 2 Pet. 2.17. A fit expression
(therefore) of such kind of Priests or Prophets, as do convey unwholesome
liquor or water up and down a country. Now of these it is said, that on the
pouring out of this vial, they became blood, not only in regard that their
waters themselves are blood, the doctrine and worship which they do hold forth
to the people are corrupt, as their sea is, (like the plague in Egypt, when
their waters and rivers were turned to blood) but that chiefly in regard of the
punishment which they inflict on them for so doing, which is a bloody death, as
blood is expounded in the 5. and 6. verses, where the Angel of the waters
says, Thou art righteous, O Lord, etc. because thou have judged thus: Why? For
they have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them blood
to drink, for they are worthy: So this is blood which God has given them to
drink. And that is an usual phrase, to give a man blood to drink, is to kill
him: As Tomyris of old said to King Cyrus, Thou have been a bloodthirsty man,
drink thou blood which thou have thirsted. When you give a man blood to drink,
you put him to death. So this Angel, who ever it was, that poured out this
vial, he puts these Priests to death, he gave them blood to drink, both made
themselves to undergo a bloody death, to drink blood, and also made all that
received and entertained them, to drink blood too; and this was effectually
accomplished by Queen Elizabeth, when in the 27. year of her reign, in the
year 1581. by the consent of the Parliament, she made it a Law, that if any
Priest or Jesuit, that had received Orders from the Sea of Rome, or any
authority from that Sea, should come into the Realm, and go about or practice
to seduce any of the Queens loyal Subjects from their allegiance, to the
obedience of the Sea of Rome, or practice to draw them to that religion, he
should be judged guilty of high treason, and suffer in the case of a Traitor;
And this was another branch of that Statute, That if any gave entertainment to
such Priests and Jesuits (after certain days,) and knew them to be such,
should suffer as in case of Felony, without the benefit of his Book; so that
both of them must drink blood, both the Jesuits and Priests themselves, and
their abettors and entertainers; and the ground was, because they had bloody
intendments in their coming, intending to kill the Queen, or corrupt the
State with unwholesome and pernicious Doctrine, to draw the people from their
allegiance, to the obedience of the Sea of Rome, that so as it was said, a
generation of Catholics was the corruption of her subjects: To prevent which
mischief, this Law was enacted, and so upon this occasion, many suffered that
year, and others in after years, most part of her Reign.

Now what is then the meaning of the next words, I heard the Angel of the
waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and wast, and shall be,
because thou have judged thus: so it was blood recompensed with blood. This
Angel of the waters, it was he or she that poured out this vial on these
waters: She with the consent of her Council, and Parliament, they were this
Angel of the waters that had this power over these rivers and fountains, and
this was accomplished two or three years after, when she set Secretary Cicill
on work to write a Book with this Title, JUSTITIA BRITANNIAE, The Justice of
Britain, wherein Secretary Cicill, by her appointment, does make it clear to
all neighbor Nations, (and for that end published his Book in sundry
Languages, French, Dutch, and Spanish) that what was decreed in that Parliament
was just, according to the Law of God, and the true principles of Christian
State Policy, that there was no hope of safety to the Queens Person, or of
peace to the Common wealth, or of liberty to true Reformed Religion, if such
persons were suffered to go up and down in that pestilentious manner, to
pervert and corrupt the people, and withdraw them from their Allegiance, and
subject them to the Bishop of Rome; that they did not suffer merely on point
of Religion, though on those points of their Religion which gave them occasion
so to work, he does not deny that neither, but in respect that the frame of
their Religion was not compatible to any Protestant State: And the very Book
it self holds forth this in effect, that the Lord was just herein; and as the
Text here tells us, Thou art righteous, O Lord, because thou have judged thus:
And he attributes not only righteousness to God in this, but immutability,
and constancy, which art, and wast, and shall be always. The same from the
ancient Law of retaliation, in the 24. of Leviticus, 19, 20, 21. it is there
ordained, that look what a man does to others, it shall be so done to him,
Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, etc. They gave thy Prophets
and Saints blood to drink, and now thou have given them blood to drink: This
is the reason why he acknowledges this not only righteous, but according to
his old and ancient proceeding, his righteousness ever since Moses his time,
and since the world began: that is Gods manner, Genesis 9.4, 5. He that sheds man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed: God always has been of that mind: They
that put others to death, that shed innocent blood, Their blood shall go for
their blood, Genesis 9.6. to that purpose justly speaks that book; it is that
which they have found, for they are worthy.

And when he adds further, I heard another Angel out of the Altar say, Even so,
Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments: That is another
Angel, a Minister and Messenger of Gods justice. This phrase, out of the Altar,
in this Book, does usually hold forth some under-persecution, either going, or
new come out of persecution: for so it is expressed in the 6. Rev. 9. I saw
under the Altar the souls of them that were slain for the Word of God, and
for the testimony which they held. The Altar is Christ, and Christ suffering;
and those under the Altar, are they that suffered with Christ for the Word of
God, speaking of the Primitive Christians in their first persecution: But here
he does not say, they were under Martyrdom, but they were come out from under
the Altar; And that holds forth those Christians in the Low-countreyes, who of
a long time had been under persecution by Duke Dalva, and other Spanish
Princes; Duke Dalva boasts of it, there were 36000. that he had put to death,
Hugonites and Protestants; Judge you what the rest might also do; and all for
the testimony of Jesus, for holding forth true Protestant Religion; but they
were all rescued by the faithfulness of God; giving and blessing the courage
of Q. Elizabeth: and now they are got out from under the Altar, and now they
are freed from wrestling with such great difficulties as had been like to sink
them, if God had not by his stretched out arm rescued them. And look as in
1584. Cicill set forth that book, so this Angel from under the Altar set forth
a Law in 1586. wherein by the consent of all the States generally of the
confederate Provinces, they enact and enjoyne, that none of the bloody sect of
the Jesuits, nor any of their Scholars, whether he be stranger, or borne in
the Land, shall have liberty to come into the Country, but be put to capital
punishment as an enemy to the State; and they have been in some measure
careful of that Law, though more in Grave Maurice his time, then since; and so
they justly say Amen to the Queens Law, that as she put those Popish Emissaries
to the pain of High Treason, hanging, drawing, and quartering, and thus gave
them blood to drink; so this Angel from out of the Altar says Even so, he
says Amen to it, let it even be so with them, Lord God Almighty, true and
righteous are thy judgments; they acknowledge Gods Almighty power, that had
given them power to make that Law against them, who had so lately suffered
under them; and acknowledge Gods righteous judgments; for that State that
makes a Law to the same purpose, which they have found enacted in another
State, they do say Amen to what has been done, and both the one State and
other acknowledge it to be a righteous judgment of God, and the
administration, a just law, and a just execution. This (as others have done
before me) I take to be the natural and true meaning of this Vial in the
several parts thereof, without wresting of the words, nor need it be
offensive to any that such particular persons are named as the accomplishers of
this Vial, considering the matters were not of small importance, but of great
consequence and admiration, all states rang of these laws, and it raised all
Christendom in combustion, the wars of eighty eight, the Spanish invasion had
special respect to this, and had not the Lord borne witness to his people and
their Law, in defeating the intendments of their enemies, against both the
Nations, it might have been the ruin of them both: So you see the meaning of
the words of the Text.

The words are many, and though containing much matter in 4. verses, I shall
shortly contract and recollect the substance contained in them into one note,
and handle that one at this time, as conceiving all the doctrine of these words
may be grasped together in one Observation; For though there be liberty of
entering into common places of Gods righteousness and immutability, and of his
justice in retaliation, and of his omnipotency, out of this Text; yet all
these particulars have been spoken to in the former Chapter, in the third
verse, and in the fourth, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou
King of Saints. That for God being ever the same, which was and is to come, we
have spoken to it diverse times before in this book; and therefore though they
be Catechism points, which my place calls me to attend upon; yet I shall not
here speak to them, having so lately handled the most of them, but therefore I
will only speak to this Doctrine, which contains all the verses. This is the
note then,



For so you see it is upon the discovery of their sea of blood, of the Religion
of the Sea of Rome, to be a Sea of blood. We opened and showed before, that The
second Angel poured out his vial on the sea, that is, on the Religion of the
Sea of Rome, and discovered it to be as the blood of a dead man, made it
manifestly appear, that both their doctrine, and worship, and government, was
deadly, and such as was utterly unwholesome, both for private families and
States, Church and Commonwealth; and so corrupt, as was deadly; who ever lived
and dyed in that Religion, lived an hypocrite, and dyed a reprobate. Now the
next Angel that comes, upon this discovery, he poures his vial on the rivers
and fountains of waters, and they became blood: That is, they make Laws to
adjudge all that carry that Religion up and down the Nation, to be guilty of
blood, and therefore to be put to death, as Traitors and Rebels against the
State. And this is acknowledged by the Angels of God, I mean those that are
Ministers of Gods Justice, and approve this testimony as authentical; they
acknowledge this a righteous judgment of God, as he that is, was, and shall be
always one and the same. Thus he was wont to carry it, and thus he does still.
In old time, if a man played the false Prophet, and suggested such devices as
these, the Lord judged him to death, this was his manner: And so in the New
Testament, as in the Old, he condemns all such to death, (and he is most
righteous in so doing.) This is the sum.

It was a great while before this, though not full two thousand years, when
Zachary prophesyed, that God would cut off the false Prophet, in the 13. Zach.
2, 3. and if there were any false Prophet should arise, his father and mother
should thrust him through, because he spoke lies in the name of the God of
truth, he should not live. And they speak not of his Typical death, that is,
of his death by Church censure, or banishment, which have a kind of death in
them; but they speak of such a death, as that he was not worthy to live; To
cast a lie upon the God of Truth, the Oracle of Truth. But long before Zachary,
this was an ancient law of Moses in the 13. Deuteronomy. this was a law, that false
Prophets, they that turned Religion to the blood of a dead man, that did
fundamentally pervert Religion, they should not live. And mind the reason that
God gives here, partly in this text, and partly in other Scriptures.

It is taken from the heinousness of blasphemy in the 24. Lev. He that
blasphemeth the name of God, shall surely be put to death. Every blasphemer
shall be put to death. Now we cannot excuse Popish Priests and Jesuits from
gross blasphemy, they that are acquainted with the Ladies Psalter and Orysons
made to her, cannot but acknowledge sundry blasphemous speeches in it, they make
their Prayers to the Virgin Mary that she would request her father, and
command her Son, and that by the power of a mothers right to forgive their
sin, which if this be not blasphemy, I confess I know not what is, and in a
high degree, unless they should say, he were no God at all, and that falls not
far short of it, to set a creature above God, and yet this is allowed as good
devotion in the Church of Rome: It is true, if a man blaspheme out of
ignorance, as Paul did, in the 1 Timothy 1.13. or if a man blaspheme unwillingly,
as he did unwittingly, not knowing what he did, and he did compel some to
blaspheme, Act. 26.11. why if he compel them to Blaspheme, those that are
compelled, they do it unwillingly, but if men wittingly blaspheme, knowing
what they do, knowing Jesus is God as well as man, and has power to forgive
sins as he is God, and know the Virgin Mary has need of a Savior, as all the
daughters of men have, that they shall put upon her the power to command her
Son to forgive sins, this is such blasphemy, that he that will stand to
it, let him die the death; his blood shall be upon him: If high treason
against Princes on earth, may justly be punished, by death, verily, this is as
dishonorable to the Lord of Heaven, and Prince of all the Princes of the earth.

Deuteronomy. is spent about the seducing of false prophets: and he puts a threefold
gradation, If he be a Prophet, (therefore though never so seemingly holy by his
place and gifts,) yet if he turn you away from the Lord your God, and draw you
from the ways of God, what then? thine eye shall not spare him, he shall
surely be put to death, from the 1. ver. to 5. from the 6. ver. to 11. he will
have no neerenesse of blood to hinder from due execution of Justice: but if it
be thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy daughter, or the wife of th
bosom, or thy friend, which is as thy own soul that shall go about to seduce
thee secretly, saying, let us go and serve other Gods which thou have not
known, thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him, thine eye shall
not spare him, neither shall thou conceal him, but thou shall surely kill him,
thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, etc. from the 12. ver.
to the end. If there be never so many that shall join, if a whole City shall
join together in such a course, thou shall rise against, and destroy the City,
and burn it with fire, and leave not a stone upon a stone which shall not be
thrown down, in utter detestation of that wickedness: And he gives a notable
reason for it, why a seducer should be thus dealt withal, because, says he,
he seeks to turn thee away from thy way, and to thrust thee away from the
Lord thy God, to turn thee off either by deceit, or to thrust thee off by
eanest persuasions; and therefore lest you should think these false prophets
fail only in the object of worship, and not in manner of worshipping,
therefore consider in the 22. Josh. when the two tribes and a half set up an
Altar by Jordan, although they thought not they would bring in another object
of worship, but another manner of worship, (here is but another way of worship,
whether mediation or satisfaction of Gods wrath devised) the whole ten Tribes
rise up, and send a sufficient Company or Troop of Military men to go and
expostulate with them, and know whether it were true; and either they would
reclaim them from it by argument, or make war against them; and they had cut
off two Tribes and an half, if they had found another Altar for worship: Now
he that sets up another Mediator or Mediation, Saint or Angel, he sets up as
great a matter as another Altar; or he that brings in other men's merits, he
brings in another Altar: Therefore by the ancient Laws of that unchangeable
God that thought it unsufferable in those days, he thinks it unsufferable now
that Priests and Jesuits should bring in other Altars, other Mediations and
Mediators, as Prayers of Saints and Angels; the Lord looks at it as deeply
meritorious of a bloody death, as in former times. He is the same God, and his
zeal and jealousy is deeply provoked against the like kind of viciousness
now as ever it was then. That is a second Argument.

And yet in point of seducement, this I will say, that if a man upon conviction
shall see the wickedness of his way, and humble his soul before God, and give
satisfaction to the Church and State where he shall be convinced, on such
conviction and repentance, we find liberty to pardon; but yet stigmatize him,
as in the 13. of Zach. If the Prophet, shall repent, and say, I am no Prophet,
nor the son of a Prophet, but an Husbandman, and my father taught me to keep
beasts or sheep, and therefore he will not wear a rough garment to deceive;
And if any man ask him, What are those wounds in thine hands? he shall answer,
Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends, Zach. 13.4, 5, 6.
That shows in such a case they saved his life, but they inflict some punishment
on him, to carry away with him. And this is spoken not of the days of the Old
Testament, but it is written to be done when there is a fountain opened to the
house of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for
uncleanness, in the 1. ver. And in the 7. ver. when the Lord calls for a sword
against his Shepherd, and against the man that is his fellow, the Lord Jesus
Christ, and his companions his disciples, He will smite the shepherd, and the
sheep shall be scattered, (and those are the days of the New Testament) in
those times it is, when the Prophets shall be thus cut off that rise up to
seduce the people of God.

And a third Reason is taken from the due desert of soul-murther: Mat. 15.
Beware of false Prophets which come unto you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening wolves: Is it not an acceptable service to the whole Country
to cut off the ravenous wolves? what is the wolf to the sheep? is he not the
very death of them all that he lights on, or fall in his jaws? so is it with
the sheep of Christ, that fall into the jaws of these Romish ravenous wolves.

It is said of those false teachers, 2 Timoth. 2.18. They destroyed the faith
of some, who concerning the truth, have erred: And in the 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. he
tells us, There shall be false teachers amongst them, that shall bring in
damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and shall bring upon
themselves swift destruction, etc. They shall make merchandise of you, as the
Church of Rome, and her fountains and rivers do; they make merchandise of the
souls of men, Rev. 18.13. Now to make merchandise of an Israelite, as in the
21. Exodus 16. it is a capital crime, He that steals a man, and sells him,
or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death. Now these sell
men, and engage them to perpetual bondage, under their tyranny, both in
doctrine, and worship, and government. This murder of souls is juftly a
capital crime; as Moses said before, If they thrust thee from thy God, and
will not let thee walk with him, let not thine eye spare such kind of
corrupters and desperate deluders.

Iustitia Britanniae stands most upon, and becomes Statesmen to do; and that
is the conspiracy and treason against the State: And that unavoidably, by
suffering such locust to run up and down the Country, to poison the hearts of
men, by their corrupt ways and means: for these Ministers, they do
unavoidably, not accidentally, but they unavoidably draw men from their
Allegiance due to their Native Prince, to a foreign State: For if a Prince
should profess Protestant Religion, (which is the true Religion) and thereupon
be excommunicate by the Bishop of Rome, what then? then by the Laws of their
State he is deposed from his throne.

And they do notably abuse the old type of Leprosy for this: Vzziah being
once smitten with leprosy, then the High Priest removes him from the Temple of
the Lord, and he may not be suffered any more to govern; for if once the Lord
finite a man with leprosy in his judgment, (and indeed, let heresy be one
kind of leprosy) if the Priest pronounce him so, then he is cut off from the
government of the Country, then his people are not subject to him, and so
subjects are freed from their fidelity to their natural Prince, which is a
notable abuse of that place: For God does not intend that the authority of any
Minister or Priest in the Old or New Testament should so far prevail, that
what they did in the Old Testament to Vzziah, should take off Princes from
their Government in the New: For even in the old Testament they still retained
the Crown, though their power of execution was delegated to another; and that
not by the Highpriests appointment, but by himself.

But as things were with them, so though not in the same kind, but in a
typical way, it befalls Princes in the New Testament. If a man were found a
Leper in the Old Testament, he was sequestered from the administration of his
Kingdom, and from his own house, Leviticus 13.46. he must not live in the
Camp, or in the Town or Village, but alone, and in a separate place by
himself, (as those that are sick of the Pestilence in our Native Country)
they are not suffered to live in the town, but in Pest-houses, unless there
be a general infection.

But this thing must not be applied in the letter to the state of the Church,
in the New Testament; for Leprosy was not only a type of scandalous,
infectious sins, but it was also a bodily, noisome, infectious disease, and
made a man unfit for civil commerce.

Moreover, as Leprosy was also a type of scandalous and infectious sins, so
the sequestring of Vzziah from the Temple, does type forth, not that Christian
Kings should be separate from their thrones; For he that gives to a man a
Kingdom, or any earthly estate, does not debar that man from his house, if
he be a private man, nor from his government, if he be a public person.

But what is the Kingdom that is typed out?

It is the Kingdom of the glory of CHRIST JESUS: If therefore he be shut out
from the holy Temple of Israel, he is shut out from the Kingdom of Heaven
indeed, that is true; for what is done by the Churches of God on earth, is
bound in Heaven: But yet Christ Jesus never thought it meet to separate any by
any Church power, from communion with his wife and children, those whom nature
bound him to; nor from his servants and subjects, whom civil engagements bound
unto him; but only from interest in the spiritual communion of the seals of
immortality, and yet but for a season, for the healing of his soul, not for
the destroying of his person or state, but otherwise to exclude them from their
own houses, or Kingdoms, or from any civil right, it was never Gods counsel
nor meaning in the New Testament: But now the contrary being the doctrine of
the Church of Rome, and on that ground justified. When Princes are
excommunicated, they do depose them, and being deposed, discharge subjects
from their allegiance, and then judge you what treason redownds to Christian
Princes, and what conspiracy and rebellion grows in the state of a Kingdom,
when some take part with the King deposed, and others with him that is
substituted by the Pope; and so there is Treason both against Prince, and
State, and Kingdom. And therefore it is an ancient justice of God, that has
so ordered it, that those that shall draw Gods people from the Allegiance of
their Prince, shall be judged Traitors, and suffer pain of death.

Mary, and Henry the eighth, and all the Kings since, the Statute against
Lollards in England, as also against the Hugonites in France, if a man were
suspected of heretical pravity, and pronounced guilty thereof by the Church,
he was to be delivered to the secular power; only he might have leave to
consider of it: But if he fell again, there was no hope of mercy, but he must
look for blood, as if he were no better then a child of death: And yet they
were men that never troubled the State, but quietly suffered for their Religion
and Conscience: So that these Jesuits and Priests, delivering up so many
innocent Lambs of Christ, Ministers of the Gospel, and holy Saints, to the
Secular power, to be burnt at the stake in Smithfield, and elsewhere, and the
Abettors of these Priests and Jesuits, being very zealous to cut off such
Lollards from the land of the living, it is just and right with God, They have
given thy Saints and Prophets blood to drink, and therefore look as they have
measured to others, it is measured to them, by the ancient Law of God, that is
the same, and will be for ever, Rev. 13.10. He that kills with the sword,
must be killed by the sword. So you see this point is plain, That upon the
discovery of the deadly corruption of the Religion in the Romish Sea, it was
the righteous judgment of God, and such as argued him to be unchangeable, and
ever the same, that the Priests ands Jesuits which carried the waters of that
Sea, that Religion up and down the Nation, should be condemned to a bloody
death: you see the truth of the point, and the reasons of it.

For the use of the point, it may first serve to justify the holy England or
Holland, for putting Popish Priests and Jesuits to death, and there was a like
law also made in France, upon the murder of Henry the fourth, that all
Jesuits should be put away out of the Country, and their studies demolished,
etc. but they made it in policy: But the Text speaks of England and Holland,
it was a just and righteous law, that these rivers and fountains of waters
should become blood: you see there is blasphemy in their worship against the
Lord Jesus Christ, they do seduce the people of God, and turn them from the
Lord, and thrust them from him, by their justification by works, by their
callings on Saints and Angels, and trusting in other Mediators besides the Lord
Jesus in the intercession of Saints and Angels: It has been a just hand of
God, that they that worry (like ravenous wolves) the souls of Gods people,
should themselves be worried: that they that have made firebrands of
Christians, should drink blood themselves; they that overwhelmed Christians
in confusion and tumult, it is just with God, that they should be overwhelmed;
they that have been so busy in putting to death innocents, that they should
also be put to death: you see this is just with God, it is well becoming to
the unchangeable righteousness of God: thus it was in the old Testament, and
why should it be changed in the new?

You will say it was but a typical matter then, and you must look for a
spiritual death in the New Testament.

Why I pray you Brethren consider,

1. Thou have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy: and he speaks of
the very blood of the hearts of men: And it is parallel with Gods justice of
old; it was just then, and it is just now. Zachary intends the days of the New
Testament, though written in the Old, that when a fountain is opened to the
house of David, and inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness,
then the father and mother of a false Prophet shall accuse him to the
Magistrate, and shall say unto him, He shall not live. Was it an abomination
then to speak lies in the Name of the Lord, and no less then blasphemy, and
shall it be more favorably interpreted now? A man may now speak a lie, and
bring in a false Christ, a false Mediator, and false means of satisfaction,
and false merits, now he may without peril of his life, in the Old Testament
he might not. Why but was it not sufficient to have a spiritual judgment?
Even they had spiritual judgments then; but God saw it meet to inflict some
temporal judgment as well as spiritual, and is now his judgment changed?

Besides, are not Moses Moral Laws of perpetual equity, and therefore to be
observed in all Ages? Is blasphemy more tolerable in the New Testament, or
thrusting men away from God? is it not as odious now as then? Is not murder of
souls as damnable now as then? Is not conspiracy and sedition as damnable and
capital now as then? Is not the law of retaliation as just in the New Testament
as in the old? and therefore a man would wonder that such frivolous
interpretations should come into the hearts of men, to hinder the free passage
of the justice of God, on such notorious offenders.



the Old Testament as now? If any man had a conscience to turn men from God, he
would have men of as much conscience to cut them off; if they make no
conscience of the blaspheming the name of God, the Lord would have, men make no
conscience of cutting them off from breathing in the air of God; If men make
no conscience of murdering souls, or raising sedition, and tumult, and
murdering men better then themselves, the Lord would have men make no
conscience of paying every man in his own kind.

But let me answer again, But mark what I say, the Lord will easily provide for
this, and so he does: and in England I am sure he has, (what in Holland I know
not, but) he has provided there, That if a Jesuit or Priest, or their
abettors, shall come in, and take the oath of fidelity to the State, and so
carry matters before some Justice of Peace, the Law discharges them from
capital punishment: And the Law of God in the New Testament is, that such
should be once or twice admonished, but if he still continue, the Apostle would
have him cast out of the Church; the Church has no farther power; if they be
proceeded with farther, it must be by the Magistrate: Him that is an heretic,
ofter once or twice admonition, reject, knowing that he that is such, is
subverted, etc. So that it must be for Fundamental Articles of Religion in
doctrine or worship, which are so clearly delivered in the Word, that no man
that understands Scripture, and the ways of salvation, but may be satisfied in
conscience what is the holy and acceptable will of God in such points; and
therefore he takes it for granted, if a man be once or twice admonished, he is
convinced of himself, he is subverted, he is turned off from the foundation,
that now no man is put to death for his conscience, but for sinning against the
light of his conscience; his own conscience has convinced him, and the light
of the Word is so clear, as cannot but convince him, that the way of God
runs just quite contrary to his interpretation and seducement: And therefore
now if you sin, you sin against conscience, and therefore you justly suffer
for being subverted, and turned off from the foundation, from Chrift Jesus, and
holding another foundation, and persisting therein obstinately. So there are
two things in an heretic, he is both subverted himself, as an house from the
foundation, it is against the foundation of Religion; and he holds out
obstinately against light of conscience, with stubbornness; and now in such a
case thine eye shall not spare him. A soul that sins of ignorance, may be
pardoned, but if he still continue obstinate, thine eye shall not spare him;
the wrath of God now goes out against a person, against a City; if it were
against a Tribe, they go about by force of Arms to redress it; they shall
not suffer such in a Country. This is then the Answer to the second Objection,
and still justifies the equity of that Law.

lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them? Mat.
13.30. Now our Savior tending to clemency and moderation, he says, Let both
grow together until the harvest, etc.

Jerome, and none so well; the tares are very like the wheat in Jury; what they
are in other Countries I know not, but they are like to the wheat there, and
you will not know the difference in the green blade, nor in the spindling,
until it grows toward the harvest, then you will find it but an empty ear
and thin, and yet it grows so close with the other wheat, and like it, that if
you pluck it up, you may pluck up the wheat with it, let therefore both grow
together till the harvest.

What is then meant by Tares? Not such as sin through obstinacy, but
hyhocrites that are like the servants of God, that you would think they are
such; after you discover them, they are empty ears; and hollow, have no
fatness of grain, and that is indeed none of the wheat. Now let Hypocrites
grow together with the Elect, do not cast them out merely for hypocrisy,
though you find them halting, unless they break forth to scandalous
behavior, either in doctrine, or worship, or conversation, as they appear to
be briars and thorns; if they be manifest fruits of the curse, away with them,
Why cumber you the ground? for else you shall neither have Church censure, nor
cavil to stand. Such notorious wicked persons, adulterers, Idolaters, railers,
refractory and scandalous persons, drunkards, and the like, are not tares; we
must not abuse Scripture, that because tares and hypocrites are suffered,
therefore refractory, scandalous, notorious wicked men and heretics may be
suffered; no, that is not the meaning, they are not ears, you may see them afar
off; you shall not need to fear rooting up the wheat by cutting off them, the
wheat is nothing like them. So you see the first Use, to justify the equity
and sovereignty of such capital punishments on Priests and Jesuits, and
consequently on such as bring in other Gods, or another way of worshipping the
true God, then that wherein we may enjoy fellowship with the true God, the
justice and suitableness of it to the holy will of God, since there were any
Laws made amongst Gods people.

For a second Use, it may serve to reprove the carnal and sinful Ier. 10.
Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently; and cursed is he that
keeps back his sword from blood, when the Lord calls us to sheath the sword
of Authority in such kind of delinquents as these be; if we shall now spare
them, and neglect this work of God, cursed be such. A State shall be separate
from God, and a Kingdom more and more corrupt and leavened, by such
toleration; the wrath of God will break forth, tumults, and seditions, and all
kind of scandalous, and unrighteous, and ungodly proceedings will set a whole
Kingdom in combustion, Church and Commonwealth at variance: There can be no
peace to such a State, where such persons are tolerated: And therefore we may
fear the righteous hand of God, in disturbing the Country whereto we owe so
much love and faithfulness, if there be a suspending of the holy and righteous
Law of God; that these rivers and fountains should drink of blood, for they
are worthy.

Thirdly, this may serve to teach all Magistrates and Governors be righteous
laws: If you will act any thing justly, the Lord takes it as his act, he is
the actor of it. And therefore though this Law was made by Queen Elizabeth,
with the consent of the whole body of the Parliament, and though her Secretary,
by her direction and consent, published the justice of the Law, the Text says,
it is the Lord, Thou art just and righteous, just and true are thy ways,
because thou have judged thus: They have shed the blood of Saints and Prothets,
they have given them blood, and thou have given them blood to drink, for they
are worthy. Even so, says another Angel, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous
are thy judgments. If there be any wholesome and just Law in a Kingdom, the
Lord ownes it as his own, and it is to be obeyed as a righteous Law of God; if
it be unjust, it is not Gods, for his law is just, an adequate rule of
righteousness. So that what ever is less then the Law of God, if it suit not
with the Law of God, and keep correspondencie therewith, you cannot say it is a
Law of God: Therefore Law givers, and Law makers, should ever have respect what
does the Lord our God say; If it be Gods Law, and Gods will, let it be
established; if not, let it be antiquiated: But if you can find a hint from
the Law of God for it, then let it stand.

Elizabeth makes a Law in the year 84. against Priests and Jesuits, the
Decree is righteous, when others hear of this righteous section, they make it
also a capital crime for any such persons to be found amongst them; if it be
capital in England, it is so in Holland, they will require it of the necks of
them that shall be found delinquent. What then? This is Even so, one State must
say Even so upon the just act of another; and they must record it in their
Statutes, unless there be some apparent dissimilitude, which is not in case of
this nature; for there is the same equity in all Ages, and all Nations, and
therefore it is for them to say Amen, or Even so to it: And what is that? It is
no more but this, If you enact a Law which is in another Country, you say Amen
to Gods justice in your own Country, as others do in theirs.

Moses, to all the judicial laws of Moses, that are built upon moral equity;
that is, where the reason of a Law holds in one Nation as well as in another;
in the New Testament as in the Old. There are sundry Laws particular to that
Polity, which had peculiar reasons for them, as to marry in their kindred, to
keep their inheritance to their Tribe, we have not that reason: But where the
Laws are of like moral reason, as will hold in all Ages, and in all Countries,
as it is in all the capital Laws of Moses, there is no reason why a Jew should
be put to death for point of Adultery, or Incest, or for stealling a man, and
selling him to a Pagan, more then a Christian. I say therefore look what was
the Law of God by Moses, if it were of perpetual reason and equity, it lies on
every Commonwealth to establish the same, and to take your selves as much
bound to it as the Jews, why? for the Text tells us, the very righteousness of
God is in it: And look as he was then a hater ofall wickedness with a perfect
hatred, and as he was just, so he is still, heresy is no more pleasing to him,
nor blasphemy, nor seducing, nor to change the way of his worship, and to draw
men to ways wherein they cannot enjoy the Lord in peace; murder of souls is
no more welcome to him now, then of old. And therefore if there were a Law to
punish such with capital punishment, it is a like justice of God to enjoyne
such Laws in every Christian Commonwealth. And therefore if we look at Gods
justice as unchangeable, we may not prevaricate judicial laws, setting aside
some typical considerations, or some peculiar consideration, in regard of
their Polity: But such as were to punish men by death, or were received on
moral equity and ground, look what was for them to do there, is the same
proportion for us; put the same case, and you will find the like reason for
the same punishment. It is true, some ceremonies were there punished with
death, and so the like kind of profaning the Sabbath, is as justly punishable
with us, if profaned with an high hand; to gather sticks with an high hand, in
contempt of the Sabbath of the Lord, is as justly punishable with death now as
then. And so you may say of any other law justly punishable by death, and that
are built on perpetual moral equity, Our God is the same God that he was; and
so you shall have him count that righteous whiles the world stands.

For a sixth. This may serve to take off a corrupt interpretation have gathered
from hence, that the Angels of God are deputed to several offices; here is one
Angel of the waters; and some are deputed to govern the earth, some fire, some
the waters and sea, as I might tell you, if it were meet to trouble you with
humane inventions, and collections of men's brains; the collection is chiefly
grounded on this place, but it is wholly mistaken, for the Angel of the waters
here is not any particular Angel of God, any of those heavenly spirits, but the
Angels and Ministers of Gods justice, upon metaphorical seas and waters. It is
true, those here were Governors of the narrow seas, and the that gave
commission to execute the righteous judgment of God upon those rivers, she was
Admiral of the narrow seas, but that is not the meaning. But the Angel that
poured out his vial upon the rivers and fountains of waters, it is he or she
that did execute the righteous judgment of God upon the Popish Priests and
Jesuits; and that did both Queen Elizabeth, and he that had a great hand in
executing that judgment, and the Angel from under the Altar, they ratified
that Law, and justified it when they had done. Now it is true, the Angels of
God assist the servants of God in this glorious work, but they are sent forth,
indifferently, to protect Gods servants by sea or by land: And I find no
Scripture to show that they are more particularly sent to the sea, or to the
earth, but indifferently to protect Gods servants in their outgoings and
in-commings.

Cor. 3.18. what then? where the sea is pure, all Ministers of the Country,
and Elders of Churches, carry forth the doctrine and worship of Christ, they
are as rivers and fountains, and being living water, rivers of fresh water,
and water all the Country. This is the office of of them, in opposition to
those in 2 Pet. 2.17. that are wells without water, without sweet water. Godly
Ministers therefore are fountains of sweet water, and from them issue forth
streams of living water. In Psalm. 88. ult. All my fresh springs are in thee. I
would only apply it thus, and leave it and the Text with the time: That
therefore look as a man when he would go forth to a new Plantation, or sit
down in any place, or if he would set his dwelling house in a place, he would
wisely forecast to have a fountain of living water, a living spring near to
his house, or some sweet spring run near him. Why? If he be without fresh
water, it is a great want for the provision of his household: Water they must
have, either a fresh tiver, or a fresh spring, the one of the two; if they can
have both, they covet both: and there is great need of both, not only to
quench fire, and water gardens, etc. but for boiling of meat and drink, washing
of clothes, and sundry victuals. Water is ever necessary, as any thing;
nothing more. This is men's care, when they go about Plantations, or whether
they plant towns or villages, or their own dwelling houses, they have a care
to provide for fresh water. All I would say is this, Take heed you do not
provide for fountains of ordinary water, and neglect rivers of sweet water:
That is, beware of going about such work, without carrying such fountains with
you, as may from the sea of pure Religion, pure doctrine, and pure worship,
carry forth some such sweet streams as may make glad the hearts of your
families, and Church of God where you go.

But you will say, Have not Christians so much liberty, a

All this is true brethren, I would infringe no part of it: Only take the Lord
Jesus Christ along with you, and take rivers and fountains of waters; that as
you look for rivers and fountains for the refreshment of your cattle, and
servants, and children, you may find a living fountain of the blood of
Christ, conveyed and running in the plantation where you intend to sit down;
otherwise you will find the springs there, and the fountains and rivers you
sit down by, rise up in judgment against you, that these are the things you
sought for, and out of regard to these, you left the fountains and rivers of
Gods house, the ordinances of God behind you, and go and live in the outmost
corners of a country, or in some other country, all is one; Therefore sit
down no where without good Ministers, if it be possible, and sure possible it
is, else Christians may resolve to tarry where they are, as Ezra tarried by the
river Ahava, in the 8. of Ezra 15. till he had got some Levites to go with
them, that they might go and make a comfortable work of it, that they might
not leave the Ordinances behind them; and yet there were some there before,
whither they went. It is true, some may go and make a beginning, but yet never
make a beginning, but where you may come and partake of the waters of Gods
house every Lords day, and let them that cannot so travel, let them continue
where they are, and drink of the waters of eternal life, rather then run such
hazards. You have seen when some have made a beginning without Ministers, they
have staid three or four years before they have got any help, and when they
have got them, they have had much ado to settle: they have been suddenly
unsettled, though they have not gone rashly about it, but with good advice: but
for want of this there, not taking these rivers and fountains with them, they
have been at a loss, and therefore in such a case let it be the wisdom of
sincere hearted Christians, that come from old England for liberty and purity
of Ordinances, not to leave them now for fresh medows and fountains: and for
want of planting ground, and the like, it will not be suitable to these ends
for which you left your native Country.

The Fourth VIAL.
Revel. 16.8, 9. And the fourth Angel poured out his vial upon the Sun, and
power was given to him to scorch men with fire.

And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, which
had power over these plagues; and they repented not to give him glory.


ALl the seven Angels that are described to pour out the seven Vials of the
last fierce wrath, are all of them said to come out of the Temple of the
Tabernacle opened in heaven in the 5 Verse of the 15 Chapter: That is to say,
all of them to proceed, and to come forth out of reformed Churches, such as had
gotten the victory over the Beast, and his Image, and his Name, and the number
of his Name. In the 6 Verse of this Chapter, they are all of them further
described, to be clothed with pure and white linen, and to have their breasts
girded with golden girdles; that is to say, all of them to be clothed with the
righteousness of Christ (which is pure linen) both justifying and sanctifying
of them, the one imputed, the other inherent, and all of them to be sincere
prof^ssors of the truth of Christ, their breasts girded with the golden girdles
of truth. Further, they are all of them said to receive a command from God to
pour out the Vials of his wrath, and all of them to pour out the Vials of his
wrath upon the earth; in the first Verse of this Chapter: and yet it was but
the first that poured out his Vial upon the earth; for the second is said to
pour it out upon the Sea; and the third upon the rivers and fountains; and the
fourth (you read in my Text) upon the Sun; and the fifth upon the Throne of the
Beast; and the sixth upon the great river Euphrates; and the last upon the air:
yet all are commanded (the whole seven) to pour out the wrath of God upon the
earth, in the first verse. The earth being opposed to the Church in heaven, the
visible Church open in heavenly purity; it is so taken for some earthly,
carnal, Antichristian state, or Church: but when it is not opposed to heaven,
but other elements, then it is the lowest of all the rest; and so it is
according to this double opposition interpreted in this Chapter. If you look at
the earth, as opposite to heaven, the heavenly pure Churches, so he means the
earthly and Antichristian Church, the Romish Popish Church that then was. Now
if you say, as in the first verse it is said, The first only poured out his
vial upon the earth; now you mean the lowest element of the Antichristian
state, the common Catholics, whereupon there fell a grievous sore upon all
that received the mark of the Beast, and worshipped his Image. When those holy
servants, and faithful Ministers of Christ did discover the corruption of
Religion in common Catholics, the Catholics were afflicted with much
confusion and indignation; as being convinced, they were bedabled with gross
superstition, ignorance, and idolatry, and many other evils which you have
formerly heard: So that you see, the first of them fell upon the Beast; and so
from the first to the last, the first began with the Beast; and in the last,
Babylon is fallen, in the 19 Verse of this Chapter. So that all these Vials
poured out the wrath of God upon something or other of the Beast; the first
upon the common worshippers of the Beast; the second upon the Sea; that is, the
confluence of all the Ordinances, that is, such Ordinances as the worshippers
of the Beast have in their Religion; and they discovered that Sea to be but the
blood of a dead man, not to have the life of Christ in it: And the third poured
out his Vial upon the Fountains and Rivers of water, which are the Priests and
Jesuits of that Church, which carry that Religion up and down the earth, as the
Rivers and Fountains do the water of the Sea (and of these you heard at large
the last day:) And look as the opening of the Seals (mentioned before in this
Book) did open the wrath of God, and his judgments aginst the Roman-Pagan
Empire, and the seven Trumpets did sound out the wrath of God against the
Roman-Christian Empire and Church; so these last Angels, with the last wrath in
the seven Vials, they pour it all out upon the Antichristian Roman state: So
that all the judgments in this Book are still upon Rome; either Rome Pagan, or
Rome Christian, or Rome Antichristian; the one falls under seven Seals, the
other under seven Trumpets, and this last under seven Vials: So that if the
earth, upon which the first Angel poured out his Vial, be the common sort of
Catholics; and the Sea, upon which the second Angel poured out his Vial, be
their Religion, and convinced it to be the blood of a dead man, and no life of
the blood of Christ in it, to wash sin from the souls and consciences of men,
nothing else but unwholesome and unsavory choking corruptions, ready to destroy
all that were washed in it, or drank of it. And the third Vial being poured out
upon the Jesuits and Priests, they were thereby adjudged to capital punishment
(as you have heard) for they were forced to drink blood, as they were worthy,
having caused the Martyrs of CHRIST JESUS to drink blood.

This fourth Vial therefore comes to be poured out upon something of the Beast,
as all the rest of the Vials were: The fourth Angel poured out his Vial upon
the Sun, to wit, something of the Beast, which resembles the Sun in his world,
even as the Sun is the greatest light in this material world, which GOD
created in the beginning. In these words then you may see described, the
pouring out of the Vial of the fourth Angel, which is set forth by the subject
upon which it is poured, Upon the sun: Secondly, by the effect which followed
upon that, He had power given him to scorch men with fire; and secondly, Men
were tormented with great heat upon it. And a third Argument, by which this
Vial poured out, is described, is the event which followed, and that is double,
Men blasphemed the name of God; and God here described to have power over these
plagues, as an aggravation of that blasphemy, to blaspheme the name of God,
that had power over these plagues. And secondly, they are described by another
event, their Impenitencie, their not repenting, they repented not to give him
glory: So that here the fourth Vial is poured out, Upon what? Upon the Sun.
What is the effect of that? Power is is given to that Angel, to scorch men with
fire; and men were scorched with heat: and the event of it was, they that were
so scorched, continued still impenitent, they repented not to give God glory;
but on the contrary, blasphemed the name of the great God, that had power over
these plagues.

For opening the meaning of the words briefly; By the Sun cannot here be meant,
that body of the Sun that gives light to us in these visible heavens: For how
shall an Angel coming out of the Temple, out of a reformed Church, pour out
his Vial upon that Sun? Or if he should be able so to do, how should he work
any distempered heat in it, but it would annoy reformed Churches as well as
Antichristian? How will it reflect a peculiar plague upon Antichrist? It must
therefore be some other Sun, and indeed such a Sun as is wrapped up under the
general Notion of Earth; for all the Angels poured out their Vials upon the
earth; they had no other Commission given them to pour out their Vials, but
upon the earth, in the first Verse. And therefore he that poured out his Vial
upon the Sea, it was but an earthly sea, a worldly sea; and he that poured his
Vial upon the rivers and fountains, did but pour it out upon earthly rivers and
fountains: and therefore he that pours his out upon the Sun, does but pour it
out upon an earthly Sun, not an heavenly Sun; I mean not any spiritual Sun of
heavenly brightness or glory: Mind therefore, that it cannot be allowed to
interpret this Sun to be the Lord Jesus Christ, as some good Interpreters have
expounded it, (he is indeed the Sun of true visible reformed Churches, but not
of Antichristian:) Now will it be in like sort allowed, to interpret it of the
Scriptures, (as some of our best Interpreters have expounded it) for these are
but one; for the Scriptures reveal Christ, and the woman clothed with the Sun,
that is Christ, she is clothed with him as he is revealed in the Scripture, 12
Revel. 1. But I do not see how it should well be allowed, that that should be
the Sun here meant: For first, the Angels that pour out these Vials, are all
godly men, at least generally so reputed, and accounted, and acknowledged by
the Churches; they are clothed with pure white linen, which is the
righteousness of the Saints, inherent and imputed: They are also girded with
gelden girdles, sincere prof^ssors of the truth; and how these can be imagined
to pour out wrath upon the Lord Jesus, or the Scriptures, it is not to be
believed or conceived.

And besides, all these had command to pour out the wrath of God on those
subjects, upon which they poured out their Vials, as in the first Verse. Now
God forbid we should conceive, that any wrath of God should be poured out upon
Christ ever since his Resurrection, or that any wrath of God should be poured
out upon the Scriptures: For although they that thus expound this Vial to be
poured out upon the Sun, do not say that the wrath of God was poured upon the
Sun, but upon the Antichristian state; yet the Text tells us, they poured out
the Vials of the wrath of God upon that subject; that they poured them on, they
poured them all upon the earth: So that all these things are but earthly
matters, and such earthly matters as have been open justly to the wrath of God.
It is therefore but an earthly sea, and they are but earthly rivers and
fountains, and it is but an earthly Sun, and an earthly air, corrupt air, an
unwholesome Antichristian air, upon which the Vials are poured. So that I cannot
go so freely along with that Exposition, that the Sun here, is Christ revealed
in the Scriptures, or the Scriptures revealing Christ.

If any man shall say, but the Sun spoken of in the Trumpets, was Christ in the
Scriptures, or the Scriptures revealing Christ, and those Trumpets hold forth a
like degree of judgment upon the Roman-Christian Empire, as here upon
Antichristian Rome: For upon the sounding of the first Trumpet, judgment falls
upon the earth, common Christians: The second Trumpet sounding, judgment falls
upon the Sea, (as in the 8 Revel. 7, to 12.) And the third upon rivers and
fountains: And the fourth Trumpet sounding, did bring an hand of God upon the
Sun, a third part of the Sun was smitten; that is, the Son Christ Jesus was
much darkened in that degenerated Christian-state, and so it was with the
Scriptures, with the Church state, and with humane Learning, they were all
darkened, as it is there described: But (mind you) the Sun is one thing to a
Church that has truth in it, though degenerated; CHRIST was their light,
though they were darkened, in a third part: But now when Religion is wholly
corrupt, that all the whole Sea is the blood of a dead man; now the world is
altered, and if you have a new world, you must have a new Sun: That was a
Christian world, and CHRIST might still be the Sun, and light of that, though
in many degrees corrupted; and the Scriptures might be still the light of the
world. But now when you come to an Antichristian world, so wholly degenerated,
that there is no power of CHRIST to be seen, as they administer any Ordinance;
now the case is so far changed, that you must look for another Sun in another
world: Here is another earth, and another Sea, that Sea was not like the blood
of a dead man (though corrupt) but this is; and those waters, though their
Teachers were corrupt, yet it was but a third part; but here all is become
blood, and they drink of blood, for they are worthy. And here is another Sun in
this new world, and what must that be? In a word, there be others that
interpret it of the greatest and most illustrious light, most eminent and
glorious light in the Antichristian world: And what may that be? If you look
through all the Antichristian world, what should be the most eminent, and most
glorious, and most illustrious light that shines in the greatest glory amongst
them all? What does more readily offer it self then the house of Austria, the
chief governor in the Antichristian state, of eminent luster, and has been so
for 200 years, as they call it, the Lumen, and Columen of that state, the light
and pillar of that state? And they that so expound it, they wrote just in this
time when the king of Sweden came forth to represent the Angel, he with his
followers, to pour out a Vial of GODS wrath upon the Imperial state of
Germany, and consequently upon the rest of that house that were allied to them,
whether Spaniards or others; and that to the provoking of so much indignation,
you know what scornful derisions they put upon him, as if he came in like a
Tinker with his Copper money, rather then a worthy General; and you know what
indignation and wrath has been kindled by that means against all Germany; what
a world of blood has been spilt; how fire and sword has pursued those
attempts to this very day? What might be said against this Interpretation, is
not much, but yet so much, as to make some addition to this Interpretation.

The Papists will by no means bear and acknowledge it, that any Civil state
should be the most Illustrious light of their Religion; they will tell you that
the Emperor is but a borrowed light from the Sun, and does owe homage to the
Pope for his Imperial Crown, that have translated the Empire from Greece to
France, and from France to Germany; They will tell you, the Pope is as much
above the Emperor, as the Sun is above the Moon. And they are not ashamed to
speak to the Pope, in the amplification of his glory, Thou art the light of the
world, the flower of Paradise, the gate of Heaven: And if they make the Pope
their greatest light, their most transcendent and Illustrious light, the Sun in
the primest and chiefest glory, then you must look and search somewhat further,
for some further Interpretation then merely the Imperial state, or the state
of that same Family combined and united unto it.

And yet neither would I wholly wave that Interpretation of the Imperial
state, because the matter is not what Papists will acknowledge, or what the
Church of Rome will own, Whether they will own the Emperor to be the primest
and chiefesf light, or others; for the holy Ghost speaks of things as they be,
as well as how they are conceived to be.

Now in Scripture Interpretation, the greatest lights are Magistrates, that
hold forth the greatest luster and splendour, but yet in the Churches; and when
you speak of spiritual Administrations, they that are to derive light from
CHRIST to the Church, they are the greatest lights for spiritual things: But
we come to speak therefore of the great light they set up, they set up him as
the chiefest and greatest light, which derives light to the very Scriptures;
for they conceive that they should not be Authentical, unless the B: of Rome
count them so; and if he do count them authentical, then they shall be so,
though they be Apocrypha; and no sense of Scripture allowed for the light of
truth, unless it be acknowledged by him; nor no Decrees go for current,
unless he ratify them: So that that which they take for the light of their
world, is chiefly the Bishop of Rome: If then he be their greatest light, then
this Angel pours his Vial of Gods wrath upon the Pope his transcendent light,
whereby he gives authority to the Scriptures, to Doctrine, to Worship, to
Government, to Councels, and whereby he gives power to all his Officers, to
administer Discipline and Church Power in all Christendom, (as they call it)
all Christian Churches over. Then they are the Angels that pour out the Vial
upon that Sun, that take from him that transcendent Prerogative of the Sun,
which is to rule by day, 136 Psalm. 8. Take then from him his rule by day; for
you must speak of things metaphorically in this place, though in the Psalm is
meant another Sun; but in this Sun, take from the Pope, from this Sun Popish
rule of Religion, the rule of all Churches, the Sovereign power in all
Ecclesiastical affairs; and what then? Then you will pour out a Vial of wrath
upon him: And so did Queen Elizabeth in her time; and the Parliament then by
making the Popes Supremacy, and the defense of it, high Treason against her
person, and the State of the Kingdom, and against the Lord Jesus: It poured
forth such a Vial of Gods wrath upon this great Light, the Antichristian State;
that it rules no more by day, neither in England, nor Scotland, nor Ireland,
nor diverse other neighbor Nations, who by her precedent example did abandon
the like usurpation, the supreme rule of the Pope in Ecclesiastical affairs,
which is the very Rule of the Churches of Christ. Thus you see, take the one,
or the other, both will stand together: Let the house of Austria be the Sun, as
it is in his kind and Sphaere, the greatest light of all their created Civil
power, and has been a great light indeed, and both an ornament and nourishment
to the Sea of Rome: Or take the Pope himself, who will be the greatest
Church-light, and claims to himself Supreme power, not only in Ecclesiastical
causes, but Civil too. It is no unusual thing in Scripture, to make a graduall
Interpretation of dark Scriptures; as in the 17 Chapter, The seven beads (says
the Text) are seven mountains, upon which the woman sits; and (in the 10
verse) they are also seven Kings; the same that represent seven mountains, does
represent seven Kings. And so both these are great lights of that state, the
Imperial and the Spanish power combined in that house, by blood and affinity,
and the Pope himself in his sphaere, are both the great lights of that state,
and it has pleased ^od to pour out his Vial of wrath upon them both, and both
the one and the other suffer; and they shall suffer more and more, because they
do not repent to give God glory of their due and deserved punishment, but
continue still in their blaspheming against the Lord and his people; and when
men grow worse and worse, both civil state, and Ecclesiastical state, both
growing worse and worse, doubtless their plagues will be multiplied: Sweden
began with one, and has been followed: Queen Elizabeth in England, and others
elsewhere have begun with the other, the Lord by sundry instruments in one
kind or other has gone forth, and will go on still, to let them know that the
most high has power over all the earth, and will not be driven out: When once
he begins to execute judgment, he will go on destroying to destroy; and though
the ministers of this wrath may conflict with doubtful and various events, yet
the issue will be blessed; and Popish Princes and States shall stand a far off,
and cry, Alas, alas, that great city Babylon, that mighty city; for in one hour
is thy judgment come: That will be the final issue of the great wrath of God
upon it; and how far both these have proceeded, you cannot choose but know: How
far queen Elizabeth scorched that Antichristian state with fiery indignation,
it is universally known; which provoked Catholic Princes so much, that what
with pouring out the former Vials upon the Rivers and Fountains, when she
decreed it Treason for any to carry Popish Religion to England, and to
reconcile men to that See, the pouring out of that Vial there, and this here,
so far provoked them, that they brought in their whole power against her in 88,
and would have swallowed her up quick, they were so exasperated with heat and
fury; and had not the Lord by his out-^^retched arm and wisdom prevented, there
had been no hope of preservation, but desolation of her and her Kingdom. Thus
have I showed you, as shortly and plainly as I could, what should be the
meaning of this fourth Vial, and the Angel by whom it was poured out, Let us
shortly come to gather a note or two from the words, and very briefly. First
this;



This is evident in the Gradation of the Text, here is the wrath of the Lord
kindled against the Antichristian state, called here, the earth, an earthly
Kingdom, an earthly state, brought forth of the earth, and minding earthly
things, and all their Ordinances savouring of the earth, of humane inventions,
and wisdom and power: The Lord then when his wrath is kindled, and sends forth
Messengers of his wrath on that State, how begin they? They begin first with
the earth, the lowest Element; they begin not with the Sea, nor with the Sun,
nor with the Air, but first the Vial falls upon the Earth: Common Catholics,
they first feel the shame, and confusion thereof, (as you have heretofore
heard:) Then, as he discovers their Religion to be generally corrupt, as the
blood of a dead man; so he pours out the next Vials upon the Rivers and
Fountains of water, those that carry this Religion up and down the Countries
and Nations, the Lord exasperates Civil States so far against them, that they
force them to drink blood, their own blood, as they made Martyrs to drink
blood; so the Lord gave them to drink blood, for they are worthy, (as you heard
it opened this day seven-night.) He first begins with the common Catholics,
then with Priests and Jesuits: Well, does he here stay, when the Lord sees what
little fruit grows hereby? Verily no, for here is no Reformation of the
common sort, they still continue in their Ignorance, and Superstition, and
Idolatry: And what are the Priests and Jesuits any thing reformed? It is
nothing so, nor do the lights of that State, either the lights of the Imperial
world, of the Provinces, or their general and grand holy Father the Pope (as
they call him) none seek Reformation, what then? Then let the Imperial state,
and Pope, that claims Lord Paramountship over all, let him look it, the next
Vial falls upon his head, and the Lord does this by degrees; first upon his
supreme luster and glory, as he rules by day: And the next falls upon his
Throne, and that is a great blow to him; and still the Lord goes on pouring to
pour out, and striking to strike, till at length he crusheth the man of sin,
and all his abettors. For, their religion is corrupt, and all that drink of it
perish, and the common people, Priests and Jesuits shall smart; and then the
Pope and Emperor, whoever are their great lights, let the^ be lights in Church
or Commonwealth, (for I will exclude neither) they both partake in the sin,
and shall partake in the punishment of it: The four Angels, they may be
several persons, but they have one common work, they pour Vials upon the
lights of both States, and truly so the Lord did in Christian Rome, this is
Antichristian, but when Rome was once Pagan, and then became Christian in
Constantines time, and under the Christian Emperors, Constantine and the rest
opened the doors of the Church so wide, that all the garden of God was become a
wilderness by an inundation of carnal people, Christians in name, but Pagans
in heart, that were let in; and then that which was once a garden enclosed, was
now made a wilderness, when they took down the Pale, and let in all dogs and
swine that will come in, the wrath of God breaks out against them, then the
Trumpet sounds a shrill sound, and what was that? In the 8 of Revel. 7. The
first Angel sounding, there followed hail, and fire mingled with blood, and
they were cast upon the earth, etc. and that is upon the lowest sort of
Christians, there was given grievous hail, cold hail-storm, they received not
the truth in love, and being cold in Christianity, they were hot in Emulation
and Contention. And then the second Trumpet sounding, there was as it were a
great Mountain burning cast into the Sea, and there was a third part of the Sea
became blood; there was high preferment cast into the Officers of the Church,
and a great part of the Administrations grew corrupt. Then the third Angel
sounded, and there falls a Star from Heaven, called Wormwood, Wormwood of
Heresy, and corrupts the Priests; many were infected with the Heresy of
Arrius, and Nestorius, and Eutyches: Afterward all Scriptures came to be
darkened with Allegorical, and Heretical, and corrupt Interpretations, that
Christ is scarce discerned in all their writings, and the light of Scripture is
darkened, and the light of humane Learning, that there is little light left.
And then the next Angel, he sounds, and smoke comes out of the bottomless pit,
and there comes Locusts upon the earth, and they have a King set over them,
which is the Angel of the bottomless pit, which is the Pope over the Friars
and Monks. So, thus the Lord begins to deal with men, first he falls upon them
in one degree, upon the earth first, and then upon Religion in them, and then
upon Ministers, the publishers of that Religion, and after grows higher and
higher, till in the end there comes the Antichristian state, the seventh head,
and he surmounts all Christian Emperors, leads them all captive, and has the
Key of the bottomless pit to destroy their souls, whose name is Abaddon in
Hebrew, but in the Greek Apollyon, and then comes the Turk in the sixth
Trumpet, and he destroys and swallows up all: So the Lords manner is, first he
breaks forth against the common people, then against the Ministers, then at
last he rises to the great Lords of the world, the Rulers of the State, they
smoke for it at last. What should be the Reason of the Point? The Reason is,



Prove. 28.2 For the wickedness of a land, many are the princes thereof; many
and wicked Rulers too; They never lived long, nor well, after once the house of
Israel had cried out, What portion have we in David, or what inheritance in the
son of Iesse? The Lord never gave them good King in Israel after, not in Israel
I say, Judah indeed had sundry times good Kings, but for Israel (the 10 Tribes)
that rejected the yoke, and the house of David, in regard of the hard payments
that Solomon's son put upon them; and therefore in their profaneness cried
out, What portion have we in David? etc. Then immediately after that, the Lord
never gave them any good King, 1 King. 12.16. So there grows Religion to be
corrupted in the people, and then for their wickedness God gives them wicked
Princes; I gave them a King in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath. O
Israel thou have destroyed thy self, Hos. 13.9, 10. Israel corrupts it self,
and provokes God, and he gives them a King in his anger, and takes him away in
his wrath: And it is written as a heavy curse of God, in Lev. 26.17. If you
still trespass against me I will set Princes over you, that shall hate you:
Mischievous Princes, odious Princes that shall be odious to God, and malignant
to the people. If you still provoke me, and for all this turn not to me, I will
set such over you, them that shall be odious to me, and odious to you, that
shall make you more and more to corrupt your ways: And if God at any time give
them good Princes, he will lead them into temptation for their sin. In 2 Samuel
24.1. you read there, the wrat^ of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he
provoked David against them to say, Go number Israel and Judah: The wrath of
the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he provoked David, etc. To what end?
That so a plague might come upon Israel: So that (mind you) how the sins of
the time rise from the contagion of the hearts and lives of the people; That
look as a man catches cold on his feet, it fills the head with distempers:
Catch but cold in the lowest part, about the ancles or feet; or suppose the
stomach be somewhat annoyed through ill diet, or ill digestion, what then? It
strikes up to the head presently; you cannot annoy the feet, ancles, or middle
parts, but the head will feel both: So, if either Ministers be corrupt, or
common people, the head, the Rulers will straightway be corrupt, it will not
be otherwise; If the Prophets prophecy lies, and the Priests bear rule by
their means, and the people love to have it so, what will be the end? Do you
think there will come any Princes that will reform them? Do you think the Lord
will take any course to reform such great evils as these be? As evil first
begins with the common people, so they are first plagued.

For a third Reason, As evil first begins with the people, and they are first
plagued, and as for them it is derived to the Priests and Princes, and they are
by that means corrupted, either are not good, or led into some temptation.

Ezekiel. 7, to 10. Hear this, O ye Shepherds of Israel; and he speaks (as
best Interpreters expound it) both to Ecclesiastical and Civil Shepherds, to
the Priests in the Church, and the Princes in the Commonwealth, he speaks
expressly to both: Hear O ye Shepherds, because you have suffered my people
to wander, and my flock to be a prey, therefore I am against you, and he
professes he will rend his people from them, and rend the very cause of their
heart, and execute judgment upon them, and he will judge between the Rams and
the He Goats, and tender Kids, and will deliver them, and set them one
Shepherd over them, that shall be more faithful to him and his people, even
his servant David, he means Christ, and they that are of David's spirit, that
shall in his name rule his people. So that (mind you) the wrath of God is
carried an end in this course, he begins with the people first, because they
are first corrupt, and then with Rulers, for had not they been soon corrupted,
it had not been possible that the Church should so quickly have become a
wilderness. So here he begins with the common sort, and then with Ministers,
and then with the great Lights that rule by day, that rules the affairs of the
Church and Commonwealth.

For the use of this point briefly;

showed in the Word, as it has been hitherto held forth to you: Look to it,
that the Sea you wash and bathe your souls in be not defiled, let it be so
clear that the virtue of the blood of Christ may be discerned in it; otherwise
(believe it) though you may think, it least concerns you: Let Church Officer
look to it, and let Civil Magistrates see to it, it is their calling to look
to Worship and Government in their time and place: though that be true, they
must look to it, and God will require it else at their hand, yet if you look
not to it, the wrath of God will be powered out upon you: If men unprepared
shall most giddily rush into the Church, what will the issue be? The Lord will
power a cold haile-storme upon you: never such coldness fell upon men, as
there will be, when they rush into Churches before they be warmed with the blood
of Christ Jesus, Revel. 8.7. that was the first Trumpet of Gods vengeance
there, heavy, grievous hailestones, great hailestones; and which is wonderful,
you will think it mavelous, but it is true, as they were cold in Religion, so
they were zealous for contention and Coveteousnesse and Ambition, and personal
respects, that if they got an opinion by the end they contended for it, as (pro
aris and focis) for fire on the hearth, as if there were no warmth but in that,
though the opinion were never so unsavory: when men thrust into the Church and
take it very ill if they be examined; What will the issue be? Nothing but cold,
shill, dead-heartednesse falls upon them, and then a wild fire of rage and
crotchetly opinions, and then grow so zealous therein, as if religion lay in
some quintessence notions of theirs: therefore first look for, and beware of
corruption in the common people.

Then secondly, let the Lords Ministers (I speak to my self, the Ministers of
the Gospel must look to it, for the next thing will be some heavy judgment
or other God will bring upon them if they be not vigilant to see that all
things be done according to the true platform left to us in the word: you
know the Prophet Malachy complains of it in Malac. 1.11, 12, 13. that men
began to wax weary of sacrifices, and snuffed at the cost of it, and brought
the blind and lame, and any thing for Sacrifice, and the Table of the Lord was
polluted, and what then And now (says the Lord) O ye Priests this
Commandment is for you, in the first verse of the second Chapter (it is a very
sad word which the Lord speaks) if you will not hear and lay it to heart; what
should they lay to heart? This hailstone Corruption of the people, this
snuffing at the Ordinances if you lay not this to heart, I will send a curse
upon you, and will curse your blessings, yea, I have cursed them already,
because you do not lay it to heart, and I will corrupt your seed, etc. in the
1, 2, 3, verse, and so he goes on very sadly in threatening the Ministers of God
upon this point: The people corrupted their ways, and were weary of holy
duties, cold hearted, and only quick for contention and division; and what
then? because the Ministers of God do not bestirre them, the Lord brings a
curse upon their blessings, their best gifts in heart, and outward blessings,
he blasts both, and therefore it marveilously concerns Ministers to be most
tender this way, to see that all be carried exactly according to the word of
God.

help you not to continue watchful in this kind: It is true there is an order
to look to all corruption in doctrine, and worship, and government that are
stirring in the Country: And it is true, matters of religion are first and
properly considerable in the Churches themselves, by the officers and brethren
of the Church: But if Magistrates shall find Brethren or Officers defective, or
neglective, it will be their parts to give free passage to all undertakings for
redress, and if any thing come to your cognizance before it come to the
Church, then it will concern you to stir up the Church to look to doctrine,
worship, and government, and you will find in this case you will deliver your
souls from danger, and Church Officers and people too, otherwise you see the
danger of corruption in religion; if the earth be corrupt, the sea will be
corrupt, and the rivers and fountains, and the Sun will be corrupt, and all
alike more or less afflicted and plagued of God, for toleration of such evils
as are found amongst them. So much for the first point, let me speak a word of
another, and so come to an end. The next note is this:

A wicked heart will not repent of sin, no not under the wrathful Ahaz, that
when he was in distress on every hand, yet in his distress he did trespass
more against the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 28.22. This is that King Ahaz: as who should
say, brand him for an hypocrite and a reprobate, that in his distress
trespasseth yet more, why? for he went and sacrificed to the gods of Damascus
which smote him, because the gods of the kings of Syria help them, etc. In
stead of humbling himself under Gods hand to give him glory, he breaks forth
into blasphemy, and hardens his heart, and repents not to give him glory, but
waxes more fierce against the Lord, to blaspheme. And another profane King of
Israel, Ioram, 2 King 6.31, 32, 33. He wears sackcloth indeed upon his loins,
but being in distress, by reason of the famine, he breaks forth into fury
and rage; God do so to me and more also, if the head of Elisha shall stand on
him this day; he meant to cut off Elisha's head by reason of the famine, when
an Asses head was sold for fourscore pieces of silver; and in the 33 verse,
Shall I wait for the Lord any longer? There he breaks forth into blasphemy, he
is full of fiery indignation and blasphemy against the God of Israel; see you
this son of a murderer? While he yet spoke this, the Messengers came down unto
him, and he said, Behold this evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the
Lord any longer? So you read in Isa. 8.21. They in their distress shall curse
the Lord and their King, and look upward: This is the frame of carnal and
wicked hearts. And the Reason is,

Sam. 6.9. If he go up the way of his own coast to Bethshemesh, then he has
done us this evil, but if not, then we shall know it was but some chance that
happened to us: They neither see the hand of God that smites them, nor their
own desert that provokes the Lord thus to smite them; and so, they repent not
to give him glory, but blaspheme him. And a second Reason is,

Isa. 26.9, 10, 11. But they will not behold the majesty of the Lord; When thy
hand is lifted up, they will not see it, but they shall see it, and be ashamed,
etc. They will not see it a good while, that either their own sin has brought
this judgment, or that it is a just hand of God upon them, they will not see
such things as these. So you see the Reasons of the point; not to speak of what
high reasons might be given, of Gods heavy vengeance upon men's unprofitablenes
under the hands of God, they grow worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13. That the Lord
leaves them to hardness of heart, and gives them up to themselves to obstinate
their spirits, as Pharaoh, that they will exalt themselves against him; and
though you bray a fool in a mortar, yet his folly will not depart from him. The
Use of the Point is thus much;

Sun in the firmament, be they Civil Magistrates in their sphaere, in highest
place; or take it as the Popish Prelacie do, they will be highest in both
kinds, be it as it will be, as the common people have been visited with
judgment, their Religion corrupt, and Priests and Jesuits plagued, and the
Lord has begun to plague their lights in this world, and Church lights too: So
make account of this, forasmuch as they repent not to give God glory, but break
forth to greater wrath, and outrage against the Lord and his Church, and
servants, and secret ones, what will the end of all this be? Never did any man
strive against God, and prospered; what, under the mighty hand of God, under
the Vials of Gods wrath, and still blaspheme the name of God, and still hope to
prosper? Verily you may write upon it, God will wound the head of his enemies,
and the hairy scalp of such as go on still in their wickedness, Psalm. 68.21.
Let them look to it, the Lord has begun to pour out his wrath, and one Vial
has not done when another begins to work, but they are pouring upon the common
people, and upon Priests and Jesuits, and will be more and more, and so shall
both the house of Austria, and the Pope himself, in their supremacy and lordly
authority; and howsoever they may have some refreshing, and succor, and supply
in their declining state, yet as their apostacies and backslidings are
perpetual, as the Text says they are, seeing they repent not to give God
glory, the Lord has set it down, (and the Scripture must be fulfilled) they
will go on in their rage and blasphemy against the God of Israel, and what
will the issue of that be? Truly, if men prosper in hardness of heart and
blasphemy, then let Pharaoh prosper of old, and let all wicked States prosper;
but the Lord sent judgment upon judgment, upon Pharaoh, first upon the
waters, and then upon the fruits of the field, at length he came to Murrain of
the Beasts, and then a plague upon their firstborn; and when that served not,
then the wrath of God came upon the red Sea, and overwhelmed them all: This is
Gods manner of dealing, and let the Imperial State, and all blasphemers know
it, that they shall not prosper in stouting it out against the Lord, but
(believe it) as they have begun to fall before reformed Churches, so they shall
surely fall: As it was told Haman in Ester 6.13. If this Mordecai be of the
seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun to fall, thou shall not prevail,
but shall surely fall before him: So fall they will, and in falling they shall
fall, and yet more and more fall, till the Lord has cut them off, root and
branch: there is more judgments, you shall read of a further Vial upon the
throne of the Beast, and upon the air, and then Babylon is fallen, it is not
long till then, there is but three Vials more, and whether some of them be not
yet begun to be poured out, it is not yet so clear: Let them know it for their
terror, and we for our comfort, the Lord will go on in destroying to destroy
them. It is a speech the Lord often uses, in Isaiah 9.12, 13, 14. Yet for all
this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still: Why?
For the people turn not to him that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord
of hoasts; and when they do not turn to him, then the hand of the Lord is not
drawn back, but stretched out still: that is the constant course of Gods
providence, as the people turn not to him that smites them, so the Lord will go
on, and cut off head and tail, branch and rush in one day, ancient, honorable,
he is the head; and the Prophet that teaches lies, he is the tail, etc.

For a second Use of this Point,

This may serve to teach us, that the Lord is the chief Governor, Is there any
evil in the City, which the Lord has not done? Amos 3.6. If a man were to
speak to Christian Princes in other parts, how might a man call upon them, to
beware of timerousnesse, and fear, in provoking the displeasure of the house of
Austria, or of the Pope? For the wrath of God is gone out against that State,
and the Pope, and the Lord has power over these plagues: Why should we fear
all the power of the house of Austria, or Papal thunderbolts, when the Lord
has you under his hand, when he means to go on plaguing to plague? Shall men
underprop this rotten building which the Lord intends to destroy? This cursed
fabric which the Lord will ruinate? Do you think to strengthen your selves by
them, when they are not able to help themselves? No, it is a time of Gods
plague; and therefore it is a warning and Trumpet to all Christian nations, and
to us, do not think if we shall not yield to this and that of Antichrist, then
Churches and Magistrates shall never subsist, fear it not; I tell you, all the
States that cleave to Popery, shall fall with Popery, if they continue in it:
Indeed if the Lord rescue and redeem them with a mighty hand, and bow their
power and Crown, to comply with the Lord Jesus and his people, they may save
themselves and their Kingdoms; but otherwise it is not possible for them to
prosper, in maintaining this ruinous Babylon that hastens to destruction. The
Lords plagues they are, and it is not all the power of men, or Princes, no nor
of Angels in heaven, nor devils in hell, that can take off the plagues that God
has set on.

Thirdly, it teaches us what is the duty of all the sons of men Peter? Humble
your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in
due time, 1 Pet. 5.6. Has the Lord begun to smite the common state, and it may
be the body of the country, in that which is the sinews of trading, in the
scarcities of moneys? Brethren do you think it is not a judgment of God? Is
not the silver and gold his? and has he it not for this state as well as for
others, if we had not some ways provoked him? Did he not take it away from
them in Hagge, when they neglected Temple work? And did not he say, The silver
and gold is mine, 1 Hag. 6. and 2 Hag. 6.7, 8? Has not the Lord blasted us,
because we grew cold hearted, and formal in Church Fellowship, and confident,
and warm, and bold-hearted in matters pertaining to our selves and to the
world, and in matters that tended only to tumult? What then? In such a case
marvel not, if the Lord send forth a Vial of his wrath upon us, and curse our
blessings, that that which within these 4, or 5, years was but a drug, and men
would not labor for money, they would have corn, and be glad of it, they
would have provisions. Now provisions are a drug, Beef and Butter, it is not
current now, men will give no money for it, they will not part with it: Is it
not a Vial of his wrath, or at least a twig of his rod? And is it not meet now
to repent, and give him glory, that has power over this plague, that we be not
senseless, and obdurate? And does not the Lord say he will curse our blessings,
he says so to Ministers, and will any be free? Will any prosper when they lay
not Gods hand to heart, but make a trifling business of it? but make account
the Lord calls men to serious consideration of it.

To make an end, Let this be the last Use.

They gave not glory to God that has power over these plagues; they are Gods
plagues, and he has power to send them, and we see his hand in them, his
plagues they are, and that is the first thing in repentance, to see it is the
hand of God in this kind, and that kind, in any kind that may befall us, Give
God the glory of his sovereignty, who has sent these plagues, and this will
help us to repentance.

2. Give him the glory of his Justice, that has sent them most justly for his
part, and on our part most deservedly: Neh. 9.33. The faithful in Israel say,
Thou art just in all that is come up n us, we have dealt wickedly, and thou
have done righteously. Thus repentance gives God the glory of his Justice, as
well as of his Sovereignty: we have provoked God to plague us in this or that
kind, whether I speak to public States or private persons, if any evil lies
upon us, it is the hand of God, whether it come for one end or other, and
(believe it) it is for us to give him the glory of his justice, as well as of
his sovereignty: We have given him just cause by our worldly mindedness, by
our estrangement from the Lord, and spiritual work, and falling short of our
spiritual aims and ends: we cut short our growth in Christianity, and the
Lord cuts short our outward estate: Do you think a Christians outward estate
shall prosper, when his inward estate grows leaner and leaner? And as you give
him the glory of his justice and sovereignty. So,

3. Give him the glory of his truth, which these wicked persons would not give
him the glory of: To acknowledge their religion was a dead sea, like Mare
mortuum, to acknowledge the bloudthirstinesse of their Priests and Jesuits,
they shall drink blood therefore, they would not acknowledge reformation, but
blasphemed it as heretical innovation, and therefore the Lord had poured a
vial upon their great lights in Church and Commonwealth, and will do it more
and more till they be consumed; they give not God the glory of his truth: As
Ioshuah said to Achan. Josh. 7.19 My son give glory to God, and tell me truly
what thou have done: And he told him truly, there was some hope of some seed of
repentance; and it is not possible a man should truly repent before God, in
confessing what has been wickedly done, if he denies any thing that his
conscience tells him is truth: Nay, some give God the glory, and tell me now
what thou have done? If a man hide it under his tongue, it is not possible he
should repent, why? for he cannot give God glory, he gives him not the glory of
his truth, and then there is no repentance. And,

4. What does repentance give God the glory of? as of his sovereignty, and
justice, and truth, in making humble confession of it where we are called, if
we have just occasion; so the Lord requires that we should give him the glory
of his mercy and grace, that we look for all our pardon and mercy in the blood
of the Lord Jesus, and in unfeigned seeking after fellowship with him,
believing on his grace, confessing what is sinful, turning from our evil
ways, laying hold of eternal life, and of every gift of the Spirit, that
might quicken us in every spiritual duty, that we might depend upon his grace
for pardon, and healing of our bottomless depth of unbeleefe for the changing
of our hearts, and quickening of our spirits; this gives God the glory of his
grace, thus repentance does: In the 130. Psalm. 3, 4. If thou Lord should
mark iniquity, who then should stand? There they give him the glory of his
justice; but there is pardon with thee that thou may be feared, there they
give him the glory of his pardoning mercy; thus ought all to do, that
unfaignedly desire to walk in the serious practice and use of repentance: You
never repent kindly whiles a spirit of bondage lies upon you, and makes you
sensible of the wrath of God and hell, that alone will never bring forth kindly
repentance, but when the Lord helps us to give him the glory of his power, that
he swayes and rules in all, and that we give him the glory of his justice,
that has righteously plagued us, and the glory of his truth to confess truly
what is done amiss, and the glory of his grace to pardon sin, and heal the
soul, this is repentance, and without this there is no repentance: It is a
wonder to see when people provoke God and the Church, how little able they are
to give God glory, but take glory to themselves still, it was thus and thus,
and might have been interpreted thus and thus, it is a wonder to see how little
they give God the glory, our own glory lies so near us: And therefore it
behooves us, as we desire sincerity, to repent; so to make conscience of giving
him glory, let all run in that stream, that we acknowledge his justice, and
truth, and mercy, and grace, and look up to him for receiving from him whatever
is of his mercy and grace needful for us, and then we shall avoid those
plagues and judgments which are threatened or gone forth against us, and shall
recover from under Gods hand, like gold out of the fire.

THE FIFTH VIAL.
REVEL. 16.10, 11. And the fifth Angel poured out his Vial upon the seat of
the Beast] or, as the word is in the Original, the Thrones and his Kingdom
was full of darkness, and they gnawed their Tongues for pain, And blasphemed
the God of Heaven because of their pains, and their sores, and repented not of
their deeds.
IN these words you have described the pouring out of the Vial of the fifth
Angel, and described it is,

First by the subject on which it was [On the throne of the Beast.]

Secondly by the effect of it, which is

1. Proper and primary [His Kingdom was thereby darkened]

2. The secondary and accidental events were three.

1. Anguish and indignation^ They gnawed their Tounges for pain.] 2. Blasphemy
[They blasphemed the God of Heaven.] 3. Impenitency [They repented not of their
deeds.
This Scripture and the interpretation of it, is the more difficult, because it
is generally conceived that the execution of Gods judgments upon the Beast,
has not yet gone beyond the pouring out of the fourth Vial, therefore
conjectures about it, will be the more difficult, and it may be more
uncertain: yet because the Scripture in it self is not dark, how dark so
ever we may be in our apprehensions: The Kingdom of the Beast is dark, but
not the Kingdom of Christ. And the Lord has promised a gracious blessing upon
all that read, and hear the words of this prophecy, Chap. 1. verse 3. so that
by the comparing of one part of this prophecy with another, and observing the
due poise of every word in his place, with holy fear and reverence, the Lord
is wont to lead his people into truth, according to the promise made to the
Apostle, John 16.13. (which is fulfilled to every successor of theirs in some
measure) Let us therefore go on in the fear of God to consider of these
things.

First the difficulty chiefly lies in opening the subject whereon this Vial
will be powered, for open that, and the rest will be clear. The seat of the
Beast is generally taken for the City of Rome, and it is confirmed from the
like speech, Rev. 13.2. Where the Dragon gave the Beast his power, and his
seat, (or throne) and great authority, and therefore they gather from hence the
ruin of Rome, applying also hereunto some prophecies of the Sibills, who in
their Language tell us thus much, that Rome shall then be desolate, and be as
if it had never been a state. Now though we have much cause to glorify God for
the labors of such of his servants as have give^ that exposition, yet I must
confess I cannot rest satisfied with that interpretation: for I find it
clear in the sequel of this Chapter, that Babylon (which is doubtless meant
of Rome [As throughout the seventeenth Chapter it is also] is said to come up
into Remembrance before God in the 19. verse of this Chapter, And that is in
the pouring out the seventh Vial; which implies that before, it came not up
in remembrance before God in point of actual punishment, for things are said
to come up into ^^^^^brance before God, when he takes in hand either to show
mercy to them, or to power out wrath upon them, a sign that the Vial and
fierceness of his wrath was not yet powered out upon Rome: besides it is
expressed in this Text, that upon the pouring out of this Vial, the Kingdom
of the beast was darkened, but there is a great difference between darkning,
and destroying; Egypt was darkened, before Pharoh was destroyed, or the body of
Egypt overwhelmed in the red Sea. Upon these grounds therefore I cannot
conceive that it is meant of Rome, but of something else, which in Scripture is
to be understood by [Throne] sometimes it is put for that form of government
and authority which any person or state sitting on that throne does administer,
as it is said of Christ, that his throne is a throne of Righteousness, and
that is not so much spoken of the place where he governs, as of the
government it self, so in the 89 Psalm 29. and 36, 37. I will make his throne
as the days of Heaven, and again his throne shall be as the Sun before me;
It shall be established for ever as the Moon, and in Psalm 122.5. Thrones of
judgment are distinguished from the thrones of the house of David, to wit,
such as David has erected: so by the like proposition it is here meant of that
form of government, which the beast exercises in the Church both
subjectively, that which himself does occupy over the Churches subject to him,
and effectively, that which proceeds from him, and is exercised by others in
other Churches according to the frame and form of government received from
him, and that is such a peerless kind of government, as wherein one alone
does rule; for a throne is such a kind of seat wherein one of peerless
authority does govern; as a Monarch in his own Dominion.

Indeed the universal supremacy of the Pope both in spiritual and temporal
things, whereby he challenges transcendent authority over all Kings and
Princes, that was violated by the fourth Vial of these Angels: but yet still
here is another throne which yet hitherto remains unplagued, and that is his
singular sole authority, and monarchical government, whereby he sits chief
and only Judge in Ecclesiastical causes in his own jurisdiction, and like
unto which he has established the government of all National, Provincial and
Diocesan Churches, and so this interpretation does very fitly suit with the
proper effect of the pouring out of this Vial expressed in the Text [his
Kingdom was darkened] (...); and what kind of government is that? such as
wherein one does reign, as they are wont to say there must be but (...), One
Prince in a state: this form of government himself does exercise still in his
own jurisdiction inviolately, and this he has brought into all national and
Provincial and Diocesan Churches in the world where popery has prevailed; and
which still continues in some Protestant Churches, where though the Doctrine,
and worship of Popery be abolished, and the transcendent supremacy of his
government, yet the form of his government, monarchical, or sole and singular
government by one, that is Episcopacy, is still continued. Who is then the
fifth Angel that has powered out his Vial upon this peerless government the
Episcopacy? Though it be said this Vial is not yet powered out, and though it
happily was not powered out with the writings of such men (who so conceived) were
under their hands: yet Beza, and Cartwright did sprinkle some drops of this
Vial upon this government, though the power and strength of the Episcopacy in
their time was such as drunk them up like the dry Earth, that drinks in the
rain; yet will not God be so put off from his word, he powers out more drops
upon them by holy Baines his trial of Diocesan government, and godly learned
Parkers Ecclesiastical Polity, but these were drops: you now see whole Vialls
full of wrath powered out by the whole Church of Scotland, who have engaged
themselves, and their state for ever in this quarrel, and have been carried
along herein, not in a way of popular tumult, but with such wisdom, courage,
judgment and Piety, that you may see and say that it is not a Vial powered out
by an unadvised multitude, but by an Angel of God, by the Heavenly Ministers
of his wrath.

It has been taken in hand with serious and deep and general humiliation,
judging themselves for their toleration of such a government amongst
themselves, and so seconded in their constant fruits of Reformation, as that
their very adversaries stand amazed to behold them, and these are not drops
alone, but like unto great ground showers which grow unto a flood and overflow
all for they have turned away the flood of superstition in their own Country,
by the Rivers of the power of God, and his Evangelicall truth, so now they have
also flowed into England, insomuch that a great many of the Commons of England
and many noble Peers, do begin to say that Episcopacy is an antichristian
frame and form, which he brought in, and does still countenance and animate,
and while it continues, popery will not fall: whereupon, It has come to pass
(if your intelligences fail not) that many sad considerations have been taken
up in England, whether it be not best to abandon all such thrones: men will not
fight for the defense of these thrones, nor draw their purses to maintain such
war, but men begin generally to be taught of God, that this is not the form
of the government of Jesus Christ. Nor do I know that any of the former Vialls
have been powered out by any men, whose loins have been more gert with truth,
and whose clothing has been more pure, and white, then these servants of God
have been gert, and clothed withal. These things being thus understood, take
you the sequel, and it will easily interpret it self; for does not hereby the
Kingdom of the beast (his monarchical form of Church government) grow full
of darkness? Is not Episcopacy now (...)? the very word of the Text, as it
were alluding to the Nation that darkeneth it? Episcopal government does it
not grow dark? yea full of darkness? Is it not scotized, darkened and
beclouded with a Scottish mist? so as that it grows base and vile, not only
in the eyes of godly, wise, and judicious Divines, but in the eyes of good
people; nor of godly people alone, but of many civil, and orderly minds:
mervaile not therefore if it be said that the Kingdom of the beast (that is,
this form of his government be full of darkness: And has not this
darkness procured other secondary effects? do they not gnaw their tongues
for very indignation, what do you think of the chief Church governors of
Scotland? and some of the chief of that order in England, and their chief
companions (if your reports be true) do they not get themselves into dark
corners?

2. And for the second event [They blasphemed the God of Heaven] have you not
heard that the pouring out of this Vial has been by them accounted nothing
else but Rebellion against the state of the Kingdom? have they not taxed that
(which is the reviving of the Church and Common wealth) to be the ruin of both?

And for the third event [They repented not of their deeds] have they no cause
think you to repent of all their oppressions and tyrannies over godly men,
through many ages? for that their governments have been formidable to none but
the peaceable men of the Land: if it be a drunkard or some base fellow that
comes to their Courts, they say to him, what do thou here thou simple
fellow? pay thy fees, and be gone: but for the people of God, nothing will
satisfy but their extirpation from their Ministry, livings and dwellings;
they shall not be allowed to breath in the free air, if any prison in the
Country will hold them. And is it not to be repented of the invasions of the
liberties of Church, and of civil liberties which have been by some of them
desperately impeached, so as that neither subject nor Prince shall know what
belongs to either of them; and some of the throne of the beast will tell you,
that between Prince and subject there is no meum, and tuum, but the Prince may
say omne meum, are not these things to be repented of? And is there no
superstition to be repented of? And have they repented of these things? does
any semblance of repentance appear? have they not still gone an end, even
while this Vial has been in pouring out to put new inventions upon Gods
people? have they not imposed an Antichristian Oath, that this is the only
government, and that they neither do acknowledge nor ever will acknowledge any
other, and is not this a blasphemy against the name and Crown of Christ Jesus?
and yet they repent not of these deeds: therefore they have said not much
amiss, that said that all the mischiefs that have sprung up in any state in
the World, where these thrones have been set up, have sprung from them that
sat upon these thrones. Thus you see what is the true and simple meaning of
these words, and I durst not have spoken it, but that no other interpretation
will well abide by the words of the Text. Babylon will not abide it, for that
comes up into remembrance in the seventh Vial; do but consider all things
together, and weigh the words of the Text well with what goes before, and with
what will follow after by the help of God, and you shall find this to be the
true meaning. Nevertheless though these former and late attempts against
Episcopacy may be the beginning of this Vial, and some good measure also of
the pouring it forth, you may believe that it will not rest here, but as Moses
said Deuteronomy. 32.4. Perfect is the work of God, and as the Lord spoke concerning
Eli. 1 Samuel 3.12. When I begin, I will also make an end, so (reserving all due
honor unto those interpreters who rest from their labors and their works do
follow them) I do conceive, and believe, that this Vial will go on from our
native Country to all the Catholics Countries round about them, until it
come unto the very gates of Rome it self. In the mean time all these Vialls
are at work, and one is not ended when another is begun, though that which
most excels is most in observation, and the pouring out thereof, is the
work which the Lord calls men principally to attend upon, and wherein God
has manifested his presence most, and will go on still to manifest more of the
presence of his wrath unto other states: now the points that arise from the
words are two.

That form of government, wherein one by sole and singular Vialls upon the
Earth: Verse 1. Not as Earth is opposed to other elements, but as it is opposed
to Heaven: so that as their Earth is earthly, so is their Sea, and their
Rivers, and Fountains, and their Sun: and this throne is but an earthly
throne, you see no such throne in the Tabernacle of the Testimony opened in
Heaven: so far as Churches are Heavenly, these thrones are not set up in
them: for this is it which John reprooveth (3. Io. 9.) in Diotrephes, that he
loves to be a primate and would not regard a letter from John himself though
an Apostle; and for the brethren he would not receive them himself, and forbad
them that would, and cast them out of the Church, the true spirit of an earthly
Primate, for they savor of earthly ambition and covetousness, love Balaams
wages, they stick not to buy their places for silver, care not what they give
for them, but having gotten them with buying, they must maintain them by
selling, they must sell Ordinations and Absolutions, and Dispensations, and
must be maintained by the benevolences of their obedient Clergy, and in truth
the sum of the matter is, quid mihi dabis? and what is all this but earthly
bravery, if ever you have been at their thrones (though it were but the
thrones of their chauncellors and Officialls) you shall see nothing but that
which savoureth of the Earth, earthly pride, or pleasure or Covetousness, I
am, (and have less cause then many others from my last Diocesan, who being
more learned, was more ingenuous and favorable then many others) not wont to
speak these things, yet when the necessity of clearing my Text leads me to
them, I may not without unfaithfullnesse to God and his Church, keep silence,
we came not hither to speak hardly of other Churches: but when the Word of God
calls for it, we should be wickedly silent if we should not let the people
know, what the mercy and blessing is, which we do enjoy, and what we are
delivered from.

If thy brother offend thee, go and tell the Church, and must the offense stay
till all the world be gathered together; or if it were meant of one Diocesan or
provincial Church, when will they meet? therefore the Church that must hear
al offenses is the Church of a particular Congregation, which may all of them
meet together in one place (1 Cor. 14.23.) and then though offenses come
thick, they may all be orderly heard and remooved. And consider moreover (that
which further cleares up this first ground) what variety of officers God has
given to this Church, not many Parishes to one Bishop, but many Bishops to one
Church, so as that Paul writteth to the Saints at Philippi, with the Bishops
and Deacons, Phil. 1.1. And he sends for the Elders of the Church of Ephesus
Acts 20.17. Whom he calls Bishops Verse 28. And they were more then one in
every Church, according to Acts 14.23. They ordained them Elders in every
Church, directly contrary to the practice of the Lord Bishops of these days;
These things we speak, that the people may know we set forth no new
inventions, though it be true that there is a newness in all the blessings of
the new Testament, whereas all the inventions of men wax old as does a garment,
and there is no new thing under the sun, as touching men's inventions, but
they will grow old and vanish away, as all Diocesin Churches will do, which
the Lord has not instituted: Though indeed in the old Common wealth of Israel
the Church was National, and there was but one high Priest who was a type of
Christ, but now Christ is come he has delivered all his counsel to his 12.
Apostles, and they have left the ordering of his Church to some pastors, and
some teachers and some ruling Elders, and some Deacons. But besides these the
Gospel knows no other.

The second ground is taken from the kind of power which But he has in his
Word prohibited both these. Math. 20.25, 26, 27. The Princes of the Gentiles
exercise dominion over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon
them, but it shall not be so amongst you, but whosoever will be great amongst
you let him be your Minister, and whosoever will be chief amongst you let him
be your servant. Amongst the Officers of Christ honor is carried by the most
labor, and not by most outward splendour: But those that sit upon the throne of
of the Beast do not labor in any kind of government but that, which is
merely antichristian, to foment sin and let loose the reins of all
profaneness: neither do the officers which Christ has set in his Church reach
after outward honor, but the chief of them make themselves equal with them
of the lower sort, as Peter (though an Apostle) when he writes to the Elders
styles himself a fellow Elder 1. Pet. 5.1. and exhorts them to feed the
flock of God, not as Lords over Gods heritage, but being examples to the flock;
so the Apostle in his second and third Epistle styles himself an Elder, so
far is he from affecting Lordly authority: by all which we may see that all
this kind of Lordly, and stately government is no way compatible to that
government, which Christ has instituted in his Church.

The third reason is taken from that authority which the Lord It is true, the
Lord has given them power over the Church, let the Elders that rule well be
counted worthy of double honor, etc. 1 Timothy 5.17. A power they have to call
the Church together, as the Apostles did for the choice of Deacons, Acts 6.2.
And to open the doors of speech, and shut the doors of silence, Act. 13.15. A
power they have also to dismiss the assembly as they see cause, for they that
begin they also make an end, and send away the people with a blessing, Number.
6.24, 25, 26. Power they have to direct, to admonish privately, publicly, to
rebuke with all authority Tit. 2.15. And sundry branches of rule may be deduced
out of these: yet as true it is also that the Lord has given power to the
Church over their Rulers, as first to choose them, they ordained them Elders by
lifting up their hands, Acts 14.23. And when there was an Apostle to be chosen
in Judas his room, they out of an 120 persons chose two men, and presented
them to the Lord, Acts 1.23. Secondly they have power to send them forth about
the Churches service, as they sent Paul and Barnabas to Jerusalem, Acts 15.2.
And without controversy he that sends is greater then he whom he sends,
Ioh, 13.16. Secondly they have power to admonish them, if they do offend, say
to Archippus, take heed to they Ministry, etc. Col. 4.17. And the Church
contended with Peter for eating with the heathen, Acts 11.2, 3. And had he not
given them the better answer, they would have proceeded against him: These
things then laid together, what a beastly power is that of the Church of Rome,
and of such as imitate them, as usurp authority, and judgment over so many
Churches, and will be judged by none?

John has been dead above 1500 years, he dyed with the end of the first
hundred years after Christ, but the word spoken by him dyed not with him,
according to what we read Zach. 1.5, 6. Your fathers where are they? and the
Prophets do they live for ever? but my words and my statutes which I commanded
my servants the prophets, did they not take hold of your Fathers? So (though
John be dead) whatsoever John has spoken with his mouth he will fulfill with
his hand, and will not leave till he has finished all the words that are
written in this book. And what marveilous stay in this to the souls of those
that build their faith upon the word of God: He will ever be mindful of his
Covenant, Psalm 111.5. He did let none of the words of Samuel fall to the
ground. 1 Samuel 3.19. He will not leave fulfilling, to fulfill until he has
fulfilled all, and then Christ will come to gather his people to himself,
therefore let not your hearts fail, because God remains faithful and whether
Zachary believe or no, the Lord will fulfill his Word, Luke 1.20.

The second use may be, to take off that amazement which has Scots in our
native Country, since the world began was it never known (for there are no
Histories of note but are commonly known) such a pattern as this, that ever a
whole Nation did rise to take up such a quarrel, with so much justice, wisdom
and piety, a thing to be wondered at, that a whole Nation should carry such a
matter in such a way: many things have been done in Holland, in Geneva, for
reformation, but with much more tumult, which when the Papists have objected,
our Divines have been wont to answer, that they do not excuse men's thrusting
in their own weaknesses into Gods Work: but wonder not overmuch if you find
it otherwise in this matter, for the Angels of God are their guides, so that
their foot shall not swell, but they shall keep their ranks, and places, and
remember that they are subjects through they carry their swords in their hands.
Just care is taken that there be no robbery nor pilfering, no oppressions, no
violation of any man's bed, nothing taken up but it shall be duly paid for, and
yet the proceeding made with such constancy, that (in a way of humility) the
end must be attained, or else there will be no place in the conclusion. These
are great things: but if men take them in hand that are girded with golden
girdles, when their Bibles go along with them, when Fasting and Prayers steer
along their course, you need not much wonder in such a Case.

Thirdly, this may serve to teach us, that surely this work will Vial of Gods
wrath in his Hand, and he will not be beaten off; though some instruments may
quail, yet will he still raise up more in their stead till those plantations be
rooted out, according to the word of Christ, Mat. 15.15. Every plant which mine
heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up. In vain therefore is it
for men to uphold such sandy buildings, which will in the end be shaken down;
whatsoever dammes men may make to uphold the Episcopacy, it will befall unto
them as when men make dammes to stop water courses, others come and cast in
some small quantity of quicksilver, or Aquafortis, which eats such holes
through the stones that it will soon issue out the water, so this Aqua
omnipotentis, the vialls of the wrath of God will at last consume and wast all
things whatsoever stand up against them.

rejoice with trembling, for our great liberties, and pray that God will never
leave, until he have rooted out not only the throne of the Beast, but the
Beast himself, that the world may never more be pestered with them.

Now from the effects that follow upon the pouring out of this Vial we may
observe this second note.

Vial of Gods wrath upon the throne of the Beast, their place, the Pope
himself and the rest of their Prelates, and all their favorites and followers
have not turned to God by Repentance, but have broken forth against him in
indignation and blasphemy. His Kingdom was full of darkness, but what profit
have they made of it? they gnawed their tongues through vexation, rage, and
malignity of spirit against the Lords holy providence, and the succesfull
proceedings of these holy Angels, they blasphemed the God of Heaven, and look
at reformation, as Rebellion, as if it were the dissolution of al goodness,
and at length they will say, that they fear Christ himself is become a
Puritan, and have they repented of their tyrannies, and usurpations over
Ministers and over Churches? but they have broken forth still more, and more
against the Lord, his servants and Churches, and what more may come forth I
know not, judge you what they speak in secret, when they write such things as
these openly: we speak of the generality of Prelates, not of some to whom God
has given a better spirit, then the spirit of the throne they sit upon.

Rev. 15.11. The very dreggs and sediments of the wrath of God; and there is no
grace of Repentance laid up in them, for the wrath of God is come upon them to
the uttermost, wonder not therefore if you do not hear of many Bishops or
Pariters repentance though God may bring some of them to Repentance, yet the
body and state of them is not like to repent, but to belch out blasphemings
against the Lord.

Because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved,
therefore does God give them up to the efficacy of delusions, that they should
believe a lie; that they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness; those that preached the truth and Doctrines
of Repentance, and reformation, they branded them with the name of Puritans,
they hated them with a perfect hatred, they loved not blessing therefore it is
far from them, it is the nature and common fashion of superstition to leave men
besotted in their own Religion.

This may teach us to look at it, as a ground of Faith, that the Amos says
Chap. 3.5. Shall one take up a snare from the Earth, and have taken nothing at
all? noe, the Lord will either subdue their spirits to unfeigned Repentance, or
else he will go on insnaring to ensnare them till he have swept them like
doung from the face of the Earth, For when Israel turns not to him that
smites him, then is not his anger turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still, Isai 9.12.13 Therefore men cannot more dishonor nor oppose the Lord
then by seeking to underprop this sandy building.

The Second one of this point may be to teach us all in the fear

THE SIXTH VIAL.
REVEL. 16.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. And the sixth Angel powered out his Vial upon
the great River Euphrates, and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of
the Kings of the East might be prepared, etc.
IN these verses the pouring out of the Vial of the sixth Angel is described.

Euphrates, which is amplifyed by the adjunct of greatness, [The great River
Euphrates.]



1. First the water thereof was dried up, and that is amplifyed by the end
which God aimed at in it [That the way of the Kings of the East might be
prepared.]

2. Secondly, the warrelike preparations unto a great battle; and those are
described,

1. By the principal commanders in that preparation, and war, which are said
to be three [The Devil, the Beast, and the false Prophet.]

2. By the instruments, and Ministers of it, who are certain spirits, and they
are described many ways, as,

1. By their nature and quality [Vncleane spirits.] 2. By their number [three.]
3. By, by their resemblance [Like Froggs.] 4. By their original descent, which
is threefold, [They come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth
of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet. And that descent is
amplifyed by the Cause of it, for they are the spirits of Devils. 5. They are
described by their effects, which are threefold. 1. They work miracles. 2.
They go forth to the Kings of the Earth, and of the world, to gather them to
the battle of that great Day of God Almighty, Ver. 14. 3. They are efficacious
and successful herein, they do gather them together into a place called in
the Hebrew tongue Armageddon. Ve. 16.

3. These warlike preparations are described by the watchword which the God of
Israel gives unto his own troops, and that is a word of watchfulness,
behold I come as a thief, blessed is he that watches and keeps his
garments, least he walk naked, and they see his shame. Thus stands the Text.

Now for the meaning of it: It is the more dark, because it is, (though not
altogether) yet in a great part to come; and such as shall seriously consider
what is the meaning shall (happily) find it no small difficulty to satisfy
themselves, and much more to satisfy others, yet (by the help of God) let us
endeavor to open some such part of the words, as we may be likely to finish at
this time. First what is meant by the river Euphrates? Secondly, who are the
Angels that power out this Vial upon this river? Thirdly, what is the drying
up of this river? Fourthly, who are these Kings of the East? These things
contain the principal difficulties in the parts of this Vial, other things
may more easily be opened, if these things be premised and cleared.

1. What is meant by the great river Euphrates: Some of our host interpreters
(to whom God has given most light in these spiritual mysteries) do
understand it, properly for the river that did run along by the walls of old
Babylon in Chaldea, which made the City impregnable, and yet by the stratagem
of Cyrus was dried up, by turning the Course of the streams to run in other
channels, whereby the channel before the City was dried up; and the reeds
burnt by the Soldiers, and the City sacked when as Belshazzar was quaffing in
the vessels of the Temple: this was foretold by Jeremy Chap 50.38. A drought is
upon her waters, and they shall be dried up, for it is the Land of graven
Images, and they are mad upon their Idols. And Ier. 51.31, 32. One post shall
run to meet another, and one messenger to meet another, to show the King of
Babylon that his City is taken at an end, and that the passages are stopped,
and the reeds they have burnt with fire, etc. Now they that interpret
Euphrates to be the same river, do understand that when God calls home his
ancient people, he will dry up Euphrates before them, so that they may assault
the Turkish monarchy, and recover their ancient inheritance out of his hand.
The reason which they give of it is, 1. Because they read of no Nation for whom
God dried up any rivers but only for the Israelites for whom he dried up the
red Sea, and the waters of Jordan. 2. They say it has been anciently foretold
by the Prophet Ier. 44.27. and 51.10. and 63.11. In all which places God is
described to have dried up the waters, and rivers for them, that as a pledge of
the like power to be manifested for them hereafter. 3. (Say they) the prophet
Isay ( Chap 59.20. alleged by the Apostle Paul Romans 11.26.) foretells the
calling of the Jews. and if this Vial speak not of their calling, it is
spoken of no where in this book, which is not credible.

Now although their reasons are not to be slighted, yet they do not seem to
carry force enough to understand Euphrates literally, for Gods Hand may as well
be seen in drying up the metaphorical rivers; Besides, Isay 44.27. Does
properly speak of Gods drying up the river Euphrates before Cyrus, which was
then to come, but is not meant of this drying up in the Text, which is to be
many hundred years after, and for the two other places mentioned, Isay 51.10.
and 63.11. They only recount what God had done for their Fathers of old,
whereupon they desire that he would not forsake them now, and so they are
reported of as ancient passages of his power for them, but not as promises what
he would do for them afterward: Save only as encouragements to their Faith,
to expect great deliverances from the same hand.

And for the third reason: It is not necessary that it should be foretold in
this Vial, or else not foretold in this book: for the whole 21, and 22
Chapters of this book do hold it forth, which are events of the pouring forth
of the seventh Vial, and not of this sixth.

If then it be not meant of the natural river, Euphrates, of what then may it
be understood? There are some that understand it of something that is unto
Rome, as Euphrates was to old Babylon, I shall tell you what I most incline
unto, as far as the Text will permit.

Some say it is meant of Nations, and Tongues, and People, and Languages, for
they are sometimes understood by waters: but Euphrates is but one river among
many, and therefore why should it be meant of many Nations that should fall off
from Rome? I cannot well close with that, nor is it necessary that Euphrates
should be a name given to any one Nation, unless it were some one that might
lie near Euphrates, which no Christian Nation does. And others there are that
do understand by it another resemblance, as it was a means to convey much
maintenance to old Babylon, and therefore conceive it means all the revenewes
of the Bishop of Rome whereby he is made rich, and wealthy; now Christian Kings
shall dry up this river Euphrates by taking away this kind of maintenance, and
so by these Kings of the East they understand those Christian Kings, that shall
take away these revenewes; but neither can I well close with that
interpretation; for you may consider it, that all these seven Vialls are
suitable to the seven Trumpets, though they fall out in different ages of that
Church: The seven Trumpets brought in judgments upon Christian Rome, and these
Vialls are the plagues of God upon those very corruptions, which the Trumpets
brought in: Now you shall find that the effect of the sounding of the sixth
Trumpet was, there were four Angels loosed which were bound in the great river
Euphrates, and th^^^ Angels were ready with an Army of two hundred thousand
thousand; and they by general consent of all interpreters, are to be
understood of the four Families of the Turks, that were bound by some
encumbrances at the river Euphrates, but afterward broke fourth upon all
Christendom, and got Constantinople into their hands, and overwhelmed all
Asia. And besides to understand the Kings of the East to be the 10 Christian
Kings will not accord, for they are not seated East from Rome, or if some of
them be, yet nothing near the number of ten. Therefore there be that say, that
the river Euphrates does here mean the Turkish Dominion, and that this river
Euphrates shall be dried up by the power of the Kings of the East, whom they
interpret to be the Jews, (and I would not hinder that) thereby to make way
for the recovery of their Land; And true it is that Euphrates in the first
Trumpet did signify the Turkish power that lay by that river: In like manner it
is expounded of the Assirian monarchy, Isa. 8.7. When the Lord brings upon
them the waters of the river strong and many, even the King of Assyria, and all
his glory, and he shall come over his channels, and overflow all his banks,
because they refused the help which God had given them at home. Now that
Euphrates, and Mesopotamia, which then the Assyrian Monarchy had in dominion,
is at this day possessed by the Turks, and if the Assyrian Monarchy may be
resembled unto it, so may the Turkish also: this comes nearest to the Text,
yet I cannot say that altogether it suteth with the context, nor that this sixth
Angel should be meant of the Jews; And let me give you some reasons, why it
cannot be the Jews, that must power out this Vial, nor that the drying up of
Euphrates can be meant only of the Turkish Monarchy, though they also shall be
plagued by the drying of it up.

Jews appears from what is said, Chap. 15. ult. That no man was able to
enter into the Temple till the seven plagues of the 7 Angels were fulfilled,
therefore the Jews cannot come into the visible Church in the time of this
sixth Vial, till the seventh be powered out. But certain it is these Angels
who power out the Vialls, do all of them come out of the Temple,) and are
clothed in pure, and white linen, having their breasts girded with golden
girdles, therefore they are al professors of the truth, and sincere professors.

Jews is prepared, by the pouring out of this Vial. And therefore they are
not this Angel who power out this Vial, but have a way prepared, only for
their Conversion, as an effect of this Vial.

Vialls are powered are such against which the wrath of God is kindled: for they
are the Vialls of the wrath of God that are powered: and they are all powered
upon the Earth, by which is meant the antichristian state, and such things
therein against which Gods wrath is kindled. Now the anger of God is not
kindled against the river Euphrates more then against any other river, his
wrath falls not upon rivers, though sometimes for man's sake it may; but
Euphrates lies not near to the Roman antichrist, nor to any state subject to
him. What the^ would you say? is it not most likely to hold forth the Turkish
Dominion? which God is angry with? Shall not Christian Princes power out the
wrath of God upon the Turkish Dominions? I would by no means say so: But let
us consider what is the Fountain, and what are the streams of this river,
which did, and do still wash upon the Turkish Dominion, and which are indeed
as Walls, and Bulwarks to the Turkish state? For this Euphrates though it be
not here the Turkish Dominion, yet it is of the same use to them and unto the
Pope, as Euphrates was unto old Babylon, which made glad the same, and conveyed
maintenance unto it. Let us therefore consider what was the Original of the
Turkish Dominion, and you shall find that it sprung from five several
streams. Rev. 9.20.21; where (having described the loosing of the four
Angels, which were bound by the great river Euphrates ver. 14.) and those were
the four Families of the Turks, which at length were swallowed up by the
house of Othoman; He says the rest of the men which were not killed by these
plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not
worship Devils, and Idols of Gold, and Silver, and Brass, and Stone, and of
Wood, which neither can see nor hear, nor walk (this was their Idolatry)
neither repented they of their murders, nor of their Sorceries, nor of their
Fornications, nor of their thefts: So these were the five streams of this
river Euphrates, that gave power to the Turkish Dominion to wit, the
Idolatries, Murders, Sorceries, Fornications, and Thefts of Christendom, for
by reason of these barbarous wickedness of Popish Churches, and states,
cloaked under a face of Religion, God brought upon them a barbarous Nation,
that has a Face of government, and yet knows not well what it means, yet
did not the Papists (whose sins these were) repent of their Idolatries, nor
of their Murders, which they committed upon the souls of men, and upon the
bodies of Gods faithful servants; nor of their Sorceries, of which many of the
Popes themselves were guilty; nor of their Whoredoms, their stews, and
beastly uncleanness; nor of their Thefts, Indulgences, and pardons for money,
by which they dreyned Christendom of their substance.

Now if these were the sins, which the Lord upbraideth Christian Churches for
not repenting of, though this barbarous nation did prevail against them, yet
doubtless these are the walls of the Turkish Dominion, even those streams of
corruption of Religion, which are the maintenance of the Sea of Rome to this
day: thus by admirable wisdom the Lord has expressed his holy Counsel: that
his instruments by drying up these streams of Euphrates, these corruptions of
Religion shall prevail at once both against the Turks, and the Pope together.

2. Who then shall be the Angel, that shall power out this sixth Vial? if they
shall not be the Jews (as before we prooved) then it must needs be some
Christian states, and these are no other then the 10 Christian Kings spoken of
Rev. 17.16, 17. That shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate, and
naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, and so you have all
these expositions fall in together, they will run in the right channel, and
fully reach all that interpreters have sought after.

3. These Christian Kings shall so far fall off from Rome, as that they shall
dry up all her revenewes, when as they shall see and abhor the vanity of
their Images, and Temples, and Monasteries, and the unprofitablenesse of their
expenses, when they shall see the wickedness of their bloody inquisitions, the
unnaturalness of all those murders of Gods blessed servants, and shall see
their witchcrafts, and sorceries; the horrible fornications, and whoredoms of
their stews: and when they shall see that all their devises to get money are so
many thefts, and robberies, (as it is the complaint of Pareus, a German
interpreter, that two parts of the revenewes of the Empire did go to the
Bishop of Rome, and but one third to the Christian Princes) and a world of
work would be to tell you of all their Theeveries in England of old, and other
Christian Kingdoms. Now when these Christian Kings are so far converted unto
God, as that they shall see the wickedness, of all these abuses of Religion,
they will then dry up all these revenewes, then will they suffer no more Image
worship, no more sorceries, nor murders, and when these things are thus
remooved, then is Euphrates dried up, that maintains old Babylon; then is the
Fountain of the Turkish maintenance cut off also: For their rise was by these
corruptions, and they stand, and will stand whilst these corruptions stand, but
if these fall then is the river Euphrates dried up, and a ready way made indeed
for the Kings of the East.

4. Whom the most judicious Interpreters do understand to be the Jews. 1.
Because they are so by Gods calling, Exodus. 19.6. Yea shall be to me a
Kingdom of Priests: And Daniel foretells, that when the Roman Monarchies are
broken in pieces, by the stone cut out of the Mountains without hands, Daniel
2.45. (which is the Lord Jesus:) then the Dominion shall be given to the people
of the Saints of the most high, Daniel 7.27. Therefore they are called Kings of
the East, in the Greek Testament Kings from the rising of the Sun, they
shall have great power, and place when God shall bring them to it; Neither can
any man tell but that some of these Eastern Kings in the East, Judges may be
of the Families of the House of Israel: Sure I am when Joseph was lost, though
his Father thought him to have been utterly cast away, yet when he was found,
he was found to be a great man in Egypt, and the Prophet Ezekel understands
by Joseph, all the 10 Tribes. Ezech. 37.16. And who can tell whether some of
these 10 Tribes may not be found to be great men of the East. And I remember
Iunius an exact Translator, and commentor upon the Bible, says that which is
called the Land of Sinim, Isay 49.12. May more probably be meant of China, and
that the Greek Geographers do call them Sinea'es, not China'es, which if it
be the meaning there may be there many of them; and indeed he that reads
their story shall find sundry memorable things in them that may agree to such
as have sometimes been Gods people; for though they worship other Gods, yet
they have records, that their fathers did not so in ancient times; and it is
reported of them that they make account that those are the best books, that
bring a man to that estate wherein he was first made, which is no gentile-like
principle, and the greatest preferents among them are of their Bookish men: It
may be some of the ten Tribes or buried among them: yet it is not material to
the Text, though if it be true, their Eastern situation will suit well with the
Text: but however it be, the truth is God does by Covenant, account the whole
Nation to be a royal Nation, and promises the Kingdoms of the World to be
their Dominion, and that all enemies God will sweep them off from the face of
the Earth, as it is prophesied at large Rev. 19. Now then if these be the Kings
of the East, you will easily understand the evidence of other things in the
Text: for what is the great stumbling block that hinders the Jews from
closing with Christianity? They abhor Images, and the Iuggling of the Friars,
and Monks, who are not so cunning to devise miracles as the Jew is cunning to
search them out, and to discover the legerdemaine of the Priests in them. To
worship Idols of Gold and Silver is an abomination to them, and so are the rest
of those five streams of wickedness, which uphold the Turkish state: Let
Christian Princes once arise and overthrow Images, repress their murders,
remoove away their Fornications, Thefts, delusions, which they put upon
Christianity, then shall there be a ready way prepared for their conversion,
and no remaining impediment but their own corruption which God will mightily
overpower; if once Euphrates be dried up, down falls Popish, and Turkish
tyranny together, and the Jews shall come forth marching to fight that great
battle of the Lord God Almighty, then shall they see him whom they have
peirced, and be zealous for God, as ever they have been outrageous against
him. And hereby you shall clearly see the agreement between Romans 11.12.15.
(Where it is said, If the casting away of them be the reconcilement of the
World: what shall the receiving of them be but life form the dead?) and 25.
Where he says, blindness in part is happened unto Israel, until the
fulness of the Gentiles be come in; The reconcilement lies here: The
hardness of the Jews lies upon them until the Christian Nations of the
Gentiles, that have with the Pope apostatifed from Christ, be come in, until
they have dried up this River Euphrates, hardness lies upon the Jews, but
then all Israel shall be saved, and after that look for the rest of the
Gentiles that never yet received the Gospel, to come in also: then will God
bring them home mightily, and not till then: Thus you see the meaning of these
words, wherein I have been the more large, because in such Scriptures, the
explication is as much to be attended as the application. Let us shortly touch
upon a note or two.



For this sixth Angel are those 10 Christian Kings spoken of Chap. 17.16. They
shall power out this wrath. Therefore those Christian Kings went a wrong way to
work, when they thought to have overcome the Turk, and regayned the holy
Land; It is strange to see how the Turks prospered against them, and how much
Christian blood Christian Princes spent to no purpose, in fighting against
them? The way had been, first to have dried up all those streams of
Superstition, and Idolatry, and to have thrown down that man of Sin; that
had been the ready way to prevail against the Turk; but the season was not
then come, it is now coming, and how soon it will come I know not, the Lord
knows, but coming it is, as appears by the Context of this Vial with the
former; yea they are in part fulfilled, and like the spear of Joshua they will
not return, nor cease till all the Lords enemies be overcome; The judgments
of God upon their common Catholics; their worship and government, their
secular, and regular Priests, upon the Sun the House of Austria, and the
Popes supremacy, you have heretofore heard the judgments of God upon the
throne of the Beast, which is the Episcopacy, is already begun, as you lately
heard darkened it has been by the going forth of the Scots, and doubtless the
Lord will not let it rest there until it have gone over the Seas, and come to
the Gates of Rome, yea to the Bishop of Rome himself, for after the Lord has
been pleased to scome the Churches from their Hierarchicall monarchy, then the
next news you shall hear of, will be, that Christian Princes begin to see the
lewdness that is found in their worship, the wickedness of their Murders,
Sorceries, Fornications, and Thefts, whereby they robbed their souls, as well
as their bodies, then will they dry up these streams, and so Euphrates (that
did wash this Rome, and the Turkish Empire also) will be dried up: for this
work will go on prospering to prosper, and though it may now and then be
interrupted, yet when it begins, it will also make an end, for the Lord is
Almighty, when he begins he will go on to perfect his work, and he will
not leave unto old Eli root or branch. It is easy with the Lord to advance the
work a little higher, and then the streams of their maintenance will be dried
up by the hatred, wherewith they will hate the whore, and make her desolate,
and naked for the time is approaching.

The reason why the Lord will thus dry up the streams of Euphrates of the
sixth Trumpet the four Angels that were bound in the great river Euphrates
were loosed, and by this means the Turkish Tyranny was brought in. Now by the
pouring out of the Vial of the sixth Angel, the spirits of Christian Princes
are stirred up to dry up the River Euphrates, thereby to make way for the
subversion of the Turk and Pope, and to prepare a way for Gods ancient people
to come in, that there may be no more wrath upon the face of the Earth.

Vial, and will not cease until he have left the Pope neither root nor
branch.

Babylon? dry up Euphrates, and Babylon is taken with a wet finger, as when
they dried up Euphrates, they found it but a work of burning of Reeds, to
take old Babylon. And how shall you overcome the Turks? dry up but the
Fountains of the Corruptions of Religion, and you remoove Antichrist, and make
the Turks easily Conquerable, he will not be defenceable then, whereas now he
stands like a wall of brass, and so will do until these streams of
corruption be dried up: It was a notable practice that which the Lord directed
his people unto Judges 10. When they cried unto the Lord to deliver them from
their enemies that oppressed them: The Lord recounteth the gracious
deliverances which he had showed them; yet (says he Verse 13.) you have
forsaken me and served other Gods; wherefore I will deliver you no more; go
and cry unto the Gods which you have chosen, and let them deliver you in the
time of your Tribulation. When they heard that they confessed their sin and put
away the strange Gods from among them, and served the Lord; and his soul was
grieved for the misery of Israel; then the Lord stirs up the people to
think upon Iephthah, and they easily go through the work of vanquishing the
oppressing Enemies: In like manner bring but in false Doctrine, worship, and
government into the Church, and you bring in monsters of men among you, the
grand seigniours of the World will oppress, and rule over you: On the other
side let the Churches be reformed in France, in England, in Scotland, etc.
Whatsoever other nations there be by that have defiled themselves with Popish
doctrine, worship and government, let them but fall to this work of
reformation, and verily the Lords Soul will be grieved for their misery, that
they are so oppressed with a base Priest and his Clergy, who is in the mean
while nothing else but a dunghill of corruption, and what need have we
earnestly to strive in prayer with God for these things? and as great Nations
are healed so are particular persons also by being purged from their
Idolatries, Fornications, Thefts, and Murders, they are preserved from those
personal evils which by Sea or Land might prevails against them. And the Lord
is able to do it for great Nations as well as for particular persons; for as
he puts it into the hearts of Princes to agree and give their Kingdoms unto
the Beast; so he can as easily withdraw their hearts from him, and cause them
to see the vanity of their subjection to him: Let us therefore give the Lord no
rest, until he have fulfilled his word, and overturned all his Enemies.

That the pouring out of the wrath of God upon the Romish Jews.

When they shall see Christ riding upon a white horse, and going forth
conquering to conquer, then shall they be gathered unto him, Rev. 19.

Because popish delusions, Idolatry and Superstitions are the Jews, together
with the rest of the Nations which cannot enter into the Temple until the
seven plagues of the seven Angels are fulfilled, and then will they come in as
honorable maids attending upon the Queen; it will be like unto the
resurrection from the dead unto them; many devises there are in the minds of
some to think that Jesus Christ shall come from Heaven again, and reign here
upon Earth a thousand years, but they are but the mistakes of some high
expressions in Scripture, which describe the judgments powered out upon Gods
enemies, in making a way for their conversion, by the pattern of the last
judgment.

Vial upon them, that from 25l. they shall fall to 5l. price; the Lord has
sometimes threatened that he will famish all the Gods of the Earth Zeph. 2.11.
So that all the Gods of the Gentiles shall not be able to provide, any more
offerings to be brought unto their Altars, neither Apollo, nor Jupiter, nor
Hercules can have any victuals: and so will God deal with our Cattle if they
be our Gods, they shall either be worth little, or else he will deny us todder
for them; if they devour our spirits, and take off our minds from the
Ordinances of God; he will rend away any thing that stands between him and
our souls; Therefore as ever we desire that we may prosper, and that their may
be a ready way prepared for our comfort, let no streams of Idolatry, be found
among us, then will the Lord make way for many of his deserved ones to come in
among us, or else will make us well without them; For all the silver and gold in
the world is his, as the Cattle are his on a 1000 Hills. Only let us take part
with this Angel in pouring out Vialls upon the corruptions that are found in
our own hearts; look that their be no corruptions in us, but such as are still
drying and drying up, and see if God be not faithful and gracious to us
abundantly; stir we up our selves therefore, and one another hereunto, and
pray that God would stir up other Nations and People hereunto, then shall we
see Gods ancient people brought home, and the Lord shall be one over all the
Earth, and his name one, which will prove a Resurrection unto all the Churches
of the Saints.

The second part of the sixth Vial. VIAL.
16. REVEL. 12, Ver. to 14. XII. And the sixth Angel powered out his Vial upon
the great River Euphrates, and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of
the Kings of the East might be prepared. (13.) And I saw three unclean spirits
like Frogs come out of the mouth of the Dragon and, out of the mouth of the
Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, (14.) For they are the
spirits of Devils working miracles, which go forth unto the Kings of the
Earth, and of the whole World, to gather them to the battle of that great day
of God Almighty.
IN these words (as ye have heard) is described the pouring out of the sixth
Vial of Gods wrath. Described it is by the subject, upon which it was powered
forth, and secondly, by the effect which ensued. The subject was the great
River Euphrates. The effect that followed it, was first the drying up of the
waters thereof: and that amplified by the end, that the way of the Kings of the
East might be prepared. The second effect was a warlike expedition, or
preparation thereunto; set forth by the principal Commanders, the Dragon, the
Beast, and the false Prophet, and by the instruments, who are here said to be
for their nature Spirits for their quality Unclean, for their number three,
for their resemblance like Frogs, for their original coming out of the mouth
of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the
false Prophet: And that amplified by the cause; for they are the spirits of
Devils. And Lastly, they are described by their effects; which are three. 1
They work miracles. 2 They go forth to the Kings of the earth, and of the
World to gather them to Battle, and thirdly they do gather them into a place
called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon. Thus is this war here especially
described by their principal Commanders, and instruments It is described also
by the watchword, which the Lord gives unto his servants against the battle
in that time, B hold I come as a thief, blessed is he that watches, and
keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.

We entered into these words the last day; And showed you whom this Angel was,
what is meant by the River Euphrates, who are the Kings of the East, and the
way prepared for them: in a word (only to make way to that which remains) you
heard this sixth Angel that powered out this Vial upon the great River
Euphrates, cannot well be understood of the Jews pouring out the wrath of God
upon the Turkish Dominions; For it is evident from the last verse of the 15
Chapter, that no man can enter into the Temple till these 7 Vialls be powered
out. The Jews therefore shall not be called till the seventh Vial be powered
out.

And they that powered out these Vialls were such as came out of the Temple, 15
Chapter 6 Verse, Out of reformed Churches, girt with golden girdles of truth;
and clothed with pure, and white Linen, which is the righteousness of the
Saints. They that power out of these Vialls are godly Christians, professors of
the truth in sincerity. Now the Jews cannot enter into that estate till the
seven plagues be fulfilled. Again suppose the Kings of the East be the Jews,
as they are more then probably conceived by enterpreters; yet they cannot be
the Angel that powered out this Vial: For the Angel that powered out this Vial
he dries up the waters, and makes way for their coming in, therefore it is not
they that powered out this Vial.

Ye have heard that the River Euphrates cannot be properly meant of that River
Euphrates that watered old Babell; because the wrath of God is not upon
material Rivers, and Fountains of waters, but only upon such persons as
dwell near them, or may be watered by them: but the R^ver it self cannot be
it. It is not taken here for one of those Rivers and Fountains of water which
were turned into blood, in the 18 Verse of this Chapter by the third Angel:
for then if it had been so understood the wrath of God had been powered upon him
in the third Vial, not in this sixth. The rivers there meant are such popish
Emissaries, and Priests, as do carry the popish Doctrine up and down the
Country; now Euphrates washed Babylon; and his rivers are dried up when Babylon
is taken: now Babylon comes to be taken, and destroyed in the next Vial, not
in the sixth Vial, as some have hertofore taken it: But Euphrates therefore
being that which watered the City of old Babell, it must be something that does
the like office unto this new Babell, unto Rome: that waters the throne of the
Beast; that waters the seat of antichrist. And yet (mind ye) so waters it, that
if the waters thereof be dried up, there is way made for the Kings of the East
to come in, and consequently way made for the ruin of the Turkish Empire, and
Monarchy; For as ye heard these seven Vialls come in, in order as the seven
Trumpets did; to remove the seven judgments they brought in; look how the
seven Trumpets sounded, and by their sounding brought in several graduall
judgments, so just in the same order are these Vialls powered out, and the
former judgments removed. As the first Trumpet brought a plague upon the
Earth, so the first Angel powered out a Vial upon the Earth, to remove that
plague. The second Trumpet sounding brought a judgment upon the Sea; The
second Angel powers out his Vial upon the Sea; and so the rest: The sixth
Trumpet (as ye heard) let loose the four Angels, the four Turkish Families
bound by the river Euphrates, which brought in the Turkish apostasy, and
tyranny into the World. This Euphrates is such a river as waters Babell; and
the drying it up did of old make way for the ruin of Babell. So will the
drying up of this Euphrates dry up the force, and strength of the new Babylon;
and so of the Turkish tyranny also. In one word, ye have heard, that which
has been the strength and fence of the Turkish Dominion has been the streams
of corruption and false worship in the Babilonish, for so ye read in the ninth
Chapter of this book, and the 20 and 21 verse: That for all this says the
Text, notwithstanding the letting loose of the Turks from Euphrates, yet they
repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship
Devils, and Idols of Gold, and Silver, and Brass, and Stone, and of Wood,
etc. Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of
their fornications, nor of their Thefes: So that its evident the Turkish Empire
was raised up, and stands to this day, as a scourge of God upon the idolatries,
and superstitions of the Church of Rome, and upon their murders, and
witch-crafts, and thefts, by which the whole Christian world has been abused
these many hundred years.

So that then the Angel that powered out this Vial ye heard to be those ten
Christian Kings, of whom ye read more at large in the next Chapter: that shall
dry up this Fountain: that is to say, the streams of antichristian worship,
and pollution; shall stop the course of it. They shall stop the course of those
Murtherous inquisitiones; They shall stop the course of those Thefts; and
indulgences and pennances: they shall stop the course of of those Whoredoms,
wherewith Babylon has been made drunk; the cup of her Fornication. Now when
this stream of corruption is dried up by the reformation of protestant Kings;
it shall come to pass, that there will be a way made for the Kings of the East
to come in: for ye heard, that by the Kings of the East are properly meant the
Jews: as being of old called Kings, A royal Priesthood: so that way is made
for them by this reformation of religion in Christendom; The removing of those
abuses (to wit) of the corruption of religion, and popish superstition, and
idolatry, way is made for their conversion: and do but dry up those streams,
and then you leave Babylon dry; and you leave the Turkish Monarchy weakened:
for the staff of the Turkish Monarchy is the superstition of Antichristianisme.

From hence therefore ye have heard already these two notes gathered, and
handled: the first is this, that the days are coming, wherein Christian
Princes shall dry up the streams of antichristian corruption in Religion; And
thereby also dry up the Fountains of the streams of the Turkish tyranny.

Secondly, ye have heard this note (also) gathered, and handled. That upon the
drying up of the streams of corruption of Antichristian religion, and of
Turkish Tyranny, way is made for the conversion of the Jews, the ancient
people of God.

Of these two we spoke the last day; and thus much was needful to be
repeated, that ye might understand where we are. To proceed to the next note
then, the third that concerns this Vial, but the first at this time: Let me
first gather the note and then show you how it rises out of the Text: then give
some grounds of it, and make use of it as the Lord shall help, the note is
this.

Upon the drying up of the streams of the corruption of religion Jews.

This is the sum. See all these points expressly, and distinctly delivered,
and fully, in these two Verses, the 13 and 14. For further then so I shall not
go at this time. And this one note opens both these Verses, and all the
passages therein.

First ye see upon the pouring out of this Vial upon the river Euphrates, and
the drying up the streams thereof, that is upon the drying up of the
corruptions of religion, superstition, Idolatry, Murders, and Whordomes:
restraining and drying up all such Fountains, what follows? He says the
Beast, the Dragon, and the false Prophet, sent out of their mouths three
unclean spirits, like Frogs; which go forth unto the Kings of the Earth, and
of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great day of God
Almighty.

To open this doctrine, and the words a little.

First for the Dragon ye have heard it noted before (from the 12. Rev. 9.
verse) him to be the old Serpent, Satan: but taken chiefly as he does act, and
govern, and dwell in the Roman state: And therefore he is described to have
seven hads, and ten Horns, in the third verse of the 12 Chapter. But take him
as he is Satan spiritually, and he has neither heads, nor horns. Take him as
he governes Rome and so he has seven heads, and ten hones. The seven heads are
seven hills: And the ten horns are ten governments, who then is the Beast?
the Beast (as ye have heard) he is described by the very same Characters, seven
heads and ten horns, 13. Rev 9. verse. It is said to be him to whom the Dragon
has given his power, and his seat, and great authority; it does therefore hold
forth the Roman state; not Rome Pagan nor Rome Christian (as ye have heard) It
remains therefore to be Rome antichristian: which is that? The Roman visible
Catholic Church: that's the first Beast, which claims all the power by
pretense of religion, which old Rome, and the Roman Monarchy claimed by force
of arms. Who is then the false Prophet? The false Prophet he is never
mentioned before in this book, not by name; and yet he is spoken of here as
well known: It appears therefore, this false Prophet is the 2 Beast in 13
Rev. 11 verse to the end: The second Beast there is said to work Miracles: in
the 13 Verse he does great wonders, etc. And 18 Verse he deceives them that
dwell on the Earth, by the means of these miracles, etc. And the same ye
shall read of the false Prophet in the 19 Rev. 20 Verse, The Beast was taken,
and with him the false Prophet that wrought miracles before him, with which he
deceived them that had received the mark of the Beast.

And them which worshipped his Image, etc. The description is the same of the
false Prophet, and of the Beast: both of them holding forth the head of the
Roman Church: The false Prophet Balaam, the Bishop, (or Antichrist) of Rome. So
that it does imply thus much, that the Dragon, and the Devil himself did stir
up, not the Pope only, but the whole Catholic Church, to gather into some
council, or some other solemn meeting, some chief concurse of them, who by
common content shall (out of their mouths) that is to say, by their commands,
their Cannons, and Decrees, for that is out of their mouths: out of their
commands, out of their edicts, out of their injunctions, shall send forth their
unclean Spirits; Spirits they be for nimblenesse and activity, Spirits they
be for impetuousnesse, and strength, Spirits they be also for close and
cleanly conveyance: There is no stoping the gates against Spirits, ye cannot
so stop the Cinque Ports but they will in; they will enter into any Court,
Princes Palaces, or great men's Houses; there is no hindering of them, they have a
cleanly conveyance, and secret and close passage. And they are also Spirits of
Devils. It is not the ordinary word Devil, but Demon, the which is wont to
express Spirits for their knowledge, and learning: They are learned spirits,
and yet Devils for their deceit and mischeife: Ye are of your Father the
devil, and the works of your Father ye will do, John 8 44. Liers for deceit,
and Murderers for mischief; these are the spirits he sends forth, which surely
coming as they do, out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of
the beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, they are not spirits
properly so called: They are therefore Emissaries sent forth by them, men of
nimble wits, and parts, active for nimblenesse, and close conveyance: and full
of deceit and mischief. And these are the spirits are sent forth: and here
said to be three spirits coming out of their mouths, not as if one came out
of the mouth of one, and another came out of the mouth of another; but all
three of them came out of all their mouths together at once. It is not rightly
translated here, that he says he saw them coming out; for the word coming
out, is not in the original: but he saw them out of those mouths, out of
those mouths they had came; thence they had their original, and from thence
they sprange.

Much inquiry there is who they should be: I will not trouble you with variety
of men's judgments, The Dragon is no more here the Turkish Empire then before,
but the Dragon here is he that is before called Satan, acting Rome, and so
has seven Heads, and ten Horns; which are the Arms of Rome, as ye have
heard before, not of Constantinople: And it is he that consults, and conspires
with the Beast of Rome to send forth these three unclean Spirits. Now if you
shall put all together that has been observed by different Interpreters, and
consider withal what kind of spirits the Catholic Church, and the head
thereof (the Bishop of Rome) has troubled the Church withal, ye shall find
they all fall under three sorts: three sorts of spirits they do all issue
from; and these have all inspired and breathed into them the very Character of
the nature which is found in the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet.
There are many rables of popish orders, which were endless to name now: But
they are all summed up in three Heads: for all the other are but hangbies, and
trains to them: all the Emissaries of Rome, the spirits whereby she has
troubled the Church, they all fall under these three, either Cardinals,
Bishops, or Jesuits: and under the Jesuits I rank all regular Friars, they
are all of them of one nature, regular men, Cloyster-men; of which the Jesuits
are the chief; and I would rather instance the Jesuits, because the rest of
that rabble (the other orders of Friars and Monks) they are described not
under the name of Frogs, but under the name of Locusts, chirping Creatures, as
the Frogs are Croking: and both come out of the bottomless pit: But the other
are more like to Locusts, in the 9 Revelations 3 to 11. They be both of them
mischeivous, both the Locusts, and the Frogs too; but the Frogs are a little
too dull for this kind of employment, which is attributed to the Frogs: but
these three the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet, send forth the
Cardinals, the Bishops, and the Jesuits: ye shall find the quintessence of
nimble wits in these Spirits; active and nimble spirits, ye shall find them
close and secret in their conveyances, like spirits: no part can be so secretly
watched but they will enter in, no Gates of Princes Palaces so secret but thy
will enter them. And unclean they be as neither fit for meat nor for
sacrifice: as unclean Beasts were. They are neither fit for Church nor
Commonwealth: neither fit for the one nor the other, neither for meat nor
sacrifice: unclean also arising out of the mud; unclean in their Doctrine,
rooting out the Doctrine of Life; unclean in their conversation, as all false
Teachers more or less be, Jude 8. and 10 Verse. And making the Countries
unclean where they come: they let loose the raines and open a door unto all
Licentiousness and Profaneness. Three unclean Spirits like Frogs. This
description of them likening of them to Frogs does exclude them from the
Locusts, for they are not Amphibia (as they call them) such as can live upon
the Waters or Earth: for Locusts love not to be in the Waters; but these are
indifferent on Earth or Waters: Therefore these three can indifferently live
either upon the waters, or upon the Earth; and even as well in the one as in
the other. It is indifferent to them whether ye employ them in Church work,
they can domineer there; or whether you employ them in state matters, they are
as free, and as busy there, in the Courts of Princes, and the states of
Commonwealths, and as impetuous there, and as active there, and as cunning, and
as dominering, and Lordly there as they are in the Church.

And therefore look as were the plagues of Egypt (which is called Sodom) so
are these plagues of spiritual Sodom. The Frogs they came upon them cunningly,
and would come into the Kings Palaces, and no place could be kept free from
them: Even such are these three unclean spirits, no place can they be kept out
from. And like unto Frogs are they for their continual croking; nothing but
one kind of tune: their own matters they never leave croking of not like these
Frogs here in America that have a several tune in each part of the year, but
they are always in one, or two, or three at the most; either the Catholic
visible Church, or the Pope the Judge of controversies, or of visible
succession. And then look as ye see it is with Frogs they are most busy with
their notes when it grows dark, and in the heat of the day they are a great
deall more silent, for then they get them down into the mud; so it is with
these unclean spirits, they ly close if the light of the Gospel shines forth
brightly; And if it grow warm in the zeall of the spirits of Christians, then
ye here no news of them, but they are in some muddy places then, they are
hushed then: I if you should come with a Torch in the midnight they are silent
and still then.

But now when there is want of light, or want of heat of Religion, then it is
indeed that these spirits are most croking, and tumultuous, and unquiet: but
otherwise if the spirits of Christians and Statesmen grow warm in Religion,
there is no noise nor news of these spirits; so these are the three unclean
spirits that come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the
Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet. And these three have left a
spice of their own nature in them, the Devil has left a spice of his murder
and malice against religion, and well ordered government tending to disorder;
the Catholic Church has left them her state and pre-eminence, her Lordly
Dominion and spiritual supremacy, and authority, carrying all before him; The
false Prophet has left them corrupt Doctrine and corrupt worship; These
corrupt all where they come, and with cleanly conveyance in the Name of the
Lord, and thus says the Lord: when indeed it is nothing but the mere
inventions of the sinful false hearts of the sons of men. To go on a little
further in the exposition of these spirits.

They are the spirits of Devils, That is to say all of a devilish nature;
they are not Gods spirits: men they will be accounted to be, but they are
spirits of the bottomless pit, the spirits of Devils, Devils for learning,
and Devils for deceit, and Devils for mischeife.

Working miracles,] It is a proper work of the second Beast, but they are all
but lying wonders, they come (says the Apostle Paul) with all power of signs
and lying wonders. 2 These. 2.9. And these being all thus furnished, the Text
tells you,

They go forth unto the Kings of the Earth] by Earth in this book is meant
the Earthly Religion, and so to the Princes of Earthly religion they go forth,
therefore they go unto the Kings of the Earth, And of the whole World] They
do not contain themselves in the limits of Christendom, but the other
Princes, the Princes of the whole world (that is to say) to Pagan Princes, They
would have power to prevent (if it were possible) this great mischief to
themselves, that they might crush these Christian Kings that brought in the
reformation; Therefore they go forth to the Kings of the Earth, and of the
whole World, To gather them to battle, To the battle of that great day of God
Almighty.] That Is not the last judgment, (as some have thought) there will be
no warring then; but every day of great execution is called a great day of God
Almighty. But that we shall speak to (God willing) when we come to it, of that
great day of God Almighty.] But what day is that? ye have it expounded in the
19. Rev. 17. It is the day of Gods great Supper; that ye may eat the flesh of
Kings, and the flesh of Captains, and the flesh of mighty men, etc. This is
the great day of God Almighty, on which these worldly and wicked, these Popish
and Pagan Princes with all their power, and all their forces, and armies they
are able to make, shall come forth against the Lord Jesus, and against these
Christian Princes, that have been serious, and studious in the reformation of
Religion, and in the drying up of these streams of corruption. Thus you see
the words opened, and the plain and true meaning of them. I cannot speak of
the coming of Christ now, and of the gathering together to the great battle
of Armageddon, and I would not open more then I am able to finish at this
present. Therefore now consider the Doctrine again, and the truth of it, how
it does plainly arise from the words of the Text.

Upon the pouring out of the sixth Vial (that is to say) upon the drying up of
the current, and streams of the corruption of Antichristian religion, or
Christian religion (for Antichristian religion is but the corruption of
religion in Christendom,) The Dragon (that is to say the Devil) and the Beast
(that is to say the Roman Catholic visible Church,) and the false Prophet
(that is to say the Pope the head of the Church) did send forth out of their
mouths (that is to say out of their commands) three unclean spirits, (that is
Cardinals, and Bishops, and Jesuits.)

To stir up the Princes of the Earth, and of the whole World, (that is both
Popish, and Pagan Princes) to a great battle. To what end? ye may see by the
occasion of it, is was upon the pouring out the Vial of the wrath of God upon
the streams of corruption of religion, therefore they would turn the stream
again, to prevent the way of the Kings of the East (that is) the conversion of
the Jews, by bringing in old Idolatry and superstition, spiritual Adulteries
and Whoredoms, and Witchcrafts, for the maintenance of the Sea of Rome.

Thus you see the point plain from the Text, neither is there any difficulty
that remains for the opening of it, that I do discern.

Now then for the Reasons of the point, and so briefly to come to the use. The
reasons are two, why that upon this drying up of the streams of corruption of
Religion these three great commanders should thus send forth such kind of
Emissaries, instruments that will be active, and nimble to gather such a
fearful Battle against the Lord, and against his servants.

The first reason is taken from the nature of their Kingdom. John speaking of
Antichrist, in the 1 Ioh. 4. Chapter 6 Verse. And therefore (mind ye) the
weapons of their warfare are carnal, full of malice, and full of envy, and
devillishnesse; their instruments are not spiritual, but carnal, and worldly.
And therefore being thus shaken as they are, their return is not to Fasting
and Prayer, or the power of the holy Ghost, or the power of spiritual gifts,
or so forth; these are estranged from them: And now they fall to carnal policy
and worldly power, and devilish engines, and instruments, these are fit for
this use. This is one Reason.

Jew or Gentile, to the saving knowledge of the Lord Jesus, there is nothing
more grevious to these spirits then the prosperity of religion, they gnash
their Teeth for pain in the former Vial, this is that will vex them more then
all the rest, to see these Rivers dried up, and these streams dried up, and
now the holy City of Rome blasted; this does stir them up to implacable
malice, and mischief: and now they care not who they confederate withal, so
they may crush the Christian Princes and hinder reformation; It was truly
prophesied of by the Apostle Paul, That evil men and seducers shall wax worse
and worse, deceiving and being deceived. 2 Timothy 3, 13. So it is with these
evil men here, if they see they cannot get victory over Protestants, though
they have pretended war with the Turk for the recovering of the holy Land,
yet now they will consent with him; they stick not who they agree with, so
they may mantaine their war. To come then briefly to make some use of what ye
have heard: the use of the point is thus much.

of his spirit, and cleanly conveyance, aplaud himself in such kind of
inlargements as these be, I tell you the Devil has as quick wits as you are;
and as active spirits as you are; and men of as dexterous conveyance as you can
be; And therefore never pride your selves in these, they are such as are as fit
instruments for the Devil as for Christ, and many times the Lord Jesus takes
less delight in such as these, then he does in plainer and simpler men; Ye
see your calling Brethren. (says the Apostle Paul) in the 1 Corinthians 1.26.
How that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are
called. It is I say (therefore) an abasement unto all flesh, and unto all the
glory of the flesh; all flesh is as Grass, and the goodliest of flesh and
blood, is but as the flower of the Field that fades away: take it at the best
its but a Flower, but take them as they may be improved by Satan none more
mischeivous, none more active instruments for the Devil, for sin, for
Corruption then these fine quick wits and spirits be, These nimble wits,
these active spirits; pride not your selves in these things I say; these are
the most dangerous if the Lord set not in to take hold of them; pride not your
selves (therefore) in these things, The more learned and witty you be, the
more fit to act for Satan will you be if the Lord leave you, the more neat
handed, and quick witted and nimble spirited you be, the more notable, and
profitable will you be for the Devil, if he take hold of you: pride not your
selves (therefore) in these, much less allow your selves in sacrificeing of
these to Satan; But see you do sacrifice your wts, and spirits, and dexterity,
and what ever you be, or have as a living sacrifice to Christ Jesus, to his
advantage: or else they will be improved to the service of the Devil, and his
instruments, The great and monsterous Beast, the Roman Catholic visible
Church, and the head thereof, the holy Father the Pope as they call him.

Secondly, it may take off the fond doting of the sons and fair
representations of a goodly condition before the eyes of flesh and blood, be
not taken with the applause of these persons, ye have many at this Day, that
stand and wonder upon the reading of the Jesuits, at the witty inventions, and
marvelous dexterity of judgment. They are strong perswaders, and strange
practitioners of what they take in hand: marvelously are men taken with the
strength of their judgments, and the strength of their wits; And dote
mervalously upon the Cardinals, and upon the Bishops, and upon the Jesuits,
and upon holy Catholic Mother Church, and their holy Father the Pope. These
are the gods many of them do adore.

I pray do but look well upon them all, what are they? all of them? Let but
the holy Ghost give his judgment of them, (who is only wise) let his Counsel
be taken, and what? They are spirits indeed, but unclean spirits, spirits of
Devils, that come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the
Beast, the Roman visible Catholic Church is in the esteem of the Holy Ghost
a monsterous Beast (as ye heard in the 13 Chapter Revel. 1 Ve.) And the head
of the Popish Church a false Prophet. And what are these nimble wits, and
goodly glorious persons ye speak of? unclean spirits neither fit for meat
nor sacrifice, neither fit for Church nor Commonwealth. Oh ye will say they
are fit for both; But says the holy Ghost they are Frogs, and not Churchmen
(as they call them) and unclean, and not fit for civil use: neither fit for
Church nor State; but fit to corrupt both, and breed corruption in both: Frogs
they are and their Songs are much what as Frogs are, if ye mind them their
note is always much at one, either visible succession, and that is one note;
the Judge of controversies, which they say must be the Bishop of Rome, and the
Roman Catholic visible Church the holy Mother Church as they call it, these
are their notes, their Song, but it is but a Frog-like Song what ever they
think: and ye shall ever find it, that when Religion has been most
lightsome, and Princes and Statesmen have been most warm in Religion, then
ye shall here no noise of these Frogs, they ly close in the mud; But when
Religigion grows dark once, the shadow of the Sun grows low, and large,
when Christians wax cold, and Courtiers begin to be Popish, or carnal, or I
cannot tell how conformable to the corruptions of the times, then they begin to
croke loud, and all things must be as they will have them: but I say take them
as they be, and they are but unclean Frogs, that do corrupt both Church, and
State. And (mind ye) they are confederate with the Dragon, the Beast, and the
false Prophet. Ye shall find it in time that they will be confederate with
Turk, or Russian, Indian or Infidel, they will be ready to confederate with
them all, and make no scrupill of these things. And yet they (as men think)
are the only Patriarchs, and make the greatest show of religion: be not
deceived, you see how the holy Ghost describes them. And let those that are of
God learn what they are.

And thirdly, this may serve to teach Christian Princes, Rome begin to decay:
the streams that do water and refresh Rome. Then look for Wars, and
Tumults of Wars, great Wars, mustering up of Popish Princes, and their
Armies, and pagan Princes, and their Armies, there will be no backwardness in
these earthly spirits, in this case, to the captivating of all (if it were
possible) to the maintenance and supportance of Rome.

And last of all, and so I make an end. Let this be Rome; I say though great
Wars may arise from all the chief Princes of the World, both Popish and
Pagan, and a great day of battle it will be when ever those days do shine
forth (as hasteing they be,) why ye shall find this to be the comfort of it,
a great day it shall be, It is so said in my Text, but not a great Day to the
Beast, nor a great Day to the Dragon, nor a great Day to the false Prophet,
(They look for a Day of it,) but it shall be a great day of GOD Almighty: men
are afraid if they stir they shall bring Wars about their Ears, true they
shall do so, they will arise at once: but though the battle will be great
and terrible, yet never the less most comfortable to the People of God: It
will be a great Day indeed, but a great Day of the Lord God Almighty, that he
may offer a great sacrifice to himself by the hands of his servants, that all
the souls of prey and the beasts of prey may all of them come, and eat the
flesh of Kings, and the flesh of Captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and
the flesh of Horses and of them that sit on them; and the flesh of all men,
both free and bound, both small and great; It will I say be a great Sacrifice
to the Beasts of prey, and the fowls of prey: It shall be a great day indeed,
but it shall not be a great day to the Papists, not a great day to the Dragon,
nor to the Romish Catholic Church except it be a great day of their
destruction, and that it will be indeed, as ye shall see when this battle is
to be fought in the nineteenth Chapter, and they shall never trouble the World
more, that will be the issue of it; The Dragon is reserved to a further day;
but he shall be bound for a thousand years, and afterward shall make a
great battle with the Saints, but after that shall be taken, and then cast
into the lake forever: But this will be a great day of God Almighty, wherein
he will power cut all the Vialls of his wrath upon the enemies of God, and his
people; that the Name of the Lord GOD Almighty may be praised from the rising
of the Sun to the going down thereof.

And therefore great and wonderful are the Works of the Lord that he does
reserve for after ages, wherein the loftiness of man he will lay low, but his
name only shall be exalted Esaias 2.2. Speaking of a far less day then this
that I am now speaking of; It will be a great day to the glory of God, and the
good of his people; To the enlargement of the Church of Christ, but of
destruction to the enemies of the Lord Jesus: That they may be overthrown, and
taken and cast into the bottomless pit, never to rise up again.

THE THIRD SERMON UPON THE SIXTH VIAL.
REVELAT. 16.15. Behold, I come as a thief: Blessed is he that watches, and
keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.
YOu have heretofore heard that these words set forth a description of the
pouring out of the sixth Vial. Set forth it is by the subject, upon the great
River Euphrates. By the effects, they were double: First, Immediate, the waters
thereof were dried up. The second was Accidental, and mediate, warlike
preparation. The former effect of drying up the River, was amplified by the
end; That the way of the Kings of the East might be prepared. The accidental
effect, (which was warlike preparation) was set forth by a double argument:
First, by the efficients, Principal and Isntrumental. Secondly, by the
watchword which the Lord gives his people. The efficients were (principally)
the Devil, the Beast, and the false Prophet. The Instrumentals were certain
spirits, for nature: three spirits for number: Unclean for quality: Like Frogs
for similitude: Out of the mouth of the Beast, the Dragon, and the false
Prophet: For their original which are described by their effects, which are
three: They work miracles; They go forth to the Kings of the earth, to gather
them to battle: And thirdly, They do gather them together into a place called
in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon. The watchword which is the second Adjunct,
observed in this warlike preparation, is the watchword of the Lord Jesus to
his people (in the words of my Text) there are two parts of it: First, a
description of the manner of his coming: by a comparison taken from the manner
of a thief: Behold I come as a thief. The second is a word of promise, unto
such as watch and keep their garments at that time. The promise is first of
blessedness to them: And secondly, the prevention of the discovery of their
own nakedness and shame: Blessed is he that watches and keeps his
garments, left he walk naked; and they see his shame. Not to repeat what has
been delivered, that which offers it self here to our consideration, is a
twofold doctrine. the first is this:

To gather the Princes of the earth, and of the whole world, unto battle: And
those Princes shall go forth to battle against the Lord and his people. It is
behovefull for the people of God, to behold the Lord Jesus coming against
them, or coming to them as a thief. That Is the note: when the Lord exposes
his people to great trials, by the busy diligence of those Frogs, or by the
violent rage of the Beast and Kings of the earth, against Religion: The Lord
then calls his people to behold him coming upon them, (I mean upon all the
professors of the Gospel) the Lord calls them to look upon him coming at
them, or coming to them as a thief. Behold (says he) I come as a thief.
When does he say so? when these Frogs were let forth: Those unclean spirits of
Devils sent forth to stir up the Kings of the earth, and of the world to
gather them to battle, against the Lord, and against his people, and against
Christian Religion, and them that maintain it. Then, Behold, I come as a
thief: They are the words of the Lord Jesus. Because the notes are double,
that the Text holds forth; I must be brief in either of them.

As a theef] The Scripture has respect to a foure-fould manner of a thief
coming. He does not come as a thief in Justice or robbery: That the holy
Spirit of the Lord Jesus cannot be capable of. How can he steal any thing
from us, which is not his own: There is nothing but it is his, and therefore in
that sense he cannot be said to come as a thief, (But yet) as a thief he can
come suddenly, and he can come secretly and slily, yea, and he can come also
violently, and terribly, as a thief.

Thus he can come, and thus he is described in the Scripture to come; which,
though some think it to be at the last judgment, yet I cannot so conceive it;
for here is a world of business that is to be translated after this Vial is
poured out: above a thousand years after this, before the coming of Christ to
the last judgment, but his coming in any notable judgment, his coming,
especially if it be a coming suddenly, and secretly, and powerfully: It is
coming as a thief, as ye have an instance of it in Rev. 3.3. to the Church of
Sardis, I will come on thee as a thief. How like a thief? Thou shall not know
what hour I will come upon thee. And so in Luke 12.39. If the good man of the
house had known what hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not
have suffered his house to be broken through. But coming suddenly, and
secretly, at unawares therefore it comes to pass, that the good man of the
house is asleep, and the thief breaks through and steals, when all is bisht then
he comes, like a thief in the night, 1 These. 5.2. Your selv as know perfectly,
that the day of the Lord so comes, as a thief in the night. So like a thief
he comes suddenly, and secretly. Thirdly, he comes as a thief, to take away,
and bereave a man of such goods as he carnally keeps, not to steal from him,
but to recover his own: Though not as a lawless thief steals, yet as a just
recoverer of his fathers goods, out of the hands of those that have not been
faithful in improving of them. John 10.10. The thief comes not, but for to
steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come, that they might have life, and
that they might have it more abundantly.

And so he may come also to kill; but not unjustly, as a thief, but verily as a
just Judge, upon those that do not watch, and keep their garments: He may take
their garments, and leave them naked, that men may see their shame, and justly
too, because they have not watched, but have suffered themselves to be defiled.

Thus then Christ will come at that time (ye shall have many men serious of
Reformation, when the Lord shall dry up the River Euphrates, that makes glad
the city of Babel) when the ten Kings shall come to make the Whore desolate:
the Lord will then come and try all those Kings and their soldiers, who ever
they are he will try them: in the Frogs he will try them, secretly and slily,
for they will not cease to be enchanting, as secretly as they can, into the
hearts of Kings, and all godly spirits; to turn things back again into the
former course of corruption: into those idolatries and thefts, which made glad
the City of Rome, and which did uphold the Turk.

And in the Kings of the earth, and of the world, he will come upon them as a
thief violently and terribly, to shake the hearts of all the Kings of
Christendom (as its called) to withdraw them from the Reformation of Religion,
which they shall be zealously addicted to; suddenly to drive them to their
former superstition of their forefathers. So in one sort of these he will come
as a thief, secretly and slily; In the other sort of these, he will come as a
thief, violently and terribly.

Kings 19.12. So here he comes in these unclean spirits, for the Lord acts
them; he comes in Potent Princes, for he is said to come in the likeness of
these, he comes in them both; and he is said to come as a thief, in the
likeness of these Frogs, because they come in his likeness. Ye shall have
many false Prophets come in my name, (says Christ) Mat. 24.24. Take heed of
them, for they shall deceive many; they shall come secretly, and slily, and
play legerdemain, and by that means deceive many; and they shall come
outragiously, first against the Lord and his people; and the Lord comes forth
in their rage: that look as it is said (by some Interpreters) of Paul, 1 Cor.
15.32. He fought with beasts at Ephesus, after the manner of men; they
interpret it thus, not that ever he was put to any such trial (that any
probable Stories mention) in Ephesus, or any where else; but he fought with
beasts at Ephesus, after the manner of men; because, the men of Ephesus fought
with him after the manner of beasts: So Christ is said to come in these men,
because they come in the name of Christ, and plead for the Catholic Church of
Christ, and the Vicar of Christ. Behold, I come as a thief; they are all but
thieves, though they pretend to come in the name of Christ; that may be one
part of the meaning: But yet notwithstanding, this that follows do I most of
all cleave unto, not excluding that.

This may be another, taken from the authority of Christ, and power of Christ,
in leading a people into temptation, what ever the instruments be; I say it is
the Lord Jesus that leads his people into all kinds of temptation, whatsoever
the instruments be: If any Prophet be deluded, it is Christ the Lord has
deluded that Prophet: Or if any Tyrants be set up, it is the Lord that sets
them up: Or what ever unclean spirits come against his Church, it is the Lord
that stirred them up, it is the Lord that stirred them up unto this battle
against his Church, it is the Lord that stirred them up, what ever the
instruments be, be they Frogs, or unclean spirits that gathers to the battles
of Pray; And therefore we are taught to pray in (that which is commonly called)
the Lords Prayer ( Mat. 6.13.). Lead us not into temptation: We pray to the
Lord, that he would not lead us into temptation: As who should say, to the Lord
it belongs, to bring one creature against another; the devil against Eve, and
Eve against the devil; the Lord it is that brings the evil, whoever be the
instruments; it is the Lord that brings his challenge into the field, he brings
Goliath into the valley of Elah. And therefore when it is said, 1 Chronicles. 21.1.
that Satan rose up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel. In 2
Samuel 24.1. it is said, The anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and
he moved David against them, to say, Go number Israel and Judah. The Lord was
angry with the people, and then he let Satan loose to tempt David to number the
people: It was the Lords doings, though it was Satan's act. And so, when Micaiah
in his Vision saw the Lord sitting on his Throne, and all the host of Heaven
standing by him, on his right hand, and on his left. And the Lord said, Who
shall persuade Ahab, that he may go up, and fall at Ramoth-Gilead? And one said
on this manner, and another said on that manner. At length (says the Text)
there came forth a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I will persuade
him. And the Lord said unto him, Wherewith? And he said, I will go forth, and I
will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets. And he said, Thou
shall persuade him, and prevail also: (says the Lord) Go forth and do so. 1
Kings 22.19, 20, 21, 22. So that (mind you) whoever goes forth, the Lord sends
him, the Dragon, the Beast, and the false Prophet, may give one Commission, but
the Lord gives him permission; yea, and (I may say) Commission too: For in
effecting the thing, the Lord does it; that as David says of Shimei, The Lord
has bid him curse me: (that is to say) he has given him effectual liberty,
and opportunity to do the thing, as if he had given him a command to do it. If
a false Prophet arise (says the Lord in Deuteronomie, Chapter 13. Verse 12.)
and give thee a sign, and a wonder;) saying, Let us go after other gods, Thou
shall not harken unto the words of the Prophet, or unto the dreamer of dreams:
for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God
with all your hearts, and with all your souls

The Lord will suffer such to come, and this he does to try his people, so that
(mind you) it is the Lords doings, it is he that commands a thief, when he
comes like a thief: it is the Lord that sends forth such that are clothed with
sheeps skins, but inwardly are ravening wolves; though they have no direct
commission from God, yet they have such secret permission from God, and
commission by giving them opportunity to do that which they come for; that
indeed the Lord comes: Beloved, think it not strange (says the Ap: Peter, 1
Pet. 4.12.) concerning the fiery trial, which is come to try you, as though
some strange thing happened unto you. He means the ten Persecutions, the
Persecutions in Nero's time, and those that were to follow. Let no man think it
strange; why? for judgment must begin at the house of God, to that (mind ye)
all the fiery trials, what were they but the judgments of God: God sends them
forth in his fatherly wisdom, and by his Sovereign Authority, to try the
patience, and wisdom, and watchfulness of his people: And therefore it
becomes the people of God, when they see such creatures budge, and when they
see the Kings of the earth stir: then, Behold, says the Lord, I come as a
thief, suddenly, secretly, slily, and violently.

John 19.10, 11 Pilate says to him, Know thou not that I have power to
crucify thee, and have power to loose thee? Jesus answered, Thou could have
no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above: therefore he
that delivered me unto thee has the greater sin. And it implies also (and
it had been a wholesome lesson for Pilate to have sucked out of it) that it was
the greater sin in Pilate, to abuse his authority, to condemn the Lord Jesus.

For Judas to betray Christ to the Jews Ecclesiastical Authority: and for the
Jews to deliver Christ into the hands of Pontius Pilate, it was a great sin,
and so much the greater, because Pilates authority was of God; and they would
arm the sword of God against the Lord Jesus: And if Pilate had the power given
him of God either to crucify Christ, or loose him: if he shall abuse his
authority, in putting Christ to death, as he did: Then he that delivered me
unto thee has the greater sins: But thou then that do abuse thy power, to
crucify me, shall be found very sinful in the end: So that, that will not
excuse any Instrument for abusing the power for such an end. If God raise up
Pharaoh ( Exodus 10 16.) to make his power known, and to declare his name
thorow-out all the world: If he shall abuse this Authority, the more heavy will
the wrath of God be upon him; and it will not be for him and such like to
complain against God; and say he has ordained me to it; Oh man who art thou
that disputest against God: for God never does it, but being over-justly
provoked by the creature. Therefore so much the greater is the sin of any that
will abuse their wits and parts in a way of sin against God: And therefore it
must teach men to beware of excusing theft: And neither is their
unrighteousness in Christ, For the Lord is righteous in all his ways, and
holy in all his works, Psalm. 145.17.

He does not these unclean spirits, (Cardinals, Bishops and Jesuits) any wrong;
but even as the Seraphims cried one to another, so let us learn, Holy, holy,
holy is the Lord of hoasts; the whole earth is full of his glory. When is this?
When he sends Isaiah to harden the hearts of the people, and make their ears
deaf, Isa. 6.3, 10. So that let the Lord and his Throne be guiltless, and let
guilt lie upon these thieves; thieves and robbers, let them bear the burden of
their own sins.

If we ask how this can be imagined? Ans. All this acting with theeeves is an
accidental concurring; in all these things the Lord does no act but holy and
good: neither his efficacy in co-working with them; all this efficacy is only
an accidental concurring. God gives them the gift and the opportunity which
they will abuse: And so these Kings of the earth are justly deluded, because
they received not the truth in the love of it, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. Thus is
the Lord and his Throne guiltless, but all the theft and robbery lies on the
instruments (which the Lord does use) in their own abuse, he that rides a horse
which halts, every step he takes, the halting is not the owners that rides him,
but the horses. And so when the Sun hardens clay, it softens wax; and when it
draws stinking savours out of the dunghill, it draws sweet savours out of the
garden: hardening to the clay, and stinking savours to the dunghill, is not
properly from the Sun, but in themselves, occasionally from the Sun. Even
so it is in this case. This evil lies not in the proper act of the Lord Jesus,
but accidentally only from him. Thus therefore the first Use; for a second Use,

The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord:
Thus Job, (in Job 1.21. and Chap. 2.10.) when the Lord sorely visited him, in
his cattle, and servants, and children, and in his own body, he sees the Lords
hand in all the sad changes that passed over him: and it is a notable speech he
has in Job 16.11, 12, 13, 14. God has delivered me up to the ungodly, and
turned me into the hands of the wicked, and God has delivered me. He sees the
hand of God in all, and there is mavelous benefit in that: First, it keeps a
man (always) patient and meek in all: Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, I opened not my
mouth because thou did it. He sees it is Gods hand, and therefore he
patiently submits thereto, he has not a word to say, but meekly submits; the
Lord does all, comes upon me as a thief, Blessed be the name of the Lord.

I was worth thus much within this twelve month, and now not worth half so
much; Blessed be the name of the Lord. I was rich in cattle, or in this or
that commodity, but now the prises are fallen, they are not worth half, nor (it
may be) one third of that they were; the Lord has done this, he has come upon
us on a sudden like a thief, and blessed be his name for it.

Secondly, it helps us in the use and improvement of them all, it naturally
leads men by the hand, to humble themselves under the hand of God: and this is
the only way to obtain deliverance, 1 Peter 5.6. Humble your selves under the
mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time: Its not the casualties
or calamities of the Country that comes either by chance, or fortune, but from
the Lord, he takes away all, by one means or another, takes away all; whether
by our pride, that we must have every new fashion, and be like the men of the
world, in houses, apparel, and the like, or daintiness, that we must have our
varieties, be it what it will be, though it cost never so much; and no matter
what follows, though it eat up our estates, and brings us into want: The Lord
has made use of our folly, and pride, and daintiness, our idleness, our
covetousness, (or what ever it be) to bring us into poverty, the Lord has
done it; and let the people of God see the hand of God in it.

Thirdly, it leads you by the hand in all the sad changes that pass over you,
to look to the Lord, and to wrestle with the Lord, and not to stand wrestling
with men: Jacob he is in trouble, and he wrestles with the Lord, Genesis 32.26.
And so it behooves the Lords people to wrestle with the Lord, and not to stand
contesting with the Bishops, nor with the Jesuits, as it may be men may do: No,
no, prevail with the Lord, and get him to turn all things about; and if Jacob
get God to bless him, Esau shall not (then) curse him. I will not let thee go
till thou bless me; and if the Lord bless Jacob, Esau shall be cursed.

And lastly, it will help you to quit your selves like men in all the things
that do befall you; as Paul says in 1 Corinthians 16.13. God has set us
(says the Apostle) upon a Theater, (as the word is in the original, 1
Corinthians 4.9.) unto the world, and unto Angels, and unto men; therefore
says he, quit your selves like men, as Heb. 10.35.) Cast not away your
confidence, which has great recompense of reward; for ye have need of
patience, etc. It behooves Christians to quit themselves like men, sanctifying
the Lord in all conditions, in afflictions and crosses, wrestling with him to
turn away these things, and to turn us from all our evil ways; and then
walking in a holy self-denial, and integrity of heart and life, giving every
man his own: And so while we walk in paths of holiness and righteousness, in
humility and meekness of spirit; unclean spirits may come out against us, and
the Lord come as a thief upon us, and yet when he does, we shall keep our own
garments. So much for the first Point.

The second Note is this; that



Its evident in the Text, Behold, I come as a thief: Blessed is he that
watches, and keep th his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.
He that watches, and keeps his garments, when Christ comes he is blessed,
that is, he injoyes his own blessedness, and increases it, and establishes
it; and he shall by this means prevent the discovery of his own shame and
nakedness, or his shameful nakedness.

Quest. What are these garments, garments in the Plural Number?

Answ. They are interpreted briefly in the 19 Chapter of the Revelation, Verse
8. The fine linen is the righteousness of the Saints. There is a double
righteousness of the Saints; there is an inherent righteousness, and an
imputed righteousness: An inherent righteousness, He that does
righteousness, is righteous, 2 John 3.7. There is a righteousness therefore
of a man's own, to wit, spiritual graces; as, Zachary and Elizabeth were both
righteous before God, Luke 1.6. And it is well observed by some holy Divines,
that he puts a double Epithet upon this righteousness of the Saints, a double
commendation; they are pure, and they are bright, this fine linen its both
pure and bright; for the words are in the original (...) (and they well
observe it) pure, because imputed, righteousness is pure indeed, and has no
spot in it, but it is not bright, you can see no great matter in it, it makes
no great show before men: A man may be very much defiled, and be subject to
many scandals, and yet clothed with the garment of imputed righteousness; the
righteousness inherent, is the righteousness of a godly heart and life before
men; Let your l ght so shine before men, that they may see your good works,
Matthew. 5.16. The righteousness of Christ imputed (I mean the righteousness of
Christ received by faith, and imputed by grace, is a pure righteousness hat
shines before God, and not before men. But the righteousness inherent, that's
not pure, (but very bright) before men. There is therefore a righteousness
that is very bright, that's the righteousness inherent, expressed in our
conversation; and there is another righteousness, to wit, the righteousness
imputed, which is incomparably more pure: As it has been said of old, There is
not the poorest Saint, though Lazarus on the dunghill, but is as pure as the
Virgin Mary, Phil. 2.8. So then those are the garments, clothed in bright and
in pure garments: And these garments are the righteousnesses of the Saints.
Garments, why? To cloth our nakedness, for our natural corrupt estate is
nakedness: Now both these are given to cover this nakedness of ours; these
Indewments, rightly so called; Indowments, or Induments, Knowledge covers the
nakedness of our ignorance; Zeal covers the nakedness of our Luke warmness;
Wisdom covers the nakedness of our Folly, Faithfulness covers the nakedness
of our Unfaithfulness and fals-heartednesse; Humility covers the na^ednesse of
our Pride; Patience covers the nakedness of our Passion; Chastity covers the
nakedness of our Wantonness; and the Righteousness of Christ covers all: And
as garments cover the nakedness, so they keep us from the injuries of weather,
wet and cold, etc. so do these garments keep us from all injuries in the world;
all temptations from the devil, or our own corrupt lusts: And they do adorn us
also, in the sight of men, and make us beautiful, amiable, and glorious, as
our garments which are not only for necessity, but comeliness.

Now, Bl^ssed is he that watches, and keeps his garm^nts. Which argues,
that our garments are kept by watchfulness; watches unto what? Watches unto
prayer, 1 Pet. 4.7. Watch, (says our Savior to his sleepy Disciples) Mat.
26.41. And, Watch unto the Word: Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way?
By taking heed thereto according to thy W^rd. Psalm. 119.9. Watch unto Prayer,
and watch unto the Word, and watch unto your conversation and ways, and then
keep your garments and your selves clean; and then watch to the special duties
of your calling: Blessed are those servan s, whom the Lord when he comes shall
find watching, (Luke 12.37.) Verily I say unto you, that he shall gird
himself, and make them to sit down at meat, and will come forth and serve him.
Then Peter said unto him, (ver. 41.) Lord speak thou this Parable to us, or
even to all? And the Lord said, Who is that faithful and wise Steward, whom
his Lord shall make ruler over his household, to give them their meat in due
season? Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so
doing: in the 22 and 43 verses of the same Chapter. When a man watches to the
improving of his calling, unto those good ends, for which God has given him
it. Why? Blessed is that man, which when the Lord comes, he shall find so
doing. And fourthly, he watches unto his own heart, that he does not trust to
his own righteousness; and runs away from God by deceitfulness and unbelief
of his own heart: Take heed (says the Apostle) lest there be in any of you an
heart of unbelief, to depart from the living God, Heb. 3.12. And so,
Watchfulness is opposed unto Drowsinesse, especially in good duties, Luke
6.41. it is opposed to Sensuality, Luke 21.34, 35, 36. it is opposed also to
carnal Security, 2 Thessalonians. 5.2, 3, 4. So see now by this means, whilst a man
watches unto prayer, watches to the Word, watches to his calling, and
watches over his own unclean, corrupt, and deceitful heart; Hence it comes to
pass, that he keeps his garments so bright; in one word, he keeps faith and a
good conscience, and faith helps him to keep his garments: He keeps holiness
and righteousness, and all is kept in this holy way. So that by this means,
what ever thieves or robbers come, a man's garments are kept clean; he is not
gulled out with those Frogs, nor frighted or tired out with these Kings of the
earth. So that by this means he does not show his own nakedness, but does
enjoy his own blessedness.



It is (as I remember) one of the aboundantest promises of grace that is made
to any estate of Gods people, that he makes to a watchful heart, in the
forenamed place in Luke 12.37. Blessed are those servants whom the Lord when
he comes shall find watching: why, wherein lies their blessedness? The Lord
(says the Text) shall gird up himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and
will come forth and serve them. A wel-girt Christian has ever a well-girt
Christ to minister to him; that as his garments are girt to him, and the loins
of his mind girt up, and his Spirit attentive to watch over himself, and to
watch to his calling; The Lord Jesus will watch over him, and he shall enjoy
him, and his blessedness: And wherein lies our blessedness? but in the
enjoyment of Christ: Christ will be ever with us to help us to pray, and to
hear our prayers: He will be with us to serve us, he will supply us, and carry
an end all our works for us.

And a second Reason is taken from the woeful nakedness of O my God (says
Ezra) I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee my God, for our
iniquities are increased over our head, etc. Ungirtnesse, or looseness, fills a
Christian with shame. I say, if this be the shamefulnesse of sin, the
nakedness of it, that a man is not so ashamed of the nakedness of his body,
as a Christian of the ungirtnesse of his spirit; why then (mind ye) he that
watches and keeps his garments, he enjoyes his own blessedness, and prevents
the shameful discovery of his own nakedness. The use of this point is thus
much.

First, it may teach us, how to esteem truly and rightly of the shame of a
man's nakedness. And idleness in a man's calling, is the very nakedness and
shame of a man So on the other side, what is righteousness? the white linen
of a Christian^? pure shining garments? They are such, that if the Lord look
upon a man, he is pure in his eyes; if the world look upon him, he is bright,
yea, it even dazels the eyes of wicked men. I say, it is the honor of a
Christiam, it is the comeliness of his person. There is no garment, that
becomes a Christian so well, as to be clothed from top to toe with the pure g
rments of Christ's righteousness imputed. Inherent righteousness is not so
comely, save in the eyes of men. A tender conscience, a spirit easy to be
entreated, is a comely spirit; a man void of passion, that has the bridle and
reins of his affections, it is a great beauty to a man; both righteousness
inherent, and righteousness imputed, they make us walk so, as no man shall
see our nakedness and shame. Diligence in a man's calling, and trustiness and
faithfulness are comely things in Christians. A well-girt Christian the Lord
will keep, that men shall not see his nakedness; though in many things he may
fail and be ashamed, yet the Lord keeps him that men see not his nakedness.
That is the first Use. And the second is this;

streams of Euphrates, that makes glad none but Cardinals, and Bishops, and
carnal hearts; whatsoever is a support to new Babylon, or old; whatsoever
maintains Popish Idolatry, or Turkish Tyranny: But to bestir themselves like
men, that so the work of the Lord may go forward, and the streams of the River
Euphrates may be dried up; what ever maintains Popish Idolatry, or Turkish
Tyranny, that all this were dried up. What a cause of joy would this be to all
the people of God! If ye hear any ill news from our native country, you will
hear nothing but shamefulnesse discovered. If men be not watchful,
shamefulnesse in Doctrine, and shamefulnesse in Worship, and shamefulnesse in
Government will be discovered, if men be not watchful at this day: For now is
the time that God goes about to pour out the Vials of his wrath upon the Throne
of the Beast, to dry up the Episcopacie. And ye shall find great way made for
the drying up of the river Euphrates, for it will suddenly be dried up. I say
(therefore) it behooves men in this time especially to be watchful; and
therefore let us pray for our Brethren, and for our selves in this regard, that
the Lord would gird them and us close, that our lamps may be burning, as men
that are bound to dry up this river Euphrates, that makes glad Rome, but sad
the hearts of Gods people.

Last of all (to make an end) it will be a ground of comfort to If the good man
of the house did know when the thief would come, he would surely watch, and not
suffer his house to be broken through, etc.) I say in such a case as this is;
if the Lord give up the spirits of men (as I doubt not but he does) those that
are so, take it for your comfort; ye that are close girt, carry it home as an
encouragement unto continual watchfulness. Such as walk before him
spiritually and watchfully, mark what the Lord promises you, for ye see what
the blessedness is which the Lord promises. He shall not have blessedness
only, but he is a blessed man. Blessed is he that watches, he shall enjoy the
Lord Jesus Christ, and all Sovereign good. He will gird himself, and will sit
down at table and minister unto you, Luke 17.7. A man will not say so to his
servants. But (mind ye) here is a difference, that if so be a man have walked
with a watchful frame of spirit, the Lord will serve him. A man that has kept
his garments without spot, the Lord so well approves the frame of his spirit,
as that he will gird himself, and will serve him, (that is) ready prepared to
do such a soul good.

He shall find him at supper, he shall find him at the ordinances, at every
spiritual duty he shall find him; at least, it will not be long, but he shall
find him. I set aside extraordinary cases of trial, times of temptation and
trial, which may come upon any of Gods servants; and these shall not be long.
The Lord will hide them under the shadow of his wings, and preserve them from
shameful falls; or will hide the shamefulnesse of them; and the Lord will for
the present be girt close to you: He will be ever and anon helping you in all
trials and temptations, when you have most need of him, then shall ye find him
ready to be most near you. And therefore it is a mavelous comfort, and stay
to a Christian whom the Lord helps to be thus watchful: He will be a Sun, and
a shield; and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk thus uprightly
with him, Psalm 84.11.

THE FOURTH PART, UPON THE SIXTH VIAL.
REVEL. 16.16: And he gathered them together into a place, called in the Hebrew
tongue Armageddon.
THESE words are the last part, of the description of the Event that follows,
upon the pouring out the Vial of the sixth Angel, and in them is set forth the
Efficacy of those three Spirits of Devils: who as they are described, by their
effect of working miracles, and going forth to gather men to the Battle of the
great day of God Almighty, ver. 14. So they do prevail, they did gather them
together into a field, wherein the Battle was fought, and that is called in
the Hebrew tongue Armageddon.

The place it self is of much difficulty, and much variety of Interpretations
has been made of it, I may not so much as reckon them up, much less spend
time to refute them.

In a word, two things are chiefly to be opened; First who is that [He] of whom
it is said, [Hee gathered them together etc.] Secondly what is this place.
Thirdly why is it described in the Hebrew tongue. Fourthly what is this unto
Christian Kings. And fifthly wherefore is this Battle fought here?

He gathered them together.] Some understand it of the Lord God Almighty, and
so it might well be meant, for it is he that gathers the Nations together
into the Valley of Iehosaphat; Joel 3.2. Though that be not meant of this
Armageddon, but is spoken of, Revel. 20.8, 9. The Lord indeed, may not be
excluded from this work, yet because the same word is used, ver. 14. and it is
an usual phrase in that language, to join Verbes of the singular number to
neuter Substantives of the plural, therefore I would translate this Verb of
the singular Number in the plural, and say [they gathered them,] they went
forth to persuade them, and they did prevail mightily with them. For the word
in the native and proper meaning of that Language, is to be translated in
another Language in the plural Number rather then in the Singular.

Into a place called [Armageddon] there be that translate it to Hebrew: A
Greek word might have expressed it as well. Some do interpret it to be the
Mount of delights, which the Turks shall compass; but you shall find that
this is not that Battle; that is it which shall be fought in the Valley of
Iehosaphat (though they be usually confounded by Interpreters) but that Battle
to which they are here gathered, is fought in the 19. chap. ver. 17. to 21. The
Battle of Gog and Magog, which is in the valley of Iehosaphat, is spoken of in
the 20. chapter of this book; therefore you read that the Devil was bound a
thousand years, and then loosed out of Prison, and at length cast into the
Lake that burns with fire, and brimstone; ( Rev. 20.10.) where he found the
Beast and the false Prophet, who were both cast in before, Rev. 19.20. So that
I dare not understand it to be meant indefinitly, nor of the Mount of delights;
for I know not why they here spoke of (to wit Christian Kings) should go to
Jerusalem to fight this Battle; their business will lie nearer home. And
whereas many think that the Jews shall have a great stroke in this Battle, I
dare not consent unto that, because there is but a way prepared for them in
this Vial; they shall come in the seventh Vial; These things put me off from
closing with these, and such like Interpretations: what then may be the meaning
hereof?

Armageddon does signify the hill of Megiddon, for Maygeddon, and Megiddon are
but different writings holding forth the same thing: But why should it be
called thus? shall this battle be fought there? there is no light for that.
But as he sometimes calls Rome by the names of Sodom, and Egypt; and
Babylon, because of their near resemblance one to another: So this is called
Armageddon, because of the near resemblance of that battle fought in this
field, unto those battles which were fought in Megiddon in old time; For it is
usual in the Prophesies of the New Testament, to allude unto things spoken of
in the Old: Now you may remember that three great battles have been fought in
Megiddon, and I conceive that the Holy Ghost makes the events of the battle
here fought, to be like the events of those battles.

First there was fought the battle of Deborah and Barak against Iabin and
Sisera which (the text says) was by the waters of Megiddo, Judge. 5.19. This
battle ended in a memorable and joyful victory, celebrated with a joyful
Psalm, Judge. 5. This overthrow there given was dreadful to all their
adversaries, they destroyed them all, and saved not a man of them: an eminent
victory it was, and therefore Deborah prays, so let all thine Enemies perish
O Lord, ver. 31. And David prays concerning Gods Enemies, do unto them as
unto Sisera, as to Iabin at the brook Kison, which perished at Endor etc. And
like hereunto will this battle in Armageddon be, when those Canaanites which
have oppressed the Church of God shall be oppressed, and crushed in pieces by
the 10. Kings that shall rise against them.

There was a second battle fought at Megiddon, and that by Josiah and Pharaoh
Nechoh who met Josiah at Megiddo, and slew him there, 2. Kings 23.29. whereupon
there grew a great Lamentation, in so much, that all Judah and Jerusalem
mourned for Josiah, and Jeremiah lamented for Josiah, and all the singing men
and singing women spoke of Josiah in their Lamentations, 2 Chronicles. 35.24, 25.
And hereupon Jeremiah wrote the book of Lamentations, as if he had seen the
City ruined, their wives ravished, their children tossed upon the spears of
their Enemies, because the breath of Church and Commonwealth, and every Family
was choked in the death of Josiah. And the like Effect of mourning shall this
battle fought in Armageddon work in the Jews, and shall become the rise of
their calling, when as they shall see the mighty power of Christ in rooting out
all Image Worship, and worshippers that have so long time hindered them, from
coming to the knowledge of the Messiah; then shall there be a great mourning
amongst them, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Mageddon, Zach.
12.10, 11. Therefore it is spoken of in the Hebrew tongue, because this shall
befall the Hebrew people, as when you read, Rev. 9.11. that the King of the
bottomless pit has his name in the Hebrew Abaddon, and in the Greek tongue
Apolion, it is to be understood that he is a destroyer both unto the Jews and
Gentiles: and if you shall afterward hear of some tnat sing Halelujah, know of
a truth that it principally concerns those, in whose language it is spoken,
(for every Nation is to praise God in his own Language:) so the battle will
be fought in Armageddon, because as it will be a great destruction to Gods
Enemies, so it will produce a peninentiall, and comfortable mourning at the
length unto the Jews.

MEGIDDON, these battles were fought in the valley? therefore the Holy Ghost
would not express it barely by the name of Magiddo, that so he might point
besides these, at another battle which was fought in the hill of Megiddon: now
the hill that looked over this valley, was Mount Gilboa, where the battle was
fought by the Philistines against Saul, upon whose overthrow David was
established in the Kingdom; The men of Israel and Saul, and his sons fell
down slain in Mount Gilboa, 1 Samuel 31.28. From hence went Saul to enquire of
the Witch at Endor, and that was in the valley of Megiddon; so they were nigh
one to another, for Baraks battle with Sifera was fought near Endor, Psalm.
83.9, 10. Thus we have an allusion to all these three notable and memorable
battles, whereas had he said in a place in the Hebrew tongue Gilboa, then had
he limited the allusion unto Saul's battle, who was indeed a destroyer of
Religion, but so other effects of this battle fought in this Text, had not
been pointed at. Therefore that he might graspe in all those Events, which
those battles that were fought about Megiddon brought forth, he says the place
was called Armageddon; and it is an usual thing that battles in the hill are
pursued to the valley, and in the valley to the Hill: the hill and the valley
lying near together. And indeed the same Events will this battle bring forth,
which fell out upon all the former battles at Megiddo. So then the sum is,
that these spirits went forth to gather these Popish and Heathen Princes
together, into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon, where the
battle shall have the like success, that it had of old unto the destruction
of Gods Enemies, the utter ruin of Antichrist, as of Saul, the settling of the
Kingdom of Christ upon David, unto the conversion of the Jews, who shall upon
this occasion mourn bitterly over him, whom they have pierced. Only let us a
little further clear one scruple which may somewhat remain; why shall the
Jews come in mourning at this victory? shall they mourn with Indignation for
the success of Christian Princes, and States? or shall it be a mourning of
compassion for the destruction of Rome? no verily, the text is plain, they
will rejoice for both, and join together with the rest of the Christian
Churches to praise the name of the Lord with Hallelujahs in the 19. chapter of
this book and the 1. ver. After these things, (that is after the destruction
of Babel) I heard a great voice of much people in Heaven saying Hallelujah: So
again ver. 3.6. they shall praise God with an Hallelujah, as well as the
Latins with a Laudate Dominum: It is therefore neither a mourning of
Indignation for the succ sse of the Saints, nor of compassion for the Rivers of
Babell; but (what is it then?) It is a mourning of compunction whereby they,
(seeing in this battle that Christ is indeed the true Messiah) they shall
mourn that they have been so long estranged from him; for two maine stumbling
blocks will this battle remove out of their way.

First, that which is their great stumbling block, to wit, the Epicure, and
maintains Idolatry and superstition; and though many in the world abhor his
ways, yet they look at them but as Sects, and inferior people and States, in
respect of the Pope and Popish Princes; but when they shall see that the Zeal
of Christian Princes has dried up those streams of Superstition, to the utter
confusion of the man of sin, then will they also see that, that Jesus whom
they have resisted all this while, even that Jesus is the Messiah.

Messiah comes, he shall destroy the four Monarchies spoken of, Dan. 2.45. The
stone that was cut out of the Mountain without hand, brake in pieces the Iron,
the Brass, the clay, the Silver, and the Gold: Now (say they) if your Jesus be
the Messiah, how comes it to pass the Monarchy stands upon his two feet,
the Turk and Pope? but they might have considered that the Lord Jesus has
been crushing them a great while together, and he never told them that he
would do it as soon as he came, though he will never leave until he has
crushed them to the dust, and when once this battle is fought, that there
shall be no more remaining, but what is the Jews work to do: then shall they
see the Prophecy of Daniel fulfilled, when the battle in Armageddon shall end
in the destruction of the man of Sin and then shall they see Jesus Christ
held forth in the purity of the Gospel, contrary whereunto no word of the
Prophets shall be found, and then shall they see him whom they have crucified
to be indeed both Lord and Christ: Then shall they see that the name of the
Lord Jesus, which they now curse in their Liturgies is blessed for ever, now
they will grieve that they have cursed his name blasphemously, praying that it
might perish from under these Heavens, and from above this Earth: for these
things will they mourn bitterly.

battle, is not a sufficient means to convert a people to the Lord, that are
fully possessed with their own ways: Here indeed may be a removens prohibens,
that may somewhat help forward; but it is needful unto their Conversion, that
some word of God be set home to their hearts to convince them, that the curse
of the Law which belongs unto them, it is Christ only that has borne it for
them.

Iethro (who was a Prince or Priest of Midian,) when he comes to see his
son Moses, who told him of all the great deliverances that God had wrought
for his people, Exodus 18. 8.9, 10. what says he? now I know that the Lord is
greater then all Gods: for in the thing wherein they dealt proudly he was
above them: This is the effect of his hearing of the wonders that God had
wrought for his people: so that you need not doubt it, but when these battles
are fought (though they shall be noe parties on the one side nor on the other)
yet they shall hear what will be reported upon this occasion, in the public
Ministry of the word, which will be sufficient to convince (as a Priest of
Midian; so) a Jew, that this is the Lord Jesus, who has so fulfilled all that
he has spoken of in his word. And moreover I do believe, that great will be
the power of the Ministry of the word in fighting of this battle, by
declaring the powerful presence of Christ with them, and for them; thus shall
the sword of the Ministry of the Gospel prevail mightily, by animating
Christian Princes and people, according as it is said, chap. 19.21. of this
book; the remnant were slain with the sword that proceeds out of his mouth,
that is, out of the mouth of Jesus Christ, and when the word of Christ goes
along with the sword of Princes, you need not wonder if it do not only
prevail against the Beast, and false Prophet, but also to make Satan fall
down from Heaven like lightning, even out of the hearts of the Jews, from
deceiving them any longer.

Thus much for the opening of the words, which though it have been long and
difficult, yet many times things most difficult to open, are sweetest to chew
upon, as in all bones, and the like; let us therefore from hence observe this
note.

That the Event and success of the great, and last battle, Antichrist, and
his Adherents, shall be like in success to the battles fought at Armageddon:
that is to say, desperate destruction to the Enemies of Gods people; joyful
victories, and Triumphs to the Churches of Christ; godly sorrows and
penitential mourning to the Jews.

All these several Events are inclusively spoke unto, in this word Armageddon,
and each branch of them are expressly mentioned in this book, and other
Prophesies of Scripture.

First, that there shall be great and desperate destruction to Gods people,
you read in chapter 19, that it will be so great that the Angel standing in
the midst of the Sun, cried with a loud voice saying to all the fowls,
that fly in the midst of Heaven, come, and gather your selves together to
the Supper of the great God, that ye may eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh
of Captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them
that sit on them, and the flesh of all men both free and bond, both small and
great: therefore this battle must not be sought only with the Ministry of
the Gospel, (though that will mightily concur) but with the sword, and
Weapons of war, else the fowls of Heaven would have little flesh to eat,
upon battles fought by the Ministry of the word: but Word and Sword fighting
together. Thus will there be wrought a great destruction to Gods Enemies, to
satiate all the fowls of Heaven.

Christ, as you read of their songs of praise, for the victory gotten by
Deborah and Barak, over Iabin and Sisera, Judges 5. So here there will be many
Hallelujahs, chap. 19.1. to the end of 7. which they sing again and again to
the Lord.

Israel of God, Zach. 12.10, 11. when they shall see Christ coming in his
glorious power, it will break their hearts with holy mourning over them, and
this shall be fulfilled when the new Jerusalem shall come from God out of
Heaven, as is prophesied in this book, chapter 21.2.10. Then shall the Tribes
of the Earth mourn bitterly after Jesus Christ.

Why will the Events of these battles be the same?

Gods Enemies will be like in their sins, unto those that fought against
Israel of old; Therefore they must partake in the like Judgments, wherein are
they like in their sins? In their oppressions of the people of God; so Jabin
mightily oppressed the children of Israel, Judges 4.3. And Saul was a malicious
persecuter of David: So has the man of sin, and his Adherents been
malicious persecuters of the Saints of God. And Saul took Counsel of the
Witch at Endor; So have these been famous for their witch-crafts, neither did
they repent of their sorceries, chap. 9. ult. Now as their sins are like, so
shall their punishments be, because of the unchangeable wisdom and Justice
of God, who punishes now as he did of old, Psalm. 83.9, 10. The likeness of
their sins, the likeness of Gods Justice, bring forth the like kind of
Judgments, now as of old.

If you shall ask the Reason why there shall be the like occasion of rejoicing.

It is because the Lord shall in like manner avenge his people Judge. 5.2. where
she calls upon Gods people to praise the Lord for the avenging of Israel: so
shall he now judge the Whore, and avenge the blood of his servants at her hand;
Rev. 19.2. And look as of old they went on destroying, to destroy the Enemies
of the people of God until they had consumed them: so shall the people of God
now do until they have extinguished utterly the name of Popery, and made it
like dung upon the face of the Earth: and as there was way made of old for the
glorious Kingdom of David; so shall there be way made by these Wars, for
David to be the Prince of Gods people for ever, as the Prophet Ezechiel
foretells, chap. 34.23, 34. and 37.24.25. not in visible presence; I dare not
take up such carnal Imaginations, as that Christ shall come bodily, and reign
here upon the Earth, but by his Spirit, and in his Servants, he shall reign
on the Earth: And all these things shall give the people of God great, and
wonderful causes of rejoicing.

If you shall ask in the third place, why Gods ancient people the Jews shall
be called to such penitential mourning.

1, The Reason first is taken from the sense, which they shall have of their
own sin, a sprinkling whereof we find Act. 2.37. when they were pricked in
heart, and said unto Peter, and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren,
what shall we do? such will the sense of their sin be hereafter, as will
affect, and afflict them with affliction like that of the Jews, for the death
of Josiah; yea it is set forth in Zach. 12.10, 11. by the deepest mourning that
can befall a family: they shall mourn as one mourns for his only son, and
be in bitterness, as one that is in bitterness for his first borne; It is
true, the loss of some wife may be greater then the loss of some son: but
he speaks there of the mourning of Husband and Wife together, and they can
loose no greater outward blessing, then their first borne: And such was
mourning for the death of Josiah, wherein they saw, the ruin of Family,
Church, and Commonwealth: Therefore Jeremy complains, that the breath of
their Nostrills was taken away, Lament. 4.20. They mistake that think it was
spoken of Zedechiah, for the Lamentations were written upon the death of
Josiah, 2 Chro. 37.25. which was a bitter mourning to them all: and such shall
be their mourning in their return to the Lord, when they shall see that the
death of Christ has been the ruin, and desperate destruction, and damnation
of all their Families for these many Generations, and that all the Calamities
that have come upon them for these 1600. years, have sprung from this, that
their Fathers have put Christ to death, by which means they have bin
ru^^agates upon the face of the earth, the sense of that horrible sin and
misery which they have brought upon themselves and theirs, by the death of
their Josiah, and Messiah shall thus deeply afflict them.

2. The second ground of their mourning, will spring not only from the sight
and sense of their sin, but of the wonderful and unspeakable grace and mercy
of God unto them to give them that Son of his who has given himself to death
for them: they shall be so ashamed, and confounded, with the sense of Gods
tender mercy and loving kindness toward them that have bin such bloody Butchers
of him as that they shall be swallowed up in the sense of such unspeakable
grace. Conviction for sin does greatly help forward legal humiliation; but for
a kindly and spiritual mourning, men must look upon Christ not only as killed
by them, but as killed for them: Thus shall it be with them according to what
is foretold, Mat. 24.30. When the sign of the son of man shall appear in
heaven, then shall all the Tribes of the Earth mourn* speaking of the twelve
Tribes of Israel who shall mourn because of him that comes to show such
mercy to them who have dealt so unworthily with him. This is the mourning which
will befall this people, like that of Megiddon, when this great battle shall
be fought.

Jesuits, or Cardinals, or Bishops, do not hearken to their whisperings,
whatsoever they shall present unto you, for this will be the issue of it,
whosoever they be that hearken unto them, they w ll never leave them, till at
length they have brought them to this field of destruction, they will go forth
to gather the Princes of the Earth, and whither will they gath^r them? even
thither where will be the Fatal ru^ne of them all: And therefore let all
Christian Princes understand it, that they cannot listen unto these Froggs,
Popish Bishops or Cardinals, or Jesuits, or who ever they be, that come unto
them on this errand, but they will by this means bring their Kingdoms to
utter destruction: Be wise now therefore O ye Kings; be instructed ye Judges
of the Earth: you see what woeful work will be made at length by these Froggs,
they will bring you into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon. King
James (who made a Paraphrase upon it) does interpret it to signify destruction
by deceit, as if it were compounded of two Hebrew words, which may so hold it
forth; But oh that it had been as well believed as told; how many sad changes,
and Agitations throughout all Christendom, might have bin prevented that have
risen upon harkening to these Froggs? destruction and Calamity are in their
ways; keep your selves therefore far from all fellowship with them, that
will be your wisdom.

In the second place; this may teach us to rejoice at home, Faith, although
they be yet to come; when David rejoiced in Christ, Psalm. 16.9* 10. and faith,
therefore my heart is glad and my glory rejoices, my flesh also shall rest in
hope, for thou will not leave my dead body in the Grave, neither will thou
suffer thy holy one to see Corruption; this David in spirit ^eeth long before,
and looks at his own Resurrection as sea^ed up unto him in the Incorruption
of the body of Jesus Christ: If David can rejoice so long before in beholding
this, then ought we to rejoice in beholding beforehand the destruction of
Gods Enemies, and his gracious deliverances of his people; for we may see it
beforehand by Faith, and behold it with confidence in the truth of him that
has promised it; for so also did Abraham, John 8 56. Your Father Abraham
rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad; and why should not the Fa
th of Christians be now more clear eyed, then at that time it was, to behold
the truth of his promises, and rejoice in the accomplishment of them?

Thirdly we may from hence gather some ground of Faith, to Jews will generally
mourn for the sight and death of Christ, as much as ever they mourned of old
for the death of Josiah: and least you should say that Parabolicall Scriptures
are not Foundations of Faith, (and yet any Scripture truly expounded is ground
sufficient for the truth it holds forth; yet you may find sundry other
Scriptures that speak expressly to their Conversion, Romans 11.12.15.25, 26. I
would not Brethren that ye should be ignorant of this mystery, that blindness
in part is happened unto Israel until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in,
(that is, until men turn back from Antichrist unto Christ, until they see
Christian Princes more sincere in the work of God) and then all Israel shall
be saved, for though they were cast off for their own sakes, yet are they
beloved for their Fathers sake, v. 28. For if thou were cut out of the Olive
Tree which is wild by Nature, and were grafted contrary to Nature into a good
Olive Tree: how much more shall these which are the natural branches be
graffed into their own Olive Tree? for (says he) God is able to graffe them
in again; and he will do i^, or else the Apostles Argument will not hold.
Also that of the Apostle to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 3.14.15.16. Even unto this
day when Moses is read the Veil is upon their heart: but when it (that is,
Israel) shall turn unto the Lord the Veil shall be taken away: this is not
spoken of two or three sprinklings of Israel; that does not make up an Israel,
much less all Israel, as Paul speaks in the place forenamed, and what
mystery were it, if it were meant only of those that were brought home by
Peter's Ministry? But that blindness is come upon them, till the fulness of the
Gentiles be come in, and that then all Israel shall be saved, this is indeed a
Mystery to the Gentiles, as the calling of the Gentiles was a Mystery to the
Jews. Thus we see there are clear Scriptures for it, which when we do see,
we may more freely take up parabolicall Scriptures, perceiving what they work
upon, and build our Faith on them, thereby, to be strengthened in Prayer, for
such a blessing, that they may come and sing Hallelujahs with us, and we may
sing praises with them.

Fourthly, we may learn from hence, the true nature of Christ whom we have
pierced, and then indeed we mourn aright, when we mourn over him. It is not
saving Repentance, that which the Law works, though it does indeed make way
for it, but they see him and mourn over him; the sight of him works godly
sorrow in the heart.

And what is the measure of it? it is even such as for the loss of a man's
only Son, and his first borne, the staff, and and stay, of his name and
life, and of his prosperity: Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go
childlesse, says Abraham? such as was the mourning of Judah, and Jerusalem,
when they saw Family, Church, and Commonwealth all plucked up by the roots in
the loss of one man: such is the mourning of every godly soul, sees all his
hopes plucked up by the roots for the want of Christ.

But you will say, is it not godly mourning unless it be Christ?

I answer, mourning for one of these may indeed make more God are open, and the
Fountains of the great deep are open; this or that deep Affliction seiseth
upon a man, nature sets a man on work to mourn, and grace does not hinder
it, but when a man mourns for want of Christ, the windows of Heaven indeed
are open; but this mourning finds much opposition, below even from our hearts
within: a small shallow channel coming down from a Hill, will make a great
noise; when a man mourns for his only Son, it comes down from God as a
Judgment, down hill, nothing hinders: but this mourning for Christ is like
a stream that goes up hill, (as it were) and through many reeds and flagges,
and therefore no wonder if it makes not such a noise, though it be a far
greater stream then the other. Such is this spiritual mourning: for in these
things it does exceed all other griefs and mournings whatsoever.

It is more durable then any other sorrow, our time in this world will never
wear it out; whereas other sorrow, though it be for a man's only Son will
not last always, time will wear it out.

It is an Increasing sorrow: other sorrows are more moderated every day then
other, but this grows still more and more powerful, and will eat up all
other griefs: If a man have but a wound in his conscience, it will wear out
all other Crosses, but a wounded Spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.14. It is a
very strong mourning, as we may perceive, Ps. 102.3.4. etc. where the Holy man
complains, that his days are thereby consumed like smoke, and his bones
burnt as an hearth, his heart is smitten and withered like grass, so that he
forgets to eat his bread, etc.

David mournes for Absalom, there is much Carnal Affection in it, in so much
that Ioab does perceive it, and deals sharply with him for it, but this
mourning for Christ being heavenly, is not so clogged with those boisterous
distempers which other mournings are filled withal.

Christ as wronged by him; and yet sees himself saved by Christ: as this
object is transcendant, so is the mourning transcendant also, therefore it is
said, Romans 8 26. The Spirit makes Intercessions for us with groans that cannot
be uttered. Thus being set upon Christ, and fomented by his Spirit, it is
eternal in the causes of it, and will lift up the soul above all undermoone
discouragements, that a man will look upon them as things, which God has
given and taken, and his grief concerning them will van sh away; but this
being settled upon eternal obj cts can end no sooner then life it self: And if
our life in this world were eternal, so would this mourning be, although
indeed when this life shall have an end, it will be swallowed up in a perfect
fruition of Jesus Christ.

In the last place, I would commend this unto all the children of God, that
they Regulate their mourning according to this mourning: Let us mourn for
Christ, and for his death, and be truly sensible of the great Injuries which
we have done unto him, that so our grief may swallow up all the baseness of
our hearts, and all worldly sorrows which cause death, 2. Cor. 7.10. But godly
sorrow works Repentance never to be repented of: Let us therefore in all our
private and public Administrations mourn after him, and mourn for him, that
thereby we may be kept from such entanglements, and discouragements as might
interrupt us in our Christian Course upon other meaner occasions.

THE SEVENTH AND LAST VIAL OPENED.
Revel. 16.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. And the seventh Angel poured out his Vial into
the Air, and there came a great voice out of the Temple of heaven from the
Throne, saying, It is done.

And there were voices, and thunders, and lightnings; and there was a great
earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an
earthquake, and so great.

And the great City was divided into three parts, and the Cities of the
nations fell: and great Babylon came into remembrance before God to give unto
her the cup of the fierceness of his wrath.

And every Island fled away, and the mountains were not found.

And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone about the
weight of a talent, and men blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail,
for the plague thereof was exceeding great.


THese words describe unto us the pouring out of the seventh Vial, by the
seventh Angel; and set forth it is by a threefold Argument.

1. First by the subject upon which it fell, it fell upon the Air It is
translated [into the Ayre] but the same word in the third and fourth Verses is
translated upon (the Sea) and upon (the Rivers and fountains of water:) so it
fell upon the Air, otherwise to say, into the Air, might seem to look at
some further subject, whereupon it fell, but that is not the meaning.

Secondly, by an adjunct accompanying the same, to wit [ A great voice out of
the Temple of heaven, etc.] for I cannot call it an effect, but an adjunct it
was.

Thirdly, by the effects, and they are threefold.

First, of Terror and Horror. [There were voices, and thundrings, and
lightnings] all which do strike Terror and Horror into the hearts of men.

Second effect was changes, and alterations of states [And there was a great
earthquake] amplified by an argument taken from the less [Such as was not
since men were upon the earth] so great for amplitude, so mighty for power.

Third effect was, the working of distracting, and destroying calamities upon
three several sorts of subjects.

First upon Cities, and among them,

First, the great City was divided into three parts, which (with leave of
Interpreters that take it to be a distinct City from Babylon) I take to be
meant of Babylon, which now came up into remembrance before God, and that is
rendered as a reason how she came to be destroyed, for she came up into
remembrance before God, to give her the wine, first of distraction, secondly of
destruction.

Secondly, the cities of the Nations fell, the great City was destroyed, it
fell to ruin.

The second sort of subjects upon which this distraction fell, were [Every
Island, and every mountaine] the Islands fled away, the mountains were not
found.

The third sort, was the sons of men, and the plague that fell upon them was
a great hail out of heaven, which is amplified.

1. By the measure or weight of it [every stone about the weight of a Talent]

2. By the effect it wrought in men, [They blasphemed the God of heaven] set
forth by the cause of their blaspheming again repeated, because of the plague
of the hail, for the plague thereof was exceeding great.

3. Let us first open the words, and then sum them up into some doctrinall
observations.

1. What (in the first place) is here meant by [Ayre] doubtless not the
element of air that we breath in: for all the Vials are Vials of wrath, and
therefore poured upon subjects of Gods displeasure: Now God is not offended
with the air, which is his creature, but as you read in the first verse of
the Chapter. All these Angels received a commandment to pour out their Vials
upon the earth, and that is meant of the earthly Antichristian Church, and they
all fulfill this Commandment upon whatsoever they pour out their Vials; it is
still upon the Antichristian state: nor are the messengers of Gods wrath (which
come out of the Temple, and have their loins girded with golden girdles)
provoked against the Air which themselves do breath in; nor could a plague be
upon the Air, but it would fall upon Christian Churches as well as Popish.
Others do interpret it (with much more probability) to be upon the kingdom
of Satan, for he is called the Prince that rules in the air, Ephesians. 2.2. he
also rayseth up storms in the air, and fiery meteors therein, Job. 1.16. So
they conclude that wheresoever the Devil has to do, whether it be in Popery
or Paganism, this Vial is poured upon all his kingdom. I think the doctrine
is truly gathered from this place, that the holy Ghost intends to pour out a
judgment upon all his kingdom: yet I cannot say that the words do so
properly hold forth a judgment upon the Element of air: for all the Vials are
to be poured upon the earth, the Antichristian Church, called earth in
opposition to the heavenly and pure Church mentioned Revel. 15.5. there being
in it the whole Fabric and Systeme of the world: there is an earth, and that
is the lowest and basest common sort of Catholics in that world; and there is
a Sea, their corrupt Religion; there be Rivers, and fountains of water, those
that derived their corruptions into all countries (Priests and Monks, etc.)
there is a Sun in this world, the great light thereof: the family of Austria
in the common wealth, and the Popes supremacy in the Church: there is the
throne of the beast, the form of their government, and manner of judicature:
Afterward comes in Euphrates, the stream of all those corruptions that make
glad the City of Rome: Therefore this Air seems to be the Air of that
Antichristian Church: Look therefore what you can conceive to be the Air,
which this Antichristian Church does breath in, and that is the subject
whereupon this Vial is poured: And although indeed Mahumetry, and Paganism
come to be afflicted here by it; yet is it but an effect of pouring out this
Vial upon the Air. Now if you look into Chap. 9.1, 2. of this book you shall
find that the Air of this worldly Church is the smoke which arose out of the
bottomless pit, and darkened the Air, so that you could not see the Sun,
much less the Moon and Stars: and what was that smoke out of the
bottomless pit, but the darkness of ignorance from whence sprung all those
Locusts, and that King over them, verse. 11. the angel of the bottomless pit,
whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, he destroys the hope of the
conversion of the Jews: and in the Greek tongue has his name Apollyon, he
destroys them also, and sprung out of this ignorance. There is a double use
of Air, and this darkness corrupted both. 1. There is an use of it for
sight; for through the Air, if is be clear, you see all the heavenly lights,
and by their help, all inferior bodies. 2. It is the breath of life, which
maintains the life of men, and is the supportance of their vitals. And in
both these things does it fitly resemble heavenly, and saving knowledge, by
which, 1. In the first place, we see Jesus Christ the Sun of righteousness to
our justification; by which we see the Moon, that is, the true state of
Churches according to the Gospel; by which we see the Stars, the people of
God, and who indeed are his people, that shine like lights in the world: And
hereby they see all things here below, and judge rightly of them. And 2. by the
same saving knowledge do we breathe in our vitals (that we may so speak) our
spiritual life; By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many,
Esaias 53.11. And this is life eternal to know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent, John 17.3. Now if this Air be choked, you can
neither see Jesus Christ to your justification, nor breath in any ordinance of
his to your salvation, nor can you see what is the true Church, nor who are the
true Saints of God; you can rightly discern of nothing, if once the Sun, and
the whole body of the air be darkened; but if how there come an Angel that
shall pour out his Vial upon his smoke of the air, and dispell thereby the
clouds of darkness, and ignorance; then shall you clearly see Jesus Christ,
and the true state of his Church, and of all visible Saints, then shall you
draw in true and lively breath from every ordinance of God. This is therefore
the air whereupon this Vial shall be poured, and that will be the dispelling
of the darkness of it: The Lord will send forth such a bright and clear
knowledge of his Christ, and Church, and Saints, and holy things which will
prevail so far, as to dispell all the fogs and mists of darkness, not alone
in the Antichristian State, but in all the world: so that all Nations shall be
brightened with the knowledge of God: All Asia shall see the vanity of
Mahumetry, and all the Pagan Nations, the fondness and blindness of their
Superstitions. And the Jews shall then see, and bewail their blindness, and
wretchedness in standing out against Jesus Christ: So that most true it is
which godly Interpreters have said, that hereby all the kingdoms of Satan are
threatened, though it be rather an effect of it, then the true, and proper
sense.

2. What is then the adjunct that follows, or goes along with it: [There
came a great voice out of the Temple of heaven from the Throne] And that Throne
is set in the Church. Rev. 4.2, 3. Behold, a Throne was set in heaven, and one
sat on the Throne, which is the Lord himself: who is resembled by three
precious stones, holding forth the three persons in Trinity: A Jasper having
(as they say) a white circle round about it; representing the Eternity of the
Father; a Sardine stone, of a fleshy color, representing Jesus Christ, who
took our flesh upon him. An Emerauld being of a green color, refreshing the
eyes of those that look upon it, representing the Spirit, who is (as the
Rainbow) a token of fair weather, and is a comfortable refresher wheresoever
he comes. Now this voice coming from heaven, and from the Throne, it comes
also apparently from God, saying, It is done; that so all men may see it to be
the revealed, and holy will of God, that all these things should be thus
accomplished.

3. It is done] what is done? for here is no nominative case before the verb.
But this is that which is done, the mystery of iniquity is abolished. And the
mystery of God is fulfilled: For of this it was spoken, which you read Rev.
10.7. where the Angel (that stood upon the Sea, and upon the earth) tells us,
That in the days of the seventh Angel, when he shall sound (whose Trumpet is
sounding to this day) the mystery of God should be fulfilled; And that stands
chiefly in two things.

1. In the destruction of all his enemies.

2. In the accomplishment of all his gracious promises to the conversion of the
Jews; and both these shall be accomplished in the pouring out of this Vial, as
we may read at large, Ezekiel. 39.17. to the end of the Chapter; where the holy
Prophet speaks of this very time, when the enemies of the Church shall come
out against them, there will be a final accomplishment of all the mysteries of
iniquity, and of all the hostility of the Lords enemies against his Church: It
is also the accomplishment of all his gracious promises, and therefore he says
Rev. 21.6. When once the new Jerusalem comes down from God out of heaven,
then Christ himself says, It is done. All his promises are now performed, and
his great works now fulfilled; this is meant, when it is here said, It is
done; And the Lords voice it is, for had it been the voice of some
Church Officers alone, it might have reached to the Church, but not to the ends
of the world: but when the Lord himself speaks, whose voice is like the
voice of thunder, then is it heard from one end of the earth unto another. All
men shall see the great works that he has done upon the face of the earth,
Popery, and all false Religion abolished; the Kingdom of Christ established,
from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof. This is the Adjunct.

Now for the Effect: There is an Effect of Terror, and of agitations* and
changes, and an effect of destroying calamities, for I cannot well gather the
notes that arise, unless these things be all opened, then I conceive they may
be handled with brevity.

4. For the effect of terror: the thunderings, and lightenings, and the
voices, are the same with those that are said to come out of the Throne, Rev.
4.5. Like unto that dispensation of old, Exodus 20.18. Wherein were thunderings,
and lightenings, and in stead of voices, there is put in, the noise of the
Trumpet, and these held forth the terror of the Lord in giving of the Law, in
so much that Moses himself said I exceedingly fear, and quake, and much more
did the people fear and tremble: for such is the convincing dreadful power of
the Law of God, that let a man but hear it, and have it effectually applied,
and it will make the meekest and most innocent of the servants of God to
tremble; It will make the mountains and hills to tremble. The voice of Gods
servants is like the voice of a trumpet, Esaias 58.1. piercing deep into the
ears and hearts of men, but the voice of himself exceeds. So the meaning
is, That upon the pouring out of this Vial upon the air, there shall be
terrible thunderings, and lightenings, and voices like founds of Trumpets upon
the hearts of men, that shall make them tremble and quake: The Lord will so
terribly affright, and amaze the sons of men with the power of his holy word,
and will, as that it shall suddenly break forth all the world over; for in this
manner does the Lord begin his saving dispensations toward men, even with
terrible lightenings, and thunderings, and earthquakes, thereby partly
convincing men of sin, and subduing their hearts, and confounding their
malicious enemies. For the next Effect.

5. There was great earthquake, etc.] And that imports agitatations and
changes, and not terror only; they are such as will not cease, until they
have removed the things that are shaken, that the things which cannot be shaken
may remain, so does the Apostle, Heb. 12.26.27. Interpret the Prophecy of
Haggai. 2.6. It argues (says he) the removing of those things that are
shaken; and he interprets it concerning the Church estate in that place; and he
will also shake all the Kingdoms of the world, as the same Prophet Haggai told
Zerubbabel, Chap. 2.21, 22. saying, I will shake the heavens and the earth: and
I will overthrow the throne of Kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength of
the Kingdoms of the Heathen, etc. And so the Lord did overthrow the great
Persian Monarchy by the Grecian, and the Grecian Monarchy by the Roman, and
the Roman by barbarous Nations, and the Lord has bin shaking them eversince,
and will shake them hereafter with such a shaking as never was the like: you
read of a great earthquake, when as Rome, of Pagan, became Christian, Rev.
6.12. But that was a small shaking, unto this earthquake, for still the
Persians are Idolaters, and many Pagans in the world; that shaking brought in a
form of Christianity, but the saving knowledge of Christ was yet in a great,
measure wanting; that form of Christianity which then came in, made way for
Popery to creep in fast into the Churches, but this will shakeout Popery, and
when by it the Popish air is smitten, the Lord will also shake all the world
by it; and the time does hasten.

6. Now for the third effect, which is a distracting, and destroying calamity,
upon Cities, upon Islands, and Mountains, and upon men: Among cities, here is
the great City, and the cities of the Nations, and Babylon. Some good
Interpreters look at Babylon to be Constantinople: For my part I dare not
think but one of these is put expositively for the other; Babylon for the great
city: Now that great city which is spiritiually called Sodom, and Egypt, Rev.
11.8. is that great city, which reigns over the Kings of the earth, and that
is Rome, as all confess; and that Babylon, Chap. 17.18. and this is the same
city, which the Kings of the earth, and the Merchants of the earth do mourn
for when she is destroyed, and say, Chap. 18.10. Alas, alas, that great city
Babylon, that mighty city, etc. and that also by their confession is Rome. And
so this Latter mention of it, does but show the reason why it comes to be
divided into three parts, and why the cities of the Nations fell, for Babylon,
came up into remembrance, etc. The great city then is Babylon, and that is
divided into three parts: I should not think that it is spoken of the breach
of the natural walls of the city by the earthquake; but it will be divided
into three factions; some will stick fast unto Popery, and others of the
people of God that before durst not openly profess Religion, will now renounce
Popery, for such there shall be in Rome when it is near to be destroyed, unto
whom it shall be said, Rev. 18.4. Come out of her my people, etc. and what the
third part may be, there is not light, for in this place, what light other
places may give, we shall (if God please) see hereafter, mean while it is
sufficient to understand that it will be divided into three parts: and what if
the third part be a Neutrall between both the other?

7. What were the cities of the Nations? Those are they that trod the Church of
God under foot, Rev. 11.2. such they were who did subject themselves to Popish
Government, the cities of those Nations shall fall, whosoever they be that are
found adoring Rome, they shall fall: for Babylon her self shall come up into
remembrance before God, to give unto her the Cup of the wine of the fierceness
of his wrath, which shall infatuate her until she be utterly destroyed by
those ten Kings that shall hate her, and eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire.

8. And every Island fled away, and the mountains were not found.] He speaks
not of earthly Islands, but you must understand that he speaks of the
mountains, and Islands of the Antichristian state; what are the mountains?
They are the places where they went a whoring after their Gods in old time,
Jer. 3.6. She is gone upon every hight mountain, and under every green tree,
and there has played the harlot, there they had built them Chappells, and
there they had placed their confidence, in respect of which when they come to
repent; they shall return, and say, ver. 23. Truly in vain is salvation
hoped for from the hills, and from the multitudes of mountains, answerable
unto which are the great temples built unto false Gods they shall flee away: In
the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.22. there was no Temple seen, no Temple consecrated
to this or that Saint shall be found therein.

What are the Islands? They are grounds separated from the earth, by the Sea:
The Sea is the corruption of Religion, upon which the second Vial was poured.
Therefore such places as are consecrated by Popish Devotions, as Church yards,
and such other Popish grounds, they are these Islands, that shall flee away;
you shall no more hear tell of consecrated Churchyard, or any such matter all
the world over. Then will fall to the ground all your Cathedral Churches, and
all those high Places that overtoppe the people of God, and hinder the growth
of the things of God near about them, though those things that be
superstitiously set apart for holy ends be never so glorious, they shall be all
banished and vanish away, there will be no more noise of them.

9. And upon men there fell a great hail out of heaven] The Allusion by some,
is thought to be unto the hayle spoken of Josh. 10.11. which the Lord cast
down from heaven upon the Cananites, so that mo^e died with hailestones, then
they which the children of Israel slew with the Sword: but I cannot say, that
hail storm is here alluded unto: for here men did not die upon it, but
blasphemed only; unless it should be spoken of their everlasting death in
hell, but that were a common judgment to all the wicked: but I rather think
it is an allusion to the hail storm in, Egypt, whereof the effect was, that
they sinned, and hardened their hearts yet more, Exodus 9.34. Well then, if it
be such an hayle as does not kill men, but provoke them to blaspheme, what
kind of judgment might it be? Interpreters do not tell us: So that we can
take no better course to know it, then to see what allegorical hail stones
mean in Scripture, for by comparing Scriptures together, you shall have the
full meaning of every part of Gods Counsel. For this end let us look in Esaias
28.17. where the Prophet tells us that the hail shall sweep away the refuge
of lies, when once Christ is laid in the foundation, ver. 16. then all the rest
of the refuges of the sons of men, that are lying refuges, shall be swept away:
There is also another allusion suting hereunto in Ezekiel. 13.11.13. where the
Lord threateneth against the wall that is dawbed with untempered mortar: there
shall be an overflowing shower, and ye O great hail stones shall fall, and a
stormy wind shall rent it. So then, this kind of hail storm is such a
plague of God upon men as shall destroy all their lying refuges, and men shall
then insult over them, and say, where is the dawbing wherewith you have dawbed
it? So then, at this time the Lord will send an hail storm that shall
discover all the counterfeit Religions in the world, all the juggelings of
their Miracles, all the fair seeming pretenses of Popery, or any other
Religion, all their doctrines of merits, and confidences in their prayers to
Saints, and Angels, and superstitious Devotions, an hail storm shall fall
upon them all in such sort, that you shall see the vanity of them: And all the
world shall see, that all Relgions besides Christianity, are but a refuge of
lies, and in the end their jugglelings, and sophistry shall be blown up, and
blasted: Some shall be shaken out of them, and settled upon better bottoms, and
others will be provoked to blaspheme, they will so vex themselves with
extremity of anguish, for that they are thus bereaved of their old comfortable
good days; and oh the joyful festivals that they were wont for to keep in
their Abbeys, and superstitious places, for the loss of which they shall
blaspheme the Lord, and true Religion, and all the instruments of the Gospels
propagation. Such a thing as this we read of Rev. 11.15. When as the seventh
Angel sounded, there were great voices in heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this
world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, etc. There it is
said (...), but here (...) (the thing was then in doing, but now it is done)
Then the Nations were angry says the Text, ver. 18. and a great hail there
fell, when they began to become the Kingdoms of Jesus Christ, and there was an
earthquake, ver. 19. but never such an earthquake as this will be; so mighty,
and so great, that will blast, not Popery alone, but all the Hotamocks in this
country, and all that are found among other Indians in other parts of the
world, an Hail storm shall fall upon them all, and blast all their green
groves and arbours, wherein they were wont to be worshipped: Thus have you seen
(as the Lord has been pleased to help) the meaning of these words: Let us now
gather one note from them; For I would not long dwell upon there Aenigmaticall,
I mean Parabolicall Scriptures.

The Doctrine is, That when the darkness of Popish, and hellish Rev. 9.2. then
shall men see Jesus Christ to be all in all unto Justification, Sanctification,
Consolation, which in Popery you could not: then shall the true Church be seen,
which like the Moon, borrows all the light it has from the Sun: (true indeed
if the Moon be taken for the world, then she treads it under her feet, Rev.
12.1.) In Popery you could not see what a true Church was, they will tell you
of this and that Church, but they are no true Churches. But when this veil
shall be removed, then shall you clearly know that the true Church is not a
Catholic visible, nor a Cathedral, nor a Diocesan, nor a Provincial Church.
Then shall you see the Stars of heaven, you shall know who are the true
officers of the Church, not Paratours, and Proctours, Deacons, and Archdeacons,
Bishops, and Archbishops over many Churches, they are not the lights which the
Lord has set therein: And you shall then see who were the true members of the
Church, Not the Canonized Saints, not such as Saint George, who was an ancient
Heretic, but you shall see them to be such as are spoken of, Phil. 2.15.
blameless, and harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke, shining as lights
in the world; then shall you see the Scripture more clearly, true doctrine,
and worship, and government as it is held forth in the Gospel of Christ, and
when you shall see these things, then, It is done; Even all that God has to do
in the world, for any further Reformation expect it not, Rev. 10.7. when the
time is come that the seventh Angel has blown his Trumpet, the Lord will not
delay, but it shall then be fulfilled, and the Lord will clearly manifest to
all Nations the great grace which he has to show to the sons of men, and this
is long ago foretold, Esaias 25.6, 7, 8. In this mountain shall the Lord of
hosts make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the Lees,
of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the Lees well refined: And he will
destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all people, and
that is the pouring out of this Vial upon the air, for the face of the
covering, is the air in my Text, Then will the Lord make a feast of fat
things, then will he swallow up death in victory, and wipe away tears from off
all faces, and the rebuke of his people shall be taken away from off all the
earth: this is also prophesied of, Esaias. 11.6, 7, 8, 9. They shall not hu^t nor
destroy in all mine holy mountain, and the reason is: for the earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea: and then, It is
done: The mystery of iniquity is abolished, there is no more darkness, nor
destruction, and the calling of the Gentiles, which was a mystery to the Jews,
shall be then fully accomplished, and the calling of the Jews, which the
Apostle calls a mystery to us Gentiles, Romans 11.25. shall be then fulfilled,
and so the mystery of God is finished.

Men and brethren what shall we do to be saved? as did the Jailer when he had
been soundly shaken with the earthquake, Acts 16.26.30. and so it will be with
Kingdoms, when God has in like sort shaken them, they will contend for true
Religion, and will not then be baffled out and deluded with vanities, as now
they be: when the spirits of men are terrified, and they feel no salvation in
their Religion, they know not what shall become of their precious souls, this
will set all the world on work to look about them: for upon this ground you
shall see Indians, and Jews, and Pagans gaping after salvation, when they see
by these terrible storms, and thunders, that all their Religions are but so
many refuges of lies, then is there work in hand indeed, which when God has
begun he will also finish it unto the day of Christ, and it will be such an
earthquake, as was never heard of in the world: Heretofore so long as this
work was found among poor Christians, the great Lords of the world persecuted
them, and devised all manner of cruel torments for them: but when they felt
that the wrath of God was kindled against them, then their hearts fell, and
they were all in a combustion for the state of their souls before the Lord:
now they were glad to renounce their Jupiters, and Junoes, and to embrace
Christianity, and to hearken to a better Covenant, this is the effect of
thunderings and lightnings, and voices it soon blasteth Idolatry, and forces
man to seek after a clearer passage to heaven.

The second Reason is taken from the power of the saving knowledge

1. It subdueth and tameth the hearts of men that now they will join themselves
unto the people of God, Esa. 11.6.7, 8. the Wolf shall lie with the Lamb, the
Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, etc. So great is their change in their
hearts, that men's Ravenous tyrannies are taken away, and there is wrought in
them, a kindly sweet unshaken frame, that will so break forth against Gods
people as formerly; thus does the earthquake shake out dross, and corruptions,
and establish the heart in a sweet gracious frame of Spirit.

2. Secondly, The knowledge of Christ will breed division, as well as
conjunction; Think you (says Christ) that I am come to send p^ace, I tell you
nay, but the sword: To set men at variance among themselves, the father against
the son, and the son against the father, and the mother against the
daughter, etc. And this division is made in Cities, and in Kingdoms, Act.
14.4. The city was divided, and part held with the Apostles, and part held with
the Jews: so it is in the Text, the great city was divided into three parts,
some are hardened in their ignorance, and some are drawn out of it, and a
third part will stand Neuters between both to see, which way the balance will
turn, and these are also hardened in their blindness.

3. Thirdly the saving knowledge of Christ has in it this power to cause men
to rise up in arms against all the enemies of the Gospel of Christ in a
lawful way of God: There is a power in true Religion, that makes the hearts
of the timorous to be stiff, and strong, that where as men were before afraid
of the power of the house of Austria, and of the King of Spain, and of the
rest of the Catholic Princes, there is a power in the Spirit of Christ, that
will dispell all these, had but men the zeal of God in their hearts, it would
make all these fears to be like Scar-crowes, and makes men bold to bid battle
unto all those that stand out against Religion, so far as the Laws of a
State may bear them out.

4. A fourth power of this knowledge, is to blow up all the inventions of men
in the worship of God, whereby men have deluded themselves and others; when once
men's hearts are lifted up in the waves of the Lord, as it is said of
Johoshaphat that his heart was, 2 Chro. 17.6. and then he took away the High
places, and groves out of Judah: So when the zeal of God lifts up the hearts
of his people, then will they not endure a consecrated place in all the world
where they come. And when this Vial is poured out, the earth shall be full of
this knowledge of God, and then all the Chapels of Ease, and Churches of
state, and Temples of glory, whereby the world has been deluded, they will
not leave them a stone upon a stone that shall not be thrown down: This is
the second Reason, taken from the power of saving knowledge, which subdueth
men's wild natures, works holy division, gives courage, and the power of
zeal against all superstitions, and inventions of men, though now in some
places you may not pass through with a burden, nor look upon the wall
thereof: The zeal of the Lord of host will blow them up, those places will be
laid open to the rest of the streets, and become but common soil, they will
not then be regarded but trampled upon.

hypocritical shifts, and goodly pretenses, and wash down their untempered
dawbings, wherewith they have dawbed the walls of their standing in the Church
of God: He will so rend them to pieces, that if they will not come in, he will
leave them to such open blasphemies, that you shall clearly see there is no
more hope of their conversion, nor salvation.

The Use of this point in the first place, may serve to teach

Secondly, Learn from hence to see what great need we Psalm. 67.1. God be
merciful to us, and bless us, and cause his face to shine upon us: And for
what end? That thy way may be known upon earth, and thy saving truth among all
Nations. And when once the light of the Gospel is dispersed, it will bring in
all Nations, it will thunder upon them, and never leave until it have changed
them. If this knowledge of God come amongst an army of men, they will not touch
any thing that is their brethrens, not meddle, not make with any to do them
harm, no man's purse shall be taken from him, no man's goods taken away without
due recompense, only they will not be deluded with shadows, nor suffer
mountains to overtop them, neither will they be encompassed with hands: they
will raise such an earthquake first, in Church, and Commonwealth, as you will
at length wonder at, for though it begin in a corner of the world, it will not
cease till it have shaken all Christendom, for when men once begin clearly to
see which is the true Church of God, that it is not Cathedral, nor
Provincial, nor Diocesan, but congregationall only, the officers whereof are
godly Pastors, and Teachers, and ruling Elders, and Deacons. And when they see
that the Saints which they have embraced, and esteemed, are not the true Saints
of God, nor these the Churches, nor those the officers of Christ wherewith they
have been gulled: but they see now who are the Saints of the most high; and can
put a difference now between precious and vile: In this way men will go on to
raise such an earthquake (and that not besides the Law neither) that if any
City rise up against them, fall it must, and stoop unto them, and at length
Rome it self shall fall, and all the Cities of the Nations that cleave unto
her, and every mountain shall be rooted up, and all their consecrated places
shall lie level with the common soil, this will the Lord bring to pass, and
will not leave till he has wrought his great work in the world, this is his
revealed will, and it will not fail until every jot and tittle of it be
fulfilled. Let us therefore pray both night and day, in season, and out of
season for our brethren in our native country, for whom God has wrought all
these great things, and for whom greater things yet remain to be done, for whom
our work is to wrestle with God, that they may not perish for lack of
knowledge, nor mistake a false Church for a true, (and false it is, if it be
either Cathedral, Provincial, National, or Diocesan) But pray we, that they
may see the Moon, which God has set in the Firmament, even the true form of
a Church of the new Testament. And also that Christ may be better known in all
the parts of his Kingly office, and government in his Church, that they may see
who are Papists, and who are the true Saints of God, and who are counterfeit,
that they discern between clean and unclean: for if the saving knowledge of
God grow up unto any ripeness among them, it will not bear many things that
are there remaining, many dawbings with untempered mortar there are that must
be beaten down: And great pity were it that they should want any light which
might possibly be afforded unto them, and marv^llous useful will it be that we
should not be wanting on our parts to help with what light we have, that so
there may be no more refuges of lies in that land, I say this is mightily to
be wrastled for, both in prayers, and in all Christian endeavors: for verily
this is the work of God, meet for every man to set his heart, and hand unto,
even to pull away the veil of darkn^^^e from all faces, and from all the
minds of men, and to discover clear^ly the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and all
the holy ways of his sactuary, that every man may see, and see clearly, that
men may not make a dawbing of part Reformation, and part of Superstition, part
Popery, and part Protestanisme, part uniformity, and part conformity; O that an
hail storm might not be wanting to batter down such dawbing, that the work
of God might not cease, but amount unto the praise of the glory of his rich
grace in Jesus Christ, and extend unto the accomplishment of every holy word of
his truth.

The third use may serve to instruct you in the wonderful it is spoken, then
the providence of God will say, it is done, and then if you fail long with
Gods providence in Gods ordinance, you need not fear, nor wonder, if weak
beginnings come unto great issues: For now you take opportunity by the foretop
(as they are wont to say) if you carry along business according to the word,
the Lord will carry things an end mightily in your hands beyond all your
expectations, or imaginations, for there is no resisting, nor controlling the
work of God.



Moses himself shall be terrified. He will come in with an earthquake into thy
heart, terribly shaking thy sinful corruptions, and then he will work a real
change in thee, that nothing in heaven but Christ, nor in the earth in
comparison of him. The Lord will not suffer you to rest, until you have closed
steadfastly with him, the knowledge of God has given you will bring this matter
to pass, he will not leave you until you have gone forward to a division from
your sinful lust, and carnal companions. And whatsoever his work be, you must
do it, even unto the fulfilling of the mystery of God; and whosoever rises
against you, you must plead for Christ with the weapons of your tongue; and
whatsoever High mountain rises in you, any gifts, or parts, good duties, any
green grass that grows in you; the hail storm of Gods wrath will drive
you from trusting on any such common grace; all dawbings with untempered mortar
you cannot skill of: whatsoever does not make to the building you up in away of
saving grace you are unskilful in, therefore you are desirous still to close
with Christ; nor can ye rest, until you come to settled peace in him: This is
such a mystery of God, as he will not rest, nor suffer you to rest until it
be done; and if his Word will bring it to pass in a whole country; then sure
it is enough to effect it in thine heart: See therefore that you do not dawbe
up your selves, nor others with untempred mortar; satisfy not your selves
until you be shaken out of all such common apprehensions as hypocrites are
wont to rest in: rest you not, until you find Christ manifested to your
spirit as yours; grow up in a Lambe-like frame of spirit and way, until the
mystery of God be finished in you; and until that mystery of Iniquity that
has been wrought in you be abolished.

FINIS.

