SOME TREASURE Fetched out of RUBBISH: OR, Three short but seasonable Treatises
(found in an heap of scattered Papers), which Providence has reserved for
their Service who desire to be instructed, from the Word of God, concerning the
Imposition and Use of Significant Ceremonies in the Worship of God. viz.

I. A Discourse upon 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently and in
Order. Tending to search out the Truth in this Question, viz. Whether it be
lawful for Church Governors to command indifferent decent things in the
Administration of God's Worship? II. An Enquiry, Whether the Church may not, in
the Celebration of the Sacrament, use other Rites significative than those
expressed in the Scripture, or add to them of her own Authority? III. Three
Arguments, Syllogistically propounded and prosecuted against the Surplice: The
Cross in Baptism: And Kneeling in the Act of receiving the Lord's Supper.
Every Word of God is pure: Add not thou unto his Word, lest he reprove thee,
and thou be found a Liar,

Prove. 30.5, 6. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good: Abstain from
all appearance of evil,

1 These. 5.21, 22. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind: For
whatsoever is not of Faith is sin,

Romans 14.5, -- 23. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.

To the Reader.
THese ensuing Treatises were found laid by the Walls, and covered with dust,
in the study of an old Nonconformist, (there being diverse Copies of each,
under several unknown hands:) And as Armor, Treasure, and other things
useful, hidden in the time of our late Wars, have since been brought forth for
profitable Employment; The like is hoped of these Papers (which have so long
been kept in darkness), if seriously perused by men of sober minds. The
fileings of Gold are precious: and the Charge of Christ is considerable, Joh.
6.12. Gather up the Fragments that are left, that nothing be lost: Which Speech
of his, may both warrant and encourage the collecting and publishing of the
precious divine Truths penned by Gods faithful Ambassadors, for the
edification of his Church.

Mr. John Cotton* that faithful Servant of Christ, (famous in both Englands)
was the known Author of the first Discourse, and (as its verily believed) of
the second also.

Mr. Robert Nichols studiously composed the third, who was a man, though less
known, yet deservedly famous for his great Abilities and profitable Ministry in
Cheshire, for many years, where his memory is still very precious.

When Reverend Dr. Morton was Bishop of Chester, h^ required in writing of
those Ministers in his Diocese who did not conform to the Ceremonies, the
Reasons of this their refusal: Thereupon these three Arguments were by Mr.
Nichols presented unto him, attested by his own hand, and afterward defended
in dispute with that learned Bishop before many Witnesses. The Bishop being
hereby convinced of the good man's Ability and Ingenuity, was his friend to his
dying day.

The publishing of these Papers is, for the preventing of the imposition and
practice of sapless superstitions Ceremonies; which good end now designed may
hopefully be effected, if the Lord will give men herein concerned to study
these Controversies with unbyassed hearts.

It is notorious, that the pressing of these Ceremonies in former time,
occasioned woeful Divisions in the Church of Christ, with much affliction unto
men, famous both for their parts and piety in their Generations, and men of
truly tender Consciences and unblamable Conversation: And it is much to be
questioned, whether ever any real spiritual advantage, come to Christian Soul
by the pressing or by the observing of them.

If the Lord would grant that Issue unto this Publication which is sincerely
intended and heartily prayed for, many thanks would be given unto his Majesty,
through Jesus Christ, with comfort unto them that love Truth and Peace.

A DISCOURSE UPON 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently and in Order.
Tending to search out the Truth in this QUESTION, (viz.) Whether it be lawful
for Church- Governors, to command indifferent decent things in the
Administration of God's Worship.
ALL which that place holds forth touching this Point, may be summed up (for
ought I can discern) in these particulars.

1. That the whole Church and every Member thereof, are to perform all the
Duties of God's Worship in a decent and orderly manner.

2. What the Church and Members thereof are to do in this kind, that the
Church Governors may and ought to see it to be done.

3. It being the duty of Church Governors to see that all things be done
decently and orderly in the Congregation: It is therefore their part in eminent
measure to be able to discern and judge what is decent and undecent, orderly or
disorderly.

When I say it is their part, I mean, it is their duty; their Place and
Authority requires it: Not that they always have a Power or Spirit of
discerning, to judge aright in this case. For it seems the Highpriests and
Prophets, yea, and David himself, all of them thought it decent to bring back
the Ark of God upon a new Cart; which afterward David himself saw, and
confessed it was not done after due order, 1 Chronicles. 15.13.

From whence it appears (since they also are subject to errors in this kind)
that it will not be safe for them to judge and declare the decency of things,
by no better Rule than their own Will and Pleasure; but by such Rules as the
Holy Ghost directs us unto in this case, which are Scripture, Nature, Civil
Custom, (yea, and I willingly admit the lawful Custom of the Church or
Congregation, in which a man lives, for to judge of decency;) by all these
Rules, we have Warrant in Scripture, 1 Cor. 11.14, 16. and 14.33.

And indeed, they who are to approve themselves, in all their proceedings (as
Paul did, and all Church-Ministers ought to do,) to every Man's Conscience in
the sight of God; It is not for them to give the ground of their proceedings,
only from their own Will and Pleasure, but from such Rules as every good
Conscience may see approvable.

4. This place in hand holds forth also this further Truth, That what things
the Church sees (by the former Rules) to be indifferent and decent, or which
Church Governors shall declare so to be, those things may lawfully be done.

For the further clearing hereof, and the better discerning of the Power of
Church Governors in these matters: It may be observed that of decent things
lawful to be done in God's Church, some things are

1. Indifferent and decent, As to preach in a Gown or Cloak, whereof the one is
no more necessary or expedient than the other. 2. Expedient and decent; As to
abide in single life, or to enter into Marriage; of which, though Marriage in
time of Persecution be indifferent, yet single life is much more expedient to
prevent trouble in the Flesh. 3. Necessary and decent; either always, as a
Woman to keep silence in the Church, or at least, Hic and nunc, so as the
neglect thereof would be uncomely to the light of Nature, Scripture, Custom: As
a Woman to be veiled in the Congregation in the Eastern Countries: So, to
abstain from Blood, whilst the eating of it was offensive to the Jew.
Now, of such things as are necessary and decent, Church Governors have Power
to give Order and Commandment, as did the Synod at Jerusalem, touching those
things they called necessary, (to wit, necessary during the time of the offense
of the Jew, which was necessary to be avoided) Act. 15.28.

Of such things as are expedient and decent, the Church Governors have Power
to declare the decency and expediency of them; yea, and to advise and persuade
the practice thereof, but yet not to give an Order or Law to bind the People
thereunto, further than themselves shall find it decent and expedient for
themselves. Thus in Point of abiding in single Life, in time of the Churches
distress, the Apostle gave his Judgment and Advice 1 Cor. 7.25, 40. and
persuaded to it, for avoiding trouble in the Flesh, Ver. 26, 28. But would not
bind them to it, neither in Point of Conscience, nor of outward practice, as
having no Commandment for it from the Lord, Ver. 25. In which respect, he
calls such a Commandment, if he had given it, a snare, Ver. 35. And herein
the Power of Church Governors falls far short of the Authority of Civil
Magistrates, who may in civil matters make binding Laws for any thing expedient
to public weal, which Subjects are readily to submit unto, 1 Pet. 2.13.

Paul had Power to command Philemon that which was convenient; therefore he
might make a Law commanding the Church, expedient decent things.

Philemon did to Paul); another, to command, yea, to give a standing
Commandment, a binding Law to a whole Church, to whom he professes himself a
Servant, (...) 2 Cor. 4.6. over whom he has no Authority, but stewardly, or
oeconomical, to wit, when he speaks in his Master's Name, not in his own. The
Steward in a Family has not power over his Master's Spouse, but when he speaks
his Master's commands and directions, not his own. But of such things as are
only indifferent and decent, I do not find in Scripture that ever
Church Governors did advise and persuade them, much less charge and command
them, least of all make Laws to determine them. And that this place in hand (1
Cor. 14.40.) does not give them any such Power (though it be much urged to this
end), may appear from these Reasons.

1. The place speaks not of indifferent decent things, but of necessary decent
things, the neglect whereof was undecent by the light of Nature, and Scripture,
and Custom; As for men to pray with long hair, Women bare-headed; and for
Women to speak in the Congregation; and for many men to speak at once.

2. The words of the place run not thus, Let all decent things be done; or, Let
all things judged and declared by the Church to be decent, be done; but thi^,
Let all things (to wit, that are done in the Church, whether Prayer, or
Propesying, or other Ordinance of God,) be done decently; or in that decent
manner which Church Governors will appoint, or in some other: That the Apostle
limiteth not, but only requires, that all be done decently; which if it be so
done, his Rule here prescribed, is followed and fulfilled.

3. The same may appear out of this place by this Argument: If this place of
the Apostle did give Power and Authority to Church Governors to command
indifferent decent things, then he that should transgress the Commandment of
the Church, should also transgress the Commandment of the Apostle: As, look
what Order or Acts of Justice any Civil Governor does by the Commission of the
King, he that violates such Acts, or transgresses such Orders, transgresses
also against the Commission of the King. But it appe^reth to be otherwise in
this case; If the Church Governors command a Minister to preach always in a
Gown (it being indifferent and decent so to do), he that shall now and then
preach in a Cloak transgresses the Command of the Church, but not of the
Apostle. For he that preaches in a Cloak preaches also decently, which is all
that the Rule of the Apostle requires in this Point.

But because this Point is of great Consequence, both for Church Governors and
others to be truly informed in; give me leave to clear the same from some other
Arguments. That it is not in the power of Church Governors to command
indifferent decent things by Order of Law.

1. That which exceeds the bounds of Apostolical Authority, and streightreth
the bounds of Christian Liberty, that is not in the Power of any
Church-Governour.

But to command indifferent decent things by Order of Law exceeds etc.

The former appears from the Apostle's Commission granted to them, Matthew.
28.20. where our Savior gives them Commission to teach all Nations to observe
all things whatsoever he has commanded them. Now, all things whatsoever Christ
has commanded them, are necessary, not indifferent, for the People to observe.

If therefore the Apostles, over and above the Commandments of Christ (which
are necessary), should teach the People to observe indifferent things also
which Christ has not commanded, they should exceed the bounds of their
Commission.

It will be in vain to except: Our Savior speaks here only of matters of
Doctrine and Faith, not Government and Order, unless it could be proved that
our Savior did elsewhere enlarge this Commission, and gave them a more
illimited Power in matters of Government and Order, or Indifferency; which (for
ought I see) no man goes about to do, unless it be from this place of the
Epistle to the Corinthians, which has already been cleared from such meaning.

As for the second part of the Assumption, That to command indifferent decent
things streightneth the bounds of Christian Liberty, is of it self evident: For
whereas (for example) a single Man or Woman are at Liberty to marry where they
will, 1 Cor. 7.39. If the Apostle had bound them from Marriage by any
Commandment of his, he had straightened and deprived them of this Liberty.

Christian Liberty is preserved, though the use and practice of outward things
be limited.

Let him do (says he) what he will, he sins not, let them be married.

For a second Reason it may be this; They who are not to judge or censure one
another in differences about circumstantial things, or matters of indifferency;
they may not make a binding Law, that all men shall be of one mind, or of one
practice in such things: But the former is true, Romans 14.3. Let not him that
cateth, despise him that cateth not, etc.





3. They who did accommodate themselves in the use of indifferent things,
according to the judgment and practice of all Christians, wheresoever they
came; they did not make any Laws to bind Christians to follow their Judgment
and Practice in the use of things indifferent:

But the Apostles of Christ did accommodate themselves in the use of
indifferent things according to the Judgment and Practice of the Christians
wheresover they came. As appears from the Apostle's Example, 1 Cor. 9.20, 21,
22. To the Jews I became as a Jew, etc.



frustra est potentia quae nunquam venit in actum, is a true Axiom, whether we
speak of (...) or (...)

2. The Apostle himself clears this Point, when he confesses, he did thus
accommodate himself even to the weakness of Christians, lest he should abuse
his Authority in the Gospel, Ver. 18, 19, 20. Oh that such Church-Gouernours,
as plead their succession from the Apostles, and do challenge in sundry
passage; of Government Apostolical Authority, would also be pleased to study
and emulate an Apostolical Spirit.

For a fourth Argument, let it be this: If the Apostles, and Presbyters, and
Brethren at Jerusalem, did reach their Authority no further, than to lay upon
the Disciples necks the yoke and burden of necessary things (and that only
during the time while they continued necessary); then may not any succeeding
Synod reach their Authority, to lay upon the Church Commandments and Canons of
indifferent things: For the Synod at Jerusalem was the pattern and precedent of
all succeeding Synods; For primum in unoque genere est mensura reliquorum. And
our Savior teaches us to confute Alterations from Primitive Patterns, with
this (...), Nou sic fuit ab initio.

But the Synod at Jerusalem reached their Authority no further than to lay a
Commandment upon the Disciples only touching necessary things, Act. 15.28.
Necessary I say, either in themselves, as abstaining from Fornication; or at
least in respect of present offense, as Abstinence from blood, etc.

5. Let me conclude with this Argument, taken from the Apostle Paul his
enter-course with the Apostle Peter. If the Apostle Peter was to be blamed for
compelling the Gentiles by his example to observe the indifferent Ceremonies of
the Jews; then other Church Governors will be to blame, for compelling
Christians by Law, and by grievous Censures to observe the Ceremonies in
Question, though they were indifferent:

But the Apostle Paul tells us, Peter was to be blamed in this case, Gal.
2.11, 14.

I suppose, No man will here except, as is wont to be excepted, against such
Arguments as plead for the refusing of our Ceremonies, upon such grounds as
Paul urged against yielding to the Jewish Ceremonies, as they were urged by the
false Apostles, (viz.) with Opinion of necessity unto Salvation. For Peter's
yielding at that time to the Jewish Ceremonies, was not out of opinion of their
necessity to Salvation, but only out of fear of offense, and care to prevent
it, Ver. 12.

The Sum of all this, will lead us by the hand one step further: If it be a sin
in Church Governors to command, especially upon so strict panalt^, indifferent
decent things; it shall be a sin also in Ministers and other private Christians
to subscribe ex animo, and to yield Obedience to such Command; although the
Ceremonies commanded were indeed as good as they be pretended, (which, I
believe, are not indifferent decent things.) For, does not such voluntary
Subscription and Conformity to them build up our Church Governors; yea, and
with them the Sovereign Civil Magistrate also in this confidence, that such
Commandments are as well lawfully given by them, as received and obeyed by us?
Now, to build up or edify a Brother unto sin, is no better than to offend a
Brother: For the proper definition of an Offense, is, That which edifies a
Brother unto sin, as the original word expresses it, 1 Cor. 8.10. And so to
sin against my Brother, is to wound his Conscience; yea, (and as much as in me
lies) to cause him to perish for whom Christ dyed, which is no better than
spiritual Murder, even the Murder of his Soul.

Now, if thus to edify my Brother unto sin, be so heinous an Offense; how much
more heinous an Offense is it, to edify our Governors to the giving and urging
of such Commandments; yea, to the sharp censuring of all others; as refractory
and factious Persons, who choose rather to undergo the loss of the
greatest-Comforts they enjoy in this World, than to wound the Consciences
either of themselves or their Governors.

It is true, by forbearing Obedience to these Commandments we offend the
Spirits of our Governors, and make them to be (though causlesly) offended with
us; but by yielding Obedience to these things, we should offend their
Consciences in edifying them unto Sin, and provoke the Lord to be offended with
them and us. It is not for Christians, much less for Ministers, to redeem our
peace and liberty at so dear a price, as the hazard of the blood of so many
precious Soul, especially of our Governors in highest place.

Now, I shall proceed to answer another great Question for clearing the Point
in hand.


Exodus 30 38. Lev. 17.3. Lev. 10.1.
none a fire like the fire that he has chosen; yea, in his works themselves,
he is not magnified as he deserves, till we confess, None is able to come
after him; and till we say, Who is able to do the like? Exodus 3.14.
Again where man devises new signs, the signs of God are vilified, as if they
were from an Humane Spirit; yea, as if they were less fit and convenient: And
whereas Man is carnal, blind, and impotent, and yet a lover of his own devices
(no less than Pigmalion of his own Picture); if he should be suffered to
invent new Signs, they would be carnal and not spiritual; dead, having no
Power; dark, veiling the brightness of the Sacraments: and yet more loved and
delighted in, than the Sacraments themselves. Calr. opusc. de Neces. R form.
page 59. Joseph. Antiq. lib. 15. cap. 8. Aegesip. lib. 2. cap. 13.
For example, a Temple built on Garezim (like the Temple of Jerusalem)
overtopped the Temple; And to what fame arose a Temple which Orias built in
Heliopolis, like to that of the Lord's in Jury?

What our heavenly King delivers his People must be marked with no other form
or print save that which is framed in his Word, and in his own Sacraments: And
however God permitted the ancient Fathers to fail in heart in some particulars,
against their general Doctrine; yet they ever disallowed and abhorred the
changing of signs instituted by God, and the devising of others determined to
signify the same thing, that was sealed by the Sacraments. The memory of the
Barsamani and Semidalitae is abhorred, Danes. in Aug. de haer. cap. 64. Council.
Bracarens. 3. cap. 1. Conc^l. Constan. 6. in Trullo cap. 99. Aug. de haeres.
cap. 28. Can. Apest. c. 3. Decret. par. 3. did. 2. cap. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7. Council.
Constable. 6. in Trullo. cap. 32. Lamb. Dan. in Aug de haer. cap. 28. and 64.
Council. Antisiodorens. can. 8.
for that instead of Bread they used Meal, even as others are utterly condemned
for bringing in Orapes instead of Wine: The Ar^^mans added sodd meat to the
Bread and Wine of the Lord's Supper: The Aquarli changed Wine into Water: The
Artotyritae added Cheese to the Bread in the Supper, upon an imitation of
ancient times, when the fruits of the Earth, and the fruits of the Cattle were
wont to be offered to the Lord: Others added Honey to the Wine in the Supper,
and some Milk: But all these are condemned, because they are not in the
Institution.

Q. These Heretics and Sects condemned, brought in their devised signs as
parts of the Sacraments, which is a thing to be condemned: But what say you of
signs devised by humane Authority, and annexed to the Sacraments, not as parts,
but for signification only?

A. Signs annexed to the Sacraments for signification, to declare or teach what
God promises to man, or what duty man owes to God, are parts of the
Sacraments, no more than some of the former; and the Reasons brought to condemn
them, do cashiere and cast out these also.

1. For if he be not devout but presumptuous who administreth otherwise than he
has received of the Lord, then must all strange signs be abandoned which has
not been seen and approved of God: The charge of the Lord to his People is
this, Ye shall do my Judgments and keep my Ordinances to walk therein; Lev. 18
4. Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Mat. 4 10. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Deuteronomy. 4 1.2.
Zanch. d. Scrip. q. 8. prop. 1. Co. s. 2 A^g. Exodus 12.24.43. and 27.21. and
29.9. and 30.21. Deuteronomy. 4.1.
the meaning is plainly this, Ye shall observe all mine Ordinances, Moral and
Ceremonial, and them only; as the words of this Law is explained by the
Apostle. All things which are written in the Book of this Law. And him thou
shall serve, is expounded by our Savior, Him only thou shall serve; more
expressly the same Commandment is repeated in other places: What things soever I
command you observe to do it, thou shall not add unto it, nor diminish from it;
To what might they not add? neither to the Law Moral nor Ceremonial, as the
Word signifies, and all Circumstances of the Text do convince: For in the
former of those places, Israel is exhorted to hearken unto the Statutes and
Ordinances of the Lord; under which two words (often joined together) are
comprised all duties of the Law moral and ceremonial: And thereupon immediately
follow these words, Deuteronomy. 4.8.40. Deuteronomy. 5.1. and 6.1. and 12.1. Mal. 4.4. Lev.
18.5. and 19.37. and 26.22.18.22. Deuteronomy. 4.1, 2. Exodus 25.9, 40. and 27.19.
Ye shall not add unto the Word (or things) which I commanded unto you. The
same is more clear in the second place: for having recited many Precepts
Ceremonial, and some few Moral; he concludes, Whatsoever I command you to
observe, take heed to observe it, etc. And Moses himself faithfully in this
performed the charge of God; for having received a Commandment from him to make
all things pertaining to the Tabernacle, according to the pattern showed in the
Mount, he presumed not to add one pin to that was showed him, but strictly
followed his Sampler in every point. Exodus 39.42, 43.
And if Moses durst not challenge authority of himself to ordain Sacramental
Rite^, and annex them to the holy Ordinances of the Lord, how shall we be
assured that the Church has any liberty herein? what reason can be given why
that should be warrantable in this age of the Church, and in that unlawful? If
the Church will presume to claim any such Prerogative, it is necessary she
produce the Charter wherein the Lord has confirmed such a Privilege unto her,
which before he denied to that his Faithful servant, with whom he was pleased
to speak familiarly, and in most friendly manner. The worthy Reformers of
Religion, who lived in the Church of the Jews after the days of Moses, knew no
such grant, for they kept themselves precisely to the Law of the Lord by the
hand of Moses, not turning therefrom in any thing, without special and
extraordinary inspiration. David gave to Solomon his son, 1 Chronicles. 28.12.19.
the pattern of all that he had by the Spirit, of the Courts of the house of
the Lord, of all the Chambers round about, etc. And Hezekiah set the Levites in
the house of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 29.25.
with Cymballs, with Psalteries, and with Harps, according to the commandment
of David, and of Gad the Kings Seer, and Nathan the Prothet, for so was the
Commandment of the Lord by his Prophets. Ask the Scripture whether ever the
godly Kings among the Jews had any such Authority to bring in any special
Action or Ceremony into the service of God without special warrant; Search the
Scriptures about this matter, and if they answer [Nay] to this demand, let us
take heed to our selves, that we presume not beyond commission. Cut off those
places before cited; the Papists grant, the perfection of the Word of God may
well be concluded: Our Writers do substantially prove the sufficiency of the
Scripture in matter necessary to Salvation, because we are forbidden to add
ought to the Word written (for of that the Te^^ is meant), or to take ought
from it; and by the same reason, the sufficiency of the Scriptures in matters
Ceremonial, is established; for thse places must be understood of Ceremonies no
less then other things. Descrip. q. 8. prop. 1.
Zanchius thus urges this argument; And lest any Papist (says he) should
except and say, Neither do we think it lawful to add to those things which
pertain to Internal, and so to Spiritual piety and worship of God; but only
the Controversy is of external Ceremonies; I pray you, consider of what things
the Lord speaks in that Chapter, Deuteronomy. 4. Of what Ceremonies, sacred Rites,
and Judicial Laws; for in the Hebrew, it says thus, Hear now, O Israel, the
Statutes, and the Judgments. That word Hachukim does properly signify
Ceremonious Rites of worship: Therefore the Lord would teach, that nothing is
to be added, not only to the Moral Precepts, and internal worship, but also to
the Ceremonial-Rites and Institutions; which may be further confirmed against
our Adversaries, by the Authority of the vulgar Translation, Interpreting it in
Deuteronomy. 4.5. Ceremonies; And the Opinion of Stapleton, Relect. prin. fid. doct.
cont. 4. q. 3. art. 3. arg. 10. Answ. to the Adm. page 30.
who making answer to that place alleged by our Divine, to confirm the
perfection of Scripture against unwritten traditions; says, It is especially
to be understood of the Ceremonies. This is acknowledged by D. Whiteg. God
(says he) in the old Law to his people, prescribed perfect and absolute Laws,
not only Moral and Judicial, but Ceremonial also; neither was there the least
thing to be done in the Church omitted in the Law; And therefore for them at
that time, and during that State, it was not lawful to add any thing, nor take
any thing away, no not in Ceremonies and civil Laws. Bill. de Pont. Romans l. 4.
c. 17.
The Jews (says another) had a Prescription of particular Rites, most fitly
agreeing to the Polity of their Church and Commonwealth. But what? has God
left no greater liberty to the Church in the time of the Gospel, to ordain
significant Ceremonies; than was before given unto the Synagogue of the Jews?
No surely, both the Jewish and Christian Church are tied to the direction of
the Scriptures, without which they might not presume to do any thing in these
matters: How can these places be alleged with truth of reason against our
Adversaries, to prove the perfection of Scripture in opposition to unwritten
Traditions. If the Church have authority now to ordain Ceremonies without
direction of the Word, which then she had not: easily might they reply, That
that Injunction did not concern us at this day, seeing more liberty is given to
us touching the Institution of external Rites pertaining to the worship of God,
then was granted to the Jews. And if we may add without warrant of the Word,
what, and where they might not: Surely the Scripture was a perfect rule to
them: In another manner than it is to us. Zanchius therefore objecting in the
name of the Papists, That if these places must be understood of the Ceremonial
Law, then it pertains not to us, inasmuch as the Ceremonial Laws are now
changed: makes answer, That that Precept does pertain to us, which is manifest
(says he) if you consider the end of the Commandment; What end? That we should
obey those things, and those things only that God has commanded, adding
nothing, detracting nothing. Therefore when the same God has by his Son given
Precepts concerning Ceremonies of the New Testament, and wills us simply to
obey them; the force of that Precept remains, Thou shall add nothing, diminish
nothing. Matthew. 28.19, 20.
Moreover Christ himself plainly commands the same, Baptize them into the
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe whatsoever I
have commanded. What is this, but ye shall not add or diminish. Again, what is
that that the Apostle says, I have received of the Lord, what I have delivered
unto you: but that it is not lawful to add nor diminish? Then he concludes,
Therefore the force of the Precept in Deuteronomy, Zanch. de secundo praec.
tit. de ext. cult. q. 1. Tam igitur nobis non licet addere his vel detrahere
quam eriam non licebat Judaeis addere vel detrahere de illis.
of not adding or diminishing any thing in the Precepts of God, does remain
perpetual, even concerning Ceremonies, and holy Rites, and pertains to us. The
Jews had liberty in certain matters of order pertaining to the service of God,
as we now have. In matter of Ceremonies we are tied to the Word of God, as they
were. We have no Ceremonies but two, the Ceremonies or Sacraments of Baptism,
and the Lords Supper; and we have as certain direction to celebrate them, as
they had to celebrate their Ceremonies; and fewer and less difficulties can
arise of ours, than of theirs; we have no special hour, place, or manner of
celebration assigned for them; the like may be said of many Jewish Ceremonies,
What hour had they for their ordinary and daily Sacrifices? Jun. et Trem. in
act. 13.15.
was not it left to the order of the Church what places were appointed in their
several dwellings to hear the Word of God Preached continually, when they came
not to Jerusalem. The Word was commanded to be Preached, but no mention made in
what particular method, what manner of place, Pulpit, Seat, or Chair they
should have, and yet they had these: they had also forms of Burial and
Marriage, though nothing be commanded concerning them: The liberty of the
Christian Church stands in freedom from the burden of Jewish Ceremonies,
Beza annot. in act. 6.
not in power to ordain new Rites at her pleasure, when those which God himself
instituted are abolished; for then should our condition in the time of the
Gospel be far worse in many respects then theirs was in the time of the Law:
for whereas it is the virtue of a good Law, Arist. ad Theod. Ra. 1.3.
to leave as little undetermined, and without the compass of the Law, as may
be. If we have no Word for diverse things, wherein the Jews had particular
direction; there was greater perfection in the Law given unto them, then in the
Word which is left to the Christian Church. Again, Calv. opus. respons.
versipel. page 413.
the Ordinances of God, which are ever behovefull, are not so burdensome, as
are the unprofitable inventions of men; it is far better to bear the yoke of
God, then to be in subjection unto the mere pleasure of sinful men. And then,
If the Church of the Jews was to admit of no Ceremonies, but what was
prescribed unto her of the Lord; whereas the Christian Church is to stand to
the Arbitrament of her Guides and Governors: the Bondage and Infancy of the
Jewish, Bell. de effect. Sac. l. 2. c. 32. Bell. de Mon. l. 2. c. 13. arg. 9.
resp. and pont. r^m. lib. 4. cap. 17. Chrysostom. hom. 52. in Matthew. cited by D.
Whitak. de sc. q. 9. c. 14.
is much to be preferred before the liberty and ripeness of the Christian
Church. It is replied, that the adding and diminishing spoken of, does not mean
addition of preservation, but addition of corruption; like as the fraudulent
Coyner of Money does not corrupt the Kings Coin, either by adding baser metral
unto it, or by clipping any silver from it, and in both kinds he is a Traitor.
How little does this differ from the Jesuits gloss upon this Text: God
commands (says he) nothing to be added to his Precept to corrupt it, but not
some things which may perfect it. Can humane devised Rites preserve the
Ordinances of God from corruptions; or rather are not all such additions
manifest corruptions? When God has given to Moses particular determinations of
all symbolical Rites pertaining to his worship, had it not been an addition of
corruption in him, if upon his own head he had annexed any devised
significative Rites unto them. Bellarmine, himself grants, it had been; when in
his third answer, he labors (but to small purpose) to put this difference
betwixt the state of the old and New Testament; Petitur principium, quia et hoc
ipso contraria est quaelibet nova lex quod divina additur; quandequidem iste
sibi addi vetat. Tilen. de pot. l. 4. c. 17. not. 11. vise Lubbert. de Pap.
Romans l. 8. cap. 10.
That in the one, all Rites pertaining to the worship of God, were particularly
determined, but not in the other. And when the Jesuit confesses in his first
answer to that Argument urged by our Divines, against humane Laws binding
Conscience; Jun. any. in Bell. de Pont. Romans lib. 4. cap. 17.
that it is unlawful to add to the things commanded; As, to sacrifice two
Lambs, when God has commanded only one; does he not grant by necessary
Consequence, that when God has appointed that Baptism should be administered
with Water, it is unlawful to add thereto Oil, Cream, Salt, Spittle, and such
like? Moreover, to give Man Authority to add Rites of Information to the holy
Ordinance of God; what is it but to prefer the folly of Man before the Wisdom
of God, as though his sacred Institutions must borrow reverence or defense from
humane Forgeries:

Does not this Distinction open a wide gapp to let in manifold Abuses into
God's Worship, under the color of Addition of Preservation? Does it not much
impair the perfection of Scripture, when Rites Sacramental, tending to
preserve the purity and due regard of Christ's Institutions, shall be esteemed
lawful in the immediate Worship of God, when they find no footing to stand on
in the Word of God: D. Lambard. l. 4. did. 3. c. 1. D. Sp. page 32. D. Cov.
against Per. page 123. D. Whitg. Ans. Adm. page 32. Preserve, or keep carefully
that which is committed to our trust. 1 Timothy 6.20. Cajet. interprets this place
thus; Inhibetur additio, etiam pratextu Custodien di mandata Dei. See. Calv. in
Mat. 15.
The Synagogue of Rome does not maintain her Addition to be of absolute
necessity, or essential parts of the Sacraments, but instituted of the Church
for signification and preservation; and yet they are justly censured as
unlawful, and contrary to the Authority of the Holy Scripture. The Lord
charge that we do not add, that so we may preserve it.

This Argument might here be shut up, but that to prevent some Objections, it
is good to enquire what is an Addition to the Word. The Patrons of significant
Ceremonies say, An unlawful Addition to any of Christ's Sacraments is only
that which either participates therewith in all or at least in the chief and
proper ends thereof, or is added for Complement thereof, as necessary, and so,
unchangeable. To add to the Word, is to ordain somewhat as a thing absolutely
necessary, and pertaining to the Essence of Worship: Those add to the Word,

1. Who teach or decree any thing, either in matters of Faith or Ceremonies,
contrary to the Word. 2. Those that make any thing necessary to Salvation not
contained in the Word. 3. Such as put any Religion or Opinion of merit in any
thing that they themselves have invented, besides the Word of God.
Last of all, They add to the Word, which forbid that thing for a thing of it
self unlawful, which God does not forbid; and make that sin which God does not
make sin.

But in all these definitions, that is left out which Moses meant specially to
comprehend, which is, not to do more nor to do less than he had commanded:
Every unlawful Tradition is contrary to the Word, which forbids all such
Additions. But as the Word contrary in strict sense, is opposite to that which
is besides the Word, it reaches not (with the other particulars added to it,)
to express what is an Addition prohibited. The Lord Jesus is the sole Doctor of
his Church, whose Office it is to teach by word and sign, and therefore
whatsoever is devised by Man to instruct by outward resemblance, and to
admonish by striking the senses by way of Representation; that is an
unwarrantable Addition. God is the only Sealer of his Promises, Tho: Aquin.
page 3. q. 60. Cajetan. ibid. Cerimonalis lex perfecta in Sc. traditur in
libris Mosis, ubi nulla Ceremonia ne minutissima quidem praetermissa est. Wh.
de Sc. q. 6. cap. 14. Quod uni Judaeorum populo per Mosen diligentersatis
praescripta essent, etc. Jansen. cond. cap. 120.
and Signifier of his Will, by things sensible in the Sacrament, and by words
similitudinary in the Scripture; to him it appertains to determine what signs
must be used to signify. In the time of the Law, when signs reigned, none were
lawful but such as were showed in the pattern upon the Mount; much more in the
time of the Gospel, when shadows are abolished, what God has not instituted is
to be abandoned; Moses durst not add of his own head to those signs that were
appointed of the Lord, though to ends inferior; as profitable only to
signify, not to exhibit; as matters of expediency to explain and declare what
was represented, not of absolute necessity: And what had been presumption in
him, is intolerable in us, being delivered from the Pedagogy of the Law: In
those things God has precisely determined; in those actions, the whole form
whereof God has of purpose set down to be observed, we may not otherwise do
than exactly as he has commanded. Herein, what is not expressed, or by good
consequence enjoined, is to be held unwarrantable: In this case, the devising
of new Rites to signify the truths taught in Scripture, or sealed in the
Sacraments, cannot be deemed less than an unlawful Addition; Babing. in com. 2.
page 95.
upon this ground our Divines have cast Images out of the Church, not only for
teaching ill, but for teaching at all; because God allows no Teacher but
himself, nor means of teaching but his holy Word and Sacraments. And when the
Son of God has instituted the Sacraments, and he has commanded them to be
administered in certain Rites, instituted of himself; It is a very hard Question
(says Chenmitius) whether Man be permitted to add others over and above, Exam.
Conc. Trid. part. 2. tit. de. rit. Bapt.
under any pretense Dr. Willet reasons thus against the Rites of Popish
Confirmation: Willets Cont. 14. q. 1. par. 5. page 719. Col. 2.17.
All of them are superstitious, having mystical and typical significations and
shadows, which agree not with the Nature of the Gospel; for all shadows are now
past, the Body being come: It is contrary to the Rule of the Gospel there
should be such Types, Shadows, and Significations brought into the Service of
God. Id. Cont. 12. q. 8. Arg. 1. page 504.
Therefore we dare not allow of these descriptions of unlawful Additions
beforementioned, not only because they cannot be justified by Scripture, as
all good Expositions Theological must and ought; but also the whole current of
Scripture plainly shows it to be too strict, as may appear in part by that
which has been already said, and remains to be proved more at large
hereafter: Unde jus prodit, interpretatio quoque procedat. Decret. Grego. lib.
5. Tit. 39. cap. 31. Innocent. 3. Quis legum Aenigmata solvere idoneus esse
videtur, nisi is cui soli Legislatorem esse concessum est. Cod. lib. 1. Tit.
14. leg. 9. and 10.11. and Tit. 17.

2. As in matters of Faith, so in matters of Ceremonies significative
pertaining to the Worship of God, an Argument does hold from the Negative, to
disallow what is not found in the Scriptures expressly, or by good consequence:
As to say, such a thing is not expressed or revealed in the word; therefore it
is no matter of Faith, nor such as a man is bound necessarily to believe: such
a sign is not warranted by the Scripture, therefore it is not to be used in the
Worship of God. Jer. 7.31. and 19.5.
Thus the Prophet Jeremiah reasons more than once against the idolatrous men
of Judah, who burned their Sons and Daughters in the fire to Baal; The Lord did
not command you, he spoke no such thing, neither came it into his mind,
Therefore this ye ought not to have done. The thing he reproved was not only
not commanded, but forbidden, and that expressly; yet the Prophet chooses
rather to charge them with the fault of making a Law unto themselves, Hook
Eccle^. Pol. lib. 2. Sect. 6.
than the crime of transgressing a Law which God had made. For when the Lord
himself had once precisely set down a form of executing that wherein we are to
serve him; the fault appears greater to do that which we are not, than not to
do that which we are commanded: In this we seem to charge the Law with hardness
only, in that with foolishness: In this we show our selves to be weak and unapt
to be Doers of his Will, in that we take upon us to be Controllers of his
Wisdom: In this we fly to perform the thing which God sees meet, convenient,
and good, in that we presume to see what is meeter and convenienter better than
God himself: For these and such like Reasons, though the sin of Judah was
directly prohibited; yet it pleased the Lord by his Prophet to reprehead it,
for that he commanded them not so to do. From these places some Divines do
prove the perfection of Scripture against the Papists; Dr. Reynolds. these.
Gatak. of Lots cap. 7. S. 16.
Others, that in the Point of God's Worship, the Argument holds from the
Negative for the Substance of it: And by the same Reason we may conclude, that
no Ceremony significant may be admitted in the Worship of God, which carry not
the stamp of divine approbation; for the ground of the Prophet's Argument will
bear all alike. The purpose of God was to teach his People, both unto whom they
should offer Sacrifice, and what Sacrifice was to be sacrificed; therefore no
Sacrifice is to be offered which God has not commanded: The Lord has
determined how he will be served; therefore upon our own Will and Pleasure we
must not add any thing unto it for Substance, or take ought therefrom: And the
Lord also has appointed and determined what outward Signs shall be used to
teach, signify, or represent by Analogy or Proportion. Therefore, no Sign is to
have place in his Worship, which cannot show descent from above: Numb. 15.38.39.
The Lord, expounding the Use of the Fringes that he commanded the Israelites
to make in the borders of their Garments, says, It shall be to them for a
Sign, that they may look upon it; and remember all the Commandments of the
Lord, and do them; and that ye seek not after your own hearts, and your own
eyes, after which you use to go a whoring. Therefore he wills, that for ever
they remember all his precepts, even those that concern Ceremories or external
Worship; and on the contrary, he will not that either in Ceremonies or external
Worship they hear their own heart, or institute those things that seem good
unto them in their own eyes, Nibil oporteat in rebus divinis facere, sine Dei
Verbo. Bell. de Sacr. lib. 1. cap. 19.
or follow them; Nay, in the Worship of God, to follow that which is pleasing
to us, is to run a whoring from God, because we follow them in the heat of
adulterous Love. It may be some will answer, that Ceremonies of absolute
necessity, wherein the Substance of God's Worship consists, and which
absolutely binds Conscience, must be instituted of God; but not those that are
appointed only for signification, and as things in themselves free and
indifferent, because these may be profitable to put men in mind of their duties
to cherish Faith, and recall from sin. But what ground is there in Scripture
for this distinction; where is the liberty granted in the one, denied in the
other kind of Ceremonies* Sicut own aurum quodcu^que fuerit extra templum non
est sauctificatum. Wh^t. de Pont. q. 1. c. 3. and 8. q. 2. c. 2. and q. 4. c 1.
S. 2. Orig. in Matthew. Hom. 25.
In Philosophy no distinction is to be allowed, which Reason does not confirm:
In Theology, what has not evident foundation in the Scriptures themselves,
what is not native and taken out of them, is to be held counterfeit and
adulterate: The Rule is, where the Law distinguishes not, we must not
distinguish; it is not sufficient therefore so to distinguish, unless it can be
showed (which yet has not been done) that the distinction has footing in the
Word of God. The Papists and Lutherans do in this manner plead for the Use of
Images in their Churches; Images are Lay-men's Books, by them they are put in
mind of the Death and Passion of Christ; they may see more at once represented
by them than they can read in many hours. What Answer do our Divines return
unto them but this, That the Word and Sacraments were appointed of Christ to
teach, Conc. Seno. sense. Harm. Conf. Helver. cap. 4. fol. Synt. Tom. 2. l. 6
7. 19. in secundo praec. Par. in Genesis 28.18. De secundo praec. tit. de Imag. c.
15. resp ad Arg. 9. and 10. Faith comes by hearing, not by seeing or gazing.
Jew. art. ador. div. 10. Mart. in 1 Reg. 7. Gualter in Heb. 2.18.
and that to add to them is presumptuous against the Lord, in^urious unto his
Ordinances; that teaching to the Eye is sufficiently performed by the
Sacraments, and that the Lord, for Instruction of his People, commanded his
Ministers to preach, not to paint. Faith, says Zanchius, is to be promoted;
but by what means, such as God has ordained, viz. The Word and the Sacraments:
God would have us to be taught divine things, and all men as well vulgar as
others to know things belonging to their Salvation; But whence or of what
Instructors? Of those that he has given to be Teachers unto us, not of those
that do please our selves: He has given unto us the Book of the Creatures,
whence we may know many things of God: He has given us the Book of the
Scripture, which he would have continually to be read, and to be explained in
the Church; What can thou desire more? He has given Sacraments, Glasses of
divine mysteries: He has instituted us a Ministry, and ^^arged us to exercise
our selves daily in the Law of God; Ought not these Books and Teachers to be
sufficient for us? Now, a significant Ceremony is an Image, or a Representation
to teach by striking the sense; and what is said against Images, must
necessarily hold against them also; so that either we must take part with the
Lutherans and Papists against the Worthies of our Church, or acknowledge the
former distinction to be vain, and of none effect. Nay, let this distinction be
of any weight, and the Papists must be acquitted in their Oil, Cream, Salt,
Spittle, Crosses, Lights, Tabers, and the rest of their rotten Customs,
wherewith they have besmeared and defiled the Ordinances of God; for none of
these be held by them to be of absolute necessity.

A second Answer there is given to this Argument, of no more strength than the
former, viz. That to devise Signs of spiritual things is unwarrantable, but
not to ordain Ceremonies that shadow forth some moral duty which Man owes to
God: But this is barely spoken, not proved by any passage of holy Writ, and
may as easily be cast off as it is brought forth. The Scripture does not teach
it lawful for Man to devise mystical Signs appropriated to the solemn Worship
of God, to represent moral duties; when it forbids by any devised Sign of
that Nature to shadow forth spiritual duties, and what we learn not thence in
matters of this kind, we dare not receive. When the Lord was pleased to
instruct his Church by Types and Figures; he himself appointed not only those
that did prefigure Christ, but such also as served by their signification to
teach moral duties: All mystical Rites the Lord himself precisely prescribed,
Exodus 25.9.38.39. and 39.42.43. 1 Chro. 28.12.19. 2 Chro. 29.25. 1 Chro. 24 19.
2 Chro ^.8.14.
laying a strict charge upon Moses, to make all things according to the pattern
showed him; which Rule was religiously observed by all religious and worthy
Reformers of Religion afterward, not one adventuring without special direction
from the Word of God, to add any thing thereto, or alter ought therein.

Again, Duties moral and spiritual are parts of God's inward worship; and
Ceremonies, ordained to teach either of them by mystical Representation, are
parts of his outward Worship and Service; and so the matter is one, whether the
Sign does shadow forth a moral or spiritual duty; for it is not the
particular good thing signified by the Sign, but the Institution of it to that
end, that makes the Worship true or false: If it be appointed of God, it is
true Worship, let the signification be moral or spiritual; if of men, it is
false Worship, whatsoever it be set apart to represent or teach, in our
intention in the solemn Worship of God. In defense of Images it is objected,
that Paulinus Nolanus Bishop commanded the History of the Old and New Testament
to be painted in his Church, and that to this end, that the People might be
drawn from surfeiting and drunkenness, when they met together to banquet in
that place, being busied in viewing and beholding Images: See Jewel's Apol.
par. 5. cap. 3. div. 1.2.
Our Divines reply, that the Authority of man ought not to seem any thing
against the plain and manifest Word of God; and Nolanus and his followers did
offend the more grievously, Martyr. part. 2. c. 5. S. 23.
that they adventured to do that which the former Fathers did always disallow:
whereby we see what the judgment of Ancient and Modem Divines is, touching
Images setup in the Church, to represent or put in mind of Moral duties. And if
Images must be abolished; significant signs of men's devising, by the same
reason, remain under condemnation: for they are Images, that is, certain
figures having relation to the exemplar, or certain pictures with relation of
representations.

3. No Act, Ordinance, nor Institution, contrary to a general Negative
Commandment, is lawful, unless that Act, Ordinance, or Institution be in
special warranted by the Word of God; for the Scripture should not be
sufficient to make the man of God, that is, the Minister or Prophet, perfect to
every good work, if an Act in special might be lawful without particular
approbation, which is in general condemned as unjust and evil. If we find,
that holy men of God did some particular things, 1 Samuel 7.17. 1 King 18.32.
D^^^^ 2.5, 6, 7, 13, 14.
which were generally forbidden in the Law; as Samuel built an Altar at Ramath,
Elias the Prophet on Mount Ca^mel; when by the Law it was not lawful to offer
any Sacrifice, but before the Lord, in the place which he should choose. We must
know, they did this by special direction, and extraordinary instinct. The
Lawyers say, Generi per speciem derogatur. Sext. de lib. 5. tit. de regulis
Juris 33. Digest. l. 50. tit. 17. regul. 80.
That a particular does derogate from the general: And in these places, where a
special fact does not agree with a general Precept, there the Scripture is not
repugnant unto it self; but by the special, it is derogated from the general.
But though it was lawful for them that had such an extraordinary Commandment
contrary to the Law, at what time it pleased God after that manner to make
known his pleasure, to do what was so required of them; yet now the reason is
not like, since God speaks unto us by his Word, according to which we must
walk and worship him, and affords not that special privilege to us, that he
did to them. For God is free, subject to no Law; Zanch. de secundo praec.
he commands us, not himself; he prescribes a general Law, not to himself,
but to us, which it is never lawful to transgres, unless there be peculiar
warrant from God for it. But the use and institution of Ceremonies, signifying
resemblance in the solemn worship of God, is contrary to a general Negative
Commandment; for the second Commandment forbidding the making of any graven
Image, or the likeness of any thing in heaven above, or in the earth beneath;
does also prohibit all outward forms devised by men for Religious use in the
service of God: It being a thing peculiar to the Lord, to prescribe how his
will and worship shall be taught, as what worship shall be given unto him. By
the letter of the Precept only, the making of graven Images, or Similitudes;
and the adoration of them is condemned; but under that particular, we are
charged to forge nothing of our own heads, in Ceremonies, or Rites significant,
but to be content with those Ceremonies, and that outward Worship which God is
pleased to prescribe or appoint; whether they be Sacraments, Sacrifices, or
other holy things: This to be the scope of that Commandment, is made evident
many ways.

First, by the exposition that is given thereof in other passages of holy Writ:
It is an unquestionable truth, that the true meaning of every Precept is to be
collected out of the writings of the Prophets and Apostles; and what we find in
them commanded or forbidden, is to be referred to some one or more of these ten
Commandments, though it be not expressly mentioned in any one of them. Now then
in the Law we read, That Moses was commanded to do all things according to the
pattern showed in the Mount, without allowance to add one pin for resemblance
or shadow upon his own head.

To what Commandment can this charge be referred, but to the second: And must
it not then condemn all significant Ceremonies forged by men unto themselves
for the service of God; Nadab and Abihu are smitten with death, Levit. 10.1.
Numb. 3.4. Lev. 1.7. and 6.12. and 9.24. Pisc. obs. in Lev. 10.2.
for presuming to offer with strange fire, which God commanded not; whence
Divines observe, that the external worship of God is precisely to be exercised
according to the Prescription of God; and that we may not depart one hair
breadth from his holy Institution upon any good intent; this their fact was
contrary to the second Commandment; and is it not manifest then that we are
thereby enjoined, neither to alter what God has instituted, nor to devise of
our own heads what he never appointed. What Precept did Ahaz transgress in
commanding an Altar for burnt offering to be made after the pattern of the
Altar at Damascus, but the second? or by what reason can it be reduced unto it,
unless we shall acknowledge that all things appointed by God in his service,
must carefully be observed without addition or detraction, and that all devices
of men for worship, and instruction, are utterly unlawful.

Secondly, The words of the Commandment do show no less; for the former word
Pesel does signify any thing hewn, graven, Deuteronomy. 7.5. and 2.3. Deuteronomy. 7.25.
Esaias 16.17. Hos. 13.2. Ezekiel, 8.10. Deuteronomy. 27.15. Esaias 30.22. Numb. 12.8. Psalm.
17.15.
cut or carved; which is translated by the Greek, an Idol; the Caldee
Paraphrase, an Image; and the Thargum, called Jonathans, an Image or figure;
under which name, all other sorts are employed, as Molten or Painted Images, or
the like. The other word Temanah, is in signification, a similitude or figure,
and is opened by Moses, by Semel, and Tabinth, words of the same signification,
Deuteronomy. 4.16. So that all Portrai^ures, Shapes, Resemblances, and Forms of
things, Natural, or Artificial, Real, or Imaginary, devised by man for
Religious use, worship, or instruction, are forbidden both by the scope, and
letter of the Commandment. And if the words were not of that large
signification, yet seeing all vices of the same kind are forbidden where one is
expressly mentioned; when material, cut or carved Images are prohibited, there
all represenrations, material, aerial, real, imaginary, proper, and tropical,
are condemned; For it is not the matter of the thing, but the form or
application that is against the Precept, which is one and the same in
representations of what kind soever, in Pictures, proper, Metonymical, and
Metaphorical: It matters not whether the Image be a thing truly existent,
formed of any visible matter, Brass, Wood, or Stone; or whether it have no
other being but in the mind of men. If it be an Image devised by men for
Religious use, it comes under the sentence of the Law: Martin de Sac. tract.
5. cap. 6.
if we ask the consent of learned Interpreters, they generally agree herein.
Thus they reason against the Image of the Crucifix stamped upon the Popish
host: the manifest Law of God disalloweth all Images made for the cause of
Religion, after what sort soever; but Christ crucified set before our eyes in
the Word and Sacraments, is life and Salvation. When our Adversaries alledg in
defense of Images, That Solomon in his Temple erected Cherubims on the
Mercy-seat, where God was worshipped: To this our Divines answer, Abbot against
Bishop. tract of Imag. SS. 8. Will. Cont. 9. q. r. Art. 2. also the second Answ.
That these Cherubims were erected by the special Commandment of God, who had
prescribed both the form of them, and the place where they should be set. For
God commanded Moses to make the Ark, and the Propitiatory or Mercy-seat, which
was the Cover of the Ark, according to the fashion that he had showed him:
withal, he appointed him to make two Cherubims, one at the one end of the
Mercy-seat, and the other at the other end; so that with their wings stretched
out, they should cover the Mercy-seat. According to this Commandment Moses did,
but what was done with these Cherubims which Moses set up, it is uncertain; but
this is most sure, that Solomon by virtue of the same Commandment, 1 Reg. 8.5,
6.
and to observe that which by Moses was prescribed, made two Cherubims to stand
in the same place, as the other did, and to the same use. Inasmuch then as God
had by the Law directed in what sort this should be done, Solomon needed no
further special direction for the doing of it, but had Trespassed against God,
if, being appointed to build an house unto God, he had not done it according to
such rules as the Law before had limited for the doing of it. It is fitly
answered (says Martyr) That God gave the Law, Com. places, part, 2. cap. 5. S.
26.
not to himself, but unto us; so then we must follow the same, neither may we
bring him into order; if he otherwhiles would do any thing of special
Prerogative, he must be suffered to do after his own will, but we must obey the
Law that is made. Those special Precepts of God (says Ursinus) did as much
derogate from the second Commandment concerning Images, Ursin. tom. de Imag.
page 43.
as that singular Commandment in times past given unto Abraham concerning the
offering of his Son Isaac, may be said to have detracted from the sixth Precept
of the Decalogue. Tert. de Idolat.
Of old, Tertullian returned the same Answer to the like Objection; Well and
good, (says he) one and the same God, both by his general Law forbad any Image
to be made, and also by his extraordinary and special Commandment, willed an
Image of a Serpent to be made; If thou be obedient to the same God, thou have
his Law, Make no Image; but if thou have regard to the Image of the Serpent
that was afterward made by Moses, then do thou as Moses did. Make not any Image
against the Law, unless God command thee, as he did Moses.

They add further, that they were types of spiritual things; which now have not
place in the Church of God: Certainly (says Martyr) these Images had some
figurative meaning: Ubi supra.
But they were not set forth, as an example for us to follow; and seeing they
were external things, and had the Word added to them, they were (after a sort)
Sacraments of those times: and it is only God, and not man, that can make
Sacraments. And in Conclusion, they shut up their Answer with this, Martin. de
2. praec. page 166. Martyr. ubi supra.
That we must attempt nothing without the Commandment and Warrant of God: For
it is to be noted, That Solomon and Moses, which made the Cherubins, durst not
make any other, they only made that, which was commanded unto them by God: They
painted not upon the Walls the acts of Abraham, nor the doings of Adam, Moses,
or others of the Fathers. By all this they sufficiently declare, That, in their
judgments, the erecting of Images in the Temple for signification only, without
special Warrant from God, is a breach and violation of the holy Law and
Commandment of God. U^s. tom. 2. de divis. decalog. Fulk Rejoyn. against
Martial. Perk. Arm. aurea. Martin. ubi supra. Lumb. l. 4. did. 1. T. Aquin.
page 3. q. 83. a^t. 1. Jewels Apol. Angl. page 37.
And in their Expositions upon this Commandment, they teach, That it
condemns all counterfeit means of Gods Worship, and requires the observation
of Rites and Ceremonies prescribed by the Lord; in which only we ought to rest:
For it becomes us not to think our selves wiser than God; who would not have
his Church to be instructed with dumb signs, but with the lively preaching of
the Word: The Sacraments are Images in the eyes of all the Learned, and
unlawful by this Commandment, had not God himself commanded them. What? Are
they unlawful only as seals, and not as visible signs of God's Will and
Pleasure? Yes; as signs also; for a sign signifying by resemblance, and an
Image, are equivalent, and in largeness of sense but one; and a sign is a sign
from him that has a power to institute it. The affirmative part enjoyneth
obedience to all the Worship appointed by God; all which was significative,
Heb. 8.5. and 8.1. But by the nature of the affirmative, we learn: Therefore we
may conclude, that the institution of significant Ceremonies, is directly
contrary to the Moral Law of God; and, without his warrant, is utterly unlawful.

The quality of the Negative. Nullum enim signum sensib^l^ potest esse causa
gratiae, nec illam infallibiliter signare, nisi ex Domini institutione. Bell.
de Sac. l. 1. c. 11. Atqui in Sacramentis significare gratiam est eid^m
Sacramentaliter confer. Chem. de Sac. l. 3. c. 8.
4. Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: But significant Ceremonies not approved
of God in his Word, cannot be instituted or used in faith. Man has a twofold
light given him for his guidance and direction, Natural Reason; and
Supernatural Instruction; and what cannot be determined by the former, must be
warranted by the other; otherwise it is unlawful, and consequently not of
Faith: But natural reason cannot determine what Ceremonies significant are meet
and fit to be used in the solemn Worship of God: For man has neither power nor
authority to bless, nor liberty to annex any such forged or devised signs to
the holy Institution, nor wisdom to discern what is fit and acceptable in that
kind. He that is of authority to institute a sign to be the teacher of my
understanding, and an inciter of my devotion, must be able to give virtue
inherent, or assistance to that which should be the cause of such effects; else
is the sign vain and fruitless, the deviser idle and presumptuous. Now, man of
himself can give no power to any Symbolical sign of hi^ devising, Her. Con^ess.
W^tte n. breg. tit. de consecrat. aquae salis. M^rtyr. Com. Places. p. 4. c. 9.
Sect. 5. ^un. de cult. Sanct. l. 3. c. 7. n. 12.
to produce such effects: For the virtue of things comes either from the Word
of God put forth in the first Creation, or from his after-institution, or from
the Churches ^mpetration; which obtains by prayer those effects of things to
which they serve by God's Creation and Institution; not any creating or new
conception of things to supernatural uses: So that what force or virtue to ends
or purposes supernatural, God has not p^t into the creature, that, man by his
institution, cannot communicate unto it. Things natural, have indeed by
creation an aptness in them to represent spiritual; and some agreement with
them: But the determination of them to this purpose, the blessing of them in
this use, is from Him only that gave them their first being. Man cannot give
any blessing to his devises; Zepp. de Sac^am. l. 3. c. 12. Greg. 2.
Nor has he any warrant to beg Gods blessing upon them: for God will not be
effectual by Traditions or humane Ceremonies, but by the order and mean^
appointed by Himself; M^tth. 15.8.
according to that, They worship me in vain by the Precepts of men: Therefore
such humane ceremonies can work no true devotion, no motions of heart pleasing
to God, no confirmation of faith, or serious repentance^ but only have an
opinion of wisdom in voluntary worship. Col. 2.23.


Again: What understanding is there in man, to assure him that he may lawfully
annex signs of his own devising to the Word and Sacraments, which God has
ordained for the full instruction of his Church? Levi^. 10.1. Deuteronomy. 1.18. and
17.3. 1 Reg. 16.14. 2 Reg. 17.26.
God has disallowed the institution of new rites not commanded: as Achaz and
Manasses building new Altars in the house of the Lord, are reprehended for it.
And is there any wit of man that can devise how we should follow them in that
kind; or in general do as they did; and not incur the same rebuke? As the sin
of the Angels that fell, and the Sodomites, was one in kind, though different
in its special nature; So is the sin of building an Altar, and devising
Sacramental rites in the worship of God. Is it not our duty to acknowledge God
so wise and gracious in the signs that he has chosen; as to hold it
presumption for any man to imitare him in devising of the like? Are not the
Sacraments the seals of the heavenly King? and can any new print be added to
the seal of a King, without high Treason? What Master of a Family in his house,
What Prince in his Dominion, would grant power to any one, to change, alter, or
reform any thing upon his own pleasure? The signs which the Lord has
instituted for the instruction of his Church, are sufficient, and do better
serve for the purpose than any that man can devise: Therefore it is needless to
forge any other; yea, it is a vilifying of the wisdom of God. It is easy to
show, that the godly Learned in all Ages have disliked the devising of new
signs; howsoever, who men they have failed in some particulars, and ignorantly
gone against what in general they soundly taught: He is too partial, as will
not acknowledge this in the Fathers themselves, who did substantially maintain
the perfection of Scripture, and the necessity of celebrating Divine Mysteries
according to the precise institution delivered unto them: and yet gave more
power and virtue to vain inventions, and urged the necessity of Traditions,
further than the Truth would permit; or can stand with their own doctrine and
positions truly laid down in other places of their Writings. It is well known,
the Papists have miserably cor^upted the Simplicity of Gods Ordinances, by
their sinful, vain, and idle Ceremonies; yet some sparkles of this truth does
shine amongst them: Bellarmine would prove, that the Jews did not only desire a
corporal sign of the true God, De Eccl. trimuph. l. 2. c. 13. Sect. At hoc.
because then they had no need to make a Calf; for they had a Cloud and a
Pillar, which did lead them better than the Calf, which must be carried: In
this reason, though weak and simple (for humane vanity does many things both
needless, and unlawful; else had their Oil, Cream, Salt, Spittle, Ag^us Dei,
never been devised) this truth is contained, That where God has ordained signs
profitable and sufficient for the information of his Church, Si populo Ch
istiano Apostoli Caeremonias vel Ritus divinitus traditos imponere noluerunt;
quis, oro, sanae mentis obtrudet illi adinventiones adinventas humanitus.
Confess. Hell. vet. cap. 27. Con^. Wittemb. tit. de Baptis. Calv. opusc. pa^. 59.
It is needless and vain for men to devise and constitute others, or more, for
that end and purpose. Again, the Ceremonies which were ordained by God himself,
for the information of his Church by their signification, are now ceased; and
cannot be continued without sin: and what warrant then has any man, upon his
own will and pleasure to institute or ordain significant Ceremonies in the time
of the Gospel.

When the Church was an Infant, kept under the Rudiments of the Law, she was to
be taught only by those shadows and figures that God prescribed: And now, in
the brightness of the Gospel when all figures, shadows, vail, adumbrations;
whether signifying things present or to come, be done away: Shall we think the
light of reason sufficient to direct, without the guidance of Scripture in
m^tters of Rites and Ceremonies, appropriated to the solemn Worship of God for
the Instruction of his People? Were the old figures taken away, Whit^k. de
Pont. Romans q. 7. c. 3. Art. 6. Idem. cont. Dura. l. 9. Sect. 59. p. 826.
Rainold. Conf. with H^rt. c. 8. d. 4. p. 50. lin. 30. Visin. tom. 2. tit. de
Imag. 1 Cor. 11.23. Mat. 28.19, 28. Acts 10.47. Whitak. cont. Dur. Lib. 5.
Sect. 21. and l. 10. Sect. 21. and l. 8. S^ct. 65.
that there might be place for new? Were Divine abolished, that Humane might
succeed? Well then, may our Adversaries triumph over the Forces that are sent
forth against their Superstitions; burdensome, Jewish, vain, and heathenish
Rites and Customs. Our Writers dispute thus against them: We must have no other
signs in Baptism, than such as the Scripture warranteth; They allege that of
the Apostle, What I have received of the Lord, that do I deliver; That of our
Savior, Go and Baptize, teaching them to observe whatsoever I command you;
That of Peter, Can any forbid Water that these may not be Baptized; And
generally, the practice of Christ and his Apostles: But if Ceremonies
significant be lawful, which have only Warrant or Approbation from the will
or wit of Man; then must all these reasons stoop to the Oil, Cream, Salt,
Lights, and Spittle, in use amongst them; for all these have as much reason and
show of Wisdom to Warrant them, as any other can that are simply of man's
devising: And, what Understanding or Judgment can man have of himself to
discern how, or by what means God will be Worshipped? None at all. For the
Scripture testifies that every man is brutish by his own knowledge, Jer.
10.14, and 51, 17.
nor more able to discern what in this case is fit and acceptable, than a blind
man is to judge of Colors; Isa. 8.20. Jer. 8.9.
that there is no light in them that speak not according to the Scripture, no
wisdom in them that reject the Word of the Lord* There is a certain light
engraven in the hearts of men by Nature, whereby they know somewhat concerning
God; as, that there is a God, that he is wise, just, good and bountiful, the
Governor of all things; and they discern some things pertaining to justice,
equity, temperance, honest commerce and dealing with men: but they are utterly
ignorant how, or by what means God will be served, what he will bless for the
Instruction of his People. We see and know by experience, That is most
perilous, unprofitable, and disallowed of God, that does best sort with our
vain conceptions: Carnal Observations, Col. 2.23.
such as, Touch not, taste not, handle not; have a show of wisdom in voluntary
Religion, and carry a glorious show of holiness to our seeming; when the Word
of God discovers them to be fruitless, distasteful, odious. Whence grew the
first contempt of God's Ordinances, the pollution of holy things with carnal
Customs, that are according to this World; and not according to godliness; the
corruptions of the Truth with manifold Superstitions and Idolatries; but from a
fond admiration of Rites and Customs devised by others, or taken up upon our
own Heads; which being once admitted into the Worship of God, did multiply and
increase till they had obscured, if not clean covered and abolished the
simplicity and glory of God's Ordinances, (as bad weeds overgrow the Corn) and
secretly stolen the heart away from all due reverence and respect to the word
of Life, and seals of our Salvation. For as a man is blind, carnal, impotent;
and yet a Lover of his own devices: So are the signs devised by him, dark,
vailing the brightness of the Gospel; carnal, not spiritual; dead without
Power; and yet better affected, more delighted in, than the Sacraments
themselves. No sooner was the sign of the Cross added unto Baptism, and made a
sign like to the Lord's; but it presently became greater than the Water which
was Christ's sign, and that in the Eyes of them who so advanced it. Moreover,
admit Reason for an Umpire in this matter, and Images cannot be kept out of the
Church: for no means is more profitable to inform the mind, confirm the memory,
and move the affection, than is the sight of a Picture artificially made, cut,
or carved; if a man may believe himself, or give credit to his immagination: If
the Will of God be not unto us instead of all reasons, we shall be hardly drawn
to dislike that manner of teaching or worshipping. A man that is enlightened
with the knowledge of God's Will, and the mystery of Salvation; may lawfully in
his meditations make use of diverse Creatures or things, that are apt and fit
to represent Spiritual things unto him: but he must not take upon him to
determine them to be used as signs for such an end and purpose; for having no
promise of God to come by that course, he can expect no blessing from God in
that practice, but the contrary: Seeing therefore man is himself ignorant and
unwise, neither able to receive the things of the Spirit, nor discern that
which pertains to the Kingdom of Christ; (nor yet being enlightened with the
knowledge of the Truth according to godliness, to devise any fit or acceptable
means whereby God should be worshipped, or his People taught in the ways of
holiness): It follows, That in the worship of God, signs not approved of him
in his Word, cannot be instituted or used in Faith, and consequently are to be
held unlawful.

5. Christ Jesus, the great Doctor of his Church, Mat. 23.8, 10. Joh. 4.25.
Acts 1.3.
being called of his heavenly Father to teach to us perfectly, and at once, the
whole Counsel of God, and the things that did pertain to the Kingdom of God to
the end of the World, was faithful in all his House, as was Moses; and made
known unto his Disciples whatsoever he received of his Father. Heb. 3.2, 5.
But Moses prescribed the form of God's worship in every particular Ceremony
significant; and brought in none, Joh. 15.15.
no not one into the Church, which the Lord himself did not institute, giving
charge to the Church of the Jews, That the^ should neither add thereto, Exodus
25.9, 38, 39, 40, and 27 19, and 39, 42 43. Deuteronomy. 12, 32.
nor take ought therefrom. Therefore our Savior Christ also taught his
Disciples what Ceremonies significant ought to be used in the Church of God, to
whose Ordinance nothing must be added, from whose Institution nothing ought to
be diminished: The old Testament was indeed delivered unto one People only of
the World; The Commission of the Gospel was, Go teach all Nations. But the
liberty of Instituting Rites significant was no greater to the Christian
Church, Vis. Jun. Animad. in Bell. lib. 4. de pont. Cap. 17.
than to the Church of the Jews: They had a prescription of particular
Ceremonies, most fitly agreeing to the polity of their Church and
Commonwealth, and dispensation of those times: So, has the Christian Church
also: to which we are as precisely bound, as ever was the Church of the Jews to
the Ordinances appointed for that time and state, as has been showed before;
in Circumstantiall matters concerning Time, Place, and Order of divine Service;
And several Christian Churches have liberty according to the general Rules of
Scripture to constitute what is most agreeable to the condition of the Country,
and does best tend to Edification: And in these things the Jews had Authority
no less than the others. In Ceremonies and Rites significant annexed to the
Worship of God, the Jews were tied to the written Law of Moses and the
Prophets; nor may any thing be attempted lawfully by the Christian Church in
things of this Nature, more than was or ought to have been by them. Though men
be as different almost in Nature as in Nations and Languages, yet must they of
necessity submit themselves to the use of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, which
two Ceremonies only are commanded by Divine precept; and are to be received of
all Christians, that in truth and soundness profess the Gospel. And seeing
Christ Instituted no signs but these, the Apostles commended no other to the
several Churches planted and dressed by them: What necessity is there, that
difference of People to which the Gospel is now preached, should infer a
liberty of inventing new Signs or Rites never seen or allowed of Christ? Those
that God prescribed for the Jews were fit for that Time, and for that People,
none else might be devised; those that Christ has ordained for all Churches
are sufficient; most fit for them; what shall be brought in besides and annexed
to them, does want both his Approbation and Blessing: As Moses was faithful in
the House of God as a Servant, both in thing: re^ll and rituall, as some
distinguish; So was Christ also, as a Son, Neither did his faithfulness stand
in removing the Law of Jewish Ceremonies, and disburdening all Christians from
the use of them; but in prescribing Laws and Ordinances, whereby the Church is
to be ordered and instructed until his second coming, and that as particularly
and expressly as Moses had done unto the Israelites. To stand upon comparison
betwixt Moses and Christ in perfection or real faithfulness, (as some call it)
is not to this purpose; for his perfection is one thing, his faithfulness
another: and whom He did exceed in perfectness, He did every way equalize in
faithfulness in the House of God: He did not only teach a more excellent
Doctrine than Moses, but more full and perfect: He did not only antiquate what
Ceremonies were to be shadows of good things to come, and figures of man's
Redemption by his Sacrifice upon the Cross; but he ordained also, with what
visible Signs and Tokens his Church should be nourtured, and assured of his
love and favour^ As he died to bring Life to mankind, raised up himself from
Death, ascended, entered within the Vail, and has taken possession of the
heavenly Mansion; for us: So did he give direction to his Apostles, and in them
to all Churches, by what Statutes and Laws his People should be Governed, by
what Signs and Ceremonies they should be taught and confirmed in Faith. Do we
then leave nothing to the Arbitrament of the Church? Nothings but what was left
to the Power and Authority of the Jewish Church: for we have a Canon as
perfect, a direction as exact and particular as ever they had. Many honorable
witnesses of God's truth have judiciously observed, That Christ in holy
Scripture has not singularly and specially prescribed concerning external
Discipline and Ceremonies; for that he foresaw these things were to depend upon
the occasions and opportunities of times, which must be determined by general
Rules given for direction in these cases; whose Judgment we embrace with
reverence, and acknowledge consonant to the words of wholesome Doctrine, so it
be understood according to their true intent and meating, Of matters meetly
accidental, circumstan^iall, or natural concerning Discipline or Worship: But
thence to infer a liberty to ordain in substantial matters of Discipline and
significative Ceremonies whatsoever shall seem good in our own eyes, without the
approbation and warrant of Gods Word, is more than the Learned grant, or the
Truth it self will permit: As touching the Church (says Martyr) she alters
not her form. Loc. Com. part. 1. c. 11. Sect. 12.
It is always one manner of Common wealth, and nothing is hid from the
understanding of God the Author of the Laws. The Lord of the house was not
inferior to the servant in fidelity: What our Savior Christ heard and saw of
the Father; that he manifested to his Disciples, charging them to teach the
Church to observe it: What they received of the Lord, that they delivered in
great simplicity, without any addition of new doctrine to his Doctrine, or of
devised symbolical signs to his Signs; never once intimating in their Epistles
or Writings, any liberty that the Church should have to multiply Rites or
Ceremonies for mystical signification, and to annex them to the holy things of
God. And when we can neither hear from Moses, Christ, nor his Apostles, that
the forging and inventing of such observations is allowed before God; what
warrant can we have to bear us out therein? If Cities and Towns-Corporate plead
Immunities and Exemptions from the Law, and assume to themselves authority to
make Decrees of this or that sort: being impleaded by the King's Attorney for
it; either they must show their Charter to warrantize such Privileges, or
incur Censure for their sawciness and presumption: So they that challenge
privilege to devise significant Rites in the Worship of God, and annex them to
the Signs which God Himself has established, must either show their Charter
signed with the authentic Seal of the Court of Heaven, or be cast in Judgment
when they be impleaded at his Bar.

6. If God be the only Teacher of his Church to instruct it by Word and Sign,
then no Ceremonies significant may be admitted into the solemn Worship of God
for doctrine and instruction, but such as bear his stamp, are marked with his
Seal, are warranted by holy Scripture: For the chaste Spouse of Christ, who
knows the voice of her Beloved, will not acknowledge unwritten Traditions for
the Word of God: But God is the only Teacher of his Church both by Word and
Sign. Jam. 4.12. Matthew. 23.8. Act. 3.32.
As the doctrine which is taught must be from above, so the means whereby it is
taught must be of God: both he that teaches new doctrines, and he that
devises strange means to instruct the people of God in the knowledge of the
truth according to godliness, does run upon his own head. Mic. 7.16. Hos. 14.1.
It is a truth without controversy; That as to forgive sins, receive into
favor, and bless with spiritual blessings in Jesus Christ, is proper to the
Lord alone; so it is his peculiar, Esaias 7.14. and 38.7.
to institute signs and seals of his Covenant and Mercy. For none can sign a
Lease, who has not power to let and demise it: nor annex a seal to any
promise, that has not authority to make it, and to confer the good promised.
Jewel. Treat. of the Sacr.
But it seems as lawful to devise new seals of Divine promises, as Symbolical
signs of spiritual duties: seeing to teach the way to heaven, and to prescribe
what service man should perform to God; does belong to him that has Power and
Sovereignty of life and death, who is able to save and to destroy. And if we
may be bold to invent signs to teach man his duty; and link them to the means
of God's Worship, so long as they signify no other thing but what the
Scripture teaches. Bellar. de Sacr. l. 1. cap. 24. Sect. de Sacr.
Why may we not bring in signs also to assure us of the truth of Gods promises,
when nothing is thereby assured and sealed, but what is promised in the written
Word. As the Duty taught, and the Promise confirmed, are both from one Supreme;
so the sign of Instruction, and the seal of Confirmation, do challenge the same
author, require the same authority. This will the better appear, if we shall
consider, That signs do not become seals by any special institution; whereby
they are distinguished from signs in regard of the efficient cause, but in
respect of the thing that they are appointed to sign or signify: Signs of
Divine promises are seals, true or false; vain or behooveful, even from this,
that they are determined to signify such a thing, whether the Institution be
of God or Man. Signs of man's duty, be signs only, from what author soever they
have their ordination. The reason is, because duties are only taught, not
assured as duties; but promises represented by signs are thereby sealed. What
is a seal, Basting. Cate. q. 66. of the Sacram.
but a sign sealing up a thing promised; or a print whereby a thing promised by
Covenant is signed. Therefore if the Church may not presume to add new seals to
the promises of God, but is bound to rest contented with them that are
commended unto her by the Lord himself, She may not devise symbolical signs in
the worship of God, for the instruction of her children in the ways of
holiness. It may further be added, That a sign is a visible word: and therefore
if no voice must be heard in the Congregation but the Lords alone; no teaching
signs must be admitted in his worship, but such as he has licensed to speak
and stand in place. Syntag tom. 2. l. 6. c. 38.
Polanus says, Those things are impious, which are directly opposed to the
Commandment of God; of which sort are many Traditions of the Papists; as, the
abuse of the Lords Supper, the Mass, Invocation of dead men, worshipping of
Images, the law concerning Single life, Festival days dedicated to Saints,
Images made for religious uses, that is, that they might serve for the use of
Religion, either that they might be worshipped, or that holy things might be
represented by them, or that God be worshipped by them: For God wills not
this end of Images, but will have all men taught by his Word; Monumenta autem
quibus res divinae representantur sunt sola Sacramenta, non picta, aut ficta,
aut sculpta, sed administrata et usurpata legitime In the Book of Homilies,
Hom. for Whitsontide, part. 2. Fulk against Rhem. in Luc. 24. Sect. 5.
all humane devised signs are condemned in Baptism, because no signs should
burden the Church, save those which the Lord has left, which are not
burdensome. D. Fulk demands of the Rhemists, How is the sign of the Cross a
convenient memorial of Christ's death, which is not ordained of Christ, nor
taught by the Apostles to be such? Cont. Bell. de cult. Sanct. l. 3. c. 7.
Lambertus Danaus is resolure; It is blasphemy (says he) to think that any
outward thing may be made a sign in the Church of any thing that is spiritual;
unless it be expressly ordained in the Word, and commanded by God himself to be
used to that end. Bucer condemns them that devise any sign for religious use:
And this the Schoolmen themselves saw and taught: It pertains only to the
signifier to determine what signs must be used to signify.

7. The Scripture is the sole and sufficient Rule of all immediate worship,
Levit. 10.1. Jer. 7.31. Deuteronomy. 12.31, 32. Col. 2.23.
internal or external, moral or ceremonial, as it is evident by the whole
tenor of Gods Word, and the general Confession of all Protestant Divines. The
Lord never left it to the will and arbitrament of man, to worship him as seemed
good in his own eyes: But in all Ages of the World, and states of the Church,
he still prescribed how he would be served. The duty that Adam owed in the
state of Innocence, must be paid according to the prescription: he was taught
in what he should show his obedience, what time he should set apart as a solemn
day of rest; the like may be said of all the worship he was to perform. After
the Fall, Was any worship allowed, which was not commanded? We read not of any
express Commandment that the Fathers had to offer Sacrifice, or to observe the
difference of clean and unclean beasts. But without question, they received
particular instructions from the Lord, touching these things, either by the
inspiration of his Spirit, or some Word, or both: For the Scripture says, God
had respect unto Abel, and his sacrifice: But sacrifice and burnt-offerings
could not please him, Genesis 4.4, 5. Psalm. 50.9, 10. Heb. 11.7. Heb. 11.6.
if they had not been offered in faith and obedience. Again, By faith Abel
offered a greater sacrifice then Cain; without which it is impossible to please
God. But faith presupposes revelation, and obedience a Commandment. In other
Ages of the Church it is most clear and evident, that the Lord showed to his
Church the whole form of worship, wherewith for that time he would be served,
unto which they might not add; from which they might not detract the least jot
or tittle. The Prophets, our Savior Christ, the Apostles, Levit. 10.1. Jer.
7.31. and 28.14.47. and 12.30. and 29.26. and 31.20. Exodus 20.5. and 10.26. and
12.30. Judge. 10.10. 2 Samuel 16.19. 2 Reg. 10.18, 19, 21, 22. and 17.33. and
21.28. 1 Chr. 28.19. 2 Chro. 30.23. Jer. 8.2. Mal. 3.14, 15. Rainold. incens.
Apoc. tom. 2. p. 244.
do sharply reprehend all Rites devised by man for religious use, though
carrying never so great a show of wisdom, humility and care: which they would
never have done, if will worship had not been unlawful, and displeasing unto
God. To spend many words in the confimation of this Point is superfluous, since
it is a truth generally received by all Protestant Divines, That Ceremonies are
unlawful, when they be imposed, urged, or used with opinion of holiness,
necessity or worship. But to prevent mistaking, it will be expedient here to
show, what Worship is, and what warrant each part thereof must have from God.
The Hebrew word, Habad, which signifies to Serve, is commonly used for all that
service, good and bad, which is given either to the true God, or Idols: which
two kinds of worship as they agree in one common nature of Worship or Service,
so do they in their general or common nature, though they be opposite in their
special nature, objects, and adjuncts: contraries we know must consent in some
third, as virtue and vice, hot and cold, black and white: the same is to be
held of Divine worship true and false. For service comprehending under it
worship true and false, as the parts thereof, at least analogical; of necessity
the common nature of worship must agree to them both, else how could the
service of Idols, or false-worship of the true God, be called Worship: This
has been wisely observed in other cases not unlike, by our learned Writers
against the common Adversary. Bellarmine would prove, That the offering of
Incense and sweet Odours, is not a Sacrifice in the New Testament; because it
is not offered by the Priest only, nor only to the Lord. Our Divines reply,
That there are many Sacrifices, to which that definition of Sacrifices cannot
agree, viz. profane Sacrifices which are offered by them that are no Priests;
to devils, and not to God; after a manner devised, not prescribed by God: and
therefore seeing that of Sacrifices some be holy, and some profane, in the
definition of a sacrifice in general, those things only are to be put, which
are common to both kinds. In like manner, when there is a true and false
worship; an holy and profane service, those things only are to be put in the
definition of worship, which agree to both kinds. Divine worship taken in that
latitude of sense as to comprehend the service of God true and false, (for to
speak of the worship of false gods, is impertinent) is an action or work
commanded by Divine Authority, instituted by man, or devised upon our own
heads, whereby God is worshipped, his promises are sealed; or obedience to his
Will is taught. Zanch. de redemp. in secundum prec. Par. dradiaph. page 90.
All actions that man performs unto man, are not parts of civil worship: but
every act that man performs directly or immediately to God, is a part of
Divine worship, and ought merely to concern his glory: For it is impossible to
conceive how the creature, who is infinite degrees inferior to the Creator in
excellency, and altogether unable to return the least good back again to Him
for the infinite blessings he has received from him, should perform any act
immediately unto him but worship. A work commanded, is not large enough to
comprehend the whole nature of worship, but does distinguish true worship from
false, as the uprightness of the heart does sincere worship from hypocritical
and counterfeit. To say Man is a reasonable creature always enjoying sound
health, is not the definition of Man, but of a sound man; because there be many
subject to infirmities and diseases, who yet be men: So to define Worship to be
a work commanded of God, is to show what lawful and holy Worship is, Esaias
29.13. Matthew. 15.9.
not what worship in general: For many things are worship which God never
required. That Worship is true which God commands: that false, which man
devises: that sincere that proceeds from an honest heart, a good conscience,
Psalm. 78.34, 35.
and faith unfeigned: that hypocritical, which comes from an halting, divided,
double heart, or is performed by the outward man alone: But truth and sincerity
being special adjuncts of worship appointed and commanded of God, cannot come
within the definition of worship in general. And as the means that God has
appointed to seal his promises or teach obedience, be acts of divine service:
So the means that man shall devise or invent of himself for that end and
purpose, must needs be worship also. If God be worshipped when obedience is
taught by the preaching of the Gospel, or his promises sealed by the use of the
Sacraments: When the same duty is taught by visible signs, or the promise
confirmed by new devised seals, he is worshipped and honored: for every action
whereby God is worshipped, is worship; and every work whereby obedience is
taught, is obedience or service. From hence it appears, that the definition of
essential worship, to be, [That which is necessarily required to God's service,
so as that the contrariety thereof must needs displease him] is too short, as
that which agrees not to all worship, but only to that which is true and
ordained of God: For we know, many Traditions, Customs, and Ceremonial
observations are obtruded upon the Churches as worship, the contrary whereof
would please, and not displease God. Were not the precepts of men reprehended
by the Prophet Esaias, the Pharisaical washings taxed by Christ, Esaias 29.13.
Matthew. 15.9. Mar. 7.7. Col. 2.23.
and other Ceremonial observations condemned by the Apostle Paul, as matters of
worship, though false and erroneous? How could there be any will worship, if
all worship were necessarily required of God? Neither are those Ceremonies only
to be reputed essential parts of worship, that be urged with opinion of
Sanctity, Necessity, Efficacy, whether true or false: but those signs also that
are devised to be means of spiritual instruction by their notable and mystical
signification: It being a part and means of his worship, to teach his worship.
To place the worship of God in Faith, Hope, and Love only, and not in external
Rites and Ceremonies, is contrary to Truth and Reason: For then the Ceremonies
of the Law, and the Sacraments of the New Testament must be reputed no parts of
Gods essential worship, which is most absurd. Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 10. Sect.
9.12.
The Papists are accused by the Learned of our side, to place the Worship of
God in their vain Traditions and Observations. What worship do they in end,
only accessory and accidental, as some call it? No, but essential and
substantial: and yet they speak of Rites and Ceremonies, which by the Canons
and Constitutions of that Synagogue, are not mainained to be of absolute
necessity to salvation; as they plainly profess, and our Divines acknowledge:
Whereby it is not hard to gather, what is meant by essential or substantial
worship; that it stands not only in internal duties, but also in external Rite;
and Ceremonies which are acknowledged to be of no absolute necessity.

Now the better to conceive what warrant every part of Gods service must have
from the Scripture, three things are to be distinguished in it.

The first is the essential worship it self, whether concerning man's duty, or
the means of his Instruction.

The second, the natural Ceremonies, or voluntary compositions or gestures of
the body, as are with moderate deliberation used to shadow forth the hidden
motions, affections, and dispositions of the mind, that are begotten by the
consideration of Gods excellent Greamess, Majesty, Goodness, Love, etc.

The third, is the circumstances, and order of performance (which is by some
called accidental, or accessory worship), such as concern time, place, person,
and manner of performance; all which are required in the celebration of Gods
worship. Thus Divines make a difference (and that necessarily) betwixt the
substance of worship, and the things annexed to it as necessary circumstances.
And as we must distinguish the substantial means of worship from the external
testifications of inward devotion by natural Ceremonies; so must they be
distinguished from bare and naked circumstances of time, place, and manner of
celebrating divine Mysteries: for circumstances are meetly accessaries to
worship, no parts thereof, if we speak properly, according to the ordinary
acceptance of the word, 1 King. 19.18. Hos. 13.2. Ezekiel. 18. 6.
in Classical Authors. But the gestures of the body made, and purposely framed
to shadow forth the hidden affection of the Soul, are external acts of
adoration and worship. The true worshippers of God are distinguished from
Idolaters by this, that they had not bowed the knee to Baal. Kissing, bowing to
an Image, is condemned as a service of the Idol; and the whole worship of God
is oft-times signified by the terms of kissing, Psalm. 2.12. Esaias 45.23. Phil.
2.9, 10. Ephesians. 3.24. Joh. 4.20, 21. 1 Reg. 8.54. Ezr, 9.5. Deuteronomy. 4.19. Psalm.
95.5. Matthew. 17.4. Matthew. 2.1, 11.
bowing, kneeling, adoring, falling down before him. In the old Testament, the
worship of God is noted by this word, Carah, which signifies the bending of
the knees, or hams; Kadad, which signifies to bow, or nod the head; Sagad,
almost of the same signification; Schaphel, Schachah, and Shacack, which
signify to bow the whole body, and sometimes to fall flat upon the ground. In
the New Testament, Gods Worship is noted by these words, (...), which
signifies to bow the knee; and (...), which is to worship by kissing, and
casting down himself at the knees of another. What? that to adore, is to give
honor with the gesture of the body, as well as with the mind or words:
Priscianus, and Nonnius, derive the word Adoratio of Ador, which signifies
fine flower, or corn whereof fine Cakes were made, which the Romans used in
their Sacrifices. Valla derive it of oro, but yet he says, Adorare nihilominus
sine ore sieri, not, sine flexu genuum ac gestu corporis.

It implies in it three acts; first, An apprehension of the excellency of that
which is adored.

Secondly, An act of the Will, desiring to do something to testify our
acknowledgment of this greatness, and our subjection and inferiority.

Thirdly, An outward act expressing the same.

The two former are internal, the last is outward, bringing that to light that
was hid in the heart; but the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin words, signifying
adoration, do note an external humiliation, and either a prostration of the
whole body, or of some part, viz. the head, or the bending of the knee, or
kissing of the hands, to shadow forth and express the internal affection of the
heart, which is the Soul and life of external worship. But if it be demanded
what warrant these things must have from the Word of God, the answer is direct.

First, The actions of worship it self, whatsoever are not prescribed and
appointed of God, they are forbidden; for concerning them, nothing may be
added, diminished, or changed, but all things must be done according to Divine
Institution.

Secondly, Natural Ceremonies or Signs (as they are called), Bell. de sacr. l.
2. c. 29. sect. secund. part. Quaedam sunt ab ipsa natura, etc.
which are but inward demonstrations of the secret disposition of the heart,
are sufficiently warranted by the light of Nature, and the Word of God, though
they be not required as absolutely necessary, nor particularly prescribed, as
be the substantial means of worship. And though no precise gesture be of
absolute necessity in any part of Gods worship; yet are these Ceremonies so far
Divine, Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 10. sect. 30.
that it is not in the power of any Church in the World, altogether to
prohibit them.

Thirdly, Arbitrary Ceremonies concerning time, place, and manner of
celebrating Divine Mysteries, are in the power of the Church, to be ordered as
she shall judge to be most convenient, and tending to edification; provided that
all her Ordinances be squared according to the general rules of direction hid
down in the Word of God, and nothing be done contrary to the integrity of
Doctrine, the simplicity of Christian Religion, the edification of the Church,
good order, and the rules of love: and in all this, nothing is affirmed, but
what is taught and maintained by Protestant Divines against the common
Adversaries of Gods Grace and truth; but signs signifying by proportion annexed
to the solemn worship of God, are parts of his worship, not accessory, but
substantial; proper, not accidental, in the sense before explained. Cont.
Faust. l. 19. cap. 16. et Tract. in 10.80. et de Trin. l. 3. c. 4.
For Ceremonies significant are visible words (as Augustine calls the
Sacraments) teaching Doctrine true or false, as in signification they consent
or dissent from the Word of God; and of necessity the Doctrine taught by Word,
and Sign, must agree in one common nature. What is it to say the Sacraments are
visible words, Ursin. tom. 2. ad Flac. Sect. resp. page 1433.
but that they are Signs, Image^s, Similitudes, Types, visible Anti-types of
the Word; or that the Sacraments as Signs, do represent that to the eyes, which
words bring to the ears?

Now the public reading of Scripture for the edification of the Church, is
acknowledged to be a part of Gods Worship; so is the Preaching, Ut enim vocalis
oration est cultus, quia est signum mentalis; ita adoratio erit cultus, quia est
signum internae adorationis. Bell. de sacr. l. 2. c. 3. prop. 5.
explaining, and applying of the Word; the text being the same for substance
with the exposition; And if to teach by word be a worship of God; to teach by
sign, whether significative by the appointment of God, or declaratory by the
invention of man, is worship also, when they teach one thing in use public and
religious.

Again, all Actions whereby spiritual Duties are taught in Gods solemn
Worship, are Acts whereby God is Worshipped, and all Acts whereby God is
Worshipped in his solemn Servivce, is Worship; as all Actions whereby he is
obeyed, is Obedience. But significant Ceremonies do teach spiritual Duties in
the Worship of God; and consequen ly God is Worshipped by them, and they are
Worship. Moreover, the Jewish Ceremonies Instituted by God, and Ceremonies
significative devised by Men, and annexed to the solemn Worship of God, do
agree in the same common nature and use; both appropriated to the Worship of
God, both outward shadows of mystical signification to teach spiritual Duties:
But the use of Jewish Ceremonies in the solemn Worship of God, was a part of
his true and immediate Worship and Service: Therefore others also must be a
part of his Worship; for agreeing with them in common nature and use, they must
needs consent in the common Nature of Worship, though they differ in their
Adjuncts, true and false, as they dissent in their special Institution; the
one taking their Original from God, the other springing from Man's brain. The
commandment of God, and the special instituted signification of a Ceremony,
makes it not barely to be Worship, but true and approved Worship; and the same
thing practiced to a like end, without Divine approbation, must needs be
Worship, but false and erroneous: Incense offered to the true God according to
his prescription to an holy end, was an holy Sacrifice, pleasing and
acceptable; Incense offered to Saints without direction from God, is a
Sacrifice also, because both these are one in the common nature of a Sacrifice,
but false and profane. Circumcision, abstinence from Blood, and other legal
Rites observed according to the prescription of the Law, was an immediate
Worship of God; but now to abstain in like manner, and for the same end, is
Superstitious. Now, to take up the use of legal Rites, is Will Worship;
because they are not required at our hands: A thing in it self indifferent,
being commannded of God for some special end and purpose, becomes a necessary
and immediate part of his Worship, though it was not so before; but if any man
upon his own head shall use it to such ends to which it is not appointed, or
with the same opinion of holiness and necessity; he stands guilty of devised
Worship. Martyr speaking against the popish Addition of Salt in Baptism; says,
So then that which is added to Baptism, is self-worship; and no lawful and
sincere Administration of Baptism. Martyr. Com. pl. part. 4. cap. 8.5. In
Institutions which are means to an end, the respect of the end is also required
to the end; but a right end not so.
It had been simply indifferent to offer a Lamb speckled or unspeckled in
Sacrifice, had not the Lord determined they should bring one without spot for
an oblation; but if to the same end for which God ordained it should be without
spot, any man had presumed to appoint or offer a Lamb without spot; in so
doing, he had forged a Worship unto himself: This is no new piece of Doctrine,
but what has been acknowledged, and is maintained by our Divines against the
Adversaries. Lastly, signs Sacramental are parts of God's Worship: But
significant signs by analogy or proportion, are Sacramental; as shall be
showed in the next Argument.

8. No signs Sacamentall are warrantable or lawful, but what are Instituted of
God, and approved in his Word; Paul says, Hereceived of the Lord, what he
delivered to the Church of Corinth, touching the, Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, 1 Cor. 11.13. which must be understood of all other also: The Baptism
of John, was it from Heaven or of Men? It was not from Men, but God: He is the
Ordainer of all Sacraments, new or old; Our Divines maintain against the
Romanists, Genesis 9.13, and 17.19. Willet Con. 24. q. 4. Arg. 2. Divinum et
integrum non esset misterium, si quicquam ex te adderes. Chrysostom. homl. 7. in 1
Corrinth. Bell. de Sacr. l. 1. c. 9.14. and de Script. l. 4. c. 5. Christus in
Ecclesia solus potest Sacramenta constituere. Mald. in Matthew. 26.11. Zepper. de
sacra. lib. 1. The Sacraments were ordained to move, lead, and instruct our
dull and heavy hearts, by sensible Creatures, that so our negligence in not
hearing or marking the Word of God might be amended. Jewel's Treatise of the
Sacraments.
That the Sacraments are expressly commanded of God in holy Scripture, and that
in the Institution of a Sacrament there must be express mention of the material
parts thereof, as it was in the Institution of Baptism and the Lord's Supper;
yea, the Papists themselves acknowledge that Ceremonies Sacramental, must be
Instituted by Authority, divine, not humane; though they refuse to be judged in
this by the Scripture, and fly to unwritten Traditions, which blasphemously
they make to be one part of the word of God, in authority equal to the holy
Scripture: But signs appointed to signify by analogy or proportion, and annexed
to the solemn Worship of God, are Sacramental. The ancients define a Sacrament
to be, A visible sign or form of an invisible Grace, A sign not natural, but
voluntary; not indicant, but analogicall; teaching or shadowing by
representation: So they call a Sacrament, a visible Word, as in Scripture they
are termed Signs or Memorials. In modern Writers, the name Sacrament is given
to the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; to the Altars, Sacrifices,
Cherubins, Lights, and all Ceremonies ordained for signification in time of the
Law; as well as to the Rainbow, Manna, the Rock, the Red Sea, Circumcision, and
the Paschal-Lamb: Some of which were instituted to teach Man his Duty, as
others to seal and confirm the Promise of God, or if all of them were seals of
some spiritual Promises, they were all Signs of some spiritual Duty, and
Sacramental in both respects. Whence we may conclude, That the common nature
of a Sacrament does agree to signs determined by representation to teach any
duty that man owes to God (his absolute Sovereign, and merciful Father in
Christ Jesus) whether Supernatural or Moral. The Precepts contained in the
Book of Life, are, and do set forth the mind of God unto us, no less than the
Promises made therein; nor can any reason be given, why the representation of
some spiritual Duty [for all Duties that man is to perform unto God in Christ
are spiritual Duties,] by a mystical Rite, should not as properly pertain to
the nature of a Sacrament; as the shadowing or sealing of some spiritual
Promise. Quanquam ne professi^ quidem fidei. Nam attendendum non tantum quid
velit qui profitetu^, sed ^tiam quid ^^^ptum sit ei, apud quem opertet
professio^^^ ^s;^^^. Chapter de Sacr. lib. 1. cap. 8. ursin. tom. 2. page 1630.
What the Word does bring to the ear, that the Sacrament does exhibit to the
other senses: The whole Scripture does testify, That from the beginning of the
World, the Lord did intend this in Instituting Ceremonies, that they should
represent those things to the Eyes of men, which his heavenly Word does offer
to their Ears. But commandments are part of the Word as well as Promises; The
Will of God manifesting what he will do for us, is a mystery; so is it
prescribing what Service he will have from us, and a visible, corporal,
material element determined to teach either of them, or both, is a sign
Sacramental and mystical, expressing some sacred mystery to the Eye,
plac="marg" Signa cum adres divinas adhibentur Sacramenta vocantur. Aug. de
Doctr. Chr. lib. 3. cap. 6. and ad Max. Ep. 5.
as the Word does to the sense which receives the Voice. We know no more what
Service God will have a Christian perform unto his Highness, then we do what
good he would have men to expect from him by a lively Faith; and it seems
altogether as lawful for man to devise signs for the confirmation of his
Faith, as to admonish and teach his Duty. What difference can be made betwixt
an addition to the means of instruction appointed of God, and to the means of
our assurance prescribed by him: The commandments and the Promises are so knit
together, that it cannot be conceived how a sign should be appointed to teach
man his Duty, and not to assure him of some good from God in the use thereof:
For (...) Will is made known by Covenant, wherein he freely bin^^^ ^^elf to
bless us upon condition of sincere and faithful Obedie^^^ ^^s he obliges us
to be obedient to his Commandments that we may be blessed; and the signs added
to the Word do teach both, as in the Word it self both parts are published.
Again, it is one proper end of the Sacraments by striking the senses by outward
representative Elements to teach the understanding, help the memory, stir up
the affections, and excite devotion: But for this end also are significant
Rites devised, unless we shall confess them to be vain, idle, fruitless,
absurd and senseless; And thus agreeing with Sacraments in their nature and end;
of necessity they must be confessed to be Ceremonies Sacramental: The Scripture
does not so distinguish betwixt Signs and Seals, or signs significative and
obsignant; as to make the one Sacramental, not the other: rather under the name
sign it expresses the nature of a Sacrament, which consists in the analogy
and proportion which is betwixt a sign determined to signify, and the thing
signified. The signs which it has pleased God to add to his Covenant, are not
bare, naked, empty shadows, but lively Seals of divine Grace Promised, and
effectual Teachers of man's duty; signs of man's duty, Signs and Seals both of
God's special favor and mercy in Christ Jesus, ursia. Catech. q. 65. explic.
1. Genesis 9.12. By the Sacrament man is bound to God; and by the same, God
vouchsafes to bind himself to man Jewel's Treatise of the Sacrament. See 1
Cor. 9.2. 2 Timothy 2.19. Apo. 7.2, and 9, 4 Matthew 27.66. Vis. Ursie. tom. 4. page
1614. and 1668. Ursin. page 1673.
and in both respects Sacraments: Some signs are ordained merely to assure and
confirm unto us the Promises which God has been pleased to make; Some both to
teach visibly what the Lord requires and commands in his holy Truth, and to
confirm our Faith in what he has promised in his holy Word; but all are
Sacraments in each respect, and what is a Seal, but a visible sign annexed to a
Promise to testify or assure it: And how can a sign be added to it but, it must
testify or confirm? Even from hence that it is set to the Promise by him who
has Authority to make it, and Power to make it good, it is a Seal: So that the
Word Seal does rather note the special nature and end of some Signs as they
are referred to the Promises ratified and assured by them, than express the
common nature of a Sacrament. In orthodox Writers a Sign of God's Promise, and
a Seal of his Will and Pleasure; are put for one and the same: And whether we
look to the truth of the thing it self, or the Arguments which are brought to
prove the lawfulness of devising symbolicall and analogicall Signs; we shall
find it as lawful to devise Signs obsignant of God's Promises, as
significative of his pleasure and man's duty: For to be a Teacher of the
Understanding, and Exciter of Devotion, requires power supernatural, no less
than to be (...) ^^firmer of the heart; and he that has Authority to ordain
means ^^^mal for any of these ends, can bless them for all; he that ca^^^
appoint them for any one, can do it so none, they being all supernatural;
exceeding the power of any Creature: Man has as much power to seal what he
cannot bestow, as to teach by his own Sign, that which he cannot bless to that
end. The Institution of means serving for the spiritual Instruction of the
Church, pertains to him that blesses them; to him it belongs to ordain
Seals of his Promises, that can confert the Grace promised, and both these are
peculiar to one alone, the Lord of All. The arguments that are alleged to
demonstrate the liberty of the Church, to Institute and devise significant
Ceremonies, do speak for power to ordain Signs obsignant, if they conclude any
thing at all. Solomon [they say] built a brazen Altar, and set it besides the
Altar of the Lord, offering thereon burnt Offerings: 2 King. 18.22. Apo. 6.9.
H^b. 13.10. Matthew. 23.19. with Job. 17.17 Exodus 24.4.
Here is a humane Invention, a new Ceremony, having necessary relation to
Worship in Sacrificing: And was not the Altar, appointed for Burnt-offering, an
essential part of God's Worship in time of the Law? was it not a Type and Sign
obsignant of Christ and his Grace? was not this Altar erected by Solomon for
the same principal and special end and use, Jun. Innor. in Exodus 24.4. Par. in
Genesis 12.7. Mart. loc. com. part. 4. cap. 12. Sect. 21. Polan. Synt. tom. 2.
lib. 9 cap 36. Fulk against Rhem in Mat. 23.19.8.7. Biza Epist. 8. Zepper. de
Saer. l. 2. Maldon. in Jo. 20. Rhem. in 1 Timothy 4.14.18. Martyr thus reasoach
against the Popish Consecration of Holywater; It is not the condition of men to
institute Sacraments at their own pleasure, because that is proper to God
alone, and to none besides him; for Sacraments be Instruments of the Holy
Ghost. Mart loc. com. p. 4. c. 9. Juni. Annot. in Exodus, 25. Assunsta adve^^atem
rerun figurandam ^nt coassun^pta, non propter siguram rerum sed propter Naturam
figurarum.
for which God has ordained the Brazen Altar to be erected? An Altar was a
principal Instrument of divine Service (says Martyr). The Altar in the Temple
was a figure of Christ's only singular true Sacrifice once offered, and never
can be sacrificed again, says Fulk our of Augustine.

Now, if the Church, in the time of the Gospel, may take upon her to devise new
significant Signs in God's Worship, from this Example of Solomon, and that such
as be in kind different from them that are instituted of him; She may challenge
Power to ordain Signs, to ordain obsignant Sign; of Christ, and his Grace,
essential parts of God's immediate Worship, and in their proper and peculiar
ends, one with Baptism and the Lord's Supper; as that Altar served to the same
purpose that the other did, which was builded by the express Commandment of the
Lord. Again, it is very usual with Writers, protestant and Popish, to call
external Ceremonies signifying holy things, by the name of Sacraments,
Sacramentalls, or Sacramental Actions.

It is objected, If signification be a principal part of a Sacrament, then all
the Moral Signs used in the Levitical Worship; as namely, Bells, Lavers,
Lights, Candlesticks, and other Ceremonial Instruments, even unto the very
Snuffers of the Tabernacle, should (things taking their denomination from the
principal parts) be properly deemed Sacraments: And the like may be said of
Hog's Flesh, from touching the Corpse of the dead, from Linsey-wolsey Apparel,
and a hundred such others, whereby diverse Moralities are signified, but no
Sacrament implied; but this nothing infringeth the strength of the former
Reasons. For the Cerenionies of the Law were either taken to figure out the
Truth of things, or co^flumed for the Nature of the Figures, not for the Figure
of things; which were only annexed to the Figures, but of themselves did not
figure o^ point out any spiritual things: Of this sort were many things
pertaining to the Tabernacle, Ark, Altars, and Sacrifices; which did not by
themselves typify any thing, but only pertain to the material constitution of
the Type: And amongst them are the Snuffers and Tongs of the Tabernacle to be
reckoned; for it cannot be showed that of themselves they were ordained to
represent any mystical Promine or spiritual Duty, but did only belong as
necessary Ornaments to the Service of the Tabernacle. Therefore we may exclude
them from the number of Sacraments, and yet hold the common Nature of a
Sacrament to consist in proportion betwixt the Sign determined to signify, and
the thing signified. Secondly, amongst the Signs here degraded, as unworthy the
Name, and not participating in the Nature of the Sacraments; such are mentioned
as did seal and assure spiritual promises, Psalm. 119.105. Prove. 6.21. 2 Pet.
1.19. Rev. 4.5.
and not barely teach or signify moral duties; The Gandlesticks and Lights, did
they not signify the light of the Divine Word, and Holy Scripture, by the power
of God's holy Spirit enlightening the Church of God? The washings in the Law,
did not they seal the purging away of Sin by the Blood of Christ, Heb. 10.22.
Psalm. 26.6.
and that we being sprinkled in our hearts from an evil Conscience, and washed
in our bodies with pure water, might draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of Faith? The High Priest was a Type of Christ, Exodus 28.2.
our Mediator, and the Bells of Gold that were placed upon the Ephod did
shadow forth the Voice of Christ, which was to be heard of the People in his
Teaching and Instruction. Wherefore, if a Sacrament be a Sign of God's Grace or
free Promise, the Lavers, Lights, Bells, Candlesticks used in the Levitical
Worship may truly be called Sacraments: Heb. 9.2.
And by Anthority from the Apostle, Heb. 8.5. and 9.24.
calling things that pertained to the Service of the Tabernacle, Examples,
Shadows, and Figures of heavenly things; worthy Divines have not spared to call
them Sacraments: Thus writes Augustine, De Catech. rud. c. 20.
Ideo multis Sacramentis visibilibus onerati sunt, quo servili jugo premerentur
in observationibus ciborum, and in Sacrificiis ammalium, and in ali is innumer
abilibus, quae tamen signa erant rerum spiritualium ad Dominum Jesum Christum,
and ad Ecclesiam pertinentium. Thirdly, we find the Name Sacrament given to
those Signs pertaining to the Levitical Worship, which of all others (if in
truth that Title may be given unto any) might most properly be called Moral, by
signification of Man's spiritual Duty and Obedience: The Shewbread, Exodus
25.30. and 39.36. 1 Chronicles. 9.32. and 23.29.
called in Hebrew, Bread of faces, or of presence; because the Loavs or Cakes
were to be set before the Face or in the Presence of God continually; and, the
Bread of ordering and disposition, because they were disposed in certain order
and time: In Greek, Mat. 12.4. Mar. 2.26. Heb. 9.2.
the Bread of Proposition; and, in a contrary order, The proposition of Bread
or Cakes; Did it not signify the Office of the godly, that they should stand
continually before God, receive his Commandments, and sanctify themselves to
his Obedience: As the Ark signified the presence of God in his Church, so his
Table with the twelve Cakes, signified the Multitude of the faithful presented
unto God in his Church, continually serving him; It may be, this placing of the
Shewbread before the Ark might signify, that the Lord has his Church
continually in his sight, and does take care thereof: But the principal thing
taught thereby was, the sincerity and purity of them that walk in the Light,
and present themselves before God: What duty soever Man owes to God, it is to
be performed by virtue of the Coveuant that he has made with Man; and so the
Signs of God's Promise do imply Man's Duty, and the Signs of Man's Duty do
imply God's Promise, though some do signify the one; some, the other. And from
this we learn, Sacramentasunt v^sibilia signa, qu^bus doctrina illa declaratur
and obsignatur. Mart. de Sacr. l. 1. c. 2. q. 8.
what is a Sacrament in general, viz. A Sign Analogical of God's Will and
Pleasure; whether teaching what he requires, or representing and fealing what
he promises: True Sacraments are Signs and Seals instituted of God to signify
his Will, and confirm his' Promises: But divine Institution is to be removed
from the definition of a Sacrament in general, as that which does distinguish
true from false, and not explicate the common nature of the thing.

The distinction that some make of Signs moral, signifying the spiritual
Obedience which Man owes unto God, and mystical or sacramental, representing
and confirming the Promises of God, is not to be received: For Signs teaching
to the Eye by representation, what the Word brings to the Ear, are Sacraments
signifying the same thing that the Word does, as has been showed before. But
Signs analogical must be distinguished from negative Precepts, forbidding the
use of this or that in it self indifferent. Jewishabstinence from diverse Mears
legally unclean, to show that they were separated from other Nations, to be a
peculiar People unto the Lord, cannot properly be called a Sign signifying by
resemblance; For God in that Law seems not so much to respect the Nature of
those living Creatures prohibited to be eaten; Act. 1.15, 16, 17, 28. Juni.
Annot. in Lev. 11.
but by this external Sign he would have his People to be discerned and
separated from all other People. And if this figurative commanded Abstinence
should be deemed sacramental, what error is therein committed? As by such
Abstinence the Israelites professed themselves to be the peculiar People of God,
separated from all idolatrous Nations round about them; so did the Lord by this
Commandment signify and assute, that he had taken them to Covenant, and made
choice of them to be his peculiar Treasure. The reason whereby this commanded
Abstinence is urged, does confirm thus much, Lev. 11.44.
I am the Lord your God, ye shall therefore sanctify your selves, and ye shall
be holy, for I am holy; neither shall ye defile your selves with any manner of
creeping thing that creeps upon the Earth: For I am the Lord that brought you
up out of the Land of Egypt to be your God.

These figurative Ordinances then were Signs of the Covenant, teaching what
duty man owed to God, and assuring back again what favor they had with God:
And when the Apostle, speaking of Levitical Service, Heb. 8.9, 10.
which stood only in Meats, and Drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal
Ordinances, imposed on them until the time of Reformation, Beza in Heb. 9.10.
calls them figures for the time then present; does he not in effect say they
were Sacraments? The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, is called a
Sacrament, or a Sacramental Precept, K^cherm. Theol. lib 2. c 2. Polan. Synt.
lib. 6. cap. 44. Chaimer. panstrat. tom. 4. lib. 1. cap. 7. Si neque propter
se, neque ex suanatura, certe and propter aliud and ex Inslitutione.
by many excellent and worthy Divines, as it did signify to Man, that he should
have experience of good, so long as he continued in Obedience, and of evil or
misery if he did disobey; and as it was a Sign whereby he was admonished of his
mutability, and tried in his Obedience: But if forbearance of the Tree of
Knowledge was an Act Sacramental, much more Abstinence from such Me^ts as by
the Law were forbidden unto the Israelites. Nor shall we need to fear the force
of the Jesuit, insulting over Protestants by this Objection; viz. If
Sacraments be only Signs, then the Crucisix is a better Sign to signify the
death of Christ than the Sacraments. For we acknowledge our Sacraments not bare
Signs of God's Promise, or significations of Man's Duty; but holy Seals of what
he promises to us, and we by stipulation promise back again unto him. And this
the Jesuit himself does and cannot but acknowledge, howsoever impudently
against Conscience he imputes unto us his own device for our Doctrine: But we
may further tell this Romish Proctor, that a Crucifix made to teach by
proportion or resemblance, that Christ dyed for our sins, or that God gave his
Son to suffer death for our Redemption, is a Sacrament, or a sacramental Sign,
signifying by special Representation, though false and erroneous, because it is
devised by man, not ordained by God: The greatest Defenders of mystical Signs,
distinguish them into moral and sacramental; which differ (say they) from the
former, both as the Sacramental are significant by special Representation, and
as they are obsignant by ratifying and applying of God's Covenant of Grace unto
us: And from this we may gather, that Spiritual sigus, which signify, by
representation, the promise of God (as the Crucifix does) are Sacramental, else
is the distinction it self faulty, and the difference which is made betwixt
signs Moral, and Sacramental. And yet we make not Signification the principal
part of those special Sacraments of the Old or New Testament, which it pleased
God to add to his gracious and free Covenant; but Spiritual signification is so
proper to the Sacraments, that whatsoever sign is ordained to signify and
represent any such promise, it is thereby made a Sacrament. The Cherubims in
the Law, are called Types, and Sacraments of those times; in all reason, the
Crucifix is in that sense to be deemed a Sacrament of these times; but vain and
false, because it is destitute of Divine approbation. And what advantage has
the Jesuit gotten by this wise dispute? he has notably discovered their
impudent boldness, in preferring their own sinful devices, before the sacred
O^^^^nances of God; and their notorious presumption in attempring (...) which
they cannot but acknowledge to be proper to the Lord alone.

9. Experience testifies, that signs significant devised by men, have been the
seeds, sparkles, and instruments of diverse errors, Whitak. de Sc. q. 6. c. 14.
arg. ult. Calv. opusc. de Necess. refor. page 59.60.
superstitions, and Idolatries; but they never did, or shall do, good in the
Church of God. The bravery and excess that is seen in Popish Temples, does
affect, move, and draw the eye, but is of no worth to true Piety, devotion, and
motions of mind, pleasing to God. It has been showed before, and is further to
be proved afterward, that no true Piety or sincere devotion of mind can be
stirred up in us by humane Traditions.

10. And lest this truth confirmed by so many Arguments out of the Word of God,
should yet be cast off upon suspicion of novelty, or not relish savourly to
some palats for want of the sauce of humane Authority; It shall not be amiss to
produce the testimonies of worthy Divines, to show what has been their
Judgment in this point. Calvin says, Nulla doctrina, In Matthew. 21.25. vis.
Calv. resp. ad versipell. opusc. page 413. In Tim. 4.14. SS. 18.
nullum sacrum signum debet inter pios admitti, nisi a Deo profecta esse
constet; nec est in hominum arb^trin, quicquam excudere. Fulk against the
Rhemists, The true Church of Christ submits her self to the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles in all things, and is content with those Ceremonies
which Christ and his Apostles by his Commandment have left unto us. Dr.
Raynolds speaking of Popish significant Rites, has these words, Censur. Apoc.
tom. 2. prael. 243.
Simplicius multo veteres, quanquam et ipsi nimium peccarunt o^usmodi mysteriis
excogitandis, ut omnes propemodum ritus in Sacramenta converterent; non quin
possint omnia, quae uspiam oculis usurpamus, merito suggerere nobis ansam earum
rerum meditandarum qua faciunt ad pietatem; sed, quod magna religione cavendum
est in ecclesia, ne convertamus in morem Sacramentorum interpretationibus
hujusmodi, ut permisceamus instituta humana cum institutis ipsius Christi,
atque ita horum authoritatem communiamus commentis hominum. In Heb. 8.5.
Paraeus says, Quicquid etiam Sacramentis divinis ornatus, vel perfectionis,
vel significationis augustioris gratia ^ffingitur, qualia sexcenta circa
Baptismun^ et Eucharistiam habet papatus, exorcismos, sal, sputum, chrisma,
etc. id totum tanquam inane et evanidum oraculo hoc improbatur. Synopsis in 12.
Con^. q. 8. Non potest ulles homo instituere Caeremon^am, adquam s^queretur
gratia Sp. Sancti. Bell. de Sac. l. 2. cap. 24.
Dr. Willet speaking of the Ceremonies and Rites of Baptism, says, It is
contrary to the rule of the Gospel, that there should be such types, shadows,
significations, brought into the service of God, as the Papists make in
Baptism; for seeing we have the body which is Christ, all such shadows ought to
(...) bolished; In one Sacrament they ( sc, the Papists) have forged and found
out many, as their Chrism, Oil, Salt, Spittle, etc. None of those Ceremonies
were used when Christ himself was Baptized; which notwithstanding had been most
fit, considering the worthiness of his person, which was Baptized; neither did
Christ give any such thing in charge to his Disciples, but bids them only
Preach and Baptize In the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Nor yet were
any such Ceremonies in use in the Apostles times. Act. 10.4.
St. Peter says, Can any man forbid Water, that these should not be Baptized.
He calls not for Oil, Salt, Spittle, or any such thing, but Water only. And
a little after he produces the witness of two Martyrs against these Ceremony.
Act. and Men. Hauk. 1. Exam. Ann. 1555.
Thomas Hauks, I deny (says he) in Baptism all things invented by man, as your
Oil, Cream, Salt, Spittle, Candle, Con^uring of Water. John Denly, holy Martyr.
The Eunuch said to Philip, Act. and Mon. Denl. answ. to art. 6. Anno. 1555.
^nsti. l. 4. c. 10. sect. 23.
See here is Water. We do not ^ead, he asked for any Cream, Oil, Spit^le,
Conjured Water; for it seems that Philip had Preached no such thing unto him.
Calvin says, Unde colligimus, partem reverentiae quae illi defertur, in eo
esse positam, dum in eo colendo simpliciter quod mandat, nullas nostras
miscendo inventiones sequimur. That he speaks of devised symbolical s^gns, it
is evident by the instances he gives in that, and the two Sections following.
^oc com. p. 4. ^. 4. sect. 4.
Martyr, Seeing God is altogether the wisest, he has no need that we should by
our imagination, or endeavor, prepare Instruments for him. And afterward in
the same Chapter; Sect. 16.
Neither can they easily escape, which embrace exorcisms, but that of one
Sacrament they make many, seeing they make so many Signs, which they will have
to be accounted holy; adding Oil, Spittle, Exsufflations, and such like. So as
one Sacrament of Baptism does degenerate into many. Neither must they be heard,
when, to the intent to mock the simple, they feign a difference between
Sacraments and Sacramentalls, which is altogether sophistical; for distinctions
are to be received gladly, but those to be such as are taken our of the very
nature of the things, because they bring much light to Controversies; but those
distinctions which spring out of the brain of Sophisters, only for the
shifting off of Arguments, are altogether to be refused. Conses. Wittemb. tit.
de Caerem. Eccl.
The Judgment of the Church of Wittemberg is thus set down in the Harmony of
Confessions, Nec licet vel veteres ritus legis restaurare, vel novos comminisci
ad adumbrandam veritatem Evangelio jam patefactam et illustratam: quales sunt,
interdiu accendere cereos, ad significandam lucem Evangelii; aut uti vexillis
crucibus, ad significandam victoriam Christi per crucem; quod genus est
universa panoplia vestium Missalium, quam aiunt adumbrare totan^ Passionem
Christ^; et multa id genus alia. Multo minus licet instituere Caeremonias aut
sacra, quorum meritis expientur peccata, et accipiatur reg^um coelorum: Nam de
priori illo genere Caeremoniarum et Sacrorum, Christus ex Esaia concionatur;
Frustra, inquiens, colunt me, docentes doctrimas, pracepta hominum: et Paulus,
Nequis vos judicet in cibo aut pou^, aut in part diei festi, etc. The Church
of France and the Low Countries, Sect. 17. ad Confess. Sax. Obs. 1. Tom. 4. de
(...) Bapt. lib. 5. (...) cap. 16. sect. 27. Annot. maj. in Jo. 4.23.
in their observations upon the Confession of the Church of Saxony, write thus,
Ac perinde ne mysticos quidem ullos, alioqui non impios; ut qui, etc. Sed in
hoc capite (says Cham. speaking of Popish Rites in Baptism) merito damnamus,
qui ea addiderunt, quibus mysteria affinxerint, prop^iasque significationes; et
quidem eorum affectuun^ qui pertinent ad aquam Baptismi, etc. The Judgment of
Bezd is well known, and more than once uttered by himself; Sacramentis (says
he) pront divinitus sunt ab unico nostro legistatore ordinata, quicquam vel
detrahere, ac multo magis novas figuras vel umbras ullas in Ecclesiam invehere,
^efariam esse audaciam, ex verbo Dei omnes (...), tam express damnantis, et
ignem externum olim altari suo infer prohibentis, affirmanus. Haec nostra est
de Spirituali cultu divino sententia, his Christi verbis consenta^^a; nisi
forte sublatas, licet divinitus institutas, Mosaicas figuras et umbras
arbitramur, ut alia ab hominibus illarum loco substituerentur. De cult. Sacr.
l. 3. c. 7. n. 12, 13.
Junius assenteth unto the former; Quod si ad usum instituere non potest
quisquam, profecto neque ad significatiorem homo legitime potest adhibere, nisi
humano et irrogante instituto, ne in privato quidem, quanto minus in Ecclesia
Dei et publica administratione ipsius. Danaeus is of the same mind. Cont. Bell.
de cult. Sac. l. 3. cap. 7.
It is Blasphemy to think that any outward thing may be made a Sign in the
Church, unless it be expressly ordained in the Word, and commanded by God
himself to be used unto that end. Eccles. l. 3. cap. 5.
Junius again professes his Judgment in this matter; Res autem alias, ac non
necessarias, neque ordini convenientes, si volet quisquam instituere; eum non
pervicaciter velimus oppugnare, sed tria tamen cum animo suo expendat cupimus.
Primum qua authoritate exemplove adductus, sanctam Dei Ecclesiam et
simplicitatem mysteriorum Christi (Cujus solius vocem agnoscunt et sequuntur
oves, quia solum audiri mandavit pater Jo. 10.27.) circumvestiendam esse puter
humanis traditionibus quas repudiat Christus. Secundum, quem ad finem res suas
adsui divinis judicet oportere: nan^ si ut cum alii^ conformetur, aequius foret
alias Ecclesias it is conformari quae verbum Dei accedum proxime ex consilio
Cypriani, quam has se illis adjungere; si ut h^nestiora sint omnia, quid
simplicitate Christi honestius, quid honestate simplicius? si voluntatem, Esto
sane: at illud Tertulliani cogitandum, Voluntatem Dei esse necessitatem summam,
nec Dei Ecclesiam in divinis rebus voluntatibus humanis obligari. Tertium, quis
tandem eventus ex humanis traditionibus consequatur, ut diuturna oste^dit
experientia.

Of the Surplice.
Attire or vestiments may be distinguished into sour sorts.
THere is a fourfold distinction of Attire. 1. Natural. 2. Civil. 3.
Ecclesiastical by Divine institution. 4. Ecclesiastical by humane ap^ointment.

The Natural is such, by which the difference of Sexes, of Ma^e, and Female is
professed; Calv. harm. in lib. Mos. expos. 7. Precept. and others. Dr. Reynolds
of the overthrow of Stageplayes, page 10.
this is Moral and perpetual, Deuteronomy. 22.5.

The Civil is, when for ease, speedier dispatch of some civil business,
ornament, or politic differencing of degree in Office, Age, Trade, etc.
diversity of habit is used; and this is Arbitrary, and lawful, so that the
rules of modesty be observed. Whitgift def. of answ. to adm^^i^. tract. 7. cap.
3. divis. 1. page 264. Hooker Ecclesiast. P^li^. lib. 5. S. 78. page 424.

Those are Ecclesiastical by Divine Institution which the Lord, and Lawgiver
of his Church ordained to be used by Priests and Levites in the solemn worship
of God, Exodus 28, 12.29, 30, 40, 41, 43.
and in the place of Ceremonies: these vestiments continued necessary in use,
until the abolition of the Levitical Rites, and then determined.

Such are Ecclesiastical by humane institution, as man of his own head has
appropriated to Religious worship, or solemn Ecclesiastical use. Of this sort
and kind I take the Surplice to be, and therefore do make question of the
lawfulness thereof. My argument against it. I dispose in this form.



But the Surplice is a Vestment appropriated to the solemn. Worship of God, and
appointed for the signification of spiritual Duties, by the Will of Man,
without Warrant out of the Word of God. Therefore it is unlawful.

Propos* preved by six Reasons.
The truth of the Proposition may be cleared by these Reasons following.

1. All such Vestments as the Proposition speaks of, are an external form of
Worship; both because that in their common nature or kind, they agree with the
Levitical Vestments, which I suppose will not be denied to have been parts of
their external Worship, as well as other Rites among them. Homil. against
peril of Idolatry, part. 3. fol. 55. says, All outward Jewish Rites wherewith
God was honored in the Temple, were Cultus. For what good definition can be
given of Worship, which may not be predicated and affirmed of those Rites? To
be instituted of God, or of Man, does not vary the common nature of Worship,
but distinguish it into true and false, in which Adjuncts the common nature of
Worship does not consist. Also, would not ^arments of mystical signification
appropriated to solemn Worship, be Jewish in special, not in common nature
only, if the Mo^^ High should Authorize them? And if they be Worship, and
devised by Man, then they are Will Worship which God condemns.

2. If this Major be not true, what should hinder, but that man may bring many
of the Ceremonies of the Law of Moses into the Church of the new Testament; for
if one Jewish Rite may be brought in, why not any. It need not be doubted, but
that Vestments merely Ecclesiastical and Mystical, are Jewish, though not in
number, (or perhaps in some other petty differences), yet in kind: and are they
not then the same? Luke 14.18. Ephesians. 6.9. Dr. Raynolds Confer. with Heart. cap.
8. divis. 4. page 494, 495.

3. Either Vestments merely Ecclesiastical and Mystical, instituted by Man,
Exodus 25.9. and 39, 40, 42, 43, and 27, 19. 1 Chro. 28.12. 2 Chro. 29.5.
are unlawful; or else it had been lawful for the Jewish Church to have devised
to themselves, and used, those Priestly Robes that were in use among them,
though God had not appointed them; or they might have invented others of the
same kind afterward, and have added to those God appointed: but this they
might not do. It Is true, that this would increase the multitude of Ceremonies,
and multitude of Ceremonies of one sort, would make them Dr. Morton protest.
appeal. Lib. 1. Cap. 3. Sect. 3.
inconvenient, because this carries with it change of circumstances, whereon
convenience or inconveniency does depend. But if one Ceremony be lawful,
hundreds of the same kind be lawful also; for the definition of one is
predicated of all of that sort. It cannot be truly said, That the Jewish Church
had less liberty to devise Ecclesiastical Rites (whatsoever some say), Dr.
Sparks Persuasions to uniformity. cap. 3.8, 5. page 11. Josh. 22.10.
than the Christian Church has; except the Christian Church could under the
Lord's Charter show this Privilege to be granted unto her. Add further, that
the special Ground that the maintainers of Ceremonies do or can bring in, for
the now-urged Ceremonies, is the fact of the Reubenites building the Altar. If
this Argument be of any force, must they not grant liberty to the Church of the
Jews, as well as the Church of the new Testament? Therefore, if men deny the
Jews that liberty which the Christian Church may rightfully claim, they will
prove themselves to stand upon no Ground.

4. Such Vestiments cannot be used in Faith, without which the use thereof is
sinful. Faith, in this place, is a firm assurance of mind and conscience, Romans
14.23.
resting on assured Ground, that the thing which a man does, is allowed of God
to be done by him: So that two things are here employed.

1. That the Act to be done, Calvin. in loc. and others. Vid. Marlo. in loc.
be allowed of God; otherwise the conscience that does it, how confident soever
it be, is erroneous and faulty. Covel's ans. to Mr. Burges Apol. page 9. citing
Mooker.
No man can do evil with a good conscience.

2. That the mind of the Doer certainly apprehend a lawfulness for the doing
of it, else the conscience sins through doubtfulnesse.

With this assurance of mind and conscience, who can use such Vestiments as are
merely Ecclesiastical, Mystical Rites, when he cannot find a^^ firm Ground out
of the Scripture, that God allows such under the New Testament?

5. Whoseover does not admit the Proposition, he opens a gap unto Oil, Cream,
Spittle, Candles; holy Water, and other Popish Ceremonies to enter into the
Church, which our learned Divine^ reject; for this, that they are mystical
significant Rites, devised by Man; as is to be seen, not by the Judgment of
Foreign Divines only; As of the Church of Wittenburg. Harm. Confess. part. 2.
artic. 32. de Corem. Ecclesiasticis; The Churches of France; and the low
Countries in their Observations upon the Harmony of Confessions. Ibid. Sect.
17. ad Sax^n. Confess. Observe. 1. Calvin in Esaias 20.2. and Mat. 21.25. Beza
Epist. 8. But also our own Divines, Dr. Whitgift, Defense of Answer to the
Admon. Tract. 7. cap. 7. divis. 8. page 291. Mr. Perkins in his Commentary on
Gal. 3.23, 24, 25. who dissallow such signification of Apparel in
Ecclesiastical use, as Peter Martyr in his Epistle to Hooper would put upon it.
Loc. commun. page 1088. Edit. 1613.

And further, if the Proposition be not true, Perkin's Demonstration of Probl.
in Title Apurten. to Mass. Sect. 6. Dr. Morton's protest. appeal. Lib. 1. Cap.
3. Sect. 5. Page 58.
Might not a man reason thus for the bringing in of Popish Rites of the same
nature and kind? Vestiments instituted by man, and appropriated to God's
Worship, and of mystical signification, are lawful: Therefore, Oil, Cream,
Spittle, Candles; and other such like Popish Rites are lawful also.

6. To conclude, worthy Divines have condemned all Ceremonies when they have
been parts of, and appropriated to, Worship; As Calvin. Institut. Lib. 4. Cap.
10. Sect. 8. Perkins Reform. Cathel. p. 136. And does not Dr. Abbott call all
Priestly Garments, whereby they are distinguished from the rest of the Church,
a spiritual Character of the Beast. Antichr. Demon. Cap. 11. Sect. 26.

And whereas for eight hundred years after Christ, there were but eight
Vestures used in the whole mysteries of Religion, and now among the Papists
there be fifteen; six Priestly, and nine of the Bishops; What reason is there
to prove them, or such of them unlawful; which our Law has rejected, if this
Proposition be not true. The Assumption proved.

In the proof whereof it is requisite, that I insist upon these three Heads.

1. That the Surplice in our Church is appropriated to God's solemn Worship, as
to meet to Ecclesiastial use. 2. That it is appointed for signification of
spiritu^^ Duties. 3. That this is done by Man, without Warrant from the Word of
God.
The first of these 3 Heads is apparent by the Reasons following.

1. Albeit young Students in the Universities, who by their matriculation, did
receive their primam tonsuram into the Clergy: The Surplice to be appropriated
to Ecclesiastical use.
Queristers in the Cathedral Churches being anciently reputed of the Clergy;
and some Clerks in some Parochial and Collegiat Churches, have heretofore, and
still do retein the Surplice: Yet we see that the use is still restrained to
Worship, (viz.) Prayers, reading Scripture, administration of Sacraments, etc.
And out of that use it is not to be found, neither is there any civil use made
of the Surplice. As for burial of the dead, it is used by none but by a
Minister, or one initiate into the Clergy, and that with solemn prayers
accompanying: Who then can say, that the use of the Surplice in Burials, is a
withdrawing of it from Ecclesiastical use. 2. I might urge what I observe out
of Dr. Whitgift, who denying Pope Hadrian to be the Inventer of the Surplice,
Spark's persw^sion to Uniformity. cap. 5. page 19.
( Def. Tract. 7. cap. 6. Divis. 1.) would draw the Original thereof from
Stepha^^^, Bishop of Rome, whose testimony (if it be ought worth) proven that
holy Vestments are not to be touched of any save the Priest, ( Ibid. cap. 5.
divis. 2.) and consequently that they are not of civi use. Socrates hominibus.
Luc. Osiand. Epitom. Histor. Ecclesiast. Cent. 3. Lib. 3. Cap. 14. 3. In Popery
the Surplice was appropriated to God's solemn Worship, without which no Priest
might say Service. Missal. Romans part. 1. Missa in Galli cantu, and Missa in die
Nativitatis D^^^^. Neither could Water or Bells, or any thing else be hallowed.
Dr. Humphry his Antidiploma missal. Romans part. 3. page 96. And if it were not
of the essence of the Mass, that every Priest that says it have a Surplice
on, yet some Priest cannot say Mass without it. Durand. rational. Lib. 3. Cap.
1. Numb. 9. Neither can any Priest make his breaden-god, except he have it on.
Rh^^^ a^^tat. in 1 Cor. 11.29.
This I omit to urge, though I must confess, that hough o^r Church has varied
and changed somewhat from out immediate forefathers the Papists, from whom it
comes to us; yet they did not remove it from Ecclesiastical Places and
Services, or instituted a civil or ordinary use of the foresaid Vestment. Does
not the Stature in the first year of Queen Elizabeth appoint such Ornaments in
the Church to be retained (as were in the Church of England by Authority of
Parliament in the second year of Edward the sixth, Cap. 2.
until other Order be taken by the Authority of the Queen, etc.) at the time
of the Communion, and other administration, etc. Was Order taken? No. We must
judge then, for what kind of use the Surplice by the Stature of King Edward the
sixth was instituted and allowed.

The words of the Book of Common Prayer in the second year of his Reign, are
these; Upon the Day, and at the time appointed for the Ministration of holy
Communion; the Priest that shall execute that holy Ministry, shall put on him
the Vestures appointed for that Administration, etc. If the use of the Surplice
stand by Statute, it is, for any thing that I know, by this, which declares it
to be retained for mere Ecclesiastical use: If it be so, as Dr. Sparks says in
his Persuasion to uniformity, Cap. 5. page 20. 21. That Queen Elizabeth by
virtue of the said Statute, by the consent of the Archbishop, and High
Commissioners, in the seventh year of her Reign, appointed the Surplice to be
worn instead of the Albe; yet it hinders not, but proves what I say in this
Section. Can. Eccles. 14. and 17.
But because this I think is confessed, I pass to the second Head in the
Assumption.

That the Surplice is significant of spiritual Duties, is clear.

1. All our Ecclesiastical Ceremonies are such; In the Treatise of Ceremonies
prefixed to that Book.
They are neither dumb nor dark (says the Book of Common Prayer) but apt to
stir up the dull mind of man to a remembrance of his Duty by some notable and
special signification.

Mr. Hooker says, Ceremonies destitute of signification, must be vain; also he
calls them visible Signs, Eccl. Pol. Lib. 5. Sect. 55. Ibid. Lib. 4. Sect. 1.
which are undoubtedly most effectual to open such matter, as when men know
and remember carefully, they must needs be a great deal the better informed:
Thus much also Dr. Covell does avouch (against the Plea of the Innoc. page 58.)

2. To omit that the Papists say, All their Priestly Garments have mystical
signification. Bell. de miss. lib. 6. cap. 14. And that the Priest must be
clothed in White to signify innocence and purity, Lindan de C^lebr. miss.
and ob reverentiam Salvatoris, and totius Coelestis curiae, quam Sacra^^into
altar consiciende, and confecto, non est dubium interesse.

Those Learned men who were set awork in the days of King Edward the Sixth,
and since (and who therefore were most likely to know the meaning of our Church
in imposing) have avouched, That it is, Hook. Eccl. Pol. lib. 5. Sect. 29.
and ought to be continued, for signification. Bucer. opera Anglican. page 682.
Pet. Mart. Loc. Comman. page 1088.

Now concerning the third Head. The Surplice, in that foresaid use and
signification, is without warrant of the Word of God. It may thus be proved.

1. The Surplice being a garment of a special nature, and use, in that it is a
mere Ecclesiastical and Mystical Rite, ought to have a special Divine
Institution, as such garments have had in the Church of the Jews: for Reason
requires that the ground be suitable to the nature of the thing. But such a
ground it has not, neither can any show any special Institution.

2. There is not so much as any general warrant for it in the Book of God.
First, there is none in the Old Testament: The Priestly garments were tied only
to the place of Ceremonies, Exodus 28.43. Ezekiel. 42.14. Mornaeus de Eucharist.
not used in any of the Synagogues of the Land, nor in any of those 460 which
are reported to be in Jerusalem: Were typical, (wherein it stands not with the
nature of the times of the New Testament to mitigate them, Ezekiel. 42.13, 14. and
44.15, 17, 19. 1 Chronicles. 15.
Spark perswas. to uniformity, cap. 5. page 22.) Neither were they used in the
Peoples sight, except once extraordinary by occasion of the presence of the Ark
before the People. So that if there had been any further use of them (viz.) for
glory and comeliness, as one says, Spark. Ibid.
not considering, that in the use also they were typical, yet they cannot
possibly warrantize Vestiments in the sight of the People.

If the Prophets did use ordinarily any apparel whereby they might be known
from other men, (which does seem doubtful to some that read 1 Samuel 9.18. 1
King. 20.41.) yet that which they did wear, was of common and daily use, worn
in Town and Field, etc. 2 King. 1.8. Esaias 20.2. Zach. 13.14. So that it matters
not in this case, Whitg. def. tract. 7. cap. 2. page 262.
though the Prophets were discerned by a peculiar form of Cloak, seeing it was
not of Ecclesiastical and Mystical signification, and withal was extraordinary
as their Function was. Our Divines condemn the Popish Massing Garments, because
they are Jewish. To seek ground for the Surplice out of the Levitical Law, is
it not then to overthrow our own grounds?

Further, Matthew. 3.4.
in the New Testament, there is no ground for the Surplice: The habit of John
Baptist was daily and common, not Ecclesiastical and Mystical. That Christ or
his Apostles did use, or institute any Mystical or Ecclesiastical attire, none
can show by the holy Scriptures: and the relation of other Histories is but
humane and fallible; not the ground of faith. The Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 14.40.
requiring all things to be done decently and in order in the Assemblies of the
Saints, did give commandment for the right and seemly performance of such
Ordinances as were before established; but laid no ground for the institution
of mystical Rites in religious services. This speech of the Apostle is a
Precept, and has a Divine binding power; which not to obey, is death. How can
this concern the institution of the Surplice, which is no such matter, but
reputed indifferent by the Urgers. What the Apostle commands, is necessary and
indispensable by Man: But the Surplice and other Rites are arbitrary, and may
be dispensed with, and utterly abolished. D. Morton in Protest. Appeal lib. 1.
cap. 3. Sect. 2. numb. 3. page 54.

The Surplice is confessed to be but an humane tradition: Spark. Perswas. to
Uniform. cap. 5. page 21.
Who can prove hence, that there is any better ground for the Surplice, than
for the 15 Priestly Robes used in the Church of Rome?

Thus does it appear, that the Scripture affords not any warrant for the
Surplice in our use. I know many Testimonies are cited forth of the ancient
Writers: but their testimony being but humane, proves not that God does allow
and warrantize the Surplice. Yea, some of them do not at all concern
Ecclesiastical Vestiments. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 33.
Such is that testimony, that Eustathim was deprived of his Bishopric, for not
wearing decent apparel befitting his place. Socrat. lib. 6. cap. 20.
Such also was that white raiment that Semius the Novat. did wear; and that
under-garment of white Linen, in which Cyprian the Martyr stood apparelled
after he had given his Cap or Byrrhus, to the Executioner; and his upper
garment called Dalmatica, to the Deacon. Vide Council. a Binnio Collect. Conc.
Gang. cap. 12. part. 385.
Such is the garment spoken of by the Council of Gangris, as he that considers
it, may see.

So that these places are mis-alledged by D. Whitgift, Def. tract. 7. cap. 4.
divis. 1. page 208. etc. And that likewise of Chrysostom. Homil. 6. ad popul.
Antioch. who shows, That the dignity of the Ministry stands not in going
up and down the Church in a white garment, that is, as a gallant white attire
being a garment of honor, both in the E^^^ parts, Perk. Probl. t t. The Appu.
ten. of the Mass.
and in the West among the ancient Romans. Sigon. de Jud. lib. 3. cap. 14.

As for that which the Apostle John is said to went, called a Miter, but ratehr
a thin plate, as (...) does signify, either Eusebius does thereby (alluding to
Moses's Law, Histor. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 25. Secundu^ aliam div sionem 31.
Conference with Heart, cap. 8. divis. 4. page 516.
Exodus 28.36.) mean, that John entered into the Sanctuary, as it were, with
Prerogative, and had the very Mystery of God revealed to him, Rev. 1.1. as Dr.
Rainolds does understand; or else, if this relation deserve credit, seeing
Eusebius Pamphilus lived Anno Domini 320, about 200 years after the death of
him of whom he writes, and says, John was a Bishop, which agrees not with the
Apostle's Office and Commission, that was universal; yet this habit was a
common and daily habit, as the words of the Author rather import.

Moreover, some Testimonies urged do concern the Jewish Vestiments, as that of
Jerome in Ezekiel. 44. The Religion of God has one habit, (as Mr. Hooker
confesses. Eccles. Pol. lib. 5. Sect. 29.)

Lastly, though some testimonies quoted may show, that anciently there were
some Linen garments in Ecclesiastical use, as Theodoret, lib. 2. cap. 27.
speaks, of a baptizing robe given by Constantine to Macarius, Bishop of
Jerusalem. Lib. 1. advers. Pelagium.
And Jerome makes mention of Linen garments used in administration by Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons. And the Council of Carthage, Can. 41. (where there were
214. Bishops, of whom Austine was one) decreed, Diaconus tempore oblatimis
tantum, vel lectionis, Alba induatur. Yet none of these prove, that these were
instituted for mystical signification; or, if they were, that there was warrant
from the Word of God for so doing.

Thus the Assumption being confirmed, the Conclusion necessarily follows,
That the Surplice may not lawfully be used.

Of the sign of the Cross in Baptism.
THat the use of the sign of the Cross in Baptism is unlawful, I prove by this
Argument:

No Rite merely Ecclesiastical, and of mystical signification, having no
Warrant from the Word of God, can be used without sin.

But the sign of the Cross in Baptism is a Rite merely Ecclesiastical, and of
mystical signification, having no warrant from Gods Word:

Ergo, It cannot be used without sin.

The Proposition of this Argument, being in effect the same with the
Proposition of the Precedent Argument, (the Cross and Surplice being
Homogenea,) is confirmed by the Reasons of the foregoing Proposition. I will
therefore with great brevity confirm this Major.

First, Such Rites as are merely Ecclesiastical and mystical, having no warrant
from Gods Word, are false worship: Otherwise we shall never be able to convince
the Papists of Will Worship in their Superstitious Rites. Also, all actions,
whereby religious duties are taught in Gods public service, are Worship:
otherwise how can the preaching of the Word be worship. But Rites, merely
Ecclesiastical and mystical, etc. do teach us spiritual and religious duties.
Are they not Worship then? Yet not true, for they are not divinely warranted.
Of necessity therefore they must be false Worship.

Secondly, Such mystical Rites are Sacraments not approved of God. Sacraments
they be, for they are visible signs of an invisible grace, and have both the
parts of a Sacrament, which are set down in the common Catechism authorized by
Law. But these are not true Sacraments, when God the Author of the Covenant
does not institute them.

Thirdly, Such Rites as are merely Ecclesiastical, and Mystical, are not
discernable to be good by the light of Nature; and therefore are to have
approbation from Gods Word the rule of Faith: otherwise with safety of
conscience they cannot be received.

Fourthly, Our Learned Divines say, That to bring insignificant Ceremonies into
the Church, is plain Judaism. Dr. Reynolds Conference with Heart, cap. 8. divis.
4. page 521. Willet Synops. 2. genesis Cont. 24.2. part of the Qu. page 110. Edit.
1614.

The Assumption now remains to be proved; and in it three things. 1. That the
sign of the Cross is merely Ecclesiastical. 2. Of Mystical signification. 3.
Without warrant out of God's Word.

First, There is not the least show, to deny the sign of the Cross to be
merely Ecclesiastical: For other use of the sign of the Cross, than in
Baptism, we deny. Indeed, anciently it was ordinary in common use, as well as
in Ecclesiastical. So likewise it is with the Papists: but ordinary Crossing,
morning and evening, is condemned by our Divines: and the Law requires,
urges, and allows only the use of the Cross in Baptism: wherein if it be
not of mere Ecclesiastical use, what can Ecclefiasticall use be defined to be?

Secondly, Can there be produced any likelihood, or show of truth, to deny the
sign of the Cross to be of mystical signification, seeing all our Ceremonies
are such, as was before showed: and the words of the Common Prayer Book do
teach as much, saying, We receive this Child into the Congregation, etc. and do
sign him with the sign of the Cross, Can. 30.
in token that hereafter, etc. And the Canon says, That the Child baptized, is
dedicated to God by the sign of the Cross. These things, I suppose, do prove
the sign of the Cross to be of mystical signification.

Now it remains, that I show, That this mystical Rite is without warrant out of
the Word of God. This may be proved by these Arguments following.

Though the Cross, being a Rite of a peculiar nature, ought to show for it
self a peculiar and special Institution; yet it is so void of that, that there
is not so much as a general warrant for it in the Book of God. As the
examination of the places cited by the Papists, or Protestants, will manifest.

I omit to mention in this short abridgment, Just. Martyr in Tryphone.
some Instances for the Cross, though used by the Ancients, which have not so
much as a color of the truth, and will produce these few Instances.

(1.) The mark which was set in the forehead of the mourners, Ezekiel. 4.9. is
urged to prove the sign of the Cross lawful.

Answ. 1. Tau, translated a mark, does signify in common any sign, as Arius
Montanus, and Paguin, in their Dictionaries, show. The Vulgar Greek, called the
70, translate it (...)

2. The form of Tau being this e, makes nothing for the Cross.

3. This was an invisible mark, and peculiar to the Elect; such as that was,
Apoo. 7.3. and 9.4.

(2.) Protestarts Object the Altar built on Jordan's bank; the Altar built by
Solomon; the Music used in the Temple; the Love Feasts which were in use in
the Primitive Church; and the Kiss of love, as grounds to warrant our use of
the sign of the Cross. To all which Instances, I answer in order.

First, The Altar that stood on Jordan's Bank, was not of Ecclesiastical, but
of Civil use. Bishop Babbington on the second Commandment.
The Tribes confess that they had indeed grievously sinned, if they had
determined an Altar to the same use, for which the Lord had set up one before.
It was a memorial, that they were one people with their brethren, entitled to,
and estated in the Privileges of the Lord with them: but it was no mystical
sign of Christ and his grace.

Secondly, Ma. Sutclif. contr Bellar. de Sum. Pont. lib. 1. cip. 6. Franc. Jun.
Contr. 3. lib. 4. cap. 17. nota. 4.
If Solomon built not his new Altar by extraordinary Inspiration as a Prophet
(as one says): Yet he did it out of the equity of Moses, s Law it self, and
was no addition at all of a diverse kind. And it it most certain, That God who
by his visible descending, did approve of the whole work of the Temple when it
was done, did authorize him for the doing of it; which David's words may also
confirm, 1 Chro. 28.19.

The Music used in the Temple, was specially appointed of God, 1 Chronicles. 16.4.
and 2 Chronicles. 29.5. and both the Altar and it were Typical, tied to the place of
Ceremonies, and continuing but with them.

As concerning the Love Feasts, if they were of Apostolic Institution,
(ordained by the Apostles, as they were immediately guided by that Spirit which
infallibly did assist them in their Ministerial Function) they were Divine,
(for it is not Apostolic in that sense, and divine the same? Dr. Abb. answer
to W. Bish. cap. 7. of Tradir. Sect. 4. Fran. Junius animadv. in Bellar. lib.
4. cap. 2. not. 6.) and had a special appointment from God; which the Cross
has not. But if none knows by whom they were brought in, yet they are
abrogated there by the Apostle; where we find first mention of them: neither
were they of mystical sanctification, and are not yet proved to be of mere
Ecclesiastical use.

To conclude, Osculum pacis, Just. Marti Apoc. 2. ad finem. Durant. de rit.
lib. 2. cap. 54. Sect. 7.
which went before the Solemnity of the Supper, to prepare men to the worthy
receiving in Charity, was in tract of time disliked, and degenerated into the
kissing of the Pax. This I say was a natural indicant Sign of Peace and
Reconciliation, as embracing, shaking hands, etc. and other the like actions be.

If the Sign of the Cross be in some ancient Writers called Apostolic, they
are to be understood in no other sense than as they called Lent-Fasts, the
Creed, Saturdaies, and Wednesdaies, Fasts-Apostolick. Et praecepta Majorum
(says Jerome) unaquaeque provincia leges Apostolicas arbitratur. Jerome. Epist.
ad Luc.


Moreover, whereas it may seem that Constantine's Vision was a divine
ratification of the use of the Cross; I answer,

1. The Narration is humane and fallible.

2. The words of the Historian be (...), Eusebius. de vita Constan. l. 1. c. 22.
Soc. lib. 1. c. 1.
which do rather import, In this Christ, than in this Sign.

3. The sight which appeared was, (...) made after the fashion of a Cross,
(...) etc. (...), A maerk of Christ's Name.

The mark contains the two first Letters of Christ's Name, P, So that P was
made, and by crossing (as it were) a Spear aslope, after this manner P. Nothing
hitherto has proved the Sign of the Cross to be warranted by the Word of God;
and that which follows will prove that it is merely humane, if not worse.

Was not the Heretic Valentinus the begetter of this Sign, who gave it the
same effective Power that the Papists do, Dr. Fulk Arg. in Rhem. Test. Luc.
22.5. ex Iraen. l. 1. c. 1. Magdeburg. Cen. 3. cap. 10.
as our learned Writer says? Was not Montanus the first that gave it credit?
Was not Tertullian the chief Instrument under him, that so much commends it,
(a man well known to be infamous after his Fall)? Deering on the Epistle to the
Hebrews, Lect. 2. And did not the Superstition of the People further the
breeding of it up: D. Royn, Confer. with Heart. cap. 8. divis. 4. page 504.
Ambr. in Epist. ad Romans cap. 8.
So did it appear, when it was said, Signatos Cruce in morte secunda Diabolus
tenere non audet: Care signatur, ut Anima muniatur. Tettul. de Resurrect.
carnis.

If this be the original of the Sign of the Cross, the creeping of it into
Baptism cannot be by divine appointment.

But to conclude, if this Sign be indifferent (as it is acknowledged by the
maintainers of it,) then the instituting of the use of it cannot be more than
humane. Out of these premises it is easy to conclude the unlawfulness of the
Cross in Baptism.

Of Kneeling in the Act of receiving the Sacramental Bread and Wine.
I Acknowledge that the Supper of the Lord ought to be received with all due
Reverence, yet so that the rule and measure of that reverence be the Word of
God, not the Will and Wit of Man: To which rule, because I know not how this
kneeling does agree, therefore I dare not submit to the practice of it.



No bodily religious Adoration of God, before any Creature, with respect unto
it, having no allowance from God, can be lawfully used:

But kneeling in the Act of receiving the Sacramental Bread and Wine, is a
bodily religious Adoration of God before a Creature, with respect unto it,
having no special allowance from God.

Ergo, It cannot be lawfully used.

The Proposition may be justified by four reasons. Proposition.


1. The Scriptures are so perfect in matters of Worship, that they shut out all
humane Inventions: Therein God blaming what is not according to his
Commandment, Lev. 10.1. Jer. 7.31. and 195. his revealed Will being the
All-sufficient Rule of Worship, Dout. 12.31, 32. which both ancient Writers
(Chrysostom. in Epist. 2. ad Corinth. Homil. 13. Basil Epist. 80.) and modern
also do avouch, while they maintain the Scriptures to be the total Rule of
Faith and Manners: Protestant's Appeal. l. 2. c. 25. Sect. 11. These. Joh
Reynolds These. 1. Sect. 3. White's Way, Sect. 5. Digres. 3. And many other.

2. Such Worship the Proposition disalloweth, Hook. Eccles. Pol. l. 5. Sect. 3.
as Will Worship or Superstition; which is a Religion forged by Man, the root
whereof is Ignorance of mind, mis-guided zeal, and false fear. This is and has
been condemned and punished by the Lord, Deuteronomy. 12.8. Isa. 1.12. and 29.13. Mat.
15.9. Lev. 10.1, 2, 3. Numb. 3.4. and judged flat Idolatry both by ancient and
modern Writers, Aug de Consen Evan. l. 1. c. 18.
both Orthodox and Popish. Dr. Bilson. Apol. part. 4. page 344. Vasq. de
Adorat. lib. 2, Disput. 1. cap. 3.

3. The second Commandment does condemn relative Adoration of God without
special Warrant: For it requires that we worship the true God purely,
according to his Will. For the better understanding of it, observe two things
to be forbidden in this Commandment.

1. The making of an Image for religious use, and under this by a Trope
(wherein a part is put for the whole) all Forms of Worship devised by Man, are
forbidden. 2. The adoring of an Image, or Form of Worship of his own head: So
that if a man make an Image for sacred use, though he do not actually adore it,
yet is he a Transgressor of this Law. If of his own head he bow down to any
form of Worship, though he did not devise it, yet is he an Offender.
If any should say, That the Lord has forbidden making of an Image or Form of
Worship, and the worshipping and serving of that only which he devised, but
not the adoring of God's own Ordinance; he does so streighten the sense of the
Law, that Popish Adoration of the Sacrament would escape the censure of this
Law, Protes. Appeal. l. 4. c. 29. S. 3. White's Way page 519.
and so should be unjustly blamed in the Papists: Also he opens a gap to the
Jews to have worshipped Manna, and all the Sacrifices of the Law; and to
Christians, with religious Worship bodily to adore the Bible, Baptism, yea, the
Minister himself, without Impeachment of this Commandment: It cannot then be
denied, but that relative Adoration of God before his Ordinances, with respect
to them without special license, is here forbidden. Learned Divines have laid
this down as an Axiom in Divinity, Dr. Reynolds of Stage Plays.
That a Negative precept stands in all the parts of it in force, except the
Lord of the Law lay down so plain a dispensation of the Law, or any branch of
it, that a Man's Conscience upon good grounds may rest persuaded, that God does
exempt him from the Power of his Law, in this or that particular case; Psalm.
99.5. C^lv Piscat. Vatabl. Muscul. in loc.
as the Jews were dispensed with by special Appointment, requiring they should
worship their God before the Ark and Temple, in such a sense as they did not
before their Sacraments, and other legal Rites. Fulk against Rhem. in Heb.
11.^. De lib. Concord. Admon. Christ. cap. 11. Perkins Treatise of Divine and
relig. Worship.

4, The Brazen Serpent, set up by the appointment of God, Numb. 21.8. Joh.
3.15. Exodus 32.4. Judge. 3.13. 2 King. 10.26, 27. Dr. Re^nolds lib. 2. de Idol.
cap. 2. S. 5.
was a lively Type of Christ, was reserved as a memorial of special divine
Mercy, and in process of time the Jews did worship God respectively before it,
not determining their Worship in it; as may be gathered from Examples in
Scripture compared, and from the Judgment of the learned: yet because they
offered Incense before it to God, without special Warrant, their Fact was
condemned, and the brazen Serpent demolished.

The Proposition being confirmed, Assumpt.
the Assumption is to be proved. In the proof whereof four things are to be
insisted upon.

1. That kneeling in the Act of Receiving, etc. is a Worship. 2. No civil but a
religious Worship. 3. That it is a relative Adoration of God, before a Creature
with respect unto it. 4. There is no special Warrant, nor Appointment from God
for it.
Concerning the first branch, That kneeling is a Worship.

1. It is a gesture of the body, used to testify, signify, and shadow out the
inward and hidden Act of the mind to some person or thing. Perkins Case of
Consc. l. 2. cap. 11. Sect. 1.
This the learned acknowledge to be Worship.

2. If a man should bow in such sort, as he does in the Sacrament unto God,
Psalm. 95.6. to his Prince, 1 King. 1.23, 31. to his Parents, Exodus 20.12. to
the Chair of State; to an Angel, Genesis 18.2. and 19.1. Rev. 19.10. to his
Superior, Genesis 33.3, 6. and 42.6, 9. compared with 37.7, 9. yea, to an Idol,
is he not said to give Worship to that whereto he kneeleth?

3. Reverend kneeling and bowing of the body is expressed by such words in the
Scripture, that signify outward Worship, Scultetus de Precatione par. 2. and
Concor. Graec. de voce (...).
as (...). Genesis 18.2. and 23.7. Mat. 2.8, 11.

4. The Evangelist Mark recording the Story of the Leper that came to Christ,
says, that he kneeled down, Chap. 1.40. Luke says that he fell on his face,
Chap. 5.12. and Matthew, that he worshipped, Chap. 8.2.

Lastly, Kneeling in the act of receiving is not intended by urgers, or
obeyers, for ease, or civil furtherance. It Is no gesture of necessity, as it is
in them, who being lame, kneel, 1 Samuel 9.22.
because they can do no otherwise. Neither is it a gesture of order to kneel at
a Feast, whether Spiritual, or Corporal; and what order can there be when most
do sit or stand to attend the Word read, to sing Psalms, meditate, etc. that
the person communicating should kneel. But if that be true which some have
said, (...).
that the Greek words used by the Evangelist, speaking of the gesture used by
the Lord Jesus in his Passover, and consequently also in his Supper, do rather
signify kneeling than sitting; a man might have some color to avouch, that
nature, reason, and custom, taught rather to kneel at some Feasts, than to sit
or stand. (...).
But the truth is, that the Evangelist use two words to express the gesture of
our Savior. The one is ordinarily rendered, sitting, as may be seen in these
places, Matthew. 9.10. and 26.7.20. Mark 14.18. and 16.14. Luke 11.37. and 22.27.
Joh. 6.11. or guests, Matthew. 22.10, 11. or such as are at a Table, Joh. 13.28.
and scarce more than once it is translated lying down, Mark 5.40. and once
leaning, Joh. 13.28. The former of these not concerning any gesture, and the
latter showing their national manner and fashion of sitting.

The other word is translated, (...)
sitting, Matthew. 15.35. Mark 6.40. and 8.6. Luke 11.37. and 14.10. and 17.7.
and 22.14. Joh. 6.10. and 13.12. and, it may be, not above once otherwise, Joh.
21.20. These words are translated sitting by our English Translators, Joh.
R^yn. plect. 79. page 941, 942. Annot. Bez. in Joh. 13.23.
as in the late Translation in the Geneva, and in that of the great Bibles to
which we were tied by Law to subscribe. Beza, Piscator, Arias Montanus, the
vulgar Interpreter, the Doctors of Rhemes, do thus translate them: and do not
Grecians know, that these words do properly note the gesture of sitting? Indeed
the fashion of sitting in the Oriental parts, Perk. Case of Consc. l. 2. c. 11.
S. 1. And Com. in Matthew. 4.9.
was different from that that is used in the Northern Climates; but National
circumstances carry not the nature of gesture. I conclude then, that seeing
this kneeling is not a gesture of necessity, ease, order, or civil
furtherance; it is a gesture of reverence and worship.

Secondly, kneeling in the act, etc. is a Religious worship; for all bodily
worship is Civil, or Religious. Civil is such as is performed to the
Inhabitants of the same society, as of man to man in respect of superiority in
office, Perk. Case, l. 2. c. 11. Sect. 1.
age, or gifts. This is performed by man, but to such with whom he does
converse, and then only to Angels when they had visible communion with man.
Such civil adoration, kneeling in the act of receiving, is not: for what
finite social object is there present at the Communion, to which kneeling
should be performed? To worship man at that time with such solemn worship, is
to worship God by the halves, if not to give that to man which God does
appropriate to himself. Humane Authority commanding this gesture, does not make
it civil, no more then it makes Prayers, etc. civil actions, by enjoining them
to be made. Seeing this is not a civil gesture, it must needs be Religious.

2. Religious adoration, as it is an opposite member to civil, is Spiritual and
unlimitted in all places, at all times, and in all things, causing him that
worshippeth to adore before that which is worshipped, and this is performed to
God, or something that is reputed and worshipped as God. Of this kind is the
kneeling in question, as the chief Patrons of conformity do aver, saying,
Whitg. def. p. 598. tract. 15. c. 1. Div. 2.
that it is the meetest and fittest in respect of Prayer and Thanksgiving.

It is a gesture of Piety, and more necessary in this act than in any other.
Hook. Eccles. Pol. lib. 5. S. 68. Cov. against Burg. p. 143. Of this kneeling,
the Book of Common Prayer Authorized by King Edward the 6th, says, it is
commanded for signification of the humble and grateful acknowledgment of the
benefits of Christ given to the worthy receiver. Add further, that such
kneeling as this, done to Idols, would be an Idolatrous worship; which could
not be, except it were a Religious worship.

To conclude, bowing the knee does sometimes in the Scripture note the whole
worship of God. Psalm. 95.6. 1 King. 19.18. Esaias 45.23. Romans 14.10. Phil. 2.11.
Ephesians. 3.14. Hos. 13.2. From all this, the conclusion may be inferred, that
kneeling in the act of receiving is a Religious worship.

This kneeling is a relative adoration of God before a Creature, with respect
unto it. The Sacrament is a consecrated Creature, and before the Sacramental
Bread and Wine, we are required to bow. In the intention of the Law, and in the
opinion of the most people, there is a relation had in the very act of bowing
unto the Sacrament, though it be not the object in which they purpose their
adoration should determine. Is there not the like respect as the Papists have,
when they kneel, or knock their breasts before a Cross, or Crucifix, etc?

The act of kneeling, and the Circumstances thereof, do convince, that there is
such a relation: for we are allowed to sit, or stand meditating, or singing
Psalms, etc. until we be about to receive the Sacramental Bread and Wine, and
when it is given by the Minister to be received by us; Law requires that we
should reverently fall down on our knees, and the practice of most is suitable
ther^to. Searce is there (if any) more visible sign and token to the eye of the
spectator, to convince the Papists of adoration of the Sacrament, than this our
bowing at this time is to declare that there is an actual reverence had to the
Sacrament when we kneel to God before it. If a man were not only to bow before
it, but to it, what could he do more? If, in this sense, and after this manner,
a man should bow to an Image; would not wise men judge this act an adoring of
the Image, or of God before it? The Book of Common Prayer of Edward the 6th,
enjoyneth this posture to avoid the profanation of the Sacrament.

The urgers and maintainers of kneeling, Th. Hutton. part. 2. p. 54.56. Eccl.
regim. p. 140. Spar. perswas. to unifor. c. 4. Th. Hurt. part. 2. page 62.
tell us in plain terms, That kneeling is done to the Bread and Wine, not
simply, but as resembling Christ; that none is so sottish to adore the sign,
but the thing represented by that sign; that our bowing is an outward reverence
meet to be performed, because of the holy action in hand; that its done to keep
the Sacrament in reverence, etc. and that we kneel to put difference between
ordinary Bread and Wine, and these Sacramental, to which we give more
reverence, because its more then ordinary Bread and Wine; and partly to stir up
in our selves and others a more Religious estimation of these Divine Seals,
partly to remove all profane thoughts of contemners and despisers of the
Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus; partly to put a difference
hereby from our common bread and Wine which we take in our houses, and at our
Tables; and partly to teach us to lift up our hearts to God to bless his own
Ordinance. In a word, Articles have been put into, and allowed in
Ecclesiastical Courts, which have charged the Ministers to have delivered the
Sacrament unreverently to the people, not kneeling. To omit the opinion of the
vulgar, who come, as they say themselves, to receive their Maker; or who place
holiness in the outward bowing, and have relation to the Sacramental Signs,
which yet adds some strength to the matter in hand. Eccl. Pol. l. 5. Sect. 5.
I conclude with Mr. Hooker, who says well, In actions of this kind, we are
more to respect what the greatest part of men is prone to conceive, then what
some few men's wits may devise in construction of their own particular meaning.

Now it remains that I assay to prove, that kneeling in the act of receiving,
has no special warrant from the Word. This gesture being proved to be a
relative adoration of God before a consecrated Creature, it is of a special and
peculiar nature and use, and therefore ought to have a peculiar warrant from
God to authorize it, otherwise gestures of this kind cannot be used in Faith;
for these are not discernable by the light of Nature; neither can the general
rules of the Scripture yield ground for such. When the act done is of special
nature, it must have a peculiar direction. The Jews did not worship toward the
High Priest, or his Attire, Exodus 12.11. Exodus 15.16. Exodus 12.11. 1 Cor. 5.7.
and 10.3, 4.
toward the Paschal Lamb, the Manna, the water of the Rock, or their
Sacrifices, in that sense as they did before the Ark of the Covenant, or the
Mercy-seat in the Tabernacle, or in the Temple, although these holy things were
Types of Christ. Nature could not teach, neither yet any general rules in the
Scripture why, before one rather than before another, they should bow;
therefore for this peculiar adoration, there was a special appointment. Numb.
21.8.
When the Israelites also were stinged with fiery Serpents, they looked up at
the Brazen Serpent which was a Type of Christ, that they might be healed, but
this was by special direction.

Now as for kneeling in the act of receiving, who can show any peculiar
institution. Moreover, Canonical kneeling is not authorized by Gods Word, nor
by any general rule.

1. Both maintainers and urgers of this gesture, say, it is indifferent; and
that it was so reputed by the State, appears by this, that in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, standing was ordained at Coventry and Northampton, by
virtue of her Highness Commission, and kneeling abolished.

2. Christ and his Apostles at the first institution of the Communion, did not
kneel; which they would have done, Matthew. 26.20, 26. Mar. 14.18.22. Luke
22.14.17. Joh. 13.12.
if this gesture had been divinely ratified.

3. The Apostles after Christ's Resurrection delivered nothing concerning the
Lords Supper, but what they received of the Lord. 1 Cor. 11.23. and yet
delivered the whole counsel of God, Act. 20.20.27. but yet say nothing of
kneeling; which doubtless they would have done if it had been a divine
Ordinance. Kneeling is not of that antiquity to have ground or institution by
the Apostles. That mention which may seem to be of it in Origin, Homil. 5. in
diverse. Evang. loca.
is nothing, the book being counterfeit. Rob. Cocus in Censuram quorundam
veterum Script. page 13.

Gorgonia, her bowing before the Communion Table, or Altar, was in the night
intended for Prayer, Sozem. lib. 8. cap. 5.
not to receive the Sacrament.

About the year of our Lord 157, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 8, or 9.
Bez. Tractar. the large Vol. 3. Part. 183. De Coron. milit. cap. 3. Can. 20. De
Spir. Sanct. cap. 27. Gentillettus exam. council. Triden. lib. 2. Sect. 4. page
44. Dr Fulk. answ. to Rhem. 1 Cor. 11.29. Sect. 2.4 Jewel's resp. artic. 8.
divis. 1. Zach. Urs. common. Chitr. consid. error. 3. consid. Bale in the Life
of Honorius 3. Tho. Mort. Pret. Appeal. lib. 4. cap. 29. Sect. 3. Hispin. Hist.
Sacra. part. 1. lib. 4. Francis While's answ. to the Treatise called, White
dyed black part. 2. p. 347. Perk. Idol. of last times, last particular, etc.
Willet Synops. contr. 13. q. 4. page 649. edit. 1614. John White's way to the
true Church Sect. 50. Number. 9. Stat. 1. Eliz. cap. 2.
it may appear that Standing was used at the Communion.

About the year 160, Justin Martyr gives not the least inkling of this
Gesture, but mentions the Peoples coming to the Table.

Tertullian (who was about 180 or 200 years after Christ) reports, That in his
time they used not to kneel at prayer upon any Lords Day, or upon any other Day
between Easter and Whitsuntide.

In the Council of Nice 327, a solemn Decree was made, That none might pray
kneeling, but standing, upon the Lords Day: This continued in Basil's time, (if
that Book was his) Anno Domini, 380, and was afterward confirmed by the sixth
Council holden at Constantinople. So that either the ancient Churches never
received the Sacrament on the Lords Day (which is without controversy most
false), or they used a Gesture of greater reverence in receiving the
Sacramental Bread and Wine than they did at prayer, (whereof there is no
likelihood); or else it must be granted, That they were accustomed to receive
the Communion with some other Gesture than kneeling.

Anno 380, in Gregory Nazianzen's time, the People stood at the Communion about
the Table. I will for brevity omit other pertinent Testimonies for this purpose
which he that will may read in the Acts and Monuments in the difference between
the Church of Rome, that now is and the ancient. The sum of Paul's Doctrine
delivered to the Gentiles, etc. Also in the Dialogue between Custom and Truth,
page 1264. Edit. 1610.

To draw to an end, very many of our learned Worthies do affirm, That
odoration, or bowing before the Sacrament came into use, in the days of
Honorius the third. But whatsoever the Original of it was, That which I have
spoken shows that it is but a humane Tradition. Seeing therefore that
kneeling in the Act of receiving the Sacramental Bread and Wine, is a
religious adoration of God, before a consecrated Creature with respect unto it,
having no special Warrant out of the Word of God, it cannot be used without
sin.

Hitherto of the Arguments directly concluding the unlawfulness of the
controverted Rites. Now follow the considerations for which our request not to
be urged unto conformity, may seem reasonable.

1. It was not the intent of the Statute by which the Ceremonies stand in force
to perpetuate the use of them, but only to tolerate them out of hope of a
fitter time of reformation. This Law was not intended to be reversed, or the
benefit thereof to denied, In the Procla. prefixed, and set before the Book of
Canons.
though the Proclamation of his Highness did ratify the Authority of the
Bishops to make Ecclesiastical Canons, as the words of that Proclamation do
import; -- most humbly desiring us to give our royal assent unto the said
Canons.

2. Nonconformity proceeding from fear of sinning against God, Treatise of
Ceremonies prefixed before the Book of Common Prayer. And Stat. 1. Eliz. cap.
2. B. Bilson. ag a. Apol. part. 2. page 349. Mort. answ. to the Popish demands.
Demand. 30.
is neither contempt, nor scandal; and therefore may be allowed favor in the
eye of the Law. If a bare omission of a Rite were contempt, then all that use
Bowling which the Law dissalloweth, and do not were Caps and such Habits as the
Statute enjoyneth, shall be Contemners. Where we dare not do, we are ready
without resisting to suffer; and suffering is as sure a Sign of subjection, as
obeying. In some cases, the Law is satisfied by submitting a man's self to the
Mulct. Neither is forbearance a scandal, because it afford, no hurtful
conclusion, which may be naturally and necessarily thence deduced; except as
much and more, may be deduced from some Conformities, that do not use the
Ceremonies so often as the Law requires. The railing Inferences of some
malicious Papists, are but mere inconsequences; and do not proceed from our
forbearance, but from their malice.

3. The use of Ceremonies ought to be free. This the Law seems probably to
import, Jewel of the private Mass tract. 2. div. 9. in the end of his answ.
Stat. 13. Eliz. cap. 12
which enjoyneth subscription with this exception to the Articles of Religion,
which only concern the confession of the true Christian Faith, and the
Doctrine of the Sacraments. This practice (only) limits subscription to the
things expressed, leaving as it may seem other things at liberty. Neither was
there any hurt that came to the Church of God by the free use of the Ceremonies
in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. Sir Edward Cook his speech at
Garnet's Arraignment. P. Mart. Epist. cuidam in Angl. Scripta an. 1559 Vide loc
com. p. 1225. Bucer. censura. Mr. Casaubon Mr. Hooker. Eccles. Pol. 1. Lib. 5.
Sect. 67.
For the space of 10 years Papists came generally to the Church, but since the
urging of these Rites, they have not been so forward. This God has not blessed
the imposing of them, as the leaving of them free.

4. Worthy men, the maintainers of these Rites in the Days of King Edward;
(viz.) Peter Martyr, and Bullinger, upon better conconsideration, did retract
their Judgments.

Foreign Divines disallow these Rites, and may not we be suffered to doubt of
them?

5. Since the urging of these Ceremonies, these Points have sprung up for the
defense of them; (viz.) The Church's Authority binds the Conscience, That it is
not to be enquired into, whether Christ be present in the Sacrament by
Consubstantiation or Transubstantiation, and that it does no way hinder or
further us, however it stands. That relative adoration of God before a
Creature with respect unto it, without special Warrant, may be lawful, etc.
May not this breed some doubt of the quality of the cause, that is by great
Scholars thus maintained?

6. As yet we have nothing to settle our doubting-consciences upon, but th^se
two Points, which yet are not without some doubt.

1. That the Rites imposed are indifferent. 2. That in such things, the
Church's or Magistrate's Authority binds the Conscience.
Yet are we taught that no individual Action is indifferent, ( Thom. Mort.
Apolog. Lib. 1. Cap. 47.) indifferency resting in the general Nature, ( Aquin.
1.2, 18. Artic. 97. That, particulares Magistratuum leges mullum habent in
conscientias dominatum. Whitak. contra Duraeum. Lib. 8. Sect. ultim. That no
man incurreth the guilt of Damnation, but by breaking the Laws of God. Dr.
Pield of the Church, Lib. 4. Cap. 33. to which purpose some other Worthies do
write: Perkin's Treatise of Conscience, Cap. 2. Sect. 7. in the end. If it
should be said that the use of the Vail, 1 Cor. 11. may afford Warrant unto us,
for such Rites as are in Question. We are to consider, That the use of the Vail
was in ordinary use, not in mere Ecclesiastical use, Genesis 24.65. Also it was
not not a Symbolicall Sign, but a Natural indicant Sign of modesty. This
considered, does not our humble suit seem reasonable, that till these
Propositions be better cleared, we may be foreborn?

7. Resolution in matter of Ceremonies is not easy, because the holy Scriptures
which in weightier matters is clear, is more dark in things of lesser moment.
So that the Media to be used in Argument either for, Calvin. instit. Lib. 4.
Cap. 10. Sect. 8. Beza Epist. 24. Zanch. de operib. Redemp. cap. 4. de cultu
^^tern. qu. 4. Dr. White's defense. p. 287.
or against, the Ceremonies are difficult to be found out: Hence it is, That
from the beginning there have been great Controversies, and that among the
greatest, in matter of Ceremonies; as Bellarm. says, De effect. Sacram. Lib.
2. Cap. 3.

8. Are learned Protestants deceived or not, when they say, Popish Ceremonies
are to be condemned, because there is an opinion of holiness, necessity, and
worship annexed, wherewith they are urged? Or can our's be freed from this
holiness or necessity, seeing they are reputed religious Rites, and urged under
a great penalty, both upon Minister and People, as the Canons show.

9. Lastly, If this Proposition be true that is given and agreed of by the
Learned; Rites of mere humane Invention, of no necessary use, anciently abused
to Idolatry, now superstitiously used among many ignorant persons, are to be
abolished: It is a worthy labor to resolve us that our Ceremonies be not such.
We are taught, Dr. Willet Synops. 2. Genesis Contr. qu. 3. part. 2. p. 110. Edit.
1614. Tho: Rogers his expos. of the 39. artic. Act. 20. page 101. 102.
that Ceremonies to be in the Church, must not be in nature impious, in use
superstitions; for their weight not over heavy, and grievous to be born; that
for their worthiness in the eyes of the Ordainers, they be neither of an equal
prize, nor of more account then the Ordinances of God, so as, for the
performance of them, the Law of God must be left undone; that they be not
against the liberty of Christians, or any way contrary to the Commandment of
God: but tend both to the nourishing and increase of Love, friendship and
quietness among Christians, and retaining of God's People in God's holy fear,
etc.

FINIS.

